XXV SERMONS PREACHED AT GOLDEN-GROVE: Being for the VVinter half-year,
BEGINNING ON ADVENT-SUNDAY, UNTIL WHIT-SUNDAY.

By JEREMY TAILOR, D. D.

Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. M.
D C. LIII.

To the right Honorable and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAUHAN, Earl of
Carbery, etc.
MY LORD,
I Have now by the assistance of God, and the advantages of your many favors,
finished a Year of Sermons; which if, like the first year of our Saviors
preaching, it may be annus acceptabilis, an acceptable year to God, and his
afflicted handmaid the Church of England, a relief to some of her new
necessities, and an institution or assistance to any soul; I shall esteem it
among those honors and blessings, with which God uses to reward those good
intentions which himself first puts into our hearts, and then recompenses upon
our heads. My Lord, They were first presented to God in the ministeries of your
family: For this is a blessing for which your Lordship is to bless God, that
your Family is like Gideons Fleece, irriguous with a dew from heaven, when much
of the voicinage is dry; for we have cause to remember that Isaac complained of
the Philistims, who filled up his wells with stones, and rubbish, and left no
beauvrage for the Flocks; and therefore they could give no milk to them that
waited upon the Flocks, and the flocks could not be gathered, nor fed, nor
defended. It was a design of ruin, and had in it the greatest hostility; and
so it has been lately;

-- undique totis
Vsque adeo turbatur agris. En! ipse capellas
Protenus aeger ago; hanc etiam vix Tityre duco.
But, My Lord, this is not all: I would feign also complain that men feel not
their greatest evil, and are not sensible of their danger, nor covetous of
what they want, nor strive for that which is forbidden them; but that this
complaint would suppose an unnatural evil to rule in the hearts of men; For
who would have in him so little of a Man, as not to be greedy of the Word of
God, and of holy Ordinances, even therefore because they are so hard to have?
and this evil, although it can have no excuse, yet it has a great and a
certain cause; for the Word of God still creates new appetites, as it satisfies
the old; and enlarges the capacity, as it fills the first propensities of the
Spirit. For all Spiritual blessings are seeds of Immortality, and of infinite
felicities, they swell up to the comprehensions of Eternity; and the desires of
the soul can never be wearied, but when they are decayed; as the stomach will
be craving every day, unless it be sick and abused. But every man's experience
tells him now, that because men have not Preaching, they less desire it; their
long fasting makes them not to love their meat; and so we have cause to fear,
the people will fall to an Atrophy, then to a loathing of holy food, and then
Gods anger will follow the method of our sin, and send a famine of the Word
and Sacraments. This we have the greatest reason to fear, and this fear can
be relieved by nothing but by notices and experience of the greatness of the
Divine mercies and goodness.

Against this danger in future, and evil in present, as you and all good men
interpose their prayers, so have I added this little instance of my care and
services; being willing to minister in all offices and varieties of employment;
that so I may by all means save some, and confirm others; or at least, that
my self may be accepted of God in my desiring it. And I think I have some
reasons to expect a special mercy in this, because I find by the constitution
of the Divine providence, and Ecclesiastical affairs, that all the great
necessities of the Church have been served by the zeal of preaching in
public, and other holy ministeries in public or private, as they could be
had. By this the Apostles planted the Church, and the primitive Bishops
supported the faith of Martyrs, and the hardiness of Confessors, and the
austerity of the Retired. By this they confounded Heretics, and evil livers,
and taught them the ways of the Spirit, and left them without pertinacy, or
without excuse. It was Preaching that restored the splendor of the Church,
when Barbarism, and Wars, and Ignorance either sat in, or broke the Doctors
Chair in pieces: For then it was that diverse Orders of religious, and
especially of Preachers were erected; God inspiring into whole companies of men
a zeal of Preaching: And by the same instrument God restored the beauty of the
Church, when it was necessary she should be reformed; it was the assiduous and
learned preaching of those whom God chose for his Ministers in that work, that
wrought the Advantages and persuaded those Truths, which are the enamel and
beauty of our Churches. And because by the same means all things are
preserved, by which they are produced, it cannot but be certain, that the
present state of the Church requires a greater care and prudence in this
Ministry then ever; especially since by Preaching some endeavor to supplant
Preacbing, and by intercepting the fruits of the flocks to dishearten the
Shepherds from their attendances.

My Lord, your great nobleness and religious charity has taken from me some
portions of that glory which I designed to my self in imitation of St. Paul
toward the Corinthian Church; who esteemed it his honor to preach to them
without a revenue; and though also like him I have a trade, by which as I can
be more useful to others, and less burdensome to you, yet to you also under
God, I owe the quiet and the opportunities and circumstances of that, as if God
had so interweaved the support of my affairs with your charity, that he would
have no advantages pass upon me, but by your interest; and that I should
expect no reward of the issues of my Calling, unless your Lordship have a
share in the blessing.

My Lord, I give God thanks that my lot is fallen so fairly, and that I can
serve your Lordship in that ministry, by which I am bound to serve God, and
that my gratitude and my duty are bound up in the same bundle; but now, that
which was yours by a right of propriety, I have made public, that it may still
be more yours, and you derive to your self a comfort, if you shall see the
necessity of others served by that which you heard so diligently, and accepted
with so much piety, and I am persuaded have entertained with that religion and
obedience, which is the duty of all those who know, that Sermons are arguments
against us, unless they make us better; and that no Sermon is received as it
ought, unless it makes us quit a vice, or be in love with virtue; unless we
suffer it in some instance or degree to do the work of God upon our souls.

My Lord, in these Sermons I have meddled with no man's interest, that only
excepted, which is Eternal; but if any man's vice was to be reproved, I have
done it with as much severitie as I ought; some cases of Conscience I have here
determined; but the special design of the whole, is to describe the greater
lines of Duty, by special arguments: and if any witty Censurer shall say,
that I tell him nothing but what he knew before; I shall be contented with it,
and rejoice that he was so well instructed, and wish also that he needed not a
Remembrancer: but if either in the first, or in the second; in the institution
of some, or the reminding of others, I can do God any service; no man ought to
be offended, that Sermons are not like curious inquiries after New-nothings,
but pursuances of Old truths. However, I have already many fair earnests that
your Lordship will be pleased with this tender of my service, and expression
of my great and dearest obligations, which you daily renew or continue upon,

My noblest Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate and most obliged Servant
JEREMY TAILOR.

Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Number, and Texts.
SErmon 1. 2. 3. Doomsday Book; or, Christ's Advent to Judgment. Folio 1. 15.
30. 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.

Sermon 4. 5. 6. The Return of Prayers; or, The conditions of a Prevailing
Prayer. fol. 44. 57. 69. Joh. 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners,
but if any man be a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.

Sermon 7. 8. 9. Of Godly Fear, etc. fol. 83. 95. 114. Heb. 12. part of the
28th. and 29th. verse. Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence
and godly fear. For our God is a consuming Fire.

Sermon 10. 11. The Flesh and the Spirit. fol. 125. 139. Matt. 26. 41. latter
part. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

Sermon 12. 13. 14. Of Lukewarmnesse and Zeal; or, Spiritual Terror. fol. 152.
164. 179. Jer. 48. 10. first part. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully.

Sermon 15. 16. The House of Feasting; or, The Epicures Measures. fol. 191.
204. 1 Cor. 15. 32. last part. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die.

Sermon 17. 18. The Marriage Ring; or, The Mysteriousnesse and Duties of
Marriage. fol. 219. 232. Ephesians. 5. 32, 33. This is a great mystery; But I
speak concerning Christ and the Church. Nevertheless, let every one of you in
particular so love his Wife even as himself, and the Wife see that she
reverence her Husband.

Sermon 19. 20. 21. Apples of Sodom; or, The Fruits of Sin. fol. 245. 260.
273. Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.

Sermon 22. 23. 24. 25. The good and evil Tongue. Of Slander and Flattery. The
Duties of the Tongue. fol. 286. 298. 311. 323. Ephesians. 4. 25. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.


Titles of the 28 Sermons, their Order, Numbers and Texts. Being the second
Volume.
SErmon 1, 2. Of the Spirit of Grace. Fol. 1. 12. Romans 8. ver. 9, 10. But ye
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell
in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. * And
if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life,
because of righteousness.

Sermon 3, 4. The descending and entailed curse cut off, fol. 24. 40. Exodus 20
part of the 5. verse. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me.

6. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Sermon 5, 6. The invalidity of a late, or deathbed repentance, fol. 52. 66.
Jerem. 13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light
(or, lest while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death
and make it gross darkness.

Sermon 7, 8. The deceitfulness of the heart, fol. 80. 92. Jeremiah 17. 9. The
heat is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?

Sermon 9, 10, 11. The faith and patience of the Saints; Or, the righteous
cause oppressed. fol. 104. 119. 133. 1 Pet. 4. 17. For the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear?

Sermon 12, 13. The mercy of the Divine judgments; or, Gods method in curing
sinners, fol. 146. 159. Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance?

Sermon 14, 15. Of growth in grace, with its proper instruments and signs. fol.
172. 173. 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Sermon 16, 17. Of growth in sin, or the several states and degrees of sinners,
with the manner how they are to be treated. fol. 197. 210. Jude Epist. ver. 22,
23. And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire.

Sermon 18, 19. The foolish exchange. fol. 224. 237. Matthew. 16. ver. 26. For
what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Sermon 20, 21, 22. The Serpent and the Dove; or, a discourse of Christian
Prudence. fol. 251. 263. 274. Matthew. 10. latter part of ver. 16. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves.

Sermon 23, 24. Of Christian simplicity. 289. 301. Matthew 10. latter part of
verse 16. And harmless as Doves.

Sermon 25, 26, 27. The miracles of the Divine Mercy. fol. 313. 327. 340. Psalm.
86. 5. For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to
all them that call upon thee.

A Funeral Sermon preached at the Obsequies of the Right Honorable the Countess
of Carbery. fol. 357. 2 Samuel 14. 14. For we must needs dye, and are as water
spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up again: neither does God respect
any person: yet does he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him.

A Discourse of the Divine Institution, necessity, sacredness, and separation
of the Office Ministerial.
Sermon, I. ADVENT SUNDAY. DOOMSDAY BOOK: OR, CHRIST'S Advent to Judgment.
2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of CHRIST, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.
Virtue and Vice are so essentially distinguished, and the distinction is so
necessary to be observed with glorious appellatives, encouraging it by rewards,
entertaining

-- Facere omnia saeve
Non impune licet, nisi dum facis --
and innocence is oppressed, and the poor cry, and he has no helper; and he is
oppressed, and he wants a Patron: and for these and many other concurrent
causes, if you reckon all the causes that come before all the Judicatories of
the world, though the litigious are too many, and the matters of instance are
intricate questioned by God, and every word and every action shall receive For
we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad.

(...), so it is in the best copies, not (...), The things done in the body, so
we commonly read it; the things proper or due to the body; so the expression is
more apt and proper; for not only what is done (...) by the body, but even the
acts of abstracted understanding and volition, the acts of reflection and
choice, acts of self-love and admiration, and what ever else can be supposed
the proper and peculiar act of the soul or of the these may be called (...),
because these are the acts of the man in the state of conjunction with the
body. The words have in them no other difficulty or variety, but contain a
great truth of the biggest interest; and one of the most material constitutive
Articles of the whole Religion, and the greatest endearment of our duty in the
whole world. Things are so ordered by the great Lord of all the creatures, that
whatsoever we do or suffer shall be called to account, and this account shall
be exact, and the sentence shall be just, and the reward shall be great; all

This is that which the Apostle in the next verse calls the terror of the Lord;
it is his terror, because himself shall appear in his dress of Majesty and
robes of Justice, and it is his terror, because it is of all the things in the
World the most formidable in it self, and it is most fearful to us: where
shall be acted the interest and final sentence of eternity; and because it is
so intended, I shall all the way represent it as the Lords terror, that we may
be afraid of sin, for the destruction this terror is intended. 1. Therefore we
will consider the persons that are to be judged, with the circumstances of our
advantages or our sorrows: [We must all appear.] 2. The Judge and his
Judgment seat: [before the Judgment seat of Christ.] 3. The sentence that they
are to receive; the things due to the body, good or bad; according as we now
please, but then cannot alter. Every one of these are dressed with
circumstances of affliction and afrightment to those to whom such terrors shall
appertain as a portion of their inheritance.

1. The persons who are to be judged: even you, and I, and all the world: Kings
and Priests, Nobles and Learned, the Crafty and the Easy, the Wise and the
Foolish, the Rich and the Poor, the prevailing Tyrant and the oppressed Party
shall all appear to receive there Symbol; and this is so far from abating any
thing of its terror and our dear concernment, that it much increases it: the
first day of Judgment happened, that (I mean) of the universal deluge of
waters upon the old World, the calamity swelled like the flood, and every man
saw his friend perish, and the neighbors of his dwelling, and the relatives of
his house, and the sharers of his joys, and yesterdaies bride, and the new
born heir, the Priest of the Family, and the honor of the Kindred, all dying
or dead, drenched in water and the divine vengeance; and then they had no place
to flee unto, Trumpet of the Archangell, with the thunders of the dying and

1. Consider what an infinite multitude of Angels and Men and Women shall then
appear; it is a huge assembly when the Men of one Kingdom, the Men of one Age
in a single Province are gathered togother into heaps and confusion of
disorder; But then all Kingdoms of all ages, all the Armies that ever
mustered, all that World that Augustus Caesar taxed, all those Roman Wars from
Numa's time till Italy was broken into Principalities and small Exarchats, all
these, and all that can come into numbers, and that did descend from the loins
of Adam, shall at once be represented; to which account if we add the Armies
of Heaven, the nine orders of blessed Spirits, and the infinite numbers in
every order, we may suppose the numbers fit to express the Majesty of that
God, and the terror of that Judge, who is the Lord and Father of all that
unimaginable multitude. Erit terror ingens tot simul tantorumque populorum.
Florus.


2. In this great multitude we shall meet all those who by their example and
their holy precepts have like tapers enkindled with a beam of the Sun of
righteousness enlightened us, and taught us to walk in the paths of justice.
There we shall see all those good men whom God sent to preach to us, and recall
us from humane follies and inhumane practices: and when we epsy the good man
that chid us for our last drunkenness or adulteries, it shall then also be
remembered how we mocked at counsel, and were civilly modest at the reproof,
but laughed when the man was gone, and accepted it for a religious complement,
and took our leaves and whose work is with the Lord, and who by their life and
Doctrine endeavored to snatch the Soul of their friend or relatives from an
intolerable regard: but that work which he crowns in them he purposed

3. There in that great assembly shall be seen all those Converts who upon
easier terms, and fewer miracles, and a less experience, Ninevch, and they
shall stand upright in Judgment, for they at the preaching of one man in a
less space then forty days returned unto the Lord their God; but we have
heard him call all our lives, and like the deaf Adder stopped our ears against
the voice of Gods servants, charm they never so wisely. There shall appear the
men of Capernaum, and the Queen of the South, and the Men of Berea, and the
first fruits the obedience of Faith, and the labor of Love, and the
contentions of chastity, and the severities of temperance and self-denial, are
not such insuperable mountains, but that an honest and a sober person may
perform them in acceptable degrees, if he have but a ready ear, and a willing
mind, and an honest heart: and this seen of honest persons shall make the
Divine Judgment upon sinners more reasonable and apparently just;

4. But there is a worse sight then this yet, which in that great assembly
shall distract our sight and amaze our spirits. There evil interest, by power
or craft, by witty discourses or deep interwoven this one comfort relating to
this, which to my Thomas Aquinas was used to beg of God that he might never be
tempted from his low fortune to Prelacies and dignities Ecclesiastical; and
that his mind might never be discomposed or polluted with the love of any
creature; and that he might by some instrument or other understand the state of
his deceased Brother; and the story says, that he was heard in all: In him it
was a great curiosity, or the passion and impertinencies of a

5. We may consider that this infinite multitude of men and Pythagoras Tables,
but must needs have influence upon every spirit that shall there appear. For
the transactions of that court are not like Orations spoken by a Grecian Orator
in the circles of his people, heard by them that crowd nearest him, or that
sound limited by the circles of air, or the enclosure of a wall; but every
thing is represented to every person, and then let it be considered, when thy
shame and secret turpitude, thy midnight revels and secret hypocrisies, thy
lustful thoughts, and treacherous designs, thy falsehood to God and startings
from thy holy promises, thy follies and impieties shall be laid open before all
the be ashamed. All the wise men in the world shall know how vile thou have
been: and then consider; with what confusion of face would Volo servare
animam meam, I am resolved by all means to save my soul. But when he had
undertaken Why he did not save his soul, by all means, according as he
undertook. But when the sick man awaked and recovered, he made his words Adam
shall appear before God and his Christ, and all the innumerable companies of
Angels and Devils shall be there: and the wicked shall be afrighted with every
thing they see; We must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and that is
a new state of terrors and

2. That Is then the place and state of our appearance, Before the Judgment
seat of Christ:] For Christ shall rise from the right hand of his Father, he
shall descend toward us and ride upon a cloud, and shall make himself
illustrious by a glorious Majesty, and an innumerable retinue and circumstances
of terror and a mighty power: and this is that which Origin affirms to be the
sign of the Son of Man. Remalcus de Vaux in Harpocrate divino affirms
consentientibus animis asseverant, hoc signo Crucem Christi significari, do
unanimously affirm that the representment of the Cross, is the sign of the Son
of Man spoken of Mat. 24. 30. And indeed they affirm it very generally, but
Origin after his manner is singular, hoc signum Crucis erit, cum Dominus ad
judicandum venerit, so the Church used to sing, and so it is in the Sibyls
verses;

O lignum felix in quo Deus ipse pependit,
Nec te terra capit, sed coeli tecta videbis
Cum renovata Dei facies ignita micabit.
The sign of the Cross is that sign of the Son of Man, when the Lord shall
come to Judgment: and from those words of Scripture [They shall look on him
whom they have pierced] it has been freely entertained at the day of
Judgment, Christ shall signify his person by something that related to his
passion, his cross, or his wounds, or both. I list not to spin this curious
cobweb; but Origen's opinion seems to me more reasonable; and it is more
agreeable to the Majesty and Power of Christ to signify himself that is (say
they) the sign of the Son of man imprinted upon a cloud; but it is in others
(...), the sign of the Son of man who is in the heavens; not that the sign
shall be imprinted on a cloud, or in any part of the heavens, but that he who
is now in the heavens, shall when he comes down, have a sign and signification
of his own, that is, proper to him, who is there glorified, and shall return in
glory; and he disparages the beauty of the Sun, who inquires for a Rule to know
when the Sun shines, or the light breaks forth from its chambers of the East;
and the Son of man shall need no other signification, but his infinite retinue,
and all the Angels of God worshipping him, and Paul, We shall all be Romans 4. 10.
set before the throne or place of Christ's judicature; For it is written, As I
live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
cenfesse to God: that is, at the day of Judgment, when we

The Majesty of the Judge, and the terrors of the Judgment shall be spoken
aloud by the immediate forerunning accidents, which shall be so great
violences to the old constitutions of Nature, that it shall break her very
bones, and disorder her till she be destroyed. St. Hierom relates out of the
Jews books, that their Doctors use to account 15 days of prodigy immediately
before Christ's coming, and to every day assign a wonder, any one of which, if
we should chance to see in the days of our flesh, it would affright us into
the like thoughts, which the old world had when they saw the countries round
about them Adria, and the Mediterranean sea, when their houses and Cities are
entering into graves, and the bowels of the earth rent with convulsions and
horrid tremblings. The sea (say they) shall rise 15 cubits above the highest
Mountains, and thence descend into hollownesse, and a prodigious drought, and
when they herds of Men or congregations of Beasts; Then shall the Graves open,
and give up their dead, and those which are alive in nature, and dead in fear,
shall be forced from the rocks, whither they went to hide them, and from
caverns of the earth, where they would fain have been concealed; because their
retirements are dismantled, and their rocks are broken into wider ruptures, and
admit a strange light into their secret bowels; and the men being forced abroad
into the theater of mighty horrors shall run up and down distracted and at
their wits end; and then some shall

These signs, although the Jewish Doctors reckon them by order and a method,
concerning which they had no revelation (that appears) nor sufficiently
credible tradition, yet for the main parts of the things themselves, the holy
Scripture records Christ's own words, and concerning the most terrible of them;
the sum of which, as Christ related them, and his Apostles recorded and
explicated, is this: The earth shall tremble, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken, the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood; that is, there shall be strange eclipses of the Sun, and fearful
aspects in the Moon, who when she is troubled looks red like blood; The rocks
shall rend, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. The heavens shall
be rolled up like a parchment, the earth shall be burned with fire, the hills
shall be like wax, for there shall go a fire before him, and a mighty tempest
shall be stirred round about him:

Dies irae, Dies illa
Solvet seclum in favilia,
Test David cum Sibylla.
The Trumpet of God shall sound, and the voice of the Archangell, that is, of
him who is the Prince of all that great army of Spirits, which shall then
attend their Lord, and wait upon the sign of the Son of Man; for the
fulfilling off all these praedictions, and the preaching the Gospel to all
Nations, and the Conversion of the Jews, and these prodigies, and the Address
of Majesty make up that sign. The notice of which things some way or other
came to the very Heathen themselves, who were alarmed into caution and
sobriety by these dreadful remembrances:

-- Sic cum compage soluta
Saecula tot mundt suprema coegerit hora
Antiquum repetens, iterum chaos, omnia mistis
Sidera sideribus concurrent: ignea pontum
Astra petent, tellus extendere littora nolet,
Excutietque fretum; fratri contraria Phoebe
Ibit -- Totaque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit foedera Mundi. Lucan. l. 1.

Which things when they are come to pass, it will be no wonder if men's hearts
shall fail them for fear, and their wits be lost with guilt, and their fond
hopes destroyed by prodigy and amazement; soberly and temperately, chastely and
justly, humbly and obediently, that is, like persons that believe all this, and
such who are not mad men or fools, but will order their actions according to
these notices. For if they do not believe these things, where is their Faith?
If they do believe them, and sin on, and do as if there were no such thing
excusable in a Child. He that is youngest has not long to Christ shall be our
Judge at Doomes-day.

SERMON, II. Part II.
1. IF we consider the person of the Judge, we first perceive that he is
interested in the injury of the crimes he is to sentence. Videbunt quem
crucifixerunt, and they shall look on him whom they have pierced. It was for thy
sins that the Judge did suffer such unspeakable pains as were enough to
reconcile all the world to God: The sum and spirit of which pains could not
be better understood then by the consequence of his own words, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? meaning, that he felt such horrible, pure, unmingled
sorrows, that although his humane nature strange unspeakable evil that
attends them that are guilty of this

2. Christ may be crucified again, and upon a new account put to an open shame.
For after that Christ had done all this by the direct actions of his Priestly
Office, of sacrificing himself for us, he has also done very many things for
us which are also the fruits of his first love crucify the Lord of life again,
and put him to an open shame: that is, they, as much as in them lies, bring
Christ from his glorious joys to the labors of his life, and the shame of his
death; they advance his enemies, and refuse to advance the Kingdom of their
Lord; they put themselves in that state in which they were when Christ came to
dye for them; and now that he is in a state that he may rejoice over them, (for
he has done all his share toward it) every wicked man takes his head from the
blessing, and rather chooses that the Devil should rejoice in his destruction,
then that passion we have made ineffectuall, and whose love we have trampled
under our profane and impious feet.

3. But there is yet a third part of this consideration. As it will be inquired
at the day of Judgment concerning the dishonours to the person of Christ, so
also concerning the profession and institution of Christ, and concerning his
poor Members; for by these also we make sad reflections upon our Lord. Every man
that lives wickedly disgraces the religion and institution of Jesus, he
discourages strangers from entering into it, he weakens the hands of them that
are in already, and makes that the adversaries speak reproachfully of the Name
of Christ; but although it is certain

4. To this if we add the almightinesse of the Judge, his infinite wisdom and
knowledge of all causes, and all persons, and all circumstances, that he is
infinitely just, inflexibly angry, and impartial in his sentence, there can be
nothing added either to the greatness or the requisites of a terrible and an
Almighty Judge. For who can resist him who is Almighty? Who can evade his
scrutiny that knows all things? Who can hope for pity of him that is
inflexible? Who can think to be exempted when the Judge is righteous and
impartial? But in all these annexes of the great Judge, that which I shall now
remark,

1. If we remember the instances of Gods severity in this life, Nilus, still
there are mingled some storms and violences, some fearful instances of the
Divine Justice, we may more readily expect it will be worse, infinitely worse
at that day, when Judgment shall ride in triumph, and Mercy shall be the
accuser of the wicked. But so we read, and are commanded to remember, because
they are written for our example, Sodom and her sisters are set forth for an
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Fearful it was when God
destroyed at once 23000 for fornication, and an exterminating Angel in one
night killed 185000 of the Assyrians, and the first born of all the families of
Egypt, and for the sin of David in numbering the people threescore and ten
thousand of the people dyed, and God sent ten tribes into captivity and
eternal oblivion and indistinction from a common people for their idolatry.
Did not God strike Corah and his company with fire from Heaven? and Abiram? And
is not evil come upon all the world for one sin of Adam? Did not the anger of
God break the nation of the Jews all in pieces with judgments so great, that
no nation ever suffered the like, because none ever sinned so? And at once it
was done, that God in anger destroyed all the world, and eight persons only
escaped the angry Baptism of water, and yet this world is the time of mercy;
God has opened here his Magazines, and sent his holy Son as the great channel
and fountain of it too: here he delights in mercy, and in judgment loves to
remember it, and it triumphs over all

2. We may also guess at it by this; if God upon all single instances, and in
the midst of our sins, before they are come to the full, and sometimes in the
beginning of an evil habit be so fierce in This is the Romans 2. 5.
day of wrath, and God shall reveal, or, bring forth his righteous Judgments.
The expression is taken from Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Is not this laid up in store with
me, and sealed up among my treasures? (...), I will restore it in the day of
vengeance, for the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants. For so did the Lybian Lion that was brought up under discipline, and
taught to endure blows, and eat the meat of order and regular provision, and
to suffer gentle usages, and the familiarities of societies; but once he brake
out into his own wildness, Dedidicit pacem subito feritate reversa, and killed
two Roman boys; but those that sorrage in the Lybian mountains tread down and
devour all that they meet or master; and when they have fasted two days, lay
up an anger great as is their appetite, and bring certain death to Judah shall
appear upon his own mountain, the mountain of the Lord, in his natural dress
of Majesty, and that Justice shall have her chain and golden fetters taken off,
then Justice shall strike, and Mercy shall not hold her hands; she shall strike
sore strokes, and pity shall not break the blow; and God shall account with us
by minutes, and for words, and for thoughts, and then he shall be severe to
mark what is done amiss; and that Justice may reign entirely, God shall open
the wicked man's treasure, and tell the sums, and weigh grains and scruples:
(...), said Philo upon the place of Deuteronomy sanies and the
intolerablenesse, the obliquity and the unreasonablenesse, the amazement and
the disorder, the smart and the sorrow, the guilt and the punishment

3. We may guess at the severity of the Judge by the lesser strokes of that
Judgment which he is pleased to send upon sinners in this world, to make them
afraid of the horrible pains of Doomsday: I mean the torments of an unquiet
conscience, the amazement and confusions of some sins and some persons. For I
have sometimes seen persons surpised in a base action, and taken in the

(...)
(...).
Then only it can truly be said that he is inflexible and inexorable. No
prayers then can move him, no groans can cause him to

4. That all may think themselves concerned in this consideration, hay and
stubble, works of folly and false opinions, and states of imperfection. So S.
Austins Doctrine was, Hoc aget caminus, alios in sinistra separabit, alios in
In Psalm. 103.
dextra quodam modo eliquabit, The great fire at Doomsday shall throw some
into the portion of the left hand, and others shall be purified and represented
on the right: and the same is affirmed Origin In Ierem. hom. 13. and in Luke
hom. 14. and Lactantius lib. 7. instit. c. 21. Hilarious in Psalm. 118. octer. 3.
and in Mat. can. 2.
and Lactantius; and S. Hilary thus expostulates, Since we are to give account
for every idle word, shall we long for the day of Judgment, in quo est nobis
indefessus ille ignis ebeundus in quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a
peccatis animae supplicia, Wherein we must every one of us pass that unwearied
fire in which those grievous punishments for expiating the soul from sins must
be endured; for to such as have been baptized with the Holy Ghost it remains
that they be consummated with the fire of Judgment. And S. Ambrose adds, That
if any be as Peter or as John, they are baptized with this fire, and he that is
purged here had need to be purged there again: Illic quoque nos purificet
quando dicat dominus, Intrate in requiem meam, Let him also purify us, that
every one of us being burned with that flaming sword, not burned up or
consumed, we may enter into Paradise and give thanks unto the Lord In Psalm.
118. sermon. 3.
who has brought us into a place of refreshment. This opinion of theirs is, in
the main of it, very uncertain, relying upon the sense of some obscure places
of Scripture, is only apt to represent the great severity of the Judge at that
day, and it has in it this only certainty, that even the most innocent person
has great need of mercy, and he that has the greatest cause of confidence,
although That if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and
the sinner appear? Quid faciet virgula deserti, ubi concutietur cedrus
Paradisi? Quid faciet agnus, cum tremit aries? Si coelum fugiat, ubi manebit
terra? said S. Gregory. And if S. Paul whose conscience accused him not, yet
durst not be too confident,

5. But the matter is still of more concernment. The Pharisees jeering and many
instances of wantonness, and revelling, doing petty spites, and doggednesse,
and churlishness, lying too much gentleness and slacknesse in government, or
too great severity and rigor of animadversions, bitterness in reproof of
sinners, uncivil circumstances, imprudent handlings of some criminals, and
zeal; Nay there are some vile things, which through the evil discoursings and
worse manners of men are passed into an artificial and false reputation, and
men are accounted wits for talking Atheistically, and valiant for being
murderers, and wise for deceiving and circumventing our Brothers; and many
irregularities more, for all which we are safe enough here. But when the day
omniscient and knows all things, and his tribunal takes cognizance of all
causes, and has a coercitive for all, all things are naked and open to his
eyes (says S. Paul) therefore nothing shall Heb. 4.
escape for being secret:

(...)
(...) --
And all prejudices being laid aside it shall be considered concerning Cum
cepero tempus, ego justitias Psalm. 74.
judicabo; when I shall receive the people, I shall judge according unto right:
so we read; [When we shall receive time, I will judge justices and judgements]
so the vulgar Latin reads it; that is, in the day of the Lord, when time is put
into his hand and time shall be no more, he shall judge concerning those
judgments when men here make of things below; and the fighting man shall
perceive the noises of drunkards and fools that cried him up for daring to kill
his Brother, to have been evil principles; and then it will be declared by
strange effects, that wealth is not the greatest fortune; ought not to have
been contemptible; and that cause that is Paul, by Justice and charity, by the
Laws of God and the laws of wise Princes and Republics, by the rules of
Nature and the just proportions of Reason, by the examples of good men and the
proverbs of wise men, by severity and the rules of Discipline: for then it
shall be, that truth shall ride in triumph, and the holiness of Christ's
Sermons shall be manifest to all the world; that the Word of God shall be
advanced over all the discourses of men, and Wisdom shall be justified by all
her children. Then shall be heard those words of [We fools thought their life
madness; but behold they are justified before the throne of God, and we are
miserable for ever.] Here men think it strange if others will not run into the
same excess of riot; but there they will wonder how themselves should be so
mad and infinitely unsafe by being strangely and inexcusably unreasonable. The
sum is this; The Judge shall appear clothed with wisdom, and power, and
justice, and knowledge, and an impartial Spirit, making no separations by the
proportions of this world, but by the measures of God, not giving sentence by
the principles of our Non est judicium Dei sicut hominum, God does not judge as
Man judges.

6. Now that the Judge is come thus arrayed, thus prepared, so instructed, let
us next consider the circumstances of our appearing and his sentence; and first
I consider that men at the day of Judgment that belong not to the portion of
life, shall have three sorts of accusers, 1. Christ himself, who is their
Judge. 2. Their own conscience, whom they have injured and blotted with
characters of death and foul dishonor. 3. The Devil, their enemy, whom

1. Christ shall be their accuser, not only upon the stock of those direct
injuries (which I before reckoned) of crucifying the Lord of life, once and
again, etc. But upon the titles of contempt and unworthiness, of unkindnesse
and ingratitude; and the accusation will be nothing else but a plain
representation of those artifices and 1.
the Son gave himself for a price for us, but both gave the holy 2.
into us, a third part of a perfective constitution: we have the Spirit put
into us, to be a part of us, as properly to produce actions of a holy life, as
the soul of man in the body does produce the natural. * God has exalted
humane nature, and made it in 3.
the person of Jesus Christ, to sit above the highest seat of Angels, and the
Angels are made ministering spirits, ever since their Lord became our Brother. *
Christ has by a miraculous Sacrament 4.
5.
an easy religion, and has established our future felicity upon natural and
pleasant conditions, and we are to be happy hereafter if we suffer God to make
us happy here; and things are so ordered, that a man must take more pains to
perish, then to be happy. * God has found out rare ways to make our prayers
acceptable, our 6.
weak petitions, the desires of our imperfect souls to prevail mightily with
God; and to lay a holy violence, and an undeniable necessity upon himself; and
God will deny us nothing but when we 7.
things in heaven and earth to join toward holy and fortunate effects; for he
has appointed an Angel to present the prayers of Revel. 8. 3.
Saints, and Christ makes intercession for us, and the holy Spirit makes
intercession for us with groans unutterable; and all the holy Romans 8. 26.
men in the world pray for all and for every one; and God has teaches us what
to pray and how, and gives one promise to public prayer, and another to
private prayer, and to both the blessing of being heard.

* Add to this account that God did heap blessings upon us 8.
without order, infinitely, perpetually and in all instances, when we needed,
and when we needed not. * He heard us when we prayed, 9.
giving us all and giving us more then we desired; * He desired 10.
that we should ask, and yet he has also prevented our desires; * He watched
for us, and at his own charge sent a whole order of men whose employment is to
minister to our souls: and if all this 11.
had not been enough, he had given us more also. * He promised 12.
heaven to our obedience, a Province for a dish of water, a 13.
invited us with gracious words and perfect entertainments; * He 14.
threatened horrible things to us if we would not be happy; * He 15.
has made strange necessities for us, making our very repentance to be a
conjugation of holy actions, and holy times, and a long succession; * He has
taken away all excuses from us, he has called 16.
us off from temptation, he bears our charges, he is always beforehand with us
in every act of favor, and perpetually slow in striking, and his arrows are
unfeathered, and he is so long, first in Nathan did to David, when he was to
make the justice of the Divine Sentence appear against him. * Then it shall be
remembered 17.
every night, then the remembrance of every nights sin could have been in the
morning; * That every night, the trouble and labor of the days virtue would
have been as much passed and turned 18.
to as very a nothing, as the pleasure of that days sin; but that they would
be infinitely distinguished by the remanent effects. (...), So Musonius
expressed the sense of this inducement; and that this argument would have grown
so great by that time we come to dye, that the certain eternity. * The offering
our selves to God every morning, and the 19.
of dying like a fool, every thing indeed in the world is made to be an
argument and an inducement to us to invite us to come to God and be saved; and
therefore when this, and infinitely more shall by the Judge be exhibited in sad
remembrances, there needs no other sentence, we shall condemn our selves with a
hasty shame, and a fearful confusion, to see how good God has been to us, and
how base we have been to our selves. Thus Moses is said to accuse the Jews;
and thus also he that does accuse, is said to condemn, Verres was by Cicero,
and Claudia by Domitius her accuser, and the world of impenitent persons by the
men of Nineveh, and all, by Christ their Judge. I represent the horror of this
circumstance to consist in this, besides the reasonableness of the Judgment,
and the certainty of the condemnation, it cannot but be an argument of an
intolerable despair to perishing souls, when he that was our Advocate all our
life, shall in the day of that appearing be our Accuser and our Judge, a party
against us, an injured person in the day of his power, and of his wrath, doing
execution upon all his own foolish and malicious enemies. *

2. Our conscience shall be our accuser,] but this signifies but these two
things; 1. that we shall be condemned for the evils that we have done, and
shall then remember; God by his power wiping away the dust from the tables of
our memory, and taking off the consideration and the voluntary neglect and rude
shufflings of our cases of conscience. For then we shall see things as they
are, the evil circumstances and the crooked intentions, the adherent
unhandsomenesse and the direct crimes: for all things are laid up safely, and
though we draw a curtain of cobweb over them, and few figleaves before our
shame, yet God shall draw away the curtain, and forgetfulness secondly it
signifies this also, that not only the Justice of God shall be confessed by us
in our own shame and condemnation, but the evil of the sentence shall be
received into us, to melt our bowels and to break our heart in pieces within
us, because we are the authors of our own death, and our own inhumane hands
have torn our souls in pieces. Thus far the horrors are great, and when evil
men consider it, it is certain they must be afraid to dye. Even they that have
lived well, have some sad considerations, and the tremblings of humility, and
suspicion of themselves. I remember Cyprian tells of a good man who in his agony
of death saw a phantasme of a noble and angelical shape, who frowning and
angry said to him, Pati timetis, exire non vultis, Quid faciam vobis? Ye cannot
endure sickness, ye are troubled at the evils of the world, and yet you are
loath to dye and to be quit of them, what shall I do to you? Although this is
apt to represent every man's

3. The third sort of accusers, are the Devils; and they will do it with
malicious and evil purposes; The Prince of the Devils has (...) for one of
his chiefest appellatives: The accuser of the Brethren he is by his professed
malice, and employment; and therefore God who delights that his mercy should
triumph, and his goodness prevail over all the malice of men and Devils, has
appointed one whose office is (...) to reprove the accuser, and to resist the
enemy, and to be a defender of their cause the Brethren, that is, the Saints
and servants of God, and shall tell concerning their follies and infirmities,
the sins of their youth, and the weakness of their age, the imperfect grace,
and the long schedule of omissions of duty, their scruples and their fears,
their diffidences and pusillanimity, and all those things which themselves by
strict examination find themselves guilty of, and have confessed, all
defender; The holy Spirit that makes intercession for us, shall then also
interpose, and against all these things shall oppose the passion the robe of
his righteousness; and the sins of their youth shall not prevail so much as
the repentance of their age; and their omissions be excused by probable
intervening causes, and their little escapes shall appear single, and in
disunion, because they were always kept asunder by penitential prayers and
sighings, and their seldom returns of sin by their daily watchfulness, and
their often infirmities by the sincerity of their souls, and their scruples by
their zeal, and their possions by their love, and all by the mercies of God and
the sacrifice which their Judge offered, and the holy But as for the wicked, it
is not so with them; for although the plain story of their life be to them a
sad condemnation, yet what will be answered when it shall be told concerning
them, that they despised Gods mercies, and feared not his angry judgments;
that they regarded not his word, and loved not his excellencies; that they were
not persuaded by the promises, nor afrighted by his threatenings; that they
neither would accept his government, nor his blessings; that all the pleasant
now he shall then say was nothing, and all the gains that now invite earthly
souls and mean persons to vanity, seeds of folly, and the harvest is pain and
sorrow, and shame eternal. * But then since this horror proceeds upon the
account of so many accusers, God has put it into our power by a timely
accusation of our selves in the tribunal of the court Christian to prevent all
the arts of aggravation which at Doomsday shall load foolish and undiscerning
souls. He that accuses himself of his crimes here, means to forsake them, and
looks upon them on all sides, and spies out his deformity, and is taught to
hate them, he is instructed and prayed for, he prevents the anger of God and
defeats the Devils malice, and by making Patriarch of Alexandria told an old
religious person in his hermitage; having asked him what he found in that
desert; he was answered, only this, Indesinenter culpare and judicare meipsum;
to judge and condemn my self perpetually, that is the employment of my
solitude. The Patriarch answered, Non est alia via, There is no other way. By
accusing our selves we shall make the Devils malice useless, and our own
consciences dear, and be reconciled to the Judge by the severities of an early
repentance, and then we need to fear no accusers.

SERMON, III. Part, III.
3. IT remains that we consider the Sentence it self, We must receive
according to what we have done in the body, whether it be good or bad.
Judicaturo Domino lugubre mundus immugiet, and tribus adtribum pectora ferient.
Potentissimi quondam neges nudo latere palpitabunt: So St. Hierom meditates
concerning the terror of this consideration. The whole world shall groan when
the Judge comes to give his Sentence, tribe and tribe shall knock their sides
together; and through the naked breasts of the most mighty Kings you shall see
their hearts beat with Tunc Aristotelis argumenta parum proderunt, cum venerit
filius pauperculae quaestuariae judicare orbem terrae. Nothing shall then be
worth owning, or the means of obtaining mercy, but a holy conscience; all the
humane craft and trifling subtilties shall be useless, when the Son of a poor
Maid shall sit Judge over all the world. When the Prophet Joel was describing
the formidable accidents in the day of the Lords Judgment, and the fearful
Sentence of an angry Judge, he was not able to express it, but stammered like
a Child, or an amazed imperfect person, A. A. A. diei, quia prope est Dies
Domini; it Joel 1.
is not sense at first; he was so amazed, he knew not what to say, Agamemnon's
sorrow for the death of Iphigenia, nothing could describe it but a vail; it
must be hidden and supposed; and the stammering tongue that is full of fear,
can best speak that terror which will make all the world to cry, and shriek,
and speak fearful accents, and significations of an infinite sorrow and
amazement.

But so it is, there are two great days in which the fate of all the world is
transacted. This life is man's day, in which man him, and introduces new
Religions, and confounds the old, and changes Articles as his interest
requires, and all this while he shall speak, and no man shall answer, he shall
speak in the voice of thunder and fearful noyses, and man shall do no more as
he please, but must suffer as he has deserved. When Zedekiah reigned in
Jerusalem, and persecuted the Prophets, and destroyed the interests of
Religion, Jeremy into the Dungeon, God held his peace; save only that he
warned him of the danger, and told him of the disorder; but it was Zedekiah's
day, and he was permitted to his pleasure. But when he was led in chains to
Babylon, and his eyes were put out with burning Basins and horrible circles of
reflected fires, then was Gods day, and his voice was the accent of a fearful
anger, that broke him all in pieces. It will be all our cases, unless we hear
God speak now, and do his work, and serve his interest, and bear our selves in
our just proportions, that is, as such, the very end of whose being, and all
our faculties is to serve God, and do justice, and charities to our

What we have done in the body] But certainly this is the greatest terror of
all. The thunders and the fires, the earthquakes and the trumpets, the
brightness of holy Angels, and the horror of accursed Spirits, the voice of
the Archangel (who is the Prince of the heavenly host) and the Majesty of the
Judge, in whose service all that Army stands girt with holiness and obedience,
Philemon said of the nature of foxes.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Every fox is crafty and mischievous, and if you gather a whole the child of
wrath, and by his manners he is the child of the Devil; we call Christian,
and we dishonor our Lord, and we are Brethren, but we oppress and murder
one another; it is a great degree of sanctity now adays not to be so wicked as
the worst of men; and we live at the rate as if the best of men did design to
themselves an easier condemnation; and as if the generality of men considered
not concerning the degrees of death, but did believe that in hell no man shall
perceive any ease or refreshment in being tormented we do in the body; 12 or
14 years pass before we choose good or bad; and of that which remains above
half is spent in sleep and the needs of Nature; for the other half it is
divided as the Stag was when the beasts went a hunting, the Lion has five
parts of six: The business of the world takes so much of our remaining
portion, that Religion and the service of God have not much time left that can
be spared; and of that which can, if we consider how much is allowed to crasty
arts of cousenage, to oppression and ambition, to greedy desires, and
avaritious prosecutions, to the vanities of Alms and Prayers are the sum of
all thy good. Were thy prayers made in fear and holiness, with passion and
desire? Were they not made unwillingly, weakly, and wandringly, and abated with
sins in the Every Mat. 12. 36.
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of
Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned; and upon this account may Jcb, Quid faciam cum Job 31. 14.
resurrexerit ad judicandum Deus? What shall I do when the Lord shall come to
judgment? Of every idle word] O blessed God! what shall become of them who
love to prate continually, to tell tales, to detract, to slander, to back-bite,
to praise themselves, to undervalue others, to compare, to raise divisions, to
boast? (...); Who shall be able to stand upright, not bowing the knee with the
intolerable load of the sins of his tongue? If of every idle word we must give
account, what shall we do for those malicious words that dishonor every idle
word, that is, (...), so St. Paul uses it, every false Ephesians. 5. 6.
word, every lie shall be called to judgment; or as some Copies every wicked
word shall be called to judgment. For by [(...)] Idle words, are not meant
words that are unprofitable or unwise, for fools and silly persons speak most
of those, and have the least accounts to make; but by vain the Jews usually
understood false; and to give their mind to vanity, or to speak vanity, is all
one as to mind or speak falsehoods with malicious and evil purposes. But if
every idle word, that is, every vain and lying word shall be called to
judgment, what shall become of men that blaspheme God, or their Rulers, or
Princes of the people, or their Parents? that dishonor the Religion, our own
words we stand or fall, that is, as in humane Judgments the confession of the
party, and the contradiction of himself, or the failing in the circumstances
of his story, are the confidences or presumptions of law, by which Judges give
sentence; to be accounted for, we have enough in this account to make us die,
and yet have committed so many evil actions that if our watch over our actions
with a care, equal to that fear which shall be at Doomes-day, when we are to
pass our sad accounts. But I have some considerations to interpose.

1. But (that the sadness of this may a little be relieved, and our 1.
endeavors be encouraged to a timely care and repentance) consider, that this
great sentence, although it shall pass concerning little things, yet it shall
not pass by little portions, but by general measures; not by the little
errors of one day, but by the great proportions of our life; for God takes not
notice of the infirmities of honest persons that always endeavor to avoid
every sin, but in little intervening instances are surprised; but he judges us
by single actions, if they are great, and of evil effect; and by little small
instances, if they be habitual. No man can take care concerning every minute;
and therefore concerning it Christ will not pass sentence but by the
discernible portions of our time, by humane actions, by things of choice and
deliberation, and by 2.
the proportions of an Angel, but by the measures of a Man; the first follies
are not unpardonable, but may be recovered; and the second are dangerous, and
the third are more fatal; but nothing is unpardonable but perseverance in
evil courses. 3ly. The last Judgment shall be transacted by the same 3.
Principles by which we are guided here: not by strange and secret
propositions, or by the fancies of men, or by the subtilties of useless
distinctions, or evil persuasions; not by the scruples of Whatsoever ye shall
bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose shall be
loosed there; that is, you shall stand or fall according to the Sermons of the
Gospel, as the Ministers of the Word are commanded to preach, so ye must 4.
the measures of Nature, and possibilities, and utmost extents, but by the
mercies of the Covenant; we shall be judged as Christians rather then as men,
that is, as persons to whom much is pardoned, and much is pityed, and many
things are (not accidentally, but consequently) indulged, and great helps are
ministered, and many remedies supplied, and some mercies extraregularly 5.
by him that once dyed for us, and does now pray for us, and perpetually
intercedes; and upon souls that he loves, and in the salvation of which
himself has a great interest, and increase of joy. And now upon these premises
we may dare to consider what the sentence it self shall be, that shall never be
reversed, but shall last for ever and ever.

Whether it be good or bad.] I cannot discourse now the greatness 1.
all the good of this world, and every man's share then, in every instant of his
blessed eternity is greater then all the pleasures of Mankind in one heap.

(...),
(...).
A man can never wish for any thing greater then this immortality, said
Posidippus. 2. To which I add this one consideration, 2.
that the portion of the good at the day of sentence shall be so great, that
after all the labors of our life, and suffering persecutions, and enduring
affronts, and the labor of love, and the continual fears and cares of the
whole duration and abode, it rewards it all, and gives infinitely more; Non
sunt condignae passiones hujus saeculi; all the torments and evils of this
world are not to be estimated with the joys of the Blessed: It is the gift of
God; a donative beyond the (...), the military stipend, it is

(...)
(...)
Xenoph.
(...)
It is a day of recompenses, in which all our sorrows shall be turned into
joys, our persecutions into a crown, the Cross into a Throne, poverty to the
riches of God, loss, and affronts, and inconveniences, and death, into
scepters, and hymns, and rejoycings, and Hallellujahs, and such great things
which are fit for us to hope, but too great for us to discourse of, while we
see as in to do an evil, rather then suffer one, shall find it but an ill
exchange, that he deferred his little to change for a great one. I remember
that a servant in the old Comedy did choose to venture the lash rather then to
feel a present inconvenience, Quia illud aderat malum, istud aberat longius:
illud erat praesens, huic erant dieculae: but this will be but an ill account,
when the rods shall for the delay be turned into Scorpions, and from easy
shall become intolerable. Better it is to suffer here, and to stay till the day
of restitution for the good and the holy portion; for it will recompense both

But how if the portion be bad? It shall be bad to the greatest part of
mankind; that is a fearful consideration; the greatest part of men and women
shall dwell in the portion of Devils to eternal ages. So that these portions
are like the Prophets figs in the vision; the good are the best that ever were,
and the worst are so bad that worse cannot be imagined. For though in hell the
accursed souls shall have no worse then they have deserved, and there are not
there overrunning measures as there are in heaven, and therefore that the joys
of heaven are infinitely greater joys then the pains of hell are great pains,
yet even these are a

1. That here, all the troubles of our spirits are little participations 1.
of a disorderly passion; A man desires earnestly, but he has essence and
abstracted beings; the spirit of envy, and the spirit of sorrow; Devils, that
shall inflict all the whole nature of the evil and pour it into the minds of
for all; because the Saints have all, and they have none; therefore all their
passions are integral, abstracted, perfect passions; and all the sorrow in the
world at this time, is but a portion of sorrow; every man has his share, and
yet besides that which all sad men have, there is a great deal of sorrow which
they have not, and all the Devils portion besides that; but in hell, they shall
have the all love; and some in which the brightest jewel is understanding;
some are purity, and some are holiness to the Lord: so in the regions of
sorrow, evil and sorrow have an essence and proper being, and are set there to
be suffered entirely by every undone man that dies there for ever.

2. The evils of this world are material and bodily; the pressing of a
shoulder, or the straining of a joint; the dislocation of a bone, or the
extending of an artery; a bruise in the flesh, or the pinching of the skin; a
hot liver, or a sickly stomach; and then the mind is troubled because its
instrument is ill at ease; but all the proper troubles of this life are nothing
but the effects of an uneasy body, or an abused fancy, and therefore can be no
bigger then a blow or a cousenage, then a wound or a dream; only the trouble
increases as the soul works it; and if it makes reflex then, is nothing like
now, and the words of man's tongue which are fitted to the uses of this world,
are as unfit to signify the evils of the next, as person, and nature, and
hand, and motion, and passion are to represent the effects of the Divine
attributes, actions and subsistence.

3. The evil portions of the next world is so great, that God the Kingdom of
Heaven, (...), from the foundation of the world; for so it is observable, that
Christ shall say to the Sheep at his right hand, Mat. 25. 34.
Receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world; but to
the Goats and accursed spirits, he speaks of no such primitive and original
design; it was accidental and a consequent to horrid crimes, that God was
forced to invent and to after create that place of torments.

4. And when God did create and prepare that place, he did not at all intend it
for man, it was prepared for the Divill and his Angels, so says the Judge
himself, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, 41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, (...) which my Father prepared for the
Devil, so some copies read it: God intended it not for man, but man would
imitate the Devils pride, and listen to the whispers of an evil spirit, and
follow his temptations, and rebel against his Maker; and then God also against
his first design resolved to throw such persons into that place that was
prepared for the Devil: for so great was the love of God to mankind, that he
prepared joys infinite and never

5. The evil portion shall be continual without intermission of evil; no
days of rest, no nights of sleep, no ease from labor, no periods of the
stroke, nor taking off the hand, no intervals between Rome amongst some other
strange opinions has inserted this one into her public Offices; that the
perishing souls in hell may have sometimes remission and refreshment like the
fits of an intermitting fever: for so it is in the Roman Missal printed Paris,
1626. in the Mass for the dead; Ut quia de ejus vitae qualitate diffidimus,
and si plenam veniam animaipsius obtinere non potest, saltem vel inter ipsa
tormenta quae forsan patitur, refrigerium de abundantia miserationum tuarum
sentiat: and something like this is that of Prudentius, Sunt and Spiritibus
saepe nocentibus, Hymn. 5. lib. Cathemer.
Poenarum celebres sub Styge feriae, etc. The evil spirits have ease of their
pain, and he names their holiday, then when the Resurrection

Marcent suppliciis Tartara mitibus,
Exultatque sui carceris otio
Umbrarum populus liber ab ignibus:
Nec fervent solito flumina sulphur.
They then thought that when the Paschall taper burned, the flames of hell
could not burn, till the holy wax was spent: but because Where the worm dies
not, and the fire is never quenched, and diverse others, it is sufficient to
have noted it without further consideration; the pains of hell have no rest, no
drop of water is allowed to cool the tongue, there is no advocate to plead for
them, no mercy belongs to their portion, but fearful wrath and continual
burnings.

6. And yet this is not the worst of it; for as it is continual during its
abode: so its abode is for ever, it is continual and eternal. Tertullian
speaks something otherwise, Pro magnitudine cruciatus non diuturni, verum
sempiterni; not continual, or the pains of Lactantius is more plain in this
affair; The same divine fire by the same power and force shall burn the wicked,
and shall repair instantly whatsoever of the body it does consume: Ac sibi ipsi
aeternum pabulum subministrabit, and shall make for it self an eternal fuel.

Vermibus and flammis and discruciatibus aevum
Immortale dedit, senio ne poena periret
Non pereunte anima --
So Prudentius eternal worms, and unextinguished flames, and immortal
punishment is prepared for the ever-never dying souls of wicked men. Origin is
charged by the ancient Churches for saying that after a long time the Devils
and the accursed souls shall be restored to the Kingdom of God; and that after
a long time again they shall be restored to their state; and so it was from
their fall and shall be forever; and it may be that might be the meaning of
Tertullians expression, of cruciatus non diuturni sed sempiterni. Epiphanius
charges not the opinion upon Origin, and Austin did, and confuted the opinion
in his books De civitate Dei. However, Origin was not the first that said the
pains of the damned should cease; Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Tryphon
expresses it thus. Neither do I say that all the souls do dye, for that indeed
would be to the wicked a gain unlooked for: What then? the souls of the godly
in a better place, of the wicked in a worse, do tarry the time of Judgment;
then they that are worthy shall never dye again; but those that are designed to
punishment shall abide so long as God please to have them to live and to be
punished: But I observe, that the primitive Doctors were very willing to
believe that the mercy of God would find out a period to the torment of
accursed fouls; but such a period, which should be nothing but eternal
destruction, called by the Scripture the second death: only Origin (as I
observed) is charged by S. Austin to have said they shall return into joys;
and back again to hell by an eternal revolution. But concerning the death of
wicked souls, Hierome at the end of his Commentaries upon Isay; and Ireneus
disputes it largely, that they that are unthankful to God in this short life
and obey him not, shall never have an Lib. 2. cap. 65.
eternal duration of life in the ages to come, sed ipse se private in saeculum
saeculi perseverantia, he deprives his soul of living to eternal ages; for he
supposes an immortal duration not to be natural Adam, and restored it again
in Christ to them that believe in him and obey him: for the other, they shall
be raised again to suffer shame, and fearful torments, and according to the
degree of their sins, so shall be continued in their sorrows, and some shall
dye and some shall not dye; the Devil and the Beast, and and they that
worshipped the Beast, and they that were marked with his Character, these S.
John says shall be tormented for ever and ever; he does not say so of all; but
of some certain great criminals; (...), all, so long as God please, some for
ever and ever, and some not so severely; And whereas the everlasting fire: it
is answered, that the fire indeed is everlasting, but not all that enters into
it is everlasting; but only the Devils for whom it was prepared and others more
mighty criminals (according as S. John intimates) though also everlasting
signifies only to the end of its proper period.

Concerning this Doctrine of theirs so severe, and yet so moderated, there is
less to be objected then against the supposed fancy of Origin: for it is a
strange consideration to suppose an eternal gaiety and excessive joy; to all
alike; to all infinite and eternal,

1. It is certain that the torments of hell shall certainly last as long as 1.
the soul lasts; for eternal and everlasting can signify no less but to the
end of that duration, to the perfect end of the period in which it signifies.
So Sodom and Gomorrah, when God rained down hell from heaven upon the earth (as
Salvian's expression is) they are said to suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire: that is, of a fire that consumed them finally, and they never were
restored: and so the accursed souls shall suffer torments till they be
consumed; who because they are immortal either naturally or by gift, shall be
tormented

But 2. the generality of Christians have been taught to believe 2.
worse things yet concerning them; and the words of our blessed Lord, are
(...), eternal affliction or smiting;

Nec mortis poenas mors altora finiet hujus,
Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis.
And S. John, who well knew the mind of his Lord, says; The Rev. 14. 11.
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
day nor night: that is, their torment is continual, and it is eternal. Their
second death shall be but a dying to all felicity, for so death is taken in
Scripture; Adam dyed when he eat the forbidden fruit; that is, he was liable to
sickness and on them the second death shall have no power; but the wicked
shall be tormented horridly and insufferably till death and hell be thrown into
the lake of fire, and shall be no more, which is the second death. But that
they may not Rev. 20. 14.
imagine that this second death shall be the end of their pains, S. John speaks
expressly what that is; Rev. 21. 8. The fearful and unbeleeving, the abominable
and the murderers, the whoremongers and sorcerers, the idolaters and all liars
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death; no dying there, but a being tormented, burning in a lake
of fire, that is the second death. For if life be reckoned a blessing, then to
be destitute of all blessing is to have no life, and therefore to be
intolerably death eternal.

3. And yet if God should deal with man hereafter more mercifully and
proportionably to his weak nature, then he does to Angels, and as he admits him
to repentance here, so in hell also to a period of his smart, even when he
keeps the Angels in pain for ever; yet he will never admit him to favor, he
shall be tormented beyond all the measure of humane ages, and be destroyed for
ever and ever.

It concerns us all who hear and believe these things, to do as our blessed
Lord will do before the day of his coming; he will call Conversion to God is
the best preparatory to Doomsday: and it concerns all them who are in the
neighborhood and fringes of the flames of hell, that is, in the state of sin,
quickly to arise from the danger, and shake the burning coals off our flesh,
lest it consume the marrow and the bones: Exuenda est velociter de incendio
sarcina, priusquam flammis supervenientibus concremetur. Nemo diu tutus est
periculo proximus, says S. Cyprian, No man is safe long, that is so near to
danger; for suddenly the change will come, in which the Judge shall be called
to Judgment, and no man to plead for him, unless a good conscience good or
bad, sheep and goats, blessed and accursed souls. Among the wonders of the day
of Judgment our blessed Savior reckons it, that men shall be marrying and
giving in marriage, (...) marrying and cross marrying, that is, raising
families and lasting greatness and huge estates; when the world is to end so
quickly, and the gains of a rich purchase so very a trifle, but no trifling
danger; a thing that can give no security to our souls, but much hazards and a
great and at the best, an increase of the particular charge. Every degree of
riches, every degree of greatness, every ambitious employment, Hierom said it,
Coram coelo and terra rationem reddemus totius nostrae vitae; and tu rides?
Heaven and earth shall see all the follies and baseness of thy life; and do
thou laugh? That we may, but we have not reason to laugh loudly and frequently,
if we consider things wisely, and as we are concerned: but if we do, yet
praesentis temporis ita est agenda laetitia, ut sequentis judicii amaritudo
nunquam recedat a memoria: so laugh here that you may not forget your danger,
lest you weep for ever. He that thinks most seriously and most frequently of
this fearful appearance, will find that it is better staying for his joys
till this sentence be past; for then he shall Son and his mercies, his graces
and his holy Spirit; and they that do all this, have cause to complain of
nothing but their own follies; and they shall feel the accursed consequents
then when they shall see the Judge sit above them angry and severe, inexorable
and terrible; under them an intolerable hell; within them, their consciences
clamorous without them, all the world on fire; on the right hand, those men
glorified whom they persecuted or despised; on the left hand, the Devils
accusing; for this is the day of the Lords terror, and who is able to abide it?

Seu vigilo intentus studiis, seu dormio, semper
Iudicis extremi nostras tuba personet aures.
SERMON, IV. The Return of PRAYERS. Or, The Conditions of a PREVAILING PRAYER.
John 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a
worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.
I Know not which is the greater wonder, honestly and severely, then it wills
so coldly, that God hates the prayer; fervently, it sometimes turns that into
passion, and that passion breaks into murmurs or unquietness; or if that be
avoided, the indifferency cooles into death, or the fire burns violently, and
is quickly spent; our desires are dull as a rock, or fugitive as lightening;
either we ask ill things earnestly, or good things remissely; we either court
our own danger, or are Corah being partners of a schism, or a rebellion in
religion; or we bring unhullowed censers; our hearts send up to God an unholy
smoke, a cloud from the fires of lust, and either the flames of lust or rage,
of wine or revenge kindle the beast that is laid upon the altar; for a holy
thing, to a lawful end, presented unto him upon the wings of Zeal and love, of
religious sorrow or religious joy; by sanctified lips, and pure hands, and a
sincere heart. It must be the prayer of a gracious man; and he is only
gracious before God, and acceptable, and effective in his prayer, whose life is
holy, and whose prayer is holy; For both these are necessary ingredients to the
constitution of a prevailing prayer; there is a holiness peculiar to the man,
and a holiness peculiar to the prayer, that must adorn the prayer before
Jesus, in which union alone our prayers can be prevailing.

God hears not sinners:] so the blind man in the text, and confidently [this
we know:] he had reason indeed for his confidence; it was a proverbiall saying,
and every where recorded in their Scriptures, which were read in the synagogues
every Salbath day. For what is the hope of the hypocrite? (says Job) will God
Job 27. 9.
hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? No, he will not. For if I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, said Ps. 6. 6. 18.
David; and so said the Spirit of the Lord by the Son of David. Prove. 1. 28.
When distress and anguish comes upon you, Then shall they oall upon me, but
I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; and
Isaiah, When you spread forth your Isa. 1. 15.
hands I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers I will
not hear; your hands are full of blood: and again, Ier. 14. 12.
When they fast I will not hear their cry, and when they will offer burnt
offerings and oblations, I will not accept them. For they have 10.
loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord will
not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins:
Upon these and many other authorities it Deus non exaudit peccatores: it was a
known Vide etiam Ps. 34. 6 Micah 3 4. 1 Pet. 3. 12.
case and an established rule in the religion; Wicked persons are neither fit
to pray for themselves, nor for others.

Which proposition let us first consider in the sense of that purpose which the
blind man spoke it in, and then in the utmost extent of it, as its analogy and
equal reason goes forth upon us and our necessities. The man was cured of his
blindness, and A false Prophet could not work true miracles; this has
received its diminution when the case was changed; for at that time when then
when he said it, yet after that the case was altered: and Sinners, Magicians,
Astrologers, Witches, Heretics, Simoniacks and wicked persons of other
instances, have

There is in this case only this difference, that they who do miracles in
opposition to Christ, do them by the power of the Devil, to whom it is
permitted to do such things which we think miracles; and that is all one as
though they were: but the proposition still remains true, God hears not
sinners, God does not sinning Christians, God in this sense and toward the
purposes of miracles does hear them, and has wrought miracles by them, for
they do them in the name of Christ, and therefore Christ said, cannot easily
speak ill of him; and although they either prevaricate in their lives, or in
superinduced doctrines, yet because the miracles are a verification of the
Religion, not of the opinion, of the power or truth of Christ, not of the
veracity of the man, God has heard such persons many times whom men have long
since, and to this day call Heretics, such were the Novatians and Arrians; For
to the Palestine, Cyprus, Crete, Syria, and the voicinage, that there were but
very few Christians that with hearty persuasions fell away from Christ, (...),
said Galen, It is not easy to teach anew him that has been taught by Christ:
And St. Austin tells a story of an unbeleeving man, that being troubled that his
wife was a Christian, went to the Oracle to ask by what means he should alter
her persuasion; but he was answered, it could never be done, he might as well
imprint characters upon the face of a torrent or a rapid river, or himself fly
in the air, as alter the persuasion of a hearty and an honest Christian; I
would to God it Demas, and Simon Magus, and Ecebolius, and the lapsed
Confessors are instances of humane craft in the power of signs and wonders
able to deceive (if it were possible) even the very elect; but that was not
possible; without their faults it could not be; the elect were sufficiently
strengthened, and the evidence of Paul twice remarks in his Epistle to the
Hebrews. The result of this discourse is the first sense and explication of the
words, God hears not sinners, viz. in that in which they are sinners: a
sinner in his manners may be heard in his prayer in order to the confirmation
of his faith, but if he be a sinner in his faith God hears lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting.

2. That which yet concerns us more nearly is, that God hears not sinners,
that is, if we be not good men, our prayers will do us no good: we shall be
in the condition of them that never pray at all. The prayers of a wicked man
are like the breath of corrupted lungs, God turns away from such unwholesome
breathings. absence of which makes that even his prayer returns empty? indices
and significations by which we may make a judgment whether God has heard our
prayers or no.

1. Whosoever prays to God while he is in a state, or in the affection to sin,
his prayer is an abomination to God. This was a truth so believed by all
Nations of the world, that in all Religions they ever appointed baptismes and
ceremonial expiations to Deorum Templa cum adire disponitis ab, omni vos labe
puros, lautos, castissimosque praestatis, said Arnobius to the Gentiles: When
you address your selves to the Temples of your Gods, you keep your selves
chaste, and clean, and spotless. They washed their hands, and wore white
garments, they refused to touch a dead boyd, they avoided a spot upon their
clothes as they avoided a wound upon their head, (...). That was the religious
ground they went upon; an impure thing ought not to touch that which is holy,
much less to approach the Prince of Jews in their preparatory baptismes; they
washed their hands to signify that they should cleanse them from all iniquity,
and keep them pure from blood and rapine; they washed their garments, but that
intended they should not be spotted with the flesh; and their follies consisted
in this, that they did not look to the bottom of their lavatories; they did
not see through the vail of their ceremonies. Flagitiis omnibus inquinati
veniunt ad precandum, and se pie sacrificasse opinantur, si cutem laverint,
tanquam libidines intra pectus inclusas ulla amnis abluat, aut ulla Maria
purificent, said Lactantius; they come to their prayers dressed round about
with wickedness, ut quercus hedera, and think God will accept their offering
if their skin be washed; as if a river could purify their lustful souls, or a
sea take off their guilt. But David reconciles the ceremony with the mystery,
I will wash my hands, I will wash them in innocence, and so will I go to thine
altar. Hae sunt verae munditiae (says Tertullian) non quas plerique
superstitione curant ad omnem orationem, etiam cum lavacro totius corporis
aquam sumentes. This is the true purification, not that which most men do,
superstitiously cleansing And this is it which the Apostle also signifies,
having translated the Gentile and Jewish ceremony into the spirituality of the
Gospel, I will therefore that men pray every where, levantes puras manus,
lifting up clean hands, Latin, (...), so it is in the Greek, holy hands:
That Is the purity that God looks for upon them that lift up their hands to him
in prayer: and this very thing is founded upon the Natural constitution of
things, and their essential proportion to each other.

1. It is an act of profanation for any unholy person to handle holy things,
and holy offices. For if God was ever careful to put all holy things into
cancels, and immure them with acts and laws and cautions of separation; and the
very sanctisication of them was nothing else but the solemn separating them
from common usages, that himself might be distinguished from men by lawful
may yet be unholy in this sense; much more are unlawful things most unholy in
all senses. If God will not admit of that which is beside Religion, he will
less endure that which is against Religion. And therefore if a common man must
not serve at the altar, how shall he abide a wicked man to stand there? No: he
will not endure him, but he will cast him and his prayer into the separation of
an Sic profanatis sacris peritura Troja perdidit primum Deos, So Troy entered
into ruin when their prayers became unholy, and they profaned the rites of
their Religion.

2. A wicked person while he remains in that condition is not the natural
object of pity: (...), said Zeno; Mercy is a sorrow or a trouble at that misery
which falls upon a person which deserved it not. And so Aristotle desines it,
it is (...), When we see the person deserves a better fortune, or is disposed
to a fairer entreaty, then we naturally pity him, and Sinon pleaded for pity
to the Trojans,

-- Miserere animi non digna serentis. For who pityeth the tears of a base man
who has treacherously murdered his friend? or who will lend a friendly sigh
when he sees a traitor to his country pass forth through the execrable gates
of cities? and when any circumstance of baseness, that is, any thing that
takes off the excuse of infirmity, does accompany a sin (such as are
ingratitude, perjury, perseverance, delight, malice, treachery) then every man
scorns the criminal, and God delights and rejoices in, and laughs at the
calamity of such a person. When Vitellius with his hands bound behind him, his
Imperial robe rent, and with a dejected countenance and an ill name was led to
execution, every man cursed him, but no man wept. Deformitas exitus
misericordiam abstulerat, says Tacitus, The filthiness of his life and death
took away pity. So it is with Aretas calls them) the lusts of the lower belly,
wantonness, and its mother intemperance, we feel the price of our sin, that
which God foretold to be their issues, that which he threatened us withal, and
that which is the natural consequent, and its certain expectation, that which
we delighted in, and chose, even then when we refused God, and threw away
felicity, Hyaena, or clip the Lamia about the neck, we have as certainly chosen
the tail, and its venomous embraces, as the face and lip. Every man that sins
against God, and loves it, or, which is all one, continues in it, for by
interpretation that is love, has all the circumstances of unworthiness
toward God; he is unthankful, and a breaker of his vows, and a despiser of
his mercies, and impudent against his judgments, he is false to his profession,
false to his faith, he is an unfriendly person, and uses him barbarously who
has treated him with an affection not less then no man pities a base person,
let us remember that no man is so base in any thing as in his unhandsome
demeanor toward God. Do we not profess our selves his servants, and yet
serve the Devil? Do we not live upon Gods provision, and yet stand or work at
the command of lust, or avarice, humane regards and little interests of the
world? We call him Father when we desire our portion, and yet spend it in the
society of all his enemies. In short: Let our actions to God and their
circumstances be supposed to be done toward men, and You may thank your
selves; and be infinitely afraid lest at the same time we be in a condition of
person in which God will upbraid our unworthiness, and scorn our persons, and
rejoice that therefore makes us miserable, and this renders us desperate.

3. This great truth is further manifested by the necessary and convenient
appendages of prayer required, or advised, or recommended in holy Scripture.
For why is Fasting prescribed together with prayer? For neither if we eat are
we the better, neither alms are prescribed, together with prayer, because
deleteries and hindrances to our prayers, by irreconciling the person of him
that prays.

1. The first is unmercyfulnesse. (...), said one in Stobaeus, and they were
well joined together. He that takes Mercy from a Man is like him that takes an
Altar from the Temple; the Temple is of no use without not he tremble at thy
frown, and is of an uncertain soul till thou speak kindly unto him, and
observes thy looks as he Iliacall passion that so hardens a man's bowels,
that nothing proceeds from him but the name of his own disease, a Miserere mei
Deus, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us,
so we pray. The final sentence in this affair is recorded by St. James, He
that shows no mercy shall have Iam. 2. 13.
justice with out mercy: as thy poor brother has groaned under thy cruelty and
ungentle nature without remedy, so shall thou before the throne of God; thou
shall pray, and plead, and call, and cry, and beg again, and in the midst of
thy despairing noyses be carried in the regions of sorrow, which never did, and
never shall feel a mercy. God never can hear the prayers of an unmercifull man.

2. Lust and uncleanness is a direct enemy to the Praying man, his confidence,
and all his manly hopes; it makes his spirit light, Moloch, or the rites of
Flora, ubi Cato spectator esse non potuit, a good man will not endure them,
much less will God entertain such reekings of the Dead sea and clouds of
Sodom. For so an impure vapor begotten of the slime of the earth, by the
fevers and adulterous heats of an intemperate Summer sun, striving by the
ladder of a mountain to climb up to heaven, and rolling into various figures
by an uneasy, unfixed revolution, and stopped at the middle region of the air,
being thrown from his pride and attempt of passing toward the seat of the
stars, turns into an unwholesome bitumen, and was kindled in the dishonorable
regions below, derived from hell, and contrary to God, it cannot pass forth to
the element of love, but ends in barrenness and murmur, fantastic
expectations, and trifling imaginative confidences, and they at last end in
sorrows and despair. and channels of brimstone, and therefore may end in
brimstone and fire, but never in forgiveness, and the blessings of an eternal
charity.

Henceforth therefore, never any more wonder that men pray so seldom; there
are few that feel the relish, and are enticed with the deliciousness, and
refreshed with the comforts, and instructed with the sanctity, and acquainted
with the secrets of a holy prayer: But cease also to wonder, that of those few
that say many prayers, so few find any return of any at all. To make up a good
and a lawful prayer there must be charity, with all its daughters, alms,
forgiveness, not judging uncharitably; reasonable sacrifice; and therefore
their portion shall be amongst them whose prayers were never recorded in the
book of life, whose tears God never put into his bottle, whose desires shall
remain ineffectuall to eternal ages. Take heed for by them you hope to have
eternal life; and let any of you whose conscience is most religious and
tender, consider what condition that man is in, that has not said his prayers
in thirty or forty years together; and that is the true state of him who has
lived so long in the course of an unsanctified life; in all that while he never
said one prayer that did him any good; but they ought to be reckoned to him
upon the account of his sins. He that is in the affection, or in the habit, or
in the state of any one sin whatsoever, is at such distance from and
contrariety to God, that he provokes effect, and the exercise, and the
beginning, and the promoter of all graces, and the consummation and perfection
of many; and all those persons who pretend toward heaven, and yet are not
experienced in the secrets of Religion, they reckon their piety, and account
their hopes, only upon the stock of a few prayers; it may be they pray twice
every day, it may be thrice, and blessed be God for it; so far is very well;
but if it shall be remembered and considered, that this life we cannot in any
sense be happy, or have the effect of one returning and repenting sinners, God
delights to hear, because he delights to save us:

-- Si precibus, dixerunt, numina justis
Victa remollescunt --
When a man is holy, then God is gracious, and a holy life is the best, and it
is a continual prayer; and repentance is the best argument to move God to
mercy, because it is the instrument to unite our prayers to the intercession of
the Holy

SERMON, V. Part II.
AFter these evidences of Scripture, and reason derived from its analogy, there
will be less necessity to take any particular notices of those little
objections which are usually made from the experience of the success and
prosperities of evil persons. For true it is, there is in the world a
generation of men that pray long and loud, and ask for vile things, such which
they ought to fear, and pray against, and yet they are heard; The fat upon
Psalm, 22. 29.
earth eat and worship: But if these men ask things hurtful and sinful, it
is certain God hears them not in mercy: They pray to Saul did to his
Armor-bearer, Sta super me and interfice me, stand upon me and kill me; and he
that obeyed his voice did him dishonor and sinned against the head of his
King, and his own life. And the vicious persons of old prayed to Laverna,

-- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
Give me a prosperous robbery, a rich prey, and secret escape, let the Spirit
of holiness, and he that prays with the Spirit must be made like to the
Spirit, he is first sanctified and made holy, and then made fervent, and then
his prayer ascends beyond the cloud; first he is renewed in the spirit of his
mind, and then he is inflamed with holy fires, and guided by murderer, he
has his Laverna too, by which all his desires are guided, praecentor or the
rector chori the it is anger, if it descends upon good men, it is a curse, if
upon evil men, it is a sin, and then it is a present curse, and leads on to an
eternal infelicity. Plutarch reports that the Tyrians tied their gods with
chains, because certain persons did dream that Apollo said he would leave their
City, and go to the party of Alexander, who then besieged the town: and
Apollodorus tells of some that tied the image of Saturn with bands of wool
upon his feet. So are some Christians; they think God is tied to their sect,
and bound to be of their side and the interest Nero's Mother prayed
passionately that her son might be Emperor; and many persons of whom S. James
speaks, pray to spend upon their lusts, and they are Julian the Apostate
prayed, and sacrificed, and inquired of Demons, and burned man's flesh, and
operated with secret rites, and all that he might craftily and powerfully
oppose the religion of Christ, and he was heard too, and did mischief beyond
the malice and effect of his predecessors, that did swim in Christian blood:
but when we sum up the accounts at the foot of their lives, or so soon as the
thing was understood, and find that the effect of Agrippina's prayer was,
James, that they were given over to the tyranny and possession of their
passions, and baser appetites; and the effect of Julian the Apostate's prayer
was, that he lived and died a professed enemy of Christ; and the effect of the
prayers of usurpers is, that they do mischief, and reap curses, and undo
mankind, and provoke God, and live hated, and die miserable, and shall
possess the fruit of their sin to eternal ages; these will be no objections
to the truth of the former discourse, but greater instances, that if by hearing
our prayers we mean, or intend a blessing, we must also by making prayers the
man first be holy and his desires just and charitable, before he can be
admitted to the throne of grace, or converse with God by the entercourses of a
prosperous prayer.

That Is the first general. 2. Many times good men pray, and their prayer is
not a sin, but yet it returns empty; because although the man be, yet the
prayer is not in proper disposition; and here I am to account to you concerning
the collateral and accidental hindrances of the prayer of a good man.

The first thing that hinders the prayers of a good man from obtaining its
effect is a violent anger, a violent storm in the spirit of and often hindered,
and never hasty, and is full of mercy; prayer Jesus, and smooth like the heart
of God; and then it ascends to heaven upon the wings of the holy dove, and
dwells with God till it returns like the useful Be, laden with a blessing
and the dew of heaven.

But besides this; anger is a combination of many other things every one of
which is an enemy to prayer; it is (...), and (...) and (...), and it is (...),
and it is (...), and it is (...), and (...), so it is in the several
definitions of it, and in its natural constitution. It has sorrow, and the
heats of lust, and the disease of revenge, and the boylings of a fever, and
the rashness of praecipitancy, and the disturbance of persecution; and
therefore is a certain effective enemy against prayer which ought to be a
spiritual joy, and an act of mortification; and to have in it no hears but of
charity and zeal; and they are to be guided by prudence and consideration, Paul
gave caution, that the sun should not go down upon our anger, meaning, that it
should not stay upon us till evening prayer; for it would hinder our evening
sacrifice; but the stopping of the first egressions of anger, is a certain
artifice of the Spirit of God to prevent unmercifulness, which turns not only
our desires into vanity, but our prayers into sin; and remember that Elijah's
anger, though it was also zeal, had so discomposed his spirit when the two
Kings came to inquire of the Lord, that though he was a good man and a Prophet,
yet he could not pray, could not inquire of the Lord, till by rest and music
he had gathered himself into the evennesse of a dispassionate and recollected
mind; therefore let your prayers be without wrath. (...), for God by many
significations has taught us, that when men go to the altars to pray, or to
give thanks, they must bring no sin, or violent passion along with them to the
sacrifice, said Philo.

2. Indifferency and easiness of desire is a great enemy to the success of a
good man's prayer; When Plato gave Diogenes a great Cynic thanked him with his
rude expression; Cum interrogaris quot sint duo and duo, respondes viginti; ita
non secundum ea quae rogaris das, nec ad ea quae interrogaris respondes: Thou
neither answerest to the question thou art asked, nor give according as thou
art desired; but being inquired of, how many are two and two, thou answerest
twenty. So it is with God and us in the intercourse of our prayers: we pray for
health, and he gives it us, it may be, a sickness that carries us to eternal
life; we pray for necessary support for our persons and families, and he gives
us more then indifferency and lukewarmnesse; which although it has not in See
2. Sermon of lukewarmnesse and zeal.
it the direct nature of sin, yet it has this testimony from God,
lukewarmnesse or an indifferent spirit is an undervaluing of God and of
Religion, it is a separation of reason from affections, and a perfect
conviction of the understanding to the goodness of a duty, but a refusing to
follow what we understand. For he that lukewarm always understands the better
way, and seldom pursues it; he has so much reason as is sufficient, but he
will not obey it; his will does not follow the dictate of his understanding,
and therefore it is unnatural. It is like the fantastic fires of the night,
where there is light and no heat, and therefore may pass on to the real fires
of hell, where there is heat and no light; and therefore although an act of
lukewarmnesse is only an undecency, and no sin; yet a state of lukewarmnesse is
criminal, and sinful state of imperfection and undecency; an act of
indifferency hinders a single prayer from being accepted; but a state of it
makes the person ungracious James in his accounts concerning an effective
prayer, not only requires that he be a just man who prays, but his prayer must
be fervent; (...), an effectual fervent prayer, so our English reads it; it
must be an intent, zealous, busy, operative prayer; for consider what a huge
undeceney it is, that a man should speak to God for a thing that he values not;
or that he should not value a thing, without which he cannot be happy; or that
he should spend his religion upon a trifle; and if it be not a trifle, that he
should not spend his affections upon it. If our prayers be for temporal
things, I Qui comedit quod fuit and quod non fuit, he eat all and more then
all, what was set of felicity; and if we can have fondnesses for things
indifferent, or dangerous, our prayers upbraid our spirits when we beg coldly
and Indian hills.

He that is cold and tame in his prayers, has not tasted of the deliciousness
of Religion, and the goodness of God; he is a stranger to the secrets of the
Kingdom, and therefore he does not know what it is either to have hunger or
satiety; and therefore neither are they hungry for God, nor satisfied with the
world, but remain I cried day and night before thee, O Lord; my soul refused
comfort; my throat is dry with calling upon my God, my knees are weak through
fasting; and, Let me alone, says God to Moses; and, I will not let thee go
till thou have blessed me, said Jacob to the Angel. And I shall tell you a
short character of a fervent prayer out of the practice of S. Hierome, in his
Epistle to Eustochium de custodia virginitatis. Being destitute of all help I
threw my self down at the feet of Jesus; I watered his feet with tears, and
wiped them with my hair, and mortified the lust of my flesh with the abstinence
and hungry diet of many weeks; I remember that in my crying to sang to God, We
will run after thee into the smell and deliciousness of thy precious
ointments; such a prayer as this will never But though your person be as
gracious as David or Job, and your desire as holy as the love of Angels, and
your necessities great as a new penitent, yet it pierces not the clouds,
unless it be also as loud as thunder, passionate as the cries of women, and
clamorous as necessity. And we may guess at the degrees of importunity by the
insinuation of the Apostle: Let the married abstain for a time, ut vacent
orationi and jejunio, that they may attend to Prayer; it is a great attendance,
and a long diligence that is promoted by such a separation; and supposes a
devotion that spends more then many hours; for ordinary prayers, and many tawny
face of an Indian slave: and when in order to your hopes of obtaining a great
blessing, you reckon up your prayers with which you have solicited Christ
prayed (...) with loud cryings, and S. Paul made mention of his scholars in his
prayers night and day. Fall upon your knees and grow there, and let not your
desires cool, nor your zeal remit, but renew it again and again, and let not
your offices and the custom of praying put thee in mind of thy need, but let
thy need draw thee to thy holy offices; and remember how great a God, how
glorious a Majesty you speak to, therefore let not your devotions and addresses
be little. Remember how great a need thou have; let not your desires be less.
Remember how great the thing is you pray for; do not undervalue it with thy
indifferency. Remember that prayer is an act of Religion; let it therefore be
made thy business: and lastly, Remember that God hates a cold prayer, and
therefore will never bless it, but it shall be always ineffectuall.

3. Under this title of lukewarmnesse and tepidity may be comprised also these
Cautions: that a good man's prayers are sometimes inadvertency, sometimes by
want of perseverance. For inadvertency or want of attendance to the sense and
intention of our prayers, it is certainly an effect of lukewarmnesse, and a
certain companion and appendage to humane infirmity; and is only so remedyed as
our prayers are made zealous, and our infirmities pass into the strengths of
the Spirit. But if we were quick in our perceptions, either concerning our
danger, or our need, or the excellency

But concerning perseverance, the consideration is something distinct. For when
our prayer is for a great matter, and a great necessity, strictly attended to,
yet we pursue it only by chance or humor, by the strengths of fancy, and
natural disposition; or else our choice is cool as soon as hot, like the
emissions of lightning, or like a sunbeam often interrupted with a cloud, or
cooled with intervening showers: and our prayer is without fruit because Simon
Magus, or the trembling of Felix, or the Jews devotion for seven days of
unleavened bread, during the Passover or the feast of Tabernacles; but if we
would secure the blessing of our prayers, and the effect of our prayers, we
must never leave till we have obtained what we need.

There are many that pray against a temptation for a month together, and so
long as the prayer is servent, so long the man has a nolition, and a direct
enmity against the lust; he consents not Israel prevailed no longer then Moses
held up his hands in prayer; and he was forced to continue his prayer, till the
going down of the Sun; that is, till the danger was over, till the battle was
done. But when our desires, and prayers are in the matter of spiritual danger,
they must never be remitted, because our danger continues for ever, and
therefore so must Vult n. Deus rogari, vult cogi, vult quadam importunitate
vinci (says S. Gregory) God loves to be invited, entreated, importuned with an
unquiet, restless desire and a persevering prayer. (...), said Proclus. That Is
a holy and a religious prayer, that never gives over, but renewes the prayer,
and dwells upon the desire; for this only is effectual. (...), God hears the
persevering man, and the unwearied prayer. For it is very considerable, that we
be very curious to observe; that many times a lust is sopita, non mortua, it is
asleep; the enemy is at truce, and at quiet for watch thereunto with prayer and
continual diligence. And when your temptations let you alone, let not you God
alone; but lay up prayers and the blessings of a constant devotion against the
day of trial. Well may your temptation sleep, but if your prayers do so, you
may chance to be awakened with an assault that may ruin you. However, the rule
is easy: Whatsoever you need, ask it of God so long as you

4. The prayers of a good man are oftentimes hindered, and destiture of their
effect for want of praying in good company; for sometimes an evil or an
obnoxious person has so secured and ascertained a mischief to himself, that he
that stays in his company or his cratfick must also share in his punishment:
and the Tyrian sailers with all their vows and prayers could not obtain a
prosperous voyage so long Jonas was within the Bark; for in this case the
interest is divided, and the public sin prevails above the private piety. When
the Philosopher asked a penny of Antigonus, he told him it was too little for a
King to give; when he asked a talent, he told him it was too much for a
Philosopher to receive; for he did purpose to cosen his own charity, and elude
the others necessity, upon pretense of a double inequality. So it is in the
case of a good man mingled in evil company: if a curse be too severe for a
good man, a mercy is not to be expected by evil company; and his prayer, when
it is made in common, must partake of that event of things Absalom in the
simplicity of their heart, yet his intermediall fortune, and the event of his
present affairs may be the same with Absaloms; and it is not a light thing,
that we curiously choose the parties of our Communion. I do not say it is
necessary to avoid all the society of evil persons; for then we must go out of
the world; and when we have thrown out a drunkard, possibly we have entertained
an hypocrite; Corah and his company that rebelled against Moses their Prince;
and Dathan and Abiram that made a schism in Religion against Aaron the Priest:
for so said the Spirit of the Lord, Come out from the congregation of these
men, lest ye perish in their company; and all those that were abused in their
communion, did perish in the gain* saying of Corah. It is a sad thing to see a
good man cousened by fair pretenses, and allured into an evil snare; for
besides, that he dwells in danger, and cohabits with a dragon, and his virtue
may change by evil persuasion, into an evil disposition, from sweetness to
bitterness, from thence to evil speaking, from thence to believe a lie, and
from believing to practice it; besides this, it is a very great sadness, that
such a man should lose all his prayers to very many purposes: God will not
respect the offering of those men who assemble by a peevish spirit; and
therefore although God in pity regards the desires of a good man if innocently
abused, yet as it unites keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, we
cannot have the blessing of the Spirit in the returns of a holy prayer; and all
those assemblies which meet together against God or Gods Ordinances, may pray
and call, and cry loudly, and frequently, and still they provoke God to anger;
and many times he holy assembly, that is, holy in their desires, lawful in
their authority, though the persons be of different complexion, then the prayer
flies up to God like the hymns of a Quire of Angels; for God that made body and
soul to be one man, and God and man to be one Christ, and three persons are one
God, and his praises are sung to him by Quires, and the persons are joined in
orders, and the orders into hierarchies, and all, that God may be served by
unions and communities, loves that his Church should imitate the Concords of
heaven, and the

The sum is this, If the man that makes the prayer be an unholy person, his
prayer is not the instrument of a blessing, but a curse; but when the sinner
begins to repent truly, then his desires begin to be holy. But if they be holy,
and just, and good, yet they are without profit and effect, if the prayer be
made in schism, or an Laelius (apud Cicer. de senectute) said concerning old
age, neque in summa inopia levis esse senectus potest, ne sapienti quidem, nec
insipienti etiam in summa copta non gravis; that a wise man could not bear old
age if it were extremely poor; and yet if it were very rich, it were
intolerable to a fool; we may say concerning our prayers; they are sins and
unholy, if a wicked man makes them, and yet if they be made by a good man they
are ineffective, unless they be improved by their proper dispositions. A good
man cannot prevail in his prayers, if his desires be cold, and his affections
trifling, and his industry soon weary, and his society criminal; and if all
these appendages of prayer be observed, yet they will do no good to an evil
man, for his prayer that begins in sin, shall end in sorrow.

SERMON, VI. Part, III.
3. NExt I am to inquire and consider; what degrees and circumstances of piety
are required to make us fit to be intercessors for others, and to pray for them
with probable effect? I say with probable effect; for when the event
principally depends upon that which is not within our own election, such as are
the lives and actions of others, all that we can consider in this affair is,
whether we be persons fit to pray in the behalf of others that hinder not, but
are persons within the limit and possibilities of the presentmercy. When the
Emperor Maximinus womb and the grave, of providence and rain, could not
obtain for their bloody Emperor one drop of mercy, but he must die miserable
for over. God would not be entreated for him, and though he loved the prayer
because he loved the Advocates, yet Maximinus was not worthy to receive the
blessing. And it was threatened to the rebellious people of Israel, and by them
to all people that should sin grievously against the Lord, God would break
their staff of bread, and even the righteous should not be prevailing
intercessors; Though Noah, Job, or Daniel Ezekiel. 14. 14.
were there, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
says the Lord God: and when Abraham prevailed very far with God in the behalf
of Sodom, and the five Cities of the Plain; it had its period; If there had
been ten righteous in Sodom it should have been spared for their sakes, but
four only were found, and they only delivered their own souls too; but
neither their righteousness, nor Abraham's prayer prevailed any further; and we
If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask and
1 Ioh. 5. 16.
he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. At his prayer the
sinner shall receive pardon; God shall give him life for them, to him that
prays in their behalf that sin; provided it be not a sin unto death. For there
is a sin unto death, but I do not say that he shall pray for it. There his
Commission expires, and his power is confined. For there are some sins of that
state and greatness that God will not pardon. S. Austin in his books de
sermon Domini in monte affirms it, concerning some one single sin of a perfect
malice. Origin and Athanasius, and is followed by venerable Bede; and whether
the Apostle means a peculiar state of sin, or some one single great crime which
also supposes a precedent and a present state of criminal condition; it is
such a thing as will hinder our prayers from prevailing in their behalf; we are
therefore not encouraged to pray, because they cannot receive the benefit of
Christ's intercession, and therefore much less of our Advocation, which only
can prevail by virtue and participation of his mediation. For whomsoever Christ
prays, for them we pray, that is, for all them that are, within the covenant
of repentance, sorrow, or restitution, or recompense, or acknowledgment.
However, though it may be uncertain and disputed concerning the number of sins
unto death, and therefore to pray, or not to pray, is not matter of duty; yet
it is all one, as to the effect, whether we know them or no; for though we
intend charity when we pray for the worst of men, yet concerning the event God
will take care, and will certainly John so expresses it as if he had left the
matter of duty undetermined; because the instances are uncertain; yet the event
is certainly none at all, therefore because we are not encouraged to pray, and
because it is a sin unto death, that is, such a sin that has no portion in the
promises of life, and the state of repentance. But now, suppose the man for
whom we pray to be capable of mercy, within the covenant of repentance, and
not far from the Kingdom of heaven; yet,

2ly. No prayers of others can further prevail then to remove this person to
the next stage in order to felicity. When S. Monica prayed for her son, she did
not pray to God to save him, but to co^vert him; and when God intended to
reward the prayers and alms of Cornelius, he did not do it by giving him a
Crown, but by sending an Apostle to him to make him a Christian; the meaning of

2. As the persons must be capable for whom we pray, so they that pray for
others must be persons extraordinary in something: of an extraordinary piety,
they are apt to be intercessors for others. This appears in the case of Job:
When the wrath of God was kindled against Eliphaz, and his two friends, Chap.
42. 7, 8.
God commanded them to offer a sacrifice; but my servant Job shall pray for
you, for him will I accept: and it was so in the case of the prevaricating
Israelites; God was full of indignation against them, and smote them, Then
stood up Phinehas and prayed, and the plague ceased. For this man was a good
man, and the spirit of an extraordinary zeal filled him, and he did glory to
God in the execution Zimri and his fair Madianite. And it was a huge blessing
that was entailed upon the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; because they
had a great Religion, a great power with God, and their extraordinary did
consist especially in the matter of prayers and devotion; for that was eminent
in them besides their obedience: for so Maimonides tells concerning them, that
Abraham first instituted Morning prayer. The affairs of Religion had not the
same constitution then as now. They worshipped God never but at their
Memorials, and in places, and seldom times of separation. The bowed their head
when they came to a hallowed stone, and upon the top of their staff, and
worshipped when they came to a consecrated pillar, but this was seldom; and
they knew not the secrets and the privileges of a frequent prayer, of
intercourses with God by ejaculations, and the advantages of importunity: and
the Doctors of the Jews that record the prayer of Noah, who in all reason knew
the secret best, because he was to teach it to all the world, yet have
Abraham's family, there began to be a new institution of offices, and Abraham
appointed that God should be prayed to every morning. Isaac being taught by
Abraham, made a law, or at least commended the practice, and adopted it into
the Religion, that God should be worshipped by decimation or tithing of our
goods; and he added afternoon; and Jacob to make up the office complete added
evening prayer; and God was their God, and they became fit persons to bless,
that is, of procuring blessings to their relatives; as appears in the instances
of their own families; of the King of Egypt, and the Cities of the Plain. For a
man of an ordinary piety is like Gideons fleece, wet in its own locks; but it
could not water a poor man's Garden. But so does a thirsty land drink all the
dew of heaven that wets its face, and a great shower makes no torrent, nor digs
so much as a little furrow that the drils of the water might pass into rivers,
or refresh their neighbors Nilus.

But then do but consider what a great engagement this is to a very strict and
holy life. If we chance to live in times of an extraordinary trouble, or if our
relatives can be capable of great dangers, or great sorrows, or if we our
selves would do the Semper tu hoc facito ut cogites, Id optimum esse, tute ut
sis optimus; si id nequeas, saltem ut optimis sis proximus. He that is the best
man toward God, is certainly the best Minister to his Prince or Country, and
therefore Elijah was taken into heaven, Elisha mourned for him because it was a
loss to Israel: My Father, my father, the chariots of Israel and horsemen
thereof: But consider how useless thou art, when thou can not by thy prayers
obtain so much mercy as to prevail for the life of a single Trooper, or in a
plague beg of God for the life of a poor Maidservant; but the ordinary
emanations of providence shall proceed

And yet every man that is in the state of grace, every man that can pray
without a sinful prayer, may also intercede for others; and it is a duty for
all men to do it; all men I say who can pray at all acceptably; I will
therefore that prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men; and this is a duty that is prescribed to all them
that are concerned in the in the same degree in which his person is gracious.
There are strange things in heaven; judgments there are made of things and
persons by the measures of Religion; and a plain promise produces effects of
wonder and miracle; and the changes that are there made are not effected by
passions, and interests, and corporal changes, and the love that is there is
not the same thing that it is here, it is more beneficial, more reasonable,
more holy, of other designs, and strange productions; and upon that stock it
is that a holy poor man that possesses no more (it may be) then an Ewe-lambe,
that eats of his bread, and drinks of his cup, and is a daughter to him, and is
all his temporal portion, this poor man is ministered to by Angels, and
attended to by God, and the Holy Spirit makes intercession

2ly. That we should prevail in intercessions for others, we are to regard and
to take care, that as our piety, so also must our offices be extraordinary. He
that prays to recover a family from Mamercus Bishop of Vienna, seeing his City
and all the Diocese in great danger of perishing by an earthquake, instituted
great Letanies, and solemn supplications, besides the ordinary devotions of his
usual hours of prayer; and the Church from his example took up Mark's day did
solemnly intercede with God to divert or prevent his judgments falling upon the
people, majoribus Litaniis, so they are called; with the more solemn
supplications they did pray unto God in behalf of their people. And this has
in it the same consideration that is in every great necessity; for it is a
great thing for a man to be so gracious with God, as to be able to prevail for
himself and his friend, for himself and his relatives; and therefore in these
cases, as in all great needs, it is the way of prudence and security, that we
use all those greater praying together in public with united hearts, and above
all, praying in the susception and communication of the holy Sacrament; God
never refuses to hear a holy prayer, and our prayers can never be so holy, as
when they are offered up in the union of Christ's sacrifice: For Christ by that
sacrifice reconciled God and the world. And because then be their greatest
needs, that is their greatest advantage, and instrument of acceptance.
Therefore if you have a great need to be served, or a great charity to serve,
and a great pity to minister, and a dear friend in a sorrow, take Christ along
in thy prayers, in all thy ways thou can take him; take him in affection, and
take him in a solemnity, take him by obedience and receive him in the
Sacrament; and if thou then offerest up thy prayers and make thy needs known,
if thou nor thy friend be not relieved, if thy party be not prevalent, and the
war be not appeased, or the in time, or thou may trust with God, who
certainly does it with viz.

That in our importunity and extraordinary offices for others, we must nor make
our accounts by multitude of words, and long prayers, but by the measures of
the Spirit, by the holiness of the soul, and the just nesse of the desire, and
the usefulness of the request, and its order to Gods glory, and its place in
the order of providence, and the sincerity of our heart, and the charity of our
wishes, and the perseverance of our advocation. There are some (as Tertullian
observes) qui loquacitatem facundiam existimant, at impudentiam constantiam
deputant; They are praters, and they are impudent, and they call that constancy
and importunity: concerning which, the advice is easy: Many words or few are
extrinsecall to the nature, and not at all considered in the effects of prayer;
but much desire and much holiness, are essential to its constitution; but we
must be very curious that our importunity do not degenerate into impudence and
a rude boldness. Capitolinus said of Antonius the Emperor and Philosopher,
sane quamvis esset constans, erat etiam verecundus; he was modest even when he
was most pertinacious in his desires. So must we; though we must not be Rebus
semper pudor absit in arctis, and in this sense it is true that Stasimus in the
Comedy said concerning Mear, Verecundari neminem apud mensam decet, Nam ibi de
divinis and humanis cernitur: Men must not be bashful so as to lose their
meat; for that is a necessity that cannot be dispensed withal: so it is in
our prayers, whatsoever our necessity calls to us for, we must call to God for;
and he is not pleased with that rusticity or fond modesty of being ashamed to
ask of God any thing that is honest and necessary; yet our importunity has
also bounds of modesty, but such as are to be expressed with other
significations; and he is rightly modest toward God, who Distrust of our
selves: 2. Confidence in God: 3. Humility of person: 4. Reverence of address:
and 5. Submission to Gods will: These are all, unless also you will add that
of Solomon: Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to
Eccles. 5. 2.
utter a thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore
let thy words be few. These things being observed, let your importunity be as
great as it can, it is still the more likely to prevail, by how much it is the
more earnest, and signified and represented by the most offices extraordinary.

3ly. The last great advantage toward a prevailing intercession for others,
is, that the person that prays for his relatives, be a person of an
extraordinary dignity, employment or designation. For God has appointed some
persons and callings of men to pray for others, such are Fathers for their
Children, Bishops for their Dioceses, Kings for their Subjects, and the whole
Order Ecclesiastical for all the men and women in the Christian Church. And it
is well it is so; for as things are now, and have been too long, how few are
there that understand it to be their duty, or part of their necessary
employment, that some of their time, and much of their prayers, and an equal
portion of their desires be spent members one of another, or if we did not
think it when ever we can, and in all we can, set our hands to it; and if we
pity the Orphan children, and pray for them heartily, we would also, when we
could, relieve them charitably: but though it were therefore very well that
things were and all their desires. That this God has ordained and appointed,
Abraham and Abimelech: Now therefore Genesis 20. 7.
restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he will pray for thee, and
thou shall live; and this caused confidence in Micah: Now know I that the Lord
will do me good, seeing I have a Levite Judge. 17. 13.
to my Priest: meaning, that in his Ministry, in the Ministry of Priests, God
has established the alternate returns of blessing and prayers, the entercouses
between God and his people; And thorough the descending ages of the synagogue
it came to Ministry of Reconciliation, by their dispensing the holy
Sacraments, by the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, by Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, by binding and loosing, by the Word of God and Prayer; and therefore
says St. James, If any man be sick among you, let James 5. 14.
him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him: meaning
that God has appointed them especially, and will accept them in ordinary, and
extraordinary; and this is that which is meant by blessing. A Father blesses
his child, and Solomon blessed his Melchisedec the Priest blessed Abraham, and
Moses blessed the Sons of Israel, and God appointed the Leviticall Priests to
bless the congregation; and this is more then can be done by the people; for
though they can say the same prayer, and the People pray for their Kings, and
Children for their Parents, and the Flock for the Pastor, yet they cannot
bless him as he blesses them; for the less is blessed of the greater, and not
the greater of the less; and this is without all contradiction, said S. Paul:
Heb. 7. 7.
the meaning of the mystery is this, That God has appointed the Priest to
pray for the People, and because he has made it to found in the way of
righteousness, is the surer way to prevail in his intercessions for the
people.

But upon this stock comes in the greatest difficulty of the text: for if God
hears not sinners, there is an infinite necessity that the Ministers of
Religion should be very holy: For all their ministeries consist in preaching
and praying; to these two are reducible, all the ministeries Ecclesiastical
which are of divine institution: so the Apostles summed up their employment;
But we will give our selves Act. 6. 4.
continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word; to exhort, to
reprove, to comfort, to cast down, to determine cases of conscience, and to
rule in the Church by the word of their proper Ministry; and the very making
laws Ecclesiastical, is the ministry of the word; for so their dictates
pass into laws by being duties enjoined by God, or the acts, or exercises, or
instruments prayer is reduced administration of the Sacraments: but binding and
loosing, and visitation of the sick are mixed offices, partly relating to one,
partly to the other. Now although the Word of God preached, will have a great
effect, even though it be preached by an evil Minister, a vicious person; yet
it is not so well there, as from a pious man; because by prayer also his
preaching is made effectual, and by his good example his Homilies and Sermons
are made active; and therefore it is very necessary in respect of this half of
the Ministers office, [The preaching of Word] he be a good man; unless he be,
much perishes to the people, most of the advantages are lost. But then for the
other half; all those ministeries which are by way of prayer are rendered
extremely invalid, and ineffectuall, if they be ministered by an evil person.
For upon this very stock it was that St. Cyprian affirmed that none were to be
chosen to the Ministry but immaculati and integri antistites, holy and upright
men, who offering their sacrifices worthily to God, and holily, may be heard in
their prayers which they make for the safety of the Lords people. But he
presses Lib. 1. ep. 4.
this caution to a further issue: that it is not only necessary to choose holy
persons to these holy Ministeries for fear of losing the advantages Nec enim
sibi plebs blandiatur quasi immunis a contagione delicti esse possit cum
sacerdote peccatore communicans, the people cannot be innocent if they
communicate with a vicious priest: for so said the Lord by the Prophet Hosea,
Sacrificia eorum panis luctus; their sacrifices are like bread of sorrow,
whosoever eat thereof shall be defiled. The same also he says often and more
vehemently, ibid. and lib. 4. ep. 2. But there is yet a further degree of this
evil. It is not only a dead hand, the blessings vain, their sacrifices
rejected, their ordinations imperfect, their order is vanished, their character
is extinguished, and the holy Ghost will not descend upon the mysteries when he
is invocated by unholy hands and unsanctified lips. This is a sad story, but it
is expressly affirmed by Dionysius, by St. Hierom upon the Ad Demo.
Zephaniah, affirming that they do wickedly who affirm eucharistiam imprecantis
facere verba, non vitam, and necessariam esse tantum solennem orationem and non
sacerdotum merita: that the Eucharist is consecrated by the Word and solemn
prayer, and not by the life and holiness of the Priest; and by St. Gelasius 1.
q. 1. c. sacrosancta.
by the Author of the imperfect work attributed to St. Chrysostom Homil. 53.
who quotes the 8th. book of the Apostolical Constitutions for the same
Doctrine; Bovius In scholiis ad hunc locum.
and Sixtus Senensis Lib. 6, A. D. 108. Biblioth.
accuse both the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, and St. Hierom and
the Author of these Homilies to be guilty of the Doctrine of John Hus, who for
the crude delivery of this truth was sentenced by the council of Constance. To
the same sense and signification of Doctrine is that which is generally agreed
upon by almost all persons; that he that enters into his Ministry by Simony
receives nothing but a curse, which is expressly affirmed by Petrus Damiani Ep.
16. Biblioth. pp. tom. 3. n. 19.
and Tarasius Decret. 1. q. 1. ad c. eos qui.
the Patriarch of Constantinople, by St. Gregory Lib. 6. regist. 5. in decretis
and l. 7. c. 120.
, and St. Ambrose De dignit. sacerd. c. 5.
.

For if the holy Ghost leaves polluted Temples and unchaste bodies, if he takes
away his grace from them that abuse it, if the holy Ghost would not have
descended upon Simon Magus at the prayer of St. Peter, if St. Peter had taken
money for him: it is but reasonable to believe the holy Ghost will not descend
upon the simoniacall, unchaste Concubinaries, Schismatics and scandalous
Priests, and excommunicate. And beside the reasonableness of the Doctrine, it
is also further affirmed by the council of Neocaesarea, by St. Can. 9. orat.
4. de sacerd.
Chrysostom, 1. in ep. 20. hom. 1. part. 2. ep. 27.
Innocentius, Ep. 9. tom. 3 ad Michael. imperater. d. in 4 did. 13.
Nicolaus the first, and by the Master of the Sentences upon the saying of God
by the Prophet Malachic. Maledicam benedictionibus vestris, I will curse your
blessings; upon the stock of these Scriptures, reasons, and authorities, we may
see how we are to understand this advantage of intercession. The prayer and
offices of holy Ministers are of great advantages for the interest of the
people; but if they be ministered to by evil men, by vicious, and scandalous
Ministers, this extraordinary advantage is lost, they are left to stand alone,
or to fall by their own crimes; so much as is the action of God, and so much as
is the piety of the man that attends and prays in the holy place with the
Priest, so far he shall prevail, but no further; and therefore the Church
Quoniam me peccatorem inter te and eundem populum Medium esse voluisti, licet
in me boni operis testimonium non agnoscas, officium dispensationiis creditae
non recuses, nec per me indignum famulum tuum eorum salutis pereat pretium, pro
quibus victima factus salutaris, dignatus es fieri redemptio. For we must know
that God has not put the salvation of any man into the power of another. And
although the Church of Rome by calling the Priests actual intention simply
necessary, and the Sacraments also indispensably necessary, has left it in the
power of every Curate to damn very and the mercies of God. But although the
greatest interest of salvation a fellowworker with God in the work of his
salvation; and as in our devotion, no one prayer of our own alone prevails upon
God for grace and salvation, but all the devotions of our life are upon Gods
account for them; so is the blessing of God brought upon the people by all the
parts of their religion, and by all assistances of holy people, and by the
ministeries not of one, but of all Gods Ministers, and relies finally upon our
own faith, and obedience, persons of a great piety, of a holy calling, and by
the most solomn offices.

Lastly, I promised to consider concerning the signs of having our prayers
heard; concerning which, there is not much of particular observation; but if
our prayers be according to the warrant of Gods Word, if we ask according to
Gods will, things the thing signified; when we feel the effect, then we are
sure God has heard us; but till then we are to leave it with God, and not to
ask a sign of that, for which he has made us a promise. And yet Cassian has
named one sign, which if you give me leave I will name unto you. It is a sign
we shall prevail in our Collat. 9. cap. 32.
prayers, when the Spirit of God moves us to pray, cum fiducia and quasi
securitate impetrandi, with a confidence and a holy security of receiving what
we ask. But this is no otherwise a sign, but because not lawful, has made an
unholy prayer; if it be lawful and not profitable, we are then heard when God
denies us; and if both these he that doubts is a sinner, and then God will not
hear him; but beyond this I know no confidence is warrantable; and if this be a
sign of prevailing, then all the prudent prayers of all holy men shall
certainly be heard, and because that is certain, we need no further inquiry
into signs.

I sum up all in the words of God by the Prophet: Run Ierem. 5. 1.
to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in the
broad places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, that seeks truth, virum quaerentem fidem, a man that seeks for
faith, and propitius ero ei, and I will pardon it. God would pardon all
Jerusalem for one Ruffinus spoke a great thing, but it was hugely true: Quis
dubitet mundum stare precibus sanctorum? the world it self is established and
kept from dissolution by the prayers of Saints; and the prayers of Saints shall
hasten the day of Judgment; and we cannot easily find two effects greater. But
there are many other very great ones; for the prayers of holy men appease Gods
wrath, drive away temptations, resist and overcome the Devil: Holy prayer
procures the ministry and Prayer that can do thus much for us, can do nothing
at all without holiness; for God hears not sinners, but if any man be a
worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.

Sermon, VII. Of godly Fear, etc. Part I.
Heb. 12. part of the 28th. and the 29th. verses. Let us have Grace whereby we
may serve God with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire.
(...), so our Testaments usually read it from the authority of Theophylact;
Let us have grace: But some copies read it in the indicative mood (...), we
have grace, by which we do serve; and it is something better consonant to the
discourse of the Apostle. For having enumerated the great advantages which the
Gospel has above those of the Law, he makes an argument a majori; and Sinai,
the Gospel from Mount Sion, from the heavenly Jerusalem: The Law was given
with terrors and noises, with amazements of the standers by, and Moses himself
the Minister did exceedingly quake and fear, and gave demonstration how
infinitely dangerous it was by breaking that Law to provoke so mighty a God,
who with his voice did shake the earth; but the Gospel was given by a meek
Prince, a gentle Savior, with a still voice, scarce heard in the streets. But
that this may be no objection, See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if
they escaped not Verse. 25.
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven: for as God Haggai, which the Apostle
quotes here, he once shook the earth. But, once 2. 7.
more I shake, (...), it is in the Prophecy; I will shake not the earth only,
but also heaven with a greater terror then was upon Mount Sinai, with the voice
of an Archangell, with the trump of God, with a concussion so great, that
heaven and earth shall be shaken in pieces, and new ones come in their room.
This is an unspeakable and an unimaginable terror: Mount Sinai was shaken, but
it stands to this day, but the things that are shaken shall be no more; that
those things that cannot be shaken may remain, that is, not only that the
clestiall Jerusalem may remain for ever, but that you who do not turn away from
the faith and obedience of the Lord Jesus, you who cannot be shaken nor removed
from your duty, you may remain for ever; that when the rocks rend, and the
mountains fly in pieces like the drops of a broken cloud, and the heavens
shall melt, and the Sun shall be a globe of consuming fire, and the Moon shall
be dark like an extinguished candle, then you poor men who could be made to
tremble with an ague, or shake by Moses: as it was then, so it is true now, Our
God is a consuming fire: He Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
was so to them that brake the Law, but he will be much more to them that
disobey his Son, he made great changes then, but those which remain are far
greater, and his terrors are infinitely more intolerable; and therefore
although he came not in the spirit of Elias, but with meekness and gentle
insinuations, soft as the breath of heaven, not willing to disturb the softest
stalk of a violet, yet his second coming shall be with terrors, such as shall
amaze all the world, and dissolve it into ruin, and a Chaos. This truth is of
so we therefore have grace, that is, we have such a motive to make us reverence
God and fear to offend him, that he that dares continue in sin and refuses to
hear him that speaks to us hypothesi, and in his own ruin, which the Apostle
declares in thesi, and by way of caution, and provisionary terror, Our God is a
consuming fire; this is the sense and design of the text.

Reverence and godly fear, they are the effects of this consideration, they are
the duties of every Christian, they are the grace of God. I shall not press
them only to purposes of awfulnesse and modesty of opinion, and prayers against
those strange doctrines reverence and godly fear, are therefore to be avoided
because Etymologicum, whatsoever is terrible is destructive of that thing for
which it is so; and if we fear the evil effects of sin, let us fly from it,
we ought to fear its alluring face too; let us be so afraid, that we may not
dare to refuse to hear him whose Throne is heaven, whose Voice is thunder,
whose Tribunal is clouds, whose Seat is the right hand he is a consuming fire,
that is, dwell in the everlasting burnings.

(...), Reverence and caution, modesty and fear, (...), so it is in some
copies, with caution and fear; or if we render Hesychius (...), then the
expression is the same in both words, and it is all one with the other places
of Scripture, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, degrees of the
same duty, and they signify all those actions and graces which are the proper
effluxes of fear; such as are reverence, prudence, caution, and diligence,
chastity and a sober spirit: (...), so also say the Grammarians; and it means
plainly this; since our God will appear so terrible at his second coming, let
us pass the time of our sojourning 1 Pet. 1. 17.
here in fear, that is, modestly without too great confidence soberly without
bold crimes, which when a man acts he must put on shamelessness; reverently
toward God, as fearing to offend him; diligently observing his commandments,
inquiring after his will, trembling at his voice, attending to his Word,
revering his judgments, fearing to provoke him to anger, for it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Thus far it is a duty.

Concerning which, that I may proceed orderly, I shall first consider how far
fear is a duty of Christian Religion. 2. Who

1. Fear is taken sometimes in holy Scripture for the whole duty of man, for
his whole Religion toward God. And now Israel what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
God, etc. fear is obedience, and fear is love, and fear is humility, because
it is the parent of all these, and is taken for the whole duty to which it is
an introduction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning Psalm. 111. 10.
of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, Eccles. 12.
13.
the praise of it endures for ever; and, Fear God and keep his 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man: and thus it is also used in
the New Testament: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 2. Fear is sometimes taken
for worship: for so our blessed Savior expounds the words of Moses in Mar. 4.
10. taken from Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, so Moses; Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, said our blessed
Savior: and so it was used by the Prophet Jonah, I am an Hebrew, and I fear
the Jonah 1. 9.
Lord the God of Heaven, that is, I worship him; he is the Deity Assyrians did
not do so, at the beginning of King. 17. 25.
their dwelling there, they feared not the Lord, that is, they worshipped other
Gods, and not the God of Israel, therefore God sent Lions among them which slew
many of them. Thus far fear Fear as it is a religious passion is divided as the
two Testaments are; and relates to the old and new Covenant, and accordingly
has its distinction. In the Law, God used his people like servants; in the
Gospel, he has made us to be sons. In the Law he enjoined many things, hard,
intricate, various, painful, and expensive; in the Gospel he gave
commandments, not hard, but full of pleasure, necessary and profitable to our
life, and well being of single persons and communities of men. In the Law, he
has exacted those in the Gospel, he makes abatement for humane infirmities,
temptations, moral necessities, mistakes, errors, for every thing that is
pitiable, for every thing that is not malicious, and voluntary. In the Law,
there are many threatenings, and but few promises, the promise of temporal
prosperities branched into single instances; in the Gospel, there are but few
threatenings, and many promises: And when God by Moses gave the 10
Commandments, only one of them was sent out with a promise, the precept of
obedience to all our parents and superiors; but when Christ in his first Sermon
recommended 8 duties, Christian duties to the College of Disciples, every one
of them begins grace is opposed to the Law. So that upon these differing
interests, the world Mat. 5. ad v. 10.
put on the affections of Servants, and Sons: They of old feared God Ioh. 1. 17.
as a severe Lord, much in his commands, abundant in threatenings, Romans 6. 14,
15.
angry in his executions, terrible in his name, in his Majesty, and appearance,
dreadful unto death; and this the Apostle calls (...), The spirit of bondage,
or of a servant. But we have not Romans 6. 15.
received that Spirit, (...), unto fear, not a servile fear, but the Spirit of
adoption and a filial fear we must have; God treats us like Malo vereri quam
timeri me a meis, said one in the Comedy, I had rather be reverend then feared
by my children. The English does Romans 8. 15. he calls (...), 2 Timothy 1. 7. The
spirit of bondage is the spirit rather of timorousness, of fearfulness rather
then fear; when we are fearful that God will use us harshly; or when we think
of the accidents that happen, worse then the things are, when they are
proportioned by Aristotle, Good men are guided by reverence, not by fear, and
they avoid not that which is afflictive, but that which is dishonest: they are
not so good whose rule is otherwise. But that we may take more exact measures,
I shall describe the proportions of Christian or godly fear by the following
propositions.

1. Godly fear is ever without despair; because Christian fear is an instrument
of duty, and that duty without hope can never go forward. For what should that
man do who like Nausiclides (...); at post quam adempta spes est, lassus, cura
confectus stupet, if you take away the hope the mind is weary, spent with
care, hindered by amazements; aut aliquem sumpserimus temeraria in Deos
desperatione, says Arnobius; a despair of mercy makes men to despise God; and
the damned in hell when they shall for ever be without hope, are also without
fear; their hope is turned into Dionysius the Tyrant imposed intolerable
tributes upon his Sicilian subjects, it amazed them, and they petitioned and
cried for help, and flattered him, and feared and obeyed him carefully, but he
imposed still new ones, and greater, and at last left them poor as the valleys
of Vesuvius, or the top of Aetna; but then all being gone, the people grew
idle, and careless, and walked in the markets, and public places, cursing the
Tyrant, and bitterly scoffing his person and vices; which when Dionysius heard,
he caused his Publicans and Committees audaces cogimur esse metu. If our fears
be unreasonable, our diligence is none at all, and from whom we hope for
nothing, neither benefit nor indemnity, we despise his command and break his
yoke, and trample it under our most miserable feet. And therefore Aeschylus
calls these people (...), hot, mad, and furious, careless of what they do, and
he opposes them to pious and holy people. Let your confidence be allayed with
fear, and your fear the Devils still do evil things because they never hope to
receive a

2. Godly fear must always be with honorable opinion of God, without
disparagements of his mercies, without quarrellings at the intrigues of his
providence, or the rough ways of his Justice, and therefore it must be ever
relative to our selves and our own failings and imperfections. (...), God never
walks perversely toward us, unless we walk crookedly toward him. And
therefore persons that only consider the greatness and power of God, and dwell
for ever in the meditations of those severe executions which are transmitted to
us by story, or we observe by Saepius illud cogitant quid possit is cujus in
ditione sunt, quam quid debeat facere (Cicero pro Quinctio) they remember
oftener what God can do then what he will; being more afrighted at his
Judgments, then delighted with his mercy. Such as were the Lacedaemonians,
when ever they saw a man grow popular, or wise, or beloved, and by consequence
powerful, they turned him out of the country: and because they were afraid of
the power of Ismenias, and knew that Pelopidas and Pherenicus and Androclydes
could hurt them, if they listed, they banished them from Sparta, but they let
Epaminondas alone, (...), as being studious and therefore unactive, and poor
and therefore harmless; It is harder when men use God thus, and fear him as
the great Justiciar of the world, who sits in heaven, and observes all we do,
and cannot want excuse to punish all mankind. But this caution I have now
inserted for their sakes whose Schools and Pulpits raise doctrinall fears
concerning God, which if they were true, the greatest part of mankind would be
tempted to think they have reason not to love God, and all the other part
Heresy; that think God will exact the duties of a man by the measures of an
Angel, or will not make abatement for all our pitiable infirmities. The
precepts of this caution are, that we remember Gods mercy to be over all his
works, that is, that he shows mercy to all his creatures that need it; that
God delights to have his mercy magnified in all

3ly, Godly fear is operative, diligent, and isntrumental to caution and
strict walking: for so fear is the mother of holy living; and the Apostle urges
it by way of upbraiding: What! do we 1 Cor. 10. 22.
proveke God to anger? are we stronger then he? meaning, that if we be not
strong enough to struggle with a fever, if our voices reverent and obedient:
but that fear is unreasonable, servile, and unchristian, that ends in bondage
and servile affections, scruple and trouble, vanity and incredulity,
superstition and humble and devout prayers, and a strict and a holy piety,
(according to his laws) and glorifications of God, or speaking good things of
his holy Name; and then it cannot be amiss: we must be full of confidence
toward God, we must with cheerfulness rely upon Gods goodness for the issue
of our souls, and our final interest, but this expectation of the Divine mercy
must be in the ways of piety. Commit your selves 1 Pet. 4. 19.
to God in well-doing as unto a faithful Creator. Alcibiades was too timorous,
who being called from banishment refused to return, and being asked if he durst
not trust his country, answered, We must, we may most safely trust God with our
souls; the stake is great, but the venture is none at all. For he is our
Creator, and he is faithful; he is our Redeemer, and he bought them at a dear
rate; he is our Lord, and they are his own; he prays for them to his heavenly
Father, an interested person. So that he is a Party, and an Advocate, and a
Judge too; and therefore there can be no greater security in the world on Gods
part: and this is our hope, and our confidence: but because we are but earthen
vessels, under a law, and assaulted by enemies, and endangered by temptations,
therefore it concerns us to fear, lest we make God our enemy, and a party

1. I shall not here insist upon the general reasons of fear, which concern
every man, though it be most certain, that every one has cause to fear, even
the most confident, and holy, because his way is dangerous and narrow,
troublesome and uneven, full of ambushes and pitfalls; and I remember what
Polynices said in Apud Eurip. in Phoenissis.
the Tragedy when he was unjustly thrown from his Fathers Kingdom,

1t. Are those of whom the Apostle speaks, Let him that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall. (...)) 1 Cor. 10. 12.
said the Greek proverb; In ordinary fish we shall never meet with thorns, and
spiny prickles: and in persons of an ordinary even course of life we find it
too often, that they have no checks of conscience, or sharp reflections upon
their conditions; they fall into no horrid crimes, and they think all is peace
round about them: But you must know, that as Grace is the improvement and
bettering of Nature, and Christian graces are the persections of Moral habits,
and are but new circumstances, formalities, state of grace that is next to sin;
it inclines to evil and dwells with a temptation, its acts are imperfect, and
the man is within the Kingdom, but he dubiae jurisdictionis. These men have
cause to fear; These men seem to stand, but they reel indeed, and decline
toward danger and death. Let these men (says the Apostle) take heed lest they
fall, for they shake already; such are persons whom the Scriptures call weak in
faith. I do not mean new beginners in Religion, but such who have dwelt long
in its confines, and yet never enter into the heart of the country; such whose
faith is tempted, whose piety does not grow, such who yield a little, people
that do all that they can lawfully do, and study how much is lawful, that
they may lose nothing of a temporal interest: people that will not be Martyrs
in any degree, and They think they stand, and so they do, upon one leg, that
is, so long as they are untempted; but when the Tempter comes, then they fall
and bemoan themselves, that by losing peace they lost their inheritance. There
are a great many sorts of such persons: some when they are full, are content,
and rejoice in Gods providence, but murmur and are amazed when they fall into
poverty. They are chaste so long as they are within the protection of marriage,
but when they return to liberty they fall into bondage, Dinah did her honor,
by going into new company. These men in these estates think they stand, but God
knows they are soon weary, and stand stiff as a Cane, which the heat of the
Sirian star or the flames of the Sun cannot bend; but one sigh of a Northern
wind shakes them into the tremblings of a palsy: In this the best advice is,
that such persons should watch their own infirmities, and see on which side
they are most open,

2ly, They also have great reason to fear whose repentance is broken into
fragments, and is never a whole or entire change of life: I mean those that
resolve against a sin, and pray against it, and hate it in all the resolutions
of their understanding, till that unlucky period comes in which they use to act
it, but then they sin as certainly as they will of time, but God knows they do
not get the victory over their sin, but are within its power. For this is
certain, they who sin and repent, when their actions can be reduced to an order
or a method, to a rule or a certainty, that oftener hits then fails, that sin is
habitual; though it be the least habit, yet a habit it is; every course, or
order, or method of sin; every constant or periodicall return, every return
that can be regularly observed, or which a man can foresee, or probably
foretell, even then when he does not intend it, but prays against it, every
such sin is to be reckoned not for a single action, or upon the accounts That
Repentance was to be but once after Baptism: One Faith, one Lord, one Baptism;
one Repentance; Heb 6. 6. Heb. 10 26. 2 Pet. 2. 22.
all these the Scripture says; and it is true, if by repentance we mean the
entire change of our condition; for he that returns willingly to the state of
an unbeleeving, or a heathen profane person, entirely, and choosingly, of, and
apostasy from his Religion, cannot be renewed again (as the Apostle twice
affirms in his Epistle to the Hebrews). But then, concerning this state of
Apostasy, when it happened in the case, not of Faith, but of Charity and
obedience, there were many fears and jealousies: they were therefore very
severe in their doctrines, lest men should fall into so evil a condition, they
enlarged their fear that they might be stricter in their duty; and generally
this they did believe, that every second repentance was worse then the first,
and the third worse then the second, and still as Clemens Alexandr. stromat. 2.
(...), Those frequent and alternate repentances, that is, repentances and
sinnings interchangeably, differ not from the conditions of men that are not
within the covenant of grace, from them that are not believers, (...), save
only (says he) that these men perceive that they sin, they do it more against
and therefore they do it with less honesty and excuse, (...), I know not
which is worse, either to sin knowingly or wilfully, or to repent of our sin,
and sin it over again. And the same severe doctrine is delivered by Theodoret
in his 12 book against the Greeks, so that the repentance is every time to
begin anew; and then let it be considered what growth that repentance can make
that is never above a week old, that is for ever in its infancy, that is still
in its birth, that never gets the dominion over sin. These men, I say, ought to
fear, lest God reject their persons, and deride the folly of understanding is
right and their will a slave, their reason is for God and their affections for
sin; these men (as the Apostles expression is) walk not as wise but as fools:
for we deride the folly of those men that resolve upon the same thing a
thousand times, and never keep one of those resolutions. These men are vain
and light, easy and effeminate, childish and abused; these are they of whom our
blessed Savior said those sad decretory words, Many shall strive to enter in,
and shall not be able.

SERMON, VIII. Part II.
3. THey have great reason to fear, whose sins are not yet remitted; for they
are within the dominion of sin, within the Kingdom of darkness, and the
regions of fear: Light makes us confident, and Sin checks the spirit of a man
into the pusillanimity and cowardice of a girl or a conscious boy: and they
do their work in the days of peace and a wealthy fortune, and come to pay
their symbol in a war or in a plague; then they spend of their treasure of
wrath, which they laid up in their vessels of dishonor! And indeed, want of
fear brought after death comes judgment, a fearful and an intolerable
judgment, it God is merciful, and God forgive me, and all is done: or it may
be the good man has left some one sin quite, or some degrees of rectus in
Cur^a, his sins are pardoned, he was indeed in an evil condition, but now he
is purged, he is sanctified and clean. These things are very bad, but it is
much worse that men should continue in their sin, and grow old in it, and
arrive at confirmation, and the strength of habitual wickedness, and grow
fond of it, and yet think if they die, their account stands as fair in the eyes
of Gods mercy, as St. Peter's after his tears and sorrow. Our sins are not
pardoned easily and quickly; and the longer and the greater has been the
iniquity, the harder and more difficult and uncertain is the pardon; it is a
great progress to return from all the degrees of death to life, to motion, so
to pardon. For pardon stands no where but at the gates of heaven. It is a great
mercy that signifies a final and universal acquittance. God sends it out in
little scroles, and excuses you from falling by the sword of the enemy, or the
secret stroke of an Angel in the days of the plague; but these are but little
entertainments and inticings of our hopes to work on toward the great pardon
which is registered in the leaves of the Book of Life. And it is a mighty folly
to think, that every little line of mercy signifies glory and absolution

And indeed if we consider upon how trifling and inconsiderable grounds most
men hope for pardon (if at least that may be called hope, which is nothing but
a careless boldness, and an unreasonable wilful confidence) we shall see
much cause to pity very with mighty passion, and labor for with a great
diligence, and expect ebb or flood; and every hearty prayer, and every
bountiful alms still enlarges the pardon, or adds a degree of probability
and hope; and then a drunken meeting, or a covetous desire, David had sinned
but in one instance, interrupting the course of a holy life by one sad
calamity, it pleased God to pardon him; but see upon what hard terms: He prayed
long, and violently, he wept sorely, he was humbled in sackcloth and ashes, he
eat the bread of Syria and Egypt; his concubines were desired by an incestuous
mixture, in the face of the sun before all Israel, and his child that was the
fruit of his sin, after a 7 days fever dyed, and left him nothing David's
once, is too confident, if he thinks that all his shall be pardoned at a less
rate then was used to expiate that one mischief of the religious King: The son
of David died for his father David, as well as he did for us; he was the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world; and yet that death, and that relation,
and all the heap of the Divine favors which crowned David with a circle richer
then the royal diadem, could not exempt him from the portion of sinners, when
he descended into their pollutions. I pray God we may find the sure mercies of
David, and may have our portion in the redemption wrought by the Son of David;
but we are to expect it upon such terms as are revealed, such which include
time, and labor, and uncertainty, and watchfulness, and fear, and holy
living. But work out their salvation with fear and trembling; and the wicked
go to destruction with gayety and confidence: these men think all is well,
while they are in the gall of bitterness, and good men are tossed in a
tempest, crying and praying

But because there are sorrows on one side and dangers on the other, and
temptations on both sides, it will concern all sorts of men to know when their
sins are pardoned. For then when they whether or no, and when, and in what
degree your persons are pardoned.

1. I shall not consider the evils of sin by any Metaphysicall and abstracted
effects, but by sensible, real, and material. He that revenges himself of
another, does something that will make his enemy grieve, something that shall
displease the offender as much this we are to reckon the proportions of Gods
mercy in forgiveness,

2. Sin has obliged us to suffer many evils, even whatsoever the anger of God
is pleased to inflict; sickness and dishonor, poverty and shame, a caytive
spirit, and a guilty conscience, famine and war, plague and pestilence, sudden
death and a short life temporal death or death eternal, according as God in
the several covenants of the Law and Gospel has expressed.

3. For in the law of Moses sin bound them to nothing but temporal evils, but
they were sore, and heavy, and many; but these only there were threatened; in
the Gospel Christ added the menaces of

4. The great evil of the Jews was their abscission and cutting off from being
Gods people, to which eternal damnation answers amongst us; and as sickness,
and war, and other intermediall evils were lesser strokes in order to the
final anger of God against their Nation, so are these and spiritual evils
intermediall, in order to the Eternal destruction of sinning and unrepenting
Christians.

5. When God had visited any of the sinners of Israel with a grievous
sickness, then they lay under the evil of their sin, and were to pardon the
sin is to spare the sinner: and this appears; For when Christ had said to the
man sick of the palsy, Son thy sins are forgiven Mat. 9. 2.
thee, the Pharisees accused him of blasohemy, because none had power to
forgive sins but God only; Christ to vindicate himself gives them an ocular
demonstration, and proves his words: that ye may know the Son of Man has
power on earth to forgive sins, he says to the man sick of the palsy, Arise
and walk; then he pardoned the sin, when he took away the sickness, and proved
easier or harder: if it be easier, then sin has not so much evil in it as a
sickness, which no Religion as yet ever taught. If it be harder, then Christ's
power to do that which was harder, could not be proved by doing that which was
easier. It remains therefore, that it is the same thing to take the punishment
away, as to procure or give the pardon; because as the retaining the sin was an
obligation to the evil of punishment, so the remitting the sin is the
disobliging to its penalty. So far then the case is manifest.

6. The next step is this, that although in the Gospel God punishes sinners
with temporal judgments, and sicknesses, and deaths, with sad accidents, and
evil Angels, and messengers of wrath; yet besides these lesser strokes, he
has scorpions to chastise, and loads of worse evils to oppress the
disobedient; he punishes one sin with another, vile acts with evil habits,
these with a hard heart, and this Jews, yet we must reckon our pardon by
curing the spiritual. If I have sinned against God in the shameful crime of
Lust, then God has pardoned my sins, when upon my repentance and prayers he
has given me the grace of Chastity. My Drunkenness is forgiven, when I have
sanctification, holiness, and turning us away from our sins: So St. Peter, Ye
know that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
from 1 Pet. 1. 18.
your vain conversation; that is your redemption, that is your deliverance: you
were taken from your sinful state, that was the state of death, this of life
and pardon; and therefore they are made Synonyma by the same Apostle, According
as his divine power has given us all things that pertain to life and
godliness: to live and 2 Ep. 1. 3.
to be godly, is all one; to remain in sin and abide in death, is all one; to
redeem us from sin, is to snatch us from hell; he that gives us godliness,
gives us life, and that supposes pardon, or the abolition of the rites of
eternal death: and this was the conclusion of St. Peter's Sermon, and the
sum total of our redemption and of Act. 3. 26.
our pardon; God having raised up his Son, sent him to bless us in turning
away every one of you from your iniquity; this is the end of Christ's passion
and bitter death, the purpose of all his and all our preaching, the effect of
baptism, purging, washing, sanctifying; the work of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, the same body led by the Spirit, all your

4. They have great reason to fear concerning their condition, who having been
in the state of grace, who having begun to lead a good life, and give their
names to God by solemn deliberate acts of will grieve the holy Spirit of God
by which 1.
he was sealed to the day of redemption. For so the Antithesis is at the
conversion of a sinner there is joy before the beatified Spirits, the Angels of
God, and that is the consummation of our pardon and our consignation to
felicity, then we may imagine how great an evil it is to grieve the Spirit of
God, who is greater then the Angels. The Children of Israel were carefully
warned that they should not offend the Angel: Behold, I send an Angel Exodus 23.
20. 21.
before thee, beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will
not pardon your transgressions, that is, he will not spare to punish you if you
grieve him: Much greater is the evil if we grieve him who sits upon the throne
of God, who is the Prince affection that is as contrary to his felicity, as
lust is to his holiness; both which are essential to him. Tristitia enim
omnium spirituum nequissima est, and pessima servis Dei, and omnium spiritus
exterminat, and cruciat Spiritum sanctum, said Hennas: Sadness is the greatest
enemy to Gods servants; if you grieve Gods Spirit, you cast Ita enim dica (said
Seneca) sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet, bonorum, malorumque nostrorum
observator and custos, hic prout a nobis tractatus est, ita nos ipse tractat.
There is a holy spirit dwells in every good man, who is the observer and
guardian of all our actions, and as we treat him, so will he treat us. Now we
ought to treat him sweetly and tenderly, thankfully and with observation. Deus
praecepit Spiritum sanctum, utpote pro naturae suae bono tenerum and delicatum,
tranquillitate, and lenitate, and quiet, and pace tractare, said Tertullian de
Spectaculis. The Spirit of God is a loving and a kind Spirit, gentle and easy,
chaste and pure, righteous and peaceable, and when he has done so much for us
as to wash us from our impurities, and to cleanse us from our stains, and
streighten our obliquities, and to instruct our ignorances, and to snatch us
from an intolerable death, and to consign us to the day of redemption, that is,
to the resurrection of our bodies from death, corruption, and the dishonors of
the grave, and to appease all the storms and make us free as the Sons of God,
and furnished with the riches of the Kingdom, and all this with innumerable
arts, with difficulty, and in despite of our lusts and reluctancies, with parts
and interrupted steps, with waitings and expectations, with watchfulness and
stratagems, with inspirations and collateral assistances, after all this
grace, and bounty, and diligence, that we should despite this grace, and
trample upon the blessings, and scorn to receive life at so great an expense,
and love of God, this is so great a baseness and unworthiness, that by
troubling the tenderest passions, it turns into the most bitter hostilities; by
abusing Gods Go and sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to thee.

2. Falling away after we have begun to live well is a great cause of fear,
because there is added to it the circumstance of inexcuseablenesse. The man
has been taught the secrets of the Kingdom, and therefore his understanding
has been instructed; he has tasted the pleasures of the Kingdom, and
therefore his will has been sufficiently entertained. He was entered into the
state of life, and renounced the ways of death, his sin began to be pardoned,
and his lusts to be crucified, he felt the pleasures of victory, and the
blessings of peace, that if he chooses the way of sin again, it must be, not by
weakness Quam vilis facta es nimis iterans vias tuas! said God to Judah. Ier.
2. 36.


3. He that returns from virtue to his old vices, is forced to do violence to
his own reason, to make his conscience quiet: he does it so unreasonably, so
against all his fair inducements, so against his reputation, and the principles
of his society, so against his honor, his private retirements from virtue; or
else, when I am old, this he will; and he will, because it serves his turn:
then he is entered upon his state of fear; and if he does not fear concerning
himself, yet his condition is fearful, and the man haih (...), a reprobate
mind, that is, a judgment corrupted by lust: vice has abused his reasoning,
and if God proceeds in the man's method, and lets him alone in his course, and
gives him over to believe a lie, so that he shall call good evil, and evil
good, and come to be heartily persuaded that his excuses are reasonable and his
pretenses fair, then the man is desperately undone through the ignorance that
is in him, as St. Paul describes his condition; his heart is blind, he is past
feeling, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.
his understanding is darkened, then he may walk in the vanity of his mind, and
give himself over to lasciviousness, and shall work all uncleanness with
greediness; then he needs no greater misery: this is the state of evil which
his fear ought to have prevented, but now it is past fear, and is to be
recovered with sorrow, or else to be run through till death and hell are become
his portion; siunt novissima illus pejora pejoribus, his latter end is worse
then his beginning. Mat. 12. 45. vide 2 Pet. 2. 10.


4. Besides all this it might easily be added, that he that falls from virtue to
vice again, adds the circumstance of ingratitude to his load of sins; he sins
against Gods mercy, and puts out his own eyes; he strives to unlearn, what with
labor he has purchased, spirit to the flesh, from honor to dishonor, from
wise principles to unthrifty practices, like one of the vainer fellows, who
grows a fool, and a prodigal, and a beggar, because he delights in
inconsideration, in the madness of drunkenness, and the quiet of a lazy and
unprofitable life. So that

For we must know that no fear is displeasing to God; no fear of it self,
whether it be fear of punishment, or fear to offend; the fear of servants, or
the fear of sons: But the effects of fear do distinguish the man, and are to
be entertained or rejected accordingly. If a servile fear makes us to remove
our sins, and so passes us toward our pardon and the receiving such graces
which may endear our duty and oblige our affection; that fear is imperfect, but
not criminal, it is the beginning of wisdom, and the first introduction to
it; but if that fear sits still or rests in a servile mind, or a hatred of
God, or speaking evil things concerning him, or unwillingnesse to do our duty,
that which at first was indifferent, or at the worst imperfect, servile fear,
it cannot be a filial fear since we our selves are not sons; but if this
servile fear makes us to desire to be reconciled to God, that he may no longer
stay at enmity with us, from this fear we shall soon pass to carfulness,
from carfulness to love, from love to diligence, from diligence to
perfection; and the enemies shall become servants, and the servants shall
become adopted sons, and pass into the society fear is also reverence, and
then our God in stead of being a consuming fire, shall become to us the circle
of a glorious crown, and a globe of an eternal light.

SERMON, IX. Part III.
IAm now to give account concerning the excess of fear, not directly and
abstractedly as it is a passion, but as it is subjected in Religion, and
degenerates into superstition* For so among the Greeks, fear is the ingredient
and half of the constitution of that folly; (...) said Hesychius, it is a fear
of God, (...) that is more; it is a timorousness: the superstitious man is
afraid of the gods (said the Etymologist) (...), fearing of God as if he were a
tyrant, and an unreasonable exacter of duty upon unequal terms, and
disproportionable, impossible degrees, and unreasonable, and great and little
instances.

1. But this fear some of the old Philosophers thought unreasonable in all
cases, even toward God himself; and it was a branch of the Epicurean Doctrine,
that God meddled not any thing below, and was to be loved and admired, but not
feared at all; and therefore they taught men neither to fear death, nor to fear
punishment after death, nor any displeasure of God: His terroribus ab Epicuro
soluti Lib. de not. Deorum.
non metuimus Deos, said Cicero; and thence came this acceptance of the word,
that superstition should signify an unreasonable fear of God: It is true, he
and all his scholars extended the case beyond superstition, and reckon it
criminal, as they did all fear; that it may be called superstition, their
authority is sufficient warrant for the grammar of the appellative; and that it
is criminal, we shall derive from better principles.

But besides this, there was another part of its definition, (...), the
superstitious man is also an Idolater, Latins according to their custom,
imitating the Greeks in all their learned notices of things, had also the same
conception of this, and by their word [Superstitio] understood the worship of
Demons or separate spirits; by which they meant, either their minores Deos, or
else their (...) their braver personages whose souls were worship or a fear to
whom it was not due; for when ever they worshipped the great God of heaven and
earth, they never called that superstition in an evil sense, except the (...),
the^ that believed there was no God at all. Hence came the etymology of
superstition: it was a worshipping or fearing the spirits of their dead Heroes,
quos superstites credebant, whom they thought to be alive after their (...) or
Deification; or, quos superstantes credebant, standing in places and thrones
above us; and it alludes to that admirable description of old age which Solomon
made Greeks and Romans [Also they shall Eccles. 12 5.
be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way] intimating the
weakness of old persons, who if ever they have been religious, are apt to be
abused into superstition; They are afraid of that which is high, that is, of
spirit and separate souls, of those excellent beings which dwell in the regions
above; meaning, that then they are superstitious. However, fear is most
commonly its principle, always its ingredient. For if it enter first by
credulity and a weak persuasion, yet it becomes incorporated into the spirit of
the man, and thought necessary, and the action it persuades to dares not be
omitted, for fear of an evil themselves dream of: upon this account

1. Superstition of an undue object, is that which the Etymologist calls (...)
the worshipping of idols; the Scripture adds (...) a sacrificing to Demons 1
Cor. 10. 20.
in St. Paul and in 4. 7. ^
Baruch; where although we usually read it sacrificing to Devils, yet it was
but accidental that they were such; for those indeed were evil spirits who
had seduced them, and tempted them to such ungodly rites; Pythagorean sect,
pretended a more holy worship, and did their devotion to Angels:) But whosoever
shall worship Angels do the same thing; they worship them because they are good
and powerful, as the Gentiles did the Devils whom they thought so; and the
error which the Apostle reproves, was not in matter of Judgment, in mistaking
bad angels for good, but in matter of manners and choice; they mistook the
creature for the Creator; and therefore it is more fully expressed by St. Paul
in a Romans 11. 25.
general signification, they worshipped the creature, (...) besides the
Creator, so it should be read; if we worship any creature besides God,
worshipping so as the worship of him becomes a part of Religion, it is also a
direct superstition; but concerning this part of superstition, I shall not
trouble this discourse, because I know no Christians blamable in this
particular but the Church of Rome, and they that communicate with her in the
worshipping of Images, of Angels, and Saints, burning lights and perfumes to
them, making cultus superstitum, a cultus Daemonum, and therefore besides that
they have (...), a proper reproof in Christian Religion, are condemned by all
wise men, which call superstition criminal.

But as it is superstition to worship any thing (...) besides the Creator, so
it is superstition to worship God (...), otherwise then is decent,
proportionable or described. Every inordination of Religion that is not in
defect, is properly called superstition: (...), said Maximus Tyrius, The true
worshipper is a lover of God, the superstitious man loves him not, but
flatters: To which if we add, that fear, unreasonable fear is also
superstition, and an ingredient in its definition; we are taught by this word
to signify all irregularity and inordination in actions of Religion. The sum
is this; the Atheist called all worship of God superstition; the Epicurean called
all fear of God superstition, but did not condemn his worship; the other part
of wise men called all unreasonable fear, and inordinate worship superstition,
but did not condemn all fear: But the Christian, besides this, calls every error
in worship in the manner, or excess, by this name, and condemns it.

Now because the three great actions of Religion are, to worship God, to fear
God, and to trust in him, by the inordination of these three actions, we may
reckon three sorts of this crime; the excess of fear, and the obliquity in
trust, and the errors in worship, are the superstition: the first of which is
only pertinent to our present consideration.

1. Fear is the duty we owe to God as being the God of power and Justice, the
great Judge of heaven and earth, the avenger of the cause of Widows, the Patron
of the poor, and the Advocate of the oppressed, a mighty God and terrible, and
so essential an enemy to sin, that he spared not his own Son, but gave him
over to death, and to become a sacrifice, when he took upon him our Nature, and
became a person obliged for our guilt. Fear is the great bridle of
intemperance, the modesty of the spirit, and the restraint of gaieties girdle
to the soul, and the handmaid to repentance, the arrest of sin, and the cure or
antidote to the spirit of reprobation; it preserves our apprehensions of the
divine Majesty, and hinders our single actions from combining to sinful
habits; it is the mother of consideration, and the nurse of sober counsels, and
it puts the soul to fermentation and activity, making it to pass from

But this so excellent grace is soon abused in the best and most tender
spirits; in those who are softened by Nature and by Religion, by infelicities or
ca^es, by sudden accidents or a sad soul; and the Devil observing, that fear
like spare diet starves the fevers of lust, and quenches the flames of hell,
endeavors to highten those fond and trifling acts of jealousy which will make
God to be what the man feared he already was; We do not know God,

These persons do not believe noble things concerning God, they do not think
that he is as ready to pardon them, as they are to pardon a sinning servant;
they do not believe how much God delights in mercy, nor how wise he is to
consider and to make abatement for our unavoidable infirmities; they make
judgment of themselves by the measures of an Angel, and take the accounts of
God by the proportions of a Tyrant. The best that can be said concerning such
persons is, that they are hugely tempted, or hugely ignorant. For although
ignorance is by some persons named the mother of devotion; yet if it falls in a
hard ground, it is the mother of Atheism, if in a soft ground, it is the
parent of superstition: but if it proceeds from evil or mean opinions of God,
(as such scruples and unreasonable fears do many times) it is an evil of a
great impiety, and in some sense, and if it were in equal degrees, is as bad
as Atheism; for he that says there was no such man as Julius Caesar, does him
less displeasure, then he that says there was, but that he was a Tyrant, and
a bloody parricide. And the Cimmerians were not esteemed impious for saying
that there was no sun in the Anaxagoras was esteemed irreligious for saying the
sun was a very stone: And though to deny there is a God is a high impiety and
intolerable, yet: he says worse, who believing there is a God says, he
delights in humane sacrifices, in miseries and death, in tormenting his
servants, and punishing their very infelicities and unavoidable mischances. To
be God, and to be essentially and infinitely good, is the same thing, and
therefore to deny either is to be reckoned among the greatest crimes in the
world.

Add to this, that he that is afraid of God, cannot in that disposition love
him at all; for what delight is there in that religion which Oderunt quos
metuunt, sed colunt tamen: whom men fear they hate certainly, and flatter
readily, and worship timorously; and he that saw Hermolaus converse with
Alexander; and Pausanias follow Philip the Macedonian; or Chaereas kissing the
feet of Cajus Caligula would have observed how sordid Atheist says there is no
God, the scrupulous, fearful, and superstitious man does heartily wish what
the other does believe.

But that the evil may be proportionable to the folly, and the punishment to
the crime, there is no man more miserable in the world, then the man who fears
God as his enemy, and Religion as a snare, and duty as intolerable, and the
Commandments as impossible, fear is certainly the worst and the most
intolerable; levity and rashness have in it some spritefulnesse, and
greatness of action; anger is valiant; desire is busy and apt to hope;
credulity is oftentimes entertained and pleased with images and appearances:
fear is dull, and sluggish, and treacherous, and flattering, and dissembling,
and miserable, and foolish. Every false opinion concerning God is pernicious
and dangerous; but if it be joined with trouble of spirit, as fear, scruple or
superstition are, it is like a wound with an inflammation, or a strain of a
sinew with a contusion, or contrition of the part, painful and unsafe; it puts
on to actions when it self is driven; it urges reason* and circumscribes it,
and makes it pityable, and ridiculous in its consequent follies; which if we
consider it, will sufficiently reprove the folly, and declare the

Almost all ages of the world have observed many instances of fond persuasions
and foolish practices proceeding from violent fears and scruples in matter of
Religion. Diomedon and many other Captains were condemned to dye, because after
a great Naval victory they pursued the flying enemies, and did not first bury
their dead. But Chabrias in the same case first buried the dead, and by that
time the enemy rallyed, and returned and beat his Navy, and made his masters
pay the price of their importune superstition; they feared where they should
not, and where they did not, they should. From Gregorian account began,
continuing to call those unlucky days which were so signed in their tradition
or Erra pater, although the day upon this account fell 10 days sooner; and men
were transported with many other trifling contingencies and little accidents;
which when they are one entertained Aristodemas King of the Messenians in his
war against the Spartans, prevented the sword of the enemies by a violence
done upon himself, only because his dogs howled like wolves, and the
Soothsayers were afraid because the Briony grew up by the walls of his Fathers
house: and Nicias General of the Athenian forces sat with his arms in his
bosom, and suffered himself and 40000 men tamely to fall by the insolent
enemy, only because he was afraid of the laboring and eclipsed Moon. When the
Marble statues in Rome did sweat (as naturally they did against all rainy
weather) Augures gave an alarm to the City; but if lightning struck the spire
of the Capitol, they thought the sum of affairs, and the Commonwealth it
self was endangered. And this Heathen folly has stuck so close to the
Christian, that all the Sermons of the Church for 1600 years have not cured
them all: But the practices of weaker people and the artifice of ruling Priests
have superinduced many new ones. When Pope Eugenius sang Mass at Rhemes, and
some few drops from the Chalice were spilt upon the pavement, it was thought to
foretell mischief, wars, and blood, to all Christendom, though it was
nothing but carelessness and mischance Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury
sang the Mass of Requiem upon the day he was reconciled to his Prince, it was
thought to foretell his own death by that religious office: and if men can
listen to such whispers, and have not reason and observation enough to confute
such trifles, they shall still be afrighted with the noise of birds, and every
night-raven shall foretell evil as Micaiah to the King of Israel, and every
old woman shall be a Prophetess, and the events of humane affairs which should
be managed by the conduct of counsel, of reason,

To this may be reduced the observation of dreams, and fears commenced from the
fancies of the night. For the superstitious man does not rest, even when he
sleeps, neither is he safe because dreams usually are false, but he is
afflicted for fear they should tell true. Living and waking men have one world
in common, they use the same air and fire, and discourse by the same principles
of Logic and reason; but men that are asleep have every one a world soul, not
considering there is no other sleep, for sleep to rest in* Demon good or bad:
they are without rule and without reason, they are as contingent as if a man
should study to make a Prophecy, and by saying 10000 things may hit upon one
true, which was therefore not foreknown though it was forespoken: and they have
no certainty because they have no natural Artemidorus) and they that use to
remember such fantastic idols are afraid to lose a friend when they dream
their teeth shake, when naturally it will rather signify a scurvy; for a
natural indisposition and an imperfect sense of the beginning of a disease,
may vex the fancy into a symbolicall representation; for so the man that dreamt
he swam against a stream of blood, had a Plurisie beginning in his side: and he
that dreamt he dipped his foot in water, and that it was turned to a Marble, was
enticed into the A thief is consident in the twilight; Eurip.
if you suffer impressions to be made upon you by dreams, the Devil has the
reins in his own hands, and can tempt you by that which will abuse you when you
can make no resistance. Dominica the wife of Valens the Emperor dreamt that God
threatened to take away her only son for her despitefull usage of St. Basil:
felicity not to be a chance but a choice, and evil to be the daughter of sin
and the Divine anger, not of fortune and fancy; let us fear God when we limit
is reverence, and godliness is their end; and then fear shall be a duty, and a
rare instrument of many: in all other cases it is superstition or folly, it is
sin or punishment, a rejoicing evermore.

2. But besides this superstitious fear, there is another fear directly
criminal, and it is called, worldly fear, of which the Spirit of God has said,
But the fearful and incredulous shall have their part Revel. 21. 8.
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death;
that is, such fears which make men to fall in the time of persecution, those
that dare not own their faith in the face of a Tyrant, by all means. St.
Athanasius for 46 years did run and fight, he disputed with the Arrians and
fled from their Officers; and that flies, may be a man worth preserving, if he
bears his faith along with him, and leaves nothing of his duty behind; but
Perfect love casts out fear (says the Apostle) that is, he that loves God will
not fear to dye for him, or for his sake to be poor. In this sense no man can
fear man and love God at the same time; and when St. Laurence triumphed over
Valerianus, St. Sebastian over Diocletian, St. Vincentius over Dacianus, and
the armies of Martyrs over the Proconsuls, accusers, and executioners, they
showed their love to God by triumphing over leading captivity captive by the
strength of their Captain, whose garments were red from Bozrah.

3. But this fear is also tremulous and criminal, if it be a trouble from the
apprehension of the mountains and difficulties of duty, and is called
pusillanimity. For some see themselves encompassed with temptations, they
observe their frequent falls, their perpetual returns from good purposes to
weak performances, the daily mortifications that are necessary, the resisting
natural appetites, and the laying violent hands upon the desires of flesh and
blood, the uneasinesse Austin compares such men to children and fantastic
persons afrighted with phantasmes and specters; Terribiles visu formae, the
sight seems full of horror, but touch them and they are very nothing, the mere
daughters of a sick brain, and a weak heart, an infant experience and a
trifling judgment: so are the illusions of a weak piety* or an unskilful
unconsident soul; they fancy to see mountains of difficulty, but touch them and
they seem like clouds riding upon the wings of the wind, and put on shapes as
we please to dream. He that denies to give alms for fear of being poor, or to
entertain a Disciple for fear of being suspected of the party, or to own a duty
for fear of being put to venture for a crown, he that takes part of the
intemperance because he dares not displease

Thus far I have discoursed concerning good fear and bad, that is, filial
and servile: they are both good, if by servile we intend initiall or the new
beginning fear of penitents; a fear to offend God upon less perfect
considerations: But servile fear is vicious when it still retains the affection
of slaves, and when its effects are hatred, weariness, displeasure, and want
of charity: and of the same cognations are those fears which are superstitious,
and worldly.

But to the former sort of virtuous fear, some also add another Angelical,
that is, such a fear as the blessed Angels have, who before God hide their
faces, and tremble at his presence, and fall down before his footstool, and are
ministers of his anger and messengers of his mercy, and night and day worship
him with the profoundest adoration. This is the same that is spoken of in the
Text: Let us serve God with reverence and godly fear; all holy fear partakes of
the nature of this which Divines call Angelical, and it is expressed in acts
of adoration, of vows, and holy prayers, in hymns, and psalms, in the
eucharist and reverentiall addresses; and while it proceeds in the usual
measures of common humane; but as it arises to great degrees, and to
perfection, it is Angelical and Divine; and then it appertains to mystic
Theology, and therefore is to be considered in another place; but for the
present, that which will regularly concern all our duty, is this, that when the
fear of God is the instrument of our duty, or Gods worship, the greater it is,
it is so much the better. It was an Romans, Religentem esse oportet,
religiosum, nefas; Every excess in the actions of religion is criminal; they
supposing that in the services of their gods, there might be too much. True it
is, there may be too much of their undecent expressions, and in things
indifferent, the very multitude is too much, and becomes an undecency: and if
it be in its own nature undecent or disproportionable to the end, or the rules,
or the analogy of the Religion, it will not stay for numbers to make it
intolerable; but in the direct actions of glorifying God, in doing any thing of
his Commandments, or any thing which he commands, or counsels, or promises to
reward, there can never be excess or do as much as you can; take care that
your expressions be prudent, and safe, consisting with thy other duties; and
for the passions or virtues themselves, let them pass from beginning to great
progresses, from man to Angel, from the imperfection of man to the perfections
of the sons of God; and when ever we go beyond the bounds of Nature, and grow
up with all the extention, and in the very commensuration of a full grace, we
shall never go beyond the excellencies of God: For ornament may be too much,
and turn to curiosity; cleanliness may be changed into niceness; and civil
compliance may become flattery; and mobility

Sermon, X. The Flesh and the Spirit: Part I.
Matt. 26. 41. latter part. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is
weak.
FRom the beginning of days Man has been so cross to the Divine
commandments, that in many cases there can be no reason given why a man should
choose some ways, or do some actions, but only because they are forbidden;
When God bade the Isaaelites rise and go up against the Canaanites, and
possess the Land, Anakims, and the Cities were impregnable, and there was a
Lion in the way; but presently after, when God forbad them to go, they would
and did go, though they died for it. I shall not need to instance in
particulars, when the whole life of man is a perpetual contradiction; and the
state of Disobedience is called the contradiction of Sinners; even the man in
the Gospel that had two sons, they both crossed him, even he that obeyed him,
and he that obeyed him not: for the one said, he would, and did not; the other
said, he would not, and did: and so do we; we promise fair, and do nothing;
and they would not, and at last have better bethought themselves; And who can
guess at any other reason why men should refuse to be temperate? for he that
refuses the commandment, first does violence to the commandment, and puts on
a proeternaturall appetite, he spoils his health, and he spoils his
understanding; he brings to impossible commandments: for we complain already,
even when God commands us to drink so long as it is good for us; this is one of
his impossible laws: it is impossible for us to know when we are dry, or when
we need drink; for if we do know, I am sure it is possible enough, not to lift
up the wine to our heads. And when Paul in another case, upon our uncomely
parts we bestow more abundant comeliness. For whereas our body it self is a
servant to our soul, we make it the heir of all things, and treat it here
already, as if it were in Majority; and make that which at the best was but a
weak friend, to become a strong enemy; and hence proceed the vices of the
worst, and the follies and imperfections the spirit is willing, but the flesh
is weak.

The spirit] that is, (...), the inward man, or the reasonable part of man,
especially as helped by the Spirit of Grace, that is willing: for it is the
principle of all good actions, the (...), the power of working is from the
spirit; but the flesh is but a dull instrument, and a broken arm, in which
there is a principle of life, but it moves uneasily; and the flesh is so weak,
that in Scripture to in the flesh signifies a state of weakness, and
infirmity; so the humiliation of Christ is expressed by being in the flesh,
(...), God manifested in the flesh; and what S. Peter calls [put to death in
the flesh] St. Paul calls [crucified through weakness;] and, ye know that
through the infirmity of the flesh I preached unto you, said S. Paul: but here,
flesh is not opposed to the spirit as a direct enemy, but as a weak servant:
for if the flesh be powerful and opposite, the spirit stays not there:

-- veniunt ad candida tecta columbae: The old man and the new cannot dwell
together; and therefore here,

1. Therefore we are to consider the infirmities of the flesh naturally. 2. Its
weakness in the first beginnings of the state of grace,

1. Our nature is too weak in order to our duty and final interest, that at
first it cannot move one step toward God, unless God by his preventing grace
puts into it a new possibility.

(...)
(...).
There is nothing that creeps upon the earth, nothing that ever God made,
weaker then Man; for God fitted Horses and Mules with strength, Bees and
Pismires with sagacity, Hearts and Hares with swiftness, Birds with feathers
and a light aerie body; and they all know their times, and are fitted for their
work, and regularly acquire the proper end of their creation; but man that was
designed to an immortal duration, and the fruition of God for ever* knows By
nature we were the sons Ephesians. 2. 3.
of wrath, that is, we were born heirs of death, which death came upon us from
Gods anger for the sin of our first Parents; or by nature, that is, (...),
really, not by the help of fancy, and fiction of law, for so Oecumenius and
Theophylact expound it; but because it does not relate to the sin of Adam in
its first intention, but to the evil state of sin, in which the Ephesians
walked before their conversion; it signifies that our nature of it self is a
state of opposition to the spirit of grace, it is privatively opposed, that is,
that there is nothing in it that can bring us to felicity; nothing but an
obedientiall capacity; our flesh can become sanctified, as the stones can
become children unto Abraham, or as dead seed can become living corn; and so it
is with us, that it is necessary God should make us a new creation, if he means
to save us; he must take our hearts of stone away, and give us hearts of flesh;
he must purge the old leaven, and make us a new conspersion; he must destroy
the flesh, and must breath into us Spiritum vitae, the celestial breath of
life, without No man can come unto me (said Christ) unless my Father draw
him, (...). The Divine love must come upon us and snatch us from our
imperfection, enlighten our understanding, move and stir our affections, open
the gates of heaven, turn our nature into grace, entirely forgive our former
prevarications, take us by the hand, and lead us all along, and we only
contribute our assent unto it; just as a child when he is tempted to learn to
go, and called upon, and guided, and upheld, and constrained to put his

2. But that I may instance in particulars, our natural weakness appears best
in two things, even in the two great instances of temptation, pleasure and
pain; in both which the flesh is destroyed if it be not helped by a mighty
grace, as certainly as the Canes do bow their heads before the breath of a
mighty wind. 1. In pleasure we see it by the public miseries and follies of
the world. An old Greek said well, (...), There is amongst men nothing perfect,
because Poet that Horace tells of:

Gestit enim nummum in loculos dimittere, posthac.
Securus, cadat, an recto stet fabula talo.
Let him but have money for rehearsing his Comedy, he cares not whether you
like it or no; and if a temptation of money comes strong and violent, you may
as well tie a wild dog to quietuesse with the guts of a tender Kid, as suppose
that most men can do virtuously when they may sin at a great price. Men avoid
poverty, not only because it has some inconveniences; for they are few and
little; but because it is the nurse of virtue; they run Riches is attended by
pride and lust, tyranny and oppression, and has in its hand all that it has
in its heart; and Sin waits upon Wealth ready dressed and fit for action,
therefore in some temptations they confess how little their souls are, they
cannot stand that assault; but because this passion is the daughter of
Voluptuousness, and very often is but a servant sin, ministering to sensual
pleasures, the great weakness of the flesh is more seen in the matter of
carnal crimes, Lust and Drunkenness. Nemo enim se adsuefacit ad vitandum and
Plutar.
ex animo evellendum ea quae molesta ei non sunt. Men are so in love with
pleasure, that they cannot think of mortifying or crucifying their lust; we do
violence to what we hate, not to what we love. But the weakness of the flesh,
and the empire of lust is visible in nothing so much, as in the captivity and
folly of wise men. For you shall see some men fit to govern a Province, sober
in their counsels, wise in the conduct of their affairs, men of discourse and
reason, fit to sit with Princes, or to treat concerning Solomon glorious in all
things but when he bowed to Pharaoh's daughter, and then to Devils? and is it
not published by the sentence and observation of all the world, that the
bravest men have been softened into effeminacy by the lisping charms, and
childish noyses of Women and imperfect persons? A fair slave bowed the neck of
stout Polydamas, which was stiff and inflexible to the contentions of an
enemy: King of Nicomedia in the midst of temptation by a witty beauty, tied
upon a bed with silk and pretty violences, courted with music and perfumes,
with promises and easy postures, invited by opportunity and importunity, by
rewards and impunity, by privacy and a guard; what would his nature do in this
throng of evils and flesh do in such a day of danger? Is it not necessary that
we take in auxiliaries from Reason and Religion, from heaven and earth, from
observation and experience, from hope and fear, and cease to be what we are,
lest we become what we ought not? It is certain that in the cases of
temptations to voluptuousness, a man is naturally, as the Prophet said of
Ephraim, like a Pigeon that has no heart, no courage, no conduct, no
resolution, no discourse, but falls as the water of Nilus when it comes to its
cataracts, it falls infinitely and without restraint; And if we consider how
many drunken meetings Nations are marked for intemperance, and that it is less
noted because it is so popular, and universal, and that even in the midst of
the glories of Christianity there are so many persons drunk, or too full with
meat, or greedy of lust, even now that the Spirit of God is given to us to make
us sober, and temperate, and chaste, we may well imagine, since all men have
flesh, and all men have not the

And it is no otherwise when we are tempted with pain. We are so impatient of
pain, that nothing can reconcile us to it; not the laws of God, not the
necessities of nature, not the society of all our kindred, and of all the
world, not the interest of virtue, not the hopes of heaven; we will submit to
pain upon no terms, but the basest and most dishonorable; for if sin bring us
to pain, or affront, or sickness, we choose that, so it be in the retinue of a
lust, and a base desire* but we accuse Nature, and blaspheme God, we murmur and
are impatient when pain is sent to us from him Cappadocia set in a freezing
lake, almost consummate, and an Angel was reaching the Crown, and placing it
upon their brows, the flesh failed one of them, and drew

-- Odi artus, fragilemque hunc corporis usum
Desertorem animi --
We carry about us the body of death, and we bring evils upon our selves by our
follies, and then know not how to bear them; and the flesh forsakes the spirit.
And indeed in sickness the infirmity is so very great, that God in a manner at
that time has Patience with its appendages is the sum total of almost all
our duty that is proper to the days of sorrow: and we shall find it enough to
entertain all our powers, and to employ all our aids; the counsels of wise men,
and the comforts of our friends, the advices of Scripture, and the results of
experience, the graces of God, and the strength of our own resolutions are all
then full of employments, and find it work enough to secure that one grace. For
then it is that a cloud is wrapped about our heads, and our reason stoops under
sorrow, the soul is sad, and its instrument is out of tune, the auxiliaries
Monitor, yet it is an ill stage to act some virtues in; and a good man cannot
then do much, and therefore he that is in the state of flesh and blood, can
do nothing at all.

4. But in these considerations we find our nature in disadvantages; and a
strong man may be overcome when a stronger comes to disarme him; and pleasure
and pain are the violences of choice and chance; but it is no better in any
thing else: for nature is weak in all its strengths, and in its fights, at
home, and abroad, in its actions and passions; we love some things violently,
and Stoic when we see God dishonored; we passionately desire our
preservation, and yet we violently destroy our selves, and will not be hindered;
we cannot deny a friend

5. But to sum up all the evils that can be spoken of the infirmities of the
flesh; the proper nature and habitudes of men are liberty, and yet suppose it
determined to one object only; because that one object is the thing we choose.
For although God has set life and death before us, fire and water, good and
evil, and has primarily put man into the hands of his own counsel, that he
might have chosen good as well as evil, yet because he did not, but fell into
an evil condition and corrupted manners, and grew in love with it, and
infected all his children with vicious examples; and all nations of the world
have contracted the thoughts of man's hearts are only evil, and that
continually, and there is not one that does good, no not one that sins not:
since (I say) all the world have sinned, we cannot suppose a liberty of
indifferency to good and bad; it is impossible in such a liberty* that there
should be no variety, that all should choose the same thing; but a liberty of
complacency or delight we may suppose; that is so, that though naturally he
might choose good, yet morally he is so determined with his love to evil, that
good seldom comes into dispute; and a man grace of God eases the malignity
here, but it cannot be cured but by glory* that is, this freedom of delight or
perfect unabated election of know no good, but to please a wild, indetermin'd,
infinite appetite; so they will nothing else but what is good in their limit
and proportion; and it is with us as it was with the shee-goat that suckled the
wolves whelp; he grew up by his nurses milk, and at last having forgot his
foster mothers kindness, eat that udder which gave him drink and nourishment;
Improbit as nullo flectitur obsequio; for no kindness will cure an ill nature
and a base disposition: so are we in the first constitution of our nature; so
perfectly given to natural vices, that by degrees we degenerate into
unnatural, and no education or power Phalaris, There is no good nature but
only virtue; till we are new created, we are wolves and serpents, free and
delighted in the choice of evil, but stones and iron to all excellent things
and purposes.

2. Next I am to consider the weakness of the flesh, even when the state is
changed, in the beginning of the state of grace: For many persons, as soon as
the grace of God rises in their hearts, are all on fire, and inflamed; it is
with them as Homer said of the Syrian star,

(...)
(...)
It shines finely, and brings fevers; splendour and zeal are the effects of the
first grace, and sometimes the first turns into pride, and the second unto
uncharitableness; and either by too dull and slow motions, or by too violent
and unequal, the flesh will make pretenses, and too often prevail upon the
spirit, even after the grace of God has set up its banners in our hearts.

1. In some dispositions that are forward and apt, busy and unquiet, when the
grace of God has taken possessions, and begins to give laws, it seems so
pleasant and gay to their undiscerning spirits, to be delivered from the
sottishness of lust, and the follies of drunkenness, that reflecting upon the
change, they begin to love themselves too well, and take delight in the wisdom
of the change, and the reasonableness of the new life; and then they by hating
their own Aristophanes thus describes, (...); pale, and barefoot, and proud;
that is, persons singular in their habit, eminent in their institution, proud
and pleased in their persons, and despisers of them that are less glorious in
their virtue then themselves; and for this very thing our blessed Savior
remarks the Pharisees; they were severe and fantastical advancers of
themselves, and Judgers of their neighbors; and here, when they have mortified

2. Sometimes the passions of the flesh spoil the changes of the Spirit, by
natural excesses, and disproportion of degrees; it mingles violence with
industry, and fury with zeal, and uncharitableness with reproof, and
censuring with discipline, and violence with desires, and immortifications in
all the appetites and holy, so they desire it in prayer; that if they reprove a
vicious person, they may say what they list, and be as angry as they please;
that when they demand but reason, they may enforce it by all means; that when
they exact duty of their children, they may be imperious and without limit;
that if they design a good end, they may prosecute it by all instruments; that
when they give God thanks for blessings, they may value the thing as high as
they list, though their persons come willing and holy, but the flesh creeps too
busily, and insinuates into the substance of good actions, and spoils them by
unhandsome circumstances; and then the prayer is spoiled for want of prudence
of conformity to Gods will, and discipline and government is imbittered by an
angry spirit; and the Fathers authority turns into an uneasy load, by being
thrust like an unequal burden to one side, without allowing equal measures to
the other: And if we consider it wisely, we shall find that in many good
actions the flesh is the bigger ingredient, and we betray our weak
constitutions even when we do Justice Charity; and many men pray in the flesh,
when they pretend they pray by the spirit.

3. In the first changes and weak progresses of our spiritual life, we find a
long weakness upon us, because we are long before we begin, and the flesh was
powerful and its habits strong, and it will mingle indirect pretenses with all
the actions of the spirit; If we

4. Some men are wise and know their weaknesses, and to prevent their startings
back, will make fierce and strong resolutions, and bind up their gaps with
thorns, and make a new hedge about their spirits; and what then? this shows
indeed that the spirit is willing; but the storm arises, and winds blow, and
rain descends, and presently the earth trembles, and the whole fabric falls
into ruin and disorder. A resolution (such as we usually make) is nothing but
a little trench which every child can step over; and there is no civil man
that commits a willing sin, but he does it against his resolution; and what
Christian lives, that will not say, and think, that he has repented in some
degree; and yet still they commit sin, that is, they break all their holy
purposes as readily as they lose a dream; and so great is our weakness, that
to most men the strength of a resolution is just such a restraint as he suffers
who is imprisoned in a curtain, and secured with doors and bars of the finest
linen: for though the spirit be strong to resolve, the flesh is weak to keep
it.

5. But when they have felt their follies, and see the linen vail rent, some
that are desirous to please God, back their resolutions vows, and then the
spirit is fortified, and the flesh may tempt and call, but the soul cannot come
forth, and therefore it triumphs and acts its interest easily and certainly;
and then the flesh is mortified; It may be so. But do not many of us inquire
after a vow? And we consider it may be it was rash, or it was an impossible
matter, or without just consideration, and weighing of

6. Beyond all this, some choose excellent guides, and stand within the
restraints of modesty, and a severe Monitor; and the Spirit of God has put a
veil upon our spirits, and by modesty in women and young persons, by
reputation in the more aged, and by honor in the more noble, and by conscience
in all, have fortified the spirit of Man, that men dare not prevaricate their
duty though they be tempted strongly, and invited perpetually; and this is a
partition wall that separates the spirit from the flesh, and keeps it in its
proper strengths and retirements. But here the spirit of reputation, and
sometimes supplies it with little arts of flattery, and self-love, and is
modest as long as it can be secret, and when it is discovered, it grows
impudent; and a man shelters himself in crowds and heaps of sinners, and
believes that it is no worse with him then with other mighty criminals, and
public persons, who bring sin into credit amongst fools and vicious persons;
or else men take false measures of fame or public honesty, and the world being
broken into so many parts of disunion, and agreeing in nothing but in
confederate vices, and grown so remiss in governments, and severe honor and
public fame, modesty, and shame, are now so slender guards to the spirit, that
the flesh breaks in and makes most men more bold against God then against men,
and against the laws of Religion, then of the Commonwealth.

7. When the spirit is made willing by the grace of God, the flesh interposes
in deceptions and false principles. If you tempt some man to a notorious sin,
as to rebellion, to deceive his trust, or to be drunk, he will answer, he had
rather die then do it: But put the dash against the conscience with an open
professed name of Sin, Adams fig leaves, or the excuses of children and
truants, it

8. The flesh is so mingled with the spirit, that we are forced to make
distinctions in our appetite, to reconcile our affections to God and Religion,
lest it be impossible to do our duty; we weep for our sins, but we weep more
for the death of our dearest friends, or other temporal sadnesses; we say we
had rather die then lose our faith, and yet we do not live according to it; we
lose our estates and are impatient, we lose our virtue and bear it well enough;
and valuation of price, and a valuation of sense: or the spirit has one rate
of things, and the flesh has another; and what we believe the greatest evil,
does not always cause to us the greatest trouble; which shows plainly, that we
are imperfect carnal persons, and the flesh will in some measure prevail over
the spirit; because we will suffer it in too many instances, and cannot help it
in all.

9. The spirit is abated and interrupted by the flesh, because the flesh sorrow
breeds death, and therefore our repentances must be more gentle, and we must
support our selves in all our calamities: for we cannot bear our crosses
without a freer refreshment, and this freedom passes on to license, and many
melancholy persons drown their sorrows in sin and forgetfulness, as if sin
were more tolerable then sorrow, and the anger of God an easier load then a
temporal care: here the flesh Adam being too fond of his Eve, attends to all
its murmurs and temptations; and yet the flesh is able to bear far more then
is required of it in usual duties. Custom of suffering will make us endure
much, and fear will make us suffer more, and necessity makes us suffer any
thing; and lust and desire makes us to endure more then God is willing we
should;

I have all this while complained, and you see not without cause; I shall
afterward tell you the remedies for all this evil. In the mean time, let us
have but mean opinions of our selves; let us watch every thing of our selves as
of suspected persons, and magnify the grace of God, and be humbled for our
stock and spring of follies, and

(...)
(...).
And pray that God would give us what we ask, and what we ask not; for we want
more helps then we understand, and we are nearer to evil then we perceive, and
we bear sin and death about us, and are in love with it; and nothing comes from
us but false principles, grace is sufficient for us, and strong enough to
prevail over all our follies and infirmities.

SERMON, XI. Part II.
IF it be possible to cure an evil nature, we must inquire after remedies for
all this mischief. In order to which I shall consider; 1. That since it is our
flesh and blood that is the principle of mischief, we must not think to have it
cured by washings and light medicaments; the Physician that went to cure the
Hectic with quicksilver and fasting spittle, did his Patient no good, but
himself became a proverb; and he that by easy prayers and a seldom fast, by
the scattering of a little alms, and the issues of some more natural virtue
thinks to cure his evil nature, does fortify his indisposition, Quanto satius
est mentem potius eluere quae malis cupiditatibus Lactantius.
sordidatur, and uno virtutis as sidei lavacro universa vitia depellere? Better
it is by an entire body of virtue, by a living and active faith to cleanse the
mind from every vice, and to take off all superinduced habits of sin; Quod qui
fecerit, quamlibet inquinatum ac sordidum corpus gerat, satis purus est. If we
take this course, although our body is foul, and our affections unquiet, and
our rest discomposed, yet we shall be masters of our resolution, and clean from
habitual sins, and so cure our evil nature. For our nature naturally evil,
that is, by a superinduced nature; just as drunkards and intemperate persons
have made it necessary to drink extremely, and their nature requires it, and it
is health to them; they dye without it, because they have made to themselves a
new constitution, and another nature, but much worse then that which God made;
their sin made this new nature; and this new nature makes sin necessary and
unavoidable: so it is in all other instances; Our nature is evil, because we
have spoiled it; and therefore the removing the sin which we have brought in,
is the way to cure our nature: for this evil

(...)
(...).
We must have a new nature put into us, which must be the principle of new
counsels, and better purposes, of holy actions and great devotion; and this
nature is derived from God, and is a grace and a favor of heaven. The same
Spirit that caused the holy Jesus to be born after a new and strange manner,
must also descend upon us and cause us to be born again, and to begin a new
life upon the stock of a new nature. (...), Origin, From him it first began
that a divine and humane nature were weaved together, that the humane nature by
communication with the celestial may also become divine, (...), Not only in
Jesus, but in all that first believe in him, and then obey him, living such a
life as Jesus taught: and this is the sum total of the whole design; As we
have lived to the flesh, so we must hereafter live to the spirit: as our nature
has been flesh, not only in its original, but in habits and affection; so our
nature must be spirit in habit and choice, in design and effectual

-- (...)
(...), Euripides.

(...)
It is a fine thing to see the light of this sun, and it is pleasant to see the
storm allayed and turned into a smooth sea and a fresh gale; our eyes are
pleased to see the earth begin to live, and to produce her little issues with
part colored coats:

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
Nothing is so beauteous as to see a new birth in a childlesse family; And it
is excellent to hear a man discourse the hidden things of Nature, and unriddle
the perplexities of humane notices and mistakes; it is comely to see a wise man
sit in the gates of the City, and a new understanding, and new affections, and
excellent appetites:

2. Our life, and all our discourses, and every observation, and a state of
reason, and a union of sober counsels, are too little to cure a peevish spirit,
and a weak reasoning, and silly principles, and accursed habits, and evil
examples, and perverse affections, and a whole body of sin and death. It was
well said in the Comedy.

Nunquam ita quisquam been subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quin aetas, usus semper aliquid apportet novi,
Aliquid moneat; ut illa quae scire credas, nescias,
Et quae tibi put as prima, in experiundo repudies.
Men at first think themselves wise, and are always most confident when they
have the least reason; and to morrow they begin to perceive yesterdayes folly,
and yet they are not wise; But as the little Embryo in the natural sheet and
lap of its mother, first distinguishes into a little knot, and that in time
will be the heart, and then into a bigger bundle, which after some days abode
grows into two little spots, and they if cherished by nature will become eyes,
and each part by order commences into weak principles, and is preserved with
natures greatest curiosity; that it may assist first to distinction, the Spirit
of grace: Nature and reason alone cannot do it, and therefore the proper cure
is to be wrought by those general means of inviting and cherishing, of getting
and entertaining Gods Spirit, which when we have observed, we may account our
selves sufficiently instructed toward the repair of our breaches, and the
reformation of our evil nature.

1. The first great instrument of changing our whole nature into the state of
grace, flesh into the spirit, is a firm belief, and a perfect assent to, and
hearty entertainment of the promises of the Gospel; for holy Scripture speaks
great words concerning faith. It quenches the fiery darts of the Devil, says
St. Paul, it overcomes the world, Ephesians. 4. 16.
says St. John, it is the fruit of the Spirit, and the parent of love, it 1
Ioh. 5. 4.
is obedience, and it is humility, and it is a shield, and it is a brestplate,
and a work, and a mystery, it is a fight and it is a victory, it is a pleasing
God, and it is that whereby the just do live; by faith we are purified, and by
faith we are sanctified, and by faith we are justified, faith we are saved: by
this we have access to the throne of grace, and by it our prayers shall
prevail for the sick, by it we stand, and by it we walk, and by this Christ
dwells in our hearts, and by it all the miracles of the Church have been done;
it gives great patience to suffer, and great confidence to hope, and great
strength to do, and infallible certainty to enjoy the end of all our faith, and
satisfaction of all our hopes, and the reward of all our labors, even the most
mighty price of our high calling: and if faith be such a magazine of spiritual
excellencies, of such universal efficacy, nothing can be a greater antidote
against the venom of a corrupted nature. But then this is not a grace seated
finally in the understanding, resurrection of our bodies and souls to eternal
life, and glories infinite. Now is it humility and safety, religion and a
constant joy, devotion and peace of conscience, justice and a quiet dwelling,
charity and a Fides est velut quoddam aeternitatis exemplar, praeterita simul
and praesentia and futura sinu quodam vastissimo comprehendit, ut nihil ei
praetereat, nil pereat, praeeat nihil; Now, Faith is a certain image of
eternity, all things are present to it, things past and things to come, are all
so before the eyes of faith, that he in whose eye that candle is enkindled,
beholds heaven as present, and sees how blessed thing it is to dye in Gods
favor, and to be chim'd to our grave with the Music of a good Ethiopian;
that faith that cures the sick, and strengthens the Paralytick, and baptizes
the Catechumens, and justifies the faithful, and repairs the penitent, and
confirms the just, and crowns the Martyrs; that faith if it be true and proper,
Christian and alive, active and effective in us, is sufficient to appease the
storm of our passions, and to instruct all our ignorances, and to make us wise
unto salvation; it will, if we let it do its first intention, chastise our
errors, and discover our follies, it will make heaven to be the end of our
desires, and God the object of our love and worshippings, and the Scripture the
rule of our actions, and Christ Lord and Master, and the holy Spirit our mighty
assistance and our Counselor, all the little uglinesses of the world, and the
follies of the flesh will be uneasy, and unsavory, unreasonable, and a load;
and then that grace, the grace of faith, that lays hold upon the holy Trinity,
although it cannot understand it, and beholds heaven before it can possess it,
shall also correct our weaknesses, and master all our aversations; and though
we cannot in this world be perfect masters, and triumphant persons, yet we be
conquerors and more; that is, conquerors of the direct hostility, and sure of a
crown to be revealed in its due time.

2. The second great remedy of our evil Nature and of the loads devotion, or a
state of prayer, and intercourse with God. For the gift of the Spirit of God,
which is the great antidote of our evil natures, is properly and expressly
promised to prayer; If you who are evil give good things to your children that
ask you, how much Luke 11. 13.
more shall your Father from heaven give his holy Spirit to them that Mat. 7.
11.
ask it? That which in S. Luke is called (...), the holy Spirit, is called in
St. Matthew, (...), good things; that is, the holy Spirit is all that good that
we shall need toward our pardon, and our sanctification, and our glory, and
this is promised to Prayer; to this purpose Christ taught us the Lords Prayer,
by which we Prayer is but one part of devotion; and though of admirable
efficacy toward the obtaining this excellent promise, yet it is to be assisted
by the other parts of devotion, to make it a perfect remedy to our great evil.
He that would secure his evil Nature, must be a devout person, and he that is
devout, besides, that he prays frequently, he delights in it as it is a
conversation with God* he rejoices in God, and esteems him the light of his
eyes, and the support of his confidence, the object of his love, and the
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice; that Phil. 4. 4.
is, as the Levites were appointed to rejoice, because God was their portion in
tithes and offerings, so now that in the spiritual sense God is our portion,
we should rejoice in him, and make him our inheritance, and his service our
employment, and the peace of conscience to be our rest, and then it is
impossible we should be any longer slaves to sin, and afflicted by the baser
employments of the Juvenal observed well, Nullum malum gaudium est, Notrue joy
can be evil; and therefore it was improperly said of Virgil, Mala gaudia
mentis, calling lust and wild desires, the evil joys of the mind; Gaudium
enim nisi sapienti non contingere, said Seneca, none but a wise and a good man
can truly rejoice; The evil laugh loud, and sigh deeply, they drink drunk, and
forget their sorrows, safe and great, unchangeable and unabated, healthful
and holy; and this is true joy: and this is that which can cure all the little
images of pleasure, and temptation which debauch our nature, and make it dwell
with hospitals, in the region of diseases and evil sorrows. St. Gregory
saying, that Corporal pleasures when we have them not, inkindle a flame and a
burning desire in the heart, and make a man very miserable, before he tastes
them; the appetite to them is like thirst and the desires of a fever, the
pleasure of drinking will not pay for the pain of the desire; and when they are
enjoyed, they instantly breed satiety and a loathing. But spiritual
rejoycings, and delights are loathed by them that have them not, and despised
by them that never felt them; but when they are once tasted they increase the
appetite and swell it to bigger capacities; and the more they are eaten, the
more they are desired, and cannot become a weariness because they satisfy And
therefore when this new and stranger appetite, and consequent joy arises in the
heart of man, it so fills all the faculties, that there is no gust, no desire
left for toads and vipers, for hemlock and the deadly nightshade.

Sirenas, hilarem navigantium poenam,
Blandasque mortes, gandiumque crudele,
Quas nemo quondam deserebat auditas,
Prudens Ulysses dicitur reliquisse.
Then a man can hear the music of songs and dances, and think them to be
heathenish noises; and if he be engaged in the society of a woman singer, he
can be as unconcerned as a marble statue; he can be at a feast and not be
defiled, he can pass through theaters as though a street; then he can look on
money as his servant, nec distant era lupinis, he can use it as the Greeks did
their sharp coins, to cast accounts withal, and not from thence take the
accounts of his wealth or his felicity. If you can once obtain but pursuit of
the affairs of his Kingdom, then you have the grace devotion, and your evil
nature shall be cured.

3. Because this great cure is to be wrought by the Spirit of God, which is a
new nature in us, we must endeavor to abstain from those things which by a
special malignity are directly opposite to the spirit of reason, and the
spirit of grace; and those are drunkenness and lust. He that is full of wine
cannot be full of the spirit of God; St. Paul notes the hostility. Be not
drunk with wine, Ephesians. 5. 18.
but be filled with the Spirit; a man that is a drunkard does perire cito, he
perishes quickly, his temptations that come to him make but short work with
him; a drunkard is (...); our English well expresses it, it is a sottishness,
and the man is (...), Crobylus, it deprives a wise man of his counsel and his
understanding: now, because it is the greatest good that nature has, that
which takes it away must needs be our greatest enemy. Nature is weak enough of
it self, but drunkenness takes from it all the little strengths that are left
to it, and destroys the spirit; and the man can neither have the strengths* of
nature, nor the strengths of grace; and how Spiritus sanctus amat sicca corda,
the Spirit of Godloves dry hearts, said the Christian Proverb; and Josephus
said of Samson, (...), it appears he was a Prophet, or a man full of the
Spirit, by the temperance of his diet; and now that all the people are holy
unto the Lord, they must (...), as Plutarch said of their consecrated persons;
they must have dry and sober purities: for by this means their reason is
useful, and their passions not violent, and their discourse united, and the
precious things of their memory Adams sin, and stop all the effect which is
upon him from all the evils of the world, if he delights in seas of drink, and
is pleased with the follies of distempered persons, and laughs loud at the
childish humors and weak discourses of the man that can do nothing but that
for which Dionysius slew Antiphon, and Timagenes did fall Caesar's friendship;
that is, play the fool and abuse his friend; He cannot give good counsel or
spend an hour in wise sayings; but half a day they can talk ut foret unde
corona cachinnum tollere possit, to make the crowd laugh and consider not.

And the same is the case of lust; because it is exactly contrary to Christ the
King of Virgins, and his holy Spirit, who is the

4. Hither is to be reduced, that we avoid all flatterers and evil company;
for it was impossible that Alexander should be wise and cure his pride and his
drunkenness, so long as he entertained Agesius and Agnon, Bagoas and
Demetrius, and slew Parmenio and Philotas, and murdered wise. Calisthenes; for
he that loves to be called wise, then to be so. Flattery does bribe an evil
nature, and corrupt a good one; and make it love to give wrong judgment, and
evil sentences; he that loves to be flattered can never want some to abuse
him, but he shall always want one to counsel him, and then he can never be
wise.

5. But I must put these advices into a heap; he therefore that will cure his
evil nature, must set himself against his chiefest lust, which when he has
overcome, the lesser enemies will come in of themselves. He must endeavor to
reduce his affections to an indifferency;

8. It is necessary that in all actions of choice he deliberate and consider,
that he may never do that for which he must ask a pardon, and he must suffer
shame and smart: and therefore Cato did well reprove Aulus Albinus for writing
the Roman story in the Greek tongue, of which he had but imperfect knowledge;
and himself was put to make his Apology for so doing; Cato told him that he
was mightily in love with a fault, that he had rather beg a pardon then be
innocent; Who forced him to need the pardon? And compendium not to enter in
from whence we must uneasily retire.

9. In all the contingencies of chance and variety of action, remember that
thou art the maker of thy own fortune, and of thy own sin; charge not God with
it either before or after; Egyptian robber sleeping under a rotten wall was
awakened by Serapis, and sent away from the ruin; but being quit from the
danger, and seeing the wall to slide, thought that the Demon loved his crime,
because he had so strangely preserved him from a sudden and a violent death.
But Serapis told him, (...), I saved you from the wall to reserve you for the
wheel; from a short and a private death, to a painful and disgraceful; and so
it is very frequently in the event of humane affairs: men are saved from one
death, and reserved for another; or are preserved here to be destroyed
hereafter; and they that would judge of actions by events, must stay till all
events are passed; that is, till all their posterity be dead, and the sentence
is given at Doomsday; in the mean time, the evils of our nature are to be
looked upon without all accidental appendages; as they are in themselves, as
they have an irregularity and disorder, an unreasonablenesse and a sting; and
be sure to rely upon

9. Avoid all delay in the counsels of Religion. Because the aversation and
perverseness of a childs nature may be corrected easily;

10. Learn to despise the world; or, which is a better compendium in the duty,
learn but truly to understand it; for it is a cousenage all the way; the head
of it is a rainbow, and the face of it is flattery; its words are charms, and
all its stories are false; its body is a shadow, and its hands to knit spiders
webs; it is an image and a noise, with a Hyaena's lip and a Serpents tail; it
was given to serve the needs of our nature, and in stead of doing it, it
creates strange appetites, and nourishes thirsts and fevers; it brings care

4. I am now to consider, how far the infirmities of the flesh is hindered,
but not by God that requires them, and therefore by himself, or his worst
enemy. But the measures of this question are these.

1. If the flesh hinders us of our duty, it is our enemy; and then our misery
is not, that the flesh is weak, but that it is too strong; it is weak, but not
directly, nor always criminal. But to speak particularly.

If our flesh hinders us of any thing that is a direct duty, and prevails upon
the spirit to make it do an evil action, or contract an evil habit, the man
is in a state of bondage and sin: his flesh is the mother of corruption, and an
enemy to God. It is not enough to say, I desire to serve God, and cannot as I
would: I would fain love God above all the things in the world, but the flesh
has appetites of its own that must be served: I pray to be forgiven as because
they will not quit the love of Gods enemies; and therefore they do not desire,
what they say they do: but if the will

2. If the spirit and the heart be willing, it will pass on to outward actions
in all things where it ought, or can. He that has a charitable soul will have
a charitable hand; and will give his money to the poor, as he has given his
heart to God: For these things which are in our hand are under the power of our
will, and therefore are to be commanded by it. He that says to the naked, be
warm and clothed, and gives him not the garment that lies by him, or money to
buy one, mocks God, and the poor, and himself. Nequam illud verb^m est, been
vult, nisi qui been facit, said the Comedy; It Trinummus.
is an evil saying, he wishes well, unless he do well.

3. Those things which are not in our power, that is, such things in which the
flesh is inculpably weak, or naturally, or politically disabled, the will does
the work of the outward and of the inward man; we cannot cloth Christ's body,
he needs it not; and we cannot approach so sacred and separate a presence; but
if we desire to do it, it is accounted as if we had. The ignorant man cannot
discourse wisely and promote the interest of souls, but he can love souls, and
desire their felicity; though I cannot build Hospitals and

4. For that is the last caution, concerning this question. No man is to be
esteemed of a willing spirit, but he that endeavors to do the outward work, or
to make all the supplies that he can; not only Silver and gold have I none, and
therefore I can give you none: But I wish you well; How will that appear? why
thus, Such as I have I will give you: Rise up and walk. I cannot give you gold,
but I can give you counsel; I cannot relieve your need, but I can relieve your
sadness; I cannot cure you, but I can comfort you; I cannot take away your
poverty, but I can ease your spirit; and God accepts us (says the Apostle)
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not. Only as
our desires are great, and our spirits are willing,

Et labor ingenium misero dedit, and sua quemque
Advigilare sibi jussit fortuna premendo.
What the poor man's need will make him do, that also the good

(...). The necessity of our fortune, and the willingness of our spirits will
do all this; all that it can, and something that it cannot; You have relieved
the Saints (says St. Paul) according to your power, yea and beyond your power;
Only let us be careful in all instances, that we yield not to the weakness of
the flesh, nor listen to its fair pretenses;

Sermon, XII. Of Lukewarmnesse, and Zeal: OR SPIRITVALL TERROVR. Part I.
Jer. 48. 10. verse. first part. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully.
Christ's Kingdom being in order to the Kingdom of his Father, which shall be
manifest at the day of Judgment, must therefore be spiritual, because then it
is, that all things must become spiritual, not only by way of eminency, but by
entire constitution and perfect change of natures. the wine of elect souls; and
as to every natural appetite there is now proportioned an object, crasse,
material, unsatisfying, and allayed with sorrow and uneasinesse: so there be
new capacities and equal natural flesh, and heavenly spirit, that is, the
powers of darkness, and the regions of light, the miseries of man, and the
perfections of God; the imperfection of nature where we stand by our creation,
and supervening follies, and that state of felicities whither we are designed
by the mercies of God, there is a middle state; the Kingdom of grace wrought
for us by our Mediator, the man Christ Jesus, who came to perfect spiritual
Religion, it designs (so far as this state can permit) to make us spiritual;
that is, so as the spirit be the prevailing ingredient. God must now be
worshipped in spirit, and not only so, but with a fervent spirit; and though
God in all religions did seize upon the spirit, and even under Moses Law did by
the shadow of the ceremony, require the substantial worship, by cutting off
the flesh intended the circumcision of the heart; while the spirit prevails, we
do not to evil purposes of abatement fervent, intense, active, wise, and
busy, according to the nature of things spiritual. Now because God always
perfectly intended it, yet because he less perfectly required it in the Law of
Moses, I say they fell short in both.

For, 1. They so rested in the outward action, that they thought themselves
chaste, if they were no adulterers, though their eyes were wanton as Kids, and
their thoughts polluted as the springs of the wilderness when a Panther and a
Lioness descend to drink and lust; and if they did not rob the Temple, they
accounted Josephus reproves Polybius for saying that Antiochus was punished for
having a design of sacrilege; and therefore Tertullian says of them, they
were nec plenae, nec adeo timendae disciplinae ad innocentiae veritatem; this
was their righteousness which Christ said unless we will exceed, we shall not
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, where all spiritual perfections are in
state and excellency.

2. The other part of a spiritual worship is a fervor and a holy zeal of Gods
glory, greatness of desire, and quickness of action: the work of the Lord
deceitfully; they either gave him the action without the heart, or zeal without
charity, or religion without zeal, or ceremony without religion, or
indifferency without desires; and then God is served by the outward man his
work be done sincerely, and our duty with great affection; and by intension and
the extension are secured; our duty shall be entire, and it shall be perfect,
we shall be neither lame nor cold, without a limb, nor without natural heat,
and then the work of the Lord will prosper in our hands: but if we fail in
either, we do the Lords work deceitfully, and then we are Cursed be he that
does the work of the Lord deceitfully.

1. Here then is the duty of us all: 1. God requires of us to serve him with an
integrall, entire, or a whole worship and religion. 2. God requires of us to
serve him with earnest and intense affections; The entire purpose of both
which, I shall represent in its several parts by so many propositions. 3. I
shall consider concerning the measures of zeal, and its inordinations.

1. He that serves God with the body without the soul, serves God deceitfully.
My son give me thy heart; and though I cannot think

1. For, to worship God with our souls confesses one of his glorious 1.
attributes; it declares him to be the searcher of hearts, and that he reads
the secret purposes, and beholds the smallest arrests of fancy, and bends in
all the flexures and intriques of crafty people,

2. It advances the powers and concernments of his providence, and 2.
confesses all the affairs of men, all their cabinets and their nightly
counsels, their snares and two-edged mischiefs to be overruled by him; for
what he sees he judges, and what he judges he rules, and what he rules must
turn to his glory; and of this glory he reflects rays and influences upon his
servants, and it shall also turn to their good.

3. This service distinguishes our duty toward God from all our 3.
conversation with man, and separates the divine commandments fiscus empty,
and that all the revenues of the Crown were in his counting house, cannot be
punished by the Laws, unless himself become his own traitor and accuser; and
therefore what man cannot discern, he must not judge, and must not require? but
God sees it and judges it, and requires it, and therefore reserves this as his
own portion and the chiefest feudall right of his Crown.

4. He that secures the heart, secures all the rest; because this is the 4.
principle of all the moral actions of the whole man, and the hand obeys this,
and the feet walk by its prescriptions; we eat and drink by measures which the
soul desires and limits; and though the natural actions of man are not subject
to choice and rule, yet the animal actions are under discipline; and although
it cannot be helped but we shall desire, yet our desires can receive measures,
and the laws of circumstances,

5. That I may sum up many reasons in one; God by requiring 5.
the heart secures the perpetuity and perseverance of our duty, and its
sincerity, and its integrity, and its perfection: for so also God takes account
of little things; it being all one in the heart of man, whether maliciously it
omits a duty in a small instance or in a great; for although the expression
has variety and degrees in it in relation to those purposes of usefulness and
charity whither God designs it, yet the obedience and disobedience is all one,
and shall be equally Tryphon disputed against Justin, that the precepts of the
Gospel were impossible to be kept, because it also requiring the heart of man
did stop every egression of disorders: for making the root holy and healthful,
as the Balsame of Judaea, or the drops of Manna in the evening of the sabbath;
it also causes that nothing spring thence but gummes fit for incense, and
oblations for the Altar of proposition, and a cloud of perfume fit to make
atonement for our sins, and being united to the great sacrifice of the world to
reconcile God and man together. Upon these reasons you see it is highly fit
that God should require sacrifice of our hearts; and not at all think that God
is satisfied with the work of the hands, when the affections of the heart are
absent. He that prays because he would be quiet, and would fain be quit of it,
and communicates for fear of the laws, and comes to Church to avoid shame, and
gives alms to be eased of an importunate beggar, or relieves his old parents
because they will not dye in their time, and provides for his children lest he
be compled by Laws and shame, but yet complains of the charge of Gods
blessings, this man is a servant of the eyes of men, and offers parchment or a
white skin in sacrifice, but the flesh and the inwards he leaves to be consumed
by a stranger

2. He that serves God with the soul without the body, when both can be
conjoined, does the work of the Lord deceitfully. Paphnutius, whose knees were
cut for the testimony of Jesus, was not obliged Bartimeus could not read the
holy lines of the Law, and therefore that part of the work was not his duty;
and God shall not call Lazarus to account for not giving alms, nor St. Peter
and St. John for not giving silver and gold to the lame man, nor Epaphroditus
for not keeping his fasting days when he had his sickness. But when God has
made the body an apt minister to the soul, and has given money for alms, and
power to protect the oppressed, and knees to serve in prayer and hands to serve
our needs, then Rachel gave her maid to Jacob and she bore children to her Lord
upon her Ministresse knees, and the children were reckoned to them both,
because the one had fruitful desires and the other a fruitful womb: so must
the body serve the needs of the spirit; that what the one desires the other may
effect, and the conceptions of the soul may be the productions of the body; and
the body must bow when the soul worships, and the hand must help when the soul
pities, and both together do the work of a holy Religion; the body alone can
never serve God without the conjunction and preceding act of the soul; and
sometimes a body and a spirit, a material and a spiritual part; and when the
action has the same constitution that a man has, without the act of both it
is as imperfect as a dead man; the soul cannot produce the body of some actions
any more then the body can put life into it; and therefore an ineffective pity
and a lazy counsel, an empty blessing, and gay words, are but deceitful
charity.

Quod peto, da, Cai, non peto consilium. He that gave his friend counsel to
study the Law, when he desired to borrow 20 l. was not so friendly in this
counsel as he was useless in his charity; spiritual acts can cure a
spiritual malady, but if my body needs relief, because you cannot feed me with
Diagrams, or cloth me with Euclids elements, you must minister a real supply
by a corporal charity to my corporal necessity. This proposition is not only
useful in the doctrine of charity, and the virtue of religion, but in the
professions of faith, and requires that it be public, open, and ingenuous. In
matters of necessary duty it is not sufficient to have it to our selves, but we
must also have it to God, and all the in the heart we believe, so by the mouth
we confess unto salvation: he is an ill man that is only a Christian in his
heart, and is not so in his professions and publications; and as your heart
must not be wanting in any good profession and pretenses, so neither must
public profession be wanting in every good and necessary persuasion. The faith
and the cause of God must be owned we do the Lords work deceitfully.

3. They are deceitful in the Lords work that reserve one faculty 3.
for sin, or one sin for themselves, or one action to please their appetite,
and many for Religion. Rabbi Kimchi taught his Scholars, Cogitationem pravam
Deus non habet vice facti, nisi concepta fuerit in Dei fidem and Religionem;
that God is never angry with an evil thought, unless it be a thought of
Apostasy from the Jews religion; and therefore, provided that men be severe
and close in anger at one end, and lust at the other, so they did not flame out
in egressions of violence and injustice, in adulteries and fouler
complications: nay they would give leave to some degrees of evil actions; for
R. Moses and Selomoh taught, that if the most part of a man's actions were holy
and just, though in one he sinned often, yet the greater ingredient should
prevail, and the number of good works should outweigh the lesser account of
evil things; and this Pharisaicall righteousness is too frequent even amongst
Christians. For who almost is there that does not count fairly concerning
himself, if he reckons this means they fall into a worse pride? insomuch that I
remember Austin said, Audeo dicere superbis continentibus expedit cadere, they
that are chaste and proud, it is sometimes a remedy for them to fall into sin,
and by the shame of lust to cure the devil of pride, and by the sin of the
body to cure the worser evils of the spirit; and therefore he adds, that he
did believe, God in a severe mercy did permit the barbarous nations, breaking
in upon the Roman Empire, to violate many virgins professed in Cloisters and
religious Families to be as a mortification of their pride, lest the
accidental advantages of a continent life should bring them into the certain
miseries of a spiritual death, by taking away their humility, which Peter was
safer by his fall (as it fell out in the event of things) then by his former
confidence. Man must never cure a sin by a sin; but he that brings good out of
our evil, he can when he please. But I speak it, to represent how deceitfully
many times we do the work of the Lord. We reprove a sinning Brother, but do it
with a pompous spirit; we separate from scandal, and do it with glory, and a
gaudy heart; we are charitable to the poor, but will not forgive a savor of
death, though they were intended for the beginning and the promotion of an
eternal life; and those are faith and charity; some men think if they have
faith, it is enough to answer all the accusations of sin which our consciences
or the Devils make against us: If I be a wanton person, yet my faith shall hide
it, and faith faith, at last to quit my scores. For he that is most careful is
not innocent, but must be saved by faith, and he that is least careful may
have faith, and that will save him. But because these men mistake concerning
faith, and consider not that charity or a good life is a part of that faith
that saves us, they hope to be saved by the Word, they fill their bellies with
the story of Frimalcions banquet, and drink drunk with the news of wine, they
eat shadows, and when they are drowning, catch at the image of the trees which
hang over the water, and are reflected from the bottom.

But thus many men do with charity, [Give alms and all things shall be clean
unto you, said our Blessed Savior:] and therefore, many keep a sin alive, and
make account to pay for it, and God shall be put to relieve his own poor at the
price of the sin of another of his servants; charity shall take lust or
intemperance into protection, faith without charity, and these have charity
without hope; for every one that has this hope, that is, the hope of receiving
the glorious things of God promised in the Gospel, purifies himself even as
God is pure

1. Charity is a certain cure of sins that are past, not that are present. He
that repents and leaves his sin, and then relieves the poor and pays for his
folly by a diminution of his own estate, and the supplies of the poor, and his
ministering to Christ's poor members, turns all his former crimes into holiness;
he purges the slains and makes amends for his folly, and commutes for the
Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar [Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities Dan. 4. 27.
by showing mercy to the poor:] first be just, and then be charitable; for it
is pity alms, which is one of the noblest services of God, and the greatest
mercy to thy Brother, should be spent upon sin, and thrown away upon folly.

2. Faith is the remedy of all our evils, but then it is never of force, but
when we either have endeavored or undertaken to do all good; this in baptism,
that after: faith and repentance at first faith and charity at last; and
because we fail often by infirmity, and sometimes by inadvertency, sometimes by
a surprise, and often by omission; and all this even in the midst of a sincere
endeavor to live justly, and perfectly; therefore the passion of our Lord pays
for thus, and faith lays hold upon that. But without a hearty and sincere
intent, and vigorous prosecution of all the parts of our duty, faith is but a
word, not so much as a cover to a naked bosom, nor a pretense big enough to
deceive persons that are not willing to be cousened.

3. The bigger ingredient of virtue and evil actions will prevail when virtue
is habitual, and sins are single, interrupted, casual and seldom* without
choice and without affection; that is, when our repentance is so timely that it
can work for God, more then we served under the tyranny of sin; so that if you
will account the whole life of man, the rule is good, and the greater
ingredient shall prevail, and he shall certainly be pardoned and accepted whose
life is so reformed, whose repentance is so active, whose return is so early,
that must be pure and unmingled; if sin mingles in seldom and unapproved
instances, the drops of water are swallowed up with a whole vintage of piety,
and the bigger ingredient faith and charity.

4. There is one deceit more yet, in the matter of the extension of our duty,
destroying the integrity of its constitution: for they do the work of God
deceitfully, who think God sufficiently served with abstinence from evil, and
converse not in the acquisition and pursuit of holy charity and religion. This
Clemens Alexandrinus affirms of the Pharisees, they were (...), they hoped to
be justified by abstinence from things forbidden; but if we will be (...) sons
of the kingdom, we must (...), Flee from evil, and do the thing that is good,
and dwell for evermore, said the Spirit of God in the Psalms: and St. Peter
[Having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, give all
diligence to add to your faith virtue, to virtue patience, to patience
godliness, and brotherly kindness and charity. Many persons think themselves
fairly assoiled, Laodiceans, they are naked and poor; they have no catalogue of
good things registered in heaven, no treasures in the repositories of the poor,
neither have the poor often prayed concerning them, Lord remember thy servants
for this thing at the day of Judgment. A negative Religion is in many the work
of the Lord, and their own too, very deceitfully, unless they account
correspondencies of piety to all their powers and possibilities: they are to
reckon and consider concerning what oppressions they have relieved, what causes
and what fatherless they have defended, how the work of God and of Religion,
of justice and charity has thrived in their hands. If they have made furca and
the wheel, the torments of lustful persons, and the crown of flames, that is
reserved for the ambitious; or they shall not be gnawn with the vipers of the
envious, or the shame of the ungrateful; but they can never upon this account
(poenam sensus, the Schools call it) yet the lazic and the imperfect, the
harmless sleeper and the idle worker shall have poenam damni, the loss of all
his hopes, and the dishonours of the loss; and in the sum of affairs it will
be no great difference whether we have loss or pain, because there can pain
imaginable then to lose the sight of God to eternal ages.

5. Hither are to be reduced as deceitful workers, those that promise to God,
but mean not to pay what they once intended; * people that are confident in the
day of ease, and fail in the danger; * they that pray passionately for a grace,
and if it be not obtained at that price go no further, and never contend in
action for what Michael and the Dragon; for they divide the Spirit of God, and
distinguish his commandments into parties and factions; by seeking an excuse,
sometimes they destroy the integrity and perfect constitution of duty, or they
do something whereby the effect and usefulness of the duty is hindered:
concerning all which this only can be said, they who serve God with a

SERMON, XIII. Part II.
2. THe next enquiry, is into the intention of our duty: and here it will not
be amiss to change the word fraudulenter; or dolose, into that which some of
the Latin Copies do use, Maledictus qui facit opus Dei [negligenter,] Cursed
is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, or remissely: and it implies,
that as our duty must be whole, so it must be fervent; for a languishing body
may have all its parts, and yet be useless to many purposes of nature: and you
may reckon all the joints of a dead man, but the heart is cold, and the joints
are stiff and fit for nothing but for the little people that creep in graves:
and so are very many men; if you such are they whom S. Bernard describes, whose
spiritual joy is allayed with tediousness, whose compunction for sins is
short and seldom, whose thoughts are animal, and their designs secular,
whose Religion is lukewarm; their obedience is without devotion, their
discourse without profit, their prayer without intention of heart, their
reading without instruction, their meditation is without spiritual advantages,
and is not the commencement and strengthening of holy purposes; and they are
such whom modesty will not restrain, nor reason bridle, nor discipline correct,
along, that it may be able to enkindle the wood upon the altar, and consume the
sacrifice; but God hates an indifferent spirit. Earnestness capitulars and
canons of Religion, to love God, and to love our neighbors; besides, that the
material part of the duty [love] is founded in the spirit, as its natural
seat, he also gives three words to involve the spirit in the action, and but
one for body: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and lastly, with all thy strength; this
brings in the body too; because it has some strengths, and some significations
of its own; but heart and soul and mind mean all the same thing in a stronger
and more earnest expression; that is, that we do it hugely, as much as we can,
with a clear choice, with a resolute understanding, with strong affections,
with great diligence: Enerves animos odisse virtus solet, Virtue ha^es weak and
ineffective minds, and tame easy prosecutions; Loripedes, people whose arm is
all flesh, whose foot is all leather, Naaman did the mysteries of Rimmon, only
in a complement, or for secular regards; but without the mind, and therefore
without Zeal; I would thou were either hot or cold, said the Spirit of God to
the Angel or Bishop of Laodicea. In feasts or sacrifices the Ancients did use
apponere frigidam or calidam; sometimes they drank hot drink, sometimes they
poured cold upon their graves, or in their wines, but no services of Tables or
Altars were ever with lukewarm. God hates it worse then stark cold; which
expression is the more considerable, because accidentally it is much worse: and
so it is, if we rightly understand it; that is, if we consider it, not as a
being in, or passing through the middle way, but as a state and a period of
Religion. If it be in motion, a lukewarm Religion is

1. It is a state of the greatest imprudence in the world; for it Gyarus, the
Island of his sorrow, and to dwell upon the Adriatic: So is he that begins a
state of Religion, and does not finish it; he abides in the highway, and
though he be nearer the place, yet is as far from the rest of his country as
ever; and therefore all that beginning of labor was in the prejudice of his
rest, but nothing to the advantages of his hopes. He that has never begun,
has lost no labor; Jactura praeteritorum, the loss of all that he has done,
is the first evil of the negligent and lukewarm Christian; according to the
saying of Solomon: He that is remiss or idle in his labor, is the brother of
him that scatters Prove. 18. 9.
his goods.

2. The second appendant evil is, that lukewarmnesse is the occasion of
greater evil; because the remiss easy Christian shuts the gate against the
heavenly breathings of Gods holy Spirit; he thinks every breath that is fan'd
by the wings of the holy Dove, is not intended to encourage his fires, which
burn, and smoke, and peep through the cloud already; it tempts him to security;
and if an evil life be a certain inlet to a second death, despair on one
side, and security on the other are the bars and locks to that door, he can
never pass forth again while that state remains; who ever slips in his
spiritual walking does not presently fall; but if that vel pravae
institutionis deceptus exordio, aut per longam mentis incuriam, and virtute
animi decidente, as St. Austin observes; either upon the pursuit of his first
error, or by a careless spirit, or a decaying slackned resolution; all which
are the direct effects of lukewarmnesse. But so have I seen a fair structure
begun with art and care, and raised to half its stature, and then it stood
still by the misfortune or negligence of the owner, and the rain descended, and
dwelt in its joints, and supplanted the contexture of Sacraments, and Prayers,
Reading, and holy Ordinances; and holy actions begin with a slow motion, and
the building stays, and the unthankfulness and carelessness, a positive
neglect, and a despite of holy things, a setting a low price to the things of
God, laziness and wretchlesnesse; all which are evils superadded to the first
state of coldness, whither

3. A state of lukewarmnesse is more incorrigible then a state of coldness;
while men flatter themselves that their state is good, that they are rich and
need nothing, that their lamps are dressed, and full of ornament. There are
many that think they are in their country as soon as ever they are weary, and
measure not the end of their hopes by the possession of them, but by their
precedent labor, which they overvalue, because they have easy and effeminate
souls. S. Bernard complains of some that say, Sufficit nobis, nolumus esse
meliores quam Patres nostri: It is enough for us to be as our forefathers, who
were honest and useful in their generations, but be not over-righteous: These
men are such as think they have knowledge enough to need no teacher, devotion
enough to need no new fires, perfection enough to need no new progress,
justice enough to need no repentance; and then because the spirit of a man and
all the things of this world are in perpetual variety and change, these men
decline when they have gone their period; they stand still, and then revert;
like a stone returning from the bosom of a cloud, where it rested as long as
the thought of a child, and fell to Cassian spoke a hard saying, Frequenter
vidimus de frigidis and carnalibus ad spiritualem venisse fervorem, de tepidis
and animalibus omnino non vidimus: Many persons from vicious, and dead, and
cold, have passed into life and an excellent grace, and a spiritual warmth,
and holy fires; but from lukewarm and indifferent never any body came to an
excellent condition, and state of holiness: rarissime S. Bernard says, very
extremely seldom; The Publicans and the Harlots go before you into the
Kingdom of heaven; they are moved by shame, and punished by disgrace, and
remarked by punishments, and frighted by the circumstances and notices of all
the world, and separated from sober persons by laws and an intolerable
character; and the sense of honor, and the care of their not to have
comprehended, but still presses toward the mark of his calling, unless (I
say) he still increases in his appetites of Religion as he does in his
progression, he will think he needs no counselor, and the spirit of God
whispers to an ear that is already filled with noyses, and cannot atrend to the
heavenly calling. The stomach that is already full, is next to Qui non proficit
vult deficere, said S. Bernard: He that goes not forward in the love of God,
and of Religion, does not stand still, but goes for all that, but whither such
a motion will lead him, himself without a timely care shall feel by an
intolerable experiment.

In this sense and for these reasons it is that although a lukewarm Christian
has gone forward some steps toward a state of holiness, absolutely and
naturally, is nearer the Kingdom of God then he, that is not yet set out; yet
accidentally, and by reason of these ill appendages, he is worse, in greater
danger, in a state equally unacceptable, and therefore must either go forward,
and still do the work of God carefully, and diligently, with a Fervent spirit,
and an Active hand, with a willing heart, and a cheerful eye, or it had been
better he had never begun.

2. It concerns us next to enquire concerning the duty in its proper instances,
that we may perceive to what parts and degrees of faith, of prayer, and of
charity.

1. Our faith must be strong, vigorous, active, confident, and patient,
reasonable, and unalterable, without doubting, and fear, and partiality. For
the faith of very many men, seems a duty so weak and indifferent, is so often
untwisted by violence, or ravel'd and entangled in weak discourses, or so false
and fallacious by its mixture of interest, that though men usually put most
confidences in the pretenses of faith, yet no pretenses are more unreasonable.

1. Our faith and persuasions in Religion is most commonly imprinted in us by
our country, and we are Christians at the same rate as we are English or
Spaniards, or of such a family; our reason is first stained and spotted with
the dye of our kindred, and country, and our education puts it in grain, and
whatsoever is against this we are taught to call a temptaiton: in the mean time
we call these accidental and artificial persuasions by the name of faith,
which is only the are of the

2. The faith and the whole Religion of many men is the production of fear. Men
are threatened into their persuasions, and the iron rod of a Tyrant converts
whole nations to his principles,

3. The faith of many men is such, that they dare not trust it: Antisthenes was
initiated into the mysteries of Orph^us, the Priest told him, that all that
were of that Religion, His qui sacris visis abeunt ad inferos Homines beati
sunt, solis quia vivere Contingit illic istis, turba caetera Omnium malorum
generi incidit.
immediately after death should be perfectly happy; the Philosopher asked him,
why he did not dye if he believed what he said? such a faith as that, was fine
to talk of at table, or eating the sacrifices of the Religion, when the mystic
man was (...) full of wine and flesh, of confidence and religion; but to dye,
is a more material consideration, and to be chosen upon no grounds, but such a
faith Bias his case when he was poisoned by the Atheismes of Theodorus, no man
died more like a coward and a fool; as if the gods were to come and go as Bias
pleased to think and talk: so one said of his folly. If God be to be feared
when we die, he is also to be feared in all our pride or flatteries; and
Atheism is a proportion so unnatural and as faith does, in health and
sickness, in peace and war, in company and alone, at the beginning and at
the end of a design; but comes from weak principles, and leaves shallow and
superficial impressions; but when men endeavor to strengthen and confirm it,
they only strive to make themselves worse then they can. Naturally a man
cannot be an Atheist: for he that is so, must have something within him that is
worse either then man or devil.

4. Some measure their faith by shows and apparencies, by ceremonies and names,
by professions and little institutions. Diogenes was angry at the silly Priest
that thought he should be immortal because Agesilaus, and Epaminondas, two
noble Greeks that had preserved their country, and lived virtuously. The faith
of a Christian has no signification at all but obedience and charity; if men
be just, and charitable, and good, and live according to their faith, then
only they are Christians; whatsoever else is pretended is but a shadow and the
image of a grace; for since in all the sects and institutions of the world, the
professors did in some reasonable sort conform to the rules of the profession
(as appears in all the Schools of Philosophers, and Religions Jews, and the
usages and the country customs of the Turks) it is a strange dishonor to
Christianity, that in it alone men should pretend to the faith of it, and do
nothing of what it persuades, and commands upon the account of those promises,
which it makes us to believe. * He that means to please God by his faith, must
have his faith begotten in him by the Spirit of God, and proper arguments of
Religion; he must profess it without fear, he must dare to die for it, and
resolve to live according to its institution; he must grow more confident, and
more holy, have fewer doubtings and more virtues, he must be resolute and
constant, far from indifferency, and above contend earnestly for the faith, by
the most prevailing arguments, by the arguments of holy living, and ready
dying, by zeal and patience, by conformity and humility, by reducing words to
actions, fair discourses to perfect persuasions, by loving the article, and
increasing in the knowledge and love of God and his Son Jesus Christ; and then
his faith is not negligent, deceitful, artificial and improper, but true, and
holy, and reasonable, and useful, zealous and sufficient, and therefore can
never be reproved.

2. Our prayers and devotions must be fervent and zealous, not See Sermons of
the Return of Prayer, Part 2
cold, patient, easy, and soon rejected; but supported by a patient spirit,
set forwards by importunity, continued by perseverance, waited on by attention,
and a present mind, carried along with holy but strong desires, and ballasted
with resignation, and conformity little drops will turn aside, and fall from
the full channel by the A wise man, and a full resolution, and an earnest
spirit can do any thing of duty; but every temptation prevails when we are
willing to die; and we usually lend nothing to devotion but the offices that
flatter our passions; we can desire and the Lords work deceitfully.

3. Our Charity also must be fervent: Malus est miles qui ducem suum gemens
sequitur, He that follows his General with a heavy march and a heavy heart is
but an ill soldier; but our duty to God should be hugely pleasing, and we
should rejoice in it: it must pass on to action, and do the action
vigorously; it is called in Scripture the labor and travail of love; A friend
at a sneese and an almes-basket full of prayers, a love that is lazy, and a
service that is useless, and a pity without support, are the images and
colors of that grace, whose very constitution and design is, beneficence and
well-doing. He that loves passionately will not only do all that his friend
needs, but all that himself can; for although the law of charity is fulfilled
by acts of profit, and bounty, and obedience, and labor; yet it has no other
measures but the proportions and abundance of a good mind; and according to
this, God requires abounding, and that always, in the work of the Lord; if we
love passionately, we shall do all this, for love endures labor, and calls it
pleasure, it spends all and counts it a gain, it suffers inconveniences, and
is quickly reconciled to them; if dishonours and affronts be to be endured,
love smiles and calls them favors, and wears them willingly.

-- alii jacuere ligati
Turpiter, atque aliquis de Diis non tristibus optat
Sic fieri turpis, --
It is the Lord, said David, and I will be yet more vile, and it shall be
honor unto me; thus did the Disciples of our Lord go from tribunals rejoicing
that they were accounted worthy to suffer stripes for that beloved name; and we
are commanded to rejoice in persecutions, to resist unto blood, to strive to
enter in at the strait gate, not to be weary of well doing; do it hugely, and
do it always. Non enim votis neque suppliciis muliebribus auxilia Deorum
parantur; sed vigilando, agendo, been consulendo omnia prospere cedunt. No man
can obtain the favor of God by words and imperfect resolutions, by lazy
actions, and a remiss piety, but by severe counsels, and sober actions, by
watchfulness and prudence, by doing excellent things with holy intentions, and
vigorous prosecutions. Ubi socordiae and ignaviae te tradideris nequidquam Deos
implorabis: If your virtues be lazy, your vices will be bold and active: and
therefore Democritus said well, that the painful and soft-handed people in
Religion differ just as good men and bad; nimirum spe bona, the laboring
charity has a good hope, but a cool Religion has none at all, and the
distinction will have a sad effect to eternal ages.

These are the great Scenes of duty in which we are to be fervent and zealous;
but because earnestness and zeal are circumstances of a great latitude; and
the zeal of the present age is stark cold, if compared to the fervors of the
Apostles, and other holy primitives; and in every age a good man's care may
turn into scruple, if he sees that he is not the best man, because he duty
dwells there, and whatsoever is above it is a degree of excellence; but all that
is less then it, is lukewarmnesse, and the state of an ungracious and an
unaccepted person.

1. No man is fervent and zealous as he ought, but he that preferres Religion
before business, charity before his own case, absolutely, and in particular
instances, but always generally; and when it descends to particulars, it must
be in proportion to circumstances, and by their proper measures: for,

1. In the whole course of life it is necessary that we prefer Religion 1.
before any state that is either contrary to it, or a lessening of its duties.
He that has a state of life in which he cannot at all in fair proportions tend
to Religion, must quit great proportions of that, that he may enjoy more of
this, this is that which our blessed Savior pulling out the right eye if it
offend thee.

2. In particular actions, when the necessity is equal, he that 2.
does not prefer Religion is not at all zealous; for although all natural
necessities are to be served before the circumstances and order of Religion,
yet our belly and our back, our liberty and our life, our health, and a friend
are to be neglected rather

3. Although the things of God are by a necessary zeal to be 3.
preferred before the things of the world; yet we must take heed that we do
not reckon Religion, and orders of worshipping, only to be the things of God,
and all other duties to be the things of the world; for it was a Pharisaicall
device to cry Corban, and to refuse to relieve their aged Parents; it is good
to give to a Church, but it is better to give to the Poor* and though they must
be both provided for, yet in cases of dispute Mercy carries the cause against
Religion and the Temple. And although Mary Mary had done worse if she had been
at the foot of her Master when she should have relieved a perishing brother.
Martha was troubled with much serving; that was more then need, and therefore
she was to blame; and sometimes hearing in some circumstances may be more then
needs; and some women are troubled with overmuch hearing, and then they had
better have been serving the necessities of their house.

4. This rule is not to be extended to the relatives of Religion; 4.
for although the things of the Spirit are better then the things of
immediately, or more effectively, cannot at all times be known; the partaking
the Spirit is a nearer relation to him, then doing his ministeries, and serving
his ends upon others; * and if relations to God and Gods Spirit could bring an
obligation of giving proportionable civil honor, every holy man might put in
some pretense for dignities above some Kings and some Bishops. * But as the
things of the Spirit are in order to the affairs of another world, so they
naturally can infer only such a relative dignity, as can be expressed in
spiritual manners. But because such relations are subjected in men of civil
excellencies are the proper ground of receiving and exacting civil honors, and
spiritual excellencies do only claim them accidentally, and indirectly,
therefore in titles of honor and humane civil praeeminence is the appendix of
the greatest civil power and employment, and is to descend in proper measures;
and for a spiritual relation to challenge a temporal dignity, is as if the
best Music should challenge the best clothes, or a Lutestring should contend
with a Rose for the honor of the greatest sweetness. * Add to this, that
although temporal things are in order to spiritual, and therefore are less
perfect, yet this is not so naturally; for temporal things are properly in
order to the felicity of man in his proper and present constitution; and it is
by a supernatural grace that now they are thrust forward to a things, and
persons, and callings have properly the chiefest temporal regard; and Christ
took nothing of this away from them, but put them higher, by sanctifying and
ennobling them. * But then the higher calling can no more suppose the higher
man, then the richest trade can suppose the richest man. From callings to men,
the argument is fallacious; and a Smith is a more useful man then he that
teaches Logic; but not always to be more esteemed, and called to stand at the
chairs of Princes and Nobles. * Holy persons and holy things and all great
relations are to be valued by general proportions to their correlatives, but
if we

* But lastly, what men may not challenge is not their just and sold to redeem
Captives when there is a great calamity imminent,

But in the whole, the duty of zeal requires that we neglect an ordinary visit
rather then an ordinary prayer, and a great profit rather then omit a required
duty. No excuse can legitimate a sin; and he that goes about to distinguish
between his duty and his profit, and if he cannot reconcile them, will yet tie
them together like a Hyaena and a Dog, this man pretends to Religion, but
secures the world, and is indifferent and lukewarm toward that, so he may be
warm and safe in the possession of this.

2. To that fervor and zeal that is necessary and a duty, it is required that
we be constant and persevering. Eslo sidelis ad mortem, said the Spirit of God
to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Be faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a crown of life: For he that is warm to day, and cold to morrow, zealous
in his resolution and weary in his practices, fierce in the beginning, and
slack and easy in his progress, has not yet well chosen what side he will be
of; he sees not reason enough for Religion, and he has not confidence enough
for its contrary; and therefore he is duplicis animi, as St. James calls him,
of a doubtful mind. For Religion is worth as much to day as it was yesterday,
and that cannot

3. No man is zealous as he ought, but he that delights in the service of God:
without this no man can persevere, but must faint under the continual pressure
of an uneasy load. If a man goes personam sustinere, he acts a part which he
cannot long personate, but will find so many excuses and silly devices to omit
his duty, such tricks to run from that which will make him happy, he will so
watch the ansa or handle left whereby we can easily be drawn from duty, when
all parties are pleased with the employment. But this delight is not to be
understood as if it were always required that we should feel an actual
cheerfulness, Jonathan when he had newly tasted honey, and the light came into
his eyes, and he was refreshed and pleasant. This happens sometimes when God
please to entice, or reward a man's spirit, with little Antepasts of heaven; but
such a delight only is necessary, and a duty, that we always choose our duty
regularly, and undervalue the pleasures of temptation, and proceed in the work
of grace with a firm choice and unabated election; our joy must be a joy of
hope, a joy at least of confident sufferers, the joys rejoicing in hope, so the
Apostle calls it; that is, a going forward upon such a persuasion as sees the
joys of God laid up for the Children of men: and so the sun may shine under a
cloud; and a man may rejoice in persecution, and delight in losses; that is,
though his outward man groans, and faints, and dies, yet his spirit, (...),
the inner man is confident and industrious, and has a hope by which it lives
and works unto the end: It was the case of our blessed Savior in his agony;
his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death, and the load of his Fathers
anger crushed his shoulder, eligible, and therefore amiable, and fit by its
proper excellencies and appendages to be delighted in; it is not pleasant to
the flesh at all times, for its dignity is spiritual and heavenly; but
therefore

These are the necessary parts of zeal; of which if any man fails, he is in a
state of lukewarmnesse, and that is a spiritual death. As a banished man or a
condemned person is dead civilly; he is diminutus capite, he is not reckoned in
the census, nor partakes of the privileges, nor goes for a person, but is
reckoned among things in the possession of others: so is a lukewarm person; he
is cord diminutus, he is spiritually dead, his heart is estranged

SERMON, XIV. Part III.
3. SO long as our zeal and forwardness in Religion has only these
constituent parts, it has no more then can keep the duty alive: but beyond
this, there are many degrees of earnestness and vehemence which are
progressions toward the state of perfection, which every man ought to design
and desire to be added to his portion: of this sort I reckon frequency in
prayer, and alms above our estate. Concerning which two instances I have these
two cautions to insert. 1. Concerning frequency in prayer, it is an act of zeal
so ready and prepared for the spirit of a man, so a religious person. For in
Scripture there is no other rule for the frequency of prayer given us, but by
such words which signify we should do it always, Pray continually: and, Men
ought always to pray and not to faint. And then, men have so many necessities,
that if we should esteem our needs to be the circumstances and positive
determination of our times of prayer, we should be very far from admitting
limitation of the former words, but they must mean that we ought to they cannot
be restrained with fear: the hand grasps a power of doing all that which their
evil heart can desire, they cannot be restrained with disability to sin; they
are flattered by all mean, and base, and indiligent persons, which are the
greatest part of mankind; but few men dare reprove a potent sinner; he shall
every day be flattered and seldom counseled: and his great reflections and
opinions of his condition makes him impatient of reproof, and so he cannot be
restrained with modesty: and therefore pray often, that they pray without
ceasing; For there is great reason they should do so, and great security and
advantage, if they do; For, he that prays well and prays often, must needs be
a good and a blessed man; and truly he that does not, deserves no pity for his
misery. For when all the troubles and dangers of his condition may turn into
his good, if he will but desire they should; when upon such easy terms he may
be happy, for there is no more trouble in it then this, Ask and ye shall
receive; that is all that is required; no more turnings and variety in their
road; when (I say) at so cheap a rate, a poor man may be provided for, and a
rich man may escape damnation, they that refuse to apply themselves to this
remedy, quickly, earnestly, zealously, and constantly, deserves the smart if he
be poor, and if he be rich it is fit he should (because he desires it) dye by
the evils of his proper danger. * It was observed by Cassian; orationibus
maxim insidiantur Daemones, the Devil is more busy to disturb our prayers,
then to hinder any thing else. For else it cannot be imagined why we should be
brought to pray so seldom, and to be so listlesse to them, and so trifling to
them. No, The Devil knows upon what hard terms he stands with the praying
man; he also knows that it is a mighty emanation of Gods infinite goodness and
a strange desire of saving mankind, that he has to so easy a duty promised
such mighty blessings. For God knowing that upon to pray coldly, or to pray
seldom, he secures his interest, and destroys the man's; and it is infinitely
strange, that he can and does prevail so much in this so unreasonable
temptation. Opposuisti nubem ne transiret oration, the mourning Prophet
complained there Lam. 3. 44.
was a cloud passed between heaven and the prayer of Judah; a little thing God
knows; it was a wall which might have been blown down with a few hearty sighs,
and a few penitential tears; or if the prayers had ascended in a full and
numerous body, themselves would have broken through that little partition; but
so the Devil prevails often; opponit nubem: he claps a cloud between; some a
stranger is come; or my head aches; or the Church is too cold; or I have letters
to write; or I am not disposed; or it is not yet time, or the time is past:
these, and such as these are the clouds, the Devil claps between heaven and
us; but these are such impotent objections, that they were as soon confuted as
pretended, by all men that are not fools, or professed enemies of Religion, but
that they are clouds: which sometimes look like Lions and Bears, Castles, and
walls of fire, armies and horses; and indeed are any thing that a man will
fancy; and the smallest article of objection managed and conducted by the
Devils arts, and meeting with a Arislo. (...).
as the Sophister said in the Greek Comedy, Clouds become any thing as they are
represented; Wolves to Simon, Hearts to Cleonymus; For the Devil fits us with
clouds according as we can be abused; and if we love affairs of the world, he
can contrive its circumstances so, that they shall cross our prayers; and so
it is in every instance: and the best way to cure this evil is prayer; pray
often, and pray zealously, and the sun of righteousness will scatter these
clouds, and warm our hearts with his holy fires: But it is in this, as in all
acquired habits; habits are the daughters of action, but then they nurse their
mother, and produce daughters after her image, but far more beautiful and
prosperous. For in frequent prayer there is so much rest and pleasure, that as
soon as ever it is perceived, the contrary temptation appears unreasonable;
none are so unwilling to pray as they that pray seldom; for they that do pray
often, and with zeal, and passion and desire, feel no trouble so great as when
they are forced to omit their holy offices taste how good and gracious the Lord
is to the praying man, so long you cannot see the evil of your coldness and
lukewarm state; but if you would but try, though it be but for curiosity sake,
and inform your selves in the vanity of things, and the truth of pretenses,
and the certainty of Theological propositions, you should find your selves
taken in a golden snare, which will tie you to nothing but felicity, and
safety, and holiness, and pleasures. But then the caution which frequency in
prayers, and that part of zeal which relates to it, is to be upon no account
but of an holy spirit, a wise heart, and reasonable persuasion; for if it
begins upon passion or fear, in imitation of others, or desires of reputation,
honor or fantastic principles, it will be unblessed and weary, unprosperous
and without return or satisfaction: therefore if it happen to begin upon a weak
principle, be very curious to change

2. When you are entered into a state of zealous prayer, and a regular devotion,
what ever interruption you can meet with, observe their causes and be sure to
make them irregular, seldom, and contingent, that your omissions may be
seldom and casual, as a bare accident; for which no provisions can be made;
for if ever it come, that you take any thing habitually and constantly from
your very frequently, it cannot be but you will become troublesome to your
self; your prayers will be uneasy, they will seem hindrances to your more
necessary affairs of passion and interest, and the things of the world: and it
will not stand still, till it comes to Apostasy, and a direct despite and
contempt of holy things. For it was an old rule, and of a sad experience,
Tepiditas si callum obduxerit fiet apostasia, if your lukewarmnesse be
habitual and a state of life, if it once be hardened by the usages of many
days, it changes the whole state of the man, it makes him an apostate to
devotion. Therefore be infinitely Chrysostom, Docendi, praedicandi officia and
alia cessant suo tempore, precandi autem nunquam; there are seasons for
teaching, and preaching, and other outward offices; but prayer is the duty of
all times, and of all persons, and in all contingences: From other things in
many cases we can be excused, but from prayer never. In this therefore (...),
it is good to be zealous.

2. Concerning the second instance I named, viz. To give alms above our
estate, it is an excellent act of zeal, and needs no other caution to make it
secure from illusion and danger, but that our egressions of charity do not
prejudice justice. See that your alms do not other men wrong, and let them do
what they can to thy self, they will never prejudice thee by their abundance;
but then be also careful that the pretenses of justice do not cosen thy self
of thy charity, and the poor of thine alms, and thy soul of the reward. He
that is in debt is not excused from giving alms till his debts are paid; but
only from giving away such portions which should and would pay them, and such
which he intended should do it: There are lacernae divitiarum, and crumbs from
the table, and the gleanings of the harvest, and the scatterings of the
vintage, which in all estates are the portions of the poor, which being
collected considerable in the accounts of Justice; for nothing ought to be Mat.
5. 16*
of the lowest place there, and will not labor for something beyond

3. Hither is to be reduced * the accepting and choosing the counsels
Evangelicall: * the virgin or widow estate in order to Religion: * selling all
and giving it to the poor: * making our selves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven: * offering our selves to death voluntary, in exchange or redemption of
the life of a most useful person, as Aquila and Priscilla, who ventured their
lives for St. Paul: * the zeal of souls: * St. Paul's preaching to the
Corinthian Church without wages: remitting of rights and forgiving of debts,
when the obliged person could pay, but not without much trouble: * protection
of calamitous persons with hazard of our own interest and a certain trouble;
concerning which and all other acts of zeal, we are to observe the following
measures, by which

1. The first measure, by which our zeal may comply with our duty, and its
actions become laudable, is charity to our neighbor. 3.
For since God receives all that glorification of himself whereby we can serve
and minister to his glory, reflected upon the foundation of his own goodness,
and bounty, and mercy, and all the Allellujahs that are or ever shall be sung
in heaven are praises and thank givings, and that God himself does not receive
glory from the acts of his in via misericordiae, in the way of mercy, and
bounty, charity, and forgiveness, love, and fair compliances; There is no
greater charity in the world then to save a soul, nothing that pleases God
better, nothing that can be in our hands greater or more noble, nothing that
can be a more lasting and delightful honor, then that a perishing soul,
snatched from the flames of an intolerable Hell, and born to Heaven upon the
wings of piety and mercy, by the Ministry of Angels, Him, for the Author and
finisher of salvation, and thee for the Minister and charitable instrument;
that bright star must needs look pleasantly upon thy face for ever, which was
by thy hand placed there, and had it not been by thy Ministry might have been
a footy coal, in the regions of sorrow. Now in order to this, God has given us
all some powers, and ministeries, by which we may by our charity promote this
Religion, and the great interest of souls: Counsels, and prayers, preaching,
and writing, passionate desires, and fair examples, going before others, in the
way of godliness, and bearing the torch before them that they by the way we
should do well to consider what we have done toward it. For as it will be a
strange arrest at the day of Judgment to Dives, that he fed high and sufferred
Lazarus to starve, and every garment that lies by more frequently then thou
have humbly, and passtonately, and charitably, and zealously bowed thy head,
and thy heart, and knees to God to redeem that cruelty or importune justice. He
that strikes the Prince for justice, as Solomon's expression is, is a companion
of murderers; and he that out of zeal of Religion shall go to convert Nations
to his opinion by destroying Christians whose faith is entire and summed up by
the Apostles; this man breaks the ground, with disputes and hypocrisy, new
summaries of Religion estimated by measures of anger, and accursed principles;
and so much of the religion as is necessary to salvation is laid aside, and
that brought forth that serves an interest, not holiness; that fills the
Schools of a proud man, but not that which will fill Heaven. Any zeal is
proper for Religion, but the zeal of the sword, and the zeal of anger; this is
(...), the bitterness of zeal; and it is a certain temptation Iam. 3. 14.
to every man against his duty; for if the sword turns preacher and dictates
propositions by empire in stead of arguments, and ingraves them in men's hearts
with a poniard, that it shall be death to believe what I innocently and
ignorantly am persuaded of, it must needs be unsafe to try the spirits, to try
all things, to make inquiry; and yet without this liberty, no man can justify
himself before God or man, nor confidently say, that his Religion is best;
since he cannot without a final danger make himself able to give a right
sentence, and to follow that which he finds to be the best; this may ruin
souls by making Hypocrites, or inordination of zeal; for Christ by reproving
St. Peter drawing his sword, even in the cause of Christ, for his sacred and
yet injured person, (...), (says Theophylact) teaches us not to use the sword
though in the cause of God, or for God himself; because he will secure his own
Moses passion, it throws the tables of the Law out of our hands, and breaks
them in pieces out of indignation to see them broken. This is the zeal that is
now in fashion, and has almost spoiled Religion; men like the Zelots of the
Jews cry up their Sect and in it their interest, (...); they affect Disciples
and fight against the opponents; and we shall find in Scripture, that when the
Apostles began to preach the meekness of the Christian institution,
salvations, and promises, charity and humility, there was a zeal set up against
them; the they stirred up the City, they made tumults, they persecuted this way
unto the death, they got letters from the high Priest, they kept Damascus with
a Garrison, they sent parties of soldiers to silence and to imprison the
Preachers, and thought they did God service, when they put the Apostles to
death, and they swore neither to eat nor to drink till they had killed Paul. It
was an old trick of the Jewish zeal,

Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
They would not show the way to a Samaritan, nor give a cup of cold water but
to a circumcised brother. That was their zeal; But the zeal of the Apostles was
this; they preached publicly and privately, they prayed for all men, they wept
to God for the hardness of men's hearts, they became all things to all men that
they might gain some, they traveled through deeps and deserts, they endured the
heat of the Syrian Star, and the violence of Euroclydon, winds and tempests,
seas and prisons, mockings and scourgings, fastings and poverty, labor and
watching, they endured every man and wronged no man, they would do any good
thing and suffer any evil if they had but hopes to prevail upon a soul; they
persuaded men meekly, they entreated them humbly, they convinced them
powerfully, the watched for their good but meddled not with their interest, and
this is the Christian zeal, the zeal of mecknesse, the zeal of charity, the
zeal of patience, (...),

2. The next measure of zeal is prudence. For, as charity is the matter of
zeal, so is discretion the manner. It must always be for good to our
neighbor, and there needs no rules for the conducting of that, provided* the
end be consonant to the design, that is, zeal also of Religion or worshipping,
and this has more need of measures and proper cautions. For Religion can turn
into a snare, it may be abused into superstition, it may become weariness in
the spirit, and tempt to tediousness, to hatred, and despair: and many persons
through their indiscreet conduct and furious marches, and great loads taken
upon tender shoulders and unexperienced, have come to be perfect haters of
their joy, and despisers of all their hopes, being like dark Lanthorns, in
which a candle burns bright, but the body is encompassed with a crust and a
dark cloud of iron;

1. Therefore our zeal must never carry us beyond that which is profitable.
There are many institutions, customs, and usages introduced into Religion upon
very fair motives, and apted to great necessities; but to imitate those things
when they are disrobed of their proper ends is an importune zeal, and signifies
nothing but a forward mind, and an easy heart, and an imprudent head; unless
more non saeculari, after the manner of men divore'd from the usual
entercourses of the world, still their desire of single life increased; because
the old necessity be used alone. He therefore that thinks he is a more holy
person for being a virgin or a widower, or that he is bound to be so because
they were so, or that he cannot be a religious person because he is not so,
has zeal indeed, but not according to knowledge. But now if the single state
can be taken out and put to new appendages, and fitted to the end of another
grace or essential duty of Religion, it will well become a Christian nothing
else; fast when they have no need, when there is need they should not; but call
it religion to be miserable or sick; here their superiors should not think the
Law obeyed, unless the end of the first institution be observed; a fasting day
is a day of humiliation, and prayer; and fasting being nothing it self, but
wholly the handmaid of a further grace, ought not to be divested of its
holiness and sanctification, and left like the

2. Our zeal must never carry us beyond that which is safe. Some there are who
in their first attempts and entries upon Religion while the passion that
brought them in remains, undertake things as great as their highest thoughts;
no repentance is sharp enough, no charities expensive enough, no fastings
afflictive enough, then totis Quinquatribus orant; and finding some
deliciousness at the first contest, and in that activity of their passion,
they make vows to bind themselves for ever to this state of delicacies. The
onset is from something to something, at last it will come to just nothing, and
indignation and hatred of holy things, an impudent spirit, carelessenesse or
despair. Zeal sometimes carries a man into temptation: and he that never thinks
he loves God dutifully or acceptably, because he is not imprisoned for him, or
undone, or designed to Martyrdom, may desire a trial that will undo him. It
is like fighting of a Duel to show our valor. Stay till the King commands you
to fight and die, and then let zeal do its noblest offices. This irregularity
and mistake was too frequent in the primitive Church, when men and women would
strive for death, and be ambitious to feel the hangmans sword; some miscarryed
in the

3. Let Zeal never transport us to attempt any thing but what is possible. M.
Teresa made a vow that she would do always that which was absolutely the best.
But neither could her understanding always tell her which was so, nor her will
always have the same fervours: and it must often breed scruples, and sometimes
tediousness, and wishes that the vow were unmade. He that vows never to have
an ill thought, never to commit an error, has taken a course that his little
infirmities shall become crimes, and certainly be imputed

4. Zeal is not safe unless it be in re probabili too, it must be in a likely
matter. For we that find so many excuses to untie all our just obligations,
and distinguish our duty into so much finenesse, scruple and snares, shameful
retreats and new fantastic principles; In all our undertakings we must
consider what is our state of life, what our natural inclinations, what is our
society, and what are our dependencies; by what necessities we are born down,
by what hopes we are biassed; and by these let us measure our heats and their
proper business. A zealous man runs up a sandy hill; the violence of motion is
his greatest hinderance, and a passion in Religion destroys it sometimes spoils
the action, and always endangers it. But I must remember we live in an age in
which men have more need of new smoke and lurking fires do corrode and secretly
consume: therefore this discourse is less necessary. A Physician would have
but small employment near the Riphaean Mountains, if he could cure nothing but
Calentures; Catarrhes, and dead palfies, Colds and Consumptions are their
evils, and so is lukewarmnesse and deadness of spirit, the proper maladies of
our age: for though some are hot when they are mistaken, yet men are cold in a
Nondum vidisti requiem quam speramus, nec tormenta quae timemus; young man,
thou have not seen the glories which are laid up for the zealous and devout,
nor yet beheld the flames which are prepared for the lukewarm, and the haters
of strict devotion. But the Jews tell that Adam having seen the beauties, and
tasted Indian Mountains for three hundred years together: and we who have a
great share in the cause of his sorrows, can by nothing be invited to a
persevering, a great, a passionate religion, more then by remembering what he
lost, and what is laid up for them whose hearts are burning lamps, and are all
on fire with Divine love, whose flames are fanned with the wings of the holy
Dove, and whose spirits shine and burn with that fire which the holy Jesus came
to enkindle upon the earth.

Sermon, XV. The House of Feasting: OR THE EPICVRES MEASVRES. Part I.
1 Cor. 15. 32. last part. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye.
THis is the Epicures Proverb, begun upon a weak mistake; started by chance,
from the discourses of drink, and thought witty by the undiscerning company,
and prevailed infinitely, because it struck their fancy luckily, and maintained
the merry meeting; but as it happens Seneca describes the spare diet of
Epicurus and Metrodorus, he uses this expression; Liberaliora sunt alimenta
carceris: sepositos ad capitale supplicium, non tam anguste, qui occisurus est,
pascit. The prison keeps a better table, and he that is to kill the criminal
to morrow morning, gives him a better supper over night. By this he intended to
represent his meal to be very short: for as dying persons die to morrow, and by
the sentence and unalterable decree of God, they Philenium's name, no fat
Mullets, no Oysters of Luerinus, no Lesbian or Chian Wines, (...), Therefore
now enjoy the delicacies of Nature, and feel the descending wines distilled
through the limbecks of thy tongue, and larynx, and suck the Apultan Swine, and
the condited bellies of the scarus; but lose no time; for the Sun drives hard,
and the shadow is long, and the days of mourning are at hand, but the number
of the days of darkness and the grave cannot be told.

Thus they thought they discoursed wisely, and their wisdom was turned into
folly; for all their arts of providence, and witty securities of pleasure were
nothing but unmanly prologues to death, fear and folly, sensuality and beastly
pleasures. But they are to be excused rather then we. They placed themselves in
the order of beasts and birds, and esteemed their bodies nothing but
receptacles of flesh and wine, larders and pantries; and their soul the fine
instrument of pleasure and brisk perception, of relishes and gusts, reflections
and duplications of delight; and therefore they treated themselves accordingly.
But then why we should do the same things, who are led by other principles, and
a more severe institution, and better notices of immortality, who understand
what shall happen to a soul hereafter, and know that this time is but a passage
eternity, this body but a servant to the soul, this soul a minister to the
Spirit, and the whole man in order to God and to felicity; this I say is more
unreasonable, then to eat aconite to preserve our health, and to enter into the
flood that we may die a dry death; this is a perfect contradiction to the state
of good things, whither we are designed, and to all the principles of a wise
Philophy, whereby we are instructed that we may become wise unto salvation.
That I may therefore do some assistances toward the curing the miseries of
mankind, and reprove the follies and improper motions toward felicity, I
shall endeavor to represent to

1. That plenty and the pleasures of the world are no proper instruments of
felicity.

2. That intemperance is a certain enemy to it; making life unpleasant, and
death troublesome and intolerable.

3. I shall add the rules and measures of temperance in eating and drinking,
that nature and grace may join to the constitution

1. Plenty and the pleasures of the world are no proper instrument of felicity.
It is necessary that a man have some violence done to himself before he can
receive them: for natures bounds are, non esurire, non sitire, non algere, to
be quit from hunger, and thirst, and cold, that is, to have nothing upon us
that puts us to pain; against which she has made provisions by the fleece of
the sheep, and the skins of beasts, by the waters of the fountain, and the
herbs of the field, and of these no good man is destitute, for fungus, to cats
and owls, to moles and bats, making her storehouses always to stand open to
them, and that for the Lord of all these, even to the noblest of her
productions she should have made no provisions, and only produced in us
appetites sharp as the stomach of Wolves, troublesome as the Tigres hunger, and
then run away, leaving art and chance, violence and study, to feed us and to
David said to God, Whither shall I go from thy presence? If I go to heaven,
thou art there, if I descend to the deep, thou art there also; if I take the
wings of the morning and fly into the uttermost parts of the wilderness, even
there thou will find me out, and thy right hand shall uphold me: we may say it
concerning our table, and our wardrobe; If we go into the fields, we find them
tilled by the mercies of are ministered singly; by that labor that can procure
what we need, by that wisdom that can consider concerning future necessities,
by Susa, or garments stained with the blood of the Tyrian fish, that if we
desire to feed like Philoxenus, or to have tables laden like the boards of
Vitellius, that we shall never want. It is not Nature that desires these
things, but lust and violence; and by a discase

Si ventri been, si lateri est, pedibu^sque tuis, nil Horace.

Divitiae poterunt Regales addere majus.
And therefore it is that plenty and pleasures are not the proper instruments
of felicity. Because felicity is not a jewel that can be locked in one man's
cabinet. God intended that all men should be

He that cannot be satisfied with common provisions, has a bigger need then he
that can; it is harder, and more contingent, and more difficult, and more
troublesome, for him to be satisfied; (...); said Epicurus, I feed sweetly upon
bread and water, those Magna pars libertatis est been moratus venture: Senec.
he need not swell his accounts, and intricate his spirit with arts of subtlety
and contrivance, he can be free from fears; and the Anachoreticall and
Philosophical persons, who lived meanly as a sheep, and without variety as the
Baptist, but in the same proportion it is also true in every man that can be
contented with that which is honestly sufficient. Maximus Tyrius considers
concerning the felicity of Diogenes, a poor Synopean, having Greece; but he saw
that he was compelled by no Tyrant to speak or do ignobly; he had no fields to
till, and therefore took no care to buy cattle, and to hire servants; he was
not distracted when a rent-day came; and feared not when the wise Greeks played
the fool and fought who should be Lord of that field that lay between Thebes
and Athens; he laughed to see men scramble for dirty silver, and spend 10000.
Attick talents for the getting the revenues of 200 Philippics; he went with his
staff and bag into the camp of the Phoconses, and the soldiers reverenced his
person and despised truce with him whosoever had wars; and the Diadem of Kings,
and the Purple of the Emperors, the Mitre of high Priests, and the divining
staff of Soothsayers were things of envy and ambition, the purchase of
danger, and the rewards of a mighty passion: and men entered into them by
trouble and extreme difficulty, and dwelt under them as a man under a falling
roof, or as Damocles under the Tyrants sword,

Nunc lateri incumbens -- mox deinde supinus,
Nunc cubat in faciem, nunc recto pectore surgens,
Sleeping like a condemned man; and let there be what pleasure men can dream of
in such broken slumbers, yet the fear of waking from this illusion and parting
from this fantastic pleasure, is a pain and torment which the imaginary
felicity cannot pay for. Cui cum paupertate been convenit, dives est; non qui
parum habet, sed qui plus cupit, pauper est. All our trouble is from within us;
and if a dish of lettice and a clear fountain can cool all my heats, so that I
shall have neither thirst nor pride, lust nor revenge, envy nor ambition, I am
lodged in the bosom of felicity; and indeed Ahasuerus feast cannot satisfy my
ambition and my pride. Nulla re egere, Dei proprium; quam paucissimis autem,
Deo proximum, said Socrates. He therefore that has the fewest desires and the
most quiet passions, whose wants are soon provided for, and whose possessions
cannot be disturbed with violent fears, he that dwells next door to
satisfaction, and can carry his needs and lay them down where he please, this
man is the happy man, and this is not to be done in Dives jam factus desiit
gaudere lent, Carius edit and bibit, and latatur dives, quam pauper, qui in
quolibet, in parato, in inempto gaudet, and facile epulari potest, dives
nunquam. For as it is in plants which nature thrusts forth from her navell, she
makes regular provisions, and dresses them with strength and ornament, with
easiness and a full stature, but if you thrust a Jessamine there where she
would have had a Daisie Scythian clown; she feeds them and makes them easy
without cares and costly passion; but if you thrust an appetite into her which
she intended not, she gives you sickly and uneasy banquets, you must struggle
with her Ad supervacua sudatur. A man must labor infinitely to get more then
he needs; but to drive away thirst and hunger, a man needs not sit in the
fields of the oppressed poor, nor lead armies, nor break his sleep, and
contumeliosam humanitatem pati, and to suffer shame and danger, and envy and
affront, and all the retinue of infelicity.

-- Quis non Epicurum
Suspicit, exigui laetum plantaribus horti?
If men did but know what felicity dwells in the cottage of a virtuous poor man,
how sound his sleeps, how quiet his breast, how composed his mind, how free
from care, how easy his provision, how healthful his morning, how sober his
night, how moist his mouth, how joyful his heart, they would never admire the
noises

Nam neque divitibus contingunt gaudia solis.
These which you call pleasures are but the imagery and fantastic
appearances, and such appearances even poor men may have. It is like felicity
that the King of Persia should come to Babylon in the winter, and to Susa in
the summer; and be attended with all the servants Asia. It is like this, that
Diogenes went to Corinth in the time of vintage, and to Athens when winter
came, and in stead of Courts visited the Temples and the Schools, and was
pleased in the society of Scholars and learned men, and conversed with the
Students of all Asia and Europe. If a man loves privacy, the poor fortune can
have that Markets and to Courts, and may glut himself with strange faces, and
strange voices, and stranger manners, and the wild designs of all the world:
and when that day comes in which we shall dye, nothing of the eating and
drinking remains, nothing of the pomp and luxury, but the sorrow to part with
it, and shame to have dwelt there where wisdom and virtue seldom comes,
unless it be to call men to sober counsels, to a plain and a severe and more
natural way of living; and when Lucian derides the dead Princes and Generals,
and says that in hell they go up and Philip of Macedon, (...), mending of
shoes in a little stall; he intended to represent, that in the shades below
and in the state of the grave, the Princes and voluptuous have a being
different from their present plenty, but that their condition is made
contemptible and miserable by its disproportion to their lost and perishing
voluptuousness. The result is this, that Tiresias told the Ghost of Menippus
enquiring what state of life was nearest to felicity, (...), The private life,
that which is freest from tumult and vanity, noise and

2. Intemperance in eating and drinking is the most contrary course to the
Epicures design in the world; and the voluptuous man has the least of
pleasure; and upon this proposition, the consideration is more material and
more immediately reducible to practice, because in eating and drinking men
please themselves so much, and have the necessities of Nature to usher in the
inordination of gluttony and drunkenness, and our need leads in vice by the
hand, that we know not how to distinguish our friend from our enemy; and St.
Austin is sad upon this point; Thou O Lord have taught me that I should take my
meat as I take my Physic, but while I pass from the trouble of hunger to the
quietness of satisfaction, in the very passage I am ensnared by the cords of
my own concupiscence; Necessity bids me pass, but I have no way to pass from
hunger to fullness, but over the bridge of pleasure; and although health and
life be the cause of eating and drinking, yet pleasure, a dangerous pleasure
thrusts her self into attendance, and sometimes endeavors to be the
principal, and I do that for pleasures sake which I would only do for health;
and yet* they have distinct measures whereby they can be separated, and that
which is enough for health is too little for delight, and that which is for my
delight destroys my health, and still it is uncertain for what end I do
indeed desire; and the worst of the evil is this, that the soul is glad
because it is uncertain, and that an excuse is ready, that under the pretense
of health, Obumbret negotium voluptatis, the design of pleasure may be advanced
and protected. How far the ends of natural pleasure may lawfully be enjoyed,
I shall afterward consider; In the mean time, if we remember that the Epicures
design is pleasure principally, we may the better reprove his folly by
considering that intemperance is a

1. It is an enemy to health, without which it is impossible to feel anything
of corporal pleasure. 2. A constant full table has in it less pleasure then
the temperate provisions of the Hermit, or the Labourer, or the Philosophical
table of Scholars, and the just pleasures of the virtuous. 3. Intemperance is
an impure fountain of vice, and a direct nurse of uncleanness. 4. It is a
destruction of wisdom. 5. It is a dishonor and disreputation to the person
and

It is an enemy to health: which is as one calls it, ansa voluptatum and
condimentum vitae; it is that handle by which we can apprehend, and perceive
pleasures, and that sauce that only makes life delicate; for what content can a
full table administer to a man in a fever? and he that has a sickly stomach
admires at his happiness that can feast with cheese and garlic, unctious
breuuages and the low tasted spinach: Health is the opportunity of wisdom, the
fairest scene of Religion, the advantages of the glorifications of God, the
charitable ministeries to men; it is a state of joy and thanksgiving, and Paul
affirms to be (...), manifest, leading before unto judgment. It bears part of
its punishment in this life, and has this appendage like the sin against the
holy Ghost, that it is not remitted in this world, nor in the world to come;
that is, if it be not repented of, it is punished here and hereafter, which the
Scripture does not affirm concerning all sins,

But in this the sinner gives sentence with his mouth and brings it to
execution with his own hands;

Paena tamen praesens, cum tu deponis amictum
Turgidus, et crudum pavonem in balneaportas.
The old gluttons among the Romans, Heliogabalus, Tigellius, Crispus, Montanus,
notaeque per oppida buccae, famous Epicures, mingled their meats with
vomitings; so did Vitellius, and entered into Syene, and then they went home
and drew their breath short till the morning, and it may be not at all before
night,

Hinc subitae mortes, atque intestata senectus.
Their age is surprised at a feast, and gives them not time to make their will,
but either they are choked with a large morsel, and there is no room for the
breath of the lungs, and the motions of the heart; or a fever burns their eyes
out, or a quinzie punishes that

Plurimus hinc aeger moritur vigilando: sed illum
Languorem peperit cibus imperfectus, and haerens
Ardenti stomacho --
So that the Epicures geniall proverb may be a little altered, and say, Let us
eat and drink, for by this means to morrow we shall die; but that is not all,
for these men live a healthlesse life* that is, are long, are every day dying,
and at last dye with torment. Menander was too soft in his expression, (...);
that it is indeed a death, but gluttony is a pleasant death,

-- (...)
(...),
(...).
For this is the gluttons pleasure, to breath short and difficultly, scarce to
be able to speak, and when he does, he cries out, I dye and rot with pleasure.
But the folly is as much to be derided as the men to be pityed, that we daily
see men afraid of death with a most intolerable apprehension, and yet increase
the evil of it, the pain, and

Rem struere exoptant caeso bove, Mercuriumque
Arcessunt fibra --
They pray for herds of cattle, and spend the breeders upon feasts and
sacrifices. For why do men go to Temples and Churches, and make vows to God
and daily prayers, that God would give them a healthful body, and take away
their gout and their palsies, their fevers and apoplexies, the pains of the
head and the gripings of the

Poscis opem nervis, corpusque fidele senectae.
Esto age, sed grandes patinae tucetaque crassa Per. sat. 2.

Annuere his superos vetuere, Jov emque morantur.
But it is enough that the rich glutton shall have his dead body condited and
embalmed; he may be allowed to stink and suffer living sinners and walking
rottenness, and hereafter will be dying penitents and perfumed carcasses, and
their whole felicity is lost in the confusions of their unnatural disorder.
When Cyrus had espied Astyages and his fellows coming drunk from a banquet
laden with variety of follies and filthiness, their legs failing them, their
eyes red and staring, cousened* with a moist cloud, and abused by a doubled
object, their tongues full as spunges, and their heads no wiser, he thought
they were poisoned, and he had reason; for what malignant quality can be more
venomous and hurtful to a man then the effect

But therefore me thinks the temptations which men meet withal from without,
are in themselves most unreasonable and soonest confuted by us. He that tempts
me to drink beyond my measure, civilly invites me to a fever; and to lay aside
my reason, as the Persian women did their garments and their modesty at the end
of feasts: and all the question then will be, which is the worse evil, to
resuse your uncivil kindness, or to suffer a English Surfeit. Creon in the
Tragedy said well,

(...),
(...),
It grieve thee O stranger, or to he affronted by thee, then to be tormented by
thy kindness the next day and the morrow after; and freed man of Domitius the
Father of Nero suffered himself to be killed by his Lord; and the son of
Praxaspes by Cambyses, rather then they would exceed their own measures up to a
full intemperance, and a certain sickness, and dishonor. For, (as Plutarch
said well) to avoid the opinion of an uncivil man, or being clownish, to run
into a pain of thy sides or belly, into madness or a headache, is the part of
a fool and a coward, and of one that knows not how to converse with men citra
pocula and nidorem, in any thing but in the famelick smells of meat and
vertiginous

Ebrius and petulans, qui nullum forte cecidit,
Dat poenas, noctem patitur lugentis amicum
Pelidae --
A drunkard and a glutton feels the torments of a restless night, although he
has not killed a man; that is, just like murderers and persons of an
afrighting conscience; so wake the glutton, so broken and sick, and disorderly
are the slumbers of the drunkard. Now let the Epicure boast his pleasures, and
tell how he has furorem illum conviviorum and foedissimum patrimoniorum
exitium culinam, of the madness of delicious feasts, and that his kitchen has
destroyed his Patrimony; let him tell that he takes in every day,

-- Quantum Lauseia bibebat, As much wine as would refresh the sorrows of 40
languishing

Ut quod multi Damalis meri
Bassum Threicia vicit amystide,
That he has knocked down Damalis with the 25th. bottle, and has outfeasted
Anthony or Cleopatra's luxury; it is a goodly pleasure and himself shall bear
the honor.

-- Rarum and memorabile magni
Gutturis exemplum, conducendusque magister.
But for the honor of his banquet he has some ministers attending that he did
not dream of, and in the midst of his loud laughter, the gripes of the belly
and the fevers of the brain, Pallor and genae pendulae, oculorum ulcera,
tremulae manus, furiales somni, inquies nocturna, as Pliny reckons them,
palenesse and hanging cheeks, ulcers of the eyes and trembling hands, dead or
distracted sleeps, these speak aloud, that to day you eat and drink, that to
morrow you may dye, and dye for ever.

It is reported concerning Socrates, that when Athens was destroyed by the
plague, he in the midst of all the danger escaped untouched by sickness,
because by a spare and severe diet, he had within him no tumult of disorderly
humors, no factions in his blood, no loads of moisture prepared for charnell
houses, or the sickly hospitals; but a vigorous heat, and a well proportioned
health and study, Philosophy and Religion, for the temples and the Academy, but
no superfluities to be spent in groans and sickly nights: And all the world of
gluttons is hugely convinced of the excellency of temperance in order to our
temporal felicity and health, because when themselves have left virtue, and
sober diet, and counsels, and first lost their temperance, and then lost their
health, they were forced to run to temperance and abstinence for their cure,
Vilis enim tenuisque mensa (ut loquuntur pueri) sanitatis S. Chrysostom.
matter est, Then, a thin diet and a humbled body, fasting and emptiness, and
arts of scattering their sin and sickness, is in season; Vitellius vomiting,
that they might eat again; but so they may entail a fit of sickness upon every
full moon, till both their virtue and themselves decrease into the corruptions
and rottenness of the grave. But if they delight in sharp fevers and horrid
potions, in sour palats and heaps of that which must be carried forth, they
may reckon their wealthy pleasures to be very great and many, if they will but
tell them one by one with their sicknesses and These men (as St. Paul's
expression is) heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
the day of Gods most righteous judgments. Strange therefore it is that for the
stomach which is scarce a span long, there should be provided so many furnaces
and ovens, huge fires and an army of cooks, cellars swimming with wine, and
granaries sweating with corn; and that into one belly should enter the vintage
of many Nations, the spoils of distant Provinces, and the shell-fishes of
several seas. When the Heathens feasted their Gods, they gave Liguria,
Sicilian beeves, and wheat from Egypt, wild boars from Illyrium, and Grecian
sheep, variety, and load, and cost, and curiosity: and so do we. It is so
little we spend Cynic; It is to be wondered at that men eat so much for
pleasures sake; and yet for the same pleasure should not give over eating, and
betake themselves to the delights of temperance, since to be healthful and
holy is so great a pleasure. However, certain it is that no man ever repented
that he arose from the table sober, health, and their virtue, and their God is
departed from them.

SERMON, XVI. Part II.
2. A Constant full Table is less pleasant then the temperate provisions of
the virtuous, or the natural banquets of the poor. (...), said Epicurus,
Thanks be to the God of Nature, that he has made that which is necessary to be
ready at hand, and easy to be had, and that which cannot easily be obtained,
is not necessary it should be at all; which in effect is to say, it cannot be
constantly pleasant; for necessity and want makes the appetite, and the
appetite makes the pleasure; and men are infinitely mistaken when they despise
the poor man's Table, and wonder how he can excise of pleasure, and that he can
suffer his days labor, and recompense it with unsavory herbs, and potent
garleek, with watercresses, and bread colored like the ashes that gave it
hardness; he has a hunger that gives it deliciousness; and we may as well
wonder that a Lion eats raw flesh, or that a Wolf feeds upon the turfe, they
have an appetite proportionable to this meat, and their necessity, and their
hunger, and their use, and their nature are the Cooks that dress their
provisions, and make them delicate: And yet if water and pulse, natural
provisions, and the simple diet were not pleasant, as indeed Non est voluptas
aqua and polenta, (said a Philosopher) sed summa voluptas est posse ex his
capere voluptatem, It is an excellent pleasure to be able to take pleasure in
worts and water, in bread and onions; for then a man can never want pleasure
when it is so Fortune and Art gives delicacies; Nature gives meat and drink;
and what nature gives, fortune cannot take away, but every change can take away
what only is given by the bounty of a full fortune; and if in satisfaction and
freedom from care, and security and proportions to our own natural appetite,
there can be pleasure, state of feastings which a War can lessen, and a Tyrant
can take away, or the Pirates may intercept, or a Blast may spoil, and is
always contingent, and is so far from satisfying, that either it destroys the
appetite, and capacity of pleasure, or increases it beyond all the measures of
good things.

He that feasts every day, feasts no day, (...) and however you treat your
selves, sometimes you will need to be refreshed beyond it; but what will you
have for a Festival, if you

Plerumque gratae principibus vices,
Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperum
Coenae sine aulaeis, and ostro,
Sollicitam explicuere frontem.
But however, of all the things in the world a man may best and most easily
want pleasure, which if you have enjoyed, it passes away at the present, and
leaves nothing at all behind it, but sorrow and sour remembrances. No man
felt a greater pleasure in a goblet of wine, then Lysimachus when he fought
against the Getae; and himself and his whole Army were compelled by thirst to
yield themselves to bondage; but when the wine was sunk as far as his navel,
the pleasure was gone, and so was his Kingdom and his liberty; for though the
sorrow dwells with a man pertinaciously, yet the pleasure is swift as
lightning, and more pernicious; but the pleasures of a sober and a temperate
Table are pleasures till Timotheus said of Plato's Scholars, they converse
sweetly, and are of perfect temper and delicacy of spirit even the next
morning; whereas the intemperate man is forced to lie long in bed, and forget
that there is a Sun in the sky; he must not be called till he has concocted,
and slept his surfeit into a truce and a quiet respite; but whatsoever this man
has suffered, certain it is that the poor man's head did not ache, neither did
he need the juice of poppies, or costly cordials, Physicians or Nurses, to
bring him to his right shape again; like Apuleius's Ass with eating roses: and
let him turn his hour-glasse, he will his head aches longer then his throat was
pleased; and which is worst, his glass runs out with joggings and violence,
and every such concussion with a surfeit makes his life look nearer its end,
and ten to one but it will before its natural period be broken in pieces. If
these be the pleasures of an Epicures Table, I shall pray that my friends may
never feel them; but he that sins against his Maker shall fall into the
calamities of intemperance.

3. Intemperance is the Nurse of vice; (...), Venus milk, 3.
so Aristophanes calls wine, (...), the Mother of all grievous things: so
Pontianus. For by the experience of all the world, it is the band to lust: and
no man must ever dare to pray to God for a pure soul in a chaste body, if
himself does not live temperately, if himself make provisions for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts of it; for in this case he shall find that which enters
into him shall defile him more then he can be cleansed by those vain Diogenes,
Tyrants never come from the cottages of them that eat pulse and course fare,
but from the delicious beds and banquets of the effeminate and rich feeders.
For to maintain plenty and James, Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
Iam. 2. 6.
before the Judgment seat? For all men are passionate to live according to that
state in which they were born, or to which they are devolved, or which they
have framed to themselves; Those therefore that love to live high and
deliciously,

Et quibus in solo vivendi causa palato, who live not to God, but to their
belly, not to sober counsels, but to an intemperate table, have framed to
themselves a manner of living which oftentimes cannot be maintained, but by
injustice and violence, which coming from a man whose passions are made big
with sensuality and an habitual folly, by pride and forgetfulness of the
condition and miseries of mankind, are always unreasonable, and sometimes
intolerable.

-- regustatum digito terebrare salinum
Contentus perages, si vivere cum Jove tendis.
Formidable is the state of an intemperate man, whose sin begins with
sensuality, and grows up in folly and weak discourses, and is fed by violence
fools and parasites, full bellies, and empty heads, servants and flatterers,
whose hands are full of flesh and blood, and their hearts empty of pity and
natural compassion; where religion cannot inhabit, and the love of God must
needs be a stranger; whose talk is loud, and trifling, injurious and
impertinent; and whose employment is the same with the work of the sheep or the
calfe, always to eat; their loves are the lusts of the lower belly, and their
portion is in the lower regions to eternal ages, where their thirst, and their
hunger, and their torment shall be infinite.

4. Intemperance is a perfect destruction of Wisdom. (...), 4.
a full gorged belly never produced a sprightly mind: and therefore these kind
of men are called (...), slow bellies, so S. Paul concerning the intemperate
Cretans out of their own Poet: they are like the Tigres of Brasil, which when
they are empty are bold, and swift, and full of sagacity, but being full, sneak
away from the barking of a village dog. So are these men, wise in the morning,
quick and fit for business; but when the sun gives the sign to spread the
tables, and intemperance brings in the messes, and drunkenness fills the
bouls, then the man falls away, and leaves a beast in his room; nay worse,
(...), they are dead all but their throat and belly, so Aristophanes has
fitted them with a carcasses above half way; Plotinus descends one step lower
yet; affirming such persons, (...), they are made trees, whose whole employment
and life is nothing but to feed and suck juices from the bowels of their Nurse
and Mother; and indeed commonly they talk as trees in a wind and tempest, the
noise is great and querulous, but it signifies nothing but trouble and
disturbance. A full meal is like Sisera's banquet, at the end of which there is
a nail struck into a man's head: (...), so Porphyrie; it knocks a man down, and
Pilot is drunk and the helm dashed in pieces, and the ship first reels, and by
swallowing too much is it self swallowed up at last. And therefore the Navis
Agrigentina, the madness of the young fellows of Agrigentum, who being drunk,
fancyed themselves in a storm, and the house the ship; was more then the wild
they were all cast away, they were broken in pieces by the foul disorder of the
storm.

Hinc vini atque somni degener discordia, Prudent. him. de jejun.

Libido sordens, inverecundus lepos,
Variaeque pestes languidorum sensuum.
Hinc frequenti marcida oblectamine
Scintilla mentis intorpescit nobilis,
Animscsque pigris stertit in praecordiis.
The senses languish, the spark of Divinity that dwells within is quenched, and
the mind snorts, dead with sleep and fullness in the fouler regions of the
belly.

So have I seen the eye of the world looking upon a fenny bottom, and drinking
up too free draughts of moisture gathered them into a cloud, and that cloud
crept about his face, and made him first look red, and then covered him with
darkness and an artificial night: so

Putrem resudans crapulam
Obstrangulatae mentis ingenium premit.
The clouds gather about the head, and according to the method and period of
the children, and productions of darkness, it first grows red, and that
redness turns into an obscurity, and a thick mist, and reason is lost to all
use and profitablenesse of wise and sober discourses; Clem. Alexandr.
darkens the soul, and makes it crasse and material, polluted and heavy,
clogged and laden like the body: (...), And there cannot be any thing said
worse, reason turns into folly, wine and flesh into a knot of clouds, the soul
it self into a body, and the spirit into corrupted meat; there is nothing left
but the rewards and portions of a fool to be reaped and enjoyed there, where
flesh and corruption shall dwell to eternal ages; and therefore in Scripture
such men are called (...). Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravant:

But temperance is reasons girdle, and passions bridle, (...), so Homer in
Stobaeus, that is (...), prudence is safe, while the man is temperate, and
therefore (...) is opposed (...), a temperate man is no fool, for temperance is
the (...), such as Plato appointed to night-walkers, a prison to restrain
their inordinations; Pythagoras calls it; (...), so Socrates; (...), so Plato;
(...), so Iamblicus, It is the strength of the soul, the foundation of virtue,
the ornament of all good things, and the corroborative of all excellent habits.

5. After all this, I shall the less need to add, that intemperance is a
dishonor and disreputation to the nature, and the person, and the manners 5.
nature shall be the vail for their gluttony, and the night shall cover their
drunkenness. (...), which the Apostle Alcaeus.
rightly renders, They that are drunk are drunk in the night; but the Priests
of Heliopolis never did sacrifice to the Sun with wine; meaning, that this is
so great a dishonor, that the Sun ought not to see it; and they that think
there is no other eye but the Sun that sees them, may cover their shame by
choosing their time; just as children do their danger by winking hard, and not
looking on. (...), To drink sweet drinks and Theophrastus makes them characters
of a Clown.

And now that I have told you the foulness of the Epicures feasts 3.
and principles, it will be fit that I describe the measures of our eating and
drinking, that the needs of nature may neither become the cover to an
intemperate dish, nor the freer refreshment of our persons be changed into
scruples, that neither our virtue nor our conscience fall into an evil snare.

1. The first measure of our eating and drinking is our natural needs, 1.
(...); these are the measures of Hunger, and thirst, and cold are the natural
diseases of the body; and food, and raiment, are their remedies, and therefore
are the measures.

In quantum sitis atque fames, and frigora poscunt,
Quantum Epicure tibi parvis suffecit in hortis.
But in this there are two cautions. 1. Hunger and thirst are only nature, and
nothing at all to grace; For God has given a latitude in desires and degrees
of appetite; and when he has done, he laid restraint upon it in some whole
instances, and of some parts in every instance; that man might have something
to serve God of his own, and something to distinguish him from a beast in the
use of their common faculties. Ructation, uneasy loads, singing, looser
pratings, importune drowsinesse, provocation of others to equal and full
chalices; and though in every accident of this signification, it is hard for
another to pronounce

2. This hunger must be natural, not artificial and provoked: For many men
make necessities to themselves, and then think they are bound to provide for
them. It is necessary to some men to have garments made of the Calabrian fleece
stained with the blood of the murex, and to get money to buy pearls round and
orient; scelerata hoc fecit pulpa; but it is the man's luxury that made it so;
and by the same principle it is, that in-meats, what is abundant to nature is
defective and beggarly to art; and when nature willingly rises from Chrysostom.
wonder that men should be so much in love with earth and corrution, the parent
of rottenness, and a disease, that even then when by all laws witches and
inchanters, murderers and manstealers are chastised and restrained with the
iron hands of death, yet that men should at great charges give pensions to an
order of men, whose trade it is to rob them of their temperance, and wittily to
destroy their health; (...), the Greek Fathers

-- curvae in terris animae and coelestium inanes, people bowed down to the
earth; lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: Aretinas mentes, so
Antidamus calls them, men framed Viz. ab Areto, unde sicut ex aliis Etruriae
figulinis testacea vasa Romam d^ferebant.
in the furnaces of Etruria, Aretine spirits, beginning and ending in flesh and
filthynesse; dirt and clay all over. But go to the Crib thou glutton, and
there it will be found that when the charger wantonness and folly wait at the
table, and sickness and death take away.

2. Reason is the second measure, or rather the rule whereby we judge of
intemperance; For whatsoever loads of meat or drink make the reason useless,
or troubled, are effects of this deformity; Quae cum amatore suo cum coenant
liguriunt: These persons are to take their accounts from the measures of
Religion, and the Spirit; though they can talk still or transact the affairs
of the world, yet if they be not fitted for the things of the Spirit, they are
too full of flesh or wine, and cannot or care not to attend to the things of
God. But reason is the limit beyond which temperance never wanders; and in
every degree in which our discourse Dum sumus in quadam delinquendi libidine,
nebulis quibusdam insipientiae men's obducitur, says St. Ambrose, when the
fleshpots reek, and the uncovered dishes send forth a nidor and hungry smells,
that cloud hides the face, and puts out the eye of reason; and then tell them
mors in olla, that death is in the pot, and folly in the chalice, that those
smells are fumes of brimstone, and vapors of Egypt; that they will make their
heart easy, and their head sottish, and their color pale, and their hands
trembling, and their

(Mullorum leporumque and suminis exitus hic est,
Sulphureusque color carnificesque pedes.
For that is the end of delicacies, (...), as Dio Chrysostom. palenesse and
effeminacy, and laziness, and folly:) yet under the dominion of the pleasures
of sensuality, men are so stripped of the use of reason, that they are not only
useless in wise counsels and assistances, but they have not reason

3. Though reason be so strictly to be preserved at our tables as well as at
our prayers, and we can never have leave to do any violence 3.
to it; yet the measures of Nature may be enlarged beyond the bounds of prime
and common necessity. For besides hunger and thirst, there are some labors of
the body, and others of the mind, and there are sorrows and loads upon the
spirit by its communications with the indispositions of the body; and as the
laboring man student and contemplative man with more delicious and spritefull
nutriment: for as the tender and more delicate easily-digested meats will not
help to carry burdens upon the neck, and hold the plough in society and yokes
of the laborious oxen; so neither will the pulse and the leeks, Lavinian
sausages, and the Cisalpine tucets or gobbets of condited bulls flesh minister
such delicate spirits to the thinking man; but his notion will be flat as the
noise of the Arcadian porter, and thick as the first juice of his country
lard, unless he makes his body a fit servant to the soul, and both fitted for
the employment.

But in these cases necessity, and prudence, and experience are to make the
measures and the rule; and so long as the just end is fairly designed, and
aptly ministered to, there ought to be no scruple concerning the quantity or
quality of the provision: and he that would stint a Swain by the commons of a
Student, and give Philotas the Candian, the leavings of Plato, does but ill
serve the ends of temperance,

4. Sorrow and a wounded spirit may as well be provided for in the quantity and
quality of meat and drink, as any other disease; and 4.
this disease by this remedy as well as by any other. For great sorrow and
importune melancholy may be as great a sin as a great anger; and if it be a sin
in its nature, it is more malignant and dangerous in its quality; as naturally
tending to murmur and despair, weariness of Religion, and hatred of God,
timorousness and jealousies, fantastic images of things and superstition; and
therefore as it is necessary to restrain the fevers of anger, so also to warm
the freezings and dullness of melancholy by prudent and temperate, but proper
Give Prove. 31. 6.
strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of
heavy hearts, let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more, said King Lemuel's Mother. But this is not intended to be an habitual
cure, but single and occasional; for he that has a pertinacious sorrow is
beyond the cure of meat and drink, and if this become every days physic, it
will quickly Germans use to mingle music with their bowls, and drink by the
measures of the six Notes of Music:

Ut relevet miserum fatum, solitosque labores: but they sing so long that they
forget not their sorrow only, but their virtue also, and their Religion; and
there are some men that fall

5. Even when a man has no necessity upon him, no pungent sorrow, natural and
necessary, is therefore not criminal, because it is of Gods procuring; and
since we eat for need, and the satisfaction of our need is a removing of a
pain, and that in nature is the greatest pleasure, it is impossible that in its
own nature it should be a sin. But in this case of Conscience, these cautions
are to be observed: 1. So long as nature ministers the pleasure and not art, it
is materially innocent. Si tuo veniat jure, luxuria est: But it is safe while
Senec^.
it enters upon natures stock; for it is impossible that the proper effect
Malum panem expecta, bonus fiet; etiam illum tenerum tibi and siligineum fames
reddet: If you abstain and be hungry, you shall turn the meanest provision
into delicate, and desirable.

2. Let all the pleasure of meat and drink be such as can minister to health,
and be within the former bounds. For since pleasure in eating and drinking is
its natural appendage, and like a shadow follows the substance, as the meat is
to be accounted, so is the pleasure: and if these be observed, there is no
difference whether nature

3. It is lawful when a man needs meat to choose the pleasanter, even merely
for their pleasures; that is, because they are pleasant, besides that they are
useful; this is as lawful as to smell of a rose, or to lie in feathers, or
change the posture of better serve for health, and directly to refreshment, so
collaterally to Religion: Always provided, that it be in its degree moderate,
and we temperate in our desires, without transportation and violence, without
unhandsome usages of our selves, or taking from God and from Religion any
minutes and portions of our affections. When Eicadastes the Epicure saw a
goodly dish of hot meat served Homer,

(...), and swallowed some of it greedily, till by its hands of fire it curled
his stomach, like parchment in the flame, and he was carried from

Non poterat letho nobiliore mori: It was fit he should dye such a death; but
that death bids us beware of that folly.

4. Let the pleasure as it came with the meat, so also pass away with it.
Philoxenus was a beast, (...), he wished his throat as long as a Cranes, that he
might be long in swallowing his pleasant morsels: Moeret quod magna pars
felicitatis exclusa esset corporis angustiis; he mourned because the pleasure
of eating was not spread over all his body, that he might have been an Epicure
in his hands: and indeed, if we consider it rightly, great eating and drinking
is not the greatest pleasure of the taste, but of the touch; and Philoxenus
might feel the unctious juice slide softly down his throat, but he could not
taste it in the middle of the long neck; and we see that they who mean to feast
exactly, or delight the palate, do libare or pitissare, take up little
proportions and spread them upon the tongue or palate; but full morsells and
great draughts are easy and soft to the touch; but so is the feeling of silk,
or handling of a melon, or a moles skin, and as delicious too as in latrinam,
together with the meals whose attendant pleasure is.

5. Let pleasure be the less principal, and used as a servant; it sauces, and
cooks, and pleasure, and folly.

6. Let pleasure as it is used in the regions and limits of nature and
prudence, so also be changed into religion and thankfulness. Turtures cum
bibunt non resupinant colla, say Naturalists, Turtles when they drink lift not
up their bills; and if we swallow our pleasures without returning the honor
and the acknowledegment to God that gave them, we may large bibere jumentorum
modo, drink draughts as large as an Ox, but we shall die like an Ox, and
change our meats and drinks into eternal rottenness. In all

Qui Veientarum festis potare diebus,
Campana solitus trulla, vappamque profestis.
For then the body may rejoice in fellowship with the soul, and then a
pleasant meal is religious, if it be not inordinate. But if our festival days
like the Gentile sacrifices end in drunkenness [(...)] and our joys in
Religion pass into sensuality

To sum up this particular, there are, as you perceive, many cautions to make
our pleasure safe, but any thing can make it inordinate, and then scarce any
thing can keep it from becoming dangerous.

Habet omnis hoc voluptas, Boethius l. 3. Metr. 7.

Stimulis agit furentes,
Apiumque par volantum,
Ubi grata mella fudit,
Fugit and nimis tenaci
Ferit icta corda morsu.
And the pleasure of the honey will not pay for the smart of the sting. Amores
enim and deliciae mature and celeriter deflorescunt, and in omnibus rebus
voluptatibus maximis fastidium finitimum est. Nothing is so soon ripe and
rotten as pleasure, and upon all possessions and states of things, loathing
looks, as being not far off; For this is the law of our nature and fatal
necessity; life is always poured forth from two goblets.

And now after all this, I pray consider, what a strange madness and prodigious
folly possesses many men, that they love to swallow death, and diseases, and
dishonor, with an appetite which no reason can at least to be accounted wise;
and would infinitely scorn to be called fools; and we are so great lovers of
health, that we will folly and madness, and healthlesnesse and dishonor. We
do to God what we severely punish in our servants; we correct our children for
their meddling with dangers, which themselves prefer before immortality; and
though no man think himself fit to be despised, yet he is willing to make
Grecian Orator in the midst of his popular noyses, at the same time he shall
talk such dirty language, such mean low things, as may well become a changeling
and a fool, for whom the stocks are prepared by the laws, and the just scorn
of men. Every drunkard clothes his head with a mighty scorn, and makes
himself lower at that time then the meanest of his servants; the boys can
laugh at him when he is led like a cripple, directed like a blind man, and
speaks like an infant, imperfect honor, and the most jealous of loosing the
shadow, and the most careless of the thing? Is it not a horrid thing, that a
wise, or a crafty, a learned, or a noble person should dishonor himself as a
fool, destroy his body as a murderer, lessen his estate as a prodigal,
disgrace every good cause that he can pretend to by his relation, and become an
appellative of scorn, a scene of laughter or derision, and all, for the reward
of forgetfulness and madness?

Why do valiant men and brave personages fight and die rather then break the
laws of men, or start from their duty to their Prince, and will suffer
themselves to be cut in pieces rather then deserve the name of a Traitor or
perjured? and yet these very men to avoid the hated name of Glutton or
Drunkard, and

Me thinks it were but reason, that if to give life to uphold a cause be not
too much, they should not think too much to be hungry and suffer thirst for the
reputation of that cause; and therefore much rather that they would think it
but duty to be temperate for its honor, and eat and drink in civil and fair

There are in the world a generation of men that are engaged in a cause, which
they glory in, and pride themselves in its relation and appellative: but yet
for that cause they will do nothing but talk and drink; they are valiant in
wine, and witty in healths, and full of stratagem to promote debauchery; but
such persons are not considerable in wise accounts; that which I deplore is,
that some men prefer a cause before their life, and yet prefer wine before
that cause, and by one drunken

Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis ullius unquam,
Commissumque teges, and vino tortus and ira.
Wine discovers more then the rack, and he that will be drunk is not a person
fit to be trusted: and though it cannot be expected men should be kinder to
their friend, or their Prince, or their honor, then to God, and to their own
souls, and to their own bodies; yet when men are not moved by what is sensible
and lie in hell like sheep, death gnawing upon them, and the righteous shall
have domination over them in the morning of the resurrection.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora non est tua, cum furit Lyaeus
Cum regnant rosae, cum madent capilli.
Much safer it is to go to the severities of a watchful and a sober life; for
all that time of life is lost, when wine, and rage, and pleasure, and folly
steal away the heart of a man, and make him go singing to his grave.

I end with the saying of a wise man; He is fit to sit at the table of the
Lord, and to feast with Saints, who moderately uses

Sermon, XVII. THE MARRIAGE RING: OR THE Mysteriousnesse and Duties of
Marriage. Part I.
Ephesians. 5. 32, 33. This is a great mystery, But I speak concerning Christ and
the Church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his Wife
even as himself, and the Wife see that she reverence her Husband.
THe first blessing God gave to man was society, Quemlibet hominem cui non est
uxor, minime esse hominem, cum etiam in Scriptura digatur, Masculum and
foeminam creavit eos and vocavit no men little Adam self hominem. R. Eliezer
dixit in Gem. Bab. Quicunque negligit praecepium de multiplicatione humani
generis habendum esse veluti homicidam.
the world was most desirous of children, impatient of barrenness, accounting
single life a curse, and a childlesse person hated by God. The world was rich
and empty, and able to provide for a more numerous posterity then it it had.

-- (...)
(...).
You that are rich Numenius, you may multiply your family, poor men are not so
fond of children; but when a family could drive their herds, and set their
children upon camels, and lead them till Increase and multiply. The next
blessing was the promise of the Messiah, and that also increased in men and
women a wonderful desire of marriage: for as soon as God had chosen the family
Abraham tobe the blessed line, from whence the worlds Redeemer should descend
according to the flesh, every of his daughters hoped to have the honor to be
his Mother, or his Grandmother or something of his kindred: and to be
childelesse Christiani and apud Athenas, (...) refert Julius Pollux l. 3.
(...). Idem ctiam Laccdaemoue and Romae. vide Festum verb. uxorium, atque ibi
Joseph. Scat.
in Israel was a sorrow to the Hebrew women great as the slavery of Egypt, or
their dishonours in the land of their captivity.

But when the Messiah was come, and his doctrine was published, and his
Ministers but few, and the Disciples were to suffer persecution, and to be of
an unsettled dwelling, and the Nation of Etiam Judaei qui praeceptum esse viris
(...) aiunt uno ore concedunt tamen dispensatum esse cum ils qui assiduo legis
studio vacare volunt, alias etiam immunibus ab acriori carnis stimulo. Maimon.
cap. 15. Halach. Ishoth.
(said our blessed Lord) who make themselves Eunuchs non ad vitae bonae meritum
(as St. Austin in the like case) not that it is a better service of God in it
self, but that it is useful to the first circumstances of the Gospel and the
infancy of the Kingdom, because (...), etc.

Epist. ad Philadelth.


apt to spiritual and Ecclesiastical employments: first (...) and then (...),
holy in his own person, and then sanctified to public ministeries; and it was
also of ease to the Christians themselves, because as then it was, when they
were to fly, and to fly for ought they knew, in winter, and they were
persecuted to the four winds of heaven; and the nurses and the women with
child were to suffer a heavier load of sorrow because of the imminent
persecutions; and above all, because Paul (...), Such shall have trouble in the
flesh, that is, they that are married shall, and so at that time they had: and
therefore it was an act of charity to the Christians to give that counsel,
(...) I do this to spare you, and (...): for when the case was altered and that
storm was over, and the first necessities of the Gospel served, and the sound
was gone out into all nations; in very many persons it was wholly changed, and
not the married but the unmarryed had (...) trouble in the flesh; and the state
of marriage returned non non erat bonum homini esse solitarium, and it was not
good for man to be alone.

But in this first intervall, the public necessity and the private zeal
mingling together did sometimes over-act their love of single life, even to the
disparagement of marriage, and to the scandal of Religion; which was increased
by the occasion of some pious persons renouncing their contract of marriage,
not consummate, with unbeleevers. For when Flavia Domitilla being converted by
Nereus and Achilleus the Eunuchs, refused to marry Aurelianus to whom she was
contracted; if there were not some little envy Aurelianus thought himself an
injured person, and caused St. Clemens who veiled her, and his spouse both, to
dye in the quarrel. St. Thecla being converted by St. Paul grew so in love
with virginity, that she leaped back from the marriage of Tamyris where she was
lately engaged. St. Iphigenia denied to marry King Hirtacus, and it is said to
be done by the advice of St. Matthew. And Susanna the Niece of Diocletian
refused the love of Maximianus the Emperor; and these all had been betrothed;
and so did St. Agnes and St. Felicula, and diverse others then and afterward;
insomuch, that forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. Upon
this occasion it grew necessary for the Apostle to state the question right,
and to do honor to the holy rite (...). Ignatius epislol. dd Philadelph. Et
Clemens idem ait a pud Eusebiumbist. Eccles. lib. 3. sed tamen eam non
circumduxit sicut Petrus: probat autem eae Philip. 4.
had been a married man, but was now a widower, does explicate the
mysteriousnesse of it, and describes it is honors, and adornes it with rules
and provisions of Religion, that as it begins with honor, so it may proceed
with piety, and end with glory.

For although single life has in it privacy and simplicity of affairs, such
solitariness and sorrow, such leisure and unactive Marriage is honorable in
all men, so is not single life; for in some it is a share and a (...), a
trouble in the flesh, a prison of unruly desires which is attempted daily to be
broken. Celibare or single life is Raphael waited upon a young man that he
might have a blessed marriage, and that that marriage might repair two sad
families, and bless all their relatives. Our blessed Lord, though he was born
of a malden, yet she was veiled under the cover of marriage, and she was
married to a widower; for Joseph the supposed Father of our Lord had children
by a former wife. The first Miracle that ever Jesus did, was to do honor to a
wedding; marriage was in the world before sin, and is in all ages of the world
the greatest and most effective antidote against sin, in which all the world
she shall be saved in childbearing, if she be found in faith and
righteousness. Marriage is a School and exercise of virtue; and though
Marriage has cares, yet the single life has desires which are more
troublesome and more celibate or single life may have the advantage of degrees
ordinarily and commonly, that is, in chastity and devotion: but as in some
persons this may fail, and it does in very many, and a married man may spend as
much time in devotion as any virgins or widows do, yet as in marriage even
those virtues of chastity and devotion are (...). Plato.
single life can never be crowned; Here is the proper seen of piety and
patience, of the duty of Parents and the charity of relatives; here kindness
is Add quod. Eunuchus nulla pietate movetur,

Nee generi natisve cavet clementia cunctis

In similes animosque ligant conscrtia damni. Claudian.


spread abroad, and love is united and made firm as a center: Marriage is the
nursery of heaven; the virgin sends prayers to God, but she carries but one
soul to him; but the state of marriage fills up the numbers of the elect, and
has in it the labor of love, and the delicacies of friendship, the blessing
of society, and the union of hands (...).
more sad; is fuller of sorrows, and fuller of joys; it lies under more
burdens, but it is supported by all the strengths of love and charity, and
those burdens are delightful. Marriage is the mother of the world, and
preserves Kingdoms, and fills Cities, and Churches, and Heaven it self:
Celibate, like the fly in the heart of an apple, dwells in a Siquis patriam
majorem parentem extinguit, in eo culpa est, quod facit prosua part quise
eunuchat aut aliqua liberos producit, i. e. differt eorum procreationem. Varro
in lege Maenia.
perpetual sweetness, but sits alone, and is confined and dies in
singularity; but marriage, like the useful Be, builds a house and gathers

(...)
(...).
Single life makes men in one instance to be like Angels, but marriage in very
many things makes the chaste pair to be like to Christ. This is a great mystery,
but it is the symbolicall and sacramental representment of the greatest
mysteries of our Religion. Christ descended from his Fathers bosom, and
contracted his divinity with flesh and blood, and married our Nature, and we
became a Church, the spouse of the bridegroom, which he cleansed with his
blood, and atque una domus est omnium filiorum ejus, all the children dwell in
the same house, and are heirs of the same promises, entitled to the same
inheritance. Here is the eternal conjunction, the indissoluble knot, the
exceeding love of Christ, the obedience of the Spouse, the communicating of
goods, the uniting of interests, the fruit of marriage, a celestial
generation, a new creature; Sacramentum hoc magnum est; this is the
sacramental mystery represented by the holy rite of marriage; so that marriage
is divine in its institution, sacred in its union, holy in the mystery,
sacramental in its signification, honorable in its appellative, religious in
its employments: It is advantage to the societies of men, and it holiness to
the Lord. Dico autem in Christo and Ecclesia,] It must be in Christ and the
Church.

If this be not observed, marriage loses its mysteriousnesse: but because it is
to effect much of that which it signifies, it concerns all that enter into
those golden fetters to see that Christ and his Church be in at every of its
periods, and that it be entirely conducted and overruled by Religion; for so
the Apostle passes from the sacramental rite to the real duty; Nevertheless,
that is, although the former discourse were wholly to explicate the conjunction
of Christ and his Church by this similitude, yet it has in it this real duty,
that the man love his wife, and the wife reverence her husband; and this is the
use we shall now make of it, the particulars of which precept I shall thus
dispose.

1. I shall propound the duty as it generally relates to Man and Wife in
conjunction. 2. The duty and power of the Man. 3. The rights and privileges
and the duty of the Wife.

1. In Christo and Ecclesia] that begins all, and there is great need it should
be so, for they that enter into the state of marriage cast a dye of the
greatest contingency, and yet of the greatest

(...),
(...).
life or death, felicity or a lasting sorrow are in the power of marriage.

Ah tum te miserum, malique fati
Quem attractis pedibus patente porta
Percurrent mugileque raphanique
The boys, and the pedlers, and the fruiterers shall tell of this man, when he
is carried to his grave, that he lived and dyed a poor wretched person. The
Stags in the Greek Epigram, whose knees were clogged with frozen snow upon the
mountains, came down to the brooks of the valleys, (...), hoping to (...), etc.
marriage to refresh their troubles, and there they enter into fetters, and are
bound to sorrow by the cords of a man's or woman's peevishness: and the worst of
the evil is, they are to thank their own follies; for they fell into the snare
by entering an improper way: Christ and the Church were no ingredients in their
choice: but as the Indian women, enter into Eriphyle the Argive, (...), she
preferred gold before a good man) and show themselves to be less then money by
overvaluing that to all the content and wise felicity of their lives: and when
they have counted the money and their sorrows together, how willingly would
they Non ego illam mihi dotem duco esse quae dos dicitur, Sed pudicitiam and
pudorem, and sedatum cupidinem, Deum metum, parentum amorem, and cognatum
concordiam. Plaut. in Amphit.


buy with the loss of all that money, modesty, or sweet nature to their
relative! the odd thousand pound would gladly be allowed in good nature and
fair manners. As very a fool is he that chooses for Facies, non uxor amatur.
beauty principally; cui sunt eruditi oculi and stulta men's (as one said) whose
eyes are witty, and their soul sensual; It is an ill band of affections to tie
two hearts together by a little thread of red and white.

(...)
(...).
And they can love no longer but until the next ague comes, and Tres rugae
subeant, and se cutis arida laxet,

Fiant obscuri dentes, oculique minores,

Collige sarcinutas dicet libertus, and exi.

Juven. Sat. 6.


they are fond of each other but at the chance of fancy, or the small pox, or
childebearing, or care, or time, or any thing that can destroy a pretty flower.
But it is the basest of all when lust is the Paranymph and solicits the suit,
and makes the contract, and joined the hands; for this is commonly the effect
of the former, according to the Greek proverb,

(...),
(...).
At first for his fair cheeks and comely beard, the beast is taken for a Lion,
but at last he is turned to a Dragon or a Leopard, or a Swine. That which is at
first beauty on the face may prove lust in the manners.

(...)
(...),
So Eubulus wittily reprehended such impure contracts; they offer in their
maritall sacrifices nothing but the thigh and that which the Priests cut from
the goats when they were laid to bleed upon the Altars. (...), said St.
Clement. He or she that looks too curiously upon the beauty of the body, looks
too low, and has flesh and corruption in his heart, and is judged sensual and
earthly in his affections Begin therefore with God, Christ is the president of
marriage and the holy Ghost is the fountain of purities and chaste loves, and he
joins the hearts; and therefore let our first suit be in the court of heaven,
and with designs of piety, or safety, or charity; let no impure spirit defile
the virgin purities and castifications of the soul, (as St. Peter's phrase is)
let all such contracts begin with religious affections.

Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris, at illi
Notum qui pueri, qualisve futura sit uxor.
We sometimes beg of God for a wife or a child, and he alone knows what the
wife shall prove, and by what dispositions and manners and into what fortune
that child shall enter: but we shall not need to fear concerning the event of
it, if religion, and fair intentions, and prudence manage, and conduct it all
the way. The preservation It is not good for man to be alone; Children was the
next, Increase and multiply; but the avoiding fornication came in by the
superfetation of the evil accidents of the world. The first makes marriage
delectable, the second necessary to the public, the third necessary to the
particular; This is for safety; for life and heaven it self;

Nam simulac venas inflavit dira cupido,
Huc juvenes aequum est descendere; --
The other have in them joy and a portion of immortality: the first makes the
man's heart glad, the second is the friend of Kingdoms, and cities, and
families, and the third is the enemy to hell, and an antidote of the chiefest
inlet to damnation: but of all these the noblest end is the multiplying
children, Mundus cum patet, Deorum tristium atque inferum quasi patet janua;
propterea uxorem liberorum quaerendorum causa ducere religiosum est, said
Varro, It is religion Macrobius ex Varrone.
to marry for children; and Quintilian puts it into the definition of a wife,
est enim uxor quam jungit, quam diducit utilitas; cujus haec reverentia est,
quod videtur inventa in causa liberorum, and therefore St. Ignatius when he had
spoken of Elias, and Titus, and Clement, with an honorable mention of their
virgin state, lest he might Epist. ad Philadelph.
seem to have lessened the married Apostles, at whose feet in Christ's Kingdom
he thought himself unworthy to sit, he gives this testimony, they were (...),
that they might not be disparaged Amabit sapiens, cupient caeteri, said
Afranius, love is a fair inducement, but desire and appetite are rude, and the
characterismes of a sensual person: Amare justi and boni est, cupere
impotentis; to love, belongs to a just and a good man; but to lust, or
furiously and passionately to desire, is the sign of impotency and an

2. Man and wife are equally concerned to avoid all offenses of each other in
the beginning of their conversation: every little thing can blast an infant
blossom; and the breath of the south can shake the little rings of the Vine,
when first they begin to curle like the locks of a new weaned boy; but when by
age and consolidation they stiffen into the hardness of a stem, and have by
the warm embraces Plutarch compares a new marriage to a vessel before the
hoops are on, (...), every thing dissolves their tender compaginations, but
(...), when the joints are stiffned and are tied by a firm compliance and
proportioned bending, scarcely can it be dissolved without fire or the violence
(...).
nothing else could entice him to return: and the band of common children, and
the sight of her that nurses what is most dear to him, and the endearments of
each other in the course of a long society,

-- Tormentum ingens nubentibus haeret
Quae nequeunt parere, and partu retinere maritos,
When it is come thus far, it is hard untwisting the knot; but be careful in
its first coalition, that there be no rudeness done; for if there be, it will
for ever after be apt to start and to be diseased.

3. Let man and wife be careful to stifle little Quaedam parva quidem, scd uon
toleranda maritis.
things, that as fast as they spring, they be cut down and trod upon; for if
they be suffered to grow by numbers, they make the spirit peevish, and the
society troublesome, and the affections loose and easy by an habitual
aversation. Some men are more vexed with a sly then with a wound; and when the
gnats disturb our sleep, and the reason is disquieted

4. Let them be sure to abstain from all those things which by experience and
observation they find to be contrary to each other. Mercury strnding by Venus,
to signify, that by fair language and sweet entreaties, the minds of each
other should be united; and hard by them Suadam and Gratias descripserunt, they
would have all deliciousness -- Hujus n. rari summique voluptas

Nulla boni, quoties animocorrupta superbo

Plus aloos quam mellis habet --

Juven. Sat. 6.


of manners, compliance and mutual observance to abide.

5. Let the husband and wife infinitely avoid a curious distinction of mine and
thine; for this has caused all the laws, and all the suits, and all the wars
in the world; let them who have but one person, have also but one interest. The
husband and wife are heirs to each other (as Dionysius Halicarnasseus relates
from Romulus) if they dye without children, but if there be children, the wife
is (...), a partner in the inheritance; But during their life the use and
impolyment is common to both their necessities, and in this there is no other
difference of right, but that the man has the dispensation of all, and may
keep it from his wife just as the governor of a power, but no right to do so.
And when either of them begins to impropriate, it is like a tumor in the flesh,
it draws more then its share, but what it feeds on turns to a bile: and
therefore the Romans forbad any donations to be made between man and wife,
because neither of them could transser a new right of those things which
already they had in common; but this is to be understood only concerning the
uses Corvinus dwells in a farm and receives all its profits, and reaps and sowes
as he please, and eats of the corn and drinks of the wine, it is his own: but
all that also is his Lords, and for it, Corvinus pays acknowledgement; and his
patron has such powers and uses of it as are proper to the Lords; and yet for
all this, it may be the Kings too, to all the purposes that he can need, and is
all to be accounted in the census and for certain services, and times of
danger: So are the riches of a family, they are a woman's as well as a man's;
they are hers for need, and Macarius (...).
all that a woman has is reckoned to the right of her husband; not her wealth
and her person only, but her reputation and her praise; So Lucian. But as the
earth, the mother of all creatures here below, sends up all its vapors and
proper emissions

These are the duties of them both, which have common regards and equal
necessities, and obligations; and indeed there is scarce any matter of duty,
but it concerns them both alike, and is love, in the other is called reverence;
and what in the wife is obedience, the same in the man is duty. He provides,
and she dispenses; he gives commandments, and she rules by them; he rules her
by authority, and she rules him by love; she ought by all means to please
Periander did his dead Melissa, by an unnatural union, neither pleasing, nor
holy, useless to all the purposes of society,

SERMON, XVIII. Part II.
THe next inquiry is more particular, and considers the power and duty of the
man; Let every one of you so love his wife even as himself; she is as himself,
the man has power over her as over himself, and must love her equally. A
husbands power over his wife is paternall and friendly, not magisteriall and
despotick. The wife is in perpetua tutela, under conduct and counsel; for the
power a man has is founded in the understanding, not in the will or force; it
is not a power of coercion, but a power of advice, and that government that
wise men have over those who Et vos in manu and in tutela non in servitio
debetis habere eas, and malle patres vos, and viros, quam dominos dici, said
Valerius in Livie; Husbands should rather be Fathers then Lords. Homer adds
more soft appellatives to the character of a husbands duty, (...), Thou art to
be a father and a mother to her, and a brother: and great reason, unless the
state of marriage should be no better then the condition of an Orphan. For she
that is bound to leave father and mother, and brother for thee, either is
miserable like a poor fatherless child, or else ought to find all these and
more in Medea in Euripides had cause to complain when she found it otherwise.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Which St. Ambrose well translates: It is sad] when virgins are with their own
money sold to slavery; and that services are in better Exhort. ad virg.
state then marriages; for they receive wages, but these buy their fetters and
pay dear for their loss of liberty: and therefore the Romans expressed the
man's power over his wife but by a gentle word, Nec vero mulieribus praefectus
reponatur, qui apud Graecos creari solet, sed sit censor qui viros doceat
moderari uxoribus; said Cicero, let there be no governor of the women
appointed but a censor to moderate their wives, that is, fairly to induce them
to the measures of their own proportions. It was rarely observed of Philo,
(...) when Adam made that fond excuse for his folly in eating the forbidden
fruit, he said [The woman thou gave to be with me she gave me] He says not
[the woman which thou gave to me] no such thing; she is none of his goods,
none of his possessions, not to be reckoned among his servants; God did not
give her to him so; but [the woman thou gave to be with me] that is, to be my
partner, government is no other then provision; as a nurse governs a child
when she causes him to eat and to be warm, and dry and quiet; and yet even the
very government it self is divided; for man and wife in the family are as the
Sun and Moon in the firmament of heaven; He rules by day, and she by night,
that is, in the lesser and more proper circles of her affairs; in the conduct
of domestic provisions and necessary offices, and shines only by his light and
rules by his authority: and as the Moon in opposition to the Sun shines
brightest, that is, then, when she is in Gynaeceo in the nursery and offices of
domestic employment; but when she is in conjunction with the Sun her Brother,
that is, in that place and employment in which his care and proper offices are
employed, her light is not seen, her authority has no proper business; but
else there is no difference: for they were barbarous people, among whom wives
were in stead of servants, said Spartianus in Caracalla; and it is a sign of
impotency and weakness to force the camels to kneel for their load, beccuse
thou have not spirit and Dominus and Domina, Governor and Governesse, Lord and
Lady, Master and Mistress, the same difference there is in the authority of
man and woman, and no more; Si tu Caius ego Caia, was publicly proclaimed upon
the Domina in the sense of the civil Law was among the Romans given to wives.

Hi Dominam Ditis thalamo diducere adorti, Aeneid. 6.
said Virgil: where though Servius says it was spoken after the manner of the
Greeks who called the wife (...) Lady or Mistress, yet it was so amongst both
the Nations, Ac domus Dominam voca, says Catullus; Haerebit Dominae vir comes
ipse suae, so Martial; and Epithal. Juliae.
therefore although there is a just measure of subjection and obedience due
from the wife to the husband (as I shall after explain) yet nothing of this is
expressed in the man's character, or in his duty; he is not commanded to rule,
nor instructed how, nor bidden to exact obedience, or to defend his privilege;
all his duty is signified by love, by nourishing and cherishing, by being
joined to her Ephesians. 5. 25.
in all the unions of charity, by not being bitter to her, by dwelling Col. 3.
19.
with her according to knowledge, giving honor to her: so that it seems 1 Pet.
3. 7.
to be with husbands, as it is with Bishops and Priests, to whom much

Let him love his wife even as himself:] that is his duty, and the measure of it
too; which is so plain, that if he understands how he treats himself, there
needs nothing be added concerning his demeanor toward her, save only that we
add the particulars, in which

(...). That Is the first. Be not bitter against her; and this is the least
Index and signification of love; a civil man is never bitter against a friend
or a stranger, much less to him that enters under his roof, and is secured by
the laws of hospitality. But a wife does all that, and more; she quits all her
interest for his love, she gives him all that she can give, she is as much the
same person as another can be the same, who is conjoined by love, and mystery,
and religion, and all that is sacred and profane.

Non equidem hoc dubites amborum foedere certo
Consentire dies, and ab uno sidere duci;
They have the same fortune, the same family, the same children, the same
religion, the same interest, the same flesh [erunt duo in carnem unam] and
therefore this the Apostle urges for his (...), no man hates his own flesh,
but nourishes and cherishes it; and he certainly is strangely sacrilegious
and a violator of the rights of hospitality and sanctuary, who uses her rudely,
who is fled for protection, not only to his house, but also to his heart, and
bosom. A wise man will not wrangle with any one, much less with his dearest
relative; and if it be accounted undecent to embrace in public, it is
extremely shameful to brawle in public, for the other is in it self lawful,
but this never, though it were assisted with the best circumstances of which it
is capable. Marcus Aurelius said, that a wise often to admonish his wife, to
reprove her seldom, but never to lay his hands Ah lapis est, ferrumque, suam
quicunque pucllam Verberat, e coelo diripit ille Deos.

Sit satis e membus tenuem praescindere vestem, Sit satis ornatus dissoluisse
cemas,

Sit lachrymas movisse satis, quater ille beatus, Quo tenera irato flere puella
potest.

Sed manibus qui saeviu erit, scutumque sudemque It gerat, and miti sit procul
a Venere.

Tibull.


upon her: neque verberibus neque maledictis exasperandam uxorem, said the
Doctors of the Jews; and Homer brings in Jupiter sometimes speaking sharply to
Juno (according to the Greek liberty and Empire) but made a pause at striking
her,

(...) Iliad. 0.

(...)
And the Ancients use to sacrifice to Juno (...) or the president of Marriage
without gall, and St. Basil observes and urges it, by way of upbraiding
quarrelling husbands; etiam vipera virus ob nuptiarum venerationem evomit, the
Viper casts all his poison when he marries his female, Tu duritiam animi, tu
feritatem, tu crudelitatem Homil. 7. Hexaem.
ob unionis reverentiam non deponis? He is worse then a viper who for the
reverence of this sacred union will not abstain from such a poisonous
bitterness; and how shall he embrace that person Chrysostom preaching
earnestly against this barbarous inhumanity of striking the wife, or reviling
her with evil language, says it is as if a King should beat his Viceroy and
use him like a dog; from whom most of that reverence and majesty must needs
depart which he first put upon him, and the subjects shall pay him less duty,
by how much his Prince has treated him with less civility; but the loss
redounds to himself; and the government of the whole family shall be
disordered, if blows be laid upon that shoulder which Quod si verberaveris
exasperabis morbum, (says St. Chrysostom) asperitas enim mansuetudine non
alia asperitate dissolvitur; if you strike Cato at Utica in his despair) tear
the wounds in pieces; and yet he that did so ill to himself whom he loved well,
he loved not women tenderly, and yet would never strike; And if the man cannot
endure her talking, how can she endure his striking? But this caution contains
a duty in it which none prevaricates but the meanest of the people, fools and
bedlams, whose kindness is a curse, whose government is by chance and
violence, and their families are herds of talking cattle.

Sic alternos reficit cursus
Alternus amor, sic astrigeris
Bellum discors exulat or is.
Haec concordia temperat aequis
Elementamodis, ut pugnantia
Vicibus cedant humida siccis,
Jungantque sidem frigora flammis.
The maritall love is infinitely removed from all possibility of such
rudenesses: it is a thing pure as light, sacred as a Temple, lasting Aamicitia
quae desinere potuit nunquam vera fuit, said one; that love that can cease was
never true: it is (...), so Moses called it; it is (...), so St. Paul; it is
(...), so Homer; it is (...), so Plutarch; that is, it contains in it all
sweetness, and all society, and all felicity, and all prudence, and all
wisdom. For there is nothing can please a man without love, and if a man be
weary of the wise discourses of the Apostles, and of the innocence of an even
and a private fortune, or hates peace or a fruitful year, he has reaped
thorns and thistles from the choicest flowers of Paradise; For nothing can
sweeten felicity it self, but love; but when a man Felices ter and amplius

Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis

Divulsus querimoniu

Suprema citius solvet amor die.

Horat.


No man can tell but he that loves his children, how many delicious accents
make a man's heart dance in the pretty conversation of those dear pledges, their
childishness, their stammering, their little angers, their innocence, their
imperfections, their necessities are so many little emanations of joy love his
wife, are nothing but so many necessities and capacities of joy. She that is
loved is safe, and he that loves is joyful. Love is a union of all things
excellent; it contains in it proportion Tiberius Gracchus chose to die for the
safety of his wife; and yet me thinks to a Christian to do so, should be no
hard thing; for many servants will dye for their masters, and many Gentlemen
will die for their friend; but the examples are not so many of those that are
ready to do it for their dearest relatives, and yet some there have been.
Baptista Fregosa tells of Neapolitan that gave Dominicus Catalusius the Prince
of Lesbos kept company with his Lady when she was a Leper; and these are
greater things then to die.

But the cases in which this can be required are so rare and contingent, that
holy Scripture instances not the duty in this particular; but it contains in it
that the husband should nourish and cherish her, that he should refresh her
sorrows and entice her fears into confidence and pretty arts of rest; for even
the fig trees that grew in Paradise had sharp pointed leaves, and harshnesses
fit to mortify the too forward lusting after the sweetness of the fruit. But
Uxoris vitium tollas opus est, aut feras:

Qui tollit vitium, uxorem commodiusculam

Sibi praestat; qui fert, sese meliorem facit. Varro.


by fairly expounding all the little traverses of society and communication, by
taking every thing by the right handle, (as Plutarchs expression is) for there
is nothing but may be misinterpreted, and yet if it be capable of a fair
construction, it is the office of love to make it.

-- (...)
(...). Eurip.

-- (...)
(...).
Love will account that to be well said, which it may be was not so intended;
and then it may cause it to be so another time.

3. Hither also is to be referred that he secure the interest of her virtue and
felicity by a fair example; for a wife to a husband, is complain not that she
is infected that lies in the bosom; the interest of whose love ties her to
transcribe thy copy and write after the characters of thy manners. Paris was a
man of pleasure, and Helena was an adulteress, and she added covetousness
Ulysses was a prudent man, and a wary counselor, sober and severe, and he
efformed his wife into such imagery as he desired, and she was chaste as the
snows upon the mountains, diligent as the fatal sisters, always busy, and
always faithful: (...), she had a lazy tongue and a busy hand.

4. Above all the instances of love, let him preserve toward (...).
her an inviolable faith, and an unspotted chastity, for this is the marriage
Ring, it ties two hearts by an eternal band; it is like the Cherubims flaming
sword set for the guard of Paradise; he

-- (...)
(...).
This is a grace that is shut up and secured by all arts of heaven, and the
defense of laws, the locks and bars of modesty, by honor and reputation, by
fear and shame, by interest and high regards; and that contract that is
intended to be for ever, is yet dissolved and broken by the violation of this;
nothing but death can do so much evil to the holy ties of marriage, as
unchastity and breach of faith can. The shepherd Cratis falling in love with a
she goat, had his brains beaten out with a buck as he lay asleep; Romans, a man
might kill his daughter or his wife if he surprised her in the breach of her
holy vows, which are as sacred as the threads of life, secret as the privacies
of the sanctuary, and holy as the society of Angels. Nullae sunt inimicitiae
nisi amoris acerbae, and God that commanded us to forgive our enemies left it
in our choice, and has not commanded us to forgive an adulterous husband or a
wife; but the offended parties displeasure may pass into an eternal
separation of society and friendship. Now in this grace it is fit that the
wisdom and severity of the man should hold forth a pure taper, that his wife
of heaven: and therefore it is but reason that the wisdom and who can more
easily be tempted by another, and less by her self.

These are the little lines of a man's duty, which like threads of light from the
body of the Sun do clearly describe all the regions of his proper obligations.
Now concerning the woman's duty, although it consists in doing whatsoever her
husband commands, and so receives measures from the rules of his government,
yet there are also some lines of life depicted upon her hands, by which she may

1. The first is obedience; which because it is no where enjoined that the man
should exact of her, but often commanded to her to pay, gives demonstration
that it is a voluntary cession that is required, such a cession as must be
without coercion and violence on his part, but upon fair inducements, and
reasonableness in the thing, and out of love, and honor on her part. When God
commands us to love him, he means we should obey him; This is love that ye keep
my Commandments, and, if ye love me (said our Lord) keep my Commandments: Now
as Christ is to the Church, so is man to obedience is the best instance of her
love; for it proclaims her submission, her humility, her opinion of his
wisdom, his preeminence in the family, the right of his privilege, and the
injunction imposed by God upon her sex, that although in sorrow she brings
forth children, yet with love and choice she should obey. The man's authority is
love, and the woman's love is obedience; and it was not rightly observed of him
that said, when woman fell God made her timorous that she might be ruled, apt
and easy to obey, for this obedience is no way founded in fear, but in love
and reverence. Receptae reverentiae est si mulier viro C. alia D. solut. Matrim.
subsit, said the Law; unless also that we will add, that it is an effect of
that modesty which like rubies adorn the necks and cheeks of women. Pudicitia
est, pater, eos magnificare qui nos socias sumpserunt Pluatus in Sticho.
sibi; said the maiden in the comedy: It is modesty to advance and highly to
honor them who have honored us by making us to be the companions of their
dearest excellencies; for the woman that went before the man in the way of
death, is commanded to follow him in the way of love: and that makes the
society to be perfect, and the union profitable, and the harmony complete.

Inferior Matrona suo sit, Sexte, marito;
Non aliter siunt foemina virque pares.
For then the soul and body make a perfect man when the soul Male and Female
created he them, and called their Genesis 5. 2.
name Adam, says the holy Scripture; they are but one: and therefore the
several parts of this one man must stand in the place where God appointed,
that the lower parts may do their offices in their own station, and promote the
common interest of the

-- Faciunt graviora coactae
Imperio sexus -- Juvenal.

But that is not all; for she is miserable too: for,

(...)
(...).
It is a sad calamity for a woman to be joined to a fool or a weak O vere
Phyrgiae, neque enim Phryges, It is a curse that God thereatned sinning
persons, Devoratum est robur eorum, facti sunt quasi mulieres. Esai. 3. 4.
Effeminati dominabuntur eis. To be ruled by weaker people, (...), to have a
fool to ones master is the fate of miserable and unblessed people: and the wife
can be no ways happy, unless she be governed by a prudent Lord, whose

But now concerning the measures and limits of this obedience, we can best take
accounts from Scripture: (...), says the Apostle, in all things; ut Domino, as
unto the Lord; and that is large enough; Ephesians. 5. 24.
as unto a Lord ut Ancilla Domino, so St. Hierom understands it, who neither
was a friend to the sex nor to marriage; But his ut Dominis, be subject to
your husbands as unto Lords, but (...), that is, in all religion, in reverence
and in love, in duty and zeal, in faith and knowledge; or else (...) may
signify, wives be so subject to your husbands, but yet so, that at the same
time ye be subject to the Lord. For that is the measure of (...) in all things;
and it is more plain in the parallel place, (...) as it is fit in the Lord:
Religion Col. 3. 18.
must be the measure of your obedience and subjection: intra limits
disciplinae, so Tertullian expresses it. (...), Stromat. 7.
so Clemens Alex. In all things let the wise be subject to the husband, so as
to do nothing against his will, those only things excepted in which he is
impious or refractary in things pertaining to wisdom and piety.

But in this also there is some peculiar caution. For although in those things
which are of the necessary parts of faith and holy life, the woman is only
subject to Christ, who only is and can be Lord of consciences, and commands
alone where the conscience is instructed and convinced; yet as it is part of
the man's office to be a Plutarch) that the wife should acknowledge her husband
for her teacher and her guide; for then when she is what he please to efform
her, he has no cause to complain if she be no better: (...), his precepts and
wise counsels Eosdem quos maritus nosse Deos and colere solos uxor debet (said
Plutarch.) And the rites which a woman performs severally from her husband are
not pleasing to God; and therefore Pomponia Graecina because she entertained a
stranger religion was permitted to the judgment of her husband Plantius. And
this whole affair is no stranger to Christianity. For the Christian woman was
not suffered to marry an unbelieving man; and Romulus. A woman by the holy
Laws has right to partake of her husbands goods, and her husbands sacrifices,
and holy things. Where there is a schism in one bed, there is a nursery of
temptations, and -- Quis deditus autem
Usque adeo est, ut non illam quam laudibus essert,
Horreat, inque diem septenis oderit horts?
Juven. Sat. 6.


love is persecuted and in perpetual danger

2. The next line of the woman's duty is compliance, which S. Peter calls, the
hidden man of the heart, the ornament of a meek and 1 Pet. 3. 4.
a quiet spirit, and to it he opposes the outward and pompous ornament of the
body; concerning which as there can be no particular Menander in the Comedy
brings in a man turning his wife from his house because she stained her hair
yellow, which was then the beauty,

(...)
(...).
A wise woman should not paint. A studious gallantry in clothes cannot make a
wise man love his wife the better. (...), said the Comedy, such gayeties are
fit for tragedies, but not for the uses of life: decor occultus, and tecta
venustas, that is the Christian woman's finenesse, the hidden man of the heart,
Malo Venusinam quem te Cornelia matter
Gracchorum, si cum magnis virtutibus offers
Grande supercilium, and numer as in dote triumpho.
Juven Sat. 6.

compliances, high opinion of him, and mean of her self.

(...), To partake Quid juvat ornato procedere vitta capillo,
Teque peregrinis vendere muneribus,
Naturaeque decus mercato perdere cultu,
Nec sinere in proprils membra nitere bonis?
Propert. l. 1. cl. 1.
secretly, and in her heart of all his joys and sorrows, to believe him comely
and fair, though the Sun has drawn a cypress over him, (for as marriages are
not to be contracted by the hands and eye, but (...).
with reason and the hearts: so are these

(...)
(...), etc.
And indeed those husbands that are pleased with undecent gayeties Circe had
turned Ulysses companions into hogs and monkies, by pleasures and the
enchantments of her bravery and luxury, they were no longer useful to her, she
knew not what to do with them; but on wise Ulysses she was continually
enamored. Indeed the outward ornament is fit to take fools, but they are not
worth the taking; But she that has a wise husband, must entice him to an
eternal dearnesse by the vail of modesty, and the grave robes of chastity, the
ornament of meekness, and the jewels of faith and charity; fucus but
blushings, her brightness must be purity, and she must shine round about with
sweetnesses and friendship, and she shall be pleasant while she lives, and
desired when she dies. If not,

-- (...),
(...),
(...).
Her grave shall be full of rottenness and dishonor, and her memory after she
is dead: For that will be the end of all merry meetings; and I choose this to
be the last advice to both.

3. Remember the days of darkness, for they are many; The joys of the bridal
chambers are quickly past, and the remaining portion of the state is a dull
progress without variety of joys, but not without the change of sorrows; but
that portion that shall enter Abraham and Joseph, S. Peter and St. Paul, and
all the married Saints.

(...)
(...).
All those things that now please us shall pass from us, or we from them, but
those things that concern the other life are permanent as the numbers of
eternity: and although at the resurrection there shall be no relation of
husband and wife, and no marriage shall be celebrated, but the marriage of the
Lamb, yet then shall be remembered how men and women passed through this state
which is

Amen.
Sermon, XIX. APPLES of SODOM: OR The Fruits of Sin. Part. I.
Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
THe son of Sirach did prudently advise concerning making judgments of the
felicity or infelicity Eccles. 11. 28.
of men: Judge none blessed before his death; for a man shall be known in his
children. Some

Eripitur persona, manet res. Indeed they cannot longer dwell upon the estate,
but that remains Chabrias grew miserable by the folly of his son Ctesippus; and
the reputation of brave Germanicus began to be ashamed, when the base Caligula
entered upon his scene of dishonorable crimes. Commodus the wanton and feminine
son of wise Antoninus gave a check to the great name of his Father; and when
the son Hortensius Corbius was prostitute, and the heir of Q. Fabius Maximus
was disinherited by the sentence of the city Praetor, as being unworthy to
enter into the fields of his glorious Father, and young Scipio the son of
Africanus was a fool and a prodigal; posterity did weep afresh over the
monuments of their brave progenitors, and found that infelicity can pursue a
man, and overtake him in his grave.

This is a great calamity when it falls upon innocent persons: and that Moses
died upon Mount Nebo in the sight of Canaan, was not so great an evil, as that
his sons Eliezer and Gersom were unworthy Priesthood was devolved to his
Brother, and the Principality to his servant: And to Samuel, that his sons
proved corrupt, and were exauthorated for their unworthiness, was an allay to
his honor and his joys, and such as proclaims to all the world, that the
measures of our felicity are not to be taken by the lines of our own person,
but of our relations too; and he that is cursed in his children, cannot be
reckoned among the fortunate.

This which I have discoursed concerning families in general, is outward
senses are its handmaids, and the inward senses are of its privy chamber; the
understanding is its counselor, the will its friend, riches are its
ministers, nature holds up its train, and art is its emissary to promote its
interest and of this splendid family, and see what issue sin produces, (...),
ugly and deformed, foolish and ill natured; and the Apostles calls them by their
names, shame and death. These are the fruits of Sin, the apples of Sodom, fair
outsides, but if you touch them, they turn to ashes and a stink; and if you
will nurse these children, and give them whatsoever is dear to you, then you
may be admitted into the house of feasting, and chambers of riot where sin
dwells; but if you will have the mother, you must have the daughters; the tree

In answer to which question we are to consider, 1. What is the sum total of
the pleasure of sin? 2. What fruits and relishes it leaves behind by its
natural efficiency? 3. What are its consequents by its demerit, and the
infliction of the superadded wrath of God, which it has deserved? Of the first
St. Paul gives no account, but by way of upbraiding asks, what they had? that
is, nothing nothing that remains: and where is it? show it; what is become of
it? Of the second he gives the sum total; all its natural effects are shame
and its appendages. The third, or the superinduced evils by the just wrath of
God, he calls death, the worst name in it self, and the greatest of evils that
can happen.

1. Let us consider what pleasures there are in sin; most of them are very
punishments. I will not reckon nor consider concerning envy, which one in
Stobaeus calls (...), the basest spirit and yet very just, because it punishes
the delinquent in the very act of Aelian says of the Polypus, (...), when he
wants his prey, he devours his own arms; and the leanness, and the secret
pangs, and the perpetual restlesnesse of an envious man feed upon his own
heart, and drink down his spirits, unless he can ruin or observe the fall of
the fairest fortunes of his neighbor. The fruit of this tree are mingled and
sour, and not to be endured in the very eating. Neither will I reck on the
horrid afrightments and amazements of murder, nor the uneasinesse of
impatience, which doubles every evil that it feels, and makes it a sin, and
makes it intolerable; nor the secret grievings,

It were easy to make a catalogue of sins, every one of which is a disease, a
trouble in it is very constitution and its nature: such are loathing of
spiritual things, bitterness of spirit, rage, greediness, confusion of
mind, and irresolution, cruelty and despite, slothfulness distrust,
unquietness and anger, effeminacy and niceness, prating and sloth, ignorance
and inconstancy, incogitancy and cursing, malignity and fear, forgetfulness
and rashness, pusillanimity and despair, rancour and superstition: if a man
were to curse his enemy, he could not wish him a greater evil then these; and
yet these are several kinds of sin which men choose, and give all their hopes
of heaven in exchange for one of these diseases. Is it not a fearful
consideration that a man should rather choose eternally to perish, then to say
his prayers heartily, and affectionately? But so incogitancy, and hates the
employment, and suffers the torments of prayers which he loves not; and all
this, although for so doing it is certain he may perish: what fruit, what
deliciousness can he fancy in being weary of his prayers? There is no pretense
or color for these things. Can any man imagine a greater evil to the body and
soul of a man, then madness, and furious eyes, and a distracted look,
palenesse with there are but very few sins that pretend to pleasure: although a
man be weak and soon deceived, and the Devil is crafty, and sin is false and
impudent, and pretenses are too many, yet most kinds of sins are real and
prime troubles to the very body, without all manner of deliciousness, even to
the sensual, natural, and carnal part; and a man must put on something of a
Devil before he can choose such sins, and he must love mischief because it is
a sin; for in the lusts of the lower belly, ambition, and revenge; and although
the catalogue of sins is numerous as the production of fishes, yet these three
only can be apt to consen us with a fair outside; and yet upon the survey of
what fruits they bring, and what taste they have, in the manducation, besides
the filthy relish they leave behind, we shall see how miserably they are abused
and fooled, that expend any thing upon such purchases.

2. For a man cannot take pleasure in lusts of the flesh, in gluttony, or
drunkenness, unless he be helped forward with inconsideration folly. For we
see it evidently that grave and wise persons, men of experience and
consideration are extremely less affected with lust and loves; the
hare-brain'd boy, the young gentleman that thinks nothing in the world greater
then to be free from a Tutor, he indeed courts his folly and enters into the
possession affricare cutem, it went but to the skin; but the allay went
further; it kept a

Dum mala delectent mea me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi --
so that his sins might delight him, or deceive him, then to be wise and
without pleasure in the enjoyment. So that in effect, a man must lose his
discerning faculties, before he discerns the little fantastic joys of his
concupiscence; which demonstrates how vain, how empty of pleasure that is, that
is beholding to folly and illusion, to a juggling and a plain cousenage, before
it can be fancyed to be pleasant. For it is a strange beauty that he that has
the best eyes cannot perceive, and none but the blind or blear-eyed people can
see; and such is the pleasure of lust, which by every degree of wisdom that a
man has is lessened and undervalued.

3. For the pleasures of intemperance, they are nothing but the relics and
images of pleasure, after that nature has been feasted; For so long as she
needs, that is, so long as temperance waits, so long pleasure also stands
there. But as temperance begins to go away, having done the ministeries of
Nature, every morsel; and every new goblet is still less delicious, and
cannot be endured but as men force nature by violence to stay longer then she
would: How have some men rejoiced when they have escaped a cup! and when they
cannot escape, they pour it in, and receive it with as much pleasure as the old
women have in the Lapland dances; they dance the round, Devil in the company,
and such as is his pleasure, such is theirs: he rejoices in the thriving sin,
and the swelling fortune of his darling drunkenesse, but his joys are the
joys of him that knows and always remembers that he shall infallibly have
the biggest damnation; and then let it be considered how forced a joy that is,
that is

Non been mendaci risus componitur ore,
Nec been sollicitis ebria verba sonant.
Certain it is, intemperance takes but natures leavings; when the belly is full
and nature calls to take away, the pleasure that comes in afterward is next to
loathing: it is like the relish and taste of meats at the end of the third
course, or the sweetness of honey to him that has eaten til he can endure to
take no more; and in this, Phalangia of old, (...), some of these serpents make
men die laughing, and some to die weeping: so does the intemperate, and so does
his brother that languishes of a consumption; this man dies weeping, and the
other dies laughing: but they both die infallibly, and all his pleasure is
nothing but the sting of a serpent, immixto liventia mella veneno, it wounds
the heart, and he dies with a Tarantula dancing and singing till he bows his
neck, and kisses his bosom with the fatal noddings and declensions of

4. In these pretenders to pleasure which you see are but few, and they not
very prosperous in their pretenses, there is mingled so much trouble to bring
them to act and enjoyment, that the appetite is above half tired before it
comes; It is necessary a man should be hugely patient that is ambitious,
Ambulare per Britannos, Scythicas pati pruinas: no man buy's death and
damnation at so dear a rate, as he that sights for it, and endures cold and
hunger,

-- Patiens liminis atque solis, The heat of the sun, and the cold of the
threshold; the dangers of war, and the snares of a crafty enemy; he lies upon
the ground with a severity greater then the penances of a Hermit, and fasts
beyond the austerity of a rare penitent; with this only difference, that the
one does it for heaven, the other for an uncertain honor, and an eternity of
flames. But however, by this time that he has won something, he has spent
some years, and he has not much time left him to rest in his new purchase, and
he has worn in all the rooms of the houses of pride and great designs. And
revenge, which is pleasant only to a devil, or a man of the same cursed
temper. He does a thing which ought to trouble him, and will move him to pity
what his own vile hands have acted; but if he does not pity, that is, be
troubled with himself and wish the things undone, he has those affections by
which the Devil does rejoice in destroying souls; which affections a man
cannot have, unless he be perfectly miserable, by being contrary to God, to
mercy, and to felicity; and after all, the pleasure is false, fantastic, and
violent; it can do him no good, it can do him hurt: it is ods but it will; and
on him that takes revenge, revenge shall be taken; airy and fantastical; It
is like a rolling stone, which when a man has forced up a hill, will return
upon him with a greater violence, and break those bones whose sinews gave it
motion. The pleasure of revenge is like the pleasure of eating chalk and coals;
a foolish disease made the appetite, and it is entertained with an evil
reward; it is like the feeding of a Cancer or a Wolf, the man is restless
till it be done, and when it is, every man sees how infinitely he is removed
from satisfaction or felicity.

5. These sins when they are entertained with the greatest fondness from
without, it must have but extreme little pleasure, because Persian King gave
Themistocles a goodly pension, assigning Magnesia with the revenue of 50
talents for his bread, Lampsacum for his wine, and Myos for his meat; but all
the while he fed high and drunk deep, he was infinitely afflicted that every
thing went cross to his undertaking, and he could not bring his ends about to
betray his country; and at last he mingled poison plenteous and criminal; but
its employment is base, and it is so against a man's interest, and against what
is and ought to be dearest to him, that he cannot persuade his better parts to
consent, but must fight against them and all their arguments. These things are
against a man's conscience, that is, against his reason and his rest; and
something within makes his pleasure sit uneasily. But so do violent perfumes
make the head it pleases the senses, but diseases the spirit, and wounds that:
and

-- Difficile est imitari gaudia falsa,
Difficile est tristi fingere mente jocum.
It will be veryhard to delight freely in that which so vexes the more tender
and most sensible part; so that, what Pliny said of Caicus, (...), it brings a
stone in stead of a flower or fruit; so are the pleasures of these pretending
sins; the flower at the best is stinking, but there is a stone in the bottom,
it is gravel in the teeth, and a man must drink the blood of his own gums when
he manducates such unwholesome, such unpleasant fruit.

-- Vitiorum gaudia vulnus habent. They make a wound, and therefore are not
very pleasant.

6. The pleasure in the acts of these few sins that do pretend to it, is a
little limited nothing, confined to a single faculty, to one sense, having
nothing but the skin for its organ, or instrument, an artery, or something not
more considerable then a Lute-string; and at the best it is but the
satisfaction of an appetite which reason can cure, which time can appease,
which every diversion can take off; such as is not perfective of his nature,
nor of advantage to his person; it is a desire to no purpose, and as it comes
with no just cause, so sensual desires are nothing but an impatience of being
well and wise, of being in health, and being in our wits; which two things if a
man could endure (and it is but reasonable, a man would think, that we should)
he would never lust to drown his heart in seas of wine, or oppress his belly
with loads of undigested meat, or make himself base as the mixtures of a
harlot, by breaking the sweetest limits, and holy festivities of marriage.
Malum impatientia est boni, said Tertullian, it is nothing else; to please the
sense, is but to do a man's self mischief; and all those lusts tend to some
direct dissolution of a man's health, or his felicity, his reason, or his
religion; it is an enemy that a man carries about him, and as the spirit of God
said concerning Babylon, Quantum in deliciis fuit, tantum dat illi tormentum
and luctum, Let her have torment lust and desire is a torment; the remembrance
and the absence is a torment, and the enjoyment does not satisfy, but disables
the instrument, and tires the faculty; and when a man has but a little of what
his sense covets, he is not contented, but impatient for more; and when he has
loads of it, he does not feel it; for he that swallows a full goblet does not
taste his wine: and this is the pleasure of the sense; nothing contents it but
that which he cannot perceive: and it is always restless, till he be weary;
and all the way unpleased, till

7. Sin has little or no pleasure lin its very enjoyment; because its very
manner of entry and production is by a curse and a contradiction; it comes into
the world like a viper through the sides of its mother by means unnatural,
violent, and monstrous. Men love sin only because it is forbidden; Sin took
occasion by the Law, says St. Paul, it could not come in upon its own
pretenses, but

Sed quia caecus inest vitiis amor, omne futurum
Despicitur, suadentque brevem praesentia fructum,
Et ruit in vetitum damni secura libido.
Men run into sin with blind affections, and against all reason despise the
future, hoping for some little pleasure for the present; and

-- Frontemque a crimine sumunt, Some because they are reproved, many by
custom, others by importunity:

Ordo fuit crevisse malis -- It grows upon crab-stocks, and the lust it self is
sour and unwholesome; and since it is evident, that very many sins come in
wholly upon these accounts, such persons and such sins cannot pretend pleasure;
but as Naturalists say of pulse, cum maledictis and probris serendum
praecipiunt, ut laetius porventat; the country people were

8. The pleasures in the very enjoying of sin are infinitely trifling and
inconsiderable, because they pass away so quickly; if they be in themselves
little, they are made less by their volatile and fugitive knit and solid only
by contingency, and are very often born away with the impetuous torrent of an
inevitable accident, like Xerxes bridge over the Hellespont, and then he is to
begin again, and sets new wheels a going; and by the arts, and the labor, and
the watchings, and the importunity, and the violence, and the unwearied study,
and he enters upon possession, and finds them not of so long abode as one of
his cares, which in so vast numbers made so great a portion of his life
afflicted? (...), The enjoying of sin for a season, St. Paul Heb. 11. 25.
calls it; he names no pleasures; our English translation uses the word of
enjoying pleasures; but if there were any, they were but for that season, that
instant, that very transition of the act, which dies in its very birth, and of
which we can only say as the minstrell sung of Pacuvius when he was carried
dead from his supper to his bed, (...), A man can scarce have time enough to
say it is alive, it was: nullo non se die extui^t, it died every day, it lived
never unto life, but lived and dyed unto death, being its mother, and its
daughter: The man dyed before the sin did live, and when it had lived, it
consigned him to dye eternally.

Add (...) this, that it so passes away, that nothing at all remains behind
it, that is pleasant: it is like the path of an arrow in the air; the next
morning no man can tell what is become of the pleasures of the last nights sin:
they are no where but in Gods books, deposited in the conscience, and sealed up
against the day of dreadful He that dies, dies for that which is not; and in
the very little present he finds it an unrewarding interest, to walk seven
days together over sharp stones only to see a place from whence he must Haec
mala mentis gaudia. It abides too little a while to be felt, or called
pleasure; and if it should abide longer, it would be troublesome as pain, and
loathed like the tedious speech of an Orator pleading against the life of the
innocent.

9. Sin has in its best advantages but a trifling inconsiderable pleasure:
because not only God and reason, conscience and honor, interest laws, do
sour it in the sense and gust of pleasure, but even the devil himself either
being overruled by God, or by a strange unsignificant malice makes it
troublesome and intricate, entangled and involved; and one sin contradicts
another, and vexes the man with so great variety of evils, that if in the
course of Gods service he should meet with half the difficulty, he would
certainly give over the whole employment. Those that St. James speaks of who
prayed that they might spend it upon their lusts, were covetous and prodigal,
and therefore must endure the torments of one to have the pleasure of another;
and which is greater, the pleasure of spending, or the displeasure that it is
spent, and does not still remain after indication that it is intended, the man
should feel the images and dreams of pleasure, no longer but till he be without
remedy? Pleasure is but like centries or wooden frames, set under arches, till
they be strong by their own weight and consolidation to stand alone; and when
by any means the Devil has a man an early hell, and be tormented before the
time. Does not envy punish or destroy flattery; and self-love sometimes
torment the drunkard; and intemperance abate the powers of lust, and make the
man impotent; and laziness become a hinderance to ambition; and the desires of
man wax impatient upon contradicting interests, and by crossing each others
design on all hands lessen the pleasure, and leave the man tormented?

10. Sin is of so little relish and gust, so trifling a pleasure, can give;
Men could not otherwise be cousened. And if it be inquired, why men should sin
again, after they had experience of without and against its interest; but
either they still proceed, hoping to supply by numbers what they find not in
proper measures; or God permits them to proceed as an instrument of punishment;
or their understandings Lucius, (...), and seeing waters pure as the tears of
the spring, or the pearls of the morning, expects that in such a fair promising
bosom, the inmates should be fair and pleasant, (...), but finds the fishes
black, filthy, and unwholesome; so it is in sin, its face is fair and
beauteous,

(...),
(...).
Softer then sleep, or the dreams of wine, tenderer then the curds of milk, and
Euganea quantumvis mollior agna; but when you come to handle it, it is filthy,
rough as the Porcupine, black as the shadows of the night, and having promised
a fish it gives a scorpion, and a stone in stead of bread.

II. The fruits of its present possession, the pleasures of its taste are less
pleasant, because no sober person, no man that can discourse does like it long,

-- Breve sit quod turpiter audes. Juven.
But he approves it in the height of passion, and in the disguises of a
temptation; but at all other times he finds it ugly and unreasonable; and the
very remembrances must at all times abate its Dion Prusaeus reports that when
the Persians had got the victory, they would pick out the noblest slave, (...),
They make him a King for three days, and cloth him with royal robes, and
minister to him all the pleasures he can choose, and all the while he knows he
is to dye a sacrifice to mirth and folly. But then let it be remembered what
checks and allayes of mirth the poor man starts at, when he remembers the axe
and the altar where he must shortly bleed; and by this Qui sacrificant hominem
osculabuntur Vitulum, He that Hos. 13. 2.
gives a man in sacrifice shall kiss the calf, that is, shall be admitted to
the seventh chapel of Moloch to kiss the Idol: a goodly reward for so great
a price, for so great an iniquity.

After all this I do not doubt but these considerations will protestatio
contra factum, and fine pretenses against all experience; and that for all
these severe sayings, sin is still so pleasant as to tempt the wisest
resolution. Such men are in a very evil condition: and in their case only I
come to understand the meaning of those words of Seneca; Malorum ultimum est
mala sua amare, ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed etiam placent. It is the
worst of evils when not only delighted with them but pleased also; not only
feel the relish with too quick a sense, but also feel none of the objections,
nothing of the pungency, the sting, or the lessening circumstances. However, to
these men I say this only, that if by experience they feel sin pleasant, it is
as certain also by experience, that most sins are in their own nature
sharpnesses and diseases; * and that very few do pretend to pleasure: * That a
man cannot feel any deliciousness in them, but when he is helped by folly and
inconsideration; that is, a wise man cannot, though a boy or a fool Phryne
desired to be writ on the gates of Thebes, (...), Phryne the harlot built it
up, but Alexander dug it down; the pleasure these are the harlots hands that
build the fairy castle, but the Neque enim Deus ita viventibus quicquam
promisit boni, neque ipsa per se men's humana talium sibi conscia Plat. de Rep.
quicquam boni sperare audet. To men that live in sin God has promised no
good, and the conscience it self dares not expect it.

SERMON, XX. Part II.
WE have already opened this dunghill covered with snow, which was indeed on
the outside white as the spots of leprosy, but it was no better; and if the
very colors and instruments of deception, if the fucus and ceruse be so
spotted and sullyed, what can we suppose to be under the wrinkled skin, what in
the corrupted liver, and in the sinks of the body of sin? That we are next to
consider: But if we open the body, and see what a confusion of all its parts,
what a rebellion and tumult of the humors, what a disorder of the members, what
a monstrosity or deformity is fever, or long for madness or the gout. Sin in
its natural efficiency has in it so many evils, as must needs afright a man,
and scare the confidence of every one that can consider.

* When our blessed Savior shall conduct his Church to the mountains of glory,
he shall present it to God without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.
that is, pure and vigorous, entirely freed from the power, and the infection
of sin. Upon occasion of which expression it has been spoken that sin leaves
in the soul a stain or spot, permanent upon the spirit; in sordibus in such
filthiness, that he who is of pure eyes cannot behold. But roncerning the
nature or proper effects of this spot or stain, they have not been agreed. Some
call it an obligation or a guilt of punishment; so Scotus. Some fancy it to be
an elongation from God, by a dissimilitude of conditions; so Peter Lombard.
Alexander of Ales says it is a privation of the proper beauty and splendour of
the soul, with which God adorned it in the creation and superaddition of grace;
and upon this expression they most agree, but seem not to understand what they
mean by it; and it signifies no more, but as you describing sickness, call it
a want of health, and folly a want of wisdom; which is indeed to say what a
thing is not, but not to tell what it is: But that I may not be hindered by this
consideration, we may observe that the spots and stains of sin are
metaphorical significations of the disorder and evil consequents of sin;
which it leaves partly upon the soul, partly upon the state and condition of a
man; as meekness is called an ornament, and faith a shield, and salvation a
helmet, and sin it self a wrinkle, corruption, rottenness, a burden, a wound,
death, filthiness: Psa. 38. 4. and 65. 2 Timothy 3. 6.
so it is a3 defiling of a man, that is, as the body contracts nastinesse and
dishonor by impure contacts, and adherencies, so does the soul receive such a
change as must be taken away before it can enter into the eternal regions, and
house of purity. But it is not a distinct (...), etc.
thing, not an inherent quality, which can be separated from other evil
effects of sin, which I shall now reckon by their more proper names; and St.
Paul comprises under the scornful appellative of shame.

1. The first natural fruit of sin is ignorance. Man was first tempted by the
promise of knowledge; he fell into darkness by believing the Devil holding
forth to him a new light. It was not likely good should come of so foul a
beginning; that the woman should believe the Devil putting on no brighter
shape then a snakes skin, she neither being afraid of sin nor afrighted to hear
a beast speak, and he pretending so weakly in the temptation, that he promised
only that they should know evil; for they knew good before; and all that was
offered to them was the experience of evil: and it was no wonder that the
Devil promised no more; for sin never could perform any thing but an
experience of evil, no other knowledge can come upon not to have known evil.
Now this knowledge was the introduction of ignorance. For when the
understanding suffered it self to be so baffled as to study evil, the will was
as foolish to fall in love with it, and they conspired to undo each other. For
when the will began to love it, then the understanding was set on work to
commend, to advance, to conduct and to approve, to believe it, and to be
factious in behalf of know evil, just as a man is said to taste of death: for
in proper speaking, as death is not to be felt, because it takes away all
sense; so nether can evil be known, because whatsoever is truly cognoscible,
is good and true; and therefore all the knowledge a man gets by sin is to feel
evil: he knows it not by discourse, but by sense; not by proposition, but by
smart; The Devil doing to man as Esculapius did to Neoclides, (...), the fool
has said in his heart, there is no God. That Is his character: the thing framed
says that nothing is, and that which made it, is not. But this folly is as
infinite as hell, as much without light or bound, as the Chaos or the primitive
nothing. But in this, the Devil never prevailed very far; his Schools were
always thin at these Lectures: some few people have been witty against God,
that taught them to speak before they knew to spell a syllable; but either they
are monsters in their manners, or mad in their understandings, or ever find
themselves confuted by a thunder or a

But the Devil has infinitely prevailed in a thing that is almost as
senseless and ignorant as Atheism, and that is idolatry; not only making God
after man's image, but in the likeness of a calf, of a cat, of a serpent;
making men such fools as to worship a quartan ague, fire and water, onions and
sheep. This is the skill man learned, and fire is cold, and the Sun black, that
fornication can make a man happy, or drunkenness can make him wise? And this
is the state of a sinner, of every one that delights in iniquity; he cannot be
pleased with it if he thinks it evil; he cannot endure it, without believing
this proposition, that there is in drunkenness, or lust, pleasure enough, good
enough to make him amends for the intolerable pains of damnation. But then if
we consider upon what nonsense principles the state of an evil life relies, we
must in reason sense is to be preferred before reason, interest before
religion, a lust before heaven, moments before eternity, money above God
himself; that, a man's felicity consists in that which a beast enjoyes; that, a
little in present uncertain, fallible possession, is better then the certain
state of infinite glories hereafter; what child, what fool can think things
more weak, and more unreasonable? And yet if men do not go upon these grounds,
upon what account do they sin? sin has no wiser reasons for it self then
these: (...), the same argument that a fly has to enter into a candle, the no
wiser are his hopes; all his hopes that he has is, that he shall have time to
repent of that which he chooses greedily; that he whom he every day provokes
will save him, whether he will or no; that he can in an instant, or in a day
make amends for all the evils of 40 years; or else that he shall be saved
whether he does or no; that heaven is to be had for a sigh, or a short prayer,
and yet hell shall not be consequent to the affections, and labors, and
hellish

But then consider, that there are some sins whose very formality is a lie.
Superstition could not be in the world, if men did believe God to be good and
wise, free and merciful, not a tyrant, not an unreasonable exactor: no man
would dare do in private, what he fears to do in public, if he did know that
God sees him there, by God; or that the shame of a few men's talk is more
intolerable then to be confounded before Christ, and his army of Angels,
opinion is better then reality, and that there is in virtue nothing good, but
the fame of it. * And the man that takes revenge, relies upon this foolish
proposition; that his evil that he has already suffered grows less if
another suffers the like; that his wound cannot smart, if by my hand he dies
that gave it. (...), the sad

I shall not need to thrust into this account the other evils of mankind that
are the events of ignorance, but introduced by sin; such as are our being moved
by what we see strongly, and weakly by what we understand; that men are moved
rather by a fable then by a syllogism, by parables then by demonstrations, by
examples then by precepts, by seeming things then by real, by shadows then by
substances; that men judge of things by their first events, and measure the
events by their own short lives, or shorter observations; So foolish and
ignorant was I (said David) and as it were a beast before thee. Ambition is
folly, and temerity is ignorance, and confidence never goes without it, and
impudence is worse, and zeal or contention is madness, and prating is want of
wisdom, and lust destroys it, and makes a man of a weak spirit, and a cheap
reasoning; and there are in the Catalogue of of sins very many, which are
directly, kinds and parts, and appendages of ignorance; such as are blindness
of mind, affected ignorance, and wilful; neglect of hearing the word of God,
resolved incredulity, forgetfulness of holy things, lying and believing a lie;
this is the fruit of sin, this is the knowledge that the Devil promised to our
first parents as the rewards of disobedience; and although they sinned as
weakly and fondly, (...), upon as slight grounds and trifling a temptation and
as easy a deception as many of us since, yet the causes of our ignorance are
increased by the multiplication Chaldees and the wiser Hebrews which worship
God chastely and purely, they only have a right to be called wise; all that do
not so are fools and ignorants, neither knowing what it is to be happy, nor how
to purchase it; ignorant of the noblest end, and of the competent means toward
it: they neither know God nor themselves, and no ignorance is greater Harpaste
think that the house is dark, but not themselves. Virtue makes our desires
temperate and regular, it observes our actions, condemns our faults, mortifies
our lusts, watches all our dangers and temptations: but sin makes our desires
infinite, and we would have we cannot tell what; we strive that we may forget
our faults; we labor that we may neither remember nor consider; we justify
our errors, and call them innocent, and that which is our shame we miscall
honor; and our whole life has in it so many weak discourses and trifling
propositions, that the whole world of sinners insensati, madness and folly
possesses the greater part of mankind. What greater madness is there then to
spend the price of a whole farm in contention for three sheaves of corn? and
yet tantum pectora caecae noctis habent, this is the wisdom of such as are
contentious, and love their own will more then their happiness, their humor
more then their peace.

-- Furor est post omnia perdere naulum. Men lose their reason, and their
religion, and themselves at last for want of understanding; and all the wit and
discourses by which sin creeps in, are but (...), frauds of the tongue, and
consultations of care: but in the whole circle of sins there is not one wise
proposition, by which a man may conduct his affairs, or himself become
instructed to felicity. This is the first natural fruit of sin: It makes a man
a fool, and this hurt sin does to the understanding, and this is shame enough
to that in which men are most apt to glory.

Sin naturally makes a man weak; that is, unapt to do noble things: natural
disability: for it is equally ready for a man to will good as evil, and as
much in the power of his hands to be lifted up in prayer to God as against his
Brother in a quarrel; and between a virtuous object and his faculties there is
a more apt proportion, then between his spirit and a vice; and every act of
grace does more please the mind, then an act of sin not to be drunk, not to
swear, and it is not to be understood that a man has naturally no power not to
do; if there be a natural disability, it is to action, not to rest or ceasing;
and therefore in this case, we cannot reasonably nor justly accuse our Nature,
but we have reason to blame our manners which have introduced upon us a moral
disability; that is, not that the faculty is impotent and disabled, but that
the whole man is; for the will in many cases desires to do good, and the
understanding is convinced and consents, and the hand can obey, and the
passions the will finds a difficulty to do them so much violence, and the
understanding consents to their lower reasonings, and the desires of the lower
man do will stronger; and then the whole man cannot do the duty that is
expected. There is a law in the members, and he that gave that law is a tyrant,
and the subjects of that law are slaves, and oftentimes their ear is bored, and
they love their fetters and desire to continue that bondage for ever; The law
is the law of sin, the Devil is the tyrant, custom is the sanction or the
sirmament of the law; and every vicious man Lex enim peccati est violentia
consuetudinis, qua trahitur and tenetur animus etiam invitus, eo merito quo in
eam volens illabitur; said St. Austin; The law of sin is the violence of
custom, which keep a man's mind against his mind, because he entered
willingly, and gave up his own interest, which he ought to have secured for his
own felicity, and for his service who gave for it an invaluable price: And
indeed in questions of virtue and vice there is no such thing as Nature; or it
is so inconsiderable, a perfect indifferency, we may if we will, or we may
choose; but custom brings in a new nature, and makes a Biass in every faculty.
To a vicious man some sins become necessary; Temperance makes him sick;
severity is death to him; it destroys his cheerfulness and activity; it is as
his nature, and the desire dwells for ever with him, and his reasonings are
framed for it and his fancy, and in all he is helped by example, by company, by
folly, and inconsideration; and all these are a faction and a confederacy
against the honor and Philosophy is at a stand, nothing can give an account of
it but experience, and sorrowful instances; for it is infinitely unreasonable,
that when you have discoursed wisely against unchastity, and told, that we are
separated from it by a circumvallation of Laws of God and man, that it
dishonours the body, and makes the spirit caitive, that it is fought against by
Plutarch.
Custom does as much as Nature can do; it does sometimes more, and
superinduces a disposition contrary Eudemus had so used his stomach to so
unnatural drinks, that, as himself tells the story, he took in one day two and
twenty potions in which Hellebore was infused, and rose at noon, and supped at
night, and felt no change. So are those that are corrupted with evil customs,
nothing will purge them; if you discourse wittily, they hear you not; or if
they do, they have twenty ways to answer, and twice twenty to neglect it: if
you persuade them to promise to leave their sin, they do but show their folly
at the next temptation, and tell that they did not mean it: and if you take
them at an advantage when their hearts are softened with a judgment or a fear,
with a shame or an bars and locks of vows upon them, it is all one; one vow
shall hinder but one action, and the appetite shall be doubled by the
restraint, and the next opportunity shall make an amends for the first
omission: or else the sin shall enter by parts; the vow shall only put the
understanding to make a distinction, or to change the circumstance, and under
that color the crime shall be admitted, because the man is resolved to suppose
the matter so dressed was not vowed against. But then when that is done, the
understanding shall open that eye that did but wink

Nam si discedas, laqueo tenet ambitiosi
Consuetudo mali: -- and in aegro cord senescit.
Custom has waxen old in his deceived heart, and made snares for him that he
cannot disintangle himself; so true is that saying of God by the Prophet, Can
an Aethiop change his skin? then may ye learn to do well when ye are accustomed
to do evil. But I instance in two things which to my sense seem great
aggravations of the slavery and weakness of a customary sinner.

The first is, that men sin against their interest. They know they shall be
ruined by it; it will undo their estates, lose their friends, ruin their
fortunes, destroy their body, impoverish the spirit, load the conscience,
discompose his rest, confound his reason, amaze him in all his faculties,
destroy his hopes, and mischief enough besides; and when he considers this, he
declares against it; but, Cum bona verba erumpant, affectus tamen ad
consuetudinem relabuntur, the Tyrinthians, who to free their nation from a
great plague, were bidden only to abstain from laughter, while they offered
their sacrifice: but they had been so used to a ridiculous effeminacy, and vain
course of conversation, that they could not, though the honor and splendour of
the Nation did depend upon it. God of his mercy keep all Christian people from
a custom in sinning; for if they be once fallen thither, nothing can recover
them but a miraculous grace.

2. The second aggravation of it is, that custom prevails against experience.
Though the man has already smarted, though he has been disgraced, and undone,
though he lost his relation and his friends, he is turned out of service, and
disimployed, he begs with a load of his old sins upon his shoulders, yet this
will not cure an evil custom: Do not we daily see how miserable some men make
themselves with drunkenness, and folly? Have not we seen them that have been
sick with intemperance, deadly sick, enduring for one drunken meeting, more
pain then are in all the fasting days of the whole year? and yet do they not
the very next day go to it again? Indeed some few are smitten into the
beginning of repentance,

Nec tu cum obstiteris semel, instantique negaris
Parere imperio, Rupi jam vincula, dicas.
Think not the chain is off when thou have once or twice resisted; or if the
chain be broke, part remains on thee, like a cord upon a dogs neck,

Nam and luctata canis nodum arripit; attamen illi
Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars magna catenae.
He is not free that draws his chain after him; and he that breaks off from
his sins with greatest passion, stands in need of prosperous circumstances, and
a strange freedom from temptation, and Opus est aliqua fortunae indulgentia
adhuc inter humana luctanti, dum noaumillum exolvit and omne vinculum mortale,
Scneca de vita beata.
for the knot can hardly be untied which a course of evil manners has bound
upon the soul; and every contingency in the world can entangle him that wears
upon his neck the links of a broken chain. Nam qui ab eo quod amat, quam
extemplo suavi is sagittatis percussus est, illico res for as labitur, liquitur;
if he sees his temptation again he is (...), his kindness to it, and
conversation with his lust undoes him, and breaks his purposes, Philomusus was
a wild young fellow in Domitian's time, and he was hard put to it to make a
large pension to maintain his lust and luxury, and he was every month put to
beggarly arts to feed his crime. But when his father died and left him all, he
disinherited himself; he spent it all though he knew he was to suffer that
trouble always, which vexed his lustful soul in the frequent periods of his
violent want.

Now this is such a state of slavery, that persons that are sensible ought to
complain, (...), that they serve worse lords them Egyptian taskmasters, there
is a lord within that rules and rages, Intus and in jecore aegro pascuntur
domini; sin dwells there, and makes a man a miserable servant: and this is not
only a Metaphorical expression, under which some spiritual and metaphysicall
truth is represented, but it is a physical, material truth, and a man endures
hardship, he cannot move but at this command, and not his outward actions only,
but his will and his Marcus Antoninus; The two parts of a man are rent in
sunder, and that that prevails is the life, it is the man, it is the eloquence
persuading every thing to its own interest. * And now consider what is the
effect of this evil. A man by sin is made a slave, he loses that liberty that
is dearer to him then life it self; and like the dog in the fable, we suffer
chains and ropes only for a piece of bread; when the Lion thought liberty a
sufficient reward and price for hunger, and all the hardnesses of the
wilderness. Do not all

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...) Euripid.

Either men are slaves to fortune, or to lust; to covetousness, or tyranny;
something or other compels him to usages against his will and reason; and when
the laws cannot rule him, money can; divitiae enim apud sapientem virum in
servitute sunt, apud stultum in imperio; for money is the wise man's servant,
and the fools Master: but the bondage of a vicious person, is such a bondage as
the Peter's Angel call us and b^at us upon the sides, and offer to go before us,
yet we cannot come forth from prison; for we have by our evil customs given
hostages to the Devil, never to stir from the enemies quarter; and this is
the greatest bondage that is imaginable, the bondage of conquered, wounded,
unresisting people: (...), Virtue only is the truest liberty: And if the Son of
God make us free, then are we free indeed.

3. Sin does naturally introduce a great baseness upon the spirit, expressed
in Scripture in some cases by the Devils entering into a man, as it was in the
case of Judas, after he had taken the sop, Satan entered into him; and St.
Cyprian speaking of them that after Ioh. 13. 27.
Baptism lapsed into foul crimes, he affirms that spiritu immundo Cypr. Ep. 76.
quasi redeunte quatiuntur, ut manifestum sit Diabolum in baptismo side
credentis excludi, si sides postmedum defecerit regredi; Faith, and the grace
of Baptism turns the Devil out of possession: states of evil rather then
evil actions, principles of mischief rather then direct emanations; such as
are, u. thankfulness, impiety, giving a secret blow, fawning bypocrisie,
detraction, impudence, forgetfulness of the dead, and forgetting to do that in
their absence which we promised to them in presence, (...); Concerning which
sorts of unworthiness Eurip.
it is certain they argue a most degenerous spirit, and they are the effect,
the natural effect of malice and despair, an unwholesome ill natured soul, a
soul corrupted in its whole constitution. I remember Phaedrus, it is told
concerning an ill natured fellow, that he refused to pay his Symbol, which
himself and all the company had agreed should be given for every disease, that
each man had; he denying his itch to be a disease; but the company taking off
the refusers hat for a pledge, found that he had a scaled head, and so demanded
the money double; which he pertinaciously resisting, they threw him down, and
then discovered he was broken bellied, and justly condemned him to pay three
Philippicks:

-- Quae fuerat fabula, poenafuit. One disease discovers it self by the hiding
of another, and that being opened discovers a third; He that is almost taken in
a fault, tells a lie to escape; and to protect that lie, he forswears himself;
and that he may not be suspected of perjury, he grows impudent; and that sin
may not shame him, he will glory in it, like the slave in the Comedy, who being
torn with whips, grinn'd, and forced an ugly smile that it might not seem to
smart. * There are some sins which a man that is newly fallen, cannot
entertain. There is no crime made ready for a young sinner, but that which
nature there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked] therefore they must make
a fantastic peace by a studied cousening of themselves, by false
propositions, by carelessness, by stupidity, by impudence, by sufferance, and
habit; by conversation, and daily acquaintances; by doing some things as
Absalom did when he lay with his fathers concubines, to make it impossible for
him to repent, or to be forgiven, something to secure him in the possession of
hell; Tute hoc intristi quod tibi exedendum est, the man must thorough it now;
and this is it that makes men fall into all baseness of spiritual sins,
[(...), when a man is come to the bottom of his wickednsse, he malice and
despite, rancor and impudence, malicious studied ignorance, voluntary contempt
of all Religion, hating of good men and good counsels, and taking every wise
man and wise action to be his enemy; (...). And this is that baseness of sin
which Plato so much detested, that he said he should blush to be guilty of,
though he knew God would propter solam peccati turpitudinem, for the very
baseness that is in it. A man that is false to God, will also, if an evil
temptation overtakes him, betray his friend; and it is notorious in the
covetous and ambitious,

(...), --
-- (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
They are an unthankful generation, and to please the people, or to serve
their interest will hurt their friends. That man has so lost himself to all
sweetness and excellency of spirit, that is gone thus far in sin, that he
looks like a condemned man, or is like the accursed spirits preserved in chains
of darkness and impieties unto the Judgment of the great Day, (...), this man
can be nothing but evil; for these inclinations and evil forwardnesses, this
dyscrasie and gangrened disposition does always suppose a long or a base sin
for their parent; and the product of Devil shall enter into them as he entered
into Judas, and fill them full of iniquity.

SERMON, XXI. Part III.
4. ALthough these are shameful effects of sin, and a man need no greater
dishonor then to be a fool and a slave, and a base person, all which sin
infallibly makes him; yet there are some sins which are directly shameful in
their nature, and proper disreputation, and a very great many sins are the
worst and basest in several respects; that is, every of them has a venomous
quality of its own, whereby it is marked and appropriated to a peculiar evil
spirit. The Devils sin was the worst, because it came from the greatest malice:
Adams was the worst, Judas sin the worst of men, because against the most
excellent person; and the relapses of the godly are the worst, by reason they
were the most obliged persons. But the ignorance of the Law is the greatest of
evils, if we consider its danger, but covetousness is worse then it, if we
regard its incurable and growing nature: luxury is most alien from spiritual
things, and is the worst of all in its temptation and our pronenesse; but pride
grows most venomous by its unreasonablenesse and importunity, arising even
from the good things a man has; even from graces, and endearments, and from
Sins of malice and against the Holy Ghost oppugn the greatest grace with the
greatest spite; but Idolatry is perfectly hated by God by a direct enmity. Some
sins are therefore most heinous, because to resist them is most easy, and to
act them there is the least temptation: such as are severally, lying, and
swearing. There is a strange poison in the nature of sins, that of so many
sorts, every one of them should be the worst. Every sin has an evil spirit, a
Devil of its own to manage, to conduct, and to imbitter it: and although all
these are Gods enemies, and have an appendant shame in their retinue, yet to
some shame is more appropriate, and a proper ingredient in their constitutions:
such as are lying, and lust, and vow-breach, and inconstancy. God sometimes
cures the pride of a man's spirit by suffering his evil manners, and filthy
inclination to be determined upon lust; lust makes a man afraid of public
eyes, and common voices; it is (as all sins else are, but this especially) a
work of darkness, it does debauch the spirit, and make it to decay and fall
off smart so much as shame: Lustful souls are cheap and easy, trifling and
despised in all wise accounts; they are so far from being fit to sit with
Princes, that they dare not chastise a sinning servant that is private to their
secret follies; It is strange to consider what laborious arts of concealment,
what excuses and lessenings, what pretenses and fig leaves men will put before
their nakedness and Adam, and when the second world began, there was a strange
scene of shame acted by Noah and his sons, and it ended in slavery and
baseness to all descending generations.

We see the event of this by too sad an experience. What arguments, what
hardness, what preaching, what necessity can persuade men to confess their
sins? they are so ashamed of them, that to be concealed they prefer before
their remedy; and yet in penitential confession the shame is going off, it is
like Cato's coming out of the Theater, or the Philosopher from the Tavern; it
might have been shame to have entered, but glory to have departed dressed of so
shameful a disease. And there are but few men that will endure it, but rather
choose to involve it in excuses and denial, in the clouds of lying, and the
white linen of hypocrisy: and yet when they make a vail for their shame, such
is the fate of sin, the shame grows the bigger and the thicker; we lie to men,
and we excuse it to God; either some parts of lying, or many parts of
impudence, darkness, or forgetfulness, running away, or running further in,
these are the covers of our shame, fucus, and the chinks filled with ceruse;
besides that it makes no real beauty, it spoils the face, and betrays evil
manners; it does not hide old age, or the change of years, but it discovers
pride or lust; it was not shame to be old, or wearied and worn out with age,
but it is a shame to dissemble nature by a wanton vizor. So sin retires from
blushing into shame; if it be discovered, it is not to be endured, and if we go
to hide it, we make it worse. But then if we remember fame and reputation, for
honor and a fair opinion, for a good name all our days, and when our days
are done, and that no ingenuous man can enjoy any thing he has, if he lives in
disgrace, and that nothing so breaks a man's spirit as dishonor, and the
meanest person alive does not think himself fit to be despised; we are to
consider into what an evil condition sin puts us, for which we are not only
disgraced and disparaged here, everybody can chide us, and we dye unpitied, and
lie in our graves eaten up by worms, and a foul dishonor; but after all this,
at the day of Judgment we shall be called from our charnell houses, where our
disgrace could not sleep, and shall in the face of God, in the presence of
Angels and Devils, before all good men and all the evil, see, and feel the
shame of all our sins written upon our foreheads: Here in this state of misery
shame; there is light enough for that, but darkness for all things else: and
then he shall reap the full harvest of his shame; all that for which wise men
scorned him, and all that for which God hated him; all that in which he was a
fool, and all that in which he was malicious; that which was public, and that
which was private; that which fools applauded, and that which himself durst not
own; the secrets of his lust, and the criminal contrivances

There is one great circumstance more of the shame of sin, which extremely
enlarges the evil of a sinful state, but that is not consequent

3. When the Boeotians asked the Oracle, by what they should become happy? the
answer was made, (...), wicked and irreligious persons are prosperous: and they
taking the Devil at his word, threw the inspired Pythian, the ministering
witeh, into the sea, hoping so to become mighty in peace and war. The effect
of which was this, The Devil was found a liar, and they fools at first, and at
last felt the reward of irreligion. For there Sympathies and Antipathies,
effects which we feel by experience, and The rod of God, which comes not into
the lot of the righteous, strikes the sinning man with sore strokes of veng
eance.

1. The first that I shall note is that which I called the aggravation of the
shame of sin; and that is, an impossibility of being concealed in most cases of
heinous crimes; (...), let no man suppose that he shall for ever hide his sin:
a single action may be conveyed away under the covert of an excuse Ulysses did
the search of Polyphemus, and it shall in time be known that it did escape, and
shall be discovered that it was private; that is, that it is so no longer. But
no wicked man that dwelt and delighted in sin, did ever go off from his scene
of unworthiness without a filthy character, The black veil is thrown over him
before his death, and by some contingency or other he enters into his cloud,
because few sins determine finally in the thoughts; but if they dwell there,
they will also enter into action, and then the thing discovers it self; or else
the Epicurus, believed that no man could be secured or quiet in his spirit from
being discovered. Scelus aliqua tutum, nulla securum tulit; They are not secure
even when they are safe; but are afflicted with perpetual jealousies; and
every whisper is concerning them, and all new noises, are arrests to their
spirits; and the day is too light, and the night is too horrid, and both are
the most opportune for their discovery; and besides the undiscernible connection
of the contingencies of providence, many secret crimes have been published by
dreams, and talkings in their sleep. It is the observation of Lucretius,

Multi de magnis per somnum rebus loquuntur,
Indictoque sui facti persaepe fuere.
And what their understanding kept a guard upon, their fancy let loose; fear
was the bars and locks, but sleep became the key to open, even then when all
the senses were shut, and God ruled alone without the choice and discourse of
man. And though no man regards the wilder talkings of a distracted man, yet it
has sometimes happened that a delirium and a fever, fear of death, and the
intolerable apprehensions of damnation have opened the cabinet of sin, and
brought to light all that was acted in the curtains of night,

Quippe ubi se multis per somnia saepe loquentes,
Aut morbo delirantes protraxe feruntur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata dedisse.
But there are so many ways of discovery, and amongst so many, some one does
so certainly happen that they are well summed up by Sophocles, by saying, that
time hears all and tells all,

(...)
(...).
A cloud may be its roof and cover till it passes over, but when it is driven
by a fierce wind, or runs fondly after the Sun, it lays open a deformity,
which like an ulcer had a skin over it, and a pain within, and drew to it a
heap of sorrows big enough to run over all its enclosures. Many persons have
betrayed themselves by their own fears, and knowing themselves never to be
secure enough, have gone to purge themselves of what no body a word in a fools
heart, was uneasy till it came out; Non amo se nimium purgitantes, when men
are over-busie in justifying themselves, it is a sign themselves think they
need it. Plutarch tells of a young gentleman that destroyed a swallow's nest,
pretending to them that reproved him for doing the thing, which in their
superstition the Greeks ominous, that the little bird accused him for killing
his Father. And to this purpose it was that Solomon gave counsel: Eccles. 10.
20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the rich in thy bedchamber, for
a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that that has wings shall tell
the matter; Murder and treason have by such strange ways been revealed, as if
God had appointed an Angel president of the revelation, and had kept this in
secret and sure ministry to be as an argument to destroy Atheism from the face
of the earth, by opening the secrets of men with this key of providence.
Intercepting of letters, mistaking names, false inscriptions, errors of
messengers, faction of the parties, fear in the actors, horror in the action,
the majesly of the person, the restlesnesse of the mind, distracted looks,
weariness of the spirit, and all under the conduct of the Divine wisdom, and
the Divine vengeance, make the covers of the most secret sin transparent as a
net, and visible as the Chian wines in the purest Crystal.

For besides that God takes care of Kings and of the lives of men,

(...) Homer.

(...),
driving away evil from their persons, and watching as a Mother to keep gnats
and flies from her dear boy sleeping in the cradle, there are in the
machinations of a mighty mischief, so many motions to be concentred, so many
wheels to move regularly, and the hand that turns them does so tremble, and
there is so universal a confusion in the conduct, that unless it passes
suddenly into act, it will be prevented by discovery, and if it be acted it

2. A second superinduced consequent of sin brought upon it sin; when God
punishes sin with sin he is extremely angry; for then the punishment is not
medicinal, but final and exterminating; God in that case takes no care
concerning him, though he dies and dies eternally. I do not here speak of those
sins which are naturally consequent to each other, as evil words to evil
thoughts, evil actions to evil words, rage David's adultery by permitting him
to fall to murder, and Solomon's wanton and inordinate love, with the crime of
idolatry, and Ananias his sacrilege with lying against the holy Ghost, and
Judas his covetousness with betraying his Lord, and that betraying with
despair, and that despair with self-murder.

-- (...)
(...),
One evil invites another, and when God is angry and withdrawes his grace, and
the holy Spirit is grieved and departs from his dwelling, the man is left at
the mercy of the merciless enemy, and he shall receive him only with variety
of mischiefs; like Hercules when he had broken the horn of Achelous, he was
almost drowned with the flood that sprung from it; and the evil man when he
has passed the first scene of his sorrows, shall be enticed or left to fall
into another. For it is a certain truth, that Habenti dabitur, said our blessed
Lord, to him that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly; from
him that has not shall be taken, even that which he has. It is a remarkable
saying of David; I have thought upon thy name O Lord Ps. 119. 55, 56.
in the night season, and have kept thy Law; this I had because I kept thy
Commandments: keeping Gods Commandments, was rewarded with keeping Gods
Commandments; And in this world God has not a greater reward to give; for so
the soul is nourished unto life, so it grows up with the increase of God, so
it passes on to a perfect man in Christ, so it is consigned for heaven, and so
it enters into glory; for glory is the perfection of grace, and when our love
to God is come to its state and perfection, then we are within the circles of a
Diadem, and then we are within the regions of felicity. And there is the same
reason in the contrary instance.

The wicked person falls into sin, and this he had because he sinned against his
maker. Tradidit Deus eos in desideria cordis eorum: and it concerns all to
observe it; and if ever we find that a sin succeeds a sin in the same
instance, it is because we refuse to repent; but if a sin succeeds a sin in
another instance, as if lust follows pride, or murder drunkenness; it is a
sign that God will not give us the grace of repentance: he is angry at us with
a destructive Chrysostom, it is the biggest part of the evil that the man
feels it not, yet the very antiperistasis or the contrariety, the very horror
and bigness of the danger may possibly make a man to contend to leap out of
the fire; and sometimes God works a miracle,

3. Sin brings in its retinue, fearful plagues and evil angels, messengers
of the displeasure of God, concerning which, (...), there are enough of dead; I
mean the experience is so great, and the notion so common, and the examples so
frequent, and the instances so sad, that there is scarce any thing new in this
particular to be noted; but something is remarkable, and that David did? we
have reason to tremble when we remember what he suffered, even when God had
sealed his pardon. Did not God punish Zedekiah with suffering his eyes to be
put out in the house of bondage? was not God so angry with Valentinian, that he
gave him into his enemies hand to be flayed alive? Have rebellion was punished
in Corah and his company, by the gaping of the earth, and the men were buried
alive; and Dathan and Abiram were consumed with fire for usurping the Priests
office: But God has struck severely since that time; and for the prostitution
of a Lady by the Spanish King, the Moors were brought in upon his Kingdom, and
ruled there for 700. years. And have none of us known he dyed by the hands of
violence, in a manner so seemingly impossible impartial, and we have no
privilege, no promise of exemption, no reason to hope it; what then do we
think shall become of this affair? where must we suffer this vengeance? For
that it is due, that it is just we suffer it, these sad examples are a perfect
demonstration. flaying alive not to be too big a punishment: that for which God
has smitten Kings with formidable plagues; that for which governments have
been changed, and nations enslaved, and Churches destroyed, and the Candlestick
removed, and famines and pestilences have been sent upon a whole Kingdom; and
what shall become of us? why do we vainly hope it shall not be so with us? If
it was just for these men to suffer what they did, then we are at least to
expect so much; and then let us consider into what a fearful condition sin
has put us, upon whom a sentence is read, that we shall be plagued like
Zedekiah, or Corah, or Dathan, or Spain, or any other King who, were, for ought
we know, infinitely more innocent and more excellent persons then any of us.
What will become of us? For God is as just to us as to them; and Christ dyed
for them as well as for us; and they have repented more then we have done; and
what mercy can we expect that they might not hope for, upon at least as good
ground as we? Gods ways are secret, and his mercies and justice dwell in a
great abyss; but we are to measure our expectations by revelation and
experience. But then what would become of us, if God should be as angry at our
sin as at Zedekiahs, David's? where have we in our body room enough for so many
stripes, as our sin ought justly to be punished withal? or what security or
probability have we that he will not so punish us?

For I did not represent this sad story, as a matter of possibility only, that
we may fear such fearful strokes as we see God lay upon sinners; but we ought
to look upon it as a thing that will come some way or other, and for ought we
know we cannot escape it. So much, and more is due for the sin, and though
Christ has redeemed our souls, and if we repent we shall not Me e Coelo ad
Barathrum demisit peccatum, and vos ullum in terra locum tutum existimabitis?
Sin thrust me from heaven to hell, and do you think on earth to have

Tuum libenter prorsus appeterem cibam, Phaedrus.

Nisi qui nutritus illo est, jugulatus foret;
we may learn to avoid these vain pleasures which cut the throat after they are
swallowed, and leave us in that condition that we may every day fear, lest that
evil happen unto us, which we see fall upon the great examples of Gods anger;
and our fears cannot, ought not at all to be taken off, but by an effective,
busy, pungent, hasty, and a permanent repentance; and then also but in some
proportions, for we cannot be secured from temporal

1. But this has two appendages which are very considerable; and the first is,
that there are some mischiefs which are the proper and appointed scourges of
certain sins, and a man need not ask; Cujus vulturis hoc erit cadaver? what
vultur, what death, what affliction shall destroy this sinner? The sin has a
punishment Make them, O my God, like unto Psalm. 83.
a wheel, of an unconstant state: and we and our fathers have seen it, in the
change of so many families, which have been undone by being made rich: they
took the lands from the Church, and the curse went along with it, and the
misery and the affliction lasted longer then the sin. Telling lies frequently
has for its punishment to be given over to believe a lie, and at last, that no
body shall believe it but himself; and then the mischief is full, he lust is
properly shame; and witchcraft is still punished with baseness, and beggary;
and oppression of widows has a sting, for the tears of the oppressed are to
the oppressor, like the waters of jealousy, making the belly to swell, and
the thigh to rot; the oppressor seldom dies in a tolerable condition: but is
remarked toward his end with some horrible affliction. The sting of oppression
is darted In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur. The Divine Judgment did point at
the sin, lest that be concealed by excuses, and protected by affection, and
increased by passion, and destroy the man by its abode. For some sins are so
agreeable to the spirit of a fool and an abused person, because he has framed
his affections to them, and they comply with his unworthy interest, that when
God out of an angry kindness, smites the man, and punishes the sin, the man
does fearfully defend his beloved sin, as the serpent

2. The second appendage to this consideration is this, that there are some
states of sin which expose a man to all mischief, as it can happen by taking
off from him all his guards, and defenses; by driving the good Spirit from him,
by stripping him of the guards of Angels. But this is the effect of an
habitual sin, a course of an a grieving the good Spirit of God. But the guard
of Angels is in Scripture only promised to them that live godly; The Angels of
the Lord pitch their Psalm. 33.
tents round about them that fear him, and delivers them, said David.

(...)
(...).
And the Hellenists use to call the Angels (...) watchmen; which custody is at
first designed and appointed for all, when by baptism they give up their names
to Christ, and enter into the covenant of Religion. And of this the Heathen
have been taught something by conversation with the Hebrews and Christians;
unicuique nostrum dare paedagogum Deum, said Seneca to Lucilius, non primarium,
sed ex eorum numero, quos Ovidius vocat ex plebe deos. There is a guardian God
assigned to every one of us, of the number of those which are of the second
order; such are those of whom David speaks, before the Gods will I sing praise
unto thee; and it Genius and a Juno: Quamobrem major coelitum populus etiam
quam hominum intelligi potest, quum singuli ex semetipsis totidem Deos faciant,
Junones gentosque adoptando sibi, said Pliny. Every one does adopt Gods into
his family and get a Gunius and a Juno of their own, Junonem meam iratam
habeam; it was the oath of Quartilla in Petronius; and Socrates in Plato is
said to swear by his Juno; Romans it became the woman's oath, and a note of
effeminacy; But the thing they aimed at was this, that God took a care of us
below, and sent a ministering spirit for our defense; but that this is only upon
the accounts of piety, they knew not. But we are taught it by the Spirit of God
in Scripture. For, the Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to
the good of them who shall be heirs of salvation; and concerning St. Peter, the
faithful had an opinion, that it might be his Angel; agreeing to the Doctrine
of our blessed Lord, who spoke of Angels appropriate to his little ones, to
infants, to those that belong to him. Now Behold I send an Angel before thee,
beware of him and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
trangressions. So Excd. 23. 10.
that if we provoke the Spirit of the Lord to anger by a course of evil
living, either the Angel will depart from us, or if he stays, he will strike
us. The best of these is bad enough, and he is highly miserable,

-- Qui non sit tanto hoc custode securus, whom an Angel cannot defend from
mischief, nor any thing secure Erythrean Sibyl gave of God,

(...),
(...),
(...).
It is Gods appellative to be a giver of excellent rewards to just and innocent
persons: but to assign to evil men fury, wrath, and to eternal ages; with
this only difference, that they shall both be ponam Babylonem in possessionem
Erinacei, Babylon shall be the possession of an Hedgehog: that is a sinners
dwelling; encompassed round with thorns and sharp prickles, afflictions and
uneasinesse all over. So that he that wishes his sin big and prosperous, wishes
his Be as big as a Bull, and his Hedgehog like an Elephant; the pleasure of
the honey would not cure the mighty sting; and nothing make Publius Mimus,
Tolerabilior est qui mori jubet quam qui male vivere, He is more to be endured
that puts a man to death, then he that betrays him into sin. For the end of
this is death eternal.

Sermon, XXII. THE GOOD and EVIL TONGUE.
Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers.
HE that had an ill memory did wisely comfort himself by reckoning the
advantages he had by his forgetfulness. For by this means he was hugely
secured against malice, and ambition; for his anger went off with the short
notice and observation soon spun out, and his fountain grew quickly dry, and
left running Egyptians sacrificed to Harpocrates their god of Silence, in the
midst of their rites they cried out (...), The Tongue is an Angel, good or bad,
that is as it happens; Silence was to them a god, but the Tongue is greater; it
is the band of humane intercourse, and makes men apt to unite in Societies and
Republics; and I remember what one of the Ancients said, that we are better in
the company of a known dog, then of a man whose speech is not known, ut
externus alieno non sit hominis vice; a stranger to a stranger in his language,
is not as a man to a man; for by voices and homilies, by Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, spoken by the tongues of men and
Angels; and the blessed Spirits in heaven cease not from saying night and day
their (...), their song of glory to him that sits on the throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever; and then our employment shall be glorious as our
state, when our tongues shall Allelujahs to their Maker and Redeemer; and
therefore since Nature has taught us to speak, and God requires it, and our
thankfulness obliges us, and our necessities engage us, and charity sometimes
calls for it, and innocence is to be defended, and we are to speak in the cause
of the oppressed, and open our mouths in the cause of God: and it is always a
seasonable prayer, that God would open our lips, that our mouth may do the
work of heaven, declare his praises, and show forth his glory; it concerns us
to take care that nature be changed into grace, necessity into choice, that
while we speak the greatness of God, and minister to the needs of our
neighbor, and do the works of life and religion, of society and prudence, we
may be fitted to bear a part in the songs of Angels, when they shall rejoice at
the feast of the marriage supper of the Lamb. But the tongue is a fountain
both of bitter waters and of pleasant; it sends forth blessing, and cursing; it
praises God, and railes at men; it is sometimes set on fire, and then it puts
whole Cities in combustion; it is unruly, and no more to be restrained then
grace to the hearers, and then it is as God would have it; and this is the
precept of the text, first telling us what we should avoid, and then telling us
what we should pursue; what our discourse ought not to be, and 2ly. what it
ought to be; there being no more variety in the structure of the words, I shall
1. discourse of the vices of the tongue; 2. of its duty and proper employment.

1. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth; (...), corrupt or
filthy communication; so we read it; and it seems properly to note such
communication as ministers to wantonness; such as are the Fescennines of
Ausonius, the excrement Martial's verse, and the Ephesiaca of Xenophon; indeed
this is such a rudeness as is not to be admitted into civil conversation; and
is wittily noted by the Apostle, charging that fornication should not be once
named among them as becomes Saints; not meaning that the vice should not have
its name and filthy character, but that nothing of it be named, in which it can
be tempting or offensive; nothing tending to it, or teaching of it, should be
named: we must not have (...), fornication in our talk; that is such a
baseness, that it not only grieves the Divine Spirit, but words which bring
that sin upon the stage of fancy, and offend auriculas non calentes, sober and
chaste ears. For who can without Seneca describing the Looking-glass of
Hostius, or the severe but looser words of Persius, or the reproves of St.
Hierom himself, that great Patron of virginity, and exacter of chastity? yet
more then once he reproves filthy things with unhandsome language: St.
Chrysostom makes an Apology for them that do so; (...), Homil. 4. in ep. Romans
you cannot profit the hearers unless you discover the filthiness, for the
withdrawing the curtain is shame and confutation enough for so great a
baseness;

Irritamentum Veneris languentis and acris
Divitis urticae --
and not wholly to be excused by the fair meaning, will soon be granted by all
who know what danger and infection it leaves upon the fancy, even by those
words by which the spirit is instructed. Ab hac scabie tenemus ungues, it is
not good to come near the leprosy, though to cleanse the Lepers skin.

But the word which the Apostle uses [(...)] means more then this. (...), said
Eupolis, and so it signifies musty, rotten, and outworn with age; (...), iusty
peace, so Aristophanes: and according to this acception of the the remains of
the old man, and by the Greeks, doting or talking fondly; (...); the boy talks
like an old dotard. 2. (...) signifies wicked, filthy, or reproachful, (...),
any thing that is in its own nature criminal and disgraceful, any language
that ministers to mischief. But it is worse then all this: (...), it is a
deletery, an extinction of all good, for (...) is (...), it is a destruction,
Menander quoted by St. Paul, (...), Evil words corrupt good manners. And
therefore under this word is comprised all the evil of the tongue, that wicked
instrument of the unclean Spirit, in the capacity of all the appellatives. 1.
Here is forbidden the useless, vain, and trifling conversation, the (...),
Hesychius; it is slander, hatred, and calumny. 3. But the third is (...), the
Devils worst appellative, the Destroyer, the dissolute, wanton, tempting,
destroying conversation; and its worst instance of all is flattery, that
malicious cousening devil, that strengthens our friend in sin, and ruins him
from whom we have received, and from whom we expect good. Of these in let no
vain communication proceed out of your mouth.

1. The first part of this inordination is multiloquium, talking too much:
concerning which, because there is no rule or just measure for the quantity,
and it is as lawful, and sometimes as prudent to tell a long story as a short,
and two as well as one, and sometimes ten as well as two; all such discourses
are to take their estimate by the matter, and the end, and can only be altered
by their circumstances Martial speaks of, he was a good man, and full of
sweetness and justice and nobleness, but he would read his nonsense verses to
all companies at the public games and in private feasts, in the baths, and on
the beds, in public and in private, to sleeping and waking people.

Vis quantum mali facias videre? Lib. 3. ep. 44

Virjustus, probus, innocens timeris.
Every one was afraid of him, and though he was good, yet he was not to be
endured: The evil of this is very considerable in the accounts of prudence,
and the effects and plaisance of conversation: and the Ancients described its
evil well by a proverbiall expression; for when a sudden silence arose, they
said that Mercury was entered, meaning, that he being their loquax numen, their
prating god, yet that quitted him not, but all men stood upon their guard, and
called for aid and rescue, when they were seized upon so tedious an
impertinence. Pontus they perpetually empty themselves by their mouth, making
every company or single person they fasten on, to be their Propontis; such a
one as was Anaximenes, (...), He was an Ocean of words, but a drop of
understanding. And if there were no more in this then the matter of prudence,
and old men, and young men and women to separate from their persons the
reproach of their sex and age, that modesty of speech be the Supellex ejus
garrulitas. Comoed. Muliebre ingenium p^cluvium. Accius in Andromeda. Sola
laboranti potuit succwrere Lunae.
ornament of the youthful, and a reserved discourse be the testimony of the
old man's prudence. Adolescens from (...), said one: a young man is a talker for
want of wit, and an old man for want of memory; for while he remembers the
things of his youth, and not how often he has told them in his old age, he
grows in love with the trifles of his youthful days, and thinks the company
must do so too; but he canonizes his folly, and by striving to bring
reputation to his first days, he loses the honor of his last. But this thing
is considerable In multiloquio peccatum non deerit, Sin goes along with it, and
is an ingredient in the whole composition. For it is impossible but a long and
frequent discourse must be served with many passions, and they are not always
innocent; for he that loves to talk much, must rem corradere, scrape materials
together to furnish out the scenes and long orations; and some talk themselves
into anger, and some furnish out their dialogues with the lives of others;
either they detract, or censure; that, truth or honest plainness seldom does)
or there is a byasse in it, which the more of weight and transportation it
has, the less it has of ingenuity. Non credo Auguribus qui aureis rebus
divinant, like Soothsayers, men speak fine words to serve ends, and then they
are not believed, or at last are Pride and flattery, malice and spite,
self-love and vanity, these usually wait upon much speaking; and the reward of
it is, that the persons grow contemptible and troublesome, they engage in
quarrels, and are troubled to answer exceptions, some will mistake them, and
some will not believe them, and it will be impossible that the mind should be
perpetually present to a perpetual talker, but they will forget truth and
themselves, and their own relations. And upon this account it is, that the
Doctors of the Primitive Church do literally expound those minatory words of
Verily I say unto you, of every idle word that Matt. 12. 36.
men shall speak, they shall give account at the day of Judgment. And by idle
words, they understand, such as are not useful to edification and instruction.
So St. Basil, So great is the danger of an idle In Reg. brevior.
word, that though a word be in its own kind good, yet unless it be directed
to the edification of faith, he is not free from danger that speaks it: To this
purpose are the words of St. Gregory; while Lib. 7. Moral.
the tongue is not restrained from idle words, ad temeritatem stultae
increpationis efferatur, it is made wild, or may be brought forth to rashness
and folly: And therein lies the secret of the reproof: A periculo liber non
est, and ad temeritatem efferatur, the man is not free from danger, and he may
grow rash, and foolish, and run into crimes, whilst he gives his Tongue the
reins, and lets it wander, and so it may be fit to be reproved, though in its
nature it were innocent. I deny not but sometimes they are more severe. St.
Gregory calls every c. 17. ubi sup.
word vain or idle, quod aut ratione justae necessitatis, aut intention piae
utilitatis caret: and St. Hierom calls it vain, quod sine utilitatis in cap. 12
Matt.
and loquentis dicitur and audientis, which profits neither the speaker nor the
hearer. The same is affirmed by St. Chrysostom in Ps. 118.
, and Gregory Nyssen cap. 1.
upon Ecclesiastes, and the same seems intimated in the word (...), as it is in
some copies, every word that is idle or empty of business. But for the stating
the case of Conscience, I have these things to say.

1. That the words of our blessed Savior being spoken to the 1.
Jews, were so certainly intended as they best and most commonly understood,
and by [vain] they understood false or lying, not useless or imprudent; and
yet so though our blessed Savior has not so in genere bonorum, as St. Basil's
expression is; that is, though it be in the intention charitable, or in the
matter innocent.

2. Of every idle word we shall give account, but yet so, that sometimes 2.
the (...), the judgment shall fall upon the words, not upon the persons; they
be hay and stubble, useless and impertinent, light and easy, the fire shall
consume them, and himself shall escape with that loss; he shall then have no
honor, no fair return for such discourses,

3. If all unprofitable discourses be reckoned for idle words and 3.
put upon the account, yet even the capacities of profit are so large and
numerous, that no man has cause to complain that his tongue is too much
restrained by this severity. For in all the ways in which he can do himself
good, or his neighbor, he has his liberty; he is only to secure the words
from being directly criminal, and himself from being arrested with a passion,
and then he may reckon it lawful even upon the severest account to discourse
freely, while he can instruct, or while he can please his neighbor;

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare -- while himself gets a fair opinion and a
good name, apt to serve honest and fair purposes; he may discourse himself
into a friendship, or help to preserve it; he may serve the works of art or
nature, of Idea or witty representment; and he that can find talk beyond all
this, discourse that cannot become useful in any one of these purposes, may
well be called a prating man, and expect to give account of his folly in the
days of recompense.

4. Although in this latitude a man's discourses may be free and 4.
safe from judgment, yet the man is not, unless himself design it to good
and wise purposes, not always actually, but by an habitual and general
purpose. Concerning which he may by these measures best take his accounts.

1. That he be sure to speak nothing that may minister to a vice, willingly and
by observation.

2. If any thing be of a suspicious and dubious nature, that he decline to
publish it.

3. That by a prudent moral care he watch over his words, that he do none of
this injury and unworthiness.

4. That he offer up to God in his prayers all his words, and then look to it,
that he speak nothing unworthy to be offered.

5. That he often interweave discourses of Religion, and glorifications Zeno
calls (...), to dip our tongues in understanding. In all other cases the rule
is good, (...), either keep silence, or speak Eurip.
something that is better then it; (...), so Isocrates constantly enough to
this Evangelicall precept; a seasonable silence, or a profitable discourse,
choose you whether; for

5. This account is not to be taken by little traverses and intercourses 5.
of speech, but by greater measures, and more discernible portions, such as are
commensurate to valuable portions of time; for however we are pleased to throw
away our time, and Bernard gave caution, Nemo parvi aestimet tempus quod in
verbis consumitur otiosis, Let no man think Sermon. de triplici custodia^.
it a light matter that he spend his precious time in idle words; let no man be
so weary of what flies away too fast, and cannot be recalled, as to use arts
and devices to pass the time away in vanity, which might be rarely spent in
the interests of eternity. Time is given us to repent in, to appease the divine
anger, to prepare

(...) Eurip.

(...).
Good counsel is lost upon him, and he has served all his ends when he pours
out whatsoever he took in; for he therefore loaded his vessel that he might
pour it forth into the sea.

These and many more evils, and the perpetual unavoydable necessity of sinning
by much talking, has given great advantages to silence, and made it to be
esteemed an act of Discipline and great Religion. St. Romualdus upon the Syrian
mountain severely kept a seven years silence: and Thomas Cantipratensis tells
of a religious person in a Monastery in Brabant, that spoke Palladius tells of,
Ammona who lived with 3000 Brethren in so great silence, as if he were an
Anachoret; but Theona was silent for 30 years together, and Johannes surnamed
Silentiarius was silent for 47 years. But this morosity and sullenness is so
far from being imitable and laudable, that if there were no direct Gregory
Nazianzen, who made Silence an act of Discipline, cujus facti mei si causam
quaeris (said he in his account he gives of it) idcirco a sermon prorsus
abstinui, ut sermonibus meis moderari discam; I then abstained wholly, that all
the year after I might be more temperate in my talk. This was in him an act of
caution, but how apt it was to minister to his purpose of a moderated speech
for the future, is not certain; nor the philosophy of it, and natural
efficacy easy to be apprehended. It was also practiced by way of penance, with
indignation against the follies of the Tongue, and the itch of prating, so to
chastise that petulant member, as Paul the Hermit, Scholar of St. Anthony, that
having once asked whether Christ or the old Prophets were first, he grew so
ashamed of his foolish Question, that he spoke not a word for 3 years
following: And Sulpitius, as St. Hierom reports of him, being deceived by the
Pelagians, spoke some fond things, and repenting of it, held his tongue till
his dying day, ut peccatum quod loquendo contraxerat tacendo penitus emendaret.
Libitinarian Religion;

Murmuracum secum and rabiosa silentia rodunt, so such importune silence was
called, and understood to be a degree of stupidity and madness; for so
Physicians among the signs of that disease in dogs, place their not barking;
and yet, although the excess and unreasonablenesse of this may be well
chastised there is wisdom, and there may be deep religion. So Aretaeus
describing the life of a studious man, among others, he inserts this, they are
(...), without color, pale and wise, when they are young, and by reason of
their knowledge, silent as Mutes, and dumb as the Seriphian frogs. And indeed
it is certain, great knowledge, if it be without vanity, ut quisque
contemptissimus and maxim ludibrio est, ita solutissimae linguae est, said
Seneca, Every man as he is a fool and contemptible, so his tongue is hanged
loose, being like a bell, in which there is nothing but tongue and noise.

Silence therefore is the cover of folly, or the effect of wisdom; but it is
also religious, and the greatest mystic rites of any institution are ever the
most solemn and the most silent; the words in use are almost made Synonymous;
There was silence made in heaven for a while, said St. John, who noted it upon
occasion of a great solemnity, and mysterious worshippings or revelations to be
made there. (...), one of the gods is within, said Telemachus, upon occasion of
which his Father reproved his talking.

(...)
(...).
Be thou also silent and say little, let thy soul be in thy hand, and under
command, for this is the rite of the gods above. And I remember that when
Aristophanes describes the Religion in the Temple of Esculapius, (...), The
Plunu.
Priest commanded great silence when the mysteriousnesse was nigh; and so among
the Romans,

Ite igitur pueri, linguis animisque faventes,
Sertaque delubris and farra imponite cultris.
But now although silence is become religious, and is wise and reverend, and
severe, and safe, and quiet, (...), as Hippocrates affirms of it, without
thirst, and trouble, and anguish; yet it must be (...), it must be seasonable,
and just, not commenced upon chance or humor, not sullen and ill-natured, not
proud and full of fancy, not pertinacious and dead, not mad and uncharitable,
nam sic etiam tacuisse nocet. He that is silent in a public joy has no
portion in the festivity, or no thankfulness to him that gave the cause of it.
And though of all things drunkenness, yet even in Religion there are seasons
to speak; and it pain and grief to David to be silent; But yet, although
tedious and dead silence has not a just measure of praise and wisdom; yet the
worst silence of a religious person is more tolerable and innocent, then the
usual pratings of the looser and foolish men. Pone Domine custodiam ori meo
and ostium circumstantiae labiis meis, said David, Put a guard O Lord unto my
mouth, and a door unto my lips; upon which St. Gregory said well, Non parietem,
sed ostium petit, quod viz. aperitur and clauditur; he did not ask for a wall,
but for a door; a door that might open and shut: and it were well it were so
indeed. Labia tua sicut vitta coccinea, so Christ commends his Spouse in the
Canticles; Thy lips are like a scarlet hair-lace, that is tied up with modesty
from folly and dissolution. For however that few people offend in silence and
keeping the door shut too much, yet in opening it too hastily, and speaking too
much and too foolishly, no man is without a load of guiltynesse, and some
mouths like the gates of death

Noctes atque dies patent -- are open night and day, and he who is so cannot be
innocent: It is said of Cicero, he never spoke a word which himself would fain
have Austin in his 7. Ep. to Marcellinus says, it was the saying of a fool and
a sot, not of a wise man, and yet I have read the same thing to have been
spoken by the famous Abbat Pambo in the Primitive Church; and if it could be
well said of this man who was sparing and severe in talk, it is certain it
could not be said of the other, who was a talking bragging person.

SERMON, XXIII. Part II.
THe consideration hitherto has been of the immoderation and general excess
in speaking without descending to particular cases: but because it is a
principle and parent of much evil, it is with great caution to be cured, and
the evil consequents will quickly disband. But when we draw near to give
counsel, we shall find that upon a talking person scarce any medicine will
stick.

1. Plutarch advises that such men should give themselves to writing, that
making an issue in the arm, it should drain the floods of the head; supposing
that if the humor were any way vented, Ligurinus had writ a Poem, he talked of
it to all companies he came in; But however, it can be no hurt to try, for some
have been cured of bleeding at the nose, by opening a vein in the arm.

2. Some advise, that such persons should keep company with their betters, with
grave, and wise, and great persons, before whom men do not usually bring forth
all, but the better parts of their discourse, and this is apt to give
assistance by the help of modesty; and might do well if men were not apt to
learn to talk wise and knowing, be apt to speak before their opportunity.

3. Consideration of the dangers and consequent evils has some efficacy in
nature to restrain our looser talkings, by the help of fear and prudent
apprehensions. Aelian tells of the geese flying over the mountain Taurus, (...),
that for fear of Eagles nature has taught them to carry stones in their
mouths, till they be past their danger; care of our selves, desire of
reputation, appetites of being believed, love of societies

4. Some advise that such persons should change their speech into business and
action: and it were well if they changed it into action and business is not
the cure alone, unless we add solitariness; for the experience of this last
age has made us to feel, that companies of working people have nursed up a
strange Religion; the first, second, and third part of which is talking and
folly, save only that mischief, and pride, and fighting came in the retinue.
But he that works and works alone, he has employment, and no opportunity. But
this is but a cure of the symptom and temporary effect; but the disease may
remain yet. Therefore,

5. Some advise that the business and employment of the Tongue be changed into
Religion, and if there be a pruritus or the sacrifice of fools; and the
talking much of the things of Scripture has ministered often to vanity, and
divisions. But therefore whoever will use this remedy

6. But some men will never be cured without a Canker or a Squinsie; and such
persons are taught by all men what to do, for if they would avoid all company,
as willingly as company avoyds them, they might quickly have a silence great as
midnight, Spartan brevity. But Gods grace is sufficient to all that will make
use of it; and there is no way for the cure of this evil, but the direct
obeying of a counsel, and submitting to the precept, and fearing the divine
threatening; always remembering, that of every word a man speaks, he shall give
account at the day of Judgment: I pray God show us all a mercy in that day,
and forgive us the sins of the Tongue. Amen.

Cito lutum colligit amnis exundans, said St. Ambrose, Let your language be
restrained within its proper channels and measures, for if the river swells over
the banks, it leaves nothing but dirt Stultiloquium, or speaking like a fool:
2. Scurrilitas, or immoderate and absurd jesting: 3. And revealing secrets.

1. Concerning Stultiloquy, it is to be observed that the Masters of spiritual
life mean nor, the talk and useless babble of weak civility and humanity, as
seemingly to them, as the strictest and most observed words of the wiser; if it
be their best, their folly may be pityed, but not reproved, and to them there
is no caution to be added, but that it were well if they would put the bridle
into the hands of another, who may give them check when themselves cannot; and
no wisdom can be required or useful to them, but to suspect themselves and
choose to be conducted by another. For so the little birds and laborious bees,
who having no art and power of contrivance, no supreme power, their Lord, and
ours, do things with greater niceness and exactness of art, and regularity
of time, and certainty of effect, then the wise Counselor, who standing at
the back of the Princes chair, guesses imperfectly, and counsels timorously,
and thinks by interest, and determines extrinsecall events by inward and
unconcerning principles; because these have understanding, but it is less then
the infinity of accidents and contingences without; but the other having none,
are wholly guided by him

But that which is here meant by Stultiloquy, or foolish speaking, is the
Lubricum verbi, as St. Ambrose calls it, the slipping with the tongue, which
prating people often suffer, whose discourses betray the vanity of their
spirit, and discover the hidden man of the heart. For no prudence is a
sufficient guard, or can always stand in excubiis still watching, when a man
is in perpetual floods of talk; for prudence attends after the manner of an
Angels ministry; it is dispatched on messages from God, and drives away
enemies, and places guards, and calls upon the man to awake, and bids him send
out spies and observers, and particulars; but he that is given to talk cannot
be secured

2. The second is Scurrility, or foolish jesting. This the Apostle so joins
with the former (...), [foolish speaking and jestings which are not convenient]
that some think this to be explicative Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
of the other, and that St. Paul using the word (...) (which all men before his
time used in a good sense) means not that which indeed is witty and innocent,
pleasant and apt for institution, but that which fools and Parasites call
(...), but indeed is (...), what they called facetiousnesse and pleasant wit,
is indeed to all wise persons a mere Stultiloquy, or talking like a fool; and
that kind of jesting is forbidden. And indeed I am induced fully to this
understanding of St. Paul's words by the conjunctive particle [(...)] which he
uses, (...), and filthiness, and [foolish talking, or jesting] just as in the
succeeding verse he joins (...), uncleanness (so we read it) or
covetousness; one explicates the other, for by covetousness is meant any
defraudation; (...), fraudator, so St. Cyprian renders it: and (...) St. Hierom
derives from (...), to take more then a man should; and therefore when St. Paul
said, Let no man circumvent his brother in any matter, he expounds adultery;
and in this very place he renders (...), stuprum, lust; and indeed it is usual
in Scripture, that Covetousness being so universal, so original a crime,
such a prolifick sin, be called by all the names of those sins by which it is
either punished, or to which it tempts, or whereby it is nourished; and as here
it is called uncleanness or corruption; so in another place it is called
idolatry. But to return; This jesting which St. Paul reproves, is a direct
(...), or the jesting of Mimics and Players, that of the fool in the play,
which in those times, and long before, and long after, were of that
licentiousness that they would Socrates or Aristides: and because the rabble
were the laughers, they knew how to make them roar aloud with a slovenly and
wanton word, when they understood not the salt and ingenuity of a witty and
useful answer, or reply; as is to be seen in the intertextures of Aristophanes
Comedies. But in pursuance of this of St. Paul, the Fathers of the Church have
been very severe in their censures of this liberty. St. Ambrose forbids all.
Non solum Lib. de Offic.
profusos, sed etiam omnes jocos declinandos arbitror; Not only the looser
jestings, but even all are to be avoided: Nay, licet interdum joca honesta and
suavia sint, tamen ab Ecclesia horrent regula, the Church allows them not,
though they be otherwise honest and pleasant; for how can we use those things
we find not in holy Scriptures? St. Basil gives reason for this severity;
jocus facit animam remissam and erga praecepta Dei negligentem; and indeed that
cannot be denied; those persons whose souls are dispersed and ungathered by
reason of a wanton humor of intemperate jesting, are apt to be trifling in
their Religion. St. Hierom is of the same opinion, and adds a commandment of a
full In ep. ad Ephesians.
authority, if at least the record was right; for he quotes a saying blessed
Savior out of the Gospel of the Nazarens, Nunquam laeti sitis nisi cum fratrem
vestrum in charitate videritis, Never be merry but when you see your brother in
charity: and when you are merry, St. James has appointed a proper expression
of it; and a fair entertainment to the passion; If any man be merry, let him
sing Psalms. But St. Bernard who is also strict in this particular, yet he
adds the temper. Though jesting be not fit for a Christian, interdum tamen si
incidant, ferendae fortassis, referendae nunquam: magis interveniendum caute
and prudenter nugacitati: If they seldom happen, they are to be borne, but
never to be returned and made a business of; but we must rather interpose
warily and prudently to hinder the growth and progress of the trifle.

But concerning this case of conscience, we are to remember, these holy persons
found jesting to be a trade; such were the Vide St. Chrysostom homil. 6. in
Matthew.
ridicularii among the Romans, and the (...) among the Greeks; and this trade
besides its own unworthiness, was mingled with Paul upon the same account. And
in the same state of reproof to this day, are all that do as they did: such
as are professed jesters, people that play the fool for money, Penitent and a
Jester is like a Grecian piece of money, on which were stamped a Helena on one
side and a Hecuba on the other, a Rose and a deadly Aconite, a Paris and an
Aesop, Hierom, Verum and haec a sanctis viris penitus Vbi supra.
propellenda, quibus magis convenit flere atque lugere; Weeping and
penitential sorrow, and the sweet troubles of pity and compassion become a
holy person, much better then a scurrilous tongue. But the whole state of this
Question is briefly this.

1. If jesting be unseasonable, it is also intolerable; (...).

2. If it be immoderate it is criminal, and a little thing here

3. If it be in an ordinary person, it is dangerous; but if in an eminent, a
consecrated, a wise, and extraordinary person, it is scandalous. Inter
saeculares nugae sunt, in ore Sacerdotis blasphemiae; so St. Bernard.

4. If the matter be not of an indifferent nature, it becomes sinful by giving
countenance to a vice, or making virtue to become ridiculous.

5. If it be not watched that it complies with all that hear, it

6. If it be not intended to fair and lawful purposes, it is sour in the
using.

7. If it be frequent, it combines and clusters into a formal sin.

8. If it mingles with any sin, it puts on the nature of that new
unworthiness, beside the proper uglynesse of the thing it

The Ecclesiastical History reports that many jests passed between St. Anthony
the Father of the Hermits, and his Scholar St. Paul; and St. Hilarion is
reported to have been very pleasant, and of a facete, sweet, and more lively
conversation; and indeed plaisance, and joy, and a lively spirit, and a
pleasant conversation, and the innocent caresses of a charitable humanity, is
not forbidden; plenum tamen suavitatis and gratiae sermonem non esse indecorum,
St. Ambrose affirmed; and here in my text our conversation that it may minister
grace, that is, favor, complacence, cheerfulness; and be acceptable and
pleasant to the hearer: and so must be our conversation; it must be as far from
sullenness, as it ought to be from lightness; and a cheerful spirit is the
best convoy for Religion; and though sadness does in some cases become a
Christian, as being an Index of a pious mind, of compassion, and a wise proper
resentment of things, yet it serves but one end, being useful in the only
instance of repentance; and has done its greatest works, not when it weeps and
sighs, but when it hates and grows cheerfulness and a festival spirit fills
the soul full of harmony, it composes music for Churches and hearts, it makes
and publishes glorifications of God, it produces thankfulness and serves the
ends of charity, and when the oil of gladness runs over, it makes bright and
tall emissions of light and holy fires, reaching up to a cloud, and making joy
round about: And therefore since it is so innocent, and may be so pious and
full of holy advantage, whatsoever can innocently minister to this holy joy
does set forward the work of Religion and Charity. And indeed charity it self,
which is the vertical top of all is nothing else but an union of joys,
concentred in the heart, and reflected from all the angles of our life and
intercourse. It is a rejoicing in God, a gladness in our neighbors good, a
pleasure in doing good, a rejoicing with him; and without love we cannot have
any joy at all. It is this that makes children to be a pleasure, and friendship
to be so noble and divine a thing; and upon this account it is certain that
all that which can innocently make a man cheerful, does also make him
charitable; for grief, and age, and sickness, and weariness, these are
peevish and mirth and cheerfulness is content, and civil, and compliant, and
communicative, and loves to do good, and swells up to felicity only upon the
wings of charity. In this account here is pleasure enough for a Christian in
present, and if a facete discourse and an amicable friendly mirth can refresh
the spirit, and take it off from the vile temptations of peevish, despairing,
uncomplying Campanian wines; and our faces and our heads may as well be
anointed and look pleasant with wit and friendly intercourse, as with the fat
of the Balsam tree; and such a conversation no wise man ever did, or ought to
reprove. But when the jest has teeth and nails, biting or scratching our
Brother *, when it is loose and wanton *, when it is unseasonable *, and much,
or many *, when it serves ill purposes *, or spends better time *, then it is
the drunkenness of the soul, and makes

But above all the abuses which ever dishonored the tongues of men, nothing
more deserves the whip of an exterminating Angel, or the stings of scorpions,
then profane jesting: which is a bringing of the Spirit of God to partake of
the follies of a man; as if it were not enough for a man to be a fool, but the
wisdom of God must be brought into those horrible scenes: He that makes a jest
of the words of Scripture, or of holy things, plays with thunder, and kisses
the mouth of a Canon, just as it Search the Scriptures, for therein you hope to
have life eternal; and, All Scripture is written by inspiration of God, and is
fit for instruction, for reproof, for exhortation, for doctrine, not for
jesting; but he that makes that use of it, had better part with his eyes in
jest, and give his heart to make a tennisball; and that I may speak the worst
thing in the world of it, it is as like the material part of the sin against
the holy Ghost, as jeering of a man is to abusing him; and no man can use it
but he that wants wit and manners as well as he wants Religion.

3. The third instance of the vain trifling conversation, and immoderate
talking is, revealing secrets; which is a dismantling and renting off the robe
from the privacies of humane intercourse; goes thither as to sanctuary, and to
violate the rites of that is sacrilege, and profanation of friendship, which
is the sister of Religion, the mother of secular blessing; a thing so sacred,
that it changes a Kingdom into a Church, and makes Interest to be Piety, and
Justice to become Religion. But this mischief grows according to the subject
matter and its effect; and the tongue of a babbler may crush a man's bones, or
break his fortune upon her own wheel; and whatever the effect be, yet of it
self it is the betraying of a trust, and by reproach, oftentimes passes on to
intolerable calamities, like a criminal to his scaffold through the execrable
gates of Cities; And though it is infinitely worse when the secret is laid open
out of spite or treachery, yet it is more foolish when it is discovered for no
other end but to serve the itch of talking, or to seem to know, or to be
accounted worthy of a trust; for so some men open their cabinets to show only
that a treasure is laid up, and that themselves were valued by their friend,
when they were thought capable of a secret; but they shall be so no more; for
he that by that means goes in pursuit of reputation, loses the substance by
snatching at the shadow, and by desiring to be thought worthy of a secret,
proves himself unworthy of friendship or society. D' Avila tells of a French
Marquess, young and fond, to whom Guise had conveyed notice of the intended
massacre, which when he had whispered into the Kings ear, where there was no
danger of publication, but only would seem a person worthy of such a trust, he
was instantly murdered, lest a vanity like that might unlock so horrid a
mystery.

I have nothing more to add concerning this, but that if this vanity happens
in the matters of Religion, it puts on some new circumstances of deformity: And
if he that ministers to the souls of men, and is appointed to restore him that
is overtaken in a fault, shall publish the secrets of a conscience, he
prevaricates the bands of Nature Valerius Soranus was put to death by the old
and braver Romans, ob meritum profanae vocis, quod contra interdictum Romae
nomen eloqui fuit ausus; because by prating he profaned the secret of their
Religion, and told abroad that name of the City which the Tuscan rites had
commanded to be concealed, lest the enemies of the people should call from them
their tutclar gods, which they could not do but by telling the proper
relation. And in Christianity all Nations have consented to disgrace that
Priest, who loves the pleasure of a fools tongue before the charity of souls,
and the arts of the

These I reckon as the proper evils of the vain and trifling tongue; for though
the effect passes into further mischief, yet the original is weakness and
folly, and all that unworthiness which is not yet arrived at malice. But
hither also upon the same account some other irregularities of speech are
reducible, which although they are of a mixed nature, yet are properly acted by
a vain and a loose tongue; and therefore here may be considered not improperly.

1. The first is common Swearing, against which St. Chrysostom 1.
spends twenty homilies: and by the number and weight of arguments has left
this testimony, that it is a foolish vice, but hard to be cured; infinitely
unreasonable, but strangely prevailing; almost as much without remedy as it is
without pleasure; for it enters first by folly, and grows by custom, and dwells
with carelessness, and is nursed by irreligion, and want of the fear of God; it
profanes the most holy things, and mingles dirt with the beams of the Sun,
follies and trifling talk interweav'd and knit together with the sacred name
of God; it places the most excellent of things in God is so sacred, so mighty,
that it rends mountains, it opens the bowels of the deepest rocks, it casts out
Devils and makes Hell to tremble, and fills all the regions of Heaven with joy;
the name of God is our strength and confidence, the object of our worshippings,
and the Eden with the swords of Cherubims, and none durst speak it but he whose
lips were hallowed, and that at holy and solemn times, in a most holy and
solemn place; I mean the High Priest of the Jews at the solemnities when he
entered into the sanctuary, then he taught all the world the majesty and
veneration of his Name; and therefore it was, that God made restraints upon our
conceptions and expressions of him: and as he was infinitely curious, that from
all the appearances he made to them, they should not putting his name amongst
them, and representing no shape; so even when he had put his name amongst them,
he took it off from the tongue and placed it before the eye; for Jehovah was so
written on the Priests Mitre, that all holy Name, the Tetragrammaton or Jehovah
made articulate; to signify God manifested in the flesh; and so he wore the
character of God, and became the bright image of his person.

Now all these great things concerning the Name of God are infinite reproves
of common and vain swearing by it, Gods name is left us here to pray by, to
hope in, to be the instrument and conveyance of our worshippings, to be the
witness of truth and the Judge of secrets, the end of strife and the avenger
of perjury, the discerner of right and the severe exacter of all wrongs; and
shall all this be unhallowed by impudent talking of God without sense, or
fear, or notices, or reverence, or observation?

One thing more I have to add against this vice of a foolish James, But above
all things swear not at all, (...), that ye may not fall Chap. 5. v. 12.
into condemnation; so we read it, following the Arabian, Syrian, and Latin
books, and some Greek Copies; and it signifies, that all such swearing and
putting fierce appendages to every word, like great iron bars to a straw
basket, or the curtains of a tent, is a direct condemnation of our selves: For
while we by much talking regard truth too little, and yet bind up our trifles
with Of every idle word Matthew. 12.
you shall give account; for by thy words thou shall be condemned, and by thy
words thou shall be justified. But there is another reading of these words,
which has great emphasis and power, in this article, Swear not at all, (...),
that you may not fall into hypocrisy, that is, into the disreputation of a
lying, deceiving,

All these things put together may take off our wonder at James expression, of
(...), above all things swear not,] it is a thing so highly to be regarded,
and yet is so little considered, that it is hard to say, whether there be in
the world any instance in which men are so careless of their danger and
damnation, as in this.

The next appendage of vain and trifling speech is contention, wrangling and
perpetual talk proceeding from the spirit of contradiction: Profert enim
mores plerumque oration, and animi secreta detegit: Nec sine causa Graeci
prodiderunt, ut vivat quemque etiam dicere, said Quintilian: For the most part,
a man's words Greeks said, As a man lives so he speaks; for so indeed Menander,
(...), and Aristides, (...): So that it is a sign of a peevish, an angry and
quarrelling disposition, to be disputative and busy in Questions, and
impertinent oppositions.

You shall meet with some men (such were the Skeptics, and such were the
Academics of old) who will not endure any man shall be of their opinion, and
will not suffer men to speak truth, or to consent to their own propositions,
but will put every man to fight for his own possessions, disturbing the rest
of truth, and all clamosum altercatorem, Quintilian calls such a one. This is
(...), an overflowing of the heart and of the gall; and it makes men
troublesome, and intricates all wise discourses, and throws a cloud upon the
face of truth, and while men contend for truth, error dressed in the same habit
flips into her chair, and all the litigants court her for the divine sister of
wisdom. Nimirum altercando veritas amittitur: There is noise but no harmony,
fighting but no victory, talking but no learning, all are teachers and all are
wilful, every man is angry, and without reason and without charity.

(...), Their mouth is a spear, their language is a two-edged sword, their
throat is a shield, (as Nonnus his expression is) and the clamors and noyses of
this folly is that which St. Paul reproves in this chapt. Let all bitterness
and clamor be put away. People that contend earnestly, talk loud; Clamor equus
est irae, cum prostraveris equitem dejeceris, says St. Chrysostom, Anger rides
upon noise as upon a horse, still the noise and the rider is in the dirt; and
indeed so to fine strength, and the cleanest spiritual force that can be
exercised in this instance; and though it be hard in the midst of a violent
motion instantly to stop, yet by strength and good conduct it may be done. But
he whose tongue rides upon passion, and is spurred by violence and contention,
is like a horse or mule without a bridle, and without understanding, (...), No
person that is clamorous can be wise.

These are the vanities and evil fruits of the easy talker; the instances of
a trifling impertinent conversation; and yet it is observable, that although
the instances in the beginning be only vain, yet in the issue and effects they
are troublesome and full of mischief: and that we may perceive, that even all
effusion and multitude of language and vainer talk cannot be innocent, we may
observe that there are many good things which are wholly spoiled if they do
but touch the tongue; they are spoiled with speaking: such as is the sweetest
of all Christian graces, humility, and the noblest actions humanity, the doing
favors and acts of kindness. If you speak of them, you pay your self, and
lose your kindness; humility is by talking changed into pride and hypocrisy,
and patience passes into peevishness, and secret trust into perfidiousnesse,
and modesty into dissolution, and judgment into censure; but by silence and a
restrained tongue all the first mischiefs are avoided, and all these graces
preserved.

SERMON, XXIV. Part III. Of Slander and Flattery.
HE that is twice asked a Question, and then answers, is to be excused if he
answers weakly. But he that speaks before he be asked, had need take care he
speak wisely; for if he does not, he has no excuse; and if he does, yet it
loses half its beauty; and therefore the old man gave good counsel in the
Comedy to the Boy, (...). The profits of a restrained modest tongue cannot
easily be numbered any more then the evils of an unbridled and dissolute. But
they were but The spirit of detraction; and 2. The spirit of flattery. The
first is (...), from whence the Devil has his name, He is an Accuser of the
brethren. But the second is worse; it is (...) or (...), damnable and deadly;
it is the nurse of vice, and the poison of the soul. These are (...), sour
and filthy communication; the first is rude, but the latter is most
mischievous, and both of them to be avoided like death, or the despairing
murmurs of the damned.

1. Let no calumny, no slandering, detracting communication proceed out of your
mouth; the first sort of this is that which the Apostle calls whispering, which
signifies to abuse our neighbor secretly, by telling a private story of him.

-- linguaque refert audita susurro, for here the man plays a sure game as he
supposes, a mischief without a witness,

-- (...), as Anacreon calls them; the light, swift arrows of a calumniating
tongue; they pierce into the heart and bowels of the man speedily. These are
those which the holy Scripture notes by the disgraceful Levit. 19. 6.
Talebearers: Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among the people;
for there are six things which God hates, (says Solomon) yea the seventh is an
abomination unto him, it is (...), as bad and as much hated by God as an idol,
and that is, a whisperer or talebearer that sows contention amongst
brethren. Prove. 6. 17. and 26. 20.
This kind of communication was called (...) among the Greeks, and was as much
hated as the Publicans among the Jews, (...), It is a vile thing, O ye
Athenians, it is a vile thing for a man to be a Sycophant, or a Talebearer,
and the dearest friendships in the world cannot

Te singente nefas Pyladen odisset Oresles,
Thesea Pirithoi destituisset amor:
Tu Siculos fratres, and majus nomen Atridas,
Et Ledae poteras dissociare genus.
But this crime is a conjugation of evils, and is productive of infinite
mischiefs; it undermines peace, and saps the foundation of friendship; it
destroys families, and rends in pieces the very heart

Et si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses, and no man's interest nor
reputation, no man's peace or safety can abide, where this nurse of jealousy,
and parent of contention like the earwig creeps in at the ear, and makes a
diseased noise, and scandalous murmur.

2. But such tongues as these, where they dare, and where they can safely, love
to speak louder, and then it is detraction; when men under the color of
friendship will certainly wound the reputation of a man, while by speaking some
things of him fairly, he shall without suspicion be believed when he speaks
evil of him; such was he that Horace speaks of, Me Capitolinus convictore usus
amicoque etc. Capitolinus is my friend, and we have long lived together, and
obliged each other by mutual endearments, and I am glad he is acquitted by the
criminal Judges,

Sed tamen admiror, quo pacto judicium illud
Fugerit --
yet I confess I wonder how he should escape; but I Will say no more, because he
is my friend. (...), says Polybius; This is a new way Joab slew Abner, he took
him by the beard and kissed him, and smote him under the fifth rib that he died;
so does the detracting tongue, like the smooth tongued lightning, it will break
your bones when it kisses the flesh; so Syphax did secretly wound Massinissa,
and made Scipio watchful and implacable against Sophonisba, only by
commending her beauty and her wit, her constancy and unalterable love to her
country, and by telling how

3. But the next is more violent, and that is railing or reviling; which
Aristotle in his Rhetoricks says is very often the vice of boys and of rich
men, who out of folly or pride, want of manners, or want of the measures of a
man, wisdom and the just Tacitus noted it of the Claudian family in Rome, an
old and inbred pride and scornfulnesse made them apt to abuse all that fell
under their power and displeasure; quorum superbiam frustra per obsequium and
modestiam essugeres; No observance, no prudence, no modesty can escape the
reproaches of such insolent and high talkers. A. Gellius tells of a boy that
would give every one that he met a box on the ear; and some men will give foul
words, having a tongue rough as a Cat, and biting like an Adder, and all their
reproves are direct Nero did so to Thraseas, and the old Heathens to the
primitive Martyrs, pereuntibus addita Iudibria, said Tacitus of them, they
crucified them again by putting them to suffer the shame of their fouler
language, they railed at Psalmist speaks. Our tongues are our own, we are they
that ought to speak, who is Lord over us? that is, our tongues cannot be
restrained; and St. James said James 3.
something of this, The tongue is an unruly member which no man can tame; that
is, no private person, but a public may; for he that can rule the tongue, is
fit also to govern the whole body, that is, the Church or Congregation;
Magistrates and the Governors

(...)
(...),
no evil is worse or of more open violence to the rest and reputation of men,
then a reproachful tongue. And it were well if we considered this evil, to
avoid it in those instances, by which our conversation is daily stained. Are we
not often too imperious against our servants? Do we not entertain and seed our
own anger with vile and blessed Savior restraining the hostility and murder
of the tongue, threatens hell fire to them that call their brother fool;
meaning, that all language which does really and by intention disgrace him in
the greater instances, is as directly against the charity of the Gospel, as
killing a man was against the severity and justice of the law. And although the
word it self may be used to reprove the indiscretions, and careless foolish;
and S. James used (...), Matt. 23. 17, 19.
vain man, signifying the same with the forbidden raca, (...), vain, Luke 24.
25.
useless, or empty; and St. Paul calls the Galatians, mad, and foolish, and
bewitched; and Christ called Herod, Fox; and St. John called the Pharisees, the
generation of vipers; and all this matter is wholly determined by the manner,
and with what mind it is done: If it be contumely; But when men upon all
occasions revile an offending person, lessening his value, sowring his spirit,
and his life, despising his infirmities, tragically expressing his lightest
misdemeanour, (...), Apollonius the Philosopher said, will not suffer the
offending person to know when his fault is great, and when it is little. For
they who always put on a supreme anger, or express the less anger with the
highest reproaches, can do no more to him that steals, then to him that breaks
a Crystal: Non plus aequo, non diutius aequo, was a good rule for reprehension
of offending servants; But no more anger, no more severe language then the
thing deserves; if you chide too long, your reproof is changed into reproach;
if too bitterly, it becomes railing; if too loud, it is immodest; if too
public, like a dog.

(...)
(...),
so the man told his wife in the Greek Comedy; to follow me in the streets with
thy clamorous tongue is to do as dogs do, not as persons civil or religious.

4. The fourth instance of the calumniating filthy communication, slander, or
the inventing evil things, falsely imputing crimes to our neighbor: Falsum
crimen quasi venenatum telum, (said Cicero) A false tongue or a foul lie
against a man's reputation, is like a poisoned arrow, it makes the wound deadly,
and every scratch to be incurable. Promptissima vindicta contumelia, said one,
To reproach and rail is a revenge that every girl can take. But falsely to
accuse is spiteful as Hell, and deadly as the blood of Dragons.

Stoicus occidit Baream, delator amicum. This is the direct murder of the
Tongue, for life and death are in the hand of the tongue, said the Hebrew
proverb, and it was esteemed so vile a thing, that when Jesabel commanded the
Elders of Israel to suborn false witnesses against Naboth, she gave them
instructions to take two men, the sons of Belial; none else were fit for the
employment.

Quid non audebis perfida lingua loqui? This was it that broke Ephraim in
judgment, and executed the fierce anger of the Lord upon him; God gave him
over to be oppressed by a false witness, quoniam coepit abire post sordes,
therefore he suffered calumny, and was overthrown in judgment. This was it
that humbled Joseph in fetters, and the iron entered into his soul, but it
crushed him not so much as the false tongue of his revengefull Mistress,
until his cause was known, and the Word of the Lord tried him. This was it
that flew Abimelech, and endangered David; it was a sword in manu linguae Doeg,
in the hand of Doegs tongue. By this Siba cut off the legs of Mephibosheth, and
made his reputation lame for ever; it thrust Jeremy into the dungeon, and
carried Susanna to her stake, and our Lord to his Cross; and therefore against
the dangers of a slandering tongue, all laws have so cautelously armed
themselves, that besides the severest prohibitions of God often Levit. 6.
recorded in both Testaments, God has chosen it to be one of his appellatives
Zech. 7.
to be the Defender of them, a party for those, whose innocence Luke 3.
and defencelesse state makes them most apt to be undone by pupils, and widows,
the poor, and the oppressed. And in pursuance of this charity the Imperial
laws have invented a juramentum de calumnia on oath to be exhibited to the
Actor or Plaintiff, that he believes himself to have a just cause, and that he
does not implead his adversary calumniandi animo, with false instances, and
indefencible allegations; and the Defendant is to swear that he thinks himself
to use only just defenses, and perfect instances of resisting; and both of
them obliged themselves, that they would exact no proof but what was necessary
to the truth of the Cause. And all this defense was nothing but necessary
guards. a spear, and a sword, and an arrow is a man that speaks false
witness against his neighbor. And therefore the laws of God added yet another
bar against this evil, and the false Accuser was to suffer the punishment of
the objected crime: and as if this were not sufficient, God has in several
ages wrought miracles, and raised the dead to life, that by such strange
appearances they might relieve the oppressed Innocent, and load the false
accusing Tongue with shame and horrible confusion. So it happened in the case
of Susanna, the spirit of a manwas put into the heart of a child to acquit the
virtuous Gregory Bishop of Agrigentum, falsely accused by Sabinus and
Crescentius; Gods power cast the Devil out of Eudocia, the Devil or spirit of
Slander, and compelled her to speak the truth. St. Austin in his book De cura
pro c. 11.
mortuis, tells of a dead Father that appeared to his oppressed Son, and in a
great matter of Law delivered him from the teeth of false accusation. So was
the Church of Monts rescued by the appearance of Aia the deceased wife of
Hidulphus their Earl, as appears in the Hanovian story; and the Polonian
Chronicles tell the like of Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia, almost oppressed by
the anger and calumny of Boleslaus their King; God relieved him by the
testimony of St. Peter their Bishop, or a Phantasme like him. But whether these
records may be credited or no, I contend not; yet it is very material which
Eusebius relates of the three false witnesses accusing Narcissus Bishop l. 6.
c. 7.
of Jerusalem, of an infamous crime, which they did, affirming it under
several curses: the first wishing that if he said false, God would destroy him
with fire; the second, that he might die of the Kingsevil; third, that he might
be blind: and so it came to pass; the first being surprised with fire in his
own roof, amazed and intricated, confounded and despairing, paid the price of
his slander with the pains of most fearful flames: and the second perished by
pieces, and Surgeons, and torment: which when the third saw, he repented of
his fault, cried mightily for pardon, but wept so bitterly, and found at the
same time the reward of his calumny, and the acceptance of his repentance:
(...), said Cleanthes, nothing is more operative of spiteful and malicious
purposes, then the calumniating Tongue. In the Temple at Smyrna Greeks call
these (...): and so is every false tongue; it lies in the face of heaven, and
abuses the ears of justice, it oppresses the Innocent, and is secretly revenged
of virtue, it defeats all the charity of laws, and arms the supreme power, and
makes it strike the Innocent; it makes frequent appeals to be made to heaven,
and causes an oath, in stead of being the end of strife, to be the beginning of
mischief; it calls the name and testimony of God to seal an injury; it feeds
and nourishes cruel anger, but mocks justice, and makes mercy weep

5. The last instance of this evil I shall now represent is Cursing;
concerning which I have this only to say; that although the causeless curse
shall return upon the tongue that spoke it, yet because very often there is a
fault on both sides, when there is reviling or cursing on either, the danger of
a cursing tongue is highly to be declined, as the biting of a mad dog, or the
tongue of a smitten serpent. For as envy is in the evil eye, so is cursing in
the reproachful tongue; it is Thessalic ceremonies, by charms, and nonsense
words, by figures and insignificant characterismes, by images and by rags, by
circles and imperfect noyses, has more advantage and real title to the
opportunities of mischief, by the cursing tongue; and though God is infinitely
more ready to do acts of kindness then of punishment, yet God is not so
careless a regarder of the violent and passionate wishes of men, but he gives
some over to punishment, By the tongue we bless God and curse men (says St.
James) (...), reproaching is cursing; and both of them opposed to (...), to
blessing; and there are many times and seasons in which both of

3. I am now to instance in the third sort of filthy communication, that in
which the Devil does the most mischief, by which he undoes souls; by which he
is worse then (...), an Accuser: For though he accuses maliciously, and
instances spitefully, and heaps objections diligently, and aggravates bitterly,
and with all his powers endeavors to represent the separate souls to God as
polluted and unfit to come into his presence, yet this malice is ineffective,
because the scenes are acted before the wise Judge of Men and Angels, our
Father and our Lord, who knows whereof we be made, and remembers that we are
but dust; before our Savior and our elder Brother, who has felt our
infirmities, and knows kow to pity, to excuse, and to answer for us: But though
this accusation of us cannot hurt them who will not hurt themselves, yet this
malice is prevailing when the spirit of flattery is let forth upon us. This is
the (...), the Destroyer, and is the most contrary thing to charity in the
whole world: and St. Paul noted it 1 Cor. 13. 5.
in his character of Charity, (...), Charity vaunteth not it self, so we
translate it, but certainly not exactly, for it signifies easiness, complying
foolishly, and flattering, Charity flattereth not, Suidas out of St. Basil, it
signifies any thing that serves rather for ornament then for use, for pleasure
then for profit.

Et eo plectuntur poetae quam suo vitio saepius,
Ductabilitate nimia vestra aut perperitudine,
says the Comedy; the Poets suffer more by your easiness and flattery, then
by their own fault. And this is it which St. Paul says is charity. For it to
call a man fool and vicious, be so high an injury, we may thence esteem what a
great calamity it is to be so; and therefore he that makes him so, or takes a
course he shall not become other, is the vilest enemy to his person, and his
felicity; and this is the mischief that is done by flattery; it is a design
against the wisdom, against the repentance, against the growth and promotion
of a man's soul. He that persuades an ugly, deformed man, that he is handsome, a
short man that he is tall, a bald man that he has a good head of hair, makes
him to become ridiculous and a fool, but does no other mischief. But he that
persuades his in all the dimensions of the sin, till it grows intolerable, and
perhaps l. and rather then lose this contemptible sum of money, I will throw
him that shall give it me (as far as I can) into hell, there to roar beyond all
the measures of time or patience. Can any hatred be more, or love be less, can
any expression of spite be greater, then that it be said, you will not part
with 20 l. to save your Friends, or your Patrons, or your Brothers soul? and so
it is with him that invites him to, or confirms him in his folly, in hopes of
getting something from him; Courtiers of Alexander counterfeited his wry neck,
and the Sicilian Tyrant pretended themselves dim sighted, and on purpose rushed
one against another, and overthrew the meat as it was served to his table,
only because the Prince was shortsighted, they gave them sufficient instances
in what state of affairs they stood with them that waited; it was certain they
would commend every foolish answer, and pretend subtilty in every absurd
question, and make a petition that their base actions might pass into a law,
and be made to be the honor and sanctity of all the people: and what
proportions or ways can such great personages have toward felicity, when
their vice shall be allowed and praised, every Carneades said bitterly, but it
had in it too many degrees of truth; that Princes and great personages never
learn to do any thing perfectly well, but to ride the great horse, quia scil.
ferociens bestia adulari non didicit, because the proud beast knows not how to
flatter, but will as soon throw him off from his back as he will shake off the
son of a Potter. But a Flatterer is like a neighing Horse, that neigheth under
every rider, and is pleased with every thing, and commends all that he sees,
and tempts to mischief, and cares not, so his perish pleasantly. And indeed
that is a calamity that undoes many a soul; we so love our peace, and sit so
easily upon our own good opinions, and are so apt to flatter our selves, and
lean upon our own false supports, that we cannot endure to be disturbed or
awakened from our pleasing lethargy. For we care not to be safe, but to be
secure, not to escape hell, but to live pleasantly; we are not solicitous of
the event, but of the way thither, and it is sufficient, perit procari, si
latet, said Plancus, If you be not perceived, you lose your reward; if you be
too open, you lose

1. Some flatter by giving great names, and propounding great examples; and
thus the Egyptian villains hung a Tumblers rope upon their Prince, and a
Pipers whistle; because they called their Ptolemy by the name of Apollo their
God of Music. This put buskins upon Nero, and made him fidle in all the great
Towns of Greece. When their Lords were Drunkards, they called them Bacchus;
when they were Wrestlers, they saluted them by the name of Hercules; and some
were so vain as to think themselves commended, when their Flatterers told
aloud, that they had drunk more then Alexander the Conqueror. And indeed
nothing more abuses easy fools that only seek for an excuse for their
wickedness, a Patron for their vice, a warrant for their sleepy peace, then to
tell stories of great examples remarked for the instances of their temptation.
When old Cato commended meretricious mixtures, and to prevent adulteries
permitted fornication, the youth of the succeeding ages had warrant enough to
go ad olentes fornices, into their chambers of filthy pleasure;

Quidam notus homo cum exiret fornice; macte
Virtute esto (inquit) sententia dia Catonis:
And it would pass the goblets in a freer circle, if a flattering man shall
but say, Narratur and prisci Catonis saepe mero caluisse virtus, that old Cato
would drink hard at sunset. When Varro had noted, that wise and severe Salust,
who by excellent sententious words had reproved the follies of lust, was
himself taken in adultery, The Roman youth did hug their vice, and thought it
grew upon their nature like a man's beard, and that the wisest men would lay
their Seneca tells that the women of that age despised the adultery of one man
only; and hated it like marriage, and despised that as want of breeding, and
grandeur of spirit, because the braver Spartans did use to breed their children
promiscuously, as the Heards-men do cattle from the fairest Bulls. And Arrianus
tells that the women would defend their baseness by the doctrine of Plato, who
maintained the community of women. This

2. Others flatter by imitation: for when a crime is rare and insolent,
singular and out of fashion, it must be a great strength of malice and
impudence that must entertain it; but the flattering man doing the vice of his
Lord takes off the wonder, and the fear of being stared at; and so incourages
it by making it popular and common. Plutarch tells of one that divorced himself
from his wife because his friend did so; that the other might be hardened in
the mischief; and when Plato saw his scholars stoop in the shoulders, and
Aristotle observed his to stammer, they began to be less troubled with those
imperfections which they thought common to themselves and others.

3. Some pretend a rusticity and downright plainness, and upon the confidence
of that humor their friends vice, and flatter his ruin. Seneca observed it of
some of his time; alius quidam adulatione clam utebatur parce, alius ex aperto
palam, rusticitate simulata, quasi simplicitas illa ars non sit. They pretend
they love not to dissemble, and therefore they cannot hide their thoughts; let
their friend take it how

4. Some will dispraise themselves that their friend may think better of
himself, or less severely of his fault.

5. Others will reprove their friend for a trifle, but with a purpose to let
him understand, that this is all; for the honest man would have told his friend
if it had been worse.

6. Some will laugh and make a sport of a vice, and can hear their friend tell
the cursed narrative of his adultery, of his drunkenness, of his craft and
unjust purchases; and all this shall prove but a merry scene; as if damnation
were a thing to be laughed at, and the everlasting ruin of his friend were a
very good jest. But thus the poor sinner shall not be affrighted from his
danger, nor chastised by severe language, but the villain that eats his meat
shall take him by the hand, and dance about the pit till he falls in, and dies
with shame and folly. Thus the evil Spirit puts on shapes enough; none to
affright the man, but all to destroy him; and yet it is filthy enough when it
is (...)
(...)
The Parasite or Flatterer is a beast that is all belly, looking round with his
eye, watchful, ugly, and deceitful, and creeping on his teeth; they feed him,
and kill them that reach him bread: for that is the nature of all vipers.

I have this one thing only to insert, and then the caution will be
sufficient, viz. that we do not think all praise given to our friend to be
flattery, though it be in his presence. For sometimes praise is the best
conveyance for a precept, and it may nourish up an infant virtue, and make it
grow up toward perfection, and its proper measures and rewards. Friendship
does better please our friend then flattery, and though it was made also for
virtue, yet it mingles pleasures in the chalice, (...), it is delicious to
behold the face of a friendly and a sweet person; and it is not the office of a
friend always to be sour, or at any time morose; but free, open, and
ingenuous, candid and humane, not denying to please, but ever refusing to abuse
or corrupt. For as adulterine metals retain the luster and color of gold, but
not the value; so flattery in imitation of friendship takes the face and
outside of it, the delicious part; but the flatterer uses it to the interests
of vice, and a friend by it serves virtue; and therefore Plutarch well compared
friendship to medicinal ointments, which however delicious they be, yet they
are also useful, and minister to healing. But flattery is sweet and
adulterate, pleasant to be good; and he that does so, shall also better be
suffered when he reproves, because the needing person shall find that then is
the opportunity and season of it, since he denied not to please so long as he
could also profit. I only add this advice, that since self-love is the
serpents milk that feeds this viper flattery, we should do well to choke it
with its mothers milk; I mean, learn to love our selves more, for then we
should never endure to be flattered. For he that because he loves himself, of
all sauces (said Euenus) sharpness, severity, and fire is the best.

SERMON, XXV. Part IV. The Duties of the Tongue.
Ephesians. 4. latter part of the 29 verse. -- But that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
LOquendi ministros habemus homines, tacendi Deos, said one; Men teach us to
speak, and God teaches us to hold our tongue. The first we are taught by the
lectures of our Schools; the latter, by the mysteries of the Temple. But now
garrulity and foolish inordinate talking is a conjunction of folly and sin, and
the prating man while he desires to get the love of them he converses with,
incurres their hatred; while he would be admired, is laughed at; he spends much
and gets nothing, he wrongs his friends and Religion; yet it is with holy
speaking and innocent silence as it is with a Hermit and a Bishop; the first
goes to a good school, but practical life of Ecclesiastical Governors being
found in the way of holiness and zeal, is called status perfectionis, a more
excellent and perfect condition of life, and far beyond the retirements and
inoffensive life of those innocent persons which do so much less of profit,
by how much charity is better then meditation, and going to heaven by religion
and charity, by serving God and converting souls, is better then going to
heaven by prayers and secret thoughts: So it is with silence, and religious
communication. That does not offend God; this glorifies him: Plutarch said
well, Qui generose and regio more instituuntur, primum tacere, deinde loqui
discunt. To be taught first to be silent, then to speak well and handsomely, is
education fit for a Prince; and that is St. Paul's method here: first we were
taught how to restrain our tongues in the foregoing instances, and now we are
called to employ them in Religion.

1. We must speak that which is good] (...), any thing that may serve the ends
of our God and of our Neighbor, in the measures of Religion and usefulness.
But it is here as in love God, by this love Christ understands obedience; when
we are commanded to honor God, it is by singing and reciting his praises, and
doing things which cause reputation and honor: and even here when we are
commanded to speak that which the edification of necessity: the phrase is an
Hebraisme, where the genitive case of a substantive is put for the adjective;
and means, that our speech be apted to necessary edification, or such
edification that it may minister grace, something that may please and profit
them, according as they shall need; all which I shall reduce to these three
heads:

1. To Instruct. 2. To Comfort. 3. To Reprove.

1. Our conversation must be (...), apt to teach. For since all our hopes on
our part depend upon our obedience to God, and conformity to our Lord Jesus, by
whom our endeavors are sanctified and accepted, and our weaknesses are
pardoned, and all our obedience relies upon, and is encouraged and grounded in
faith, and faith is founded naturally and primarily in the understanding, we
may observe that it is not only reasonably to be expected, but experimentally
felt, that in weak and and ignorant sufficient to the thing, is not sufficient
for the person; and therefore that God does usually give us more, and we need
more yet; and unless God works in us to will and to do, we shall neither will
nor do; though to will be in the power of our hand, yet we will not will; it
follows from hence that all they who will comply with Gods method of
graciousnesse, and the necessities of their Brethren, must endeavor by all
means, and in all their own measures, and capacities to lay up treasures of
notices and instructions in their brothers soul, that by some argument or other
predestination, a favor of which he has no promise, no security, no
revelation; and although to do this God, has appointed a special Order of
men, the whole Ecclesiastical Order, whom he feeds they who are set over them
shall also die for want of charity. Here therefore we must remember, that it is
the duty of us all, in our several measures and proportions, to instruct those
that need it, and whose necessity is made ready for our ministration; and let
accounted for, yet it may leave him in that state in which his

2. Our Conversation must be (...), apt to comfort the disconsolate; and then
this, men in present can feel no greater charity. For since half the duty of a
Christian in this life consists in the exercise of passive graces, and the
infinite variety of providence, and the perpetual adversity of chances, and
the dissatisfaction and emptynesse that is in things themselves, and the
weariness and anguish of our spirit does call us to the trial and exercise of
patience even in the days of sunshine, and much more in the violent storms
that shake our dwellings, and make wine, and oil, and society, cordials and
variety; and time it self is checkered with black and white; stay but till to
morrow, and your present sorrow will be weary, and will lie down to rest. But
this is not all. The third person of the holy Trinity is known to us by the
name and dignity of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and God glories in the
appellative, that he is the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, and
therefore to minister in the office to listen for light and ease, and when he
perceives that there is such a thing in the world, and in the order of things,
as comfort and joy, to begin to break out from the prison of his sorrows at the
door of sighs and tears, and by little and little melt into showers and
refreshment? This is glory to thy voice, and employment fit for the brightest
Angel. But so have I seen the sun kiss the frozen earth which was bound up ut
sit homo homini Deus, that every good man in his season may be to his brother
in the place of God, to comfort and restore him; and that it may appear how
much it is the duty of us all to minister comfort to our brother, we may
remember that the same words and the same arguments do oftentimes more
prevail upon our spirits when they are applied by the hand of another, then
when they dwell in us, and come from our own discoursings. This is indeed
(...) and (...), it is (...), to the edification of our needs, and the greatest
and most holy charity.

3. Our communication must in its just season be (...), we must reprove our
sinning brother; for the wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of an
enemy (says Solomon:) we imitate the office of the great Shepherd and Bishop
of souls, if we go to Prove. 27. 6.
seek and save that which was lost; and it is a fearful thing to Mithridate,
and the Devil be defeated in his malicious employment of our language. He is a
miserable man whom none dares tell of his faults so plainly, that he may
understand his danger; and he that is incapable and impatient of reproof, can
never become a good friend to any man. proud, and Scorner is his name; he
thinks himself exempt from the condition and failings of men, or if he does
not, he had rather go to hell then be called to his way by an angry Sermon, or
driven back by the sword of an Angel, or endure one blushing, for all his
hopes and interests of heaven. It is no shame to be reproved, but to deserve
it; but he that deserves it, and will do so still, shall increase his shame
into confusion, and bring upon himself a sorrow bigger warrant shall be
liberty, whose thanks shall be amendment, whose entertainment shall be
obedience; for a flattering word is like a bright sunshine to a sore Eye, it
increases the trouble, and lessens the sight;

Haec demum sapiet dictio quae feriet; The severe word of the reproving man is
wise and healthful: But because all times and all circumstances, and all
persons are not fit for this employment:

-- et plurima sunt quae
Non audent homines pertusa dicere laena;
Some will not endure that a poor man, or an obliged person should reprove
them, and themselves are often so unprofitable servants

1. Let not your reproof be public and personal: if it be public, it must
be in general; if it be personal, it must be in private; If thy Brother
offends, tell it him between him and thee; for when it comes afterward in case
of contumacy to be declared in public, it passes from fraternall correption to
Ecclesiastical discipline. When Socrates reproved Plato at a feast, Plato told
him, it had been better he had told him his fault in private; for to speak it
publicly is indecency: Socrates replied; and so it is for you publicly to
condemn that indecency. For it is the nature of man to be spiteful when he is
shamed, and to esteem that the worst of impudence and perseverance for its
cover, when his shame is naked: And for this indiscretion Aristomenes the Tutor
of Ptolemy, who before the Corinthian Ambassadors reproved the King for
sleeping at the solemn audience, profited nothing, but enraged the Prince, and
was himself forced to drink poison. But this wariness is not always
necessary. For 1. a public and an authorized person, may do it publicly, and
may name the person as himself shall judge expedient.

-- secuit Lucilius urbem:
Te Lupe, te Muti; and genuinum fregit in illis:
Omne vafer vitium --
Lucilius was a censor of manners, and by his office he had warrant and
authority. 2. There are also some cases in which a public reproof is prudent,
and that is when the crime is great, but not understood to be any at all; for
then it is Instruction and Catechism, and lays aside the affront and trouble
of reproof. Thus Ignatius the Martyr did reprove Trajan sacrificing at the
Altar in the sight of all the Officers of the Army; and the Jews were commanded
Jer. 10. 11.
to reprove the Babylonians for Idolatry in the land of their Captivity: and if
we see a Prince in the confidence of his pride, and carelessness of spirit, and
heat of war spoil a Church or rob God, it is then fit to tell him the danger
of Sacrilege, if otherwise he cannot well be taught his danger, and his duty.
3. There are some circumstances of person in which by interpretation, duty or
custom a leave is indulged or presumed, that liberty may be prudently used,
publicly to reprove the public vices: so it was in the old days of the
Romans; vice had then so little footing and authority, so few friends and
advocates, that the Prophets and Poets used a bolder liberty to disgrace

-- unde illa priorum
Scribendi quodcunque animo flagrante liberet
Simplicitas --
and much of the same liberty is still reserved to Pulpits, and to

2. Use not to reprove thy brother for every thing, but for great things only:
for this is the office of a Tutor, not of a Friend; and few men will suffer
themselves to abide always under Pupillage. When the friend of Philotimus the
Physician came to him to be cured of a sore finger, he told him, Heus tu, non
tibi cum reduvia est negotium, he let his finger alone, and told him that his
liver was impostumate: and he that tells his friend that his countenance is not
grave enough in the Church, when it may be the man is Solon reproved Croesus,
and Socrates Alcibiades, and Cyrus chid Cyaxares, and Plato told to Dion that
of all things in the world he should beware of that folly, by which men please
themselves, and despise a better judgment: quia ei vitio adsidet solitudo,
Because that folly has in it singularity, and is directly contrary to all
capacities of a friendship, or the entertainments of necessary reproof.

3. Use not liberty of reproof in the days of sorrow and affliction; for the
calamity it self is enough to chastise the gayeties of sinning persons, and to
bring him to repentance; it may be sometimes fit to insinuate the mention of
the cause of that sorrow, in order to repentance, and a cure: But severe and
biting language is then out of season, and it is like putting vinegar to Crater
the Cynic met Demetrius Phalereus in his banishment and trouble, he went to him
and spoke to him friendly, and used his Philosophy in the ministeries of
comfort, and taught him to bear his trouble nobly, and so wrought upon the
criminal, and wild Demetrius; and he moved him to repentance, who if he Cynic,
and hated his presence and institution; and Perseus killed Euchus and Eulaeus,
for reproving his rashness, when he was newly defeated by the Romans.

4. Avoid all the evil appendages of this liberty: for since to reprove a
sinning brother is at the best but an unwelcome and invidious Hieron invited
Epicharmus to supper, and he knowing that Hieron had unfortunately killed his
friend, replied to his invitation, Atque nuper cum amicos immolares non
vorasti, I think I may come, for when thou did sacrifice thy friends thou
did not devour them. This was a bitter sarcasme, and might with more prudence
and charity have been avoided. They that intend charitably and conduct wisely,
take occasions and proper Ammonius observing that his Scholars were nice and
curious in their diet, and too effeminate for a Philosophical life, caused his
freed man to chastise his boy for not dining without vinegar, and all the while
looked upon the young Gentlemen, and read to them a lecture of Severity. Thus
our dearest Lord reproved St. Peter, he looked upon him when the sign was
given with the crowing of the Cock, Alcibiades was supposed to do) for it is
best to keep the severity of our own principles, and the manner of our own
living: for so Plato lived at Syracuso, just as he lived in the Academy; he was
the same to Dionysius that he was to Dion: But this I mean, that he who means
to win souls, and prevail to his brothers institution, must as St. Paul did,
effigiate and conform himself to those circumstances of living, and discourse,
by which he may prevail upon the persuasions, by complying with the affections
and usages of men.

These are the measures by which we are to communicate our counsels and advices
to our erring Brethren: to which I add this last advice, That no man should at
that time in which he is reproved give counsel and reproof to his Reprover,
for that betrays an angry spirit, and makes discord out of piety, and changes
charity into wrangling, and it looking like a revenge, makes it appear that
himself

That which remains now is, that I persuade men to do it, and that I persuade
men to suffer it; it is sometimes hard to do it, but the cause is only,
because it is hard to bear it; for if men were but apprehensive of their
danger, and were not desirous to die, there were no more to be said in this
affair; they would be as glad to entertain a severe Reprover as a careful
Physician; of whom because most men are so willing to make use, so thankful
for their care, so great valuers of their skill, such lovers of their Et per
hujusmodi offensas emetiendum est confragosum hoc iter: it is a troublesome
employment, but it is duty and charity; and therefore when it can with hope of
success, with prudence and

-- dura fatemur
Esse, sed ut valeas multa dolenda feras.
And when all remember that flattery and importune silence suffer Valentinian
should in the midst of so many Christian Prelates make a law to establish
Polygamy, and that no Bishop should dare to reprehend

If now at last it be inquired whether every man is bound to reprove every man,
if he sins, and if he converse with him? I answer, that if it should be so, it
were to no purpose, and therefore for it there is no commandment; every man
that can may instruct him that wants it; but every man may not reprove him that
is already instructed; that is an act of charity, for which there are no
measures, but the others necessity, and his own opportunity; aut lucrentur
vitam loquendo, aut tacendo abscondant scientiam; if they speak, let them
minister to the good of souls; if they speak not, let them minister to
sobriety; in the first they serve the end of charity, in the other of humility.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 35. r. entertained that at. p. 6. l. 30. seen r. scene. 29. 21.
dear r. clear. 152. 4. terror r. fervor. 71. 40. the bowed r. they bowed. 87.
41. reverend r. reverenced. 112. 27. r. illius pejora prioribus. 100. 1. one r.
once. 102. 21. that flies r. he that flies. 142. 16. r. true or false. 98. 45.
if it be turned r. if it be not turned. 283. ult. r. get a Genius. 309. 40.
still r. till. 334. 5. r. his soul.

33. 8. (...) lege (forsan) (...). 52. 29. lege (...). 140. 9. lege (...). 200.
ult. lege (...). In margin. p. 225. 5. lege (...).


