THE HELLISH PARLIAMENT Being a COUNTER-PARLIAMENT To this in England,
containing the Demonstrative Speeches and Statutes of that Court.

Together with the perfect league made between the two hellish Factions the
Papists and the Brownists.

Printed in the year, 1641.

The hellish Parliament.
HIs infernal Majesty taking into his hellish consideration the great
happiness that now is toward England, and searing that his dear Children, as
well those of the Romish saction, as of the Brownists Sect should have a
terrible fall and their erroneous and seditious practices should be laid open:
He resolved (if possible he could, to trouble the felicious proceedings of the
Parliament, and to that end having long consulted with the subtle Judges of his
infernal Empire, he purposed to summon a counter Parliament against that in
England, and gave order that the most prudent politic and impious Sectaries
within the bound of his dominions should be assembled to debate propound, and
propound, concerning diverse important and very weighty ^ffaires.

His mind was quickly fulfilled in such a manner that he was overjoyed to see
such a(...)rabble company of his very diligentest ser^ants of each faction:
Therefore his infernalship to make it appear how much he pleased therewithal
bestowed on them a speech in this ungracious manner.

Most dearly beloved and adopted Children, it is not unknown to your hellish
ucderstandings what great Thunderclaps have fallen upon our right trusty and
wel-beloved servants the Papists in England, by that wonder-working Parliament
now assembled, I give you now also to understand, that if there be not some
speedy course taken, all will be lost; for as soon as they have done with our
dear Servants the Papists, they will begin with our best beloved sons the
Brownists. Therefore (as it ever has been) so now such is our infernal care
of the increase of our servants, we have assembled this sinful Synod: Rub
therefore your hellish invention, and courageously work, striving who shall be
forwardest to our (I fear) declining Empire.

Let me hear your counsels, and I promise in all your endeavors you shall have
my utmost assistance.

Then was there a great Hubbub between the Papists and Brownists, concerning
precedencie of speech (indeed both are wicked great bawlers) The Papists being
the elder Faction, thought of right, prioritie of speech belonged to them.

But though the Brownists were the younger Sir John's, they were his
Infernalships Nursle, most resembling him their Father, and his most dearly
beloved; therefore they thought they should speak first, yet at last, after
much squabling they yielded. Then silence being commanded, Guy Faulks was chose
Speaker for the Papists, and after low obeisance made, he thus began;

Most Infernal Emperor,

We your obedient sons and servants the English Romanists are here prostrate
before you, and as dutiful servants do all accord to do you nocturnall and
diurnall service. But (Great Emperor) we cannot choose but lament, when we
remember the disastrous chances that have fallen upon our forward intentions.
You may remember with what Heroicke stomachs we have complotted for the
enlargement of your infernal Empire, as in that fat all year, 1588. when with
such large sums we negotiated abroad, and at home endeavored to conquer, for
you, that same little angle of the world, England. And in that Memorable year,
1605. when we had hatched such a Giganticke Stratagem, that our Bird was almost
ready to break the shell. And now in 1639. when we had made a breach between
the English and Scottish Nations, a more hellish Stratagem then which could not
be invented. Behold then with a serious eye, the grand enterprise of your dear
children the Romish Faction. And (profound Emperor) doubt not, but as we have
heretofore, so we will stir up all foreign power now at this last cast
against the English Parliament, and if that fail, Flectere si nequeo superos
Acheronta movebo. Thus ended bold Guy Faulks, and for the Brownists, who do you
think was chose? Samuel How, the most famous and renowned Cobbler, who thus
began after he had hum'd his hoarse voice up.

Dreadful Emperor,

Your most zealously affected children the Society of Separatists or
non-conformists alias Brownists most humble in all reverend and devoted posture,
attend your service, and in the name of the whole dispersed tribe, I your
zealous child and clyent, do pronounce the ardent heat that burns in all our
breasts to effect your perpetrations, and whereas Guy Fauks has extolled with a
wide mouth the endevors of the Romish Faction, as if we never could parallel
them, verily (most Potent Patron we have exceeded them many ways; for the
Brownists (so trimly and slily) have given such rubs and flaves to your enemies
reputations, that (I think verily) they will never recover themselves of the
wounds that we have given them. True it is being backed with foreign Princes,
they have undertook great endeavors, but never to any perfection.

But we have not feared (alas unarmed) to outcry all danger, with what zeal
have delivered your commands my self in the Nags-head Tavern near
Colemanstreet, some in the fields, some in Country villages, every one
some-where: Had we been furnished with foreign aid, we could have done more
then ever they would have done.

But what need we desire other power, since your infernal Majesty does so
stiffely maintain us. And we will requite your love, and will as we use to
do, in the same slye and slanderous and lying way forge and print any Libels
and untruths for the furtherance of your ignoble Empire, and had we arms to
fight withal, we would sprightfully and spitefully use them.

After which arose a second fray between either Faction, that their Parliament
house had like to afire, so hot were they at it, and Pluto thought verily that
hell would have broke loose, but Cerberus has proclaimed silence; Pluto with
stern and angy look thus spoke;

What means this noise, what means these angry threatenings? such looks ye
ought to show mine enemies; this is not the way to enlarge, but destroy my
Empire; Contention overthrowes the greatest States; therefore brethren-like
join hands against the common foe. You see how the Parliament of England
shakes us so much, that if you do not bestir your selves we shall be quite
undone, then they all embraced mutually; So, this is well done, hence goodwill
doubly redound to us and our, which is your Kingdom. Then they craved
instructions which they said should be as absolute Statutes of that their most
hellish Parliament; to which Pluto most joyfully accorded.

Then Rhadamanthus presented their hellish worships with these Acts following;

1. That there be a strong and perfect league of friendship betwixt his
infernal majesty's servants the Papists and Brownists. 2. That they should
cross, as much as in them lay, all good proceedings of the English Parliament.
3. That the Papists should excite foreign Potentates against the said
Kingdom. 4. That the Brownists should strew all libels about, especially such
as tend to the disgrace of learning, his infernalship being an utter enemy to
all sound literature. 5. That the Brownists bear up, relieve, and mainetaine
all contrivers of such libels, such as KNAVE REVILER HELL. 6. That John Tailor
the Water-Poet be declared an open enemy to his Infernalship and both the
Factions.
THus wicked Satan has a double way,
To work his ends to hinder his decay,
His Agents are so many and so wicked bent,
They care not for the truth so they are not shent
If that the Lions skin will do no good,
They Will soon put on the cunning Foxes hood,
England repent, and for this Parliament pray,
Since th'Devill strives to hurt thee every way.
FINIS.

