LVCIFERS LACKY, OR, The Devils new Creature.

BEING The true Character of a dissembling Brownist, whose life is
hypocritical, instructions Schismatic, thoughts dangerous, Actions
malicious, and opinions impious.

With the Relation of their repulse from the Parliament house upon Thursday the
4. of December

And the reason why Constables had warrants in the City and Liberties of London
to take up men to guard the Parliament House upon Friday the 12. of December,
1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

LVCIFERS Lacky, OR, The Devils new Creature.
IT is but very requisite that J should begin this short Treatise with the
words of our Savior, that a Kingdom divided cannot stand. Oh then poor
England in what a miserable estate art thou groaning under the burden of so
many Divisions.

Thy Towns and Cities are filled with a company of Yeas and Verilies, whose
tongues and hearts do as much differ as truth and error, they plead for
conscience forsooth, and they will hazard their ears rather then loose the
truth, they stand in defiance against Bishops, and the Book of Common Prayer
with them is abominable, the Lettime has too many by's in it, in which
judgment (in my opinion) they sell their reputations and pawn their credits
to the Arch-Broker the Devil, who at the last day, the day of judgment will
require more then ten in the hundred of them. The Tap as they profess is
abominable, and yet they do Jdolize the Tub, which as they suppose does
consecrate their devotion instead of a Pulpit, the Congregation being
assembled, rather dissembled in a Barn top.

They affirm that Papists are damned, Arminians shall not enjoy Heaven, for
why, they are like to a green stick which does bow too much.

They pity Adamites and do proffer them garments because they know they will
not receive them, they seem more innocent then Do^es, and yet will be
accounted as wise as Serpents.

They profess they will honor all teachers unless the Pope, and yet will be
ready to raise an unnatural siege against their own Father if he do but
cross them.

They would be accounted all friends to Downright, but yet cannot effect plain
Dealing or Tom-tell-troth.

They love their Neighbor as themselves, they say, but they must not then if
Males be Widdowers or being married have unhandsome wives.

They say they would have Religion reformed, and the true Church only to be
adored, adored say I, the Parson may chance to have a scrape on the Sunday
morning, and it shall be accounted no prejudice to their Hobnayles, otherwise
all outward worship and Ceremony, and that their seeming Piety does spit, at
the name of Jesus no knee must bow except that of the heart, although he that
saved the one, saved the other, and he that made the one made the other.

This sort of people were not once a handful, and then crept in corners, but
now they are like to the Egyptian Locust covering the whole-Land, and they
will rule Religion, nor Religion them, or else they will go against Religion,
as the Jews did to meet our Savior with Swords and staves, and there is not
amongst them only one Judas, but many which seek to betray it.

And yet are there amongst this holy assembly (as they term themselves) as
many several opinions, as men, which will easily be made manifest by their
last Congregation in the Malt-house of one Job a Brewer, the number being about
sevenscore, there had every one a Religion by himself, and every one a nigher
way to Heaven than the other, each showed his opinion, which to relate it would
be too tedious, but their ambitious zeal was so hot, that in snuff each left
the other, but not long after the Reverend Box-maker elevated as high as little
St. Bartholmewes Pulpit, where he threw more stones against the Bishops and the
book of Common Prayer, then little Boys use to do Snow-balls in the time of
Winter.

What shall I say of this sort of people? Shall I commend their Actions? God
forbid.

They go about to rob Levi of his due, and it is to be feared least that
unawares they deceive the Tribe of Judah.

Twice have their troops been collected being armed with Swords and staves,
and what place have they gone to besiege, a place of no lesser consequence then
the Parliament house. The first day was upon Thursday the 4. of December. the
second upon Friday the 12 of December, upon the first day the Train Band
ceazed upon them, not knowing otherwise but that they came against the
Parliament house, but their plea was they came to defend the truth, but it was
very true that many of them were committed to prison.

Upon Friday notice was given to the Parliament, how that their number was so
great, so that instantly there was warrants sent unto each Constable to command
sufficient men, with swords, and Halberts, to guard the Parliament house from
Schismatic oppression; all shcismaticks good Lord either convert, or
confound, that this Kingdom may conclude of nothing, but what may be pleasing
In thy sight.

FINIS.

When Women Preach, and Cobblers Pray,
The fiends in Hell, make holiday.

