Love one another: A TVB LECTVRE, PREACHED

At Watford in Hartfordshire at a Conventicle on the 25. of December last,
being Christmas day, by JOHN ALEXANDER, a Joyner.

His text was taken out of the Epistle of Saint John, and himself was taken by
Captain Bird, Lieutenant Rock, and other officers, from whom he received such
usage as his doctrine did deserve; for which the said officers were commended
by the Parliament.



Printed in the year of private instructing.

Love one another.
BEloved, you are well met in this solemn Synagogue to hear from me those words
of Truth, and wholesome Doctrine which this day you shall receive from me your
teacher. And you are to understand, that although I have had but six shillings
at a collection for my other Sermons, which like good seed I have sowed among
you, and the fruit whereof in a plentiful increase to your great advantage
you have reaped, yet for this Sermon I shall well deserve twelve shillings,
both for the solmnesse of the day, and the sweetness of the Doctrine that
flows from my Text, and the gravity, and Authority of me your Teacher, I will
dispense a little (with your Christian patience) with the two first reasons, or
inducements, and begin first with the last, which is the sufficiency of your
Teacher.

And what man indeed more fitting to direct your understanding in this point,
then I, who am your known, your dear, your persecuted Alexander? whose life
you have seen, whose Doctrine you have heard, and whose zeal in the holy Cause
you have admired. This is not the first time you have heard of my praises, nor
shall it be the last. To whom is it more suitable to discourse upon this Text of
Love, then unto me, who by profession am a Joyner a man ordained to join and
settle things in order? and if the husband of the Virgin Mary (as the Text
says) was but a Carpenter, I believe a Joyner is not to be despised. A
Carpenter Beloved does raise Seats or forms in the House of God, but it is the
office of a Joyner to make the Pulpit, but when the Joyner does not only make
the Pulpit, but is the Preacher that is in the Pulpit, who joyneth Truth to
Falsehood, Ignorance unto Knowledge, and Misdevotion unto Zeal, what a Joyner,
nay what a Conjoiner must that be? and this Beloved, is the happiness which
you all behold, and enjoy in me this day: and so much briefly for my self, who
am your Teacher, I will now return unto my first particular which is the
solemness of the day.

And ^ in the first place not to conceive of me to be so superstitious, as to
make any conscience of the solemnity of this day, because the Church has
ordained or does enjoin, no God forbid I should be so profane, it is a
detestation of their blindness, that have brought me hither this day, to
enlighten your eyes, and to inform your ears, how much they are abused, and
do abuse the ignorant, and a consciousnesse withal of my present wants, which
crave a supply from your Christian charities to relieve them: and in the first
place, I give you to understand, that the very name of Christmas is Idolatrous
and profane, and so verily, are the whole twelve days wherein the wicked make
many daily, and nightly sacrifices to Riot, and sensuality. The Papists
Christmas (pardon me, Beloved that I am forced to repeat the word) does begin
in Holland ten days before it does in England, for so I have been informed by
a godly brother from Amsterdam, wherein they make more haste the good speed,
and in their doing so, three things offer themselves to our observation.

There are three sorts of men that make haste.

The first that make more haste then good speed.

The second those that make haste with good speed.

The third those that make neither haste, nor good speed, of these in their
order, and first of the first.

They that make more haste then good speed, those I say, are the Popish and the
Idolatrous Churches that in their Superstitious Rites, and Ceremonies follow
them, and this indeed is the way of all sinners, and Reprobates whatsoever;
thus in the Gunpowder-Treason they made more haste then good speed. Thus Guido
Faux that limb of the Devil with his dark lanthorn which was another limb of
the Devil, for every work of darkness is a limb of the Devil, made more
haste then good speed. Thus the Earl of Newcastle at this present with his
Papisticall Army, makes more haste then good speed, to overthrow our Jerusalem,
and to ^oot out the true Reformed Religion from amongst us, but God I hope will
put a bridle in his mouth, and send him back the way he came, or send ^im to
those whose battles he fights, whither yet he never came.

The second sort of those that make haste, are they that make haste with ^ood
speed, and those Beloved, (with tears of joy I speak it) are your ^elves, who
are met all together to hear me this day: Thus the Prodigal makes have with
good speed to discharge the Usurer before the use of his money does eat into
his acres, and leaves him, and his posterity desolate.

The third sort of those that make haste, are they who neither make haste nor
good speed, And these Beloved, (Let it not trouble your patience, for I must
needs speak the truth) are our careless servants at home I am afraid now, who
while our pots are boiling over, make no haste, ^ill all the fat is fallen into
the fire. Thus the foolish Virgins would put no oil into their Lamps, until
overtaken by the Bridegroom, they were refused as unserviceable. And thus the
slothful in the Proverbs, deferreth his travel from day until at the last he
is enforced to go in the rain, and not able in it either to make haste or good
speed, is sowsed to the skin. And thus I have done with my three observations
occasioned on my meitation of my first inducement which was the solemnes of the
day, I now come unto the second, which is the sweetness of the Doctrine that
is flowing from my Text.

My Text you hear is Love, a very necessary Text in these contentious times,
whenever we our selves are troubled, are persecuted, and routed in in our
Synagogues, when we cannot have those expositions, and preachings with that
privilege and security as becomes us, when the Reprobate and profane intrude
themselves into our assembly, and catch at our words to make us or odious, or
ridiculous. When our feastings are made the admiration of the gluttons, and our
Graces thought longer then the Prayers of the Liturgy-mongers, when our honest
desires of competency in wealth is accounted coveteousnesse, and the
closeness, and wisdom of our carriages passes for hypocrisy. Brethren, and
Sisters, these are the last days, into which we are fallen, and it behooves
us, (mark what I say) to be as wife as Serpents, and because we are pursued,
derided and traduced, (though if all things succeed according to our prayers)
there will a speedy and happy period be put unto our sufferings and revilings,
and we shall live to revile the reviler, and to spit in the faces of those that
have opposed us let us (I say) join all together in one close desire, and do
as the Text enjoynes us, Love one another.

The words you hear are few, yet very remarkable, if you consider in them the
drift of the Apostle, it is an exhortation to Love, wherein you shall find the
Object, the Subject, and the Abject. The Object is Love, the Subject which is
also the Abject is one another; I call the Subject the Abject, because we
should think our selves as Abjects in this world, and not mind it nor any thing
that does belong unto it, no more then needs must, but settle our affections
altogether, on the holy Assembly of our selves, defying any sociation with the
wicked and profane: from this arises those two Doctrines,

First, that we must hate all those that be against us.

Secondly, that the best way to love one another, is to Love our selves first.

First we must hate all those that be against us, for how can we love our
selves, unless we hate our enemies? how can Peace be setle^ in a Kingdom,
unless all that seek to destroy it be utterly consumed? how can the pure light
of the Gospel shine, as long as the thick night of Superstition and those
monstrous rags of Rome, the Rites, and Idolatrous Ceremonies of our Church,
which the proud Prelates do put on, and practice: They are the hay, chafe,
and the stubble of Antichrist, which the breath of Reformation shall blow away,
and scatter in the deserts, where there shall be none to seek it out. We must
bear a perfect hate to those men and to their Arts: If we will Love one
another. We must hate the Bishops as Hell, and the Prelates as the flaming
smoke of Brimstone that proceeds from it. It is no matter in what they have
transgressed, for they are enemies to us, and to the music of our Assemblies,
and we are bound to hate them. They hate our Love, and we do love their hate:
What though we are not learned as the Clergy, what though we are not so great
Scholars as they, Let us love one another, and make our selves not only one
Church, but one family, and be as it were one family of Love. Away with all
Learning, away with all immodesty, and the trumpry of the Arts: the very
Grammar is profane, and instructs our children in the obscenenesse of
Conjunctions copulative, and what a smell think you are they like to have when
they come to Tullies Offices: Verily brethren, were that mystery of iniquity
laid open to us in our mother tongue, I do believe that the vilest jakes about
this town would not be so unsweet in the nostrills of good men, as that book
of Offices: much more may be aleadged, but I hasten to my second Use. Which
serves for terror and astonishment of heart, to all those who style themselves
by that Reprobate ti^le of Cavaliers, whether horsemen, or footmen, or of what
degree or sex soever, these be they, who tooth and nail labor to pluck up
Reformation by the root, who will have their dinners, as long as ours, and
their hair longer, men of no piety, nor grace at all, who oursweare the
French, out drink the Dutch, out Paramour the Turk. Bold Sons of Beliall,
begotten on the daughters of Anak. O that they were within my reach, now
Beloved, with this hand, would I hurl Seas of water to overwelm them, and with
this hand balls of wildfire to consume them, with this would I throw
fearfullnesse, and trembling, and with this utter ruin and desolation on them,
Mark what I say, and mark well what I do. Here would I mayme them and there
would I brain them: Here would I quash them, and there would I thrash them:
Here would I thrum them, and there would I burn them, and quite overcome them:
here would I wound them, and there would I -- O my brethren my zeal is
enlarged, and me thinks I am all on a fire, which certainly at this instant
would exhale me, did not your Christian patience assist me, which leads me to
the third sort of men, on which we must exercise our hate, and in the first
place I beseech you,

Look not my beloved so amassed and distractedly on one another, for I will
speak unto you in a softer tone, and in the voice of gentleness. There be a
third sort of men, I say, who live amongst us yet are not of us, nay they are
rather directly against us, and they are they who inveigh against our
assemblies, deride the purity of our doctrine, and scorn our instructions, of
these we ought to be more wary, the more slily they carry themselves amongst
us, and the nearer they are unto us they will prove more dangerous.

As he was preaching this, Captain Bird and one Eeles his quartermaster were
with some others at the outside of the house where this congregation was
assembled, and overheard this doctrine, and with some impatience attended the
end of this Sermon.

Beloved, we have more ill birds I am afraid then Wren, and some fish too that
are even as bad as Fish the Proctor. Beloved, there are fish known to most of
this assembly by the name of Eeles: these Eeles as the gravest writers do
affirm delight in the most nethersome part of the water, or in the mudde from
whence they do proceed: Besides, they are of a slimy and slippery nature,
slimy by reason of their propensnes unto the act of generation, and slippery by
reason of their craft and ficklenes; this fish beloved (if we may believe
Antiquity) has a head and body resembling the old Serpent from whence it does
derive its subtilty, and instead of speaking, it hisseth. I pray God (my
brethren) we have not some such fish near us, and who sometime like the
Serpent in Paradise come creeping in, even into this congregation of the
Saints. Beloved, we ought I say with all care and circumspection to look about
us, and to prosecute them with the extremest hate; wherefore if any such shall
attempt to circumvent us, and bear ill will unto our assemblies, let one of
them be as Anathema, and the other as Maranatha. I will speak now but a word
or two by the way of motive to exhort you to love one another, and so I will
conclude. Do you labor to love one another? do you instantly and earnestly
desire it? then you must love me who am your teacher, who takes pains to
inform and direct you in the right way, who do distill into your ears the
doctrine of sincerity, and keep more close unto my text then the aged man unto
his chimney, or the lame man to his stilt, or the hungry man to his food: But
some may here object, how may we express our love unto you: My brethren and
sisters I will answer it briefly by enlarging your stipends and contributions
to me, do it beloved cherefully, cherefully, a cherefull giver is most
excepted. You know when my son Iqnathan was borne what trouble I endured,
what charges I was put to because I refused to have him buried according to the
superstition of the English Church, and when my daughter Abigall was borne, you
know again what persecutions ensued on me, because out of the tenderness and
pureness of my conscience (which I hope you all have) I would not have him
Baptized at any profane Font, which has bin corrupted with the superstitious
Lyturgy of the Church of England, and made odious to all good Christians by the
often figuring of the Idolatrous sign of the cross. These troubles beloved
have befalen me, and you know not how soon they may come upon your selves,
wherefore deal bountifully with me who am ordained to be your example, and if
you will ever love one another learn to love me in the first place, so shall
the text and I and you come together in the end, and agree in this great and
happy point of loving one another.

FINIS.

