A SERMON Preached at the Consecration of two Archbishops and ten Bishops, in
the Cathedral Church of S. Patrick in DUBLIN, January 27. 1660.

By Jeremy Tailor D. D. Ld. Bishop of Down and Connor.

Sal liquefit, ut condiat. DVBLIN, Printed by W. Bladen for John North
Bookseller in Castlestreet, Anno Dom. 1661.

To the Christian Reader.
MY Obedience to the Commands of the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, and
the most Reverend and Learned Primate, and to the desires of my Reverend
Brethren, put it past my inquiry, whether I ought to Publish this following
Sermon. I will not therefore excuse it, and say it might have advantages in the
Delivery, which it would want in the Reading; and the ear would be kind to the
Piety of it, which was apparent in the design, when the eye would be severe in
its censure of those arguments, which as they could not be longer in that
measure of time; so would have appeared more firm, if they could have had
liberty to have been pursued to their utmost issue. But reason lies in a little
room, and Obedience in less. And although what I have here said, may not stop
the mouths of Men resolved to keep up a faction, yet I have said enough to the
sober and pious, to them who love Order, and hearken to the voice of the Spouse
of Christ, to the Loving and to the Obedient: And for those that are not so, I
have no argument fit to be used, but Prayer, and readiness to give them a
reason, when they shall modestly demand it. In the mean time I shall only
desire them to make use of those truths which the more learned of their party
have by the evidence of fact been forced to confess. Rivet affirms that it
descended ex veteris aevi reliquiis, that Presbyters should be assistants or
conjoined to the Bishops, (who is by this confessed to be the principal) in the
imposition of hands for Ordination. VValo Messalinus acknowledges it to be rem
antiquissimam, a most ancient thing that these two Orders, (viz) of Bishops and
Presbyters, should be distinct, even in the middle, or in the beginning of the
next age after Christ. Dd. Blondell places it to be 35. years after the death
of S. John Now then Episcopacy is confessed to be of about 1600. years
continuance: and if before this they can show any Ordination by mere
Presbyters, by any but an Apostle, or an Apostolical man; and if there were not
visibly a distinction of powers and persons relatively in the Ecclesiastical
Government: or if they can give a rational account why they who are forced to
confess the Honor and distinct Order of Episcopacy for about 16. ages, should
in the dark interval of 35. years (in which they can pretend to no Monument or
Record to the contrary) yet make unlearned scruples of things they cannot
colourably prove; if (I say) they can reasonably account for these things, I
for my part will be ready to confess that they are not guilty of the greatest,
the most unreasonable and inexcusable schism in the world. But else, they have
no color to palliate the unlearned crime. For will not all wise men in the
world conclude, that the Church of God, which was then Holy not in title only
and design, but practically and materially; and persecuted, and not immerged
in secular temptations, could not all in one instant join together to alter
that form of Church Government, which Christ and his Apostles had so recently
established, and without a Divine warrant destroy a Divine institution, not
only to the confusion of the Hierarchy, but to the ruin of their own Souls.
It were strange that so great a change should be, and no good man oppose it. In
toto orb decretum est: so St. Hierom. All the world consented in the
advancement of the Episcopal Order. And therefore if we had no more to say for
it, yet in prudence and piety we cannot say they would innovate in so great a
matter.

But I shall enter no further upon this inquiry: only I remember that it is
not very many Months since the Bigots of the Popish party cried out against us
vehemently, and inquired, Where is your Church of England since you have no
Unity? for your Ecclesiastic head of Unity, your Bishops, are gone. And if we
should be desirous to verify their argument, so as indeed to destroy
Episcopacy, We should too much advantage Popery, and do the most imprudent and
most impious thing in the world. But blessed be God, who has restored that
Government, for which Our late King of glorious memory gave his blood. And that
(me thinks) should very much weigh with all the Kings true hearted Subjects,
who should make it Religion not to rob that glorious Prince of the greatest
honor of such a Martyrdom. For my part, I think it fit to rest in those words
of another Martyr St. Cyprian, Si quis cum Episcopo non sit, in Ecclesia non
esse: Ep. 69.
He that is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church: that is, he that goes
away from him, and willingly separates, departs from Gods Church; and whether
he can then be with God, is a very material consideration, and fit to be
thought on by all that think heaven a more eligible good then the interests of
a faction, and the importune desire of rule can countervail.

However. I have in the following papers spoken a few things, which I hope may
be fit to persuade them that are not infinitely prejudiced: and although two or
three good arguments are as good as two or three hundred, yet my purpose here
was to prove the dignity and necessity of the Office and Order Episcopal, only
that it might be as an Economy to convey notice, and remembrances of the great
duty incumbent upon all them that undertake this great charge. The Dignity and
the Duty take one another by the hand, and are born together: only every Sheep
of the Flock must take care to make the Bishops duty as easy as it can by
humility and love, by Prayer and by Obedience. It is at the best very
difficult, but they who oppose themselves to Government, make it harder and
uncomfortable. But take heed; if thy Bishop has cause to complain to God of
thee for thy perverseness and uncharitable walking, thou will be the looser. And
for Us, We can only say in the words of the Prophet, Jerem. 9.1.
We will weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people: But
Our comfort is in God: for we can do nothing without him, but in him we can do
all things. And therefore We will pray, Domine, dabis pacem nobis, omnia enim
opera nostra operatus es in nobis: Esa. 26.12.
God has wrought all Our works within Us: and therefore he will give Us Peace,
and give Us his Spirit.

2 These. 3.1.
Finally, Brethren, pray for Us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, and be glorified, even as it is with you; and that we may be delivered
from unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have not Faith.

Errata.
P:1: l:18: lege (...). P:3: l:^ lege (...). P:6: l:10. lege but by its being
indiff. P:34: transpose these words in the 4: and 5: lines, The Gentry being
little better then Servants while they live under the Presbytery to, (...):
(...) the Gentry etc. P:36: l:17: lege Roman. P:37 l:4: for discern lege
deserve.

Luke 12. 42. And the Lord said, who then is that faithful and wise Steward,
whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his household, to give them their portion of
meat in due season.

43. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

(...)


THese words are not properly a question though they seem so, and the particle
(...) is not interogative, but hypothetical; and extends who to whosoever;
plainly meaning that whoever is a Steward over Christ's household, of him God
requires a great care, because he has trusted him with a great employment.
Every Steward (...), so it is in St. Matthew Cap. 24. 25.
(...), so it is in my text; Every Steward whom the Lord has or shall appoint
over the Family to rule it and to feed it, now and in all generations of men,
as long as this Family shall abide on earth, that is, the Apostles, and they
who were to succeed the Apostles in the Stewardship, were to be furnished with
the same power, and to undertake the same charge, and to give the same strict
and severe accounts.

In these words here is something insinuated, and much expressed.



whom the Lord shall make Ruler over his household.] 2. In the care and duty of
it, which determines the government to be paternal and profitable; it is a
Rule, but such a rule as Shepherds have over their flocks, to lead them to
good pastures, and to keep them within their appointed walks, and within their
folds: (...): that is the work, to give them a measure and proportion of
nourishment: (...) so St. Matthew calls it: meat in the season; that which is
fit for them, and when it is fit; meat enough, and meat convenient; and both
together mean that which the Greek Poets call (...) the strong wholesome diet.

[Blessed is the Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.] Of
these in order.

1. Who are these Rulers of Christ's Family* for though Christ knew it, and
therefore needed not to ask; yet we have disputed it so much, and obeyed so
little, that we have changed the plain hypothesis into an entangled question.
The Answer yet is easy as to some part of the inquiry. The Apostles are the
first meaning of the text: for they were our Fathers in Christ: They begat Sons
and Daughters unto God: and where a spiritual paternity is evident, we need
look no further for spiritual Government, because in the paternal rule all
power is founded: They begat the Family by the power of the word and the life
of the spirit, and they fed this family and ruled it by the word of their
proper Ministry. They had the keys of this house, the Stewards (...); and
they had the Rulers place; for they sat on twelve thrones and judged the twelve
tribes of Israel. But of this there is no question.

And as little of another proposition: that this Stewardship was to last for
ever; for the powers of Ministering in this Office, and the Office it self were
to be perpetual. For the issues and powers of Government are more necessary for
the perpetuating the Church, then for the first planting: and if it was
necessary that the Apostles should have a rod and a staff at first, it would be
more necessary afterward when the Family was more numerous, and their first
zeal abated, and their native simplicity perverted into arts of hypocrisy and
forms of godliness, when Heresies should arise, and the love of many should
wax cold. The Apostles had also a power of Ordination; and that the very power
it self does denote, for it makes perpetuity, that could not expire in the
days of the Apostles, for by it, they themselves propagated a succession. And
Christ having promised his spirit to abide with his Church for ever, and made
his Apostles the channels, the Ministers and conveyances of it, that it might
descend as the inheritance and eternal portion of the Family; it cannot be
imagined that when the first Ministers were gone, thereshould not others rise
up in the same places, some like to the first, in the same Office and Ministry
of the spirit. But the thing is plain and evident in the matter of fact also.
Epist. 73. ad Juba^^
Quod in Ecclesia nunc geritur, hoc olim fecerunt Apostoli, said St. Cyprian;
What the Apostles did at first, that the Church does to this day, and shall do
so for ever. For when St. Paul had given to the Bp. of Ephesus rules of
Government in this Family; 1 Timothy 6.14
he commands, that they should be observed till the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and therefore these authorities and charges are given to him and to his
Successors; it is the observation of St. Ambrose upon the warranty of that
text, and is obvious and undeniable.

Well then. The Apostles were the first Stewards; and this Office dies not with
them, but must for ever be succeeded in; and now begins the enquiry, who are
the Successors of the Apostles: for they are, they must evidently be the
Stewards to feed and to rule this Family. There are some that say, that all who
have any portion of work in the Family, all the Ministers of the Gospel are
these Stewards, and so all will be Rulers. The Presbyters surely; for say they,
Presbyter and Bishop is the same thing, and have the same name in Scripture,
and therefore the Office cannot be distinguished. To this I shall very briefly
say two things, which will quickly clear our way through this bush of thorns.

I. That the word Presbyter is but an honorable appellative used amongst the
Jews, as Alderman amongst us; but it signifies no order at all, nor was ever
used in Scripture to signify any distinct company or order of Clergy. And this
appears not only by an Induction in all the enumerations of the Offices
Ministerial in the New Testament: To. 12.6. Ephe. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
where to be a Presbyter is never reckoned either as a distinct Office, or a
distinct order; but indifferently communicated to all the Superior Clergy, and
all the Princes of the people.

II. The second thing I intended to say is this; that although all the superior
Clergy had not only one, but diverse common appellatives; all being called
(...), and (...), even the Apostolate it self being called a Deaconship Acts
1.25.
; yet it is evident that before the common appellations were fixed into names of
propriety, they were as evidently distinguished in their offices and powers, as
they are at this day, in their Names and Titles.

To this purpose St. Paul gave to Titus the Bp. of Crete a special commission,
command and power to make Ordinations: and in him, and in the person of Timothy
he did erect a Court of Judicature even over some of the Clergy, who yet were
called Presbyters: 1 Timothy 5.19.
against a Presbyter receive not an accusation but before two or three
witnesses: there is the measure and the warranty of the Audientia Episcopalis,
the Bps. Audience Court: and when the accused were found guilty he gives in
charge to proceed to censures: (...), and (...); 1 Tit. 11. and 2 Titus 15.
You must rebuke them sharply; and you must silence them; stop their mouths,
that is St. Paul's word; that they may no more scatter their venom in the ears
and hearts of the people. These Bishops were commanded, to set in order things
that were wanting in the Churches, the same with that power of St. Paul; [
other things will I set in order when I come,] said he to the Corinthian
Churches; in which there were many who were called Presbyters: who nevertheless
for all that name, had not that power. To the same purpose it is plain in
Scripture, Cap. 2. v. 2.
that some would have been Apostles that were not; such were those whom the
spirit of God notes in the Revelation: and some did love preeminence that had
it not: for so did Diotrephes: and some were Judges of questions, and all were
not; for therefore they appealed to the Apostles at Jerusalem: and St. Philip
though he was an Evangelist, yet he could not give confirmation to the
Samaritans whom he had baptized, but the Apostles were sent for: for that was
part of the power reserved to the Episcopal or Apostolical order.

Now from these premises the conclusion is plain and easy. 1. Christ left a
Government in his Church, and founded it in the persons of the Apostles. 2. The
Apostles received this power for the perpetual use and benefit, for the comfort
and edification of the Church for ever. 3. The Apostles had this Government,
but all that were taken into the Ministry, and all that were called Presbyters
had it not. If therefore this Government in which there is so much disparity in
the very nature and exercise and first original of it, must abide for ever;
then so must that disparity: If the Apostolate in the first stabiliment was
this eminency of power; then it must be so, that is, it must be the same in the
succession that it was in the foundation. For after the Church is founded upon
its Governors, we are to expect no change of government. If Christ was the
Author of it, then as Christ left it, so it must abide for ever: for ever there
must be the Governing and the Governed, the Superior and the Subordinate, the
Ordainer and the Ordained, the confirmer and the confirmed.

Thus far the way is straight, and the path is plain. The Apostles were the
Stewards and the ordinary Rulers of Christ's Family by virtue of the order and
office Apostolical; and although this must be succeeded to for ever; yet no man
for his now, or at any time being called a Presbyter or Elder can pretend to
it: for besides his being a Presbyter, he must be an Apostle too; else, though
he be called in partem sollicitudinis, and may do the offices of assistance and
understewardship; yet the (...), the Government and Rule of the Family belongs
not to him.

But then (...); who are these Stewards and Rulers over the household now? To
this the answer is also certain and easy. Christ has made the same Governors
to day as heretofore; Apostles still. For though the twelve Apostles are dead;
Yet the Apostolical order is not: it is (...), a generative order, and begets
more Apostles: now who these minores Apostoli are, the successors of the
Apostles in that office Apostolical and supreme regiment of Souls, we are
sufficiently taught in Holy Scriptures; which when I have clearly shown to you,
I shall pass on to some more practical considerations.

1. Therefore, certain and known it is, that Christ appointed two sorts of
Ecclesiastic persons; the XII. Apostles, and the LXXII. Disciples: to these he
gave a limited commission, to those a fullness of power: to these a temporary
employment, to those a perpetual and everlasting; from these two societies
founded by Christ, the whole Church of God derives the two superior orders in
the sacred Hierarchy; and as Bishops do not claim a Divine right but by
succession from the Apostles* so the Presbyters cannot pretend to have been
instituted by Christ, but by claiming a succession to the LXXII: and then
consider the difference, compare the Tables, and all the world will see the
advantages of argument we have: for since the LXXII. had nothing but a mission
on a temporary errand, and more then that we hear nothing of them in Scripture;
but upon the Apostles Christ powered all the Ecclesiastical power, and made them
the ordinary Ministers of that Spirit which was to abide with the Church for
ever; the Divine institution of Bishops, that is, of Successors to the
Apostles, is much more clear then that Christ appointed Presbyters, or
Successors of the LXXII: and yet if from hence they do not derive it, they can
never prove their order to be of Divine institution at all, much less to be so
alone.

But we may see the very thing it self: the very matter of fact. St. James the
Bp. of Jerusalem, is by St. Paul called an Apostle: Gal. 1.19.
Other Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords Brother. For there were some
whom the Scriptures call the Apostles of our Lord; that is, such which Christ
made by his word immediately, or by his Spirit extraordinarily: and even into
this number and title, Matthias, and St. Paul, and Barnabas were accounted. 2
Cor. 8.23 Philip 2.25.
But the Church also made Apostles; and these were called by St. Paul (...),
Apostles of the Churches, and particularly Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the
Philippians: properly so (says Primasius,) and what is this else but the Bp.
says Theodoret; for (...), those who are now called Bps. were then called
Apostles, says the same Father: the sense and full meaning of which argument
is a perfect commentary upon that famous prophecy of the Church, Psalm 45.16
[ In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have childen whom thou may make
Princes in all Lands,] [that is,] not only the twelve Apostles our Fathers in
Christ, who first begat us, were to rule Christ's Family, but when they were
gone, their Children and Successors should arise in their stead, Et nati
natorum, and quinascentur ab illis, their direct Successors to all generations
shall be principes populi, that is, Rulers and Governors of the whole
Catholic Church. De prole enim Ecclesiae crevit eidem paternitas, id est,
Episcopi quos illa genuit, and patres appellat, and constituit in sedibus
Patrum; says St. Austin; the Children of the Church become Fathers of the
faithful; that is, the Church begets Bps.: and places them in the seat of
Fathers, the first Apostles.

After these plain and evident testimonies of Scripture, it will not be amiss
to say, that this great affair relying not only upon the words of institution,
but on matter of fact; pas'd forth into a demonstration and greatest notoreity
by the Doctrine and Practice of the whole Catholic Church. For so St Irenaeus
who was one of the most Ancient Fathers of the Church, and might easily make
good his affirmative: We can (says he) reckon the men who by the Apostles were
appointed Bishops in the Churches, to be their Successors unto Us; leaving to
them the same power and authority which they had. Thus St. Polycarp was by the
Apostles made Bp. of Smyrna; St. Clement Bp. of Rome by St. Peter, and diverse
others by the Apostles, says Tertullian, saying also that the Asian Bps. were
consectated by St. John; and to be short, that Bps. are the Successors of the
Apostles in the Stevvardship and Rule of the Church, in 1 Cor. 12. in Psalm 44.
is expressly taught by St. Cyprian, and St. Hieron, St. Ambrose, and St.
Austin, by Euthymius, and Pasianus, by St. Gregory, Epist. 1. Simpronianum.
and St. John Damascen, by Clarus a Muscula, and St. Sixtus, by Anacletus, and
St. Isidore; by the Roman Council under St. Sylvester, and the Council of
Carthage; and the (...), or succession of Bps. from the Apostles hands in all
the Churches Apostolical was as certainly known as in our Chronicles we find
the succession of our English Kings, and one can no more be denied then the
other. The conclusion from these premises I give you in the words of St.
Cyprian, Cogitent Diaconi quod Apostolos, id est, Episcopos Dominus ipse
elegerit. Epist. 65. ad Rogat.
Let the Ministers know that, Apostles, that is, the Bps. were chosen by our
blessed Lord himself; and this was so evident, and so believed, that St. Austin
affirms it with a nemo ignorant, No man is so ignorant, but he knows this,
Quaest. V. and N.T.q. 197.
that our blessed Savior appointed Bps. over Churches.

Indeed the Gnostics spoke evil of this order; for they are noted by three
Apostles, St. Paul, St. Peter, and St. Jude, to be despisers of Government, and
to speak evil of dignities; and what Government it was they did so despise, we
may understand by the words of St. Jude: they were (...), in the contradiction
or gainsaying of Corah, who with his company rose up against Aaron the high
Priest: and excepting these who were the vilest of Men, no man within the first
300 years after Christ, opposed Episcopacy. But when Constantine received the
Church into his arms, he found it universally governed by Bps. and therefore
no wise or good man professing to be a Christian, that is, to believe the holy
Catholic Church, can be content to quit the Apostolical Government; (that by
which the whole Family of God was fed, and taught and ruled,) and beget to
himself new Fathers and new Apostles, who by wanting Succession from the
Apostles of our Lord, have no Ecclesiastical and Derivative communion with the
fountains of our Savior.

If ever Vincentius Lirinensis's rule could be used in any question, it is in
this: quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus; That Bishops are the
Successors of the Apostles in this Stewardship; and that they did always rule
the Family, was taught and acknowledged always, and every where, and by all men
that were of the Church of God: and if these evidences be not sufficient to
convince modest and sober persons in this qestion, We shall find our faith to
fail in many other articles, of which we yet are very confident. For the
observation of the Lords day, the Consecration of the Holy Eucharist by
Priests, the Baptizing Infants, the communicating of Women, and the very Canon
of the Scripture it self rely but upon the same probation: and therefore the
denying of Articles thus proved, is a way (I do not say) to bring in all Sects
and Heresies, (that is but little,) but a plain path and inlet to Atheism and
Irreligion: for by this means, it will not only be impossible to agree
concerning the meaning of Scripture, but the Scripture it self, and all the
Records of Religion will become useless, and of no efficacy or persuasion.

I am entered into a Sea of matter, but I will break it off abruptly, and sum
up this inquiry with the words of the Council of Chalcedon, which is one of
the four Generals, by our Laws made the measures of judging Heresies. (...). It
is Sacrilege to bring back a Bishop to the degree and order of a Presbyter. It
is indeed a rifling the order, and intangling the gifts, and confounding the
method of the Holy Ghost: it is a dishonouring them whom God would honor, and
a robbing them of those spiritual eminencies with which the spirit of God does
anoint the consecrated heads of Bishops. And I shall say one thing more, which
indeed is a great truth, that the diminution of Episcopacy was first introduced
by Popery, and the Popes of Rome by communicating to Abbots, and other mere
Priests special graces to exercise some essential Offices of Episcopacie, has
made this sacred order to be cheap, and apt to be invaded. But then add this;
If Simon Magus was in so damnable a condition for offering to buy the gifts
and powers of the Apostolical order, what shall we think of them that snatch
them away, and pretend to wear them whether the Apostles and their Successors
will or no? This is (...), to belly the Holy Ghost; that is the least of it: it
is rapine and sacrilege, besides the heresy and the schism, and the spiritual
lie. For the government Episcopal, as it was exemplified in the Synagogue, and
practiced by the same measures in the Temple, so it was transcribed by the
eternal son of God, who translated it into a Gospel Ordinance: it was
sanctified by the Holy Spirit, who named some of the persons, and gave to them
all power and graces from above. It was subjected in the Apostles first, and by
them transmitted to a distinct Order of Ecclesiastics: it was received into
all Churches, consigned in the Records of the Holy Scriptures, preached by the
universal voice of all the Christian World, delivered by notorious and
uninterrupted practice, and derived to further and unquestionable issue by
perpetual succession.

I have done with the hardest part of the Text, by finding out the persons
entrusted, the Stewards of Christ's Family: which though Christ only intimated
in this place, yet he plainly enough manifested in others: The Apostles and
their Successors the Bishops, are the men entrusted with this great charge: God
grant they may all discharge it well. And so I pass from the Officers, to a
consideration of the Office it self, in the next words: Whom the Lord shall
make Ruler over his Household, to give them their meat in due season.

2. The Office it self is the Stewardship, that is, Episcopacy, the Office of
the Bishop. The name signifies an Office of the Ruler indefinitely, but the
word was chosen, and by the Church appropriated to those whom it now signifies,
both because the word it self is a monition of duty, and also because the
faithful were used to it in the days of Moses and the Prophets. The word is in
the prophecy of the Church, Isai. 60.17
[ I will give to thee Princes in peace, (...) and Bishops in righteousness,]
upon which place St. Hierom says, Principes Ecclesiae vocat futuros Episcopos:
Hunc locum etiam citat S. Clemens Ep. ad Cor
[ The spirit of God calls them who were to be Christian Bps, principes, or
chief Rulers,] and this was no new thing: Neh. 11.10
For the chief of the Priests who were set over the rest, are called Bishops by
all the Hellenist Jews. Thus ^oel is called (...), the Bishop over the Pr^ests,
and the son of Bani, (...), the Bishop and Visitor over the Levites, and we
find at the purging of the Land from idolatry, the High Priest placed (...),
Bishops over the House of God. 2 Kin. 11.18
Nay, it was the appellative of the High Priest himself: (...), Bishop Eleazar,
the Son of Aaron the Priest, Numb. 4.16.
to whom is committed the care of the Lamps, and the daily Sacrifice, and the
holy unction.

Now this word the Church retained, choosing the same Name to her superior
Ministers, because of the likeness of the Ecclesiastical Government between the
Old and New Testament.

For Christ made no change but what was necessary. Baptism was a rite among the
Jews, and the Lord's Supper was but the post-coenium of the Hebrews changed into
a mystery, from a type to a more real exhibition; and the Lords Prayer was a
collection of the most eminent devotions of the Prophets and Holy men before
Christ, who prayed by the same spirit: and the censures Ecclesiastical were but
an imitation of the proceedings of the Judaical tribunals: and the whole
Religion was but the Law of Moses drawn out of it is vail into clarity and
manifestation: and to conclude, in order to the present affair, the Government
which Christ left was the same as he found it: for what Aaron and his Sons, and
the Levites were in the Temple, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are in the
Church: Epist. 2. ad Nepot.
it is affirmed by St. Hierom more then once; and the use he makes of it is
this, Epistol. ad Evagrium.
Esto subjectus pontifici tuo, and quasi animae parentem suscipe: Obey your
Bishop, and receive him as the nursing Father of your Soul. But above all; this
appellation is made honorable by being taken by our Blessed Lord himself. For
he is called in Scripture, the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

But our inquitie is not after the Name, but the Office, and the dignity and
duty of it: Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimis ac divina potestas (so St. Cyprian
calls it) a High and a Divine power from God of Governing the Church: rem
magnam and preciosam in conspectu Domini (so St. Cyril) a great and a precious
thing in the sight of God: (...), by Isidor Pelusiot; the utmost limit of what
is desirable amongst men. But the account upon which it is so desirable, is
the same also that makes it formidable. They who have tried it, and did it
conscientiously, have found the burden so great, as to make them stoop with
care and labor; And they who do it ignorantly or carelessly, will find it will
break their bones. For the Bishops Office is all that duty which can be
signified by those excellent words of St. Cyprian; He is a Bishop or Overseer
of the Brotherhood, the Ruler of the people, the Shepherd of the Flock, the
Governor of the Church, the Minister of Christ, and the Priest of God. These
are great titles, and yet less then what is said of them in Scripture; which
calls them Salt of the Earth, Lights upon a candlestick; Stars and Angels,
Fathers of our Faith, Ambassadors of God, Dispensors of the Mysteries of God,
the Apostles of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ: but then they are great
burdens too: for the Bishop is (...), entrusted with the Lords people; that is a
great charge; but there is a worse matter that follows; (...): the Bishop is he
of whom God will require an account for all their souls: they are the words of
St. Paul, Hebr. 13.17.
and transcribed into the 40th. Canon of the Apostles, and the 24th. Canon of
the Council of Antioch.

And now I hope the envy is taken off: for the honor does not pay for the
burden: and we can no sooner consider Episcopacy in its dignity, as it is a
Rule; but the very nature of that Rule does imply so severe a duty, that as the
load of it is almost unsufferable, so the event of it is very formidable if we
take not great care. For this Stevvardship is (...), a Principality and a
Ministry. So it was in Christ: he is Lord of all, and yet he was the Servant
of all: so it was in the Apostles, it was (...), their lot was to be
Apostles, Acts 1. 25.
and yet to serve and minister: and it is remarkable that in Isaiah the LXX use
the word (...) or Bishop; Isaia. 60.17.
but there they use it for the Hebrew word nechosheth, which the Greeks usually
render by (...), and the interlineary translation by Exactores. Bishops are
only Gods Ministers and tribute gatherers, requiring and over seeing them that
they do their duty; and therefore here the case is so, and the burden so great,
and the dignity so allayed, that the envious man has no reason to be troubled
that his brother has so great a load; nor the proud man vainly to be delighted
with so honorable a danger. It is indeed a Rule; but it is paternal; it is a
Government, but it must be neither (...), nor (...), it is neither a power to
constrain, nor a commission to get wealth: 1 Pet. 5.1.5^
for it must be without necessity, and not for filthy lucre sake; but it is a
Rule, (...), so St. Luke, as of him that ministers; (...), Luke 22.27
so St. Mark: as of him that is Servant of all: (...), Mark 10.43
so St. John; such a principality as he has that washes the feet of the weary
traveller: John 13.13
or if you please, take it in the words of our Blessed Lord himself, that [ He
that will be chief among you let him be your Minister,] meaning that if under
Christ's Kingdom you desire rule, possibly you may have it; but all that Rule
under him are Servants to them that are ruled, and therefore you get nothing by
it, but a great labor, and a buisy employment, a careful life, and a necessity
of making severe accounts. But all this is nothing but the general measures, I
cannot be useful or understood, unless I be more particular. The particulars we
shall best enumerate by recounting those great conjugations of worthy offices
and actions by which Christian Bishops have blessed and built up Christendom,
for because we must be followers of them, as they were of Christ, the
recounting what they did worthily in their generations, will not only
demonstrate how useful, how profitable, how necessary Episcopacy is to the
Christian Church, but it will at the same time teach us our duty, by what
services we are to benefit the Church, in what works we are to be employed, and
how to give an account of our Stewardship with joy.

1. The Christian Church was founded by Bps: not only because the Apostles,
who were Bishops, were the first Preachers of the Gospel, and Planters of
Churches, but because the Apostolical men, whom the Apostles used in planting
and disseminating Religion, were by all Antiquity affirmed to have been
Diocesan Bishops; insomuch that as St. Epiphanius witnesses there were at the
first disseminations of the faith of Christ, Lib. 3. Tit. 1
many Churches who had in them no other Clergy, but a Bishop and his Deacons,
and the Presbyters were brought in afterward as the harvest grew greater. But
the Bishops names are known, they are recorded in the book of Life, and their
praise is in the Gospel: such were Timothy and Titus, Clemens and Linus, Marcus
and Dyonisius, Onesimus and Cains, Epaphroditas and St. James our Lords
Brother, Evodius and Simeon: all which, if there be any faith in Christians
that gave their lives for a testimony to the faith, and any truth in their
Stories; and unless we who believe Thucydides and Plutarch, Livy and Tacitus,
think that all Church story is a perpetual Romance, and that all the brave men,
the Martyrs and the Doctors of the Primitive Church, did conspire as one man to
abuse all Christendom for ever; I say unless all these impossible suppositions
be admitted, all these whom I have now reckoned were Bishops fixed in several
Churches, and had Dioceses for their Charges.

The consequent of this consideration is this. If Bishops were those upon whose
Ministry Christ founded and built his Church, let us consider what great
wisdom is required of them that seem to be Pillars: The Stewards of Christ's
Family must be wise: that Christ requires, and if the order be necessary to the
Church, wisdom cannot but be necessary to the Order. For it is a shame if they
who by their Office are Fathers in Christ, shall by their unskilfulness
skilfulness be but Babes themselves; understanding not the secrets of Religion,
the mysteries of Godliness, the perfections of the Evangelical Law, all the
advantages and disadvantages in the Spiritual life. A Bishop must be exercised
in Godliness, a man of great experience in the secret conduct of Souls, not
satisfied with an ordinary skill in making homilies to the people, and
speaking common exhortations in ordinary cases; but ready to answer in all
secret inquiries, and able to convince the gainsayers, and to speak wisdom
amongst them that are perfect.

If the first Bishops laid the foundation, their Successors must not only
preserve whatsoever is fundamental, but build up the Church in a most holy
Faith, taking care that no Heresy sap the foundation, and that no hay or
rotten vvood be built upon it: and above all things, that a most Holy life be
superstructed upon a holy and unreproveable Faith. So the Apostles laid the
foundation, and built the vvalls of the Church, and their Successors must raise
up the roof as high as Heaven. For let us talk and dispute eternally, we shall
never compose the controversies in Religion, and establish truth upon
unalterable foundations, as long as Men handle the word of God deceiptfully,
that is, wit designs and little artifices, and saecular partialities, and
they will for ever do so, as long as they are proud or covetous. It is not the
difficulty of our questions, or the subtilty of our adversaries that makes
disputes interminable; but We shall never cure the itch of disputing, or
establish Unity, unless we apply our selves to humility, and contempt of
riches. If we will be contending, let us contend like the Olive and the Vine,
who shall produce best, and most fruit: not like the Aspine and the Elm which
shall make most noise in a wind. All other methods are a beginning at a wrong
end. And as for the people; the way to make them conformable to the wise and
holy rules of faith and government, is by reducing them to live good lives.
When the Children of Israel gave themselves to gluttony and drunkenness, and
filthy lusts, they quickly fell into abominable idolatries; and St. Paul says
that men make shipwreck of their faith by putting away a good conscience: 1 Timothy 1.19 2 Timothy 3.9,
for the mystery of faith is best preserved (...), in a pure conscience, says
the same Apostle: secure but that, and we shall quickly end our disputes, and
have an obedient and conformable people: but else never.

2. As Bishops were the first Fathers of Churches, and gave them being: so they
preserve them in being. For without Sacraments there is no Church; or it will
be starved and die: and without Bishops there can be no Priests, and
consequently no Sacraments: and that must needs be a supreme order from whence
ordination it self proceeds. For it is evident and notorious that in Scripture
there is no record of ordination, but an Apostolical hand was in it: one of the
(...), one of the chief, one of the superior and Ruling Clergy: and it is as
certain in the descending ages of the Church, the Bishop always had that power,
it was never denied to him, and it was never imputed to Presbyters: and St.
Hierom himself when out of his anger against John Bp. of Jerusalem endeavored
to equal the Presbyter with the Bishop, though in very many places he spoke
otherwise, yet even then also, and in that heat, he excepted ordination,
acknowledging that to be the Bps. peculiar. And therefore they who go about to
extinguish Episcopacy, do as Iullan did; they destroy the Presbytery, and
starve the Flock, and take away their Shepherds, and dispark their pastures,
and tempt Gods providence to extraordinaries, and put the people to hard
shifts, and turn the channels of Salvation quite another way, and leave the
Church to a perpetual uncertainty, whether she be alive or dead, and the people
destitute of the life of their Souls, and their daily bread, and their
spiritual comforts, and holy blessings.

The consequent of this is. If Sacraments depend upon Bishops, then let us take
care that we convey to the people holy and pure materials, sanctified with a
holy ministry, and ministered by holy persons. For although it be true, that
the efficacy of the Sacraments does not depend wholly upon the worthiness of
him that ministers; yet it is as true, that it does not wholly rely upon the
worthiness of the Receiver: but both together relying upon the goodness of God
produce all those blessings which are designed. The Minister has an influence
into the effect, and does very much toward it; and if there be a failer there,
it is a defect in one of the concurring causes; and therefore an unholy Bishop
is a great diminution to the peoples blessing. St. Hierom presses this
severely: in Cap. 2. Zeph.
Impie faciunt etc. They do wickedly who affirm that the Holy Eucharist is
consecrated by the words [alone] and solemn prayer of the consecrator, and not
[also] by his life and holiness, and therefore St. Cyprian affirms, Lib. 1. Ep.
4.
that none but holy and upright men are to be chosen, who offering their
Sacrifices worthily to God may be heard in their prayers for the Lords people:
but for others; Sacrificia eorum panis luctus (says the Prophet Hosea,) their
Sacrifices are like the bread of sorrow, who ever eats thereof shall be
defiled. This discourse is not mine but St. Cyprians: and although his words
are not to be understood dogmatically, but in the case of duty and caution, yet
we may lay our hands upon our hearts, and consider how we shall give an account
of our Stewardship, if we shall offer to the people the bread of God with
impure hands: it is of it self a pure nourishment, but if it passes through an
unclean vessel, it looses much of it is excellency.

3. The like also is to be said concerning prayer. For the Episcopal Order is
appointed by God to be the great Ministers of Christ's Priesthood, that is, to
stand between Christ and the people in the intercourse of prayer and blessing.
We will give our selves continually to prayer: said the Apostles: that was the
one half of their employment: and indeed a Bishop should spend very much of his
time in holy prayer, and in diverting Gods judgments, and procuring blessings
to the people; for in all times, the chief of the Religion was ever the chief
Minister of blessing. Thus Abraham blessed Abimelech, and Melchisedek blessed
Abraham, and Aaron blessed the people; and without all controversy (says the
Apostle,) the less is blessed of the Greater. But then we know that God hears
not sinners; and it must be the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous Man
that shall prevail.

And therefore we may easily consider that a vicious Prelate is a great
calamity to that Flock, which he is appointed to bless and pray for. How shall
he reconcile the penitents, who is himself at enmity with God? How shall the
Holy Spirit of God descend upon the Symbols at his prayer who does perpetually
grieve him, and quench his holy fires, and drive him quite away? How shall he
that has not tasted of the spirit by contemplation, stir up others to earnest
desires of Celestial things? Or what good shall the people receive, when the
Bp. lays upon their head a covetous or a cruel, an unjust or an impure hand?
But therefore that I may use the words of St. Hierom. Dial. adv. Lucifer.
Cum ab Episcopo gratia in populum transfundatur, and mundi totius and
Ecclesiae totius condimentum sit Episcopus etc. since it is intended that from
the Bp. grace should be diffused amongst all the people, there is not in the
world a greater indecency then a holy office ministered by an unholy person, and
no greater injury to the people, then that of the blessings which God sends to
them by the Ministeries Evangelical they should be cheated and defrauded by a
wicked Steward. And therefore it was an exellent prayer which to this very
purpose was by the son of Sirach made in behalf of the High Priests the sons of
Aaron [ God give you wisdom in your heart to judge his people in righteousness,
that their good things be not abolished, and that their glory may endure for
ever. Eccl. 45.26.
]

4. All the offices Ecclesiastical always were, and ought to be conducted by
the Episcopal order, as is evident in the universal doctrine and practice of
the primitive Church. (...). and 24. c. Council. Antioch.
It is the 40th. Canon of the Apostles, Let the Presbyters and Deacons do
nothing without leave of the Bishop. But that case is known.

The consequent of this consideration is no other then the admonition in my
text. 1 Cor. 4.1,2,3.
We are Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, and dispensers of the mysteries
of the Kingdom; and it is required of Stewards that they be found faithful;
that we preach the word of God in season and out of season, that we rebuke and
exhort, admonish and correct; for these, God calls Pastores secundum cor meum,
Pastors according to his own heart, which feed the people with knowledge and
understanding; but they must also comfort the afflicted and bind up the broken
heart; Jer. 3.15.
minister the Sacraments with great diligence, and righteous measures, and
abundant charity, always having in mind those passionate words of Christ to
St. Peter; If thou love me, feed my sheep; If thou have any love to me, feed
my lambs.

And let us remember this also, that nothing can enforce the people to obey
their Bishops as they ought, but our doing that duty and charity to them which
God requires. There is reason in these words of St. Chrysostom, [ It is
necessary that the Church should adhere to their Bishop as the body to the
head, as plants to their roots, as rivers to their springs, as children to
their Fathers, as Disciples to their Masters.] These similitudes express not
only the relation and dependency, but they tell us the reason of the duty. The
head gives light and reason to conduct the body, the roots give nourishment to
the plants, and the springs, perpetual emanation of waters to the channels.
Fathers teach and feed their children, and Disciples receive wise instruction
from their Masters: and if we be all this to the people, they will be all that
to us; and wisdom will compel them to submit, and our humility will teach them
obedience, and our charity will invite their compliance. Our good example will
provoke them to good works, and our meekness will melt them into softness and
flexibility. For all the Lords people are populus voluntarius, a free and
willing people; and we who cannot compel their bodies, must thus constrain
their souls; by inviting their wills, by convincing their understandings, by
the beauty of fair example, the efficacy and holiness and the demonstrations of
the spirit.

This is experimentum ejus qui in nobis loquitur Christus. Hebr. 13.7.
The experiment of Christ that speaks in us. For to this purpose those are
excellent words which St. Paul spoke. [ Remember them who have the rule over
you, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.] There lies
the demonstration: and those Prelates who teach good life, whose Sermons are
the measures of Christ, and whose life is a copy of their Sermons; these must
be followed; and surely these will: for these are burning and shining lights:
but if we hold forth false fires, and by the amusement of evil examples call
the vessels that sail upon a dangerous Sea to come upon a rock, or an iron
shore instead of a safe harbor, we cause them to make shipwreck of their
precious faith, and to perish in the deceiptful and unstable waters. Vox operum
fortius sonat quam verborum. A good life is the strongest argument that your
faith is good, and a gentle voice will be sooner entertaind then a voice of
thunder: but the greatest eloquence in the world, is a meek Spirit, and a
liberal hand: these are the two pastoral staves the Prophet speaks of nognam
and hovelim, beauty and bands: Zech. 11.7.
he that has the staff of the beauty of holiness, the ornament of fair
example, he has also the staff of bands, atque in funiculis Adam trahet eos,
in vinculis charitatis; Cap. 11.
as the Prophet Hosea's expression is; he shall draw the people after him by
the cords of a man, by the bands of a holy charity. But if against all these
demonstrations any man will be refractary; We have in stead of a staff, an
Apostolical rod; which is the last and latest remedy, and either brings to
repentance, or consignes to ruin and reprobation.

If there were any time remaining; I could reckon that the Episcopal order is
the principle of Unity in the Church; and we see it is so, by the innumerable
Sects that sprang up when Episcopacy was persecuted. I could add, how that
Bishops were the cause that St. John wrote his Gospel; that the Christian Faith
was for 300 years together bravely defended by the sufferings, the prisons and
the flames, the life and the death of Bishops, as the principal Combatants.
That the Fathers of the Church whose writings are held in so great veneration
in all the Christian World, were almost all of them Bishops. I could add, that
the Reformation of Religion in England was principally by the Preachings and
the disputings, the vvritings and the Martyrdom of Bishops. That Bishops have
ever since been the greatest defensatives against Popery. That England and
Ireland were Governed by Bishops ever since they were Christian, and under
their conduct have for so many ages enjoyed all the blessings of the Gospel. I
could add also, that Episcopacy is the great stabiliment of Monarchy; but of
this we are convinced by a sad and too dear bought experience. I could
therefore in stead of it, say, that Episcopacy is the great ornament of
Religion, the Gentry being little better then Servants, while they live under
the Presbytery. That as it rescues the Clergy from contempt; so it is the
greatest preservative of the peoples liberty from Ecclesiastic Tyranny on one
hand, and Anarchy and licentiousness on the other. That it endears obedience.
And is subject to the Laws of Princes. And is wholly ordained for the good of
mankind, and the benefit of Souls. But I cannot stay to number all the
blessings which have entered into the world at this door: I only remark these
because they describe unto us the Bishops employment, which is, to be buisy in
the service of Souls, to do good in all capacities, to serve every man's need,
to promote all public benefits, to cement Governments, to establish peace, to
propagate the Kingdom of Christ, to do hurt to no man, to do good to every man;
that is, so to minister, that Religion and Charity, public peace, and private
blessings may be in their exaltation.

As long as it was thus done by the Primitive Bishops, the Princes and the
People gave them all honor. Insomuch that by a decree of Constantine the
great, the Bp. had power given him to retract the sentences made by the
Presidents of Provinces, and we find in the acts of St. Nicholas, that he
rescued some innocent persons from death when the executioner was ready to
strike the fatal blow: which thing even when it fell into inconvenience; was
indeed forbidden by Arcadius and Honorlus; but the confidence and honor was
only changed, it was not taken away for the condemned criminal had leave to
appeal to the Audientia Episcopalis, to the Bps Court. This was not any right
which the Bishops could challenge, but a reward of their piety; and so long as
the Holy Office was holily administered, the World found so much comfort and
security, so much justice and mercy, so many temporal and spiritual blessings
consequent to the ministeries of that order, that as the Galatians to St. Paul,
men have plucked out their eyes to do them service, and to do them honor. For
then Episcopacy did that good that God intended by it: it was a spiritual
Government, by spiritual persons, for spiritual ends. Then the Princes and the
People gave them honors because they deserved and sought them not: then they
gave them wealth, because they would dispend it wisely, frugally and
charitably: Then they gave them power; because it was sure to be used for
defense of the innocent, for relief of the oppressed, for the punishment of
evil doers, and the reward of the virtuous. Then they desired to be judged by
them because their audiences or Courts did (...), they appeased all furious
sentences, and taught gentle principles, and gave merciful measures and in
their Courts were all equity and piety, and Christian determinations.

But afterward, when they did fall (...) into saecular methods, and made their
Counsels vain by pride, and durtyed their sentences with money, then they
became like other men; and so it will be, unless the Bps. be more holy then
other men; but when our sanctity and severity shall be as eminent as the
calling is, then we shall be called to Councels, and sit in public meetings,
and bring comfort to private Families, and rule in the hearts of men by a jus
relationis, such as was between the Roman Emperors and the Senate; they courted
one another into power, and in giving honor strived to out do each other: for
from an humble wise man, no man will snatch an employment that is honorable;
but from the proud and from the covetuous every man endeavors to wrest it, and
thinks it lawful prize.

My time is now done, and therefore I cannot speak to the third part of my
text, the reward of the good Steward and of the bad: I shall only mention it
to you in a short exhortation; and so conclude. In the Primitive Church a
Bishop was never admitted to public penance; not only because in them every
crime is ten, and he that could discern a public shame, could not discern a
public honor, nor yet only because every such punishment was scandalous, and
did more evil by the example of the crime, then it could do good by the example
of the punishment: but also because no spiritual power is higher then the
Episcopal, and therefore they were to be referred to the Divine judgment, which
was likely to fall on them very heavily. (...): the Lord will cut the evil
Stewards asunder: he will suffer Schisms and Divisions to enter in upon us, and
that will sadly cut us asunder, but the evil also shall fall upon their
persons; like the punishment of quartering Traitors, (...), punnishment with
the circumstances of detestation and exemplarity. Consider therefore what is
your great duty. Consider what is your great danger. The lines of duty I have
already described; only remember how dear and precious Souls are to God, since
for their salvation Christ gave his blood, and therefore will not easily loose
them, whom though they had sinned against him, yet he so highly valued; remember
that You are Christ's deputies in the care of Souls, and that You succeed in the
place of the Apostles. Non est facile stare loco Pauli; and tenere gradum
Petri,; You have undertaken the work of St. Paul, and the office of St. Peter,
and what think you upon this account will be required of us: St. Hierom
expresses it thus. The wisdom and skill of a Bishop ought to be so great; that
his countenance, his gesture, his motion, every thing should be vocal, ut
quicquid agit, quicquid loquitur, doctrina sit Apostolorum: that whatever he
does or speaks be doctrine Apostolical. The Ancient Fathers had a pious
opinion, that besides the Angel guardian which is appointed to the guard of
every man; there is to every Bishop a second Angel appointed to him at the
Consecration: and to this Origin alludes, saying that every Bishopric has two
Angels, the one visible and the other invisible. This is a great matter and
shows what a precious thing that order and those persons are in the eyes of
God; but then this also means, that we should live Angelick lives, which the
Church rarely well expresses by saying, that Episcopal dignity is the
Ecclesiastic state of perfection, and supposes the persons to be so far
advanced in holiness as to be in the state of confirmation in grace. But I
shall say nothing of these things; because it may be they press too hard, but
the use I shall make of it upon occasion of the reward of the good and bad
Steward; is to remind you of your great danger. For if it be required of
Bishops to be so wise and so holy, so industrious and so careful, so buisy and
so good up to the height of best examples, if they be anointed of the Lord, and
are the Husbands of the Churches, if they be the Shepherds of the flock, and
Stewards of the household; it is very fit they consider their danger, that they
may be careful to do their duty. St. Bernard considers it well in his epistle
to Henry Archbishop of Sens; If I lying in my Cell, and smoking under a
Bushel, not shining, yet cannot avoid the breath of the winds but that my light
is almost blown out; what will become of my Candle if it were placed on a
candlestick and set upon a hill? I am to look to my self alone, and provide for
my own salvation; and yet I offend my self, I am weary of my self, I am my own
scandal and my own danger: my own eye, and my own belly, and my own appetite
find me work enough; and therefore God help them who besides themselves are
answerable for many others. Jacob kept the Sheep of Laban; and We keep the
Sheep of Christ: and Jacob was to answer for every Sheep that was stolen, and
every lamb that was torn by the wild beast; and so shall We too; if by our
fault one of Christ's Sheep perish; and yet it may be there are 100000. Souls
committed to the care and conduct of some one Shepherd, who yet will find his
own Soul work enough for all his care and watchfulness. If any man should
desire me to carry a Frigate into the Indies in which a 100. men were imbarqued;
I were a mad man to undertake the charge, without proportionable skill; and
therefore when there is more danger, and more Souls, and rougher Seas, and
more secret Rocks, and horrible Storms, and the Shipvvrack is an eternal loss,
the matter will then require great consideration in the undertaking, and
greatest care in the conduct.

Upon this account we find many brave persons in the first and in the middle
ages of the Church with great resolution refusing Episcopacy. I will not
speak of those who for fear of Martyrdom declined it: but those who for fear
of damnation did refuse. St. Bernard was by three rich Cities severally
called to be their Bp: and by two to be their Arch-Bp. and he refused them;
St. Dominicus refused four successively; St. Thomas Aquinas refused the
Archbishopric of Naples, and Vincentius Ferrerius would not accept of
Valentia, or Ilerda, and Bernardinus Senensis refused the Bishoprics of Sens,
Vrbin and Ferrara. They had reason; and yet if they had done amiss in that
office which they declined, it had been something more excusable; but if they
that seek it be as careless in the office as they are greedy of the honor,
that will be found intolerable. Electus Episcopus ambulat in disco, recusans
volvitur in arca, said the Hermit in St. Hierom. The Bp. walks upon round and
trundling stones, but he that refuses it, stands upon a floor. But I shall say
no more of it; because I suppose you have read it and considered it in St.
Chrysostoms six books de sacerdotio, in the Apologetie of St. Greg. Naz. in the
pastoral of St. Greg. of Rome, in St. Dionysius's 8th. epistle to Demophilus,
in the Letters of Epiphanius to St. Hierom, in St. Austins Epistle to Bp.
Valerius, in St. Bernards life of St. Malachy, in St. Hieroms 138th. Epistle to
Fabiola; These things I am sure you could not read without trembling; and
certainly, if it can belong to any Christian, then [work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling] that is the Bishops burden. For the Bishop is like a
man that is surety for his friend; he is bound for many, and for great sums;
what is to be done in this case? Solomon's answer is the way: Prove. 6.3,4.
Do this now, my Son, deliver thy self, make sure thy friend, give not sleep to
thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids: that is, be sedulous to discharge
thy trust, to perform thy charge; be zealous for Souls, and careless of money;
and remember this, that even in Christ's Family there was one sad example of an
Apostate Apostle; and he fell into that fearful estate merely by the desire and
greediness of money. Be warm in zeal, and indifferent in thy temporalities. For
he that is zealous in temporals, and cold in the spiritual: he that does the
accessories of his calling by himself, and the principal by his Deputies: he
that is present at the feast of Sheep shearing, and puts others to feed the
flock, has no sign at all upon him of a good Shepherd. It is not fit for us
to leave the word of God, and to serve tables. said the Apostles. And if it be
a less worthy office to serve the tables even of the poor, to the diminution of
our care in the dispensation of Gods word; it must needs be an unworthy
employment to leave the word of God, and to attend the rich and superfluous
furniture of our own Tables. Remember the quality of your charges. D. Bernard.
ad Henr. Epise. Senensem.
Civitas est, Vigilate ad custodiam and concordiam: sponsa est, studete amari:
oves sunt, intendite pastui. The Church is a Spouse; The Universal Church is
Christ's Spouse; but your own Diocese is yours; behave your selves so, that ye
be beloved. Your people are as sheep, and they must be fed and guided and
preserved, and healed, and brought home. The Church is a City, and you are the
watch man, Take care that the City be kept at Unity in it self: be sure to make
peace amongst your people, suffer no hatreds, no quarrels, no suits at Law
amongst the Citizens, which you can avoid: make peace in your Diocesses by all
the ways of prudence, piety and authority that you can, and let not your own
corrections of criminals be to any purpose, but for their amendment, for the
cure of offenders, as long as there is hope, and for the security of those who
are sound and whole. Preach often, and pray continually; let your discipline be
with charity, and your censures slow: let not Excommunications pass for
trifles; and drive not away the fly from your brothers forehead with a hatchet:
give counsel frequently, and dispensations seldom, but never without necessity
or great charity. Let every place in your Diocese say, Invenerunt me vigiles,
the Watch men have found me out, hassovevim. They that walk the City round,
have sought me out and found me. 2 Timothy 2.
Let every one of us, (as St. Paul's expression is,) show himself a workman,
that shall not be ashamed: operarium inconfusibilem, mark that, such a labourer
as shall not be put to shame for his illness, or his unskilfulness, his
falseness and unfaithfulness in that day when the great Bishop of Souls shall
make his last and dreadful visitation. For be sure, there is not a carkase nor
a skin, not a lock of wool, nor a drop of milk of the whole flock, but God
shall for it call the Idol Shepherd to a severe account. And how, think you,
will his anger burn, when he shall see so many Goats standing at his left hand,
and so few Sheep at his right? and upon inquiry shall find, that his
ministering Shepherds, were Wolves in Sheeps clothing; and that by their ill
example, or pernicious doctrines, their care of money, and carelessness of their
flocks, so many Souls perish: who if they had been carefully and tenderly,
wisely and conscientiously handled, might have shined as bright as Angels. And
it is a sad consideration to remember how many Souls are pitifully handled in
this world, and carelessly dismissed out of this world: they are left to live at
their own rate, and when they are sick they are bidden to be of good comfort,
and then all is well: who when they are dead, find themselves cheated of their
precious and invaluable eternity. Oh, how will those Souls in their eternal
prisons for ever curse those evil and false guides! and how will those evil
guides themselves abide in judgment, when the Angels of wrath snatch their
abused people into everlasting torments! For will God bless them or pardon
them, by whom so many Souls perish? shall they reign with Christ, who evacuate
the death of Christ, and make it useless to dear Souls? Shall they partake of
Christ's glories, by whom it comes to pass that there is less joy in Heaven it
self, even because sinners are not converted, and God is not glorified, and the
people is not instructed, and the Kingdom of God is not filled? Oh no! the
curses of a false Prophet will fall upon them, and the revvard of the evil
Steward will be their portion, and they who destroyed the Sheep, or
neglected them, shall have their portion with Goats for ever and ever in
everlasting burnings, in which it is impossible for a man to dvvell.

Can any thing be beyond this? beyond damnation? Surely a man would think, not.
And yet I remember a severe saying of St. Gregory; Scire debent Praelati, quod
tot mortibus digni sunt, quot perditionis exempla ad subditos extenderunt. One
damnation is not enough for an evil Shepherd: but for every Soul who dies by
his evil example or pernicious carelessness, he deserves a new death, a new
damnation. Let us therefore be wise and faithful, walk warily, and watch
carefully, and rule diligently, and pray assiduously. For God is more propense
to rewards, then to punishments: and the good Steward that is wise and faithful
in his dispensation, shall be greatly blessed. But how? He shall be made ruler
over the household. What is that? for he is so already. True: but he shall be
much more: Ex dispensatore faciet procuratorem, God will treat him as Joseph
was treated by his Master; he was first a Steward, and then a Procurator, one
that ruled his goods without account, and without restraint. Our ministry shall
pass into Empire, our labor into rest, our watchfulness into fruition, and our
Bishopric to a Kingdom. In the mean time our Bishoprics are a great and
weighty care, and in a spiritual sense, our dominion is founded in grace, and
our rule is in the hearts of the people, and our strengths are the powers of
the Holy Ghost, and the weapons of our warfare are spiritual: and the eye of
God watches over us curiously, to see if we watch over our Flocks by day and by
night. And though the Primitive Church (as the Ecclesiastic Histories
observe,) when they deposed a Bishop from his office, ever concealed his crime,
and made no record of it: yet remember this, that God does, and will call us to
a strict and severe account. Take heed that you may never hear that fearful
sentence, I was hungry and ye gave me no meat. If you suffer Christ's little
ones to starve, it will be required severely at your hands; And know this, that
the time will quickly come, in which God shall say unto thee in the words of
the Prophet, Jer. 13.20.21.
Where is the Flock that was given thee, thy beautiful Flock? what will thou
say when he shall visit thee?

God of his mercy grant unto us all to be so faithful and so wise, as to
convert Souls, and to be so blessed and so assisted, that we may give an
account of our charges with joy, to the glory of God, to the edification and
security of our Flocks, and the salvation of our own Souls, in that day when
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls shall come to judgment, even our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory, Love and Obedience, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

