Nonsense upon Sense: OR SENSE, UPON NONSENSE: Choose you either, or neither.

Written upon White Paper, in a Brown Study, betwixt Lammas Day and Cambridge,
in the Year aforesaid.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1651.

Nonsense upon Sense, etc,
MOunt meekly low, on blew presumptuous wings,
Relate the force of fiery water Springs,
Tell how the Artick and Antartick Pole
Together met, at Hockley in the Hole:
How Etna and Vessuvius, in cold blood,
Were both drowned in the Adriatic flood.
Speak truth (like a Diurnall) let thy pen
Camelion like, rouse Lions from their Den,
Turn frantic Woolpacks into melting Rocks,
And put Olympus in a Tinder box.
Report how Russian Cats do bark like Dogs,
And Scithian Mountains are turned Irish Bogs.
Feast Ariadne with Tartarian Tripes,
Transform great Cannons to Tobacco-pipes:
Make Venus like a Negro, white as Jet.
And puffepaste of the Tomb of Mahomet.
Then mounted on a Windmill, presently
To Dunstable in Darby shire I Will fly:
From thence I Will take the Chariot of the Sun
And swim to Scotland, and bring news what is done.
From thence I Will soar to silver Cinthia's lap,
And with Endymion take a nine years nap:
There I Will drink healths with smug faced Mulciber
At all the twelve signs in the Hemisphere.
Tush tell not me these things are past dispute,
I Will from the Hesperides bring golden fruit:
Such as the Poets Palfrey Pegasus,
Fetched from the fertile Molehill Caucasus.
It Is not the Persian Gulf, or Epshams Well,
Nor Westminsters sweet Plum broth (made in Hell)
Can change my resolution; I have vowed,
To speak with silence, and to write aloud,
That bulls of Basan, and the Circean Swine,
Shall al dance Trenchmore at these works of mine.
Rouse up thou Ghost of Guzman, and apply
Thy self to me, and let us write Tempe dry:
Be ruled by me, we will empty all Hellicon,
In scribbling against the whore of Babylon;
The Dunsmore Cowes milk shall make Sillibubs,
And our Religion shall be brought in Tubs.
Make haste unto the Fair called Bartholomew,
And thence, from the Heroic Mungrell Crew,
Take the fine Gewgaw hobby horses all,
Which we will man, and then a Counsel call,
And conquer Callice, Kent and Christendom,
Knock down the Turk, and bravely ransack Rome.
What can be done more? what more can be sed?
Let Us play at Blind-man-buffe for ginger bread:
We Will have a dish of Dabs in Fish-street dressed,
And with the Lobsters Lady we will feast.
For as the Gout is but a pleasing itch.
The best Beare-garden Bull dog, was a Bitch.
We have both eight, and eighteen parts of speech,
Whereby I find Ash burns as well as Beech.
Gargantuas scull is made a frying pan,
To fry or follow the Leviathan,
That Gogmagog, Nick Wood or Mariot,
Nor Creatan, Miloe, or Iscariot,
Were not such valiant Stomack'd men as those
That eat the Devils gowty petitoes.
Hark, hark, how from the South fierce Boreas rores;
Give me a Sculler, or a pair of Oars,
I Will make the Orient and the Occident,
Both friends at Smithfield in the wild of Kent.
For now Tom Holders Mare has broke her Crupper,
Dress me a dish of AE-dipthongs to supper.
The Dean of Dunstable has bought and sold
Twelve lies new printed, for two groats in gold.
It Is almost past the mamory of man
Since famous Arthur first in Court began:
Yet though King Lud did reign in Troynovaunt,
Will Summers was no kin to John a Gaunt.
What news from Trippolie? wat^ho^s there ho:
The West wind blows South North at Jerico.
Steer well and steady, boys look look to the Helm:
Fetch Gooseberries that grow upon the Elm:
Like Cormorants let us live upon the Air,
And of a Whirlepoole make a marble chair.
Blind men may see, and deaf men all shall hear,
How dumb men talk because Cow hides are dear.
Go to the Utopian Kingdom and relate,
That to their King these lines I dedicate:
Bid him take note of me, and understand,
He has not such a Poet in his Land.
Down by the dale with Milk and Cream that slowes.
Upon a Hill (below the valley) grows
Hungarian Peacocks, white as crimson Geese,
There sat a Rat upon a Holland Cheese.
No sooner did blind Bayard see the sight:
Two beauteous ugly Witches took their flight
To tell the King of China wondrous news
How all Scotch Knaves were hanged, and English Jews.
The Athenian Hidra, and the Bird Torpedo
Were caught in France, in Mouse-traps near Toledo.
A Scolopendra coming from Pickthatch
Made drunk a Constable, and stole the Watch.
Do what you can Madge howlet is an Owl:
And Beans with Buttermilk is rare wild Foul.
The Cobblers daughter, we three both together
We Will match: he will give a thousand pieces with her;
Besides the smoke of Keinsam, and Bell-Swagger,
Who often at Mims did use his dudgeon Dagger.
Then shall the Pericranians of the East.
South, North, and West with every bird and Beast;
All Knuckle deep in Paphlagonian Sands
Inhabit Transilvanian Netherlands.
It Is the only gallant way to gain promotion,
To squeeze Oil from the Cinders of devotion,
Translate our Roundhead Turnigs into Carrers,
And turn the lowest Cellers to high Garrets.
Let Neptune be a Shepherd, and let Vulcan
Make have to Greenland, and there drink his full Kan.
Titus Andronicus has writ a Treatise
Of Mole-hills in the Entrails of Dame Theatis,
Wherein a man may learn before he looks
To catch mince-pies, with neither nets or hooks.
There Policy with practice cut and dried
Were Carted both in triumph through Cheapside.
If Monday hang himself, no further seek,
Henceforward Tuesday shall begin the week.
No more of that I pray, I am afear'd
There Is not one hair upon Diana's beard.
Great Agamemnon late combined with Hector,
To preach at Amsterdam an Irish Lector,
Which shall convert the Horse, the Ass and Mule,
And all the Beasts in Hipperborean Thule.
If Sunshine will with shaddows but consent,
We Will make the winter of our discontent
To force fierce Crook-back into better tune,
And turn Decembers heat to frost in June.
When this external substance of my soul
Did live at liberty, I caught wild foul,
I was a Caitiffe in the Court of Spain,
And played at shuttle-cock with Charlemaigne.
Then I did magnify and mundifie,
Then I the Fairy Queen did putrify,
And purify again, and dignifie,
All such as did her greatness deifie,
Females did edify and fructify,
And amplify and coldly gratify.
The Lake of Learna I did clarify,
My Verse the Ethiop Queen did beautify,
With rage my patience I would qualify,
I can both certify and testify
How Death did live, and Life did mortify:
Fear always did my courage fortify,
He Is crafty that his wits can rectify:
To villifie, make glad and terrify,
And with course words old debts to satisfy,
That man, I Will ratify and notify,
To be one that himself will justify,
And fie, fo, fum, concludes him with O fie.
Thus from complexions I have Minerals drawn,
Brave Captain Fumble laid his sword to pawn
To ransom Jeffery Chausers Cipresse Gown,
Thersites with a Rush knocked Ajax down;
Imperious Momus wrote the Atlantic story
Of wars betwixt Achilles and John Dory:
'Twas dedicated to the Isle of Lundy.
An Emblem ^ight of transit gloria mundi.
Let not the distances of place molest us,
Abidos is not forty miles from Sestus:
As Hero loved Leander I Will agree,
Though he and she were mad, what is that to me?
It Is likely Cleopatra and Antonius
Met, but saw not the Cardinail Barronius:
The Capitol, and silken Rack Tarpeyus
In a Seadan to Lichfield shall convey us;
And like a wheele-barrow we will cut and curry,
And fetch good news from Shropshire and from Surry:
There is no Eunuch of the Race of Brutus,
That either can confute us, or cornute us.
Old Solon was no Jester, nor no Jyber,
And English Thames is better then Romes Tyber:
I took a Cammell, and to Naples went I,
Of pickled Sausedges I found great plenty;
The Gudgeon catcher there, over top'd the Nobles,
And put the Viceroy in a peck of troubles:
Brave tag rag multitude of Omnium Gatherum,
Shuffle 'um together, and the Devil father 'um:
But now and then was squeezed a rich Delinquent,
By which good means away the precious chinke went:
Renowned was the Rascal Massennello,
In fifteen days he was raw, ripe, and mellow:
Laugh, laugh, thou whining fool Heraclitus,
And weep thou grinning Ass Democratus:
The gray Horse is the better Mare by half,
The Bull at Bear-Garden, and Walthams Calfe
Are reconciled, but not concluded fully
Who pleaded best. Demosthenes or Tully:
I am indifferent, fill the other Kan,
Logic has Art to make an Ape a man:
I weeping sing, to think upon the Quibblins
'Twixt Roman, and Imperial Guelphs and Giblins,
How Munsters John a Leide, and Knipperdoling
Were barberous Barbers in the Art of poling.
From Sense and Nonsense, I am wide, quoth Wallice,
But not so far as Oxford is from Callice:
Give me a Leash of merry Blades, right Bilboes,
True tatterd Rogues, in Breech, Shirts, Skirts, and Elboes,
And each of them will make a fit diciple,
To ride up Holborne to the tree that is triple.
A man may think his purse is turned a Roundhead,
When all the crosses in it are confounded:
It Is said that Poetry a thriving trade is,
And gets a world of wealth from Lords and Ladies,
The devil they do, false shameful Lowne thou lie,
And when thou can no longer live, thou dy'st.
Lend me Rhamnussnes Flanders blade, I Will lash
The sober Centaures, turn great Oaks to Ash:
A long Dev'ls broth, be sure you bring a spoon,
Our mornings shall begin at afternoon;
And Minos, Eacus, nor Rhadamantus
May roar and rant, but never shall out rant us.
As we are temporal, lets be temporisers,
We scorn to be surpised, we will be surprizers:
Let Us make grim Pluto stink, the welkin rumble,
And Hollophernes bluster, Now and grumble,
Rending up mighty thistles by the roots,
Because an Hostler stole away his boots;
Then with a multiplying Gally pot,
I Will know the projects of the crafty Scot;
And then he shall be forced to hide his head
In Tenebris, in Poland, or in Swead.
Fough, this Tobacco stinks; thou dirty Hag
Abato fair, I Will put thee in a bag.
Search Asia, Afric, and America,
To find the Goddess Berecinthia,
And know how Pirramus and Thisbe fell
Together by the ears, late in Bridewell.
Words are but wind in term time, but vacations
Are fit to publish silent Proclamations.
There was a business never understood,
The woman's suit in Law was just and good:
She lost the day, this did her cause disgrace,
The Lawyer put some ill into her case.
Before I Will live this life, I Will take a Knife,
And drown my self, and then what needs a Wife?
Strange things are done by art and humane power:
Quinborough Castle landed near the Tower.
Much like a prodigy old time played Rex:
A Kentish Castle came to Middlesex.
May not a man called Newgate dwell at Highgate,
And wed a Widow at the Pie at Algate?
Therefore let us like or dislike Presbytery,
It will work finely, if it once besquitter ye.
Bring me a Salamander from Surat in France,
The Alps and the Pirenian hills shall dance.
In Greenwich Park there smiling Nioby
Shall laugh and lie down like an Oyster Pie.
Fame is a lying slut, she told me tales,
That in October Christmas came from Wales:
Believe it, take the wings of Icarus,
And walk to Hounsditch, and to Erebus,
There tell them plainly how the case stands here,
And bring us word how matters do go there.
Unto the Market I Will run presently,
And there a peck of troubles I will buy,
One told me they would multiply and grow;
All England with them I will plant and sow:
Which, as they ripen daily I Will take care
That every living soul shall have a share.
I Will serve my self first, and I Will have such store
In time of need to serve a thousand more.
But I forget my Theme, O soul offense!
This Nonsense has a taste of too much sense:
The Ass, Goose, Woodcocke, Buzzard, and the Gull,
Beat out their Brains, and put them in my scull;
And tell the men of Gotham it is thought fit
The Wise men there should lend me all their wit.
For Nonsense I will tax all Christendom,
Great Emperors and Kings shall pay me some.
And many a Major, or Justice of the Peace
Will give me Tribute and the Tax increase
To such a height, that Cardinals from Rome
Cuckolds and Constables shall pay me some:
Strong Hull, with fata I Hell, and Hallifax,
Shall naturally bring me tole and tax.
The mighty stock of Nonsense I will win,
Shall be the universal Magazine
For Universities to work upon,
The rich Philosophers admired Stone;
Then I make Poetsrich, and Us'rers poor;
And thus resolved, at this time write more.
This Dedication is humbly directed to a living man, quartered into four
Offices, (viz.) a Scavenger, a Beadle, a Cobbler, and half a Constable.
To the high and mighty Davidius Vulcanus, Duke and Dominator of the Dunghils,
and absolute, resolute, dissolute Scavenger of the Town and Territories of
Gravesend in Norfolk, great Master and Baron of the Wheelebarrow, the only
Farmer, Transporter, Lord of the Soil, and Privy searcher of all Mixens, and
Muckhils, simple or compound, in the Liberties aforesaid. Cleanser, clearer,
and avoyder of the most Turpitudinous, Merdurinous, excrementall offals, Muck
and Garbadge. Refiner, Purger, Clarifier, Purifier, Mundifier, Excluder, and
Expulser of Putrifactious and Pestiferous Contagions; the Potentissimo,
Excellentissimo, Invader, Scatterer, Disperser, Consumer and Confounder of
offensive unsavory savours, smells, scents, and vapors: Great Sultan, Sultan,
and Grand Signiour over all varieties of stinks and stinkards; most Triumphant
Termagant, unresistable Conqueror and Commander of the major and minor (the
great and the less) Turditanians, chief Corigidor and Beadle of all the
Precinct, sole Transplanter, Terrifier, Controler, and Corrector of Beggars and
Vagabonds. The terrible Hue and Cry Crier, chief Court Crier, Jayle-Keeper,
and only confiner of the Hogs; chief and most frequent vigilant Watchman,
demi Constable, and Image of Authority, the most accomplished Cobbler, exquisite
Translater, and exact Reformer of oppressed, decayed, wicked and oppressed
seals: And the only justiciary rectifier, underlayer and setter upright of
such Brethren and Sisters, as do go aside, and tread their foot awry in these
days of vanity, and paths of iniquity: In hope (Great Sir) I have not abated
you of the least tittle of your Title, your Honorable style being so high, that
no Christian, Pagan, Heathen, Turk, Jew, Infidel, Cuckold or Canniball, can
never climb to the top of it, there being a late report that your multiplicity
and many affairs of State have distarbed your rest, and impaired your health,
insomuch as it is thought your pericranion is crazed or cracked, and you
thereby in danger to fall into a Callenturian disease, which is to be doubted
may produce a Vertigo in your head, whereby your wit may be troubled with a
superfluous flax, which may prove a molestation to your self, and the whole
Town, that has in it self, and in every place round about it, more troubles
then they can well bear. But if their hard fortune should be, that when you
are working to your own Ends, and that you should call for your Aule, and
Death should mistake and bring you your Last, whereby such a privy member as
your self might be publicly lost; it is feared, grief would overflow the
whole Town, and that some of the Townsmen (with the help of their Wives)
would run stark horn mad: To prevent this great detriment of such a loss
as that Town may undergo in this time of scarcity of wit, wisdom, and wise
men; for fear you should fall into the dangerous diseases of the
Mubblefubbles, or the grumbling in the Gizzard: Therefore (10 drive away dumps)
and to give you some Recreation, I have made bold to present your Greatness
with this Dedication, which if you will vouchsafe but to read and understand,
and in so doing you shall do more for the Auhour, then he ever was, or shall do
himself.

J. T

Allandro pasqueto Mallatrumpa entangrino liuroe.
ILvento Chioli, Mauritambull Teda fulgare,
Antro della campo il Danto Cordi sublima
Pantathos, stremo standina eschine vandri
Been in shendo, tercia penthe dissadi.
Mecrops, Sans sida vocifera Randa Bavinea,
Allatendrea quanto, Eltrada Pizminov venta,
Mega Pollimunton, Theorba quasie qaicunque
Tripolina Tiphon, Quabacondono sapho.
Terra tragmus sophye, sunt diacalcitheo Geata.
Avostre Obserdandi Zhean De Fistye Cankie De Sallamanca Andalowsia.

Or thus you may English it, in the transcending praise of the Author, and his
Book.

TIll PHOEBUS blustering blasts shall cease to blow,
And AEOLUS shall hide his radient Rays,
Till VULCANS Forge be framed of SCITHIAN Snow,
And NEPTUNE like a Shepherd spend his days;
When SATURN shall sell Mouse-traps, and allow
MARS to fing Madrigalls, and Round delays:
Then shall thy Book and thee be out of Date,
And scorn the fury of consuming Fate.
To your Worthiness in all Observance Devoted. John Defistie Cankie Of
Sallamanca in Andalusia.

FINIS.

