THE VINDICATION OF A LATE PAMPHLET, (ENTITLED, Obedience and Submission TO
THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT, Demonstrated from Bp. Overal's Convocation-Book) From
the False Glosses, and Illusive Interpretations of a Pretended Answer.

By the Author of the First Pamphlet.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCI.

THE PREFACE.
MAlice and Ignorance are very Spiteful and Opprobrious Words, and such as the
Author had little Comfort of, since he saw them in the Printed Pamphlet; for he
had learnt, That the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God; And his
design was not, to provoke and exasperate; but, if he could, to win, and
prevail upon his Non-juring Brethren with Calmness and Composedness; to examine
heartily, whether what he had writ, was the Sense of that Learned Convocation,
or no? Hoping that if they found it was, they might be brought over to comply
with, and increase the Happiness of this Present Government. Far, therefore,
was he from reproaching them with Malice or Ignorance; for he Reverenced the
Persons, and Admired the Parts, and lamented the loss of many of them. So that
the Truth is, those words never fell from the Pen of the Author; and therefore
he desires that the Dissembling Stationer, who abused him in Printing the Book
without his knowledge, may be examined about it; for till those words were
Printed, he knew nothing of them. Whoever, therefore would be so abused, may
commit his Papers to Mr. C --, and from his Confederacy with the Non-Jurors
Party, he may expect to be so treated.

THE VINDICATION OF OBEDIENCE TO THE Present Government, etc.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Imputation cast on those who took the Oaths before the
Publication of the Convocation-Book.
THE first Effort of the Answerer, is an Imputation of Guilt upon all the
Jurors, and that, whether the Allegations of the Author from the Convocation
(p. 1.) be true or false. This is hard on many a good man, that knew nothing,
either of the obscure Convocation, or the obscurer Author: But so it is, For
this can by no means justify them, being at the best, but a Pretense taken up
after the Fact; and as a subsequent Law cannot condemn, so neither can it
justify a Fact previous to it. But does he think the Author produced this for
a Reason of what he had beforehand done? The Answerer is not so soft, but he
knew this to be only an Inducement to such as himself, that were more
scrupulous of the Equity and Legality of it. And the Case is this,

The Church of England had not by any Public Act, that we knew of, interposed
her Judgment on either side, but every man was left to the Direction of his own
Conscience, guided by the General Principles of that Church, and the Word of
God: And all the Obligation that the Church could lay upon them, was only an
acting consonantly to her declared Principles. Hereupon some took the Oaths,
and some did not: and yet I dare not think but that both Parties acted on a
Principle of Conscience. Afterward an old Convocation-Book is produced, and
the Jurors perusing it, discover the Doctrine of the Church of England to
justify their Proceedings. Now though the subsequent Discovery could not be
produced, as the Ground and Reason of their Previous Act; yet, sure I am, it
does clear and vindicate them from that Scandal, of their deserting their Old
Principles, which some men labor to cast upon them: And that was all that was
designed from it.

But if in the Innocence of our Souls we had acted besides the Principles of
the Church of England, which were not sufficiently declared to us; could those
who kept this Book so long private, and afterward published it, as if it had
been meant for a Snare to our Consciences, hold themselves excused? Whatever
they can do in this respect, P. 2.
we are called upon to show any other Public Act of the Church of England, any
Opinion of one of the approved Sons thereof, the practice of any one that owned
her Principles, in favor of the Doctrines we now teach, and the Practices we
now follow, and then we shall be allowed to say something. To obtain his
favor, though the Principles whereupon men took the Oaths, were various, yet I
will instance some of them, and oblige my Answerer, by confirming them both by
the Authority of Principles and Practice; which is all that a Man can require.
Now,

1. Some men took the Oaths upon a Supposition, That the Violation of the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, did release them from the Duty of their
Allegiance: and though the Convocation-Book does no where purposely discourse
this Case, P. 27.
yet the Notion that it gives of Tyranny (of which more presently) and its
vindicating the Jews in opposing Autiochus Epiphanes, a Tyrant, leaves us very
doubtful of their sense herein. But tho they be silent, since the Opinion of
one Church-of- England-man, that is a Man approved, will satisfy the Answerer,
he shall have Bishop Bilson's Judgment in this Case, who discoursing purposely
of Christian Subjection, P. 279. Ed. 1586.
Dare not rashly pronounce all that resist, to be Rebels; because Cases may so
fall out, even in Christian Kingdoms, where the People may plead their Right
against their Prince, and not be charged with Rebellion. And being demanded to
produce an Example, he adds, If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom
to a Foreign Realm; or Change the Form of the Commonwealth from Impery to
Tyranny; or neglect the Laws established by Common Consent of Prince and
People, to execute his own pleasure; in these, says he, and other Cases, which
might be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend their Ancient
and Accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Law, they may not well be counted Rebels.

This will justify, I think, all those that deserted his Late Majesty, had
they done more than they did. For an Embassy to Rome, an Arbitrariness over
Laws, and before the Oaths were imposed, (yea, probably before the Desertion)
an Open Negotiation with France, which means our Slavery; amounts to such a
Vindication of us and them, as cannot from this Principle be denied.

And this his Determination is not destitute of all Reason: For if our
Allegiance respect primarily the Government, and then the Governor, as the
Head of it, See his Case of the Engagement.
as Bishop Sanderson seems to intimate; it sollows thence, That by virtue of
the Duty that we owe unto the Government, Allegiance must (although the
Rightful Governor by withdrawing, incapacitate himself to receive it) be paid
somewhere or other, or else the Government must be dissolved. And since this
Learned Bishop judged thus, I doubt not, but as some others that built on the
same Principles, he would have practiced so also.

2. Others supposing that the King's Desertion, or Abdication, (which you will)
left them in a State of Liberty, thought their late Oath of Allegiance to him
was vacated, and so were free to oblige themselves anew. And my Lord Clarendon,
observing that the Word Abdicate is no new Word; nor the Caprice and Humor of
Princes to abdicate their Kingdoms, a new thing: And representing it as the
hardest Case of Subjects, without their Privity, Surv. of Lev. p. 94, 95.
to be left in an instant, without any Protection, without any Security, as a
Prey to all that are too strong for them. He adds, That it is no New
Transaction for Kings and Princes to resign and RELINQVISH THEIR CROWN AND
SOVEREIGNTY; nor may it be the better for being old. Yet besides other Accounts
there mentioned; Some Princes, says he, have been so HVMOROVS, as upon the
FROWARDNESS AND REFRACTORINESS OF THEIR SVBJECTS, AND BECAVSETHEY COVLD NOT
GOVERNIN THAT MANNER THEY HAD A MIND TO DO, TO ABDICATE THE GOVERNMENT, AND
WOULD HAVE BEEN GLAD AFTERWARD TO HAVE RESVMED IT. Now, I imagine, according
to the Judgment of that Great Statesman, and true Churchman, that our
Allegiance to the Late King is void.

And the Letter (of which I have sufficient Testimony) sent from the Jesuits to
King James, at Sailsbury, advising him to leave the Kingdom, with a promising
Assurance, That he should be Restored, and have his ENDS upon us; implies
something worse than a Caprice or Humor.

3. The most that I have had Converse with, conclude their Present Majesty's to
have a Right to, as well as Possession of the Crown; and that not only from the
Law of the Land, which receives and owns them as Legal King and Queen; but also
upon the Appeal which they made to God, for the Injustice done them, on account
of the Impostor; which being determined on their sides, fairly gives them a
Divine Right. And if so, then the Groundwork of the Gentleman's whole Answer
is undermined, and his Building must fall. And this the Author in his Pamphet
asserted; but because he knew not what to say to it, he haughtily past it by.

And thus much for the Principles of some Approved Church-of- England-men.

Then for their Practice. The Case of the Engagement, represented by the
Judicious Bishop Sanderson, who plainly intimates some good men to have taken
it, and which is left almost in an Aequilibrio by that profound Casuist; nay,
and which was taken by a Great and Good Man (now with God) a Dying Advocate of
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, shows the Practices of some that have owned
her Principles, not to be altogethee repugnant to ours. But this is an
unpleasing Subject, because reflexive upon other men. From hence therefore let
us proceed to enquire something after the Convocation-Book.

CHAP. II. An Account of the Convocation-Book, and why it wanted the Royal
Confirmation.
THE Sense and meaning of this Convocation being to be enquired after,
especially in these two things, 1. Whether Right must of necessity be united to
Authority, before our Allegiance can be due unto it? And 2. When a Revolution
of Government may be supposed to have obtained a through Settlement? I thought
it not amiss to enquire into the Reasons for the calling of the Convocation;
the circumstances of Affairs when the Book was written; and the Causes why it
was laid to sleep, not being suffered to appear with the Royal Confirmation:
For the understanding of these, will mightily assist us to comprehend their
meaning. And what I have received is thus:

The Spaniards growing weary of their wars with the United Provinces, seeing
Queen Elizabeth, the great supporter of the Dutch against the House of Auflria,
to grow old, and knowing that James, then King of the Scots, was, after her
decease, to succeed her in the Throne of England, a Prince of a Peaceable
Disposition; they made previous Applications to him, to pre-engage him, when he
came to the Crown of England, to mediate a Truce, or Peace, between them and
Holland. The good Queen, according to the course of Nature, in some time after
dies; whereupon the Spaniards, by their Ambassador, as soon almost as King
James was seated on the English Throne, renew their Negotiation with him, to
mediate the foresaid Truce; supposing the United Provinces would scarce refuse
his Interposition, because at that time he held in his hands some Cautionary
Towns of theirs, which had been delivered to the late Queen. The King being of
himself inclinable to Peace, and to oblige the Spaniards (who had a Pontifical
claim to the Crown of England) to own and acknowledge his Right and Title to
that Crown, that so he might secure to himself the certainty of enjoying ease
and safety, undertakes the Mediation: But difficulties arising from the Dutch
Pretentions, who demanded to be acknowledged a Free and Independent State, though
they had but lately withdrawn themselves from the Crown of Spain; His Majesty
of Great Britain taking this to be a tender Point, and of great consequence to
all Crowned Heads, if a Province or Principality having shaken off their
Ancient Lord, might set up for a Free and Independent State; desirous also to
overruled the Dutch in their Allegations to this Claim, on the apprehension of
a Fear that it would void the overtures of the designed Truce: That he might do
it with the greater appearance of Authority and Judgment, he resolves to
consult his Convocation about the Origin of Government, its various Forms,
Alterations, and Modifications, intending them especially to exalt the
Sacredness and Grandeur of Monarchy.

Accordingly the Convocation go to work, and deduce the Power of Government
from its natural and prime Original; taking notice what it was in it self;
whence Tyranny and Arbitrary Power usurped upon the Patriarchal: How that again
was retrenched, and the True Fatherly Government settled amongst his own People
the Jews, till the Captivity of Babylon; giving also an Account what became of
them afterward, what Revolutions they underwent, till they, and all the
Western World were made subject to the Roman Eagle.

This led them to treat of the Variation of Government by the Providence of
God, who casts down Kings, and sets up Kings; who alters Kingdoms, and turns
them into Aristocratical, or Democratical States; and on the contrary, States
into Dukedoms, Elective Monarchies, and the like. As also what Obedience ought
to be paid to the said Governments, when they are once thoroughly settled upon
such Revolutions; laying down a Rule, when People with a safe Conscience may,
nay ought to pay Obedience to their Authority. But their Determination herein
touching too hard upon the Claims of Sovereigns, and the Royalties of
Monarchies (of which scarce ever Prince had more tender feeling, than that his
Majesty of Britain) King James is displeased with it, and them; charging them,
that they had dipped too deep into what all Princes did reserve amongst the
Arcana Imperii, as from his Letter at the end may be seen: and by Orders sent
by Mr. Solicitor, restrains them from meddling any farther in it. And this, I
believe, might be a Reason, why the Convocation, which had promised to treat of
the Government of the whole World, did not handle more particularly the Case of
Free and Independent States, which are, and were, one sort of Government in the
World, and comprised by them (as I before hinted) in the word Kingdoms; and
which the clew of their discourse would have led them to; and they plainly seem
to aim at, Chapter and Ca. 23. had they not by a Prohibition from the King been
restrained.

However, they said enough to maintain the Dutch Pretenses, who insisted
immovably on the Claim of being acknowledged a Free, and Independent State; or
else no Accommodation would be hearkened to, no Truce concluded. And the
Spanish Affairs being such, at that time, as would not suffer them to contest
the matter any longer, they thought it convenient to yield to their Claim (or
if you would have it in the Answerer's Language, to transfer their Right over
to the States) whereupon a Truce betwixt them was concluded, whereof King James
was made the Chief Guarantee. And these were the Circumstances when the
Convocation sat, as from the History of those Times, the Date of the
Convocation, which was called Anno 1603, and continued by Adjournments and
Prorogations, to 1610. that is, a year after the aforesaid Truce was concluded,
which commenced in April, Anno 1609. and ended after the Term of Twelve years;
and above all, by King James his Commission to this Convocation, if we could be
so happy as to get a fight of it.

Thus the Affairs of Spain and Holland were Accommodated; but it netled King
James, to have the Convocation determine so positively of Obedience to be due
to Governments established upon such Revolutions as are there mentioned.
Hereupon it is supposed that he refused the Canons his Royal Assent, and left
them to be devoured Blattis and Tineis, or at least by Old Time, if by nothing
else.

But for the Honor of the Convocation, something was to appear, lest that
Venerable Assembly should seem to meet only as the Emperor with his Army, to
gather Cockle-shels; And therefore, as I guess (for it is no more) the Book,
called God and the King, (which whoever compares with this, will find in many
things of its last Part, to be an Abstract of some of these Chapters) was
collected hence, and sent abroad into the World to atone his displeased
Majesty. And so much for the Convocation, and the Occasion of their being
summoned, and Commissionated.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Four Propositions of Government; Extracted out of
the Convocation-Book.
A Grievous Charge is now laid against me, That though I pretended to
demonstrate, yet I have omitted many things that are material, P. 2.^
and pertinent to the present Controversy about Government and Allegiance.
That what I have drawn up into Pro^^sitions, I have in some of them (if not in
all) curtailed and diminished the ^^ll sense of the Convocation. That, above
all, by adding words and Limitions, and Glosses, and Explications, I have
destroyed the Text, and per^^^tly corrupted, and perverted their sense. Well! I
will not take any exceptions at his words, else how I could argue on a Subject,
without adding Glosses and Explications, etc. I know not; but how far I am
guilty, I leave the Reader to judge, and so hasten to the Propositions. The
First of which was,

PROP. I. That the Power of Kings was originally Patriarchal, Derived from God,
and not from the People, Ca. 2, 6, 13.
On which the Complaint is, That I have expounded away, P. 12.
as I always do, the sense of the Convocation; for, it seems, I say, that Kings
are, and ought to be bound up by Laws; P. 13.
and he prays to know by what Laws? The very next words tell him: but because
nothing will digest with him but the express words of the Convocation-Book,
from them he might have understood, that they wre the Laws of God and Nature,
P. 9, and 11.
as they did concern Civil Societies and Governments, which surely ought to
bind; But why did not I express it in the words of the Convocation-Book, to
which I refer? A man has need of patience that has to deal with such a
Questionarist. But to give him satisfaction. It was because I had a mind to
deliver in general what the Convocation had said but in Particular. For that
very same Reason that obliged the Kings of Judah, to the Observation of the
Civil-Laws of their Particular Government, obliges all other Kings to the
observation of the Fundamental Establish^^ Laws of their Respective Kingdoms.
And since it is the King's being bound up by Laws that stomachs the Answerer, I
desire he would take notice from the Convocation, what those Princes are that
w^^^ not be bound up by Law; For Nimrod, say they, (and by a Parity (...)
Reason we may add all such like Princes) not cententing himself with the
Patriarchal or Mild Government, ordained of God by the Laws Reason and Nature,
became a Tyrant, and Lord of Confusion Should have delivered this Notion of
Tyranny, to be sure we had had it (...) his Scheme of New Notions; and
therefore I recommend it to the Answerers consideration: Only I observe from
them, That a Patriarchal Power, and the being limited in the Exercise of Power
by Law are not inconsistent.

PROP. II. That Descent in Hereditary Kingdoms, is the Ordinary way whereby a
Right and Title to the Crown is claimable.
His Quarrel here is, that these Words, The Ordinary Way, are Words of mine
own; for he observes that I add, P. 2.
I say, the ordinary Way: And since these were Words of mine own, how could I
let him know it otherwise, than by telling him, and all men, that they were my
Saying. Surely the Cause is sinking, when men catch thus at Reeds and Rushes.
But since I must not say, pray do you say: Is the Proposition true or false? If
true, why so captious at it? and if false, why do you not reject it? No matter
for that, for though there be some extraordinary ways in Hereditary Kingdoms, P.
2, 3.
that may give a Right and Title to the Crown besides Descent; yet the Author's
extraordinary way is none of them. For this I shall appeal to the Reader to
judge; as also for his ingenuity in interpreting the Author's Meaning from the
Convocation-Book, which asserts, That the Lord both may, and is able to
overthrow Kings or Emperors, notwithstanding any Claim, Right, Title or
Interest, which they can challenge to their Countries, Kingdoms, or Empires, to
be only God's Permissive Providence, which, I think, the Author scarce mentions
above once, and that far from the Sense that the Answerer would insinuate. But
my Citation and his must be adjusted anon, and therefore here I will speak no
more of this matter.

PROP. III. That no Violence is to be used to Kings from their own Subjects,
for any Irregularities that they commit.
This, he says, does not fully express the sense of the Convocation; yet he
intimates not wherein it is defective; but the Author's Comment destroys it.
How does this appear? Why, Because the Doctrines of Passive Obedience to a
Government established by Law, whether the Prince be Limited or Absolute, is of
absolute Necessity to the support of the Government. And is it not so? But this
is Mr. P. 3.
Johnson 's Passive Obedience, that is limited to the Laws, and not to the
Prince. The Author troubles not himself in thinking what it is, but shrewdly
suspects that the Answerer was conscious to himself that he abused him, when in
the very next Words he confesses, that if so, this is not only a plain
Contradiction to the Convocations, but to his own extracted Proposition. Whence
the Author supposes, that his Suppositive If, argues too manifestly a
conscientiousness of Guilt.

Before I pass hence, I must take notice of a fine Word that the Answerer has
met with, Yclepd Irregularity, which again he supposes the Author can mean
nothing less by, than a Prince's acting and governing against Law: P. 3.
by his favor, besides Law, will amount to an irregularity; and for his
newfound Universal Any, when the Logicians shall so esteem it, I will retrench
my Indefinites.

PROP. IV. That having sworn Allegiance to a Prince, we cannot without the
dreadful guilt of Perjury, transfer our Allegiance, whilst he continues to have
an Authoritative Right and Title to the Crown.
Kindly here he corrects the false Impression, C. 36. which should have been
the 30.

But what most grieves him here are, the Cramp-words of an Authoritative Right
and Title, and not finding them in the Convocation-Book, he discovers again,
that I confess them my own, in that I say, an Authoritative Right and Title;
but he desires the favor once more to know where I had them. I am loath to
disoblige him, and therefore may he know, that I had them from the Words of
Can. 31. where the Authority of Alexander is acknowledged to be settled amongst
the Jews; which, if the Story be true (and the Convocation-Book, not I, am to
answer for that) of necessity must be in the Lifetime of Darius, as the Book
plainly intimates, Ca. and Can. 30 and 31. taking notice, that he had preserved
his Life by flight; and if so, there was an Expiration, though not of Darius's
Life, yet of his Authoritative Right and Title.

And this the Answerer fairly confesses in these Words. The Convocation
supposes that Darius had not at that time that Authoritative Title the Author
mentions; for they tell us expressly, that this was when Darius was escaped by
flight, P. 27.
after his Army was discomfited. And so both he and they confess him at this
time to be Alive.

But says he, The Author goes on (and on he may go, for any stop that he has
given him) asserting, that the Claim of Right without the Authority, cannot
Challenge our Allegiance. Which, whether the Sense of the Convocation, or no,
is now to be examined.

CHAP. IV. Right and Authority, Whether in the Sense of the Convocation, to be
always joined as the Foundation of our Allegiance.
ONE of the greatest Points in Controversy, between the Author and the
Answerer, is conconcering Right and Authority; and whether they must of
necessity be united, before a Foundation, whereon to build our Allegiance, can
be laid; and therefore to place this in the clearest Light, I will I. Consider
what is meant by Right and Authority. II. Lay down the Grounds on which each
Party builds their Confidence of the Convocation favoring them. III.
Impartially, and in their own words, state the matter in debate betwixt them.
And. IV. Fairly adjust the Authority that each Party brings from the
Convocation, that the unbiast Reader may see where the Truth lies. Now.


1. For the word Right, when it is separated from, and opposed to Authority,
the Author always understands a Right or Title founded upon Proximity of Blood,
which the Answerer calls a Legal Title: I suppose he means it of the Law of
Nature, which indeed does respect the aforesaid Right of Proximity of Blood.
Otherwise, if he means it of the Laws of the Land, it is very plain, whatever
Nature may, our Constitution is not such, as of necessity annexeth the Crown to
the next Heir of the Blood; for to say, that the King and Parliament cannot
dispose of it otherwise, is a Praemunire. And it was actually disposed of
otherwise in its descent, either upon Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, one of
them being what I will not Name. A King de facto too, is a Legal King,
according to the Laws of the Realm. Yet, our Answerer, I believe in his Sense
will not own him such; so that by Right, he means the Right of Nature, or
Proximity of Blood, which is what the Author understood by it, when he opposed
it to Authority, nor could he indeed understand by it any thing else; for
Authority in this Case is nothing else, but that Divine Power, which God, who
is Superior to all Laws, intrusts a Person with from above, to act and execute
with Equity and Mercy, the Administration of a Government committed to his
Hands. So that the Opposition betwixt Right and Authority, in the Author's
Sense, and he thinks in the Convocation too, (of which anon) is not as the
Answerer supposes betwixt Right, i. e. a Legal Title and Possession; (which he
pretends is all that the Author means by Authority; but the Author, if he will
give him Liberty to explain himself, means something more by it, as is above
expressed); But plainly the Opposition is betwixt Right, as that implies a
Civil Title amongst Men, which excludes the Pretenses of all other Humane
Rights and Authority, as that includes in it a Claim from God. These two
generally are united; but God for Causes best known to himself, may, and
sometimes does separate them; and when they are thus separated, since it is by
him that Kings Reign, the Author supposes his Allegiance to be due to God's
Authority, and not to the Civil Right: And he thought he had proved this from
the Instance of the Kings of Israel and Judah, who being led Captive into
Babylon, though they survived there, could lay no claim to the Allegiance of
their Subjects. And this it is, or nothing, that the Answerer must oppose. But
he Equivocates in his Notion of Right, and sometimes understands by it Civil
Right, sometimes Divine; and on this Homonimy the whole Stream of his Answer
runs. He must understand by it Civil Right, when he puts the Query, Page 4.
Whether Allegiance may be separated from Right, and transferred to Authority
without Right? So, when he affirms, that according to the Convocation, Right
without Authority may, Ibid.
and ought to challenge Allegiance; and that Authority without Right cannot
challenge it. Where, if he do not mean a Civil Right, he fights without an
Adversary. But then, in the very next Page, by Right, he must understand Divine
Right; where in the case of Jehu and Ahud, he says, Page 5.
It is plain from the Convocation-Book, that they had a Right before Allegiance
became due. Where by Right he must understand Divine Right, for they had no
Civil Right, or Legal Claim to the Crown; for Joram being in Possession and the
other out, his Title was far better by all Humane Laws: And as for Ahud, his
being acknowledged a Subject, he could pretend no Legal Title to the Crown. Nor
can he evade this, by saying, that they had both Gods express Nomination, for
that cannot alter the nature of things, and create them a Civil Legal Title,
although it gives them a Divine Authority, which is far Superior unto it. It Is
true, he affirms that the Convocation expressly asserts Jehu to be a Lawful
King; page 5.
but I expect he should recall his words, unless he can make a Note of
Similitude, As, of necessity to be a Character of Identity, and prove things
that may be construed only to be alike or equal, to be the very same; for the
words are, That Jehu, upon the knowledge of Gods will, page 46.
and the Submission of the Princes, and Captains of Israel unto hsm, As to
their Lawful King, did put in execution the said Message by killing Joram.
Where the words only express the fullness of the Submission of the Captains to
him; who submitted as entirely As to their Lawful King, but need not at all to
respect a Legal Title for he had none. Thus the Author has declared what he
means by Right and Authority, and doubts not but to manifest it in its due
place, to be the meaning of the Convocation too. For,

Secondly, The account that he has given of the calling of this Convocation,
and the Circumstances of Affairs that during its continuance occurred; (which
was to consider of the Claim of the United Provinces, as to their being a Free
and Independent State,) does very plainly Evidence it. For since their
Authority could have no Legal Foundation, it must wholly be derived from a
Divine Interposition; and it was not Civil Right, but Gods Providence and
Pleasure that possessed them of the Powers of Government. I know the Answerer
pretends, the Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance to be the whole
Design of the Book. page 21.
Now all that I shall say to this at present is, that neither of these is so
much as once expressly named in all the Book, and that this is the whole design
of it, will be found difficult for him to prove. But upon the apprehension of
these different Ends and Intention of the Convocation, the different
Construction of the words of the Book, are in some measure grounded, therefore
as I promised,

Thirdly, I must impartially, and in their own words state the Matter in Debate
betwixt them. And the Author plainly affirms, that Right and Authority may be
separated, and that when they are so separated, page 5.
the Claim of Right, i. e. Civil Right, without the Authority, i. e. the Divine
Power of Government, cannot challenge our Allegiance. On the other side the
Answerer asserts, that Right without Authority may, page 4.
and ought to challenge our Allegiance; and that Authority without Right cannot
challenge it. Now if Reason might decide it, since the Authority even in Civil
Right comes from God, and the Powers that be are ordained of God, it seems
strange, that the Ordinance of God cannot command our Allegiance, because it
does not quadrate with the Constitution of Man: or that God who is acknowledged
by the Answerer to be above all Laws, cannot by his Providence dispose of his
own Power, but according to Law. But I must remember, that our Appeal was to be
to the Convocation book, and to it therefore let us go; which is the last thing.

Fourthly, To adjust the Authority that each Party brings from the
Convocation-book, that the Unprejudiced Reader may see on which side the plain
Truth does lie, I will begin with the Author, whose Assertion is, That the
Claim of Right without Authority, is not sufficient to challenge our
Allegiance; the terms of which being before explained. he produces these
Authorities from the Convocation-book to confirm it; which if a Man will but
open his Eyes, are positive and determinative: The Ground on which the
Convocation builds, the Justification of Jehu, and Ahad, in laying violent
hands on their lawful Sovereigns clearly prove it, for that is this, that God
may, and is able to overthrow any Kings or Emperors, page 53.
notwithstanding any Claim, Right, Title or Interest, which they can challenge
to their Countries, Kingdoms or Empires. So that here is an Authority to which
the Captains did pay Allegiance, as to their Lawful King acknowledged without
Right, and executed without Guilt. To put this past all doubt, the
Convocation-book having told us, that it was not lawful for any Person
whatsoever, ibid.
upon pretense of any Revelation, Inspiration or Commandment from the Divine
Majesty, either to touch the Person of his Sovereign, or to bear Arms against
him; makes this Exception, Except God should first advance the said Person from
his private Estate, and make him a King or an Absolute Prince, to succeed his
late Master in his Kingdom or Principality. Which words if they were not
intended to express a Separation of Authority from Right, and when they are so
separated, to vindicate our Allegiance to the Person, whom God from a private
Estate advances to be King, have no design or meaning at All. It is to no
purpose for the Answerer to pretend here Gods express Nomination; for that is
only to say that God may do by Revelation, what he cannot by Providence; and
the one ought to be obeyed, and not the other, whereas if it be Gods doing in
either way, it requires our Submission.

Again, the Convocation book expressly teaches, page 57.
That Authority, tho unjustly gotten, and wrung by force from the True and
Lawful Possessor (who surely had, and is here supposed to have the Legal Right)
being always Gods Authority, is ever when any such Alterations are thoroughly
settled, to be Reverenced and Obeyed by all sorts of People, and that for
Conscience sake. Where if they do not distinguish Authority from Right, and
require our Obedience to Authority against Right, no words can declare it.

Again, speaking of such Governments as are founded on (being begun) by
Rebellion (and I hope the Answerer will not say that Rebellion has Right on
its side) the Convocation owns them, when thoroughly settled, page 59.
to have Gods Authority, and that the People who live within the Territories of
such new Governments, are bound to be subject to Gods Authority. If this be not
Demonstration, I will pretend no more to it; for it is hence plain enough, that
the Claim of Right without Authority, cannot challenge our Allegiance, (...).

The Case of the Moabites and Ammonites who had thus Authority over the Jews,
the History of the Kings and Chronicles, and the very frame of the Governments
in being throughout all the World, are so many Instances of this Truth.

What the Answerer affirms to be the meaning of the Convocation-book, is this,
that Right without Authority, may and ought to challenge our Allegiance, page 4.
and that Authority without Right cannot challenge it. Now all that he brings
for proof of this, are these words, Can. 17.
If any Man shall affirm that the Kingdom of Judah, by Gods Ordinance going by
Succession, when one King was Dead, his Heir was not in Right their King, (
howbeit by some Athaliah he might be hindered from enjoying it) or that the
People were not bound without any farther Circumstance, upon sufficient notice
of their former Kings death, to have obeyed his Heir apparent, as their lawful
King, he does greatly err. Add the Instance of Joash and Athaliah, Where
notwithstanding Joash had none of our Authors Authoritative Right and Title,
Chapter and Can. 23. page 4.
(as the Answerer says, but if you believe it, you believe a notorious
Untruth, as will shortly appear) and had only the Claim of Right, without the
Authority, yet when Jehojada called the People together, and acquainted them
with the Preservation of the Prince, they altogether by a Covenant acknowledged
their Allegiance to him, as to their Lawful King, and in consequence of that
slew Athaliah the Usurper. This is the whole of his Pretenses, and all that he
can make of it is, That God having declared that he would not give his
Authority to any Person to Sway the Scepter of Judah, but only such as were of
the Line of David; whoever did ascend the Throne, not being of that Stock and
Lineage, did Usurp upon Gods Authority. And when he can produce such a
Declaration of Gods Pleasure concerning all other Kingdoms, the Kingdoms of the
whole World, (of which in General the Convocation treats) then, and not till
then, we shall allow his Plea; for surely a particular and exempt privileged
Case of the Kingdom of Judah, will not be a standing Rule for the Kingdoms of
the whole World.

The Case of Athaliah.
But because this is all that he can build on, it shall have a particular
Disquisition. The Case of Athaliah is the Burden of the Song, let us therefore
examine the Convocation-book about it, which represents it thus.

David was called and advanced to the Kingdom of Judah by God himself, Can. 14.
as truly as Aaron was to the Priesthood; and David's Posterity had by Gods
Ordinance, as rightful an Interest to succeed him in his said Kingdom, See Can.
17.
as either Aaron 's Sons had to succeed him in the Priesthood, or Moses and
Joshua, oend the rest of the Judges, (notwithstanding that God himself did
choose and named them particularly) had in their Governments: Nor had the People
then, any more Authority to withstand David, or any of his Posterity from being
their King, than they had to have expelled either Moses or Joshua, or any of
the rest of the Judges whom God by name did appoint to govern them

But Athaliah, after the Death of her Son Ahaziah, killed all his Children save
one, Chap. 23.
who was secretly conveyed away, and usurped the Throne, which she held Six
years. After which space of time, Jehojada acquainting the Fathers of Judah and
Benjamin, that Joash of the Seed of David, to whose Posterity God had expressly
given the Crown; nay, and what was more, that it was the Lords Will that he
should reign over them, was alive; page 31.
they in Obedience to Gods express command, acknowledge their Allegiance to
him, and advance him to the Throne. In all which process (says the
Convocation) nothing was done either by Jehojada the High Priest, ibid.
or by the rest of the Princes and People of Judah and Benjamin, which God
himself did not require at their hands. And let the Answerer produce such an
Entail of the Crown upon a Family as this is; let him add to that, Gods express
command to Dethrone the Possessor, as the Convocation here says Jehojada and
the Princes had to depose Athaliah; and then he produces something to the
purpose. Otherwise since they attempted not to Dethrone Athaliah, (tho another
had as Divine a Right to the Crown, as Moses who was named by God) till they
were anew acquainted, that it was the Lords Will, that Joash should reign over
them; it would almost move a forward Man to infer the necessity of
Circumspection and Caution in the Deposing even of Usurpers. However from the
Divine Entailment of the Crown of Judah on the Posterity of David, it is
manifest that Authority could not in them be separated from Right; and
therefore the Answerer unjustly affirms, That Joash had not that Authoritative
Right and Title which the Author speaks of; page 4.
but only a Claim of Right without Authority, the contrary to which from what I
have said is very evident.

What I would observe from the case of Joash and Athaliah is thus. God by
express Revelation had given to David and his Posterity the Throne of Judah and
Israel, and no one of those Kingdoms, without opposing the Express Nomination
of God, could deny Allegiance to David or his Posterity; till he had a Command
as expressive to withdraw it, as at first he had to yield it, i. e. a plain
Revelation to the contrary. For since it was Gods express word to settle those
Crowns on David and his Posterity, nothing but the same word as Expressive,
could revoke the Donation. It was therefore this express word by his Prophet,
revoking (for the Sins of his Posterity) that grant to David, that excused the
Ten Tribes, in refusing their Allegiance to Rehoboam, and transferring it to
his Competitor: And I believe it was the Admonition of the Prophet Jeremiah
from God, requiring the Jews to pay Obedience to Nebuchadnezzar, that did
discharge them of their Obedience to the Posterity of David. For the Answerer
may please himself with his Conceit of a Transferring Right: But sure I am,
that God having once by Prophecy declared his Entailing the Crown on David and
his Posterity; nothing but a Prophecy to the contrary, as express as that,
could ever revoke it, or vindicate them in paying it elsewhere.

What I have discoursed of Gods express Nomination of the Posterity of David to
rule the House of Judah, that it required a Revelation as express to revoke
that Authority and Donation; may I think be happily applied unto all other
cases, where instead of Personal Designation by Prophecy, the special
Indication of Providence exalts Persons and Families unto Thrones, and
accordingly Dethrones them. For what Prophecy was to them, both to advance and
remove; that Providence must be to us. There is now no Person, or Family,
raised to a Crown, but by the Providence of God, and since it is Providence
alone that does inaugurate them, when the same Providence does Depose them; who
are we that we should Fight against God? We have, when once the Prevailing
Power does come unto a Settlement, the same Providence that acted in their
Exaltation and Depression, to direct us in our Duty of Allegiance; even as the
Jews of old, had the same Spirit of Prophecy to direct them. And since it is
Providence alone, that by exalting a Person or Family to a Crown, gives them a
Right unto their Subjects Allegiance: I do not understand, but when the same
Providence Remands the Power out of their Hands, and transfers it to some other
Person, or Family, our Allegiance is transferred also: for the Power being
transplanted, our Homage must remove with it, or else we must deny Obedience to
that Divine Power which makes Kings, and coming from God is to be reverenced,
honored, and obeyed, where ever it pleases him to place it. This I take to be
a better account of the Reasons of our Allegiance being transferrable from one
Person to another, then his new vamped Notion of transferring a Right, which
next comes to be examined.

CHAP. V. Concerning a Prince his transferring a Right.
THe Answerer saw, and had not the hardiness to deny that there were some
Instances of transferring Allegiance mentioned and justified in the
Convocation-Book; and since he could not deny them, his Business is to palliate
them. P. 4, 5.
Hereupon he starts a new, but no sound Notion of transferring a Right, and
dishonestly Fathers it on the Convocation, for he says in these Cases i. e. of
Revolutions, the Convocation never requires nor justifies the transferring
Allegiance, but only where the Right is transferred likewise: P. 5.
To prove which he unluckily Instances in the Cases of Jehu and Ahud. But good
Mr. Answerer speak out; did Joram transfer a Right to Jehu, to kill his Person
and wear his Crown? Did Eglon transfer a Right to Ahud to sheath his Dagger in
his Belly? Yet the same, says he, may be said of the Jews Submission and
Obedience to the Babylonians etc. all mentioned in the Convocation-Book. If so,
P. 5.
I am sure it is such a transferring Right, as Mortals were never in the least
acquainted with, till the Answerer from Mr. Hobs was pleased to reveal it. And
let him here take notice once more, that, I say, from Mr. Hobs, for he was the
first that ever I heard of that started the Notion of a transferring of
Sovereignty. So that what the Answerer would fix upon the Convocation, is
indeed downright Hobbism, and borrowed from the Leviathan, where a Power is
given to his Sovereign, P. 114.
to renounce and transfer the Sovereignty to another.

However on Jehu like he drives, and will have the respective Government of the
Babylonians, Persians, etc. to have a right of Government over the Jews, though
not in the same manner with the former by God's express Nomination, yet a Right
they acquired by the Submission and Acknowledgment of those in whom the Right
was. This he says and requires you to believe it, for he never offers to prove
it, but from the Author, who expressly tells you, That the Kings of Israel and
Judah became not only Tributary, but Subjects to the King of Babylon. What! by
transferring their Right? Not a word of that; yet that was the thing to be
proved. But is not this Gentleman happy in his Proof, and full of them too,
that is forced to borrow from his Adversary Testimonies to his own ruin. But
they submitted he says, how I pray? Why! they were conquered, and is not this
a pretty way of transferring Right.

I expected he would have produced some Instrument of a Voluntary transferring
their Right, but it all dwindles into Force and Power, and they are constrained
to part with it, because they cannot keep it. If this be what he means by
transferring Right, King James his Desertion transferred it as much as their
Submission. Nay, and since Cession is one way that he mentions of thus
transferring a Right, sure I am, that the Cession of King James which had
something of Choice and Voluntariness in it being a mixed Action, P. 19.
implies more of his own Will and Freedom in that Transferance, than any
instance he has yet produced. In short, did ever a Conqueror derive the
Validity of his Title to his Conquests from the conquered Princes transferring
his Right? I am sure of the contrary; and therefore may conclude there was
never such a thing as transferring a Right, but only in the Metaphysical Head
of Mr. Hobs and the Answerer.

CHAP. VI. A Reply to some Captious Exceptions of the Answerers.
WE are now come to what the Answerer calls the last of the Authors first
Propositions, and he may call it an Apple, or an Oyster, if he please, (for
both are now in Season, and) it is all one to the Author, who for any thing that
Quibbling Answerer has said (after he had given us a cast (...) his Wit) meets
with him acknowledging it, to lie in this Form That Government derives its
Power from God, and not from the People. P. 13.
Now though this was not so very unlike the first Proposition which was, that,
The Power of King was originally Patriarchal, derived from God, and not from
the People, the Predicate being in both the same, he might have see the
Necessity of the Author's enlarging the Subject; which (...) hope by being only
more comprehensive, is not quite another thing. The Convocation undertakes to
discourse concerning the Government of the Kingdoms of the whole World; by
which word Kingdoms, I suppose they do not strictly mean that one Form of
Government, but Synecdochically all other Forms of Government to be understood
in that, as the chief; hence they treat of Aristocracy, etc. so that I was
obliged to enlarge the Terms of my Proposition to the Proportion of my design,
P. 56.
it being to be the Ground work of what was to follow: And tho this perhaps
will not content the Captious Answerer (who hereupon tells us, That Government
in General is not Patriarchal; neither are other Forms, P. 13.
besides Monarchy, Patriarchal; and more such like Stuff) yet he hopes it may
satisfy the Candid Reader. But I must observe his Motions, and (...) cannot
tell what is meant by Gods being the Author of Nature, and consequently of
Humane Societies, but he suspects ('it is a Jealous Man) some bad meaning in it.
And if it be as he thinks it is, that Mankind being of a Sociable Nature, by
that were directed to Society, and from that, i. e. Society, to Government, it
contradicts the Authors own Proposition. Now this is only a Spiteful Innuendo,
and what a fair Answerer would scorn to be Guilty of, for he very well knows,
that in Nature there is a Priority of Order, when there is none of Time, and
the Consequences of things there, respect the manner of our Conceptions, not
their Existence; as Light is conceived to be Posterior to the Sun, whence it
comes, tho they both be at one and the same Instant; even so may Society and
Government be Co-existent, yet one Consequent to the other in the order of
Nature. But the bad meaning is all his own, for the Expression is so plain,
that none, but who had the design of a Scandal, could misinterpret it; for,
what is more Intelligible than this, that Government in General, deriving its
Authority from God the Author of Nature, and consequently of Humane Societies;
must signify, that the same God who was the Author of our Nature being
Sociable, was consequently the Author of Humane Societies, which must of
necessity follow a Sociable Nature. What more strained, forced and disturbed
than his Explication of it is, which first would make me suppose Humane
Societies, and then Government, for they were directed, says he, to Society,
and from that to Government; as if there could be Society without Government,
when Government is only an Administration of Societies. Such another
disingenious Practice does he fly to, wherein he pretends that quoting a
Passage out of the Convocation book, P. 25. P. 47.
I changed Benedictions into Predictions, as if they were all one. Whereas the
words were not quoted out of the Convocation-book, but were my own words, put
into an Observation that I thence had made; so that he might have understood
the word Benedictions to have been falsely Printed for Predictions; but then he
had wanted an Exception against the Author; and by such means as these must a
Tottering Cause be supported.

The next thing that he is displeased at, is the Gloss I give upon these words,
That Government is not derived from the People, tho their Consent be ordinarily
necessary to the Constitution, P. 13.
both of the Form of Government, and the Persons Governing. And is it not so?
ibid.
he is silent upon it; But it is plain the Convocation never thought so, but
the contrary. But whence proves he this? not a word of the Pudding; for if you
will not believe him, he cannot afford to prove it. But sure I am, the Peoples
having notice of God, Chapter 17.
even his appointing Princes, Judges and Kings, that they might conform
themselves to Obedience, and their cheerfully and with great Thankfulness
submitting themselves to be ruled by them, their willingly protesting their
Obedience, their following them, their shouting when they saw them, and saying
God Save the King, and other such Expressions of their Joy and Gladness, are no
Intimations that their Consent was not had in all that was done. Indeed the
Canon says, That the King did not receive any such virtue or strength from the
People, Can. 17.
their said Notice, Presence and Applause, as that without the same the said
Callings of God, either by Name or by Succession had been Insufficient. And
elsewhere, That when God raised up Judges to Rule and Govern them, Can. 13.
the Peoples consent was not necessary thereunto. But whoever pretended it was
when God immediately did Interpose; or could so much as imagine it? unless we
should conceive a People so Foolish as not to Acquiesce in the manifest Choice
and Determination of an All-wise and an All-good God: or so Besotted, as to
think they might insist upon their Right against his Declaration, which was the
Case of Judah. And for other the best constituted Governments, when the
Solemnity of the Coronation is altered, He may then, but not till then, Dispute
the Insignificancy of their Consent.

Well at last however through all the Authors, and the Answerers, Shufflings
and Intermixings, we are got to this Point, P. 13.
That Government derives its Power from God, and not from the People: And
because I thought that herein we should agree, I made it the Groundwork of the
following as well as it is of the antecedent Discourse; and confirmed it (and
who would think the Answerer should be displeased, by having such a pleasing
Truth confirmed) by three Observations; all which are so many Arguments, that
Government derives its Authority from God. For if all Kingdoms now be in some
sort Theocracies; if the Tenure of Sovereigns be such, that God may divest them
of that Power, and transfer both it, and the Duty that is owing to it, unto
some other Person; it undeniably follows, that Government derives its Power
from God. And tho he disproves not one of these, nay fairly acknowledges the
Truth of the two last, yet his Captious Humor will not suffer him to pass over
the first, because there is something that misrepresented, he may find occasion
to talk of. Nothing could be fairer, than having observed from the Convocation,
that all Kingdoms are now in some sort Theocracies; I should express it in what
sort they were so; and this I did, by showing from the Book, That God used the
Ministry of Civil Magistrates, Chapter 35. P. 83.
as well in other Countries, as amongst his own Peculiar People Israel, without
any desert of theirs, but as in his Heavenly Providence he thought it most
convenient. This seems to me to respect his Choice of the Persons of the
Governors whose Ministry he uses, and since this was one Instance of the
Theocracy of Israel, as the Convocation intimates, when they tell us, that upon
recourse to God, he did appoint one for their Prince, P. 18. P. 21.
chief Captain, and Ruler. I think in this sort and Sense Christ Jesus, to whom
all Power both in Heaven and Earth is committed, does for the good of his
Catholic Church, thus rule the World. And for this Kingdom in particular, it
is something remarkable, what Mr. Camden in his Remains, relates of one
Brithwald a Monk, who not long before the Conquest, busying his Brain much
about the Succession of the Crown, because the Royal Blood was almost
extinguished, had a strange Vision, and heard a Voice, which forbad him to be
Inquisitive of such Matters, sounding in his Ears, The Kingdom of England is
Gods own Kingdom, and for it God himself will Provide.

But the Answerer does not much oppose this, only he complains of a Brood of
New Notions, amongst which Theocracy is one, P. 14.
and truly as he interprets it to be only Gods Permissive Providence it is so:
But then that is a Notion of his own not of the Authors. He next takes notice
of the Authors Infortunity in proving his Principles, who to prove that
Providence designs the Person of the Sovereign in other Kingdoms as well as in
Judah, P. 14, 15.
instances only in the Kingdom of Judah. P. 14.
And are not these Pure Proofs? But the Author thought he had proved this from
the Convocation book, and brought those Instances only for an Illustration of
the manner how God did it.

And for the case of Rehoboam, whereon I had remarked, That God sometimes for
the only designed Usurpation of a Prince, whose Title, and that in an
Hereditary Kingdom, was altogether indisputable, does deprive him of the
Government in part, or whole, and will not allow him so much as to endeavor
the regaining of it; he finds two things that deserve Reflection; the one is,
That Rehoboam's not regaining the Ten Tribes, P. 15.
was expressly forbidden by God, and so nothing to our Authors purpose. Yes
therefore to the Authors purpose, because God did forbid it; for this clearly
shows, that when a Prince is removed for his Usurpation, it is God that did
deprive him; unless you will deny the Interposition of God in any other way,
than express Revelation, which I suppose you dare not. And this is so visible a
Judgment of God upon Unjust Kings, Edit. Lat. Land. 1651. P. 31.
that the Book called God and the King, cannot but take notice of it, That it
is common, and familiar with God, when he is vehemently provoked by wicked
Kings, and the Contemners of his Laws, to threaten them, that he will rent
their Kingdoms from them, as he did from Saul and Rehoboam, and destroy and
extirpate their Family. But had he not had that express Prohibition, might he
not then have endeavored to regain them? P. 15.
Yes if he would. And so he did, but what then? does God countenance Deposed
Usurpers with Success? No! he never could regain his Right: And from this
something more would follow than I shall mention.

The other thing, is a foul Prevarication of Scripture, for the Author says,
That God deprived Rehoboam of his Government, for his only designed Usurpation,
whereas the Scripture is as express as can be, that it was for the Idolatry of
his Father Solomon, If so, I perceive Rehoboam had hard measure; and God,
contrary to his express word, made the Child to bear the Iniquity of the
Father; which unless they imitate the Fathers in Sin, I believe the Answerer
will not be so hardy as to assert; and let him consider from hence, who makes
boldest with Scripture. But tell me Sir, was the Cause of this Dethronement so
wholly Solomon's Idolatry, that Rehoboam had no Guilt in it: or if he had Any,
speak out, and shame the Devil. For you might pretend, if you so pleased, the
Saying which the Lord spoke by Ahijah, when he promised Jeroboam (to whom he
now gave) the Kingdom, to be the cause of it, that so Gods Word (which the
Scripture also takes notice of) might be fulfilled. Yet neither of these being
proper and personal to Rehoboam: some other must be produced to clear the
Equity of Gods dealing with him. And since you disallow what I have mentioned,
pray Sir, turn over your Bible, and Squeeze out any other if you can. Believe
me Sir, such Trifling Illusions as these may possibly become your Cause, but
they do not your Coat.

But the willful Prevarication that follows it is Injurious to them both, for
when I had noted, That the Line of Descent in an Hereditary Kingdom might be
interrupted, and yet the Law of Succession not broken; could I be supposed to
mean it of Rehoboam and Jeroboam, who were nothing related; or of Solomon and
Adonijah, who are mentioned in the same Paragraph, and where it is observed,
that the Younger Brother was advanced to the Crown. I have heard, and I find it
true, that none are so blind as those that will not see.

CHAP. VII. Concerning a Thorough Settlement.
WE are now come to the Mighty Place, and which indeed does direct us in paying
the Duty of our Allegiance; for the Convocation taking notice of the Variation
of Governments in the World, having these words, Chapter 28. P. 57.
That when having attained their Ungodly Desires (whether Ambitious Kings, by
bringing any Country into their Subjection, or Disloyal Subjects, by their
Rebellions rising against their natural Sovereign) they have established any of
the said degenerate Forms of Government viz. Aristocratical, Demecratical,
etc.) amongst their People; the Authority either so unjustly gotten, or wrung
by force from the True and Lawful Possessor, being always Gods Authority (and
therefore receiving no Impeachment by the Wickedness of those that have it) is
ever (when any such Alterations are through settled) to be reverenced and
obeyed, and the People of all sorts (as well of the Clergy as of the Laity) are
to be subject unto it, not only for Fear, but also for Conscience sake.

Hereupon I had observed, that upon a Revolution from the worst of
Circumstances, Usurpation and Rebellion, Obedience to the Establishment is
acknowledged due. This the Answerer takes no notice of, as if it had been
nothing concerned in the Cause. I then showed the vast Dispacity betwixt that,
their Representation, and our present Merciful Deliverance and Settlement; but
this also he passes over. But when I moved here upon the Question, when a
Government may be said to be settled, there he leaps like a Fish at a Fly, and
because I left out the word Thoroughly, he thinks he has caught me Napping; and
what if he had, greater than I are sometimes so taken. But did I make any
advantage of this Omission, he charges me with none. Did I not, by Settlement,
intend as much a Thorough Settlement, as if I had expressed it? I am sure I
did. And after all, what they call a Thorough. do I not express it by a Real
Establishment; P. 12.
by which (for all he has said) I cannot yet but mean a Government that is
Thoroughly Settled, for what I said before I repeat again, That that Government
is then Settled, and thoroughly Settled, when the Crown with all its Dignities,
Prerogatives, Administrations, Authorities, Revenues, etc. are generally
Recognized and personally enjoyed; which must be supposed to be, when all
Places of Power and Trust, of Royalty and Importance, are in the Sovereigns
hands, and wholly at his Disposal. For to say, because there are Foreign Wars,
or Secret Plots, that the Crown is not in full Possession, since there always
were, and always will be, discontented Parties at home, and Politic
Machinations abroad, that either actually do, or craftily design to disture the
Peace, is to say, that no Kingdom ever was, or ever can be Settled. He saw this
last Period did obviate his Important Objection of Limerick, and therefore he
wisely (but how fairly let others judge) quite left it out. But yet Limerick is
a Place of Trust, and therefore the Authors Notion of Settlement will do him no
service, just as much as he intended, P. 16.
and neither more nor less. For it will prove as Thorough a Settlement now, as
was in Queen Elizabeth, and some other Reigns when suchlike places of
Importance were in the Enemies hands. But what becomes of the Poor Irish-men,
ibid.
he doubts they must be Rebels for all our Authors Demonstration. And the
Author doubts the Tories will be so still, which doubtless pleases the
Answerer, and somebody else, besides one that would be called Most Christian
very well: Then for the Rest, when the Answerer tells me, what became of
Jaddus, whilst in the Power of Darius; I will send him back the very self-same
Answer for his satisfaction. But a Victorious Army in Ireland sticks on his
stomach, and tho he is willing to blast them, that they may fall before their
Enemies; yet neither his Breath or Pen is so Omnipotent, and therefore
acknowledging Ireland to be a Branch of the Crown of England, P. 17.
annexed to it, and dependent on it, he plainly justifies them. But Athaliah is
brought on the Stage again, for without her he can prove nothing, and with her
he only makes a noise.

But because the Thorough Settlement is made the other Pillar to support their
Cause, let us enquire what the Convocation intended by it. And since he says,
There are but two ways to understand the Sense of any Author: The natural and
usual Construction of the words they express themselves by; and if there be any
Obscurity or Doubt in the meaning of some Expressions, to interpret them by
other Expressions, and Assertions in the same Author; to which he might have
added a third, had he so pleased, the occasion of the Authors writing. But
because this would absolutely confute him; by his own Rules, I will try the
Controversy before us.

Now the natural Construction of the words are very clear and easy; that
whenever an Usurper or Rebels have gotten the Authority of a Lawful Possessor
into their hands, and so thoroughly settled themselves, that they are able to
hold, and maintain that same Authority which they have gotten; he or they, then
are to be obeyed. And that they can mean no more by it, than an Ability to
maintain the Authority they have got, is plain from the Context, and the whole
Chapter, which speaks and treats of Wringing and Forcing this Power out of the
hands of the True Possessor, and thereby thoroughly settling, themselves. Nay
which intimates, the Usurper or Rebels having attained their Ungodly Desires,
P. 57.
to be the Measure and Standard of this Thorough Settlement.

But the Answerer runs into Fancies of his own, and will have a Settlement to
denote two things:

1. The Legality of a Thing, its being according to Law. Very well! P. 18.
And is not a King de Facto, Seignier la Roy, according to our Laws. He had
much better for his own cause, have let this Notion of Settlement alone; But,

2. It denotes a quiet and peaceable Possession, without disturbance from other
Claims or Pretenders. Ask his Grace of Northumberland this, whose Title of
Northumberland, tho thoroughly settled, and so adjudged by the Supreme Court in
England, yet wants not a Pretender, who, they say, is again designing to make
some disturbance about it. And if this be so, how ungrounded and unsettled is
the Right of those Poor Princes in Germany, to whose Territories, the Answerers
and his Masters Friend and Ally, the Leviathan of France lays a Claim, and
creates Disturbances. But the Owner is actually at Law with him, or declares
that he will be so, so soon as he has opportunity, or Money to manage the
Suit. But if Judgment be given, that the Man that is at Suit, is not the Owner.
What then? Why! (without Reflection be it spoken) a Wrangling Knave, and a
Litigious Barreter will never acquiesce.

But there is one word more to be considered, and that is thoroughly, ibid.
Thoroughly Settled. Now what is the Import of Thoroughly, but perfectly, to all
intents and purposes. Come then, and let us put these together, and the Utmost
of a Thorough Settlement is, such a Right as is enjoyed plainly, and evidently,
without any Contradiction or Objection. That is, such a Right as never will be
in the World, for there is not that Crown upon any Princes Head, but what the
variety of Principles amongst Men of diverse Parties, will afford them matter
of Objections against. Such a Cobweb is the Answerers Thorough Settlement.

His other way of understanding the Sense of an Author, is by consulting the
Context, and other places, that that was their meaning, and no other. Now what
can you expect from such an Undertaker, but Demonstration as clear, nay clearer
than the Authors; but Parturiunt montes, out comes the Case of Athaliah, for
had he not that String, like a Trump Marine to Fiddle on, his Music would be
at an end. Yet upon this he hangs out a Flag of Defiance, and defies the
Author, or any body else, to show him one single Instance (either in this
Chapter, or any where in the whole Book) of any Government that the Convocation
requires, and justifies Allegiance to be paid to, but what had first acquired a
Right. And if by Right, he means a Civil Legal Right (which he must, or he says
nothing) I say, and have before proved, That there are as many Instances of it,
as there are of Revolutions of Government (for the Case of Athalia I have
showed to be an exempt Case,) and to requite him, I defy him, and all his
Party, to produce out of this Convocation Book, one Instance, wherein
Allegiance is denied to be due to God's Authority, and to be owing to Legal
Right, for Joash (he by this time knows) is acknowledged to have both.

I all this while have waited, that the Answerer should have made good his
sense of the Convocation by other parallel Expressions and Assertions in the
Book, as he promised; P. 17.
but he has disappointed me, and if it must be done, I must do it my self. To
work then let us go. And besides a long continuance, or Prescription, to which
both Parties acknowledge Allegiance to be due; but which in sudden Revolutions
can have no place, and therefore is nothing to our present purpose. I find the
Convocation supposes these New Forms of Government (for so they call them,
Can. 28. page. 59.
which intimates that they did not think Continuance to be absolutely necessary
to their thorough Settlement) to be thoroughly settled.

I. Can. 31. page. 67.
When the People are under the New Governor's Power and Protection; for so they
affirm of the Jews, That they were the Subjects of Alexander, after his
Authority was settled amongst them; which was when Darius was vanquished, Page
64, 65.
but was yet alive, being escaped by flight. Where the settlement of his
Authority, and his favorable dealing with them (of which the Convocation
speaks, but not a syllable of his Right) is made the Foundation of their Duty;
and they further give this common Reason why the Jews were bound to pray for
the long Life and Prosperity both of Alexander and his Empire, as they had done
of the other Kings, ibid.
Because they lived under their Subjection.

II. Especially if there be a general Submission of the People; for the want of
this is given as one reason of Antiochus his Government not being settled
amongst the Jews: ibid.
And the access of this, is the only Title whereby Mattathias and his Posterity
could claim Allegiance from the People; for I challenge the Answerer to produce
out of the Convocation-Book, the intimation of the least Civil Right to it: For
if a Possessory Right be something, and, as he says, Page 19.
where there is not better it ought to carry it; it is plain, that Antiochus
being possessed, had the better Legal Title; yet for want of the general
Submission of the People, it was not esteemed settled; and therefore Mattathias
his Claim is preferred before it. Of whom, though there neither was nor could
be, our Answerer's Prescription, nor a long undisturbed Possession (the last
Owner, in our Answerer's words, being actually at Law with him) nor any Legal
Right or Title, but barely the Submission and Consent of the People (whence he
may also learn how necessary their Consent is to a Government; yet of him: Can.
31. p. 68.
After the Jews were delivered from their Servitude under the Kings of Syria,
and the Government over them was settled in Mattathias 's Posterity (the
Convocation teaches, that it was not lawful for the People, upon any occasion,
to have rebelled against them, or to have offered violence to their Persons. I
know the Answerer pretends that Antiochus had no Right, and it is true he had
not the Right which the Peoples Submission would invest him with; but he had
Possession, and that is such a Right as our Answerer confesses ought to carry
it. P. 19.
If then you desire to know from the Convocation, what they mean by a thorough
Settlement, beside the natural Signification of their words, Can. 28. you hence
may see, That they suppose that Government to be Thoroughly settled, which has
Authority and Power to support it self; especially when owned and acknowledged
by the general Submission of the People, and very cautiously is the word
General made use of; for in such Revolutions an universal Submission is not to
be expected.

Thus I have done with my Answerer, and I think, Plainly demonstrated
Submission and Obedience to the present Powers, to become the Answerer's Duty,
as well as mine, if he dare stick to the Principle of the Convocation; for we
have a Government so thoroughly settled, that it can never be unhinged but with
the utter Ruin of our Laws and Liberties, and the Desolation of the whole
Kingdom. A Government founded upon an Appeal to God for Truth and Justice, and
so founded upon a Divine Right. A Government where if there be any Marks and
Notes in Providence of God's positive Will and Pleasure, is so characterized
and remarked by them (as the Pamphlet does evidence) that the Answerer could
not deny them. In short, I hope a Government that is the Reward of our
steadiness and perseverance in the late Times of Trial; and may God continue
his Blessings to us, in continuing it.

But laying aside the Convocation, the Answerer proceeds to show the Absurdity
of my Interpretation from other Topics. Now if what I have offered be indeed
the sense of the Convocation (and let the Reader judge of it: but if it be so)
what he bespatters me with are but so many virulent and base Reflections upon
these Venerable Persons whereof the Convocation did consist. The Reply
therefore swelling larger than I did expect, I am content to sit down and hear
their Reproach. Only from what I have said, let the Reader speak if he think
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance to be (what the Answerer
asserted) the whole design of that part of the Book that concerns Civil
Government. P. 21.


Then for those Worthies of the Church of England that suffered between the
years 42 and 60. a far worthier Pen has already, and will more fully represent
the difference betwixt our Case and theirs.

And as for the Absurdity of this Doctrine, which (he says) is, That the
Permission of Providence is a Rule of Practice, and a sufficient Warrant to act
contrary to the Rule of Right and Justice amongst Men. P. 23.
I tell him this is not the Consequence, but a vile Aspersion cast upon the
Convocation; for the utmost that can be extorted from it, is, That the
Permission of Providence is a Rule of Practice, and a sufficient Warrant to
Act. Besides, the Laws of Civil Right and strict Justice, when it has placed
Men in such Circumstances, that it is not possible for them to discharge some
other Duties, and observe these Laws. And let him touch here if he can or dare,
and therefore denying his Consequence till he can better prove it (and I will
give him to latter-Lammas to do it in) I am not accountable for all that putrid
stuff that follows. P. 23.
As if I taught that Men must direct their Lives, not by fixed and stated
Rules, but by God's Permissions and Providential Occurrences, and the like. All
which want as much Honesty, as they do Ingenuity.

I purposely pass by his undutiful Insinuation, of a Thief's having stolen a
Purse, and giving it his Neighbor to keep; and then Querying upon it, Whether
(since he came by it by Providence) he may not keep it. P. 24.
The Account I have already given, when it is, that Providence is a Rule of
Practice, removes this Doubt: Which indeed deserves another kind of Answer than
a Pen can give. As also something worse than this, that in his Answer may more
than once be met with. But I do not mean to turn Informer; nor have I any
Stomach to recriminate, else I could charge him, and that truly, for building
the Doctrines of Right to Crowns in New erected Governments, upon Violence,
Bloodshed and Murder, for he again and again intimates, that if the Royal Line
were but extinct, i. e. had they Murdered King James, and brought him to a
Scaffold, when they desired him but to withdraw; then the present Government
had acquired a Right, and he could have taken the Oaths with a safe Conscience.
Now I believe his Master, King James, will ken him no Thanks for this his
Doctrine.

Before I close, I must observe one thing from the Answerer, That after all his
discarding Providence from being an Intimation of God's Will and Pleasure in
any Revolutions; yet upon my Assertion, That Predictions themselves without
this Interposition of Providence are not rashly to be executed; P. 26.
for that David refused to stretch forth his Hand against the Lords Anointed;
waiting his Way and Pleasure, he confesses, ibid.
That he left it to Gods Providence so to order and dispose of things, and to
bring it about in such a manner, as he might take the Crown without the
Violation if any Duty that he owed, or of any former Engagement he made to King
Saul. Now when Providence, says he, proceeds in this manner, and so makes a
clear passage to Submission; then, and then only, it is a justifiable ground to
act upon. I am glad that it is ever a justifiable ground to act upon, and doubt
not but to show in our case, something of a parity to this, for if the taking
of the Crown in such a manner, as not to violate any Duty that he owed to
others, does make a clear passage to Submission, and is a justifiable ground
then to act upon: pray Sir speak, what Duty was violated by his Sacred Majesty;
or by such as by Oath gave him Assurance of their Fidelity, when Providence in
such a visible Divine manner had advanced him to the Throne? They durst not
oppose God, whose gracious Doing they not only supposed, but so proved it to
be, that the Answerer it seems, was not stiff enough to deny it. And then for
His Majesty, no Obligation of a Subject was upon him, but if he suspected
himself to be wronged, (and there was violent and unsatisfied Suspicion of
Wrong in the Highest Nature, both to himself and the whole Kingdom
countenanced, abetted, and designed to be established) nothing could restrain
him from seeking his Right but a Tame complying Willfulness to sit down content
with his own Loss, and the Kingdoms Ruin. All that could be pretended to the
contrary, is the Unseasonableness of seeking his Right; for, as David, they may
say, He should have waited till the Lord should smite the King, or his day
should come to dye, or that he should descend into Battle and perish. As for
the last, his late Majesty is resolved to provide against that; but to this I
reply, that his then Majesty's Counsels had so ordered the Affairs, that they
had made it absolutely necessary for his present Majesty then to seek his Right
or never; in that the Parliament that was to be called, would doubtless (by the
indirect means that were used) have been such as would have acknowledged and
confirmed the Impostor, and so Excluded their present Majesty's from the Crown.
Add to this his late Majesty's Willful Recess, and tell me then, If Providence
did not proceed in such a manner, as to make a clear passage to Submission, and
so a justifiable ground to act upon. Thus far I see no Guilt; then for what the
Answerer seems to insist on, those Active Spirits that had an hand in the
Revolution, by deferting the late King James, I excused them so far, that he
takes no notice of it, and therefore I again Repeat it, and say that his Cause
in their Conscience, being Bad, they neither could, nor ought actually to
assist him: An Equity of the Cause being necessary to the Justification of a
War. I now should have done, but for full satisfaction in the case, there is
one thing I ought not to pass by.

The Answerer would make you believe that bare Possession is that Authority or
Divine Right, that the Author all along speaks of; and so an Usurper my be
possessed of it, an Athaliah, or Antiochus, or a Cromwell. Now the Author
thinks, that there are certain Indices and Notes, whereby the Possession that
he speaks of, and the Authority that is insisted on, may easily be discerned
and distinguished. For the Convocation supposes a Thorough Settlement, before
they Appropriate Obedience to the New Government. So that Possession in General
cannot challenge the Allegiance, but yet the Authority they speak of may; for
want of which Authority both Athaliah, and Antiochus (though they had got
Possession) were Rightly opposed. Now what these Notes are (besides what is
delivered in the Pamphlet) from the Convocation's Notion of a Thorough
Settlement, will easily appear. For they requiring the Power, and Protection,
or Favorable Dealing of a Prince, and Consent of the People to complete a
Settlement, in Opposition to these.

1. Usurped Possession seldom or never suffers the State to enjoy its Rights,
Quiet and Protection; so that it is in vain, if it weee possible, to yield
Obedience, Violence, Plunder and Oppression do generally attend Usurped
Possession. Law and Justice are stifled, and Arbitrariness rules in all things.
Those who do not comply are not permitted to sit down in Peace, and enjoy the
Common Benefit of Protection, but are Harassed, Proscribed, Persecuted, and
Undone. There is no Connivance, or Favor, but Power and Wilfulness manageth
all Things; so that it is scarce possible for them to yield a Due and Full
Obedience. For besides that Honor, Reverence and Homage, which (though owing
to the Supreme Power) a Ruined, and Oppressed Subject can be hardly conceived
to Give. The very Oppression it self disables them from paying Customs, Taxes
and Tributes, which are other Branches of this Allegiance; so that the Service
of a Liege Subject can scarce be given an Usurper; on the contrary, where it is
Authority that is advanced, there the Good of Community is intended, no
Violence, Arbitrariness, and Injustice practiced, but Law has its course, and
every unsuspected Man his Liberty and Right. This is the very case of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and Athaliah. Of the first the Convocation-book expresses it. And
of the last it is to be supposed that she continued to Rule, as she entered,
with the utmost Cruelty and Violence: nay and the very Reason of her Sons
Wickedness (for which he was punished by God) is imputed to her Instigation, in
that she is said to be his Counselor to do Wickedly. And of her, as well as
of Antiochus, the Jews would have eased themselves sooner, had they but had
power, for the Scriptures gives this as the reason of her Usurpation, that the
House of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the Kingdom. When therefore
Jehoiada had strengthened himself with the Levites and Officers, he dethroned
the Usurper, and exalted Joash to the Crown.

Secondly, A Usurpation never meets with a quiet and peaceable Submission of
the People, I mean of the great Body of them, for no Revolution can expect them
all. There are always powerful Confederacies and Designs against it, and it is
only an Interested Party that Supports it. You shall meet not only with private
Murmurings, but loud, open, and (what is worst of all) most just and true
Complaints. So that Men's Spirits are kept on such a Ferment, that they may be
overawed, but cannot be won to a Willing Submission. But where it is Gods
Gracious Doings, you shall observe such a Cheerful Compliance, a ready Homage,
and Acclamations so Universal, that such a Voice of the People can scarce be
otherwise Interpreted, than the Voice of God.

I desire the Answerer to Scan over the Differences betwixt Gods Permissive and
his Positive Providence, for if I be not grossly deceived, from the Principles
that I have laid down; and the Interest the People have in Consenting to the
Form of Government, he may, if he please, discern the Difference betwixt 42 and
88. In Usurpations besides the Violence committed at the grasping at a Crown,
which for the future hardens all Good Men's Hearts against it; the Subject, not
enjoying Protection under it (as never any but an Interested Party do) cannot
be thought to be so fond of Chains, as to Kiss and Court them, by paying their
Obedience under them, nor do they ever generally own it by submitting
Cheerfully and Thankfully unto it. Whereas when there is a Revolution upon an
Appeal to God for Justice and Equity; the Prince treats his People with such
Tenderness, Care, and Circumspection, as becomes one that being advanced by,
thinks himself accountable to God, for the Trust he has committed to him: And
on the other hand the People deport themselves with those returns of
Cheerfulness and Thanks in their Submission, as are befitting a People
delivered from Wrong, Tyranny and Slavery. And by this time I hope the Answerer
has found out a Difference.

CHAP. VIII. The Close and Summary of the Whole.
THE Sum and Substance of the Whole is this: God Delegates to Kings Authority
and Power, to Govern the People committed to their Charge, in his Stead, and
for their Good. And as a King in a Dependent Kingdom constitutes a Deputy, and
Communicates with his Power part of his Name unto him, by making him a
Viceroy: so God by exalting of them to that Great Trust, makes them, as it
were, Vice-Gods; for of them he says himself, That they are Gods: And as the
Viceroy is Responsible to none but the King that entrusted him; so Kings are
only Accountable to God, whose Power they have; and in whose Stead they Rule:
and if they do abuse his Trust and Power, (seeing no one else can) God has
undertaken to call them to an Account for their Miscariages, since (as was said
in the Pamphlet) all their Violations of this Trust reflect upon God, whose
Trustees they are. And this is the Reason that makes him threaten so severely
to punish Governors, that neglect his Laws, and abuse his Power. For as the
King his Vice Roy, so God may Depose them at his own Will and Pleasure. And
when they Manage Affairs to his Dishonor, and the Discouragement of Virtue and
Probity, as he may, so also (since he himself holds the Helms of all
Governments in his own hands) it may be supposed that he will (for the sake of
Justice) Animadvert upon them; for shall not the God of the Whole Earth do
Right? No one else can; and therefore He, or none, must do it. And when he does
this, it often is by Removing them from that Power and Authority that he had
Commissioned them with; and (as a King on the Complaint of the Misgovernment of
a Vice Roy) by committing that Charge and Province to Another. For God does
Kings and Emperors no wrong, (though he thus displace them) they being Nothing
else but his Agents and Officers, and to be Employed no longer than he knows it
to be for the Good of his Church and People.

When ever therefore (for the sake of an Oppressed people) he is pleased thus
to Remove and Displace an Arbitrary and Usurping Governor; and raise another to
his Trust and Dignity, whom he in his Infinite Wisdom) foresees to be more for
the Good of his Church, and the Glory of his Providence; all Good people are in
Conscience bound submissively to Comply with God's Doing, and yield a Cheerful
Obedience to his Authority; which wherever it is, ought to be Reverenced. Now
because the Meaning of God in such Revolutions are often Dark and Ambiguous;
for they may be for our Sins, as well as the Sins of our Governors: therefore
we ought thoroughly to debate the Case in our own Conscience, and unfeignedly
and impartially Examine where the Guilt lies in Us, or in our Governors; for if
for some conceived displeasure to their Persons or Government, we rashly, and
too forwardly withdraw from them that Duty we owe, we do but add Iniquity to
Sin. But if we find our selves in such Circumstances, that without any sinful
Co operation of ours, a Door is opened for our Deliverance; One scarce can
suppose it any thing, but God's Gracious Interposition. And since God does by
his Providence now, what in the days of Prophecy he did by his Immediate
Revelations; when we see the same Events Consequent upon the same Antecedent
Causes; and God has plainly told us by his Word that He has done the One; how
can we deny (in a Parity of Causes and Events) but that the same Hand did also
the Other. Especially when we see the Injured party flying to God for Help; or
in the Use of the last Remedy making his Appeal for Justice. This is the
Summary of the Whole Case, and it would be Hard indeed, if when Deliverance
comes upon our Prayers and Tears, We might not embrace it. Let those that
hanker after the Onions in an Egyptian Bondage fix their Eyes on them, till the
Effluence of the Acrimony force them to Weep; I, for my part, will Wipe mine
Eyes and thank God, that there is no Leading into Captivity, and no more
Complaining in Our Streets.

To close up All. Since the force of the Argument runs much upon Providence,
which the Answerer would in this case (as a Loofe Sect of Philosophers, that he
knows of, do in others) discard from interposing so far, as to be an Inducement
for Men to Act Agreeably to it. I cannot, for all him, but Conclude with a
Remarque of the Wonderful Providence of God in Reserving this Convocation-Book,
(which was so long concealed,) for the Publication of these Difficult Times,
and the Determination of so Weighty a Matter. I will not say, what Party put it
forth; but there seems to be a Providence in that too. But I will say, It has
had Good success, in Bringing over One, that was the Bulwark of their Cause.
And that it may prove more and more so Successful, in prevailing with the
Answerer, and the Right Reverend the Fathers and Pastors of This our Too much
Divided Church, is the Hearty and Daily Prayers of the Author; which may God
Almighty in his own Good Time both Hear and (instead of any other) Answer, Amen.

A True Copy of a Letter Writ by King James the First, to Dr. Abbot, concerning
the Convocation called Anno 1603. 1. Jac. and continued by Adjournments and
Prorogations to 1610. Now in the Hands of a Gentleman of the Temple.
Good Dr. Abbot,
I Cannot abstain to give you my Judgment of your Proceedings in your
Convocation as you call it; and both, as Rex in solio, and unus gregis in
Ecclesia, I am doubly concerned. My Title to the Crown no body calls in
question, but they that neither love you nor me; and you guess whom I mean. All
that you and your Brethren have said of a King in Possession (for that word I
tell you, is no worse than that you make use of in your Canon) concerns not me
at all. I am the next Heir, and the Crown is mine by all Rights you can name,
but that of Conquest; and Mr. Solicitor has sufficiently expressed my own
Thoughts concerning the Nature of Kingship in General, and concerning the
Nature of it, ut in mea Persona: And I believe you were all of his Opinion; at
least none of you said ought contrary to it, at the time he spoke to you from
me. But you know all of you, as I think, that my Reason of calling you
together, was to give your Judgments how far a Christian, and a Protestant
King, may concur to assist his Neighbors to shake off their Obedience to their
own Sovereign, upon the account of Oppression, Tyranny, or what else you like
to name it. In the late Queens time, this Kingdom was very free in assisting
the Hollanders both with Arms and Advice; and none of your Coat ever told me,
that any scrupled at it in her Reign. Upon my coming to England you may know
that it came from some of your selves to raise Scruples about this Matter. And
albeit I have often told my Mind concerning Jus Regium in Subditos, as in May
last in the Star Chamber, upon the occasion of Hales his Pamphlet; yet I never
took any notice of these Scruples, till the Affairs of Spain and Holland forced
me to it. All my Neighbors call on me to concur in the Treaty between Holland
and Spain; and the Honor of the Nation will not suffer the Hollanders to be
abandoned, especially after so much Money and Men spent in their Quarrel.
Therefore I was of the Mind to call my Clergy together, to satisfy not so much
me, as the World about us of the Justness of my owning the Hollanders at this
time: This I needed not to have done; and you have forced me to say, I wish I
had not. You have dipped too deep in what all Kings Reserve among the Arcana
Imperii. And whatever Aversion you may profess, against Gods being the Author
of Sin, you have Stumbled upon the Threshold of that Opinion, in saying upon
the Matter, that even Tyranny is Gods Authority, and should be Reverenced as
such. If the King of Spain should return to claim his old Pontifical Right to
my Kingdom, you leave me to seek for others to Fight for it: For you tell us
upon the Matter before hand, his Authority is Gods Authority, if he prevail.

Mr. Doctor, I have no time to express my Mind farther in this Thorny Business.
I shall give you my Orders about it by Mr. Solicitor, and until then, meddle
no more in it, for they are Edge Tools, or rather like that Weapon that is said
to Cut with the one Edge, and Cure with the other. I commit you to Gods
Protection, Good Dr. Abhor, And rest

Your Good Friend James R.

FINIS.

