TAILORS TRAVELS, from LONDON, TO THE ISLE of WIGHT: With his Return, and
occasion of his Journey.

THE occasion why I undertook this Insulary Journey or Voyage from one Island
to another, was for three Respects: First, I had a great importunate desire to
see my Gracious Sovereign afflicted Lord and Master: Secondly, I traveled
with an intent to get some Silver in this Iron Age, (for pleasure and profit
should be the reward of honest and harmless pains taking.) Before I began
this high and mighty perambulation, I did put forth many Bills to diverse and
sundry friends, to pay me some small sums of that precious thing called Money,
at my return; the purport, purpose, pretense, signification, meaning, or
marrow-bone of the Bill, were these following words.

When John Tailor has been from London to the Isle of Wight, and returned
again, and that at his return, he do give or cause to be given to me, a
Book or Pamphlet of true news and relations of Passages at the Island, and to
and fro in his Journey; I do promise to give to him or his assigns, the sum
of what I please in Lawful money of England, provided that the said sum be
not under 6 pence.

NOW at my return, if all my Customers do pay me according to the Bill then
am I exceedingly deceived; but if none of them do pay me, then I am merely
couzened; and now begins the Story.

Printed at the Authors Charge, and are no where to be sold, 1648.

THis Pamphlet is not stuffed with Trivial Bables,
Or vain prodigious undisgested fables:
This is no Mercury (with scoffs, and jeeres)
To raise debate, and set us by the ears,
As if poor England had not yet endured
Sufficient plagues, but she must be assured,
By New, New, News, of New frights, and new foes,
And future mischiefs worse then present woes:
I bring no tidings of such consequence,
To breed Fears, Jealousies, or give offense,
Nor am I fraught with wonders, wounds, and scarres,
Or any thing relating to the Wars:
It is so writ that no man can accuse
Me of detraction, scandal, or abuse;
My lines are all from fear and horror free,
And here and there as true as true may be:
Yea much more true, I may be bound to swear
Then many Books have been this twice four year,
Or any Mercury writ heretofore,
Or old Currantoes, in the days of Yore.
Then stroke your herds, or wipe your mouths (at least,)
And read, and hear what I have here expressed.
THe next succeeding mouth unto September,
October was this year. (as I remember) I set forth on Thursday the 19. of
October.

Without the charge of Proxcy or Attorney,
My self in proper Person took this journey:
Two Gentlewomen (by two Maids attended)
Accompanied me till my travells ended.
We took one Coach, two Coach-men, and four horses; We hired the Southamton
coach which comes weekly to the Rose near Holborn Bridge.

And merrily from London made our courses:
We wheeled the top of th'heavy hill, called Holborne,
(Up which has been full many a sinful soul borne,)
And so along we jolted past Saint Gileses,
Which place from Brainford, six (or near) seven miles is.
To Stanes that night at five a clock we coasted,
Where (at the The sign of the Bush.
Bush) we had baked, boiled, and roasted.
Bright Sols illustrious Rays, the day adorning,
We past Bagshot and Bawwaw, Friday morning;
That night we lodged at the White Heart at Al^on,
And had good meat, a table with a salt on:
Next morn w' arose, with blushing cheek'd The dawning.
Aurora;
The ways were fair but not so fair as Flora:
For Flora was a beautiful Courtezan in Rome, who gat great treasure by the
prostitution of her body, which Wealth she gave to the Common Treasury, for
which they did esteem her a Gods, and the Gods of Flowers, and built a
Temple to her.
Flora was a Goddess, and a woman,
And (like the high ways) was to all men Common:
Our Horses, with the Coach, which we went into,
Did hurry us amain through thick and thine to
With fiery speed, the foaming bits they champt on,
And brought us to the Dolphin at Southampton.
There found I friendship more then I expected
Or did deserve, so much to be respected:
The Gentlewomen both their husbands met there,
The Moon was mounted, and the Sun was set there;
And after two hours time, or some such matter
We turned our Coach to a boat, and swam by water:
My entertainment was good wine and welcome,
The cups most kindly unto me pell well come;
Southamptons Governor, much love did show me,
He was my old acquaintance, and did know me:
He gave me's pass, to pass me to the Island
And I took boat, and left him on the dry Land;
It was as bright a mooneshine night, I say
As ever man saw in a Summers day;
Thus with a fore wind, and fair Cintha's light,
In four hours time we came to the Isle of Wight:
We past Cowes Castle, and into the Town went,
Where some short time we wandering up and down went;
Thus being favow'd by men, winds and weathers,
At Cowes I landed, and lodged at the Feathers:
The Isle of Wight contained a Wight of Weigh then,
And on that Wight of Weight; I came to wait then.
Long live he blessed internal, and external.
And blessed be England in his love paternall,
To guide and guard him, grace and power supernall,
Defend him from all treacherous traps infernal:
In imitation of him let us learn all
To live so here that we may live eternal:
And thou, whose mercy were can be exhausted,
In thy compassion think on England wasted:
The sword of wrath that is drawn is justly thine,
The Sins that made thee draw it forth are mine:
Jonas the storm did to himself apply;
Let each say so now, each man say it is I.
And now my story briefly I Will compose,
From harsh hard rugged rhyme, to smooth faced prose.
And thus have I truly, and merrily told the passages and Relations, how I came
to the Royal captiving Isle of Wight. Now it follows requisitely, that I
certify you of some Occurrences, and accidents there. It is to be noted, that
the Gentlemen with their wives, having such fair, and speedy passage from
Southampton to the Island, that at the Town called Cowes they had two horses,
which they left with their maids with me 'till the morning, for me to bring by
land to Newport where His Majesty was: they with their wives took a small Boat
about midnight, having the tide with them to carry them that Saturday night (or
near Sunday) 3 miles up by water to Newport: so they left me.

All the fagge end of the Saturday night, and part of Sunday morning, I had the
happiness to be John amongst the Maids, for we honestly lay in 2 beds in one
chamber, but I would have no man so mad to imagine that we lay all three both
together.

Sunday the 22. of October we arose with the Sun, between the hours of the
careless number of 6 and 7 (he is careless that sets all at 6 and 7) we quickly
made our selves as fine as could be, in hope to see fine folks, and fine
things at Court, and so we mounted our Polfreys: (the Hostler of the Princes
Arms at Cowes, being hired to be our Guide) who did ride before one Maid, and
my self before the other, and so (by consequence) both the Maids were behind
us.

The Hostler that should have guided me, guided himself, Riding before me, and
leaving me behind him sometimes a flight shoot or two; for he had many
advantages of me; first he had the stronger horse, secondly he had the lighter
carriage (for the Maid behind him was like Lent, light, lean, and lank) but
my Female Male was like Shrove-Tuesday, fat, fair, plump, well fed, and
weighty; thirdly he had two spurs, and a switch, of all which necessaries I
was destitute, and without switch or spur my horse would not go.

And now a dirty tale I mean to tell:
I Will show you what befell, and how I fell.
My ungodly Guide being much before me, within: mile of Newport, I came to a
boggy-quagmire miry, rotten, filthy, dirty, slow, through, over, or into which
I must pass; I not knowing the way, called alowd to the Guide to come back to
direct me, which he did; but I having no switch or spur (for correction) the
horse would obey no direction; so that at last the Guide said there was no
danger, but that I might ride through it any where.

Then I with kicking set my heels to horse,
Advent'ring to ride through it force perforce:
My Guides misguiding made me much the bolder
The horse fell in, quite plunged up to the shoulder.
I forward fell, and backward fell the Maid,
Man, Maid, and horse in curious pickle laid,
And never Ear did hear, or Eye did see
Such a pair-Royall fair Triplicity.
The danger past, we each on other gaping;
Not angry, or well pleased, we fell to scraping:
Sometimes we fretted, and our lips did bite,
And sometimes (at our selves) we laughed out right.
I scrapt my self: the Maid, the Hostler dressed.
The Horse looked on, uncurried like a beast.
Thus we to Newport came in gay attire,
Embredred over all with dirt and mire:
And thus from Cowes we tumbled in the slowes,
Man, Maid, and horse, moil'd like three beastly sowes:
'Twas my base guide that put me in this trim,
For which abuse I Will have about with him:
The Devil misleades us all, we plainly see,
And that same stinking Hostler misled me.
For which:

First in a Knaves skin I will wrap him hot,
Which he shall always wear until it rot:
My prayer for him shall be this execration,
Let him be nasty in his occupation:
Oh let kis provender be ever musty,
His hay be most distasteful, foul, and dusty:
His Pease, and Beans, and Oats most odious fusty,
And's curry comb (for want of use) be rusty:
Thus musty, dusty, fusty, rusty, crusty,
Shall plague the Knave that was to me untrusty.
In Urine, and Beasts Ordure let him toil:
Soil be his trade, yet nere be Lord oth' soil.
Let boot haling be most part of his living:
Let Guests be sparing to him in their giving:
Under his Rack let him in tortures lie,
And (in his Manger) let him stink and dye:
And let the preaching Cobbler at Blackwall
Be 3 hours prating at his funeral:
Let him be engraved in his own Element:
Let litter, and horse dung be his monument.
But leaving risf rasf rhyme, I Will turn my style,
To some more serious business in the Isle.
Thus having overpast this soul disaster,
I went to see my suffering Sovereign Master:
Which sight to me was all my Earthly bliss,
He gave me straight his Royal hand to kiss,
Which graced me much in all the public sights
Of Commons, Gentles, and brave Lords and Knights.
His Majesty, with an Heroic and unconquered patience, conquers his
unmatchable afflictions, and with Christian constancy, expects a happy
deliverance out of all his troubles. His greatest grief is the calamity of his
people, and Kingdoms, and His chiefest endeavors (on earth) is to settle them
in Peace and happiness; for which end he is twice every day (with his meniall
servants) upon his knees, in public prayers to his God, besides his frequent,
and pious cogitations, and ejaculations; and it is not to be doubted but the
prayers, and humble Petitions of His Majesty (with those of His loyal
Subjects) do ascend to the Throne of Grace, from whence (by the Almightyes
mercy) strong and firm faith assures him of Peace, pardon, and the fruition of
future happiness.

And for infallible Testimonies against all Ignorant, malicious, detracting,
mis-believing Heretics, Schismatiques, and Sectaries to assure those Buzards
of incredulity, that the Gracious, favorable, and preserving hand of God is
with His Majesty, whereby he has been a blessed instrument, (not only in his
former curing the grief, or disease called the Evil) but since he came into
this Island, He has cured many, of whom so cured, there are 6 or 7 most
remarkable, which I will relate as follows.

1. At a Town called Winburne, (or Wimborne) in Dorcetshire, there dwells an
For testimony of the truth of this there is one John Newbery, a Clothworker,
who dwells in Newport in the street called Castle Hole, this man did come over
the water with her, and did see her lame, and cured.
Ancient woman, the Wife to a Clothier (whose name I could not know by
enquiry;) this Woman had a long time been so lame that she could not go, and
she hearing that the King was lodged in Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight,
she was persuaded in her mind that His Majesty could cure her, in which
belief she made toward the Island, and with horse or Cart, or both, or
otherways, she was brought to Hurst Castle in Hampshire by land, from whence
she was carried into a Boat in men's arms, which Boat brought her to Newport,
from whence she was carried a mile to Carisbrook, where His Majesty did touch
her, and her lamenesse ceased in three days space, so that with thanks to
God, and prayers for the King, she departed from the Island, and went home 20.
miles on foot. This was before the Treaty began, much about the midst of August
last.

2. Mistress Elizabeth Steevens of Durley in Hampshire, came from her borne to
Winchester, and from thence to the Island to His Majesty to be cured of the
evil, whereof she had been blind of one Eye 16. days and could not open her
Eye by any means, and after the King had touched her, her Eye opened and she
saw immediately, with a clear and perfect sight. This was about the seventh of
October.

3. Elizabeth Gage of Southampton (being 3 years of age) was exceeding lame,
and in great pain, she came to his Majesty, and he touched her, whereby
(through Gods blessing) she was presently cured.

4. Ioane Mathewes, aged 15. years, a Braziers Daughter one William Mathewes,
dwelling in Newport in the Isle of Wight, she had been long time painefully
lame, and had been at the Bathe, and used many medicines in vain; she came to
the King on Thursday the 19. of October, He touched her, and she had present
ease, and every day she goes better then other: myself saw her and spoke with
her, and I left her able to go reasonable well.

5. A Soldier in Calshot Castle in Hampshire, had 2. sore issues in his
thighs, to which he did frequently apply medicines which eased him, but cured
him not: This man went to the Island to His Majesty, who did touch him, and he
did after that use his former medicines, which were wont to give him ease, but
then the said application did most grievously vex and torment him; so that he
was persuaded to forbear to use the said Oils, Emplasters, and Unguents, and
then he was suddenly cured.

6. Mistress Elizabeth Pain of Bristell was blind, and such a Rhewmatick
defluxion did daily fall from her eyes, which did wet two or three large
hancherchiefes every day; she came to the King on Sunday last, the 5. of this
November, His Majesty did touch her eyes, the Rhewme ceased; so that she went
away presently with a clear and perfect sight; and two hours after she came
to the King again, and gave him thanks upon her knees; His Majesty bade her
give thanks to God; so she with giving God praise, and prayers for the King,
went from the Island to Bristoll with exceeding joy for her recovery.

7. Margaret Hezden, aged 73. years, dwelling in Newport in Chain lane, was
not able to stir but as she was lifted from bed to chair, and from chair to
bed, touched by His Majesty, and cured, so that with one crutch she did go
about her house, and drew 5 or 6. pots of Ale for me, and my company.

These things (me thinks) should move the minds of some unmannerly Levellers
to esteem his Majesty as one that is not to be ranked or filed with common men.

Concerning any News of business at the Treaty, there is so much made of it at
London, that there is little (or none at all) at the Court; this is certain,
that from the 21. of October, till the first of November, (being 11. days)
there was no debating or treating at all: for Sir Peter Killegr^^ was all that
time from the Island to the Parliament at Westminster, and till his return
with Orders and Directions, al^ things were silent, however the London
Mercuries, and Moderate Occurrances did not fail to set forth news (o^ their
own making) every week.

All that I can relate, is, that Sir Peter came to the King on Tuesday night,
the last of October, and the next day (being the quondam All Saints) His
Majesty, with the Commissioners began to Treat, where it was agreed that the
Presbyterian Government in the Church should continue three years, that the
Book of Common Prayer should be discontinued, and not used publicly: That no
Mass should be tolerated to be said in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
or in the Principallity of Wales: These matters of high consequence being
concluded and agreed, there is great hope of speedy restoration of His Majesty
to His just Rights, and a blessed peace for the Church, people, and Kingdoms.

I came from the Island on Tuesday the 7. of November, and landed at a place
called Hell Head, from thence I came 3 miles to Titchfield, on Wednesday I came
4 miles to Wickham, Thursday to Warnford, (7. miles) Friday I footed it 17.
miles to Alton, and to Farnham, Saturday to Guilford, and to Cobham 18. miles,
and Sunday 6 miles to Kingston, and on Monday the 13. of November, I came to
London 10. Miles.

And as I have written, merrily, truly, and impartially; so I must conclude
accordingly without flattery, concerning thu Governor of the Isle of Wight,
Colonel Hammand: the plain truth is, that my self (with many others) did hate
him so much, that he was very seldom or never prayed for; the reasons and
motives which possessed most men with this mistaking and misapplyed inveterate
malice, was upon the flying, lying reports, that the Governor had behaved
himself most coursly ridged, and barbarously unrespective to His Majesty: The
false weekly Pamphlets and Pamphleteers (being inspired by their Father the
Devil) were not ashamed to publish in print, that the Governor had proceeded
so far it, incivility, as to immure or wall His Majesty in a small close room,
under many bolts, bars, grates, locks and keys, and debarred Him the comforts
of His soul, and of the seociety of men; and further it was often printed (by
several lying Villains) that the said Governor Hammond, did strike the King
on the face, and gave Him a black eye: These reports being invented by the
Devils Imps (the firebrands of contention) printed and published by needy,
greedy Knaves and Varlets, and believed by too many Fools and foolish
Gotehamists (amongst which number, I with much simplicity was one;) and as by
Oath and duty I am bound to serve, love, and honor my Sovereign Lord and
Master; so (on the contrary) my self with all true and Loyal Subjects had no
cause to be well affected to any man that should dare to affront His Majesty
with such transcended base indignities.

But to give the world satisfaction of the truth; it is certain that all those
aspersions and rumors against the Governor, are most odious, scandalous, and
malicious lies; for (according to the trust reposed in him) he has always
carried him self with such deportment, and humbleness of dutiful service to
His Majesty, that he has gained much love and favor from his Sovereign, and
such good regard from all knowing men, as belongs to a Gentleman of his place
and Quallity.

And therefore Reader understand and note,
Who ever says I lie, he lies in's throat.
Blessed Englands joy (the King) will come er'e long.
Praise God, make Bonefires, swing the Bells, ding dong.
And let him never bear a Christians name,
Whose trade and pleasure is in blood and slame
Of his dear Country, and rip, rend, and tear
His Mothers Womb, that such a brat did bear.
FINIS.

