PETER HIS REPENTANCE. Showing, among other things, these two Points for
edification. I. What weakness remains in Gods own Children, especially in
times of trial and danger; and so, what little cause they have to trust their
hearts, or be confident of themselves, but get to be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might. II. What is the power of Gods grace and Covenant, for
renewing his Children by repentance; and so, what encouragement they have to
return after every fall, and go on in their course of Watchfulness,
Humiliation, Prayer, and magnifying of Jesus Christ.

By Dr. THOMAS TAILOR.

ROMANS 11. 12. Be not high minded, but fear.

Non proponitur tibi exemplum cadendi, sed si cecideris, resurgendi,

Ambros. in Psalm. 51. Sit casus majorum, tremor minorum.

LONDON: Printed for John Bartlet, dwelling at the sign of the guilt Cup near
St. Austins Gate, 1653.

PETER'S REPENTANCE.
MARK 14. 27. And Jesus says unto them, All ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep
shall be scattered.

Verse. 28. But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee.

Ver. 29. But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet will not
I.

Ver. 30. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even
in this night, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

Ver. 31. But he spoke the more vehemently, If I should dye with thee, I will
not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.


IT has been said of old, Instruunt Patriarchae, tam erran^es, quam docentes.
that the Patriarchs and holy men of God instructed the Church as well when
they erred and fell into sin, as when they delivered wholesome and sound
Doctrine. Which may be particularly instanced in the Apostle Peter, who in his
two Epistles has left us very good instructions for our Faith and Obedience,
and against Deceivers: and in these passages of the Gospel is propounded to us
as a Pattern of humane frailty in his fall, and of Divine power in his rising
and repentance; both which instruct Believers concerning the strength of
corruptions remaining in them, concerning the weakness of their graces, their
need of renewing faith and repentance, their need of humility, fear and
watchfulness, the mercy of a pardoning God, what thankfulness they should
return for that mercy, and for the certainty of persevering in the estate of
grace, though with many failings and hoblings in the way.

But first in general, Parts of this History.
concerning all the Disciples; we have here a Prediction of their dispersion,
ver. 27. all of them offended in him: together with a confirmation of it by a
testimony of the Prophet Zachary, the Shepherd smitten, and the Sheep
scattered, ver. 28. To which Christ subjoynes a consolation, namely that he and
they should have a joyful meeting together again after his Resurrection; with
the place where, in Galilee.

Particularly of Peter's fall; first we have the occasion of it, that is, his
rashness, saying once or twice, he would stick to Christ though all should
leave him, ver. 29. Then our Saviors check thereto, ver. 30. first
admonishing him of his fall, thou shall deny me: secondly, the determinate
number of his false, thrice: thirdly, the time, this day, even this night.
Fourthly, the sign he gives him, before the Cock crow twice. Whereunto Peter
replies more stiffly, ver. 31. to dye with him rather then deny him.

Afterward, when this prediction is to be acted; we have first the Occasion of
Peter's fall, partly in his going into the Priests Hall and warming himself by
the fire, partly in the Priests Maids, who charged him with adhering to Christ,
ver. 66, 67. Secondly, his fall it self, ver. 68. whose particulars with the
circumstances and aggravations, we shall meet in treating of the words.

Lastly, for his Repentance; we have first the time, then: secondly, the
means, both external, the crowing of the Cock, and Christ's looking back
upon Peter; and internal, (...) quum animadvertisset. Bez.
Peter remembered the words of our Lord, and weighed them well: thirdly, the
manner of his Repentance, he went out and wept bitterly.

In all which we shall find useful notes and instructions for the use of
edifying, that we may avoid the like falling into like dangers; or, if we fall,
we may at least recover all by the like repentance. And first of our Saviors
Prediction.

All ye shall be offended because of me this night, etc.^ HE predicteth both
their fall and rising, their sin and his grace, that they might not despair
though their sin were great; but come again by repentance, and take hold of
his grace.

Note 1. How Christ is a rock of offense; Many offended in Christ, and how.
he says not, you shall be offended by me, but in me. In my infirmity,
humanity and base estate; for Christ was never a cause active of offense, never
gave just cause; but passively, an occasion of offense, as a rock offends no
man, but a blind Man falls and offends at the rock; Not properly and Actively,
but accidentally and Passively; so Christ offends none: but so many are the
scandals about and concerning Christ, as he pronounces him blessed that is not
offended in him.

1. Some are offended at the baseness of his Birth; Is not this the Carpinters
Son?

2. At the place of his Education; Can any good come out of Galilee?

3. At his Doctrine; these are hard sayings, who can bear them?

4. At his Miracles; he casts out Devils by Beelzebub.

5. At his conversation as too licentious, Mat. 11. John's Disciples Fast, etc.
A Wine-bibber, Glutton.

6. At his Company; He converseth with sinners, Luke 5.

7. At his Allegiance; that he pays not tribute, Mat. 17.

8. At his Cross and Passion; 1 Coa. 1. 23.
We Preach Christ crucified, a scandal to the Jews.

But what marvel of all this, that Scribes and Pharisees, blind guides, and
blind People led by them, take offense by Christ, when even his Disciples and
all they take offense at his low estate and Passion, immediately before warned
by his own mouth?

But see how prone we are to offend our selves in Christ; say not as the Jews,
Had we lived in the days of our Forefathers, we would not have slain the
Prophets; so, had we Christ among us, we would not be offended; for every one
almost is offended in him: Thus*

Christ comes in the Preaching of the Word; but that is a breach and
foolishness, yet without this foolishness of Preaching you shall never be
saved; 1 Cor. 1. (...).
thou would have heard Christ on earth had thou lived; no; He that hears
you, hears me; and contrary.

Whatsoever Christ speaks, thou would not be offended; but nothing the
Minister speaks but offends thee. If Christ should bid thee leave thy Usury,
thou would not be offended at him. If his Minister in his name bid thee, it
offends thee.

If Christ should say to thee, James 5.
swear not at all, love your enemies, in giving honor go one before another,
Mat. 5.
redeem the time, play it not away, put off vain fashi^^ in Apparel, etc. you
would not be offended. Romans 12.
But he has said it, and his Preachers cannot speak it after him, Ephesians. 5.
16.
but thou art offended.

If Christ should bid thee take up his Cross and follow him, thou say thou
would not be offended; but the Cross of the Gospel so offend thee, thou will rather part with the Gospel then suffer a word of disgrace for thy
profession; is not this to be offended at Christ? Christ comes in his Servants
that hold forth the word of life by holy profession, and express the virtues
of Christ, and abstain from the evils of the world; thou abhorrest them, can
not abide them, a pack of dissemblers; thou would be an enemy to Christ and
his Apostles.

Note 2. Marvel not that the most of the world be offended at Christ this
day; Holy profession offends at this day.
if the Apostles could be so offended at his very person, how much more the
world at his profession? as in the days of the Jews, Isay 8. 18. Behold, I
and the Children thou have given me, are as signs and wonders in Israel.

Christ's own Disciples who were mirrours in the world, were counted monsters
in the world; and those that lived as Angels, were as gazing stocks to men and
Angels, 1 Cor. 4. 9.

The holy religion of Christ was once everywhere counted as Heresy, Acts 24.
14.
Acts 28. 22. so is it among Christians; but shall we count it Puritanisme,
which is a vile Heresy? or is the Doctrine which we Preach and you profess a
Sect? if it be a Sect, better be no man then not of this Sect.

Note 3. Comfort to godly Preachers and professors of Religion; Comfort to
godly Preachers and professors.
if the world be offended in them, it was so in their head before them. And the
servant is no better; and they are offended in them that would be offended in
Christ himself; be content as Christ; and for no other cause in them then that
in Christ, and the light being the same, if it offended in the Head, it will in
the Members; Christ's Doctrine tended to Mortification, and crossed wicked men's
lusts; if thine do so, as the world was offended in him, so will it in thee.
Christ's life was holy and innocent, and actually reproved the corruptions of
the world, and this was another cause of offense. If thy life do so, all loose
persons, Teachers or others will be offended in thee; Mat. 7. 29.
Christ's Ministry was powerful against sin, not as the Scribes, but with
Authority; this was an eyesore to blind guides. If thine be so, then it will
be an offense and prick in the eyes of numbers.

Christ's whole course was so gracious, so profitable, as God testified with him
everywhere that he was with him; here was a matter of envy: If God testify
with thee, envious men will testify against thee; For if we let him alone, all
men will believe in him.

Note 4. Let our care be, Offend none justly.
that the world may not justly be offended by us; and if in us, it was our
Lords case, and our comfort shall be, men are not so much offended in us, as in
Christ in us.

Christ never offended any man, yet what loads of slanders carried he to
sanctify ours?

Quest. How should a Christian subject to offense carry himself, to stop the
mouths of wicked men, when nothing he does never so carefully and justly, but
is traduced, himself slandered, wronged, abused?

Surely thus we must resolve:

1. That innocence, wisdom, goodness, will not free us against the worlds
malice, no not if it were equal with Christ's, no more then it did with him;
but before Gods tribunal and equal hearing of men.

2. That Dogs will bark at Strangers, though they neither make nor meddle with
them; and a wise Traveller (shall make himself work enough to stop every
Dogs bark) will go on his way, and esteem it as the bark of Dogs.

3. Labor to give no offense; and if Christ in thee offend any, let them
stumble and fall; for to this they were appointed.

Note 5. A R^^ for the choice of our Religion, A trial of true religiousnesse.
or the trial of it. Christian religion is a general offense to the wicked,
as Christ the subject of it; most of the world are offended with it, as Christ
himself was left of followers, friends, Disciples, kinsfolks; and ever
suspect that way the most walk in, that is the broad way; the greater part
still is against the better part.

Few shall be saved, few believe, few find the narrow way; Christ has but a
few Disciples, and they for a time offended in him too.

Dislike not that Religion which has but a few; a few hair braind fellows
only run to Sermons, and are so precise, say some. But choose thou the broad
way at thy peril, and esteem thy Religion as the Papist his, by Multitudes.

Good men must choose theirs by Truth, and that is a dear commodity in the
hands of a few; and you must make this your wisdom to go rather by the guide
of a few that have their eyes to see their way, then of Multitudes that are
blind and discern nothing.

For it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be
scattered. COnfirmation of the former Prediction, by a testimony of Zachary 13.
7. Christ gives here a twofold reason of the Disciples scandal.

1. It was foretold; the Prediction must be accomplished.

2. Because the Shepherd was to be smitten* they as Sheep must be scattered.

The Scope of which place is, to prove Christ the true Pastor of the Flock,
Scope.
even by his smiting and abasement; and so most aptly alleged that the
Disciples might have matter of strength and comfort thence where they stumbled
and offended themselves.

How different Divine conclusions are from humane, Divine conclusions differ
from humane.
and how contrary Gods spirit is from man's in drawing conclusions! Humane
reason says thus, Christ is smitten, and therefore he is not to be longer
followed as a Guide: the Disciples themselves fall off from him; but Divine
reason concludes clean contrary; Christ is smitten, and therefore is the
Shepherd to whom the Sheep ought to cleave and not scatter themselves; so
Isaiah 53. 4. Because he was smitten of God and humbled, proves him to be our
Messiah and Redeemer.

Reason says, That is not the true Religion which is so opposed and
contradicted by Jews, Turks, Papists, held but by an handful of men; the
Spirit says, that is true Christianity which is so resisted; never was the Sun
so beset with dark clouds as Truth with oppositions. As therefore that Christ
is the true Messiah, Luke 2. 34.
because he is a sign of contradiction, whom now Herod seeks to kill, the
Scribes and Pharisees are deadly enemies unto: so is that true Christianity,
which the world opposes.

Humane reason says, That cannot be the true way which so few walk in; can so
many Ages, Mat. 7. 14.
so many great Persons be so deceived? the Spirit faith, therefore it is the
right way, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
because so few find it; not many great ones, wise, learned, etc. as not many,
but a few mean Fishermen followed Christ himself.

Reason says, they cannot be dear to God, who are so afflicted and smitten;
the Spirit from thence concludes them Sons of God, Heb. 12, 6, 7.

Use 1. Unsafe therefore it is to follow our reason for our guide in divine
things; no, be ordered by the word and rules, of Religion.

2. And we learn to deny our selves which is the first lesson in Christianity,
Mat. 16, 24.

I will smite the Shepherd. WHO is the Shepherd? Christ himself, Christ
according to his many benefits has many names.
John 10. I am the good Shepherd. Christ has as many names as Benefits.

1. He redeemed us, and thence called the Redeemer of Israel.

2. He rules us by his Spirit and grace, and thence called the King of the
Church.

3. He feeds us, and called thence the Bread of life.

4. He refreshes us, and thence called the Water of life.

5. He enlightneth us, and thence called the Light of the World. John 8. 12.

6. He eternally appeaseth the Father, so called our high Priest, and here our
Shepherd.

Quest. Why?

Answ. Because promised, Ezekiel. 34. 23. I will set up one Shepherd over them,
and he shall feed them, and accordingly performed all, offices of a good
Shepherd.

So here called a Shepherd, a name of great love and sweetness.

1. As descending of ancient Patriarks who were Shepherds, Christ why called a
Shepherd.
and they Types of him, Abel, Jacob, David, Moses.

2. He knows his Sheep, and marks them for his own. John 10. 3. 14. And God
sets his seal on them, 2 Timothy 21. 19. knows them by name, as Cyrus his
Soldiers.

3. He feeds their Souls and bodies in green pastures, Psalm. 23. and drives
them to the sweet streams and waters of comfort, by the paths of grace and
righteousness.

4. Defends them from the Wolf and enemies, being timorous, simple, weak,
shiftlesse creatures, to fly, resist, or save themselves; as David met the
Lion and Bear, and slew them, and saved the Sheep, 1 Samuel 17. 34. so this
Shepherd goes on to meet the Adversaries, and to give his life for the sheep.
Oh wonderful love, and accordingly to be much magnified! this good Sheepherd
watches over his Flock with his eye never absent day nor night, sleeps not
by night as other Shepherds, but keeps our bones, Psalm. 34. 20. numbers the
hairs, Mat. 10. 30. observes Enemies and turns them back, Psalm. 56 9.

One Sheep may forget another, as the Butler did Joseph, but Christ cannot
forget any of his Flock.

5. Nourishes the young and tender Lambs, Isa. 40. 11. breaks not bruised
reeds, suffers not his to be tempted above their strength.

Seeks them straying, rejoices in finding, as in the Parable of the lost
Sheep; seeks and saves them that are lost, cures the diseased; if the diseased
be contagious, removes it till it be cured, washes them in the streams of his
blood, and every way saves.

7. He brings them to the Fold 1. Of grace. 2. Of glory.


So of Christ's Title.

2. This Shepherd must be smitten; namely, with ignominy, reproach, grievous
strokes, Zech. 13. 17.
death and the Sword; so in Zachary, Sword, arise and smite, etc.

Quest. What had he deserved?

Answ. He was fellow of the Lord, How Christ is Gods fellow.
not only in familiarity of grace, but conformity of nature; for none can be
Gods fellow which is not of the same nature; what fellowship between abhorring
natures? therefore he was more pure then the Sun, and no spot in him from top
to toe, but all perfection of grace; he was not therefore smitten for his own
sake, but ours; so Isa. 53. 5. he was wounded for our transgressions.

3. Who smit him? By whom he was smitten.
I will smite him.

Object. The Original in Zachary says; Sword smile, and rise upon the Shepherd.

Sol. The Evangelist or our Savior respecting sense rather then words, thus
changes them.

2. The Prophet speaks prophetically, Allegorically, obscurely, in a compared
sense.

But now the accomplishment of a Prophecy being the best Expositor, he spe^ks
according to the accomplishment plainly and without obscurity.

3. In both Phrases nothing else is signified but that all that trouble and
persecution of Jesus Christ was moved according to the will and counsel of
God, as Act. 4. 28. Herod and Pilate met to do whatsoever thy hand and
counsel determined: the Prophet in the commandment to the Sword expresses
the counsel of God; the Evangelist the hand of God in the death of Christ.

Object. But he was smitten by the high Priests and Jews who slew him.

Answ. The hand and action of God was in it latent, the actions of the
instruments were apparent, Gods hand was secret and hid to them, and therefore
they sinned highly in bringing Gods purpose to pass.

Object. That God had a counsel ordaining and permitting this sin we grant;
but that he had a hand in the sin, is hard to say.

Answ. Saint Luke adds also, that God had a hand in this action, but more
improperly then counsel; for this hand wrought not with them in the sin, but
moderated, guided, restrained and overruled the sin to his glory and Christ's
advancement.

Use 1. In that Christ is the Shepherd, comfort our selves in his 1. Love. 2.
Care.


1. Love; Comfort in Christ our Sheepherd.
more Love is included in this word Shepherd, then if he should call himself
our Father, Brother, Kinsman; the good Shepherd gives his life for his Sheep,
which every Father and Brother will not do.

2. Care; the Sheep need care for nothing but the Shepherds presence, Psalm. 23.
The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall want nothing; that is, nothing that is
needful and good; Jacob was a careful Shepherd as any was, yet lost some
Sheep; some lost, some stolen, some torn, Genesis 31. 39, 40.

But the care of this Shepherd is such as he loses none whom he has chosen.
Job. 17. 12.

Moses was a careful Shepherd of Gods People, but sometimes weary, sometimes
grudged at the great burden and charge, Numb. 11. 11. But Christ was obedient
even unto the death.

Use 2. In that Christ was smitten with the Sword; Be patient in all smitings.
learn patience in all afflictions and crosses, ordinary and extraordinary,
Heb. 12. 2. Run with patience the race before us looking at Jesus.

Are we smitten with tongues of men, swords of men? so was the green Tree; the
dry may be contented.

1. He suffered for no necessity or desert, but by voluntary humility; we
deserve even fiery trials.

2. He not for his cause, but ours, and shall not we for his?

3. He despised the shame, and why should not we do so?

4. The end of his cross was the exaltation at Gods right hand, and we expect
the same end.

Use 3. Of admonition; Mourn for sin which caused Christ to be smitten.
in that he was smitten for us, see it affect us with sorrow that we by sin
drew out the Sword against Christ; Oh that we could cry out of our selves and
sins, who brought Gods companion, and as the Apostle says, one who thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, to abase himself as a Servant, as a Sinner,
to be smitten and suffer death as a malefactor, Phil. 2. 6. how should it
humble us? look on him whom we have smitten and mourn.

Again we should stir up our selves to thankfulness, that he who was Gods
companion in grace and nature, Sudy to be thankful to Jesus Christ.
would be content to be smitten for us, that by his stripes he would heal us;
had the stroke for the least sin light upon our selves, it could not be but
eternally mortal; now he having put himself between the blow of Gods sword
and us who had deserved the deadly blow, to him belongs all the praise of our
peace and freedom; if a man should keep a blow off us with the loss of his
life, we would be sorry and thankful for such a friend; nay if loss of a
limb, etc.

Again, Not all hated of God who are smitten by him.
was Christ the Shepherd smitten, who was equal with God, and that by God? see
that all are not hated of God, who are smitten of God; never was there such an
object of Gods love, all creatures were not capable of that love which his
Father poured upon him; yet he was smitten with temptation, persecution, and
all kinds of affliction to sanctify all kinds unto us, and not spared to the
death.

Let none say he is cast out of favor because of afflictions, never any so
smittenas Christ, never any so dear to God.

Again, The liker to God, the more smitten.
note who they be that are most smitten by the World in the World; even those
that are likest unto God, and most conformable unto Jesus Christ.

If Christ had not been Gods companion, he had escaped better; so acquaintance
with God brings many a blow from the World; if thou will converse with the
World which knows neither him, nor thee, he has rods in water to lash thee as
a W^nderer or Stranger.

What marvel is it that godly Pastors whose lives and doctrine come nearest
unto this chief Sheepherd, be most smitten in the World? if Jeremy be lying in
the Dungeon; if Herod smite James with the Sword, and take Peter, and vex
others; if the whole rout of Drunkards, Usurers, and bench companions say, come
and let us smite this Jeremy with the tongue, Jer. 18. 18.
let us slander him Town and Country, we dare not with our hands, but our
tongues are our own, say lewd fellows, who can control us?

Let us say to our Preacher that he never did or thought of, somewhat will
stick, if we can do it boldly enough, and with faces of brass; for even thus
was our Lord and chief Shepherd smitten, who says they laid to my charge
things I never knew; so may we, so may I.

Though Christ was smitten it was not by chance, Comfort because Gods hand is
in it.
fortune, or altogether by malice of wicked men, but all by the counsel and
decree of God, comfort thy self.

1. It is Gods hand, not so heavy as Devils or wicked men's, John 19. 10. nor
shall always lie on thee, nor so long as they would, Psalm. 125. 3.

2. As in Christ's smiting, God is now executing by evil men some of his good
purposes toward thee; all works for good.

3. He suffers them to try and exercise thee for a time, as Christ; but not his
council only is in it, but his hand to moderate it, that they cannot do what
they will, but what he will.

And the Sheep shall be scattered.] THE effect or consequent of the Shepherds
smiting.

1. Who be these Sheep, Ezekiel. 34. 10. 2. How they are scattered.

These Sheep be the Disciples and faithful Believers in the name of Christ,
under the Rule, care and custody of the chief Shepherd.

1. The Church is the great Sheepfold, Church called a Sheepfold, why.
John 10. 16. for out of the Church is no salvation; the fold is a defense for
Sheep; and because the Members of the Church live in concord and peace as
Sheep, not as Lions, Wolves, Tygars, etc. The mark of Christ's Sheep is love,
John. 13. 13.

Every Christian resembles this creature in the Text: Christians why called
Sheep.
1. Simple, foolish, subject to stay and to be scattered; yea quite lost
without the care of the Shepherd, Isa. 55. 6. seek the Lord while he may be
found; so are the faithful, not only before conversion, 1 Pet. 2. 11. I
beseech you as Pilgrims, wherein the whole life is but a straying from God; but
even after never so little left of the Shepherd, as Noah, Lot, David, Hezekiah,
and here all the Apostles; and can never return without the Shepherds call,
partly in the word as Nathan to David, partly by corrections, which are as the
Shepherds Dog to fetch us in, as Joseph's Brethren.

2. Beset with all manner of enemies, Dogs, Wolves, Lions, Foxes, and destitute
in it self of all means of safety, without speed, courage, and natural
weapons (as other creatures are armed with) to resist so many Adversaries, so
as their whole safety is in the presence and care of the Shepherd.

So the Members of Christ beset with Tyrants, Heretics, Hypocrites, Seducers,
false Brethren, and cannot put back violence with violence; their safety and
defense lies not as many beasts, in their Horns, Hoofes, Nails or teeth; they
are only armed with the mercy and care of the Shepherd, without whom they are
sure to be a daily prey to the Devil, 1 Pet. 5* 8.
the roaring Lion and his instruments.

3. Harmless, patient, bear all wrongs, offer none, lose the Fleece, their
lives, with meekness, without struggling.

Thus Christians resemble the Shepherd himself, he bare all wrongs, he never
did wrong, he was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, and before the Shearer
opened not his mouth; and his Members must receive a second wrong, rather then
revenge a former, and still possess their Souls in patience.

Use. 4. Acknowledge our selves after grace received silly Sheep, Note thy
weak disposition even after grace received.
most easy to stray away and become a prey to all the ravenous Beasts of the
field; take notice of our wandering and straying disposition, resembled in the
parable of the lost Sheep, Luke 15. that unless the good Shepherd leave the
ninety and nine to seek us up we never come back.

Let this 1. Make us depend on the Shepherd. 2. Be more watchful. 3. Pray that
he would seek us out of our wanderings and reduce us.


Psalm. 119. 176. I am as a wandering Sheep, Oh seek thy Servant.

Use. 2. Imitate Sheep in sundry Christian virtues. Imitate Sheep and wherein.


Though they be easy to stray, yet being strayed they be easily reduced
whither the Shepherd will without resistance and trouble; so Gods Sheep having
broke out into some sin, sometimes a small check of conscience, sometimes a
light affliction, sometimes a word of threatening or reprehension in the
Ministry will bring them on their knees and humble them, when as all Gods
plagues will not subdue the hard heart of wicked Pharaoh not reduced with ten
plagues, therein like the Leviathan. Job 41. 15.

Sheep know their Shepherd and no man else; they know his voice or whistle and
no man else.

We must know our Shepherd in his Person, in his offices, and esteem to know
nothing but Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
and him crucified; we must know no man else for Pardon of our sin, for merit
of righteousness, for intercession or obtaining salvation, but only Jesus
Christ.

Vera gloria, Jer. 9. 24. the right glorying.

Vita aeterna, John 17. 3. this is eternal life.

We must know and acknowledge no voice but his, no word but his, no unwritten
traditions, no determination of Popes, Councels, Fathers, but his Scriptures a
perfect guide, Gal. 1. 8, 9. If any man or Angel bring another word, hold him
accursed.

3 Sheep presently hear the voice of the Shepherd, John. 10. 27. my sheep
hear my voice, not the voice of Satan calling from light to darkness, not of
Antichrist calling to traditions and superstitions; But Christ's voice.

1. External exhortationin the ministry.

2. Internal inspirations, by the motions of his spirit not quenched.

3. Bountiful Largition; Christ speaks in his mercies, inviting to
repentance, Romans 2. 4.

4. Corporal flagellation; his hand is his voice, and calls to humiliation and
conversion.

A good Christian hears all this; Hear the Rod, and who appointed it, Mic. 6.
9.

4. Sheep follow their Shepherd; so the Sheep of Christ obey him; a fruit of
hearing; and bring in abundant fruits of obedience, abounding in good works.
Nothing but profitable in Sheep, fleece, flesh, increase, profitable in life
and death, they be nowhere but enrich the Ground. Thus did the Shepherd, and
thus must we. So of the Sheep.

Secondly, How the Sheep shall be scattered.]

OUr Savior expresses it, Of the scattering of the People.
Ioh. 16. 32. Behold, the hour comes, yea is now come, that ye shall be
scattered, every one to his own, and leave me alone. I shall be this night
smitten with reproach, ignomy, and the sharpest sword of God and men, even to
the death; and now whereas soundness of Faith would make you cleave unto me in
life and death, you shall forsake me; some of you shall deny and forswear me,
and all fly from me, and be scattered every one his way, as if you were
deceived and deluded in me; yea, every one of you shall shift for his own
safety, and fall both from me, and one from another, as Sheep are dispersed
and scattered, when the Shepherd is slain and taken from them.

And how this Prediction was accomplished, see Mat. 26. 56. Then all the
Disciples forsook him and fled, so soon as he was in his enemies hands; and
not only they but other Disciples and followers of Christ, as the two
Disciples that were going to Emaus, Luke 24. 11.
whose Faith was so shaken, as they say, We thought this should be he that
should redeem Israel, and this is the third day: but now they began to be of
another mind.

Quest. Why were the Disciples thus scattered?

Answ. 1. In themselves; carnal and excessive fear of themselves, who were
yet weak, and had not received the Spirit to strengthen them as afterward;
they had not cast the costs of their profession, nor accounted sufficiently the
expense of this building, as their Master had long before exhorted them.

Ans. 2. God in his wisdom would have Christ left of all his Disciples,
because he was to be known to tread the Wine Press of Gods wrath alone, Esaias
63. 3.
without partner or fellow; none must share in the Action, or in the glory.

Ans. 3. Thus it behoved the Scripture to be fulfilled, in regard of Christ
himself, who voluntarily undertaking the grievous burden of our sin, must
be forsaken of God, and all other creatures, and comforts for the time; for so
we had justly deserved, and he must be left alone and comfortless.

Ans. 4. To teach us, that all the safety and comfort of the strongest
Christians, were they as near to Christ as his dear Disciples, is in their
relation and dependence on the chief Shepherd; for without Christ, the
Shepherd of souls, we lie dispersed, ungathered, and in a forlorn estate: If
he withdraw himself never so little, as great Believers as the Disciples fly
away from him, and never come to him till he come to them.

Use 1. Are the Disciples scattered when Christ is persecuted and smitten? No
marvel if unsound fall quite away.
what marvel if hypocrites be quite blown away from their profession by
perecution, who only as chafe cleave to the Wheat?

If the godly be scattered for a time from Christ and from themselves, as here
the Disciples, what marvel if hypocrites be scattered from both?

If ^ffliction for Christ shake the Faith of so great Apostles, no marvel if
it quite overturne such as be uns^tled and ungrounded.

This is one of the ends of affliction for the Gospel, to try them that are
sound; for as the fair season of the Spring sets and ripens Fruits, so the
Winds and boisterous blasts of Autumn makes them fall off.

We may not therefore stumble when we see great Professors fall off in trials;
for some believe but for a time, Luke 8. 13. and so of some 1 John 2. 19. that
they went out from us, because they were not of us.

Use 2. Let no man presume of his own strength to stand in trial, Let none
trust trust his own heart.
nor be too confident in another in trial. Little knows a man, nor will
believe the deceit and hollownesse of his own heart; Hazael will not believe
he can prove such a Dog, 2 King. 8. 13.
and so vile as the Prophet speaks of.

Little knows many a man, who now continues well-affected to sound Preaching,
how soon they should find their inner disposition and outward too changed, if
outward occasions were changed but a little.

So a man would have promised as much as any of the Disciples of Christ, as any
in the world; nay, the Disciples would not believe Christ telling them how
cowardly they should leave him; they thought themselves wronged, as their
answer shows; yet how should a man have bin deceived in them? how were they
deceived in themselves, who immediately after our Lord had forewarned them,
fall into this their weakness?

Use 3. Arm our selves well against trial; Arm against shaking trials.
it was nothing for the Disciples to stick to Christ while in peace; and we
now while Christ is with us easily hold up the head; but when Christ is smitten
then is the trial; sound love to Christ is tried by continuing with him in
temptation.

Sound love to the Word, Preachers and Professors is that which has endured
trial; as that is sound Gold which has passed the fire; good Ground is known
by enduring.

Arm we therefore our selves with resolution, that we must suffer; that the
Shepherd shall be smitten, and yet go on: so with sense of our own impotency
to stand with watching and prayer, Mat. 26. 41.
that we enter not into temptation: also with sound love of Christ and
Christian Religion; or else if the Pastor be smitten, thou shall be scattered.

Use 4. If godly Ministers or Professors in time of trouble be left, and those
that seemed to depend on them, Think not much to be left alone in a good cause.
to affect them for the best things, fall to the stronger side, it was our
Lords case, we must be patient and contented; Elias persecuted by Jezabel, was
left alone; Paul himself for Christ in his bands, had none to assist him (2 Timothy 4. 16.) or stand with him: it is no new case, that faithful Pastors
especially should be conformable to the chief Shepherd; all times of
persecution did ever confirm this truth, that the Pastor was no sooner
smitten, then the Sheep were scattered from him. But let it comfort Ministers,
as Christ, I am not alone, John 16. 32.
but my Father is with me.

Use 5. If the Disciples be scattered in days of trouble, Make much of the
(...) season of grace and peace.
let us know the day of our peace, our season, the time of our visitation;
frequent holy Assemblies, get hold of Christ, increase of Faith, grow in
wisdom, enjoy our season, our Sun, our Summer, our seed time; not knowing our
day forfeits it; work while we may, do in our peace what we would, but cannot
if trial come.

Ver. 28. But after I am Risen.] NOW follows Christ's Consolation. Gospel upon
sad news soon yields comfo^t
Wherein Note difference between Law and Gospel; the Law pronounces heavy
things, and there rests. But the Gospel still after heavy news, ends with
good tidings; the Law throws down a man, and there leaves him; the Gospel
raises the humbled: You shall be scattered, but I will come again. Mat. 16.
21. I must go up to Jerusalem to suffer: heavy tidings; Peter disswades him;
But I will rise again the third day; There is Gospel indeed.

So to the Church; You shall be hated of all men for my names sake; sad
tidings; but if you continue to the end, ye shall be saved, Mat. 10. 23.

You must take up the Cross and follow Christ, but I will give refreshing to
your souls, John. 16. 33. In the Worl^ ye shall have affliction, but be of
good comfort.

Use. 1. Lay hold upon the Gospel, and sow in never so many tears, thou shall
reap in joy.

Use. 2. Accept the condition of the Gospel, be content to begin with the
Cross, be weary laden, lay a good foundation in Repentance, mortification,
godly sorrow; on this condition attain the crown of refreshing, and entrance
into the Kingdom by many afflictions, Act. 14. 22.

If we suffer, we shall reign; all true joy is fetched out of sorrow; blessed
are the mourners.

Use 3. Let Papists stick to the comfort of the Law, they shall never hear a
good word from Christ.

Let profane Persons shun the heaviness of the Gospel they shall never have
joy; Christ wipes away no tears where none be shed; he that will not be a
weary needs no refreshing. This by the way.

Ver. 28. But after I am risen I will go before you into Galilee. SUch a
promise as was never heard off before, and without exception, that a dead man
should rise within few days, and promise so to do.

Having spoken of Christ's admonitions; now of consolation where the Lord
sustaines them with many grounds of comfort.

1. That there shall be a certain end of this evil ready to swallow them up.

2. There shall be a short end after a few days, three or four.

3. There shall be a happy end; For,

1. Christ shall rise again from the dead with power and glory.

2. Whereas they are run from him, he will come to them again.

3. Though they have left their Shepherd, yet he will become their Shepherd
again, and go before them, and guide them as a Shepherd goes before his Sheep.

For their full confirmation, he declares both the time and place where he
will, and when he will meet them; in Galilee a place fit for their estate; for
it signifies dispersing or scattering; the Sea of Galilee forty miles from
Jerusalem.

Quest. Why in Galilee? Why Christ would meet them in Galilee.


Answ. 1. That they may more surely enjoy one another without fear of the
Jews, and instruct them in the Kingdom of Christ.

2. Because Christ had more Disciples and Favorites in Galilee to whom he would
familiarly offer himself, and manifest his resurrection, then in Judea.

3. Themselves were of Galilee, he would bring them back were he found them.

4. They must follow their calling till Christ came, and for the time before
they can get into Galilee, he will be there before them, expecting them; note
here.

Note. 1. The wonderful lenity and meekness of Jesus Christ; Wonderful
gentleness of Christ.
he was going to dye for his Disciples, they fly from him, and doubt the truth
of his whole proceedings, his Person, his Doctrine, his miracles, sufferings,
the event of all his course.

He now does not sharply rebuke them for their infidelity, inconstancy and
^emerity after so long being with him, but uses them gently, and with great and
loving affection (as the Titles of Shepherd and Sheep import) not only
forewarneth them of their danger, but furnishes them with grounds of comfort,
and promises them most loving and kind entreaty even after their flight, as if
they had never forsaken him.

Use A Rule to carry our selves toward Brethren that fail; let them be
restored by the spirit of meekness; Gal. 6. 1.
yea if the offense concern our selves, wherein we are hottest, to be most
cool and calm; Christ casts not off for ever, no more must we break
affection, but imitate him with all moderation.

Note 2. Christ never with-draws himself from his Members, He never quite
leaves his.
but he leaves some comfort behind him, something to bring them in love with
him, or to stay them in his absence, or to make them desire and seek after him
again; yea, something instead of his presence or promise, John. 14. having
told his Disciples he must go away and leave them; yet ver. 18. he promises
not to leave them comfortless; for he will send the comforter to supply his
absence; and still, God ordinarily takes not away one mercy but he gives
another; as Christ here removes his personal presence, but supplies it with a
double blessing.

1. Protection of their persons in his absence.

2. Promise of his presence to rest their faith on in the mean time, Cant. 5.
the Church would not open unto Christ when Christ called; he goes away in
displeasure at her unkind answer, but he left behind him drops of Mirth, some
sweet work of the spirit that made her spirit yearn within her, which wrought
compunction for her offense and quickened her to seek him, ver. 25. His
desertions are never total.

Use Which may comfort poor souls affected in sense of Christ's absence;
feel thou a want of Christ's presence? he has left some pledge behind him,
and he is perhaps nearer then thou think.

1. He has given thee a promise, he will not leave thee long.

2. He has given the spirit which has wrought some grace of trembling for
offending him; some grace of fainting and longing after him; some grace of
seeking him, as him whom thy soul loves; some grace of prayer, breathing,
earnest and inward desires, not satiate without him, some grace of fortitud,
sustaining the heart for the present, and enabling to undergo many troubles
for his sake, yet abiding and waiting for him; this sweet hunger and thirst
shall be satisfied, Mat. 5. 6.

Note. 3. That Christ will shortly come again after his smiting, Desertions
neither total nor final.
within a very few days; learn that as Christ's desertions are not total, so
neither sinall; Christ never goes away but he will see us again, John. 16. 22.

1. His displeasure is but for a moment. Psalm. 30. 5.


2. Final desertion were above their strength, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and so against his promise.

3. It will not only endanger the faith of the Elect, but quite destroy it,
which is impossible; 1 John 5. 4.
against all the Gates of Hell it is their victory.

4. Union between Christ and the Christian admits no final desertion; a fruit
of it is in John 17. 24. to be where Christ is and see his glory.

5. The Covenant is everlasting, not to depart, but do us good, Jer. 32. 40. He
marries us for ever in mercyes, Hos. 2. 12. and is a perpetual covenant, not
only on Gods part as Papists say; but on our part also who will never break
finally with God, because of his fear put in our hearts, never to depart from
him, Jer. 31. 41.

Use. Now, Comfort thy self with the assured end of every trial.
as Christ would confirm the faith and confidence of the Disciples by setting
before them a certain end of the trial; so let us confirm our selves with
these words; If the Lord seem to absent himself, he will not do it for ever;
his mercy cannot come to an utter end, his mercyes are as the Ocean which has
no eb but a flow again; sometimes he stands off the longer, because his
Children stand off with him, and the case seems desperate, as Abraham for a
Son, but he will come at length to Abraham in the Mount, but not till the
third day; to Jonas in the third day; Christ may lie in the grave till the case
seem desperate, but rises the third day, and appears to all the Disciples
save Thomas the same day, John 20. he more glorifies himself in his long
absence then presence, John 11. 6.

Note. 4. Note again, how Jesus Christ prevents us with his grace, he
promises the Disciples, Christ prevents his with loving kindness.
that before they can get to Galilee, after they have kept the Feast at
Jerusalem, he would be there before them. The Shepherd smitten will return to
the dispersed Sheep, he will gather them again, and he will be found of them
in Galilee, the place of dispersion.

He says not, they shall come to him, but they shall go into Galile* and
there he will find them: surely, we never come to him, unless he come to us
first; he must come to the Disciples themselves, or they cannot come to him,
much less we.

Note 5. Christ here both strengthens them in the Article of his Resurrection,
Christ an everlasting guide to his.
and tells them the end of his Resurrection, which is, to go before them; he
will not only rise again, but for this purpose, to be their guide and leader,
and to take them again as companions with him, as if they had never sinned
against him.

How this was performed, see Mat. 28. 7. the Angels tell the Women; Arise; go
tell his Disciples, he is risen; behold, be goes before you into Galilee, and
Mark 16. 7. As he said unto you, etc.

As Christ at first found them, and began to be their guide and leader into
Galilee; so now, after his resurrection he would manifest himself an eternal
Shepherd.

Use. And this was their happiness and ours, See hence our happine^^e.
purchased by his eternal Resurrection; that we have an high Priest immortal,
and higher then the heavens. They sled into Galilee to avoid danger from their
persons, but he finds them there.

They go thither because their Master was dead, and betake them to their old
Callings again. But their Lord finds them again at the Sea of Galilee, and
makes them (...) fishers of Men, furnishing them with power from on high, above
all they could have expected.

Christ raised, gives gifts unto men; his Death merits them, his Resurrection
applies them; as a great King gives great gifts on the day of his Coronation;
so Christ. Let us follow so worthy a guide in Faith and Obedien^e, who rose
from death to be our guide to eternal life. We proceed.

Verse 29. And Peter said unto him, Though all men should be offended, yet
would not I. HERE we have an instance (as many elsewhere) of Peter's temerity
and rashness, not well considering his weakness, and what spirit he was of.
For this holy Disciple bewrays great infirmity, in arrogating much above that
was in him.

1. He directly contradicts his Lord, Peter's rashness in five particulars
who said, all ye; Peter says no, not all, he will not; not this Night; no,
never.

2. Believes not the Oracle of the Prophet Zachary, but would shi^t it off
with pomp of words, not as concerning him; he was none of the sheep that
should be scattered, though the Pastor was smitten.

3. He presumes too much upon his own strength, and of that which is out of
his own power, never mentioning or including the help and strength of God, by
whom alone he should be enabled to stand; he neither considered his own
frailty, which will overthrow him, nor yet the power of God which should
sustain and uphold him.

4. He prefers himself too too vain-gloriously above all men; as if all men
were weak to Peter; and Peter the only champion; if all men should deny thee,
I would not; stronger in conceit then all the Apostles.

5. He is bold, hardy and vainly confident in a thing to come, in which he had
never tried his strength; he knew his present affection, he will take no notice
of his future peril; nay, he disclaimes and almost scorns the danger, now
when he is next to it, and even falling into it, and the difficulty expressed
John 13. 37. Cannot I follow thee now? I will give my life for thee; I will be
so far from denying thee, that I will confess thee to the death; perils,
dangers, fears, or death it self shall not separate me from thee. Alas man!
thou that can not follow Christ, can thou go before him?

Object. But Peter had a Promise, Noact of faith in a Promise.
Mat. 16. 18. that the gates of hell should not prevail against his Faith;
might not he be bold in this Promise?

Answ. 1. Promises of God make no man presume, but stir up watchfulness and
excite to prayer, which Peter should have done, being admonished of our Lord.

2. Though his Faith lwas not quite to be shaken and extinct, yet he might for
a time be so foiled as might bring him shame and sorrow enough.

3. He had promised indeed before this the spirit of fortitude and strength;
but Peter anticipates the time; they were to be endued with virtue from above,
but not till after the Resurrection, which was no privilege but that in the
mean time they might fall dangerously.

4. No Promise could cross the word of the Prophet, and Christ himself now
applying it to the present occasion, which ought to have bin believed.

Objec. But might not Peter be bold of victory, standing in so good a cause?
must Christians stand doubtful and in suspense always of their standing?

Answ. 1. Peter must not be bold against so express a word of Christ.

Ans. 2. No Christian boldness may make a man confident in himself, and
neglect prayer to God; that is a blameworthy boldness for a Soldier to run
into the fight without his weapons, or against the word of his Captain.

Ans. 3. He should have considered the infirmity of his Faith, which yet was
weak and suspected, if not for the truth yet strength of it, not knowing the
strength of the imminent temptation.

Ans. 4. He should have considered that the strength of Faith of the Saints
has bin shaken in temptation, as Abraham, Paul, David, and why not he?

Objec. Christians are to come with courage to the battle, assured of victory.

Ans. 1. But by his strength that has loved us, Romans 8. 37.

2. With the best diligence in using the means which Peter lays off, Faith.
Prayer. Watchfulnes.


3. With mixing Faith and Fear together; certainly believing the Promise of
God, but fearing and suspecting our own weakness; so Phil. 2. 11, 12. Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling; there is fear: for it is God that
works the will and deed; there is Faith: the temper of Faith and Fear upholds
us in the trial, when our eye is cast both on our weakness and Gods strength.

Objec. But Gods children are as bold as Lions, Prove. 28. 1^
Prove. 28. 1.

Answ. 1. There is boldness of Flesh. Faith.


2. Boldness in the strength of God and love of our Father, not of our
strength and love of him; Peter presumed to stand because of the love Christ.

3. A boldness upon the assured Promises of God and infinite merits of Christ,
foyling both carnal fear and presumption; Peter's boldness was not with the
Word, but against it.

4. Boldness not suffering to fear damnation, but to extinguish the fear of
transgression.

5. A boldness banishing fear to fall away into perdition, but not the fear
of falling into finne and offense of God, which his own Children are often too
bold in.

Note. The vain presumption of man's heart; Note, and watch pride of heart.
in Peter see our selves; our nature is as confident; we think if all should
fly from Faith and Religion, sure we would not. But were the Sword shaken a
little, and the Scepter swayed but a little another way, many would see their
mould and temper; they that now spit at the name of the hateful Idol of the
Mass, would easily conceive it a better Religion, and we should not want some
Catholic Moderators who would say, These two Religions with a little yielding
each side, might be brought into one. We are as strong before the Battle as
Peter, and when danger seems farther off; whereas the sight of one adversary
would make a whole Army of us run away, as I^rael at the sight of Goliath.

But Peter should have remembered, and so should we, the Answer of the King of
Israel to Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 11. Let not him that puts on his Armor
boast as he that puts it off. Let us not crow before the Victory. We are ready
to promise our selves success and events as he was, which are out of our
power; he might promise and purpose watchfulness; endeavor, strive against
this temptation, which was all he could do; but to promise of the event and
issue, was not his part nor to dispose of.

We can as easily promise to our selves, above that God has promised, as he;
nay, against the word of God, as he, that we shall be safe and stand, and
conceive some singular prerogative or strength in our selves, while yet we
forget to use means to grow in knowledge, awaken our Faith, provoke our
watchfulness; we can be as proud and bragging in our speech as he was,
forgetting modesty and humanity, promising Mountains; and should our actions
swell to our words, we would do wonders; but away with these brags, and learn
to speak humbly, warily and modestly, as knowing what befell this Apostle.

Use. Beware of Pride of heart, which is so hateful to God, as robbing him of
his glory, and so prejudicial to our selves; for, if nature only and the pride
of it, quicken our resolutions, and not Faith, they will dye and deceive us; if
flesh only incite our courage, it will suddenly be cold, as in Peter.

Objection. But I have great gifts of knowledge, and speech, and zeal, and
love and faith.

Answ. 1. Let no gifts puff thee up; suppose thou had gifts Apostolical,
Peter had all these gifts, but pride of heart foiled them all; and the more and
better the gifts be, it is so much the worse where they be abused or corrupted.

2. Never pride thy self above any man, who may see those corruptions and
evils in thy self, which thou never saw in any other man.

Use 2. Thou stand by Faith, Romans 11. 12. be not high-minded but fear.
Peter that was now so forward, had no small cause to fear; and we want not
more cause; as,

1. The weakness of flesh and pronenesse to sin, yea weakness of spirit in
the best, being borne of God, but yet as children.

2. Satan's malice, ever seeking to cast us down, winnowing us also as Wheat.

3. Naughtiness of our bad works, and imperfections of our best, in them
unprofitable.

4. Perfection of Gods Law, strictness against the least disobedience, and in
giving up of our Accounts.

Objection. But what need the Saints fear, or how may they, having against the
former Gods power, Gods promise, Gods intercession; and seeing nothing is more
contrary to Faith then fear and doubting?

Answ. When the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 17. wishes Christians to pass the
whole time of their dwelling here in fear, he implies both the possibility
and necessity.

But we must distinguish of fear, which is of Humility. Infidelity. Fear of
humility and of infidelity.



The former is a reverent fear of Gods presence, whom we would not offend; a
fear of falling into sin, or making matter of unkindness between him and
our selves.

The latter a hateful fear of his presence, which we would avoid; a fear of
faling into hell, and suffering according to our deserts.

The one is a despair of Gods goodness, because sin lies at door, and
wrath hangs over their heads, and their Couscience is restless, and death is
ready to overtake them in sin, and hell is open, and the Devil reaching at
them to eternal confusion.

The other is a fear of reverence, by which we fear the corruption of our
Nature and treachery of our own hearts; we fear the commiting of the least
sin, and make conscience of all known evils; we fear least we be called to
account before the reckoning be ready; we fear to offend God and godly men, or
grieve his holy Spirit; we fear to be infected by evil men, and carried into
their error.

The former cannot stand with Faith, but is utterly against it; and being a
fear of diffidence, makes men even distrustful.

The latter is not against Faith, but stablisheth it, and makes our hearts
watchful and attendant to good means, both of continuance in the estate of
grace, and work of it, and increase of Faith, that we may be upheld to the end.

Let us therefore nourish this fear in us:

Motive 1. This fear is loves keeper and preserver of graces, Holy fear to be
ever cherished.
fear of falls, temptations, occasions of offending.

2. It smites with conscience of our own infirmities and drives out to the
spirit of strength and fortitude.

3. It restaines us from evil, as the Midwives, Exodus 1. 17. and Joseph, Ge^.
39. 9. and Job c. 1. 1.

4. It has all the Promises made good to it, of prosperity and blessedness:
Blessed is he that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. We proceed.

Ver. 30. Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, this day, even this
night, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. OUR Savior
perceiving the corruption of Peter, notably checkes and reproves it in this
verse, with this asseveration, Verily I say. Wherein;

1. He admonishes Peter of his fall; thou shall deny me.

2. He gives him a sign, by which he shall take knowledge. Cock crow twice.

3. The time, this day, even this night; double for certainty.

4. The determinate number of falls or denials; deny me thrice. As if he had
said otherwise thus:

Oh Peter, Paraphrase.
thou attributest and ascribest too much to thine own strength, and know
not the present danger; for verily I say unto thee; the more seriously I speak
it, the more nearly it concerns thee to consider it; that thou who art
confident above all thy fellows, and thou who singlest thy self as more
constant unto me then all the rest, even thou Peter shall deny me.] Besides
that thou shall fly away from me with the rest, thou shall deny me, thou
shall deny me that ever thou know me, or ever had any reference or
dependence on me; and thou shall do this this night: thou say thou will
never at any time do so, but thou shall this present day do it, while yet thy
promise is yet in thy mouth and thou can not well forget it. I, many days
and nights thou might forget me or thy promise, but even this day, this
night shall not pass till thou have denied me. And that thou may consider
the truth of this my Prediction, both before and after it is come to pass, I
will give thee a sign, or mark, as a remembrance between us; Before the
Cock crow twice: A Cock ordinarily crows two times iu one night.

1. About midnight, called Gallicinium.

2. Toward morning, called Colicinium. Both times after.

But before the morning Cock crow, or before the Cock have done that crow,
thou shall perceive the truth of my words, and the vanity of thine own.

And because thou have more confidently boasted of thy strength then all the
rest of my Disciples, thou shall more shamefully fall then all the rest; for
thou shall not content thy self to deny me once, but in that small time thou
shall deny me thrice, and that in such a manner, as now thou would scorn to
hear, but thou shall not shame to do. Christ's divinity, he knows s^crets that
are to come.
John 2. 25. He knew what was in man.

Whence Note 1. The Divinity of Jesus Christ, who knew things to come in the
particular circumstances; he foretells a fact which Peter must presently do,
while he is even protesting against it, and thinks it most unlikely and
impossible: he discovers the time, the manner, the repetition, how often, and
all circumstances by which he is distinguished and discerned from all creatures
and false Gods, Isaiah 41. 23, 26. Bring forth your Gods, let them tell us what
is to come. Men may see events, as Peter did this, but Christ foreseeth them;
men see imperfectly by consequents and effects, Christ sees and knows by the
causes, he sounds the depth of Peter's heart which Peter himself could not
gage, he saw the back and deceitful corners of it, and discerned how it must
needs serve him, being left a while of Grace.

Use 1. To live in his sight with fear and trembling, to whom all our ways
are known long before; no sin we can commit, but it is foreseen, as Peter's
was, his eyes are upon the ways of man, Prove. 5. 21. for as there is no sin
committed but the eye of the Conscience is upon it above a thousand witnesses,
so there is none to be committed but the eye of the Lord is upon it, which is
above a thousand Consciences.

Use 2. Never think to carry sin so close but it shall come to reckoning,
Luke 12. 2. Nothing is so covered which shall not be revealed; no darkness can
hide the works of darkness, 2 King. 5. 26.
as the Prophet to Gehezi, Did not my spirit go with thee? so, does not the
eye of the Judge go with thee, Ez^ch. 35. 12. Thou shall know the Lord has
heard all thy blasphemies which thou have spoken against the Mountains of
Israel: so thou shall know the eye of the Judge has seen all thy
drunkenness, the times, places, manner, how often; so thou blasphemer, thou
railer, thou de^ier of good men shall know to thy cost and torment, yea, Men
and Angels shall know.

Lastly, Christ is as ready to take notice of the least good, to reward it, 1
King. 14. 13. the little good in Abjah mentioned and recompensed.

Note. 2. The humanity and meekness of our Lord and Savior; Christ's humanity,
he reprocheth not Peter for denials foretold.
Peter had already grievously sinned in contradicting his Lord, in despising
the Prophetical word, in advancing himself presumptuously against the express
word; yet our Lord is not severe in rebuking, nor so sharp in checking or
reproaching him as he had deserved, but patiently hears him, passes by the
infirmity, and only most lovingly and plainly forewarns him of his present
danger, not reproaching him for future denials.

1. Our Lord breaks not the bruised Reed, Grounds of it.
nor quenches a smoking weke.

2. The Spirit in Peter, even in the midst of infirmity, making request for
him, gets a cover and acceptance.

3. There was a grain of Faith, and spark of love, in Peter's heart, which was
more in Christ's eye, then all his frailty; the Lord in mercy looks more on his
work in us, then ours, against him.

4. Christ was now to leave them as weaklings and children, which was grief
eno^gh to them, and would not so much discourage them, especially at this time,
measuring the trial they were to undergo.

5, He saw them now out growing their weaknesses, and therefore thought fitter
to bear with them for a time; there was a good work begun which himself was
to perfect, and it is notably expressed in John 13. 37. setting down the Story;
thou can not follow me now, but hereafter shall follow me; namely, in bearing
crosses, and suffering to the death hereafter, when the Spirit is come to
strengthen the^*

Use. Which must be a pattern of our imitation on the like grounds to provoke
our selves to meekness and gentleness toward our Brethren offending; In like
cases do as Christ did.
if we must reprove, let them see our love; if we can spy the least good in
them, let that qualify our heat for the present; if we cannot spy any for the
present, hope what they may be, they may receive the Spirit, and outgrow the
weaknesses. How ever we should not forget our Saviors meekness, nor that our
selves may be tempted, as Peter, nay to good for evil.

The Woman of Canaan refuses him a dish full of Water, but he opens to her the
water of life.

Note. 3. How to come to know our own weakness, Christ here admonishes
Peter; We never know our selves aright till Christ teach us.
we never truly come to know our selves till Christ take us in hand to teach
us, as the Woman at the Well (John 4.) never came to know her self till Christ
taught her.

The word is a square, a glass, a balance, a light; Christ in the Gospel
discovers to us the dark corners of our hearts, lets us see our
hypocrisy, pride, earthlinesse, errors and lusts.

How many can say they never saw themselves in ill case till the word came,
Romans 7. 7. nay Paul was alive without the Law; so every natural man thinks
himself alive, in good case, no fear of sin, no terrors of conscience or
fear of damnation, but are happy and well, their case being as a man sick and
near to death but complains not, tells how he is not sick, because his senses
being overcome he feels not his disease; so is every unregenerate man.

But if Christ in his word cannot be believed, as Peter believes not he is so
ill as Christ says, then there is another means to bring us to the sense of
our own weakness, and that is by Experience the Mistress of fools, and so
Peter in this History.

Many say, if all were true as the Minister says, we were in a miserable
state; but we cannot make men believe us calling them to the sight of
themselves, that they are so bad as they are.

To thee I say thou that belongest to God as Peter, God will give thee up to
some lust or other, till experience beat this knowledge into thee as Peter, but
in mercy thou shall see it in season.

Thou that do not believe nor belongest to God, shall also have woeful
experience of the malice of thy heart, and wretchedness of thy course, but too
late when thy state shall be remediless; choose you now whether you will
believe the word or feel it; one you must; the word if it judge not in this
day, shall in the last day, Joh. 12. 48.

Note. 4. This Day, Suddenly we are apt to fall from very good resolutions.
this night.] Note how suddenly even a good man is turned from good resolutions
if but a little left to himself, or he remit but a little of his own
watchfulness; a few hours make so confident a Disciple of Christ, who scorned
to think of denial of his Master, to deny and forswear him too.

Reas. 1. We stand by grace, which if it be not every moment renewed, we must
needs fall; as a man upheld by a crutch, remove the crutch, and he falls down; or
set a staff upright, withdraw the hand, ye need not thrust it down; so we.

2. The suddenness of the temptation which comes like a lightning, and our
pronesse to be kindled with the same; David in the forenoone might be not only
chaste, but holily employed in holy meditations, but in the afternoon on his
Gallery spies Bathsheba, and is all enflamed and moyled in foul wantonness
and lust.

3. Freedom of the Spirit who comes and goes when he lists, as the Wind;
which is a ground of humiliation in the most holy estate we can get into; not
every joy, not any gracious estate may lift us up; Nescis quid serus vesper
vehat, the Sun may shut under a Cloud suddenly.

2. To watch our graces well, and forecast temptation.

3. Depend on the spirit of God to perfect and accomplish his own good
motions, and leave us not to our selves, who can quickly quench them.

4. No marvel if the righteousness of Hypocrites be as the morning dew, Hos.
6. 4.
their desires as flashes to make them inexcusable, being in the spirit, they
delight not to dwell in that good frame, but vanish into nothing.

Note. 5. Deny me thrice.] Prouder then others falworse then others.
Peter was most confident of all the Disciples, and must fall more shamefully
then they all; he will dye with Christ ere he will once deny him; but within
four or five hours, he shall deny him thrice; he would never deny him, but
instantly shall not content himself to deny him once and again, but thrice.

It commonly falls out, that they who pride themselves above others, even in
good gifts, that they are given up to fall more shamefully then others; and why?

Reas. 1. God does avenge pride of heart with sin and shame; cannot abide it in
any, least in his Children.

2. His wisdom tempers poison to a remedy, by these falls to abate the humor,
and let out the core.

If presence of grace puffs up, absence of grace or presence of corruptions
shall take them down.

3. Pride is a rock against which grace makes Shipwreck; Motives to humble
walking with God.
walk therefore humbly before God; for, when pride comes then comes shame,
Prove. 11. 2. and where pride is, there is folly and ignorance of a man's self,
and his own estate; so our proverb calls him a proud fool, etc.

1. David professes his heart was not haughty, but as a child, Psalm. 131. 1.

2. Humility is a seemly garment for outward carriage, 1 Pet. 5. 5. deck your
selves with lowliness of mind.

3. There is no great fall from a low place; one of the Fathers calls it
Coronam in tuto, pinnaculum and moenia, ne quis ex alto decidat.

4. Whatsoever may befall the humble-minded man, the Lord will give grace unto
him, 1 Pet. 5. 5. grace of his Spirit, grace of his favor and countenance,
grace of his Soul, he will dwell with the humble soul, Isa. 57. 15. and it
with him; a most happy cohabitation.

Verse. 31. But Peter said more earnestly, if I should dye with thee, I will not
deny thee; likewise said they all. WHen Peter had heard our Lord and Savior
with his wonted asseveration tell him so heavy things of himself, Cumulation
of sin in Peter.
that he should deny his Lord that night thrice, and so renounce his faith, his
profession and salvation by him, this should have soundly humbled Peter and
terrified him; yea should have been as a dagger to his heart to have let out
the life of his natural pride and presumption.

2. Whereas it was sufficient to have made him concieve modestly of himself, at
least to have entered into himself and consider of his weakness to take down
his carnal temerity and boldness one peg lower.

3. Whereas it should have brought him to renounce himself, and depend wholly
upon the strength and grace of Christ his Lord, which only was sufficient for
him.

4. Whereas it had been enough to make him believe the Word and affirmation of
the Lord, before his own conceit; for to all these purposes did the Lord Jesus
so forewarne him of his fall; yet he still blinded with vain confidence in
himself, or carried away with preposterous zeal, does more vehemently persist
in contradicting his Lord, in which he heaps up a number of sins.

1. The repetition and falling into the same sin after Christ's admonition and
asseveration; Four here observed.
but Peter said.

2. The manner of his sin, he said more earnestly.

3. The matter of it, I will not deny thee, if I should dye with thee.

4. The effect of it, drawing all the Disciples into the same sin with him,
likewise said they all.

Note. 1. In that Peter falls into the same sin again, Godly apt to fall
into the same sin.
and against the means used by Christ; that the Child of God through strength
of his corruption may fall often into the same sin, notwithstanding good means
against it; For,

1. It is a very hard thing to lead them out of themselves, And why (...)
almost nothing but experience of their former falls, which is the Mistress of
fools, brings them to see their folly; so here in Peter, all Christ's
warnings too little; and so long they must fall; sense of weakness is their
greatest strength.

2. Till the judgment be changed, the Actions be the same; Peter's judgment is
disguised with an erroneous misjudging his own estate; he is the same man
after Christ's speech as he was before, and so contradicts him as before; as
the most of the Fathers lived in Polygamy, not because it was ever lawful, but
their judgment being dark and erroneous in it, their practice was answerable;
and who of Gods Children see not, that they know but in part, and grow daily to
see errors in themselves which they never saw before, as Peter saw not so much
in himself as he did after?

3. Weakness of grace and regeneration in part causes even the best to go
every day over the same wants and common infirmities; as wandering thoughts,
idle speeches, unjust anger, etc. which frailties as they be daily renewed, so
they must daily renew their repentance, and daily lay hold on Christ's perfect
merits for justification; this weakness of grace gave Peter up again to this
sin of contradicting his Lord.

4. The same ends remain still, which may move the Lord to leave his Children
to themselves, and to fall in the same sort; to try, excite, humble them, work
more serious sorrow, make them more watchful, etc. which was the issue of
Peter's fall here.

Use. Comfort to troubled spirits.
Not to enbolden any in sin, or unto sin (for we speak of frailties, not of
presumptions, for which we can give small comfort) but to raise up to the
comfort of the Covenant, such as are toyled with their corruptions, and find
themselves mastered with the same lusts sundry time^, notwithstanding their
strife and watch against them.

To thee I say, the sense of thy weakness is a great part of thy strength;
labor to grow up in soundness of judgment and in strength of grace; and
though the Lord thy God for good ends sometimes let thee slip into the same
frailties, his right hand is under thy head, and thy condition is not worse
then the rest of the Saints in the world; Christ's dear Disciple here is moiled
in the same sin, but not cast off for it.

Note. 2. In that Peter more vehemently denied and contradicted his Lord,
Repetition of sin makes sin the stronger.
that every repetition of sin makes sin the stronger; for as the body, the
more it is nourished and fed, the stronger it grows; so sin in the soul;
every new act is an addition of strength till it come to an habit; it is the
Apostles comparison, Jam. 1. 15. speaking of the conception and perfection of
sin; when lust is conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death.

Beside, corruption is clean contrary to grace; as grace if it increase not,
i^ decreaseth; so corruption, if it decrease not, it gets strength and
increases.

Use. Against them that say they will repent hereafter; pluck up a twig, let
it not grow to be a Plant; dash the brains while a child; a Sore, the longer
it is let alone, grows more incurable; finne fashioned by continuance grows
to another nature. Take heed and fear; thou have an holy God to do withal,
and a corrupt heart of thine own, though some grace. And, God observes not
only the sin, but the sinful manner of doing and degrees of sinning,
carelessness, carnal confidence, pride of spirit, slacknesse in use of holy
means, relapsing; all very dangerous.

If I should dye with thee, I would not deny thee. Note 3. PEter thinks
himself strong enough to be a Martyr, We are apt to over-ween the good that is
in us.
now when he has not learned the first principle of Religion, nor to know
himself; before he promised, though all men should be offended, he would not:
Now, before he will deny him, he will dye the death; it is nothing now with
Peter to be a Martyr. Peter considers not of what metal he is made; that he
is dust, earth, and a lump of sinful mire, unable to any thing.

2. He considers not his present danger, though forewarned, that he is now
ready to be made a prey to Satan, and in the Lions mouth.

3. He considers not, Jam. 1. 17.
that every good and perfect gift is from the Father of lights; but has power
in himself to stand out the greatest of all trials; and therefore within a few
hours, the contempt of this power of God drives it quite from him.

Use. Let us well watch the pride of our own nature: Nature is so proud in
every one of us, that it will build up a tower to heaven, though it prove but a
Babel and Confusion. Pride of heart will make us sacrifice to our own Nets,
and rob God of his glory. Peter had good things, and true grace in him; but not
acknowledging them in the giver, puffes him up and darkens them; whereas grace
received and acknowledged in the giver, are so far from puffing up, as they
make humble.

Grace in Abraham coming near to God, makes him say, I am but dust and ashes,
Genesis 18. 27.

2. In good things take heed of preposterous and rash zeal, which here Peter
falls by; guide it by the Word, by Faith, by Prayer, by thy calling, by
considering our selves; and think it safer to fear, then to be very confident
of thy self.

Likewise said they all.] THE fourth is the effect of Peter's presumption; he
drew in all the Disciples into the same sin: 1. which was the stronger:

1. Because they had heard our Savior reproving Peter for his rash confidence.
2. They had never yet tried their strength. 3. If they had, they should not at
all have contradicted his word, who had said, all ye^ shall be offended. 4.
This terrible threatening of themselves and Peter, should have set them out of
themselves, and clung unto him, and said, O Lord, we know our weakness; if we
do not, thou know it; we know thy truth, and cannot but believe thy Word;
oh therefore, do thou take care of us, thou that art the faithful Shepherd,
keep us silly Sheep from wandering from thee.
But they imitate Peter; they must be as constant as Peter, and must never
seem more fearful then he. They must not be behind him, neither in
comforting their Master, nor in professing their zeal to their Lord.

Note. 1. Frailty in the best; no grain without some chafe, no flour without
some bran, no rose without some thorn; there is in the best matter of
humiliation; the Disciples themselves in Christ's presence show great
imbecility and weakness.

Matter of comfort, which concerns us in our falls; Matthew was one of them
that said so, yet Matthew records for our comfort, how he among the rest was
vainly confident.

Note 2. How quickly sin spreads it self; Sin is of an infectious nature.
Peter draws all the Disciples after his sin, when all Christ's persuasions
cannot stay them. The same of the same Apostle after he had received the
spirit, Gal. 2. 14. by not walking with a right foot, drew the Gentiles and
Barbarians also into his dissimulation, and compelled the Gentiles to Judaism^;
not by teaching any Doctrine to that purpose, for they could not err in that,
but in the authority of his example. Example in sin is a kind of compulsion.

Use 1. Take heed of sinning, least thou bring many sins upon thee, as Peter's
sin here; heavy both in regard of his Master and fellow Disciples.

2. Beware also of the company of sinners; example is become a kind of Law,
and thy self as tinder to receive such sparkles.

We proceed now to a passage in another part of the Chapter.

Mark 14. 66. And as Peter was beneath in the Hall, there came one of the
Maids of the high Priests:

Ver. 67. And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked on him, and said,
Thou wast also with Jesus of Nazareth.

Ver. 68. But he denied it, saying, I know him not, neither wot I what thou
say; Then he went into the Porch, and the Cock crew, etc.

WE have heard in the former Story, how much Peter had promised of himself;
he would not be offended, he would not fly if all should; he will dye with
Christ before he would deny him.

We have heard how our Savior forewarned him of his weakness, and predicted
his fall, and how stoutly he contradicted his Lord.

Now we come to his performance in this Story; which in general shows, that
he was not so good as his word; but the Lords word was fully accomplished; Non
factum quod Petrus dixerat, sed quod Christus praedixerat.

In the Story we have; Parts.
first, Peter's Sin: Secondly, Repentance: Peter's Fall. Rising.


1. Peter's denial of his Lord: 2. his sorrow for it; his Aversion. Conversion.


The sin and fall of Peter was the foulest and shamefullest of all the
Disciples (except Judas) they all forsook him and fled; so did he; none of
them denied him once, but he thrice; none forswore him but he, who with cursing
and swearing abjured himself, if ever he knew him.

Quest. The Lord foresaw this sin, foretold it, might have prevented it, and
sustained him in the temptation; why should he suffer his dear Disciple so
far and so foully to fall?

Answ. The Lord Jesus, Why God prevented not this fall of Peter.
who might have prevented it, neither would nor did, for many Reasons.

1. He would give us and the whole Church an example of infirmity and
weakness, by the fall of such a man.

2. The strongest must learn fear and watchfulness, and while they stand take
heed least they fall, that the enemy suddenly oppress them not, as Peter.

3. To crush presumption of men, and to teach to attribute more to the Word of
Christ then their own strength, which had Peter done, he had not so shamefully
fallen.

4. The Lord foresaw, that in the last times men transported with the spirit of
error, should transform Peter into an Idol, and grow to that madness as to
lift him up into the place and office of Christ, giving unto him the headship
of the Church, and make him the head of the Antichristian Romish Synagogue; and
therefore the Lord set Peter apart above all other Disciples, in whom should
break out such weakness as he might be acknowledged not a God, but a frail
man; not a Lord, but a weak and sinful servant; so in his life, Acts 3. 12.
and 10. 15. Carnal men worship him, but Peter refused.

And by the way observe, how accurate the Scriptures are to set down not this
fall of Peter in the particular circumstances, Many other sins no^ed in Peter
more then in other Disciples.
but many more above all the Disciples; As,

1. His curiosity, desi^ing to walk on the Waters, presently punished with an
other sin of infidelety, Mat. 19. 28.

2. His horrible sin o^ dissuading Christ from his suffering at Jerusalem,
Master pity thy self, Mat. 16. 22. for which Christ called him a scandal or
Devil, that is a special instrument of the Devil.

3. His inconsiderate rashness, Mat. 17. 4. Let us make three Tabernacles; the
Text says, he wist not what he said; he to enjoy that glory, neglected all his
fellow Disciples, yea cares not for the Salvation of the whole World; for if he
must ever dwell there with him, he must not come down to dye, which was
against his word.

4. That he among the rest contended for Primacy, Mat. 18. 2. that he among the
rest could not watch one hour with him, Mat. 26. 40. Though Christ had
specially warned him and the two Sons of Zebedee of great trial, ver. 43. that
he among the rest fled from Christ.

5. That fact of temerity and rashness in cutting of Malchus his ear, against
his calling and without warrant, condemned by Christ.

6. That he walked not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.
14. but dissembled with the Jews, and brought Barnabas in; for which Paul
reproved him to his face.

All which we note, not to exprobate to that holy Apostle, but to show that the
council of God in particular noting these failings would prevent the
blasphemous doctrines and doings of the Church of Rome;

One of the Popes themselves, Leo, Epist. 89. saying that Peter was assumed
into the fellowship of the individual unity plainly deifying him, which
blasphemy were rather to be buried with stones, then defended as Bellarmine
goes about to do.

5. In Peter's rising the Lord would give a singular example of mercy, that he
might raise up great sinners in the hope of mercy that they might not despair,
but trust confidently in the same grace.

For these Reasons, the Lord would have all the Evangelists with one mouth and
pen, and in one manner to record this grievous fact of their fellow Apostle;
nay if it be true as some of the Ancients record, that the Gospel of Saint
Mark was declared and uttred by Peter and written from his mouth by Saint
Mark, that providence so overruled the matter, that Peter himself most
ingenuously (for the former Reasons) did publish to the World both his sin and
repentance.

In the first, of Peter's fall, consider the Occasion. Fall it self.


In the occasion partly in Peter himself. Maid of the high Priest.


In Peter; As Peter was beneath in the Hall warming himself.

Here first mark how Peter ^un upon temptation; Peter's sin in ^oing into the
Hall.
for what had he to do there in the Hall of the high Priest? his Lord had set
him about other business.

1. Christ had now told him he could not now follow him, John 13. 26. yet he
will follow him afar off; and though Christ had told him he was not able to
suffer with him, nor for him, yet forward he will go.

2. Christ had said to his Apprehenders, John 18.
let these go away; yet Peter will not go.

3. Christ had commanded them all to watch and pray, because temptation was at
hand.

4. Had particularly told Peter what would be the event, if he did follow him;
for had Peter been with the other Disciples, or hid himself from the Tempter,
he had no more denied his Lord then they.

5. By a special providence Peter found the door of the high Priest shut
against him, which should have been a warning to him, and not idly passed by;
for when God casts a stop or bar in every way to hinder us in acting any evil,
we should apprehend it as a part of his gracious providence, and stop our
sins.

But Peter will not from the door till he get in; he is hankering about to see
what will become of Christ; he has a love to his Master, and is unwilling to
leave him; his zeal is not yet extinct, but rash and inconsiderate; he was
greatly bound to his Master, and holds it laudable not to leave such a friend
in distress; though he could not help him, yet would show duty; he seems
mindful of his promise also; though all men forsake him, yet would not he; and
therefore to the high Priests house he will with another Disciple, as John 18.
15, 16. whom some think to be John who uses in his story so to speak of
himself suppressing his name; but it is not likely that John so poor a
Fisherman and Disciple of Christ was so well acquainted with the high Priest;
but whosoever he was, he was a friend of Christ and his Apostles, and being
known to the high Priest was let in, but Peter unknown was kept out, till his
friend pitying his standing in the cold, entreated the Maid that kept the door
to let in Peter.

Thus Peter with much ado and importunity of his friend gets into the thicket
of temptation; his friend has besped him into that place, which Christ
forewarned him to avoid, which is another argument I think him not to be John,
who having heard his forewarne to Peter, in likelihood would rather have
diswaded him from his purpose, then been an Author in it; or if it were he and
did not, he were blameworthy, and greatly sinned.

Use. 1. He that would avoid sin must carefully avoid occasions, To avoid sin
avoid occasions.
which are the stronger because of our own natural inclination to evil;
Joseph fled from his Mistresses company, and so kept himself pure, Genesis 32.
10. it was his wisdom, not only to avoid her filthy desire, but her unclean
company.

The Lord himself is careful to remove occasions of sinning from his People,
Exodus 13. 17. carrying them through the Wilderness, would not let them pass
by the Philistines, and see War, least they should start back and sin against
him.

And our Lord Jesus would have prevented this occasion in Peter by forewarning
him of it; he that would not be burnt must not touch fire, or go upon coals;
stand not upon thine own strength where thou see so great a Cedar to fall as
Peter; thou can not avoid drunkenness, adultery, prophannesse, if thou
runnest into drunken, harlotry, and profane Persons and places; beware of
evil company, consider thy weakness and their power to seduce.

Travelers to see fashions in idolatrous Countries, do therein seek
temptations, and by the just judgment of God for wantonness find Apostasy,
returning corrupt in Doctrine, Manners, or both.


Prove. 21. 27. He that seeks danger, shall fall into it.

Use. 2. He that would avoid occasion of sin, To avoid occasions keep close
to the word.
must hold himself to Gods commandment, and within the limits of his own
calling, which if Peter had done, he had not fallen so foully; Christ had
expressed his will and pleasure, that he should not have so much as deliberated
on it, much less resolved against it; but he forgets the word and
commandment of Christ, and so falls into sin.

If Eve had remembered the word of God, and kept her to the commandment,
neither the beauty of the Apple, nor the subtle persuasion of Satan had
allured her away.

If Saul had kept him to the word of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 3. neither sparing of
Agag, nor the fat Sheep or Oxen had drawn him into that disobedience which was
worse then witchcraft; the word teaches wisdom to avoid snars of sin, but if
a man cast away the Word of the Lord, what wisdom can be in him? keep to the
word, and buckle this Sword to thee, which only can cut the Sinews of sin and
temptation.

Use. 3. Peter should have looked to his Calling; Suffer not for Christ till
called.
he was not now called to suffer, the time was not yet, John 13. 36. Besides,
he had not received strength and gifts fit for it; if he shall now come to
temptation, he can do nothing but deny his Lord, and shame himself, seeing
Christ had foretold him.

A Christian cannot do a more honorable work then suffer for Jesus Christ,
which is more then to believe in him; Phil. 1. 29.
but if it be not the will of God, 1 Pet. 3. 17. or if thou be not called to
suffer, if he forewarne thee with Peter that thou art not able to suffer the
cross, or fire, do not suffer.

Quest. What must I do? must I yield to Idolatry?

Answ. No, but step aside as Peter was commanded; watch and pray, and get
strength, and then come forth, if thou have tried thy strength and find it
not sufficient to suffer the brunt, this is a sure warning from Heaven, thou
must not put forth thy self to suffer; the farther thou go, with more shame
shall thou fly back. If we must have a calling to suffer for Christ, much more
look we have a calling to other inferior duties, else running out of thy
calling, thou runnest into danger; thou have no promise to be kept further then
thou art in thy way; a good duty not warranted by thy Calling is sin to thee,
though commended in another; Nature no sufficient in divine matters.
every man must abide in his Calling, and so maintain Gods order.

Note again, nature is an ill guide; man's own wisdom deceives himself
sometimes with show of good, and runs into infinite errors, as Peter must
follow his Master, and who would think him blameworthy in showing his love and
affection to his Lord, and in minding his promise, that he would not leave him,
if al men should; but all was but carnal wisdom; he should have believed his
Lord and Master, and relied upon his counsel, not by too much prefidence
thrust himself into danger; and surely as the pride of humane wisdom is
great, so Satan's cunning more prevails to carry us away with shows of good,
then he can in evil; is it not a good thing to become like God? and if Eve
will eat the Apple, she may; is it not good to offer thousands of fat Sheep
and Bullocks to God in sacrifice? if Saul will spare them alive, he may do it.

Is it not better and fitter one Vriah be slain, then so great and godly a
King stained in his honor and reputed an Adulterer? seldom can Satan draw on
a great sin without some false glass or gloss; we must therefore attend to
the mouth of God, walk in the paths of his wisdom, and turn not aside for
shows; remember Prove. 3. 5. trust to the Lord, and lean not to thine own
wisdom, and ver. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge the Lord, and he will direct
thy steps.

Use. 4. Lastly here is a notable rule to be observed in friendship examine the
love thou show to thy friend by the love of God. How we are to show love to
a friend.


1. Take heed thy love be subordinate to the love of God, that if thou can
not please both, thy friend be not pleased with Gods displeasure, Mat. 10. 37.
He that loves Father and Mother better then me, is not worthy of me; nay, he
that hates them not, Luke 14. 26. so did not Peter, he should first have loved
Christ as his Lord, and then as his friend, had he done so, he would have kept
his word.

2. Love the Word better then thy friend, Peter should have stuck to the word,
and not to Christ's Person.

3. See thy love to thy friend be not preposterous, that thy affection destroy
him not; here Peter's friend helps forward his sin, though perhaps unawares.

The subtilty of Satan creepes into our friendship and fellowships, that by our
improvidence, we instead of helping and loving them, hurt them more then the
Enemies could do. We must pray for wisdom and judgment, that neither
willingly nor unawares we either council or lead them into any sin, or uphold
any sin in them, or hinder in them any good.

But contrarily become true friends to their Souls; it is lamentable that a
Father should discourage the Child, the Husband the Wife, etc. from piety and
religion, or that they should abet evil, or counsel or draw one another to
ev^l; as there is the greatest hatred, so ordinarily it ends in most bitter
hatred.

Warming himself by the Fire.] WE have seen Peter gotten into the Hall of
the high Priest; What is he doing there? [she saw Peter warming himself.]
Three of the Evangelists make mention of this circumstance. John 18. 18.
expresses also his company; the high Priests servants and officers stood, etc.
who had made a fire of Coals, for it was cold, and they warmed themselves, and
Peter also stood among them and warmed himself, Luke 22. 56. Peter sat by the
fire and warmed himself. We need take no notice of that small diversity; one
of the Evangelists says he stood, another he sat warming himself; both are
true; for in so long time he sometimes stood, sometimes sat, warming himself as
they did.

Concerning the Company of Peter he found a great change; instead of Christ and
his Apostles, teaching, hearing, conferring, praying, confirming one another
against Temptations, and provoking to the love of the Lord, he is among a
company of Rackshels and profane Serving-men of the high Priest, who are at
busy against Christ as their Master, and all their tongues and talk bent
against Christ, which was now the business in hand; and Peter, if he will be
safe among them, must frame himself unto them.

Had he been in the Mountain or in the Temple, or in his own House with his
Master, his exercise had bin otherwise; but now he is in the Pretory of the
Jews, and in the House of the high Priest, where Christ indeed was, but taken
and bound, and mocked, accused, and condemned, no safe place to confess the
truth; and what can he do there but deny?

Note How soon even Gods children are corrupted with wicked Company; Good men
quickly the worse for bad company.
even Peter, a great and forward Disciple of Christ, full of zeal and courage,
who will pray, profess, and immediately before draw the Sword in Christ's
quarrel, within two or three hours before with Christ and his fellow
Disciples, now can deny among persecutors.

Great is the force of wicked Company, to pervert even a godly mind; how
easily was good Abraham brought to make a lie for his own safety (as Peter did
here) when he was in Gerar, where the fear of God was not? Genesis 20. 2.

How easily a good man may be brought to Swear through custom and continuance
with evil persons, see in godly Joseph, who dwelt in Egypt, and could swear by
the life of Pharaoh.

Reason 1. A pronenesse in godly men to be withdrawn by evil Company, as the
body to be infected by a Pestilentiall air, And why.
so the mind by the contagion of bad company, it appears by the phrase,
Prove. 1. 15. When evil men entice thee, etc. withdraw thy foot from their
path; drawing back the foot argues an inclination and propensity even in the
Son of Wisdom to walk with them.

And Chap. 4. ver. 14. advising to keep the way of Wisdom as life it self,
as a means to hold in the right way, he counsels not to enter the way of
wicked men, nor walk in their way; and to acquaint us with our own
inclination that way^; mark his vehemence, ver. 15. Avoid it, go not by it,
turn from it, pass by it: What need so many repetitions if we were not prone
to the lust of it?

Reas. 2. There is a bewitching focr^ in evil company to draw even a good
mind beyond his own purpose and resolution. Do you think Peter had a
purpose now to deny his Master, whose purpose immediately before was so strong
against it? but now suddenly in other company he is another man.

Wherefore else did the Lord so earnestly charge his own People, among whom he
had done such marvailes as were not done in all the world, Exodus 34. 10. to
look diligently to themselves, to make no compact with the people of the Land,
least they should be brought to utter departing from God, and to their most
gross Idolatry? ver. 12. 15. Numb. 11. 4. that great sin of Lusting, so
fearfully revenged, was begun by some Strangers that came out of Egypt, who
fell a lusting, and turned away, and the children of Israel also lusted; and
hence it is as impossible for a man to be still in the Sun and not be ^and, or
touch Pitch and not be fouled, as to be still in evil Company and not be evil.

Use. 1. For Gods Children to avoid and separate themselves from sinners
society; Abhor sinful society.
the danger of infection leaves it not a thing indifferent for a man to choose
any Company, but as necessary to avoid sin it self, so the company of
sinners; can there be true fellowship with God and his enemies too?

Motive 1. What agreement between darkness and light, and between
righteousness and unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6. 16. what delight for a Sheep
among a herd of Swine?

2. Every man's company tells what he is; a good man may be cast into evil
company by occasion or improvidence (as Peter) and be none of them; but as the
company he affects and seeks, is, so is he; Ravens flock together by
companies, so do Doves fly together; so wicked men love wicked men's company,
Psalm. 16. 3.
and godly delight in the Saints which excel in virtue.

A good man is described, that he will neither stand nor walk in the way of
sinners, Psalm. 1. 1. nor will sort with workers of iniquity, Psalm. 1. 4.

3. The practice of wicked men should make good men shun their company; for
wherein are their sports and delights, but in things which displease God and
grieve his spirit, and the spirits of all that love God and his glory? what can
a good man see in such company, but must either infect him, or at least offend
him in every thing almost?

What else aim they at, when a good man falls into their company, but either to
allure him unto some evil, or make him more remiss in some good?

Objec. But if we should avoid wicked company, we must go out of the world;
evil men are so rise, and bad examples so universal, 1 Cor. 5. 10.

Answ. Every conversation with wicked men is not condemned; there may be some
perso^all conversation, as Lot in Sodom; neither can we expect the floor of
Christ so cleansed, as that there is no Chafe with Wheat, and Lillies must
grow among Thorns; but

1. Unnecessary scandals and perilous, prejudicial to our faith and piety,
must be avoided; Israel cannot get out of Egypt to sacrifice to the Lord.

2. If we cannot avoid their persons, avoid their fashions, affections, courses.

3. Mourn that thou art forced to dwell in Meshech, and to have abode in the
tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.
Psalm. 120. 5.

Vex thy righteous soul daily with Lot, to hear and see the unclean
conversation of the wicked.

4. Choose to sit alone rather then with such company; Jer. 15. 17. grieving he
should be reserved to see such times, he professes that he did not sit in the
assembly of mockers, but sat alone: so Elias complains that he was left alone.

Objec. But this will be thought singularity, pride of heart, disdaining our
neighbors; I shall be thought to seem better then others, or that no company
is good enough for me, or out of singularity cast off my old company and
good-fellowship.

Answ. 1. Satan has many pretenses to keep good men in bad company; Lot
having bin once or twice warned by the Angel, prolonged the time, and made not
such haste to get out of the company of the Sodomites, till the fire had almost
overtaken him, Genesis 19. 14.

But it will be thy safety and duty, to remember the Commandment, and linger
not.

2. I must get Gods good conceit of me, and contemn what men s^nisterly judge
of me; I can never approve my self to God and evil men.

3. When thou art fully resolved to be a good man, thou will utterly disdain
evil company, Psalm. 119. 115. Away from me ye wicked; for I will keep the
Commandment of my God.

4. Thou would be ashamed of the company of a Harlot, but thy companions are
impudent in sin, as the Harlot; nay, their lives are beastly as Beasts
themselves, less harm in dwelling with brute Beasts then these reasonable.

Use 2. Reprove the indifferency of them that can brook all company, A sinful
indifferency, to run into all company.
and company with all manner of persons; if they be Atheists, Blasphemers,
Ruffians, etc. can fashion to them, and be as good fellows as the best; do
thou profess the Religion of God, and in courses join with open enemies?
consider Psalm. 50. 16. Thou runnest with the Theife, and art a companion with
Adulterers; what have thou to do to take mine Ordinances in thy mouth, either
to Preach or profess, seeing t^ou hate to be reformed?

These men let them fall in company of good men, can personate and speak of
matters of Religion, what good Sermons they have heard, give testimony to some
good Preachers and others; but herein they are artificial; their other course
is natural and proper to them; this most violent and strained; out of one
mouth can there issue sweet water and bitter? James 3. 10.


How much blameworthy are they that choose wicked society and familiarity? Is
it no sin for Daughters of God to match and marry with Sons of Men? Genesis 6.
2.
for a Man professing Religion to marry an idolatrous Papist? A Man acquainted
with his own peril will avoid Alliance and bad acquaintance farther off; and
be careful to avoid bad company for a little while; much more so near and
undivided and personal familiarity. Where is there a Trader that cares who he
be familiar withal for gain, or a Merchant almost that refuses to live in
any Idolatrous Nation, as Spain, Italy or other, where he cannot live without
bowing to Baal?

Or Gamester that cares how profane he be that will bear him company or
drink? Remember the counsel of Peter to new Converts, Acts 3. 4. Save your
selves from this untoward generation, and you may help to save them, by
avoiding them, and making them ashamed, etc. remember the shame in the end,
loss of good name, the sorrow of sin committed, and duties omitted.

Use 3. Join your selves to such as fear God, Join to godly company.
in whom thou may epsy Gods Image and Graces, for thy Pattern, Example,
Provocation, Encouragement.


By whom thou may be admonished, instructed, strengthened, and helped out of
thy weakness.

It seems very sweet to sit warm among wicked men, to eat and drink and be
joviall with them; but there is a bitter sauce for such sweet meats, as in
Peter; but on the contrary, in company of godly men thou art under the shadow
of Gods mercy for their sakes; God loves his children and their friends; for
Lots sake his Family was saved.

And among the wicked, Gods anger hangs over thy head; as they are punished,
so may thou be; therefore depart from the tents of these wicked men: A
Plague is coming.

Now his Action; Warmed himself.] PEter had little business here, but to see
what would be the issue of Christ's apprehension; to while away the time, he
sits down to warm himself with the Serving-men.

Note 1. Peter had one end in being there, Peter had one end, God another.
God had another; had Peter savoured the revealed will of God, he had not bin
there, who had no other material business but to sit down and warm himself.

But by the secret will and providence of God Peter must be here, not only to
accomplish the word of Christ, but for another special purpose; he must be
here more for the Churches good then his own, that while by being here his
own Faith fails, he might be a means to confirm the Faith of the Church; so
God one rules his weakness, as he must be an eye witness of all Christ's
sufferings in the house of the high Priest, both from the council, the
Servants, and Master himself.

Never did any evil befall any of Gods Servants, but by Gods overruling power
was turned to some good to themselves and others, not only of evil
punishment, but of sin it self; for even that is under all things, Romans 8. 28.
turned to the best. The greatest poisons are by the skill of the learned
Physician tempered to the best remedies; all Satan's temptations chase them but
to the throne of grace; all will work in the end for good, in all estates
expect this good end.

Note 2. Peter was cold, Warming the body sometime chilleth the Soul.
and it was not unlawful to warm himself; but better he had been cold and
comfortless alone in the darkness of the night, then to have set within
warming himself in such company.

Peter was now colder by the warm fir^, then he was without in the cold air;
his heart grew cold, and his faith and zeal.

Use. 1. Let us resolve that that is a cold and comfortless place (though the
fire be never so great) where Christ is bound, where Christ cannot be
professed, where Christ is scorned, and Disciples of Christ set upon as Peter
here.

Use. 2. Let us labor how cold soever the weather be without, to keep the
heart warm in grace; it had been better for Peter to have sitten cold without
and warm within, then for outward warmth to freeze and starve inwardly; the
season is generally cold, heat of zeal counted madness, godliness disguised,
etc. labor in this general coldness to keep our heat.

Note. 3. When thou sit by a warm fire, When by a warm fire, take heed of
temptation.
take heed of temptation; Peter when he followed Christ, suffering cold and
want, was strong and zealous; now he comes to the warm fire he is quite
overthrown; the warm fire of prosperity and outward peace has overthrown a
number, who in their wants and trouble stood fast in grace; how many Worthies
coming to enjoy the warmth of worldly prosperity, have revolted from their good
beginnings and proceedings in piety?

David while he was in the field fighting the Lords battles, how watchful, how
conscionable, how gracious, how observant, full of holy meditations, Psalms,
etc. but settled in the Kingdom, and fighting by his Captains and Generals,
himself at some quiet and ease, committed these two fearful sins of murder
and Adultery, 2 Chronicles. 26. 5. Vzziah sought the Lord in the days of Zachariah,
and serving him he made him to prosper, but ver. 16. when he was strong his
heart was lifted up to destruction.

This cause the Lord gives of the backsliding of Israel, Hos. 13. 6. they were
filled and their heart was exalted, and they have forgotten me, and those were
they that in affliction could serve the Lord diligently, ver. 5.

The pitt^full experience of many gives light hereto who in their youth or
entrance into the World were diligent Christians and conscionable in their
ways, careful Hearers, Readers, etc. but grown full and fat, and sitting in
the warmth of worldly wealth and prosperity, have clogged themselves with
cares, and surfeited of ease, as far gone from their zeal and diligence as
Peter here; who followed a far off, and now by the fire farthest off of all, as
the Moon never eclipsed but in the full.

How does the same warm fire prevail with many, who because they see they
cannot sit so warm in their places, if they should be so precise and follow
the word in all points, grow first to remit, and then relinquish all their
care, growing in the end to the height of profaneness by Gods just judgment on
them? others to sit by a warm fire, are as easily drawn to lie and use
injustice in their trades and dealings as Peter here.

Many godly men are too secure, as he that sits by a warm fire is subject to
sleep; Let this be a stay and some strength if thou have not prosperity and
wealth which others have in the World, and thou desire; thou want the
snares of others; God in mercy withholds hurtful wealth, and keeps thee cold
without, least thou should grow cold within; think not thy self stronger
then: Peter, Prove. 30. 8. least I be full and deny thee.

And contrary if thou be in affliction and want be not too much cast down,
for in this estate thou stand firmer in grace then in abundance; therefore
when prosperity makes wicked men grow wild and secure, God uses by affliction
to reclame them, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good I was afflicted; before I was
afflicted I meant a stray, but now I keep thy law.

Prosperity is not always a sign of Gods favor; but when it provokes to
humility and duty; ordinarily the Grasier puts his Cattle for slaughter
into best pasture; too much rankness hurts the Corn, and too much fruit
breaks the Trees; what is the cause of few great and rich are truly
religious? but then God gives gifts in mercy, when he makes us better, not
worse. We proceed.

Verse. 67. She looked on him and said, thou wast also with Jesus of Nazareth.
HERE 1. The Tempter, Occasion of Peter's sin by the Priests maid.
a Maid seeing Peter, and looking on him said. 2. The Temptation, Thou wast
also with Jesus of Nazareth.


Peter warming him by the high Priests fire, presently meets with a Tempter.

Note. 1. Note he that tempts God, a Tempter shall meet with him; he that runs
out of his way, When a man tempts God, a Tempter soon meets him.
and without the limits of his Calling, shall not want temptation; good David
when he gives up his holy prayers and exercises, and gets up to the top of
his Gallery idle, he has met with a Bathsheba a Tempter, and moyles himself
in fearful sins; thus many save the Devil a labor in tempting, run before the
temptation, Hunters of Alehouses, of lacivious company, light persons, plays
and enterludes, temptation need not come to them; they will find him if he be
in any corner of the Country.

Use. Keep thee in thy way, let not Satan thrust thee out of both Callings;
every sin is a tempting of God, Mal. 3. 15.

Note. 2. The Maid that let him in, Favors of wicked dear bought.
now tempts him; she had done him a kindness as she thought, but she pays
him with a mischief; a godly man commonly buys a wicked man's favor very
dear.

1. Commonly an evil man if he be an instrument of good to a good man, it is
against his mind, being overruled and drawn secretly by God, or inwardly by
some sinister end; they cannot show sound mercy, being a fruit of the Spirit,
but counterfeit a corrupt love and favor.

2. Sometimes pretending favor, they intend mischief, as the Machiavels of
our Age; so Saul will prefer David, makes him his Son, and gives him his
daughter, 1 Samuel 18. 17. but intended to bring him to destruction by the
Philistines.

In Anno 1572. the most bloody Massacre of Paris was thus effected, under
pretense of love, favor, marriage.

3. Truly says Solomon of the mercies of the wicked, they are cruel, Prove.
12. 10. for commonly if they intend not cruelty as before, neither did this
Maid, yet they overturne their good turns at one time or other with mischief
or hurt, either outwardly or inwardly, if occasion be offered.

Pilate would show mercy to Christ and plead for him, but command him to be
whipped, being an Innocent; and the Apostles seem very mercifully dealt with to
escape with whipping if Gamaliel himself give none of the malicious sentence,
Act. 5. 40. it is the mercy of wicked men to whip Christ, and if any mercy
indeed must be showed, it must be to Barrabas, not Christ.

Use. 1. Count it an hard case to be beholden to evil men; An ill case to be
beholden to wicked men.
Jacob knew the inconvenience, and refused the kind offer of Esau, who either
himself or his Servants would guard him in his way, Genesis 33. 13.

Balaac will not enrich Balaam, but first he must curse Gods people.

Use. 2. See thy favor benot mingled or poisoned, doing harm and mischeife;
The Heathen Emperors would show mercy, if the Martyrs will cast but one grain
into the fire; their favor must be bought dea^* The Witch will favor thee;
the Devil will cure thy Body, but he must have thy faith, thy soul; the
Father, the Master will allow his Children or Servants sports, recreations, but
on the Sabbath day, when the refreshing of the Body is the corruption and
destruction of the Soul.

Many Fugitives go away, and find favor and preferment in Rome, Doway, and in
Popish Countries, but on condition they be come traitors to God in open
Idolatry, and to their Prince and Country in open rebellion and practice, like
Satan's kindness to Christ; all this will I give thee, if thou will fall down.

Note. 3. By what manner of Tempter Peter falls, Weak tempeters can foil stout
men.
a Woman, not a man, a silly Maid, a very weak party.

Quest. Why?

Answ. 1. Peter presumes that all men could not cast him down, Christ had
denominated Peter for his solidity and firmness, and he thought himself ^ure
enough; but now he shall see more evidently his frailty, to be so suddenly cast
down by a frail Woman; he shall see now that the strength he boasted off is
blown away by the breath of a silly girl.

2. To show him the more, as his pride was more then the rest, a shameful fall
for so great a professor, to fall before so vain a Woman; Abimelech would
rather kill himself then endure the disgrace to dye by the hand of a Woman;
Judge. 9. 54.
but as pride goes before shame, so Gods justice will shame proud Peter, that
when he comes to himself, this circumstance shall kill him, and touch him at
the quick, the shame shall be as ill as the hurt.

Use. 1. How easily God overthrows the pride of man; Man's pride easily
overthrown.
he need not come in his own person, he need not bring a Champion or man of
War against him, but the sillyest creature is strong enough to confound them; a
silly boy or girl shall be Tempter too strong for as presumptuous a Professor
as Peter.

The Lord who resists all sinners, Jam. 4. 6.
is said often to resist the proud; that is, after a special and severe
manner, because they will draw Gods glory upon themselves; he commonly so
resists them as he turns their glory into shame, and confounds their
pride by weakness; has God neither Angels nor men to command against Pharaoh?
yes, but will rather confound him with an army of frogs, flies, Catterpillars
in derision of his pride; the same God could have turned the dust of the Earth
into Lions, Wolves, Bears of strange greatness and fierceness to have met
that fierce and cruel King that said, who is the Lord? and in spite of him
oppressed the People, but in scorn of his pride he turned the dust of the
Earth into Lice, who made him and his enchanters confess it was the finger of
God.

Proud Herod, Acts 12.
who assumed the glory of God to himself, it is the voice of God, not of man,
the Lord consumes him with lice the basest of the Creatures, and not so much
honored as wicked Jezabel to be eaten of Dogs, but of Lice.

Historians writes of a City in France that was depopulated and wasted, and the
Inhabitants driven away by Frogs. A History reports of a Town in Thessalonica
rooted up and overthrown by Moles. We read of Pope Adrian choked with a Fly.

Thus the Lord plays as it were with his Enemies, scorneth to come himself
in field upon them, but armeth the meanest of his creatures against them.

Let this humble us under the mighty hand of God; presume of nothing in our
selves, be proud of nothing, least we know by woeful experience that a thing of
nothing shall cast us down.

If our pride shall resist God, Gods weakness shall resist us, and we shall
know to our cost, that the weakness of God is stronger then man; never was
pride of heart unrevenged with falls, sin and shame.

Note. 4. The temptation is the same in effect with the former. Accusation
enough if thou belong to Christ.
This man is one of them; she accuses not Peter for a Malefactor, or a wicked
Liver, but only that he is one of Christ's Disciples; and this is matter of
accusation (she thinks) sufficient.

Note what are the many quarrels of evil men against the godly, and what are
their accusations: because they are of the number of Christ's Disciples and
Followers. Act. 15. 19. the Accusers brought no crime of such things as I
supposed, but had certain questions concerning their own superstitions, and
concerning one Jesus, etc. Here they hate not Peter, but so far as he was
with Christ.

Reas. 1. Evil men cannot hate evil for it self, And why?
but for sinister respects, yea, they love it, and will not leave it, and
therefore evil men commonly accuse not for evil, but for good.

Reas. 2. Darkness fights not against darkness, but light, and the greatest
light most, John 7. 7. because it testifyeth of Christ himself most, and
against the Members for the head sake; a Thief hates the light.

Reas. 3. Wicked men lie still under the woe of them that call good evil, Esaias
5. 10.
and evil good, through corruption of judgment not renewed by grace; and
therefore you shall still observe, that the greatest fault objected by the
wicked against the godly, is for most part the doing their duty as here in
Peter; was it not Peter's duty to be with his Lord? what other cause in
Prophets, Apostles, in Christ himself?

Use. In these days also to be with Christ, Wonder not if so it fall out now a
days.
is matter of accusation enough against a godly man, John 9. 22. 34. the blind
man was excommunicated because he had been with Jesus.

Papists after the same manner exercise deadly hatred against the Gospel, and
excommunicate as Heretics all that stand to the Doctrine of justification by
the only grace of Jesus renouncing merits of works of Papists, and after a
subtle manner out of the depth of Satan, have laid under the reproach of
Heretics, such as walk according to the Rules of Christ and his profession
in their course, renouncing the Libertine ways of the World and watching more
narrowly over their own.

These at the first restoring of religion and casting out of superstition and
Romish Idolatry, Papists who gnashed their teeth for envy at the Lords great
work, branded with the names of Puritans, Precisians, and holy brethren, etc.
ever since, and at this day more then ever; what is the ordinary quarrel and
scorn but the same taken out of the mouths of Enemies, thou art one of them, a
Disciple, a Puritan, a Professor, a Brother, all one with this of the Maid,
thou wast also with him; now weak things and small go for current to bring
good men into danger, as Peter's here being with Christ; even looking toward
good men is ground enough; and evil men can make great noise of it, as Jews
against Christ, he is a friend of Publicans and Sinners.

As Spyders can turn every thing into poison; so wicked men turn wholesome
things into poison and malicious accusations.

Acts 21. 28. Oh men of Israel help; this man, etc. Paul gave the Law his due,
only denied justification by it, nor spoke against the Temple, but their
hypocrisy who could discover all by coming to the Temple, nor dishonored
their place, but all their fair shows in that place would not serve, but it
was as the offering of a Dog without faith or Repentance; this was his duty to
teach; nor brought he Gentiles into their Temple, but they supposed so; and
suspicion is enough for evil men, and helps them well; I thought it had
been thus; but what if he had? now the Temple was free for all; Moses Law
ceremonial was at an end; so as when these wicked men had said all they could,
equity could find no substance in their accusation, yet these grounds were
enough against Paul to draw him to death, ver. 31.

Let a godly Preacher come and lift up his voice as a Trumpet against sin; Esaias
58. 1.
oh he is an intolerable man, he is so sour, so tart, so judging, he preaches
nothing but damnation, he makes Reprobates of us all; when all this while he
does hi^ duty in telling Israel her sin and Judah of her transgressions.

Let him preach often, and be more diligent then some idle drones, so that the
word prevail with men, and they begin to taste the soundness and the
sweetness of it, and frequent it with more gladness then the eye of envy
would they should; oh then he is factious, draws Disciples, is popular; if we
let him alone, all men will believe him say the Pharisees.

Let him preach with authority, and not as the Scribes, and convince evil men,
and seek to pull their lusts out of their hearts and hands, and now they
perceive the word too strong for them, then they fetch another windlace; Christ
teaches wonderful well, and he is Teacher from God, and teaches the way of
God truly, but he heals on the Sabbath day, or breaks some traditions of the
Elders; a good man otherwise, but his Disciples wash not, fast not, and the
failing in some idle tradition or Ceremony is enough to hate Christ's own
Doctrine and to hurt him in his own person to the unmost extremity.

Secondly, the Temptation; Thou wast also with Jesus of Nazareth; or as John
18. 17. Art thou one of this man's Disciples? Belike both asking the question,
and affirming that he was.

THE Tempter light, not Caiphas himself, but his Door keeper, and that not a
man, but a silly Maid. The Temptation as light: she does not scorn him or his
Master; she says not, belongest thou to this Seducer, nor art thou a follower
of this factious fellow, who is now brought in question for his life? but in
simplicity and gently enough, Art thou one of this Man's Disciples? yet Peter is
too weak for so weak a temptation.

Note. He that is presumptuously confident where he should not, A presumptuous
spirit is usually a ^imerous spirit.
is basely fearful where he need (...) ^^rist foretells Peter's fall, but Peter
fears nothing; but a silly Damsels (...) him; an unkind word, and fear has
oppressed him.

1. It is a just reveng^ that he that fears not God, And why?
should fear every thing else; and if the fear of God be shaken out of the
heart, the fear of man, yea of a veery worm shall be let in; had Peter
retained the fear of God, he had not here so feared, but now must fear where no
fear is.

2. God in this kind punishes the presumption and boldness which a man has
in himself, by turning his carnal courage, which resists true fear, into
terrors of heart and vain fears, that were there nothing without him to
fear, he shall not want terrors of mind that shall leave him but a little
rest. Herod is told enough to behead John, and no man can fear him for it, but
his own thoughts fear him; O, John whom I beheaded, is risen; now he fears
where no fear is, Prove. 28. The wicked fly none pursuing; his own fancy shall
fear him.

Use. Peter shrinkes not before Caiphas, Take heed of carnal confidence, which
will fail at last.
but his Maid asking but a question; see that carnal confidence and human
strength will leave a man in the suds at length; this courage of flesh and
blood had carried Peter a great way in the cause of Christ in resisting his
apprehenders, following him to the high Priests Hall, brings him to the ^ire,
but now leaves him.

If a man had all the courage we read of among the famous Roman Warriers, it
will not carry him after Christ, whethersoever he goes; it might carry him to
contemn death for his Country, for his credit, etc. but for Christ it will
fail him. Phil. 1. 29.
It is given as well to suffer for Christ as to believe.

Use 2. Examine well thy boldness, whether it be for God or Man, ere thou
trust it; the boldness of flesh will make us courageous before the Battle, but
when the Alarm is sounded, then the shaking of a Pike or report of a Musket
fears him as a Child, out of the field. How to know true courage.


Quest. How shall I know?

Answ. If thou be strong in the power of Christ's might, then thou art strong
in thine infirmities; 2 Cor. 12. 10.
that is, have a strong sense of thine own weakness, and find thy frailty,
and art driven out of conceit with thy self; and having no strength in thy
self, leanest only on the strength of thy Captain. Stand in this strength,
and in question of thy life, thou shall have boldness, as John before Herod,
Elias before Ahab, when poor Peter, stout in himself, shall fall before a
poor Maid, almost unquestioned.

Use 3. Let him that stands take heed least he fall, Take heed to thy standing.
1 Cor. 10. 12. Thou say thou love Christ; so did Peter, else he would not
have followed now; thou may account of strength to stand if all other should
fall, so did Peter; but thou see a Pillar here shaken with a Wenches word,
that thought all the threats and tortures of the Rulers could not make him
shrink.

See thou the foreman of the Apostles so near and dear unto Christ, who
would have confirmed his brethen, so foulely to fall? be not thou high-minded,
but fear. Romans 11. 20.


Mot. 1. Consider thy self a child, weak and feeble, soon cast down, and
being ready to stumble and fall, get to a stay as fast as thou may.

2. The Adversary is strong, and flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41. and is only
supported by strength of grace; the Lion of the Tribe of Judah foyles the
roaring Lion.

3. Hypocrites not fearing to fall, fall fearfully; but the godly fearing to
fall, fall not, at least prevent many falls, and rise out of them all.

Note. Peter resembles here the state of every Christian, Satan either allures
to sin, or deals with terror.
set between a warm fire on the one hand, and a dangerous temptation on the
other. Thou art one of them.

Satan's aim is, either to allure and entise us to sin, by a number of
weapons out of the storehouse of Prosperity, or daunt us by weapons out of the
Armory of Affliction and Persecution. Rabshekeh, 2 Kings 18. 31, 32. offers
peace and promises in his Masters name, if we will lay aside our Arms; and
mixeth threats and boasts in his strength: so here.

Satan's subtilty has plots amongst all men; if low (...), he will brouse and
make them ordinary fuel for fire; if high Trees, he has lightning and
thunder, and violence of every tempest.

And in all Estates, Adversity is a sharp Winter, to nip sprigs of Grace;
Prosperity as an hot Sun and Summer to nourish Weeds; Peter here feels the
force of both.

Use. That Christians watch both in Prosperity and Adversity; know that frowns
and fawns of Satan and the World are alike dangerous; flattery and force, both
enemies, and more dangerous if both assault at once; as here Peter.

Verse 68. But he denied it, saying, I know him not, neither wot I what thou
say. HEre is the first denial of this Champion, Foulness of Peter's sin.
by a silly Girl; wherein see the foulness of his sin.

1. He denies flatly, and peremptorily, saying, I know him not.

2. In doubling it, implying more resolution, neither wot what thou say;
both which speeches were manifest untruths and lies against his own conscience;
for Peter well knew Christ, having bin long with him; and one of his first
Disciples, he had confessed him, thou art the Son of God; besides, he knew well
what she meant, and therefore it was another lie.

3. In denying him so openly amongst a multitude; before them all, says
Matthew.

1. The fault is so foul, as one witness were too much; but Peter provides
witnesses enough, a cloud of witnesses.

2. He that denies Christ before any man, shall be denied before the Father,
Mat. 10. What a great sin to deny him before all men?

3. In so great a company were a number of wicked men; and now Peter exposes
the name of Christ to all their scorn and opproby; he hardens and animates
them, and stands with them in rejecting of Christ.

There were also some weak ones and well-wishers to Christ, as he that carried
Peter in, and some that might be coming forward; and Peter by his example being
the foreman of the Disciples, weakens and scandalizeth all these, and
destroys so many souls, and if he that offends one of these little ones,
better a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea; what a
case is Peter in that offends so many?

Note 1. How far soever the courage of flesh and blood carries a man, Carnal
courage will fail sooner or later.
and rash zeal, if not a stronger prop, it will leave a man in the suds at
length; for, what is become of all these great words, I will lay down my life
for thee; and why can I not follow thee now? And I will dye with thee before I
will deny thee.

Is this to follow the Master, to deny himself, his Disciples? is this to lay
down the life for the Master, to fear the voice of a silly Girl? Is this not
to deny Christ, to deny thy self a Christian? for if thou know not him to
be the Christ, thou know not thy self to be a Christian.

Thus in one word bold Peter denies and renounceth his Lord, his faith, his
profession and salvation by him.

Use. Let us look well to our zeal, Take heed to thy spirit.
that it serve us not as Peter's did him; the drugs have Adulterates, and the
most cunning Coins their slips, and the best graces have in this corruption
their cracks and defects; let us try and weigh and sound our zeal for its
truth, and that by these marks.

1. True zeal is earnest for good, True zeal what.
but it is not for a fit or passion, as John at his entrance, and Peter here;
but it is a gift of the Spirit, and a grace which is constant and lasting.

2. It rises out of knowledge of God and our selves; zeal not guided by
knowledge is hurtful, as Romans 10. 2. so here Peter had zeal for Christ, but
knew not himself; as mettle is dangerous in a headstrong Horse; so zeal
degenerated in a headstrong passion, not guided by knowledge.

3. It is attended ever with godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and grief, first for
his own sin, and then others; God is dishonored in both, and he is troubled
in both.

4. Carried with care and fear of falling, not selfe-conceitednesse, trusting
to himself, his strength, his judgment, as this of Peter's did.

5. Coveteth spiritual things in the world; Christ's was zeal to Gods house; so
David, John 2. 17.
Oh how love I thy house! how dear are thy words unto me! how sweet, etc.

These ardent desires dried him, and consumed him; Peter coveted Gods honor;
but how? his own name, reputation, life, and safety was dear unto him.

Note 2. The nature of Peter's sin which was the most direct denial of Christ
that might be. Peter's sin of an heinous nature.


First, not to profess and confess his Doctrine outwardly and secretly, is a
denial.

2. Not to express the Doctrine and power of Religion, which we acknowldge
true, whether for fear or otherwise, is an high denial of Christ.

3. To subvert or overthrow some fundamental point of Religion, is fearfully to
deny Christ; for it is all one to deny his doctrine as himself, being of the
same nature with himself.

But Peter's denial was beyond all these, not against his Doctrine only, but
against his Person immediately, and this not to deny him by silence, but by
speech, whom himself had confessed the Son of God, and had heard him so
professed from Heaven by God himself once and again.

Yes, when he needed not have openly disclaimed him, for the Maids speech was,
whether he was with Christ; he might have contented himself to have belyed
himself, and said I was not, rather then have sinned directly against his Lord
and Master. Or what lawful authority had this Maid to examine Peter; he was
not bound to confess that he knew him; neither does Peter confess some, and
conceal some, to fumble or equivocate to tell you; for if this could have
saved Peter, he needed not have wept for denying his Master, though some
Fathers would excuse him; but he flatly, and stoutly denies all, that ever he
knew him, or had to do with him; he does not say, I know him not so well as I
should do.

Alas what a poor case is Peter now in; for if he deny Christ, who does not
confess him that others may know he does so as well as himself, what a
fearful denial is to make others even boys and girls know we disclaim him.

Doctr. Note hence what a hard matter it is to confess Christ in time of
danger and peril, Hard to confess Christ in danger.
when so great a Disciple as Peter before any great danger so resolutely
denies him.

Reas. 1. Satan's malice; And why?
he winnowes and tempts Peter here, and the Saints to pluck them from this
confession, because he knows that God is greatly honored by the confession
of his Servants. That the truth is notably confirmed which shakes the Walls and
foundation of this Kingdom.

That confessing him before men, notably incites and provokes others to the
love and likeing of the truth, and to the imitation of such holy examples, and
because he would hinder the happiness of Saints, well knowing that (...) that
denies Christ, shall be denied of him.

Reas. 2. Strength of corruption in us makes it very hard at such times.

1. How hard is it to deny our selves? and not denying our selves, we cannot
but deny him; we not only reason with flesh and blood, but conclude with flesh
and blood against the yoke of Christ; Paul communed not with flesh and blood.
Gal. 1. 16.

2. How do we blush at the Chain, and shame at the Cross of Christ, which
indeed is the glory and crown of a Christian? he that is ashamed of Christ,
how can he confess him? 2 Timothy 1. 12. I suffer these things, and am not
ashamed; for I know whom I have believed; one cause why many among the Rulers
believed and durst not confess Christ, was, because they feared to be cast out
of the Synagogue, John 12. 42.

3. How are we glued to the love of the profits, and glory of the World? loath
we are to be too great losers by Christ, much less forsake all to follow him;
this makes it hard to confess Christ in cases of loss and disadvantage; this
cause is in John 12. 43. the Rulers confessed not Christ whom they knew,
because they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. Demas would
not have his commodityes hindered, and so forsook the Apostles, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

Reas. 3. Weakness of faith and graces; Peter had now true faith in his heart,
but weak and raked up in a heap of corruptions; where is no faith, is no
confession; a strong faith, a strong confession.

Peter was now as a man in a sown or qualme; living, but little show or sense
of life.

Nicodemus a Believer, a lover of Christ, his faith made him come to Christ,
but the weakness of it made him speak little and low, and not directly for
him.

Joseph of Arimathia a Disciple and a Believer, but a secret one for fear of
the Jews, John 19. 38.

Use 1. Conceive it no easy thing to confess Christ in trial, Study to
confess Christ in danger.
nor a thing to be performed by our own power, but pray for the gift of the
Spirit called the Spirit of strength, Isa. 11. 2. which sustaineth us, no cause
shall daunt it.

2. Pray for wisdom when and how to confess, that the Lord opening our eyes
and mouths we may speak as we ought.

3. Pray for Faith, Psalm 116. I believed, therefore I spoke, Romans 10. 10.
with heart believe.

2. Resolve of the nec^ssity of confessing Christ, being called thereto, 1
Peter 3. 15. be ready to give an answer to every man that asks a reason of
the hope that is in you. Necessity of it.


Philippians 2. 10. Every tongue must confess Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
glory of God.

Arg. 1. Consider here first the end of our being in the World, to honor God
and his truth, and promote our own and others salvation; therefore not only
not deny but confess.

2. The excellency of the truth confessed and witnessed unto, not by us only
but by the whole Trinity, the blessed Augels, the holy Prophets, the inspired
Apostles and constant Martyrs in all ages.

3. It is Gods right thou should confess him, even to thy utmost peril, to
whom thou art given of the Father, by whose blood redeemed, whose peculiar thou
art; how could thou brook that servant, to whom thou payest Wages, that
being ashamed of thee would deny thee his Master?

4. Christians must be considered not only as private men, but in the
communion of Saints, glorifying the Gospel, not only by walking worthy of it,
but also suffering for it, as lights, not for it self, but for others.

5. Thou would not be denied of him hereafter, but desire he should
acknowledge thee in another life; but if we deny him, he will deny us, 2 Timothy
2. 12.

6. Conversion produces confession, as in the converted Thief; and confession
is accompanied with salvation, Romans 10. 10. with the mouth confess to
salvation: only this man is of God, 1 John 3. 4.

7. Thou can not but confess Christ, nor keep Faith at home; it is as fire
within; and Christ says, He that is not with us, is against us.

Quest. How shall I be able to confess Christ in trials?

Answ. 1. Settl^ ^hy self in a sound knowledge and judgment of the truth; How
we may do this.
unstable persons that hang between two Religions, as Meteors, will never abide
the trial. If trials should come, many of our ordinary Hearers, for want of
setlednesse of judgment and sound measure of knowledge, will prove as Potters
Clay, fit for any form, or as Wax ready for any stamp or impression; so
Meteors between two Religions, enemies to Confession.

2. Get sound love to the Truth; else God will send strong delusions to believe
lies, on them that receive not the truth in the love of it, 2 These. 2. 10, 11,
12.

3. Express the power of Religion now in days of peace; for he that denies
the power of Religion now in the time of peace, God will never give him the
honor to profess in time of persecution; he that will deny by a warm fire,
will deny more easily in a fiery trial.

4. Arm thy self against the sweet and sower, the best and worst of the
world; beware of preferring of the best things as better and sweeter then
Christ and the glory of heaven; God is not so prodigal of his glory, nor of the
gracious merits of Christ, as to bestow it on such as love earth better then
himself or his Son; neither gaze with both eyes upon outward things never so
little, but on the power of God, which is manifest in weakness.

5. Set thine eye upon the glory of being confessed by Christ before his Father
and his Angels; oh this my servant was more willing to dye for me then deny me;
and the terror and disgrace that Christ should deny us, when our own
consciences are up in arms against us, then he shall proclaim and disclame us,
in that we preferred every trifle before himself, etc.

6. Look on examples of Saints, keeping the profession without wavering in
losses and crosses, Heb. 10. joyfully enduring the spoiling of Goods. Paul's
life not dear: compare thy self with these, etc.

Then he went out into the Porch, and the Cock crew. PETER having denied his
Lord, begins to perceive himself in some danger; for he sees that better
then his sin; and seeing it was not safe for him to be there, he begins to
withdraw himself, and goes into the Porch; he begins to be weary both of
the person and place, and perceiving he was gone in too far, he would get back
again if he could.

Note 1. It is not good to go too far into the houses of wicked men; Not good
to go far into wicked houses. And why?
for hardly shall a man get out without a scar, no more then Peter.

Reason 1. There can be no agreement between light and darkness,
righteousness and unrighteousness.

2. All their Counsels, courses and examples, being pestilent and hateful to
God; a good man should either offend them in reproving, or God in not
reproving; thou must do as they do, or leave thy room to such as will.

Reason 3. What good can thou expect from them, or what good can thou hope
to do to an obstinate person, who is unworthy of a reproof, unfit for Christian
counsel, Prove. 23. 9. Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will despise
the wisdom of thy words.

Use 1. To wonder that many can be inwardly conversant with all Companies, and
enter bands of society with all manner of persons, Papists and Protestants,
Church-Papists and Recusant Papists, Ruffians, swearers, Drunkards, railers and
scorners of good men and good things; how men professing godliness can be
inward with such, eat and drink with them, ordinarily uphold them in their
courses, fall to their games and exercises; certainly these men cannot hold
their own, no more then Peter here, but mustneeds counterfeit* an outside.
Peter is almost no sooner in the high Priests Hall, but he denies his Lord as
fast as any.

Use 2. He that resolves to uphold his integrity, must say with David, Psalm
119. 115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep Gods Commandments: and hide
himself away from wicked company; neither is it out of singularity, to seem
better then others; nor of pride, as disdaining neighbors, or thinking no
company good enough for them; but out of sense of their own weakness, and
fear of infection from them.

Use 3. Learn a point of wisdom in Peter; seeing we must be cast among evil
men, be not too familiar with them; rather stand without in the Porch then
thrust into the ^all; keep aloof from them, for so thou shall escape best;
thus Peter began to do when he discerned his danger by them.

Note 1. Peter went forth, but not far enough; for he went but into the
Porch, but came back.

Quest. Why did he not go quite away and leave the House as well as the Hall?
or going back, why returned he back again?

Answ. Peter was now as a Bird that had lost his nest, knew not what to do
with himself; in staying was danger, and in going now was as much danger; for
if now being questioned he should fly upon it, he should confirm their
suspicion against him; and confess that which he would fain dissemble.

Again, he had heard that Servants perhaps mutter against him; for it
appears there was a great many more then three that set upon him, and fears
they will pursue him, if he should fly, and there resolves to return among
them, set as good a face on the matter as he can, and falls into familiar and
free talk with them, if by that means he might prevent suspicion.

Note here, Get out of the Hall, yea and out of the Porch too.
that whosoever would keep himself free from the danger of sin and sinners,
must not only get out of the Hall, but out of the porch of sin too, as
Solomon out of the wicked woman's house, so every wicked man's house, Pro. 5. 8.
keep thee far from her, and come not near the door of her house.

Peter should have done better if he had left the house, and not stuck in the
Porch; it had been in him, and should be in each of us.

1. Christian wisdom, to keep without the Harlots reach.

2. Christian zeal, hating all sin even the appearance.

Many step out of the midst of sin, but hang about the Porch, would not be
outrageous sinners, but retain a smatch or taste; not open Adulterers, but
Adulterous eyes, thoughts and speeches; not noted drunkards, but company
keepers and Bibbers; not blasphemous Swearers by Wounds and Blood, but by
Faith, Troth, God, etc. not workers on the Sabbath, but idle and profane in
words and deeds; not open Railers and scorners of good exercises, and men, but
secret haters or dislikers; all which is to stick in the Porch of Sin, and as
Peter thou art not gotten out, but coming back into the Hall again.

Note 2. In that Peter sticks in the Porch and comes back among them whom he
had forsaken, Hard to leave ill company.
how hardly a man that has been long used to bad company and courses, is
brought back to leave it altogether, but either he will look back, or tarry
in the Porch; Peter that is but new come in, and scarce warm in his place
among them, cannot resolve to leave them though he be warmed by sense of peril
and danger.

Sin and Sinners are like Bird-lime; the more Peter strives to get out, he
sees himself more lymed and entangled.

How much harder is it to get out of the custom and habit of sin and sinful
Companionship?

Lots Wi^e gotten out of the midst of Sodom, looks back; nay good Lot
himself cannot be got out, but the Lord must stay his leisure, and the Angel
must pull him out that the flame catch him not.

Use 1. Pray that we never fall into bad company, Never enter among such.
and bad places, bad alliance, bad acquaintance or courses among earthly minded
and ungodly minded men; for surely we will hardly be got out, we will have as
many carnal arguments as Peter to carry us back into their company, we must
not part with old friends, we shall be thought uncivil, or strange, or it may
be we may here some say, what, art thou one of his Disciples, what, become
precise? then all is mard, and then if an Angel, yea two Angels bid thee away
in haste for our lives, we will with good Lot still prolong the time.

Use 2. Beware if thou have set forth out of the company and courses of
sinners, Or having entered return and never return back.
so far as the Court, that thou dispute not with Peter, much less resolve to
go back again; for Peter made his case worse then before, 2 Pet. 2. 20.
better never have known the way of truth, Luke 9. 62.
then forsake it; was Lots wi^e a^^ better for getting out of Sodom that
looked back? nay, was she not worse, being made an eye mark of Gods justice
to all posterity.

Is it not a fearful thing to be weary of well doing, and a fearful
wickedness to make defection from God? is he fit for the Kingdom that puts
his hand to the Plough, and looks back.

Beware thou be not one of those Dogs that return to their vomit, nor a
Swine washed returning to her wallowing, all the former motions and endeavors
were deceitful and hypocritical; for, were they sound, they should have
lasted.

The Devil once cast out and returning, brought seven worse then himself, and
the end is worse then the beginning.

Note also the contrariety of the wicked from God himself, he provideth safety
for his Children by night; Esau was admonished by night not to speak roughly
to Jacob. The Wicked always tend to destruction of themselves and others.

And the Cock crew. NOTE 1. It appears it was in the Night that Christ was
apprehended, Wicked in the night devise mischief.
and in that, how watchful and diligent Christ's Enemies were to work malice
and mischief against him; so were the Sodomites busy all Night to abuse
themselves and do mischief. Genesis 19.

Solomon says wicked men cannot sleep till they have done evil, Prove. 4* 16.
and sleep departs from them unless they cause some to fall; Judas will
watch an opportunity against Christ, even in the night to betray him.

Reas. 1. Because they are carried wholly and naturally unto evil without any
inward restraint; And why?
it is a sweet morsel, and perhaps the Lord sees them not.

2. Darkness makes them more bold, and fitter for a work of darkness, as
Judas apprehends, and Soldiers lead him away.

3. Malice against Christ and his Members in the wicked never sleeps, but
watches occasions against them; they resemble Satan their guide.

4. Having got occasion, they will not slip it, but execute presently, though
at midnight; they break their sleep for it.

5. Yet God overruleth that it should be typifyed by a Paschall Lamb, killed
by night, Exodus 12. 6. as himself was slain in the evening of the World.

Use Good men on the contrary learn to watch in the Night for good and
gracious purposes; Study thou in the night to do good.
let thy reins teach thee Wisdom in the Night; David professes he will not
go up to his Bed, nor suffer his eye* lids to slumber, till he have found out a
place for God. Psalm. 132. 3.


Tully says it were a shame for him that Catiline should be more watchful for
the destruction of the Commonwealth, then he for the safety and preservation
of it.

In sparing sleep for good purposes is a recompense, Genesis 19. 4, 29. Consider
that Night-sins, have day plagues, 2 Samuel 12. 12. consider, Job 35. 10. God
gives Songs in the Night, and his mercyes walk round about thee all night
long, he keeps watches for thee, he thinks on thee, and does for thee, that
thou do not for thy self, keeps thy house, Body, Goods, Soul, while thou
sleep; and therefore in the night do thou think of him.

Psalm. 119. 55. In the night season oh Lord I thought on thee. In the night
commune with the Lord by prayer, meditation and confession. Psalm. 77. 60. In
the night I commune with my heart, and search out my spirit; in the night
desire after the Lord, Isa. 26. 9. so the Church, with my Soul have I desired
thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me, will I seek thee early; in
the night praise the Lord; at midnight I will rise and praise thee.

Examine thy employment of thoughts in the night, when thou go to bed and
risest, whether thy thoughts run after money and mucke, world and business,
whether on revenge, pride, hatred, sports, or whatsoever.

A good heart has a better treasury within it self, and without it for thee
to feed on; meditate and be serious, and remember still how diligent we should
be in Gods wo^ke; cursed is he that does Gods work negligently, Jer. 48. 10.

Note 2. God would admonish Peter according to his word by the Cocks crow, if
so be Peter will take knowledge of himself; but Peter does not.

Quest. Why? it may be being midnight, he was sleepy and could not hear.

Answ. But Peter had got his first sleep before, Christ went thrice and found
them sleeping; besides Peter was now afraid, and fear and danger kept him
waking enough, and therefore the cause was,

1. His heart was asleep and regardlesse of his sin, and so long all the Cocks
in the World cannot wake him.

2. The time appointed for his wakening was not yet come; he had denied but
once as yet; he must deny thrice, let the Cock crow never so often.

Note. A fearful consequent and Companion of sin is induration and
blindness; Induration a fearful consequent of sin.
here we see even the godly themselves sleep fearfully after sin; how did
David cast hit conscience asleep after he had committed Adultery? his heart is
hardened; and after the Adultery, he falls into Murder, and yet along time
he is not wakened till the Lord by his Prophet wakeneth him.

Genesis 37. 24, 25. when Joseph's Brethren had taken him, and stripped him, and cast
him into a pit, then they sat-downe to eat bred; a man would have thought they
should have sat down to weep for their sin; but their sin has so blinded
them, they rejoice together as if they had nothing offended; nay, now almost
twenty years they carry their sin, and never take notice of it.

Reas. 1. Because man's heart naturally is hard, And why?
being infected with the poison of original sin; and this hardness is
increased by our own sins conceived or consented to, or committed, or
repeated, or continued; there was no deadness or dullness in Adams conscience
in innocence.

2. Sin has a property, Culpa claudit oculos, Greg.
to stun and benum the conscience and Soul of man; for as a man falling from an
high place, lies a great while in a swoon or trance, and cannot help himself;
so the Children of God in their falls of Sin.

David afte^ his Sin was a dead man without sense of sin, or of comfort; he
had lost his heart, his joy, his feeling, till God created and restored him
again, Psalm. 51.

3. The supposed pleasure of sin does drown Judgment, disturb Reason, and
blind Conscience, so as it can sooth it self, and think his own sins
less, or scarce sins; every man thinks his own breath sweet; and delight
in sin brings on custom, and custom in sin takes away the sense of sin.

Use 1. Beware of a sleepy heart and benumbed conscience, Beware of a sleepy
conscience.
a most fearful fruit of sin, and far worse then sin it self; most men
are in love with their Consciences when they lie still and quiet; and this is
the case and conscience of the common Protestant, who takes that for quietness
and peace which is indeed death it self, or a deadly lethargy of Conscience.
But this dead Conscience is like a dead body laid in the grave, sleeps, lies
still, and is clean forgotten, but shall awake, and rise again and be more
active then ever it was, either in Mercy, and in season, as in the godly, when
they shall sustain sorrow enough, and taste the sour sauce of their sweet
meats, and out of deep sorrow recover their joy, as in Peter; Or in Justice,
and too late, as in Judas, who slept all the while he conspired against his
Lord, but no sooner wakened, but he went and hanged himself; here was the most
fearful wakening, because his denial of his Lord was of maliciousness,
Peter's of infirmity.

Many living in gross sins thank God they never were troubled in
Conscience, proclaim their shame and misery.

Use 2. If a Conscience renewed in part can be so blinded by sin, Worst still
in the Wicked.
oh what gross corruption and wickedness reigns in a Conscience
unregenerate? this will make stop at nothing, but grows senseless in the
foulest ways of sin; this goes on from evil to worse without remorse, till
sometimes they be delivered up to a reprobate sense; Cain to kill his Brother,
Absolon to rebel against his own Father, Amnon to defile his sister Thamar.

A Smith lays as many hard blows on the Anvill as on the Iron he works; the
Anvill is the same not dinted, but the other yields to his desire; so here is
the difference, but that one has heat and fire in it, softning it, the other
cold without all fire within; so here, God speaks as loud strokes and as
hard on the wicked man's heart, as on the godly; the same void, the same hand,
but without all fire and heat of the Spirit mollifying without all impression,
only recoyls the voice and stroke.

Use 3. Oh that we could come to feel and cry out of the stone in the heart as
we will of the stone in the kidneyes, and esteem hardness of heart a fearful
plague, as indeed it is.

If God take away a man's bodily sight or hearing, every man takes notice, and
mourns under such a rod of God, but when sin has taken away the inward ear
and eye, that there is no seeing or hearing of admonitions and rebukes of
sin, no man thinks this a judgment, but a benefit; seeing therefore soft a
hearing heart and ear is so great a blessing, as the contrary is a curse,
labor for soft hearts, pray against hardness; use means to waken thee; get
wise and understanding hearts to observe the crow of the Cocks, to observe the
steps and ways of God with us, and his degrees and dealing with us.

Motive 1. This is a part of Gods revenge against sin, both in godly and
wicked; David will secretly take another man's Wife, his Wife shall be taken
openly on the housetop in the sight of Israel, in which all Israel shall read
the sin of David so secretly contrived.

2. That which the wicked fears must come upon him; he fears nothing but
light, nothing so much as man's eye, so if he cannot carry his business Cast
tamen cause therefore God brings this fear on him, and often Boys and Girls
come to know and speak of that they most sought to cover.

3. Shame and Sin go hand in hand; and in effect.

The Sinner hates not only his own soul, but his own good name; the
Adulterer that watches the twilight, and hides himself in the night, shuts
the doors, windows, draws curtains, etc. cannot shut out Gods eye, nor the
eye of his own conscience, no nor the mouths of men, but some one or other
spyeth him, and for the most part he is reputed as he is.

The Drunkard that is drunk in the night, he is ashamed of his sin in the day,
though many deboyst Persons be not; yet because the Wife, Children, Servants,
Neighbors, Companions spy him, he bears justly the name and shame of his
sin, which he thought darkness could bear off; so the Usurer, the unjust
trader that smootheth over deceit, one time or other, one Maid or other, one
occasion or other, shall detect them, and cast the shame of their sin in
their faces, and on their names.

Nay more, hide thy hypocrisy, thy distaste of Gods Servants in the darkest
cave and corner of thy heart; lock up secret wrath and displeasure in the most
inward Closet of thy breast, God will one day detect thee, he needs neither
man nor Maid to discover thee, the sparks of thine own fire within thee shall
fly abroad, and make men know thee better then thou would be known; he that
has birds of Heaven to carry forth curses of the thoughts against the King,
Eccles. 10. 20. and by that which has wings can declare the speeches of thy
bedchamber, can and will easily in his time declare what thou art in things
which of all others thou would be masked in.

Note 1. Here is another Maid of the high Priest as good as the former, Like
Master, like Servant.
and both as good as their Master, all of them very busy against Christ and his
Disciples, the Master against the Master, and the Servants against his Servants.

But these Maids forgetting their business, their Sex, their modesty, their
place, show themselves very rude in that, in the presence of so many men, they
take upon them to prate to a man; a stranger, in a business not concerning
themselves or places.

But learn, that as the Master is, commonly such are the Servants, such is the
Family; a good Master will have good Servants, a bad contrary.

The Centurion, Luke 7. 8. being a good man, has a number of good Servants and
trained in good order and subjection.

And we scarce read of a convert, but we read of the faith and conversion of
his Family, Acts 16. 33. The Jailer. chap. 18. 8. Crispus believed, and all his
House.

But how contrary we see that of Solomon? Prove. 29. 12. If the Prince be given
to lies, all the Servants are wicked.

If Esau be wickedly and maliciously minded against Jacob, he has three or
four hundred Servants all at his heels ready to destroy him, Genesis 33. 1.

If Absolon unnaturally plot the death of his own Brother Amnon, he keeps
Servants ready enough to act and execute it.

A swearing Master, has blasphemous Servants; a Popish Master, Popish
Servants; an Atheist Master, has Atheist Servants; he cares not, nor cares
whether their Religion be for God or the Devil.

Reas. 1. A good man has a care to provide himself good Servants, Why a good
Master has good Servants
sober, teachable, at least inclinable to goodness; David Psalm. 101. will not
suffer a vicious Person in his house, a Liar, a Slanderer.

No man is willing to entertain a Thief in his house, to rob him; and art
thou more careful of thy Goods, and weary of him, then he that will rob God of
his glory by blaspheming, cursing and wicked courses?

2. If he find them not so good, he is careful to teach and instruct them; so
Abraham was commended that he would teach his Family after him, Genesis 18. 19.
and become a good pattern and example of piety and grace; every man for his
own advantage will teach and train up his Servants and Apprentices in the
knowledge of their own trads and occupations, and much more good men hold
themselves bound to train them in the knowledge of God, and way of godly life.

3. He will carefully reform his Family with Abraham, cast out the Scorner,
the profane and incorrigible Scoffers, and such as will not yield to
instruction and admonition or correction, he will and must remove and expel as
desperate and infectious members, that the whole be not corrupted or infected.

Reas. 2. Why a wicked Master has a wicked Family and Servants. Why a bad
Master has bad Servants.


1. Because he delights in no other, but such as abett his own evil and
execute it; some men think it not for their profit to keep a Servant that
cannot lie and swear as fast as speak, so it be to others, not themselves;
they must not have their Servants blockish, for then they will neglect their
business, nor have too much knowledge; for they will see their faults, and
make scruple of their commandments.

2. Because of the contagion of Sin; Sin is of a strong and swift motion, it
can move up hill and ascend from Inferiors to superiors; from the Wife to the
Husband, as Jehoram did evil, for Ahabs Daughter was his Wife, 2 King. 8. 18.
and Ahab was wicked, whom Jezabell provoked.

From Counselors to Kings, 1 King. 12. 14.
as the evil counsel of Rehoboam, and from Servants to Masters, 1 Chr. 19. 3.
from People to Ministers, Isa. 6. 5.

If it go up Hill so fast, how swift is it down Hill? if it can rise from the
feet to the Head so quickly; how suddenly from head to feet? from Superiors to
Inferiors?

3. Because of the countenance sin gets from Superiors; if sin be so bold and
active as all the Authority and care of Superiors can scarce repress and
restrain it; how can it but thrive, when it has gotten Authority,
countenance, and confirmation, when it is incited, commanded, backed and
abetted?

It Is 2 Chr. 12. 1^
said Rehoboam did commit Idolatry, and all Judah did the like under every
green Tree, and on every green Hill, so here, all the Servants, men and maids
are as ready as their Master to mischief and wrong Jesus Christ; and it is so
in most wicked Familyes ordinarily, such as depend on Masters for approbation,
or preferment, conform to their humors.

Use. 1. For Masters to provide even for their credit by reforming their
Familyes; All should mind the reforming of their familyes
Many profess Religion and the fear of God, but it is in the Church, not in
his house; he cares not who they be he keeps in his House, Swearers, godless
and pophane Persons, and they serve his turn, and do his business, using
them as Beasts rather then men, who have souls for which they must make
account; say thou art no Swearer, no Sabbath-breaker, no Atheist, no rude or
disordered Person; if thou keep such in thy house, surely thou art either
such or may justly be so accounted.

Say not thou have such bad Servants, and it is so hard to get a good Servant;
fear rather thou art a bad Master, who neither carest to choose better, or
make them better; and perhaps they come out of such rude and disordered
Families as thine own be; thou have run to the Hedge and have taken in Briars
and Thorns, and now complainest: take them in whom thou can not govern,
and then complainest of encumbrance.

2. Let Masters hence learn to look to their own ways first, Let the Master
be first good himself.
and do nothing which they would not have their Families do after them, but
as the Sun gives light to all the Regions round about him, and by his shine
expels all darkness; so the Master by his godly example, should be as a light
to his Family, inciting and encouraging all goodness, and chasing away sin
by Instruction, Example, and all due severity.

Say with Joshuah, Josh. 24. 15.
first, I and my house will serve the Lord. Hester, Hester 4. 16.
I and my Maids will Fast.


Thou art a Master, know that true Reformation of thy Family must begin at thy
self; if thou can not abide it in thy self, thou will not brook it in
others so near thee; sin is a good fellow, is sociable, and would have all
like it self.

Again, Mat. 7. 5.
thou can not truly hate sin in another, and cherish it in thy self,
correct it in another, and cocker it in thy self. Cast out thine own beam
first.

Use 3. Masters in the disorders of their Families should humble themselves, Or
be humbled, if not.
suspect themselves; turn part of their anger against themselves; say, Truly
I and my house serve not the Lord; I have not instructed, I have failed in my
example, I have not corrected the sin when I might, I have not made right
steps to my feet, which has turned out others, Heb. 12. 13. I have eaten four
Grapes, and set their teeth on edge.

Use. 4. Servants learn hence, Servants should look to their ^ule, not bad
example.
not to think they can be borne out in their evils by their Masters example,
nor do any thing against a good Conscience; your rule is not the rule of your
Master, or framing to his example, but to the rule of the Word. If thy Master
should do or command thee to do any thing that is unhonest, unjust, unlawful
or ungodly, thou must not in any wise do it, but now know thou have a Master
in heaven; happy had it bin for this Maid, now her Master was so busy against
Christ, if she had taken his part, and the part of his Disciples, Acts 4. 19,
and 5. 29. Whether it be right to obey God or men, judge ye.

Let not Masters think themselves wronged; for neither Prentice nor Parent,
nor Husband must be obeyed but in the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 1.
It was Sarahs great infirmity, to dissemble twice at her Husbands request;
Masters must not drink that water gotten by the hazard of the souls of their
Servants, as David.

Caution 1. If a command be only inconvenient and unmeet, thou must obey; if
not unlawful, make conscience.

2. If thou be sure it be sin, not a conceit or opinion.

Object. But I am in doubt.

Answ. Here labor to be grounded: but till then, better doubt and obey, then
doubt and disobey.

3. If sure it be sin, look to the manner of disobedience; though God free
thee from obedience in act, yet not from obedience in suffering.

Though from the Action thou know ungodly, yet not from reverent, humble,
and dutiful subjection, affection and demeanor.

To deny unlawful things with sturdy and insolent words or carriage is utterly
unlawful.

Note 3. In the Instrument that Peter falls twice here by two Women; the Papists
hence declame, and make invectives against women, not only because Eve was the
cause of Adams fall, but for that these 'two Maids were means to cast down
the pillar of their profession, Saint Peter.

Indeed the Scripture show what great power is in wicked women to draw men to
evil as in Solomon, Jezabell, Herodias, many Women whose hands are as Bands to
drag men to sin, who are taken with their persuasion as says Solomon, even as
an Ox to the slaughter.

Neither is it marvel that sin comes upon us in our nearest friends, nor that
Satan first overcomes the weaker Vessel.

Nor that by that he overcomes the stronger; for we fight not with flesh and
blood, Ephesians. 6. 12.
but with spiritual wickednesses in them; and we can easily hear the
whisperings and Siren voices of sin, being altogether corrupt.

All which should teach 1. Women to be sure their persuasions of Husbands be
just, Inst^uctions to Women.
holy and good; never to dare to persuade men into sin; as knowing they were
given as helps unto men, to help them out of sin; and whereas they are weaker
Vessels, and most impotent in their passions and desires, be sure to examine
what they persuade too, so much more diligently, least they be circumvented as
Eve, and if they meet with so good a nature, as is easy to be persuaded, and
hear them, it is a double sin to abuse it, and seduce it to evil; it is said
of a good woman, Prove. 31. 26.
that she opens her mouth in wisdom.

2. It should teach Men to care not to be drawn to evil by women's
persuasions; And men^
should aman be weak and womanly impotent? Joseph would not be won from his
fidelity by any persuasion.

That all wisdom is little enough to support a man matched with an evil
Woman, see in Solomon, to whom no warnings, no wisdom was enough.

But in these two Maids observe more specially, that as the Women had the first
hand in the first sin; so women had hand also in this great sin of the death of
Christ; forthough they could pass no sentence against him in public, yet in
their places they could scorn him, and endanger his Disciples.

And consequent it is that women had need of their redemption by Christ's death
as well as men; whosoever have hand in the transgression, stand in need of the
benefit and means of pardon.

Many Women are careless of the main business, Luke 10. 42.
of the one thing necessary; Marthas; this consideration should stir them up to
choose the better part.

3. All Women learn this; What speech Women should use.
seeing much of their speech is directed to men, and they are much in speech,
how to guide their speeches.

1. To open her mouth in wisdom, as the virtuous woman, Prove. 31. 26. the law
of grace in her lips; to stir up the grace of God in any, and not the
corruption of their heart, and not as many, who if they find their Husband or
friends forward or backward make them more backward, and if there be but a
spark of goodness, are means quite to dead and extinguish it.

2. To persuade and council good things; not as Hamans Wife when he told her
of all his prosperity, but Mordecai troubled all, Hester 5. 14. She councelled
him to set up a Tree fifty cubits high; and speak to the King to hang
Mordecai, which council came home to her self.

But rather as the Shunamite to her husband, 2 King, 4. 9. I know this is a man
of God, let us make a little Chamber, and set him up a Table, Bed, Stool and
Candlestick, that he may turn in to us.

2. Comfort him in his troubles with good and approved comforts,; not as
Jezabell did Ahab sick; up, art thou King of Israel? I will get thee Naboths
Vineyard, 1 King. 21. 7. but as Manoahs wife, Judge. 13. 23. If the Lord would
kill us, he would not have received our sacrifice, nor showed us all these
things.

Note 2. The Cock crows according to Gods word, Heart hardened no means do a
man good.
which should have been a check to Peter for that he had done already, and a
stop to go no farther; but the warning that Christ gives him, wakens not his
heart, does no good; while the heart is hardened, no means can do a man good;
here was means enough to stop Peter.

1. Christ's prediction yet in his ears.

2. Christ's care in affording him a sign of his sin, to lay to his heart.

3. The accomplishment of the sign in the Cocks voice, bringing now his sin to
his ear, that he might take notice of himself; but yet Peter does not, because
of the senslesnesse and hardness of his heart.

Use. As with Peter, so with most men; God offers Peter a great blessing in the
crowing of the Cock, but Peter never sees it, nor receives it; Christ by his
word as a powerful Cock, would awaken men out of their sins, graciously
admonishes them of their danger of their falls, but men are as deaf as Peter,
they will not be dis-eased or wakened, and reformed.

2. Observe the true cause of not profiting by the voice of Christ in his
ministry; True cause of not profiting by preaching.
not in Christ, not in the Cock here, but in Peter himself not acknowledging
that voice; so the word is preached, few profit, few are reclaimed; where is
the fault? is it in God? what can he do more then warn the Sinner, is it in
the word, Romans 1. 16.
which is the Power of God to Salvation? is it in the Cock or Teacher? may
things be made more plain, more intelligent and powerful? no, it is in men's
hardening their own hearts, closing their eyes, shutting their ears; oh
Israel, thy destruction is of thy self. Hos. 13. 9.


Note 3. What a great plague of God an hard heart is, Hard heart a great plague
of God.
because it binds their sins upon them; how do Swearers, Liars,
Sabbath Breakers, Usurers, hear the voice of the Cock, nay of Christ himself
in his word, crying out of their sins, denouncing damnation for them, and yet
persist without reformation, but that custom of sin has made them so deaf
that they take no notice either of the sin, or that there is any need of
reformation? why does yet the Adulterer blush, the Drunkard shame, the
blasphemous Swearer hide his face for shame at so foul sins, Ephesians. 4. 19.
so cried and crowed out upon, but that the conscience by sin is past feeling,
and heart dead asleep?

Verse. 69. Then a Maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by,
this is one of them; but he denied it again. NOW we come to the second assault
and temptation; for Peter lies now in security, and security is never without
temptation; a sleeping man falls with a small motion; Satan needs do but little
to thrust him down, he will fall of himself, as Eutychus Acts 20. 9.

Then a Maid saw him again.] A very little while after, a Maid, whether the
same Maid, or she had told it to some of her fellows, it is not material, but
likely it was another Maid; Matthew says it was another saw him again.

Peter was bold to go to Caiaphas house, because it was night, he was in hope
to be hid, and that no body should see him; but one Maid spies him, another
wench spies him, and now he sees that he was known well enough.

Note hence the boldness of Sinners, Foolish Sinne^s think to keep all secret.
who think to carry their sins close and secret from the eye of man; besides,
that the Lord sees them through the black cloud, sometimes while they think
themselves in a mist, and that they walk invisible; in this path they are
espied well enough, and while they think to deceive others, themselves are
most deceived.

If Peter would never so feign shuffle himself in among the high Priests
Servants, one maid after another shall descry and disclaim him to be Peter;
let him hide himself in the dark, a Maid shall see him hide himself, only
Christ shall spy him.

And whereas it were very hard if they could not devise some quarrel against
their Preacher; yet sometimes the Lord so upholdeth his Lights, as they have no
just cause that they dare bring into the light, which they can quarrel
directly against; his profession and preaching is accused to be the cause of so
many evils in the World, and so much preaching makes the World worse, and so as
mad dogs they bark at the Sun, and would pull the Sun of out Heaven, because it
draws out the stink of a Dunghill; so the word, because it discovers evil is
the cause of evil.

How are good and godly men and Women, Brethren and Sisters of Jesus Christ,
members of his body, and one of another reproached and reviled at this day, and
charged to be the worst of all sorts of People that live and the common cry
runs against them, as Sectaryes, hypocrites, and worse then Idolators; why, but
says Pilate what evil has he done? you charge him with many several things,
but I see no evil in him; nay (say they) as if we would have brought him to
thee, if he were not an evil doer; Pilate must take their word, for that other
sufficient matter can he wring none.

Oh but there be great matters against these precise Professors, they be
Runners to Church, great Hearers of Sermons; nay they carry Bibles under their
Arms, they repeat Sermons when they come home, and sing Psalms in their
houses, can go about no work till they have solemnly prayed, nor go to bed
without reading and praying, so great is their hypocrisy. They be Jews in
keeping the Sabbath, they must do nothing, nor speak but holy things, scarce
make their Beds, dress any meat, or eat it when dressed.

Nay, they have been accused sometimes in Pulpits, sometimes on Stages, that
they would not swear, nor suffer an oath in another unreproved, nor they will
not be drunk, nor abide to run to Tavernes or Alehouses; they are so strict
as they will not endure any merry company, nor be merry themselves, as Israel a
People that dwelt alone, Deuteronomy. 33. 38.
and numbered not themselves among the Nations; and are not these proper
accusations? or are there any other greater justly cast upon them; so as our
Savior concluds the matter; if ye were of the world, the world would love her
own; 1 Pet. 4. 4.
and Peter, because ye run not with them to the excess of error, but stand
with Christ in your own duty and station, and therefore they hate you.

This so being, let godly men be so much the more wary of themselves and
courses, as small things are made great matters in them. Judge your selves in
small things, let the righteous smite you, and the word of God wound your
infirmityes, least you fall into their hands.

Oh that Professors would so walk, as all their accusations would vanish into
shadows and smoke; oh that you would by innocence thus dull and blunt all
their keen Weapons! the wisdom of a man will make a benefit of an Adversary,
much more the wisdom of God in his Servants.

Lastly, this may be a comfort and encouragement to godly men; if they have
nothing but thy profession to upbraid thee for, Job. 31. 36.
thou may take the Adversaryes book, and wear it as thy crown; make
account if thou in thy life testify of the evil of the World, How Christ
witnesses against the world.
it will accuse thee, if not for evil, yet for good, Christ witnesses against
the World.

1. By unweariable pains in doctrine, that their works were evil, calling it
to repentance, to mortification, remission of sins, and newness of life.

2. By accusing the hypocrisy of it, Mat. 5. 20.
except your righteousness exceed the Pharisee; a fair righteousness must
they think they had, that shut them out of Heaven.

3. By condemning not only their Adulteryes, Usurers, Oppressions, Thefts,
murders, but even their prayers, Alms, Fasts, Chastity and piety, abstracted
from faith and repentance; could the World endure this?

4. By innocence of life, opposed to their corruptions, he made both shine
clear.

5. By separating from their company in their evil, plainly declaring what he
thought of them and their courses, and do thou the like, be sure thou shall
hear of the World on both sides.

Ver. 70. But he denied it again. WHERE 1. Repetition. 2. Manner, with an
oath, Mat. 26. 72.


Peter had first denied his Lord for fear, now he denies again for shame;
least having lied, he be found a Liar; Peter was better contented to be a Liar
then so accounted, and therefore stood still in denial.

Beware of acquainting thy tongue with the least untruth, least it easily come
to be repeated, and into a custom.

Note He that once crackes his conscience, Conscience once cracked, a man
adventures ^arther.
will not much strain at it the second time; see it in good Jacob, Genesis 27.
12, 19. he is at first very fearful to seem a mocker to his Father, and to
delude him with a lie, but coming unto his Father, makes a long speech, and
professes himself boldly and securely his eldest Son Esau; and after when
Isaac suspected his voice, and asked him, ver. 29. But a^t thou my Son Esau? he
answered again, yea.

Good Joseph, Genesis 42. 15. 16. to show his vehemence to his Brethren, rapt out
one oath after another, as it seems was the manner of the Court of Egypt (as
now of England) but not fit for Joseph or seemly, nor fit for Joseph or
seemly, nor lawful for any.

Reas. 1. Sin is very bold where once it is bid welcome; if it once enter, And
why?
it knows the way again, and once admitted will plead, not possession, but
prescription; an army is easier kept out, then beaten out.

2. The Sinner is less able to resist the second time, then he was the former,
so Peter here; for grace is weakened and decayed by yiedling to the first
temptation, and the strength of God which only makes the way of grace easy,
plucked away by grieving his holy spirit.

Therefore Peter here denies as often as he is tempted, and would have denied a
thousand times if the Lord by his prediction had not limited the temptation,
and returned with new strength.

3. The way of sin once set open, is as the Gates of a City cast open for the
Enemy, by which Satan bringing in his forces, strongly plants them, and quickly
so fortifieth them, as a great strength shall hardly raze or remove them.

Every sin admitted, not only weakens, but corrupts the facultyes of the Soul
by which it is upheld, it darkens understanding, corrupts the will, disturbs
the affections, and raises a cloud of passions to dazel reason, as Peter here
in fears and perplexityes, and doubts, marvelous blind for a time.

Use Be exhorted to give sin no entrance at all, Keep sin out or drive it out
quickly.
or if thou can not keep it out, drive it out presently by repentance; as
the wise Mariner carefully keeps his Ship from leaking; and if he cannot ever
prevent, but it will take in some water, he emptyes and pomps it out at the
beginning, because then it is easier emptyed then afterward.

A wise man is careful to prevent a disease, and preserve his health; but if
he cannot always do it, he will run to the remedy betime, knowing that an old
disease troubles the Physician, which not distemper only, but age and
continuance has confirmed.

It is a folly to taste of Sin, and the sweet meats of it; but to sit down to
feed upon it, is madness to him that knows he must vomit up every morsel,
yea every crumb of it, before he can be well.

Again, see thou sin let in by sin? though it may solicit thee, yet let it
no settle on thee; cast thine eye about, and see how hard, how impossible
almost to remove a custom of swearing, of lying, drunkenness, or any evil
habit which has fastened on us; how seldom are such habitual Sinners
reclamed? how hard is it to turn the course of the Thames or River, which time
out of mind has kept his own Channel? how hard to pluck out a Nail which
one has been driving in forty or fifty years? cast thine eye within thy
self, observe how some favored corruption let in, and let go, has weakened
thy Soul, quenched thy good desires, deaded good duties dimmed thy judgment,
and wholly unfitted thee for exercise of grace and expectation of glory.

The manner of his denial, with an Oath.

A Dicer (they say) will grow to be a Beggar in a night, and in a night Peter
will grow from a Dissembler to be a Swearer and forswearer.

Note 1. How ill Peter prov^des for himself, Good men too apt to help
themselves by bad means.
to wind himself out of danger and perplexity; evil men set upon him, and he
sets upon God, and sets his own conscience against him by increasing sins and
evils as the dangers increase; not only evil men, but good men are too prone
to help themselves by evil means.

Not Esau only, being almost dead for hunger, must supply himself by selling
his birthright; but Jacob will get it by lying; not Saul only will seek to a
Witch to help him in a straight; but good Sarah wanting a child, although
having a promise, will give her maid to her Husband.

Reas. 1. Want of judgment, when passion has darkened it, takes it for a case
of necessity, And why?
as Peter here, which we say has no Law, but falsity; it is not necessity to
break the commandment, but necessity not to break it; no necessity for David
to kill Vriah so to hide his Adultery.

2. Weakness of faith which makes hasty and weary of waiting on Gods power and
providence, his promise and truth set aside; and if he delay our help a little
we easily think he denies it.

Use Let the Godly in their straits seek their enlargement from God alone, In
straights seek to God for enlargement.
and not to increase their own bonds as Peter.

Let them in their streights labor to follow God as Abraham, God will provide,
labor to keep peace, Genesis 22.
liberty and comfort of Conscience, which only can make them look up to God,
and expect a good issue.

Let Satan prevail with others to help themselves to wealth by lies, oaths,
deceit, to recovery of health, and things lost by the Witch; to wind themselves
out of punishments by hiding themselves in lies and tricks, and to avoid an
inconvenience, run into a mischief; but let them beware in their hunger to
make stones bread; let them not leap out of the pan into the fire but serving
a good Lord, let them expect his goodness in good means, which had Peter
done, he had been kept from great offenses.

Note 2. How one sin brings in another, One sinbrings in another.
and how the stay in one sin, as to David and Joseph's Brethren, brings an
increase of sins; denying brings in swearing, swearing brings in forswearing;
Peter should not have sworn, much less forsworn; for it was enough and too
much to deny the second time.

1. Here was no necessity for an oath, Conditions of an oath.
neither being lawfully called, nor in a thing which (had it been true) might
not have been otherwise proved by reason, testimony, or other proofs or
Arguments; now an oath is ordained of God for confirmation of a weighty and
necessary truth when all other proofs fail.

2. Here is an oath made, neither for Gods glory, which tended to the denial
and dishonor of God, where a right oath is a glorious use of Gods name; nor
the necessity and good of men, except it be good to be deceived in so great
matter as acknowledgement or mistaking Gods own Person.

3. The right end of an oath is a defense and shield of truth to confirm^ and
back it, and not to be a Sanctuary of lies, or to deceive the Person to whom
we swear.

4. But this Oath besides is a perjury in the highest degree; it neither agrees
with the truth in the matter, nor yet in the mind; and how fearful is this
sin?

1. How dares Peter produce God himself as a witness to confirm a known
lie? how dares he draw God into his sin, so far as he can? knows he not that
he is the God omniscient and knows the heart, that he is omnipotent and just,
able and willing to revenge all unjust oaths? if he know not, why swears he
now by him? if he do know, why will he call a Maintainer of truth and revenger
of falsehood against his own soul? knows not Peter that the Lord, who is the
Avenger of all guile, 1 These. 4. 6. must especially avenge this guile and
deceit of the highest kind, masked under a religious and solemn oath? if no
fraud shall escape, can this?

Use 1. Beware of all swearing, Brethren swear not at all, Jam. 5. 12.
let your yea be yea, all else is evil, if in ordinary communication, Eccles.
9. 2. a righteous man fears an oath; God will not hold him guiltless, that is
a Swearer, the third Commandment, a whole book of curses in Folio to fly
into the house of the Swearer and the Thief; Zach. 5. 4.
consider thou that fillest a whole Volumne with thy Oaths, that God will fill
a great Volumne with plagues against thee, Zach. 5. 3. as oaths are little, so
the plagues are great.

Beware of swearing company; Peter here does as they do; perhaps they will
suspect him the less, to be a Disciple to so strict a Master; easy it is for
an Israelite among a company of barbarous Swearers to forget the language of
Cana^n.

Beware especially of false swearing, Especial to swear falsely.
which notes a fearful contempt of Gods justice and power, a sin that the
Heathens trembled at, a sin that we never read the Devils committed; for
though he impudently resisted the truth, and is a Liar, and father of lies, and
draws his instruments to preminiries daily, yet we read not that ever he durst
back his lies with oaths.

A vain Oath is too much for a Christian, much more a false oath; a Christian
should invocate the name of God, as his strongest help, not impricate it as a
Revenger.

But this kind of Invocation is the greatest enemy and bar to true
Invocation; how dares that man presume in his want or distress to call on that
name for help, which he has so often profaned by swearing or forswearing?

In a word, if thou would avoid forswearing, or void swearing it self; an
ordinary swearing is an ordinary forswearer.

Means. Avoid passion and stirring of affections, which made Peter here
forswear, and David to swear against the life of Nabal and his Family, and
makes many forget themselves, never so little stirred, swearing and
blaspheming, as if they never had been where Reason and Religion was, but
bewray themselves as the most rude and barbarous Heathens, or as the cursed
Dog, scorn and bark and rage against God, if any man cast a stone against
him, or cross him never so little.

Verse 70. And anon after, they that stood by, said again to Peter, surely
thou art one of them, for thou art of Galilee, and thy speech is like. HERE is
the third assault and temptation of Peter set down:

First, by the Time, Anon after. Secondly, the moving Cause, They that stood
by. Thirdly, the Asseveration, Surely thou art one of them. Fourthly, the
Probation; partly by The Country, Thou art of Galilee. The Language; Thy
speech is like.

Quest. Has not Peter expressed weakness enough yet, but he must rise to
further sins, and go on like one given up to reprobate sense?

Answ. Christ had foretold Peter he must deny him thrice, and hereby most
justly punished his sin of presumption, who three several times contradicted
his Lord, saying;

1. I will lay down my life for thee.

2. I will dye with thee before I deny thee.

3. If all men, yet not I. Now Peter shall better discern his threefold
presumption by his threefold denial, and be as soundly humbled as he was
vainly puffed up; and he that had no such cause to be proud, shall have cause
enough to be humbled.

Quest. Why does the Evangelist and all the rest of his fellow-Disciples set
down this most third and fearful fall of their fellow Disciple, Why Peter's
great sin is thus blazed forth.
that was to be so great a pillar in the Church of God? Why do they thus shame
him to all posterity?

Answ. 1. These holy men guided by the holy Ghost in penning the Scripture,
looked neither at their own nor other men's glory, but the glory of God; many
of the Penmen of Scripture set down their own infirmities and falls, as
David, Matthew, John his curiosity, Paul in most vehement wise against
himself; and some think that Peter himself did dictate this Gospel, and
Mark writ it from him. Had they bin guided by a humane spirit, they would have
favored themselves and one another.

2. They more respect the glory of the grace of Christ in raising him out of
such a fall, then the disgrace of Peter in so falling.

3. More eye the consolation of the weak then his reputation; teaching us, in
case of Gods glory, neither to spare the reputation of others, or our own; but
let God be true and all men liars; let God arise, and all flesh fall down
before his footstool.

First for the time, Anon after.] Luke. 22. 59. determines the time, and tells
us, that between the first and last temptation was the space of an hour, a
very small time to heap up so many foul sins as in Peter's were.

Note. How much evil will break out of a good heart in a short space, In
little time much evil may break out of a good heart.
in one hour, if Gods grace uphold it not?

Reas. 1. The godly are by nature the children of wrath as well as any; and
after grace have the seeds and spawn of al sin in them; and that there is any
difference in them from others, and they break not out into outrageous Sins,
is only by grace; as Paul, by the grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

2. Do we not see how notwithstanding grace received, we may discern the
naughtiness of our nature in a pronenesse to all evil, to which we are as
headlong and naturally carried as a spark to fly upward? the best find in
themselves a law of evil, a law in their members, rebelling against the Law of
their mind, Romans 7. A weight of sin which presses down, and hangs fast on,
Heb. 12. 1. A rebellious flesh which lusts and fights against the spirit, Gal.
5. 17. do we see notwithstanding true grace received, notwithstanding our
watch and best endeavor, we are carried captive to sin, and forced to do
things we hate; how lamentable Slaves and Captives should we be? how forlorn
and forward unto all unrighteousness; were it not for the Spirit of grace
restraining and renewing?

Use. Take notice of the evil lying in the best of our hearts who knows the
gulf of evil there? Lessons in this respect.
we are like Hazaell, we will not believe we can be such dead dogs to do thus
or thus, 2. King. 8. 12. would David have believed the day before, or that
forenoon, that his prayers, praises, Psalms, all should be turned to
wantonness, foul Adulteryes, outrageous Murders, other sins so quickly
afterward?

2. Acknowledge it is not of our selves that we stand or fall not so soulely as
others, our hearts being as slippery and ready to play false play, but by grace
we stand, Romans 11. 14. Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, Romans 6. 14.
sin shall not reign, because ye are under grace.

3. Pray, not to be led into temptation as Christ counseled Peter and the
rest; and with David, Lord forsake me not overlong; arm thy self with Gods
armor of pro^fe, Mat. 26. 41.
beware of vain confidence, promise nothing of thy self, Psalm. 119. ^.
as Peter did, depend on Gods strength; a staff stands no longer upright, then
the hand holds it.

4. Learn to beat down pride of heart; many think themselves in good case,
no Thieves, Adulterers, Murderers, but strangers at home, look not into their
sink within, which may make them so and worse then so in as short a time as
Peter.

Secondly, the moving causes of this denial, They that stoood by said to
Peter.

SAint Luke 22. 29. says that a certain other affirmed, verily this man was
with him, for he is also a Galilean; and Saint John 18. 26. describes him to be
the high Priests Servant, Cousin to him whose ear Peter smote off; our
Evangelist speaks in the plural number, and so Mat. 26. 73. they that stood
by.

Answ. Both are true, many now set upon him, and many speak to him.

But one especially followed the temptation, who was Malchus his Cousin, and to
him they all consented and agreed, and in Scripture what one among a Rout of
wicked men speaks, all are said to speak; for they are commonly all of one
mind, and have all one voice; as crucify him, crucify him.

Note 1. Peter was set upon before by one, As security increases temptation
increases.
now by many at once; for sin and security increases, temptation increases
and grows more dangerous; for Satan draws evil men from evil to worse,
and even good men to the highest evil he can, both for Gods highest dishonor,
disgrace of goodness, shame of the Gospel, and sorrow of their own hearts.

Note 2. In that this multitude of men take the Maids part against Peter; All
take part against a godly man.
if one wicked man have a quarrel against a Disciple of Christ, all wicked
men, further then outward respects restrain them, combine with him against
such an one; they will speak all one thing.

Reas. 1. They are all of one heart and mind, And why?
and nothing differ against the fear of God.

2. All led by the same Spirit that rules in the world.

3. All cunning to unite their strength against God and his children, yea let
them be never such enemies among themselves, all of them can be friended and
agree against Christ and his Disciples, Luke 23. 10.

4. All of them Lovers of darkness, and bent to set forward every sin or work
of darkness, and contrary Haters of the light.

5. Experience shows us how Birds of a feather do flock together in wicked
combination, as Prove. 1. 12. 14. and what is done to one, is taken as done to
all.

Use 1. Not to think it strange if it be with us as with Peter; Wonder not such
partaking.
a lewd lying fellow cannot de^ise a quarrel against a godly man, professor or
preacher, but h^ shall be abetted in his courses of malice countenanced,
pleaded for, preached for perhaps; why so? not for the goodness of the cause
or Person, but because his Opposite has some goodness, some light, which the
Owle-light of carnal men cannot abide if he have been with Christ, it is cause
enough to combine against him.

Use 2. Let godly men learn hence to unite themselves, Godly should unite for
good Luke 16. 8.
and join in good things, bestirre themselves, to set forward good motions and
actions, least the wicked prove wiser in their generations then the Children of
light.

Alas, how comes it, that in good motions so many doubts and inconveniences are
cast so many Lions in the way, till opportunity be cut off amonst godly men,
when as not any wicked motion but grows an end, and a number of hands carries
it lightly away?

May we not be as bold for God and good causes as they against them? should not
the fire of Gods spirit, I mean the coals of zeal from the Altar be as hot
and burning within us, as the sparks of Hell in them?

Is not our cause as good? have we not the better end of the staff? serve we
not as good a Master? expect we not better wages? therefore let us provoke one
another to love and good works; Heb. 10. 24.
and the rather, because the time is short.

Use 3. Godly men learn, Be of one mind in good things.
and should labor to be of one mind in good things, a Pet. 3. 8. to consent
in the truth; to be of one judgment, will and affection in and for the truth:
and 1 Cor. 1. 10. that all speak one thing; that there be no dissension, but
knit togeher in one mind and in one judgment; with one mind and one mouth
glorify God, Romans 15. 6. And rather,

Mot. 1. Because Satan seeks to combine evil men in evil; seeks to break
off unity, and make division in good things; well knowing what a glory and
grace it is to Religion to consent in one. He brings in division between Jews
and Samaritans, between Papists and Protestants, all Christians; between
Puritans and Formalists, all Protestants; this opens the mouths of
Adversaries, and weakens the forces against the common Adversary.

2. Consider what a seemly thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in
unity; we profess and believe communion of Saints, and shall we not knit in
this Communion? take example by the first Christians, who were all of one heart
and mind^, Acts 2.

3. God is a God of peace, the most simple unity in himself, a lover of unity
in verity: Mat. 18. 20.
1 Cor. 14. 33. the Author of peace, and not of confusion; binding his presence
to two or three, consenting in any thing in his name.

Besides, Christ is one and not divided, his Coat without seame, and his
members aptly joyntd both to the head and within themselves.

4. By this thou expressest the humility and charity commended to Christians,
laying aside self love and vainglory, Romans 15. 1. 2.
when thou followest the truth in love, not seeking to please thy self, but
thy Brother for edification.

Thou art also one of them, for thou art of Galilee, and thy speech is like. OF
the Asseveration before; of it and the Probation jointly; Peter is now hard
beset, not only by many at once, but by apparent circumstances and signs.

1. His Country.

2. His Speech.

3. Malchus his Kinsman tells him of the Garden, where he had newly committed a
riot, and struk off his Kinsmans ear.

^. He is an eyewitness, and appeals to Peter; Did not I see thee with him
in (...) 6. ^den? Peter could not now but know his falsehood was known, and yet
(...) himself in that which all see but himself, and after the manner of
impu^^nt Malefactors, thinks to outface all still.

Note 1. It seems the Galileans speak no other tongue then the Jews, but in
another Dialect, or pronounced otherwise, by which pronunciation they gathered
him to be a Galilean. As in our Nation, the same speech is in the Southern and
Northern Countries, but the pronunciation and dialect differ, that they shall
easily know a Northern man by his speech, if he continue there from the
Southern; such difference it seemed was between them of Galilee from them
dwelling about Jerusalem.

This was indeed but a poor Reason, and no strength in it; for Peter might
well have excepted against it, and have quitted him of it far better and
handsomer then he did; for will this prove him a Disciple, because he was a
Galilean, or because he spoke as a Galilean? for, were there not many of
Galilee, and which spoke as they which were no Disciples? must every one of
Galilee be a Disciple presently? has Christ on the sudden a whole Country of
Disciples.

Note 2. What poor Reasons and weak Arguments go current against Christ and
his Disciples? Poor reasons hold cu^rant against godly men.
Mat. 11. 19. Christ eats with Publicans and sinners; he is invited to men's
houses, therefore he is a good Fellow, a Glutton, a drinker of Wine.

John Baptist came in austere and abstinent manner, therefore he has a Devil
in consequent, but enough to refuse their person, and their doctrine.

1 Samuel 22. 9. Abimelech refreshed David, therefore a Traitor; the same at this
day; let a Preacher come as John Baptist, be strict in his Doctrine, in his
life, be rough to remove high holds of sin; oh he is so precise, so singular,
so tart and rough, he preaches only damnation, he preaches the law,
therefore no good Preacher, comes near the sins of Persons, a factious
Preacher or Puritan; let him come mild, gentle, converse familiarly and freely
with men; oh he is a flatterer, a Companion, Time-server; thus shall a godly
Preacher every way be turned off.

Reas. 1. Let a good man by doctrine or life disgrace sin justly, And why?
sinners will be ready to disgrace them unjustly; whatsoever comes to hand will
serve their turn as a stone to fling at goodness, a slander, a suspicion, nay
a necessary duty; thou wast with Christ; an Hearer of Sermons, therefore an
hypocrite.

2. A desire in the wicked any way to blemish such as take more notice, or any
way discover their foul spots, and therefore will assault their names if not
for great things, for smaller; if not for evil, for good; if not for
substance, for shadows and trifles, they must keep themselves doing; Paul
mad, Disciples Devils.

3. They hope to discover their own faults by clamor against them that find
fault with them as most faulty; the most shameful Offenders are the most
shameless Accusers, none worse then they.

Use 1. Not to be too credulous when we hear religious Persons and men fearing
God accused, Receive not accusations of such easily.
and their faults aggravated; for though good men are not Saints exempted from
failing or error, yet commonly they are not faulty in the matter, or in that
measure that evil men and scorners most accuse them in.

2. Evil men will make mole-Hils swell to such Mountains against godly men;
how would they insult if they can catch just advantage? let godly men be so
much the more watchful and careful; if they cannot stop their malice, yet to
stop their mouths, and starve their malice, leaving it no just matter to feed
upon; offenses must come, Mat. 18. 7.
but woe he to him by whom they justly come.

3. Comfort our selves, if our conscience tells us we suffer causelessly, or for
innocence, if they beat us with the same staff they did Christ, Luke 23. 24. I
find no fault in him, let us chastise him, and send him away.

Note 2. This was indeed Peter's honor which they object as a crime, Our speech
should manifest us Christians.
his speech bewrayes him, a Christian, a Disciple.

Let our speech manifest our selves Christians, both for the matter, as (...)
all did not, and for the manner as his they say did.

Reas. 1. A note of a true Israelite to speak the language of Canaan, And why?
Pro^. 16. 23. A wise man will guide his speeches wisely, a Christian man
Christianly.

2. No better way to express love to God and man then by speaking for God, and
for men's edification.

3. Imitate Christ, testify thou have been with him; never man spoke so, nor
can speak so, but we must imitate him, and make him our president, his
speeches were either for God to set up the glory of his Father, or to God, in
fervent prayers and praises for himself and others.

Or else to man Either for the conversion or confirmation of the Elect. Or for
the just admonition or conviction of the wicked.


His words were never idle or empty, but filling and feeding many.

Use. Happy is that man whose words testify him a Disciple of Christ; would to
God a Jew could thus accuse us Christians.

Means 1. Get a good fountain of a good heart, Means so to frame our language.
that is a good treasury, Mat. 12. 35. Psalm. 37. 30. Prove. 10. Psalm. 45. 1.

2. Propound a good end, that thy lips may feed many, and thy speeches minister
grace, may tend to Gods glory, edification of many, and discharge of thy own
duty; so David professes, Psalm. 39. 1. I will take heed to my ways that I
offend not.

3. Prayer. Lips are sealed till the Lord open the mouth, Psalm. 51. 15. The
Lord must disposs^sse this dumb devil that makes us tongu^tyed when we (...)
speak, and Psalm. 141. 3. Set a watch O Lord, and keep the door, etc.

But how dare thou profess thou have been with Christ, or art a Disciple,
or Christian, in whose mouth dwell oaths, lies, curses, rottenness, ribaldry,
slandering, whispering, etc. Consider,

1. Thou that take no account of thy words, Mat. 12. 36.
the Lord has a time to call every of thy idle words to account, and thee for
them, much more for hurtful and deceitful, wicked and poysonfull.

2. It is froth and filthiness of a bad heart, skum of a boiling heart.

3. So it is a work of darkness as well to speak wickedly, as to do
wickedly; a good man, a child of light, must make conscience of filthy words
as well as filthy actions.

Verse. 71. And he began to curse and swear, saying, I know not this man of
whom ye speak. PETER was now in great danger, he hears of the Garden, and is
in danger to be revenged for his tumult, his quarrel, and wronging Malchus, he
is pressed by evident signs that he was with Christ, and now if he bestir him
not, he shall not avoid present danger; or if he do, he shall be branded for a
common Liar and perjured Person for ever, and therefore out of great fear he
more stoutly denies his Master then before, and because neither his simple
denial will serve him as in the first, nor his binding it with Oaths, and
swearing as in the second; as if he had not done enough, he curses and
imprecateth himself, wishing not only mischief to himself, but calling on
God a just Judge to avenge the falsehood, and inflict the deserved punishment on
him if he knew of whom he spoke; Oh fearful sin!

1. To deny his Lord and dear Master.

2. After so many warnings on Christ's part.

3. After so many confessions and professions of his own.

4. After so often, three several times, so much time of deliberation coming
between; one might seem infirmity, but thrice argues resolution.

5. With lying and perjury.

6. With cursing and imprecation.

Thus Peter is in the forwardest of them that make falsehood their refuge and
trust in lies.

Note. How a man having begun to fall falls apace, and has no stay of himself
till the Lord stay him; One fall, and fall apace.
Peter here falls from lying to false swearing, from swearing to cursing; as
Hamans wife to Haman, if thou begin to fall, thou shall surely fall, so fall
follows upon fall where the Lord with-drawes his hand, or stands aloof.

2. Wicked men shall fall from evil to worse, till they fall into Hell; Saul
from disobedience to Sorcery, from Sorcery to selfe-murther; Pharaoh shall fall
ten times and not be warned till he fall into the bottom of Hell; and even the
Child of God may fall fearfully, and should finally were he not stopped and
staid, and supported, as in our example.

Reas. 1. Satan would have every man sins out of measure sinful; and every
yiedling to temptation invites his violence, And why?
and nothing will serve evil men but riot and excess of sin.

2. One sin commonly goes not alone, but one pulls on another; a Garden
undrest has not one weed, but of all sorts of weeds; as graces go in a chain,
faith brings love, love obedience; so vices go in a link, and sins are
concatenated; David's security brings lust, lust whoredom, Adultery murder.

Solomon first betakes him to Idolatrous Wives, then to Idolatrous worship; sin
as we (...) a good fellow, one hangs to another as bars, one sin cannot well be
defended without another, or covered.

3. One faculty corrupted corrupts another; imagination being corrupted by
cogitation of sin, that corrupts the judgment, the judgment corrupts the
affection, so as there is delectation in sin; affections corrupts the will,
bringing it to consent, the will corrupts the parts by repeating custom and
habit; thus sin in the Soul as a gangreene in the body eats up the next parts,
till it speedily mortify the whole.

4. The Lord in justice often punishes sin with sin, as Pharaohs sin with
obstinacy and hardness, Exodus 9. 12. The Gentiles, by giving them up to their
hearts lusts, Romans 1. 23.

Use. To stay beginnings of sin; Wisdom to stay beginnings of sin.
sin as an Infant at first may easily be overcome as being weakest; stop the
fountain, close the windows, else thou shall find it easier to get into the
midst of sin, then find the way back again; Israel went at his own pleasure
into Egypt, but could not come back again into Canaan when they would; A man
may leap quickly and nothing lets him till he come into the bottom of a pit,
but he shall get out with more leisure and difficulty.

Means. 1. Therefore our Savior says; Mat. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, least you enter into temptation; if once ye enter, ye will not
come out without a foil, much less move to sin and offer temptation.

2. Buckle the fear of God unto thee, Psalm. 111. 10.
which is the beginning of wisdom; else thou go headlong in sin;
experience we have of men that at first are ashamed somewhat of what they do,
and get some Cloaks, some covers to hide themselves under, but by a little
continuance grow to some boldness, and cast away fear; very shortly grow to
impudency and hardened faces in their sins, care not, nor fea^e what men see or
say of them, and presently from not fearing man, come not to fear God at all;
but as Nimrod was a mighty Hunter before the Lord; so these mighty Drunkards
before the Lord, mighty Adulterers, Usurers, Swearers, Cursers, Raylers before
the Lord, no fear of God restrains them; take heed therefore and fear.

If a Pillar, a Rock, one chosen by Christ could fall so headlong, let us not
presume on our strength.

Psalm. 4. 4. stand in awe and sin not, Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah being warned
of God of the things which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence,
prepared the Arc to the saving of his household, through the which Arc he
condemned the World.

3. Consider thy danger to fall, Particular means avayling thereto.
and so far, so suddenly under prop thy self with good means afforded by God
to up hold thee, as 1. The preaching of the word; many say, what need so much
preaching? what need Preachers be so instant, so earnest in threatening us; God
is merciful for all that; but God will make good their words against the soul
of the wilful Sinner; see thou no need of such earnest preaching, thy blind
eyes see not the danger before thee, but Gods Seers do; that notwithstanding
their pains and labor thy sin is a ripening, and thou art running headlong,
or rather flying swiftly to thine own damnation; if the Trumpet will not awake
thee, I fear thou art de^^.

2. Make use of the rods and crosses of God brought on thee to stay thee from
the excesses of sin; where the Lord cannot prevail with the rod of his mouth
he comes with the rod of his hand, and lasheth him sometimes with the loss of
Goods or Friends, Wife, Children, etc. sometime with shame and loss of good
name and respect; suffering them to fall into some notorious and shameful
sin; sometime with smart and pain in Body, with lingering diseases, etc. and
all to help them out of sin; if these be slightly passed by, they are
forerunners of mischief; as thou make haste in sin to come to the height, so
the curse hasteneth which will oppress thee eternally; 1 Samuel 2. 25.
as Elyes Sons regarded not their Fathers admonishions because God would
destroy them.

3. Let the mercyes and favors of God be so many Sermons of ^^^entance, Romans
2. 4. Know thou not that the bountifulness of God should lead thee to
^^^entance? and a note it is of a wicked man, not to be drawn to God by cords
of love. Isa. 26. 10. Let mercy be showed to the Wicked, he will not repent, in
the land of uprightness he will do wickedly.

Have thou any life in thy Soul, and feel not what great mercyes God
offers unto thy soul, body, thy self and thine?

Have thou any sense and understanding in Scripture, and see not how the Lord
still makes sin more grievous by mercyes received and despised? Isa. 1. 2. 2 Samuel 12. 7. in David himself: Genesis 49. 2. Rubens excellency gone, because
being excellent he gat up into his Fathers bed; a fearful thing to have means
of repentance without the grace of repentance.

Register up the mercyes of God to thee, as the ancient Believers did, set up
an Altar in thine heart to offer Sacrifices of praise and thanks, take thy
self to task, ask the question; oh what have I done for all the benefits,
etc. shall I do so still?

Let thy thankful obedience be as a monument set up, that others may see that
Gods mercyes have deeply affected thee.

Doctr. Note 2. That Peter was not so assaulted by both the former temptations
as by this, Last temptation commonly the worst.
nor is in so great danger.

The last temptation is commonly the worst and strongest, and most dangerous,
and the most dangerous reserved till the last place; Satan bids not Peter curse
himself if ever he knew the Lord, for this he would have detested; but first
follow aloof, and then go into the high Priests Hall, then sit among Gods
enemies, then do as they did, and having once denied his Lord, stands to it
stoutly.

So Judas, he does not as first bid him betray his Lord; for, as wicked as he
was he could not be tam repent improbus; but first to covetousness, and
blinded his eyes with the offer of thirty pieces, and then struck up the matter
by degrees, and yet after the betraying of his Lord, he must go and hang
himself.

He does not usually tempt the Adulterer to cast himself upon the bed of his
Harlot; but first David must look upon Bathsheba, and that is a small thing,
then grow to liking, then to familiarity, and then to commit the heinous fact
of Adultery.

He does not usually tempt the cruel man to murder his Neighbor or Brother
at first, which is fearful and desparate, but first to dislike and fall out
with him, then to hate him, then to kill him actually.

Reas. 1. This is Satan's method in his temptations, And why?
to begin with small things wherein so much blackness appears not, which are
easily swallowed, wherein men are more secure, as not thinking them to need any
great resistance; but there he means not to stay; experience of every day
shows, that being to deal with melancholy dispositions, he makes them
discontent and impatient in some cross or loss, which is a great sin, but
lies close and hides it self, as in a just sorrow; then brings them to
discontent themselves in Gods blessings, they joy not in Husband, Wife,
Children, wealth, nor any thing; then to fall out with himself, no joy of
themselves; and then the last temptation is worst, to kill thy self or thy
Children, which was too black at first, and needed a time to prepare them.

2. Satan's subtilty, who knows well by less temptations to make way to
greater, as a cunning Thief by a little hole can wrinch up and open a great
Gate; so this subtle Serpent can by a little hole wind himself into the
heart, and cast open the doors to all Robbers and Spoylers.

Use 1. Where Satan begins his temptations, Resist first temptations.
begin our resistance; we are wise for our Bodies, to prevent diseases in the
first grudgings, so for our Souls, kill the hellish Serpent in the shell, Ephesians.
4. 29. Give no place to the Devil. Wise Citizens keep every Enemy without the
Walls.

Solomon first betakes him to Idolatrous Wives, then to Idolatrous worship; sin
as we (...) a good fellow, one hangs to another as bars, one sin cannot well be
defended without another, or covered.

3. One faculty corrupted corrupts another; imagination being corrupted by
cogitation of sin, that corrupts the judgment, the judgment corrupts the
affection, so as there is delectation in sin; affections corrupts the will,
bringing it to consent, the will corrupts the parts by repeating custom and
habit; thus sin in the Soul as a gangreene in the body eats up the next parts,
till it speedily mortify the whole.

4. The Lord in justice often punishes sin with sin, as Pharaohs sin with
obstinacy and hardness, Exodus 9. 12. The Gentiles, by giving them up to their
hearts lusts, Romans 1. 23.

Use. To stay beginnings of sin; Wisdom to stay beginnings of sin.
sin as an Infant at first may easily be overcome as being weakest; stop the
fountain, close the windows, else thou shall find it easier to get into the
midst of sin, then find the way back again; Israel went at his own pleasure
into Egypt, but could not come back again into Canaan when they would; A man
may leap quickly and nothing lets him till he come into the bottom of a pit,
but he shall get out with more leisure and difficulty.

Means 1. Therefore our Savior says; Mat. 26. 41.
Watch and pray, least you enter into temptation; if once ye enter, ye will not
come out without a foil, much less move to sin and offer temptation.

2. Buckle the fear of God unto thee, Psalm. 111. 10.
which is the beginning of wisdom; else thou go headlong in sin;
experience we have of men that at first are ashamed somewhat of what they do,
and get some Cloaks, some covers to hide themselves under, but by a little
continuance grow to some boldness, and cast away fear; very shortly grow to
impudency and hardened faces in their sins, care not, nor fear what men see or
say of them, and presently from not fearing man, come not to fear God at all;
but as Nimrod was a mighty Hunter before the Lord; so these mighty Drunkards
before the Lord, mighty Adulterers, Usurers, Swearers, Cursers, Raylers before
the Lord, no fear of God restrains them; take heed therefore and fear.

If a Pillar, a Rock, one chosen by Christ could fall so headlong, let us not
presume on our strength.

Psalm. 4. 4. stand in awe and sin not, Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah being warned
of God of the things which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence,
prepared the Arc to the saving of his household, through the which Arc he
condemned the World.

3. Consider thy danger to fall, Particular means avayling thereto.
and so far, so suddenly under prop thy self with good means afforded by God
to up hold thee, as 1. The preaching of the word; many say, what need so much
preaching? what need Preachers be so instant, so earnest in threatening us; God
is merciful for all that; but God will make good their words against the soul
of the wilful Sinner; see thou no need of such earnest preaching, thy blind
eyes see not the danger before thee, but Gods Seers do; that notwithstanding
their pains and labor thy sin is a ripening, and thou art running headlong,
or rather flying swiftly to thine own damnation; if the Trumpet will not awake
thee, I fear thou art dead.

2. Make use of the rods and crosses of God brought on thee to stay thee from
the excesses of sin; where the Lord cannot prevail with the rod of his mouth
he comes with the rod of his hand, and lasheth him sometimes with the loss of
Goods or Friends, Wife, Children, etc. sometime with shame and loose of good
name and respect; suffering them to fall into some notorious and shameful
sin; sometime with smart and pain in Body, with lingering diseases, etc. and
all to help them out of sin; if these be slightly passed by, they are
forerunners of mischief; as thou make haste in sin to come to the height, so
the curse hasteneth which will oppress thee eternally; 1 Samuel 2. 25.
as Elyes Sons regarded not their Fathers admonishions because God would
destroy them.

3. Let the mercyes and favors of God be so many Sermons of repentance, Romans
2. 4. Know thou not that the bountifulness of God should lead thee to
^^^entance? and a note it is of a wicked man, not to be drawn to God by cords
of love. Isa. 26. 10. Let mercy be showed to the Wicked, he will not repent, in
the land of uprightness he will do wickedly.

Have thou any life in thy Soul, and feel not what great mercyes God
offers unto thy soul, body, thy self and thine?

Have thou any sense and understanding in Scripture, and see not how the Lord
still makes sin more grievous by mercyes received and despised? Isa. 1. 2. 2 Samuel 12. 7. in David himself: Genesis 49. 2. Rubens excellency gone, because
being excellent he gat up into his Fathers bed; a fearful thing to have means
of repentance without the grace of repentance.

Register up the mercyes of God to thee, as the ancient Believers did, set up
an Altar in thine heart to offer Sacrifices of praise and thanks, take thy
self to task, ask the question; oh what have I done for all the benefits,
etc. shall I do so still?

Let thy thankful obedience be as a monument set up, that others may see that
Gods mercyes have deeply affected thee.

Doctr. Note 2. That Peter was not so assaulted by both the former temptations
as by this, Last temptation commonly the worst.
nor is in so great danger.

The last temptation is commonly the worst and strongest, and most dangerous,
and the most dangerous reserved till the last place; Satan bids not Peter curse
himself if ever he knew the Lord, for this he would have detested; but first
follow aloof, and then go into the high Priests Hall, then sit among Gods
enemies, then do as they did, and having once denied his Lord, stands to it
stoutly.

So Judas, he does not at first bid him betray his Lord; for, as wicked as he
was he could not be ^am repent improbus; but first to covetousness, and
blinded his eyes with the offer of thirty pieces, and then struck up the matter
by degrees, and yet after the betraying of his Lord, he must go and hang
himself.

He does not usually tempt the Adulterer to cast himself upon the bed of his
Harlot; but first David must look upon Bathsheba, and that is a small thing,
then grow to liking, then to familiarity, and then to commit the heinous fact
of Adultery.

He does not usually tempt the cruel man to murder his Neighbor or Brother
at first, which is fearful and desparate, but first to dislike and fall out
with him, then to hate him, then to kill him actually.

Reas. 1. This is Satan's method in his temptations, And why?
to begin with small things wherein so much blackness appears not, which are
easily swallowed, wherein men are more secure, as not thinking them to need any
great resistance; but there he means not to stay; experience of every day
shows, that being to deal with melancholy dispositions, he makes them
discontent and impatient in some cross or loss, which is a great sin, but
lies close and hides it self, as in a just sorrow; then brings them to
discontent themselves in Gods blessings, they joy not in Husband, Wife,
Children, wealth, nor any thing; then to fall out with himself, no joy of
themselves; and then the last temptation is worst, to kill thy self or thy
Children, which was too black at first, and needed a time to prepare them.

2. Satan's subtilty, who knows well by less temptations to make way to
greater, as a cunning Thief by a little hole can wrinch up and open a great
Gate; so this subtle Serpent can by a little hole wind himself into the
heart, and cast open the doors to all Robbers and Spoylers.

Use 1. Where Satan begins his temptations, Resist first temptations.
begin our resistance; we are wise for our Bodies, to prevent diseases in the
first grudgings, so for our Souls, kill the hellish Serpent in the shell, Ephesians.
4. 29. Give no place to the Devil. Wise Citizens keep every Enemy without the
Walls.

2. The lesser the sin to which thou art tempted, Resist small temptations.
the more suspect the Enemy that he (...) a further drift hid from thee;
suppose that be but a little one, it has certainly hold of a greater, though a
little poison be deadly; he tempts thee to go into such a company, thou
leavest thy calling, thou spendest thy time, abettest idle persons in idle
courses, there thou pourest out vain words, there thou scornest, jestest,
quarrellest, there thou swearest, cursest, perhaps as Peter; Satan bid thee not
at first curse and swear; but this was his intent, thus he has gained and
made thee a greater looser then thou lookedst for.

Seldom tempts he men to hate all religion at first, but first scorn these
Puritans, hate such and such a Pre^cher, rail on him, belie him, persecute
him, hear him not, he never preaches good to thee; and thus by degrees leads
him to cast up all religion, and to turn plain Atheist.

3. Fear not to be too precise, Fear not to be too precise.
nor scorn others as being so; what, say some, they be so precise, they may
not swear a small Oath, nor we may not be merry, nor pass some time in sports
and recreations, we may never be angry or speak one hasty word, we must be
Saints, flesh and blood must be without infirmities.

1. But first Satan desires but to get thee to pretend this, against thine own
safety.

2. It is more then thou art aware off, when Satan has prevailed, that then
thou should account thy watch against small Sins scruple and preciseness.

3. If Satan should here desist, thou might with more reason so plead; but
by these lesser evils he knows how to make way for greater, and you shall not
hear one of a Thousand thus pleading for small sins, but some reigning sin or
sins have him under, or shall have.

4. Nay, happy might we be, if we could meet every sin in the first rising of
the heart, cut off Adultery in the look, murder in the angry thought, choke
idle words within the throat, and cut off evil actions in the motions, in the
occasions; this is a preciseness that well pleases God and disappointeth
Satan in his further designs; resemble such as are taught by grace, thou can
not be hard enough for that Enemy.

Doct. Note 3. Peter having a bad cause, Bad causes are thrust on by bad means.
thrust it on by bad means, before by false swearing, now by fearful
execration and cursing of himself, and indeed bad means are never far to
seek, but are at hand to boulster up bad courses, and even good men are ready
to use bad means for their own safety and purposes; Jacob must get the
blessing by a lie or two; as Peter here will escape death by denying the Lord
of life; Lot will save his Guests by prostrating his Daughters.

Use 1. Beware of these base tricks to save our selves by; Beware of base
tricks to help thy self.
many urged, and some scarce urged, in things they would conceal, fly with
Peter to lying, to false swearing by horrible oaths, and to fearful cursing;
God confound me, as God shall judge me, God let me never live, let me never
speak, let me sink where I stand, I would I were hanged, etc. and all this
while call God a Judge against themselves.

Alas, thou know not what thou Say, or Do.


This ordinary cursing in true things or false, is an open and notorious brand
of a forlorn and wicked miscreant, who without all fear of God toss curses
against themselves and others as tennis bals out of their mouths; these tongues
are kindled with the fire of Hell, James 3. 6.

How contrary is this to the nature of Gods child, who is called to bless,
and be blessed of God for ever, is a Son of blessing; who must not curse them
that curse him, but a Priest unto God, Rev. 1. 5. whose office was to bless
the People, Numb 6. 23. Romans 12. 14. Bless and curse not. How contrary to the
nature of the blessed God, who being full of mercy and compassion, is made an
executioner of the malice of wretched men: Do thou think that God will be
at the command of every mischievous wretch to wreake their malice, as the
Devil is at the Witches command?

Object. Then my curse does him none ill?

Answ. Thou throwest the sweet name of God into a sinkehole, and have executed
thy malice, and art a Man-sl^yer, etc. You have lately heard how that same
Curse compassed, and does still, the Jews at this day; His blood be on us and
our Children.

And thy curse against thy self or others shall as a Garment cover thy self,
and as water come into thy Bowels and rot thee away, according to thy curse.
Many stories I could allege of such as whose Curses have instantly over-taken
them, some in one kind of death, some in another. If God have let thee
hitherto outstand thine own curse of thy self, it is to provoke thee to
Repentance, and bewail so high a sin against Gods sovereignty and thine own
salvation.

Use 2. See in Peter, Little credit to be given to Swearers and Cursers.
how little Swearers and Cursers are to be believed; many Oaths and Curses
make not a matter good, but far worse and less credible; for he that makes
no bones of needless Swearing or Cursing, be sure has made none of a lie, no
more then Peter; will a wise man think thou speak truth, because thou
swearest and cursest? I would be charitable, but I cannot be so blind, but thou
may Lie as well as Swear, or Curse uncalled, as here these Men believe
Peter as little as before.

Use 3. Peter sins so foulely as he could do, more to sink himself into
eternal damnation; wonder to see the child of God fall so headlong: Where is
Peter's Free Will, that so little besteads himself in so great need?

How can the Pope challenge from him freedom from error? How can they exempt
themselves from error, who at this day teach men to imitate Peter in lying,
swearing, and cursing themselves?

Object. Prove it and I will be no Papist.

Answ. Rhemists Testament in Acts 13. 12. If thou be put to an oath to accuse
Catholics, if thou have no courage to refuse, know that such an Oath binds
not at all in Conscience.

Note 4. Though Peter here swear and curse, Temptations limited to Gods People
they believe him as little as before; they believe their eyes, they saw him in
the Garden, knew him by face and by speech; Why do they let him go and draw
him to no further punishment?

Answ. 1. Time was not yet; when Peter was old, then he must be led where he
would not.

2. Christ had said that his Disciples must go their way.

Reas. 1. Every temptation and danger is limited for substance, manner,
measure, and all circumstances, beyond which the enemy cannot go. Here
Temptations come thick upon Peter, one in another neck, but shall not
utterly overthrow him; besides, these were as restless against Peter as
against his Lord, yet can they not touch an hair of his head, because his
hour was not yet come, as his Lords was.

Reas. 2. Let the Adversaries be never so violent and busy, yet Gods
providence is so wakefull, as nothing shall befall, wherein he has not a good
hand and a good end.

3. Gods mighty power restraines Satan's power and his instruments, who are as
Lions in chains. A Legion cannot hurt a Swine of Gaderens, till Christ say,
Go; and when he permits Satan to molest Job, he commands him in save his life.

Use. Comfort to the godly, who are never so committed or permitted to Satan
or danger, but that the Lord watches over their life and salvation, yea, their
very hairs, etc.

Go on therefore cheerfully in the Lords work, while thou have a day. Tell
Herod that Fox (says Christ) I must work to day and to morrow.

Verse 72. Then the second time the Cock crew.] THat the Cock crew again,
was an ordinary and natural thing; but at this time ordained for a special end.

First, to put him in mind of his promise.

2. To reprove him of his sin; for as the dumb Ass reproved the
foolishness of the Prophet, so the Cock here reproves the foolishness of
Peter.

3. To bear witness to the words of Christ, which Peter will not, till now,
believe to be true.

4. To accuse Peter to his own Conscience, he should have cried and crowed
aloud and lifted up his voice, to have awaked others out of their sin, but he
needs the voice of a Cock to help him out of his sin.

Secondly, he is admonished by this voice, that the silly Cock kept his watch,
according to the word of his Creator; but Peter has not kept his watch with
his Lord, but fearfully fallen in his station.

Doctr. Note, Voice of creatures a teaching voice.
If Peter will not hear the voice of his Lord, and be taught by his Master, he
shall hear the voice of the Cock, and be taught by him. God puts his
Creatures to a threefold use.

1. To serve man serving his Lord, the best of them not too good; the Angels
fellow servants.

2. To punish man rebelling against his Lord; for they all take their Lords
part, are his Hoasts, his Armies, as against Pharaoh.

3. To teach man many lessons, which otherwise he is loath to learn; as when
Balaam will not hear the voice of God, God opens the mouth of the Ass, and
she speaks, Numb. 22. 28. So when Peter will not hear the voice of his Lord,
his Lord opens the mouth of the Cock, and he speaks.

If the stiff necked Jews will not hear the voice of the Prophets, the very
Ox and Ass shall be called in to teach them to know their owner and feeder,
Isay 1. 3.

Quest. But have the Creatures more power to teach then God himself, or why
does the Lord thus use them?

Answ. God is the chief Teacher, Why God sets them to teaching man.
what Minister or Instruments soever he uses, he teaches Principaliter and
Authoritative; but all Creatures teach Ministerially, and all their voice is
subordinate to the voice of God; as this Cock was to Christ. And therefore God
speaks not to us by Creatures, as if they had more power and persuasion to
effect what he cannot; but hereby to shame the dullness and obstinacy of men,
whose sin has made them inferior to the very Creatures, over whom the Lord
gave them Lordship and sovereignty. Now Balaams Ass is wiser then his wilful
Master; and man who was made Lord and Ruler of the Creatures, is now become of
less understanding then they, yea, must be brought into order by them whom he
should order.

Use 1. To hear the voice of the Creatures waking us, Hear their voice, and
learn duty.
calling us, inviting us to repentance.

Their voice in General and in special; not one of them, but all in their
kind reprove Man's rebellion; they stand in their kind and station, Man does
not. The Cock crows and keeps his watches according to the law of his
Creation; so do they all further then man's sin has disordered them; when as
great a Disciple as Peter sleeps and snorts, and cannot watch one hour with
his Lord; not one of them but all of them by their example, teach us to grow
weary of our present servitude of sin, and wait for promised deliverance,
Romans 8. 21.

Shall we be more senseless then insensible Creatures? All of them call for
our obedience; our ready attendance to perform the Lords Hestes and
Commandments.

The Sun rejoices to run h^s course. If he speak to the Fire, Water, to
the Frogs, to Grasshoppers, to Winder, they obey his word.

Oh how should his Word bind the reasonable Creature, to whom it was delivered?

In Special; Mat. 10. 16.
hear the voice of the Dove, learn simplicity; of the Serpent learn wisdom;
Prove. 6. 6.
of the Emmet learn providence; of the Fowls and Lillies learn contentment
and confidence; Luke 12. 27.
of the Storke, Jer. 8. 7.
Crane and Swallow to know our season.

Use 2. But much more hear the voice of the Creator. Much more the voice of
the Creator.


Peter should first have heard the voice of his Lord, and then the Cock might
have spared his voice.

And know, if thou will not hear Gods voice accusing thee, as Peter would not,
thou shall hear the voice of one Cock or another; one Creature or other
accusing and condemning thee. If Cain will not hear the Lord accusing him, and
take up his lamentation, he shall hear the blood of his Brother; a fearful
voice of blood accuse him.

If covetous persons and Usurers will not hear the voice of Gods Word accuse
them, Jam. 5. 34.
they shall hear the voice of the Rust, Hab. 2. 11.
and their Gold and Silver, yea, the Stone in the wall and timber in the roof
shall cry against them.

If Saul will not hear the voice of the Lord, the voice of the Sheep and
lowing of the Oxen shall proclaim his rebellion. If Gods voice cannot prevail
against thy sin, the cry of thy sin shall come up in the ears of the Lord, and
prevail even against thy too late cries for mercy.

Then Peter remembered the words 1. The Time, Then. 2. The Means. 3. The
Manner, Wept.


NOW we come to Peter's Conversion; wherein is. 1. Agnitio peccati; the
knowledge of his Sin, by two means 1. Cock crew. 2. Christ looking back,
Luke 22. 62.


2. The manner of his Repentance: 1. Went out. 2. Wept bitterly. Time, Then.

Note 1. Peter now begins to waken and come to himself.

There is a time when God will awake the Elect out of sin, Elect have a time
to repent
who suffers none of his to sleep in death. Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall, he
shall not be cast off; for God puts under his hand. 2 Cor. 4. 9. We are cast
down, but we perish not; God is faithful to give with every temptation an
issue.

Hence we read of the Saints that have layne a great while, as if they had bin
quite cast off, as David, Joseph's Brethren, Solomon, Manasses; but in Gods time
remembered and called to mercy, as Lazarus lay four days in the grave, but was
at length raised; the same in this first Resurrection.

Reas. God loves with an everlasting love, and leaves not very long, not to
their loss but good.

Use 1. Far (we say) he goes that never turns; the godly never go so far;
though Peter went so far, yet repented; the Prodigal Son went into a far
Country, but at last came to himself, and so to his Father.

2. Hence take no warrant to venture; a River that seems shallow at brinke,
may ducke him that will wade along, and many adventurers are never fetched out;
think with thy self it is no small power nor mercy to bring a sinner back
out of the depth of any sin; it was a wonder that ever Jonas was brought safe
to land out of such a deep, presuming to run from God. This Doctrine is for
penitent not presumptuous sinners.

Use 3. Thou that have taken a time to sin, examine whether thou have found a
time of Repentance; for if thou belong to God, thou have or must; and let it be
a motive to hasten our Repentance, lest delaying too long, thou be forced out
of anguish of soul to say with that desparing Papist, Spira.
I have sinned with Peter, but not repented with Peter: a sign of a Reprobate,
not to find Repentance, as Esau, Judas.

4. How to understand that and such places, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we deny him, he
will deny us, except himself graciously look upon us, to give us repentance
and recover us.

Note Secondly, Repent of sin presently.
Peter has no sooner sinned, but he returns and repents. The fittest time of
Repentance is presently upon the sin, without delay. David 2 Samuel 24, 10. had
no sooner numbered the People, but his heart smote him. Luke 17. 8. Zacheus
presently made restitution, so soon as he knew his sin.

Motive 1. Consider the Exhortation, Heb. 3. 7. To day if ye will hear his
voice: have thou a lease of thy life till to morrow, that refusest to repent to
day? the day may come on thee as a snare, Luke 21.

2. Sin gets strength by continuance; thou art unfitted to morrow, grace
weaker, corruption more rooted; the nail is hard driven in; conscience more
corrupted by custom of sin; now wrath treasured, Romans 2 5. heart more
hardened through deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

3. Nature teaches in other things to take the fittest season; to sow in
Seedtime, to make Hay while Sun shines, to trade while Fair lasts, to take the
wind and tide, which stays for no man. Let grace teach thee to know thy
season, thy day of visitation; look on Christ mourning over Jerusalem, that
knows not the season of her own mourning.

4. Late Repentance is seldom true Repentance; we never read of any that
Repented at last but one, that we should not presume; and yet one, that none
should despair. August. For God giving now a call, and putting forth his
voice, if thou will not hear, God may be not only dumb, never to call thee
hereafter, but deaf, never to hear thee call, Prove. 1. 28. And it i^ just,
that thou who wilt not be at Gods command, to repent now, shall find that
Repentance shall be out of thy command hereafter.

The like of forced Repentance, of such as be sick or distressed, pretend a
Repentance, pray, promise, cry, vow, and what not? but not rising out of love,
but forced fear, their Fear is slavish and base, and so is their Repentance;
and so they grow worse in time. The Devil returns with seven worse spirits;
and running away from God again, God is gone farther then ever.

Secondly the Means of Peter's Repentance was, Means of Peter's repentanc
the knowledge of his sin, wrought by two means 1. Without him, 1. Crowing of
the Cock. 2. Looking back of Christ.
2. Within, 1. Remembering. 2. Weighing the words of Christ.



Note 1. The Cock crows the second time, 1. External. A second crow sometime
necessary.
and by this crowing Peter is wakened.

Quest. Why had this second crowing effect, and not the first? it was as loud.

Ans. 1. So now unto us, that God will call men when he pleases.

2. That he tyeth not himself to such means as he tyeth us unto.

3. That we should look beyond the means for the success and blessing of
them.

4. To note how far a degree of sin Peter was now entered into, who had
wonderfully grieved the spirit, and hardened his own heart so far, as the
former admonition was lost upon him.

We read of few of the children of God, but they have bin moved and wakened by
the first crowing of the Cock, as good David by the admonition of Nathan; so
Hezekiah, etc. But to Peter the Cock must crow again, according to Christ's
prediction.

Use 1. Comfort to painful Ministers, who are the Lords Cocks, cry out and
crow against the sins of men, labor to awaken sinners, proclaim to them their
sins and danger, but they hear not, remember as little as Peter; no good is
done.

What comfort have they, but that the Cock may crow the second time and be
heard at one time or other? the Lord may let them see their labor not lost;
God has his set times to bring things to pass. The time of Saul's conversion
was when he was most furious; and this time we wait and pray for, to men as
furiously bent against Gods word and Gods Ministers, as Saul against the Church.

Use 2. To show us where the fault is, that the word so little profits among
many; the fault was not in the Cock at first that Peter remembered not
himself, but in himself; so when little good is done, the fault is not in the
Preacher or in the word, but in the hardness of thy heart.

Was the the fault in Moses and Aaron, that Pharaoh let not the people go? was
not the fault in that Herod would not let go Herodias?

Use 3. In use of means still to depend on Gods blessing, Pray for the Spirit
to go with the word.
that he would open the ear, and accompany his word with his blessed Spirit;
for the hearing ear is from him, Job. 33. 14. God speaks once or twice, and
one sees it not, till he open the ears of men which were sealed, ver. 10.

God has spoken not once, but a thousand times amongst you; but a number of
tuffe corruptions in the heart are like ear-wax which stops that the voice
cannot enter in.

This is the cause that many are like the Fish in the Sea who lives in salt
Water* but without all taste of Saltness.

A settled ministry is like the salt of the earth under which many live without
any seasoning, because they neglect the higher teaching, even the spirit of
truth that must lead them into all truth, John. 16.

2. External means to bring Peter to acknowledgement of his sin; Christ's
looking back upon him, non oculo exteriore, sed oculo clementiae.

By this looking back of Christ we must not conceive a bar turning of his face
or eye upon Peter, nor an extraordinary look or countenance; for Christ also
set his eyes upon Judas when he came to apprehend him, Christ's look what it
imports.
and on Pilate sitting ready to sentence him, and on the Jews stoning him, who
were never the better by Christ's looking upon them; but with his look he
adjoined a gracious and secret efficacy of his blessed spirit.

The very looks of Christ was a most real and effectual Sermon to Peter's
heart; the tongue of Christ was now otherwise employed in defense of his
innocence and putting of the malicious accusations of the wicked Jews; but the
eyes of Christ silently speak unto Peter after this manner; oh Peter do thou
thus persist in denial of me thy Lord? where is thy faith, thy fidelity, thy
love, thy great promises of not forsaking me? have I made thee of a poor
Fisher, a chief Follower of me to this end? is it not enough that thy eyes see
me despised and refused among mine enemies, but thou must also deny and refuse
me? oh Peter, these vex my Body, but thou my mind; thy unkindness is greater
to me then theirs, and thus the Lord might take up the complaint, Psalm. 142. 4.
I looked on my right hand, and behold there was none that would know me, all
refuge failed me, and none cared for my Soul; he looked for no great help on
his left hand among his Enemies; for even his dearest friends and Disciples on
his right hand failed him, and knew him not.

Note 1. Christ has an eye of grace and favor for his People in all sad
cases. I have surely seen the affliction of my People in Egypt, Exodus 3. 7. The
eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.
9. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry, Psalm 34. 15.

Reas 1. His heart is upon them continually, and then no wonder if he have a
loving eye toward them; Vbi amor, ibi oculus.
because, where the heart loves, the eye looks, and is loath to be taken off;
as it was said of the Temple, 1 King. 9. 3. mine eyes and my heart shall be
there perpetually.

2. Is there not a cause? Peter's case in the Text tells us, that even a good
Soul needs Christ's looking to it, that so it may recover out of every fall,
and stand in terms of favor with God; all means else without a gracious
aspect from Heaven will never keep us tyte in the course of true piety.

3. When all is well with the soul in respect of grace and gracious conformity
to the will of God, yet there needs a good look from Christ in respect of
sound comfort, Psalm. 63. 3.
which is the light and life of the Soul. The loving kindness of God is
better then life; and if he hide his face a little, the good Soul is soon
troubled, Psalm. 30. 7.

Use 1. Which may marvelously cheer and refresh the spirit of Gods people in
all sad cases, that go over them from time to time, and not only in
afflictions or persecutions for righteousness sake, but in all their foyles
and falls into sin, wherewith their righteous souls are much troubled, and
sometimes ready to sink into despair; yet remember for your comfort, that the
high and lofty One, who inhabits eternity, Esa. 57. 15.
looks also unto him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, to revive the
heart of the contrite ones; and when such do most put away comfort, as too
good for them, he will restore comforts to the Mourners.

Use 2. If Christ have an eye to thee in all thy sad cases, do thou ever
remember to keep thine eye open unto him, Look to Christ, as he to thee.
yea, both thine eyes.

First, an eye of Faith, to wait for the gracious issue he will please to give
out of all thy trials: Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord; say with
the Church in their proverbial speech, In the Mount the Lord will see and be
seen. What if the visi^n stay beyond thy time in hastiness prefixed for
deliverance? yet in due time it will speak, and not lie. Still therefore make
use of thy Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen, and the foundation
of things hoped for.

Secondly, the eye of Obedience; still keep close to him in Duty, whether he
deliver or no; still have respect to all his commandments; remember how the
promise runs, to keep thee in thy ways, and in these ways be sure he will take
his time, and the best time, to grant deliverance, or any mercy thou want.
He is a God of judgment, and waits to be gracious to his People, and blessed
are they that in his own way wait for him, Isa. 30. 18.

Use 3. Lastly, if God have ever an eye of love to his People, then woe be to
his and their enemies; his eye of jealousy is set against them, to root out
and destroy, as the Egyptians marching against Israel, Exodus 14. 24. The Lord
looked on their Host, and troubled them; So in Psalm. 11. 6. 7. Upon the wicked
he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall
be the portion of their cup; why? for the righteous Lord loves rightousnesse,
his countenance does behold the upright; it is time therefore for such to humble
themselves before God and his people, and take the Counsel which Pilates Wife
gave him; have thou nothing to do against that just man.

Note 2. Peter was now at a very low Water, God sometime lets his be brought
very low, before deliverance.
both in respect of sin and danger, not knowing well which way to turn
himself, and now his Lord looks back upon him, so to turn the stream
again. The Lord many times lets his People be brought into a very low estate,
and then turns their captivity for them.

Zachariah 3. 2. The state of godly men, is to be as brands plucked out of the
fire, miserably smeared, scorched, and in that burnt, but plucked out.

Reas. 1. To try our faith and obedience; And why?
as in Isaac, who must not be delivered till the knife be at his Throat.

When Jonas was wrapped in Waters in the bottme of the Sea, then came deliverance.

2. To see our inability to help our selves, therefore our Lord would not hold
Peter from sinking, nor help him till he cried Master, save, I perish.

3. To set forth his mighty power which sets in when all means fail; Lazarus
must not be raised till the fourth day, when it is impossible to the power of
nature, nor Christ himself till the case was hopeless after the third day,
and Disciples faith somewhat quailed.

4. Sore crosses drive to God, and make us seek him diligently, Hos. 5. 15.
upon which search he will be found.

Manasses out of Fetters would never seek the Lord; that is the Lords season
to be found of him.

David will cry out of Deepes, and Moses at the red Sea, when there is no way
of escape, cries to the Lord, and the Lord cuts out a way.

5. It is Gods ordinary dealing with Sinners when they come to extremity,
^ecoms either to

Conversion, as Peter. Confusion, as Judas.
Use 1. Comfort to the Saints in their great troubles, To comfort Saints in
great troubles.
seeing the Lord departs not for ever, but departs for a season, that he might
return for ever; Nay his comforts are the nearest, when affliction is at the
height; as in the Body, the disease come to the height, is most raging, most
hopeless; but presently there is a change and recovery, but not before the
disease have been desperate; so here.

Joseph's Brethren were in great extremity, and knew not what way to turn
themselves, and even when Joseph must needs discover himself unto them after
he had long dissembled his affections.

So the Lord seems not to know us, when we are known well enough, and hides
his affections, when they yearne within him toward us, Psalm. 9. 9. He is a
present refuge in time of affliction; he steps in to Abraham's comfort not till
the third day, not till Isaac was bound on the wood, and the deadly stroke a
fetching; he steps in for Peter not till the night before he was sl^ine, Act.
12.

Use 2. Not to be too hasty to limit the Lord for time or manner of
deliverance, Limit not the holy one of Israel.
whose help comes never too late, 2 King. 5. 11. Naaman would be cured by his
own devised means; I thought he would in the place have called on the Lord
and touched and healed the Leprosy; and John 11. 32. Mary would have had
Christ there before her Brother was dead, as if now he had been come too late.

But in these and such like examples we are taught to shut up our own eyes and
leave all to him who knows times and seasons and means of our good.

Use. 3. Nothing can keep God from his Elect, Nothing can separate from and
his love.
nor them from him; Peter here was not only in an exceeding strait of
affliction, but led away in temptation, and swallowed up in the quick sands of
a number of heinous sins; yet being the Lords, the Lord looks on him, and
fetches him out.

The Belly of the whale could not keep Jonas from God, nor God from Jonas, but
he must deliver him again.

The hellish Behemoth may seem to swallow up Peter, or any other of Gods
Children, but he must deliver him again.

In Peter's example, Act. 12. we see the strongest prison, watch, chains,
cannot keep the Lord from him, nor here a stronger prison and chain of sin
cannot still bind him, but the Lords very look loses him.

David rescues the Sheep out of the mouth of the Lion and Bear; the true David
rescues his out of the Devils jaws and mawes; death itself cannot keep the
Elect from God, nor him from them, but at the second resurrection, the Grave,
the Sea, the fire, water, and all elements shall give up their dead to Christ;
and even not sin which is the death of the Soul, nor the Grave of sin which is
continuance, and rotting in it, shall still hold the Elect; but this first
resurrection of grace shall deliver them up to Christ, and give up their dead
unto the life of grace, etc.

Which doctrine must not encourage to sin, but stir up to repentance and the
life of God, that thou may have some good testimony thereby of thy Election.

The inward means of Peter's repentance 1. Remembered, 2. Weighed the words of
Christ.


Note 1. A strong forgetfulness in Peter, In main matters we are very
forgetful.
who had forgotten the words of his Master, so nearly concerning him, spoken a
very few hours before, yea almost the last words of his loving Master unto
him, yet he forgets them quite, as not spoken.

Because the corruption of our memoryes in things that are good, as unable to
retain good things as a five to hold water; and who can deny this to have
been the beginning of all the sin and misery we are wrapped in, that Adam
suffered to slip out of his memory the words which God himself had spoken a
little before? and the cause why Peter here was foiled that his memory was
corr^pted in all the acts of it?

The memory sanctified has four actions.

1. To commit and place in the mind needful things. Offices of memory
sanctified.


2. To retain them, as in a storehouse.

3. To recall them, on occasion.

4. To apply them to our own needful uses.

Peter now does none of all these, and so falls foully.

Use 1. See in our selves the same corruption, and such forgetfulness, as we
have lost what Peter speaks to us [as Peter] often before the Preacher have
done speaking.

Quest. What is the cause?

Answ. 1. Want of estimation; old men remember things they care for, Psalm. 119.
129. thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them.

2. Want of affection, Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight in thy statutes, and I
will not forget thy word.

3. Earthlinesse; for things Heavenly and earthly cannot be minded together;
the same eye cannot look Upward. Downward.


2. See how many errors we are given up unto by reason of this corruption,
which, did we remember the several lessons we heard, we durst not, we would
not venture upon.

Use 3. The remedy of helping our memoryes.

1. Often hearing a continual Monitor. How to help our memory.


2. Meditation holds things as our own.

3. Godly conference, a whe^stone of grace.

4. Prayer gets the Spirit, whose office it is to bring things to our memory.

Use these conscionably, as seeing in Peter, how a corrupt memory corrupts the
whole man; hear the word carelessly as Peter his Lord, no marvel if thou run
as far as Peter, who had never returned, had not the Lord looked upon him. And
as into sin, so into smart and punishment, Deuteronomy. 18. 19. joined with Judge. 3.
7, 8.

When Peter remembered his Lords words.

THEN when the sin was done, Sin will come to remembrance sooner or later.
and he in so fearful manner denied his Lord, but not before; so men forget the
word of Christ while they purpose and practice their sin; but after the sin
committed, it shall come one time or other into their remembrance.

Let Peter deny and dissemble a while, let him lie and swear, forswear and
curse, let him forget himself and the words of his Lord, yet a little while
and he shall remember himself.

Reas. 1. The Word shall take hold on thee one time or other, And why?
Zach. 1. 6. David in the pride of his heart sends out to number the People,
never thinks of Gods word against it, till Joab had done, and so soon as ever
it was done, his heart smote him, and he confessed his folly.

2. God crosses the conceits and conclusions of sinners applauding themselves
in sin; Oh I shall have peace, fear nothing; he says to his soul, rest,
thou have enough for many years; Luke 12. 19, 20
God crosses it, Thou Fool, this night shall it be required.

Use. Sin thou as merrily as thou can, Reproof to them that will needs
forget their sins.
as securely against the Word, a day of remembrance comes, when thou think
them forgot they shall be brought to mind.

Because God is patient and holds his peace, the evil heart thinks him like
himself; but a time comes to set thy sins in order before thee, Psalm. 50. 21.
O consider this ye that forget God. Let his silence and long days break off
thy sin, and lead thee to repentance, and not fill up the measure of it.

Consider 1. Gods silence cannot make him forget any thing he has to do.
Terror to this kind o^ sinners


2. He is the same that ever he was, and his memory is not so short as thine;
thy sin is written with a pen of Iron in thy forehead.

3. What madness to think all is well that begins well, and never respect the
end, but run along to deny thy heart no pleasure? a wise man cannot think a
present misery better then a future mercy.

4. Sin is sweet as Ratsbane in going down; but he that forgets the danger and
follows his palate to please it, shall be shortly put in remembrance to his
cost; or like that Poison* that makes men dye laughing.

5. Sin is ever in the way and never rests; but the order of God brings it,
first, before his goodness and patience; secondly, before the Law and
sentence. Thirdly, before execution and judgment.

All which show it is an high point of wisdom, to remember the latter end of
sin, which is bitterness.

Use 2. To teach us to remember our selves and ways in season, Remember s^n
timly; and how?
and so order our ways, as that we go not on to the perfecting of sin.

Quest. How?

Answ. David set the Lord ever in his sight, and so fell not, Psalm. 16. 8.
Abraham walked with God, Henoch, and other holy men.

Quest. How may I do it?

Answ. 1. If before the action thou consultest with God and his Word.

2. If in the action thou remembrest the Lord, whose service it is, or ought to
be.

3. If after the action thou presentest it before the Lord, if good, seeking
approbation; if evil, seeking a cover and pardon.

Secondly, The weighing the words of his Master.

THE voice of the Cock not only puts him in mind of his Masters words, but
moves him to bethink himself better, as one that by woeful experience begins
to find all true that his Master had said.

Peter had heard his Master telling him of his weakness and frailty; but he
weighed not that word; he thinks himself strong enough for all that; he had
heard his Masters word telling him that he should shamefully and suddenly, even
that night, deny him thrice; but he weighes not that word, he scorns to be
thought so wicked.

But now weighing the words of his Master, he finds himself in a woeful case,
now he feels the verity of his Masters prediction, the vanity of his own
presumption; now he rates himself that he heard not the first Cock, that he
might have prevented the fearful falls he had taken; now the second crowing
has put him in mind of the whole matter.

Doctrine. Not the hearing of the Word, Due weighing of the Word, helps out of
sin.
but the weighing of it makes it a powerful means to help us out of sin.

A man may hear the Word a thousand times, as Peter heard the words of his
Master many times repeated; but without weighing and considering it, shall
never either prevent, or repent of any sin.

Adam heard the word of God well enough, but not well weighing it, was taken by
the first temptation.

Reas. 1. As meat never so good received into the stomach, if it be not
retained and digested into wholesome nourishment, is so far from profiting, as
it is very hurtful; so the word never so powerful, coming into the mind, if
it be not considered and weighed, goes as it comes, leaves no fruit of
instruction or consolation; but ordinarily more hardens and tends to
condemnation.

2. Not the hearing of the word makes it powerful on the conscience, but the
weighing it; for let a man hear all the Sermons in the World, if he weigh not
the word of God in the Author of it, in the truth, in the eternity, in the
necessity of obedience unto it, he shall easily loosen himself from obedience,
further then himself lists.

But this consideration makes the word weighty in it self, and upon the
consideration that God whose word it is, will ever make it good on the godly in
mercy, on the wicked in justice and judgment.

3. Is it only weighing of the Word that makes sin weighty and burdensome?
many remember their sins but weigh them not, and so carry them lighter then a
Feather; others remember them, and weigh them in false weights, or in a false
manner, or lay a false finger on the Scale; our own judgment and corrupt
affections are as false weights, or we favor our selves, or we would not have
our sins so heavy, so great, so damnable, though we be Sinners as other men be.

But if we weigh them in the balance of the law, we shall find them weighty,
and exceed the Mountains of the Earth, or in the curse of the Law, we shall
find them so heavy as they weigh us down to Hell.

Or in the Doctrine of the Gospel, the least of our sins so heavy, that it
weighs Christ out of Heaven or else the Sinner for ever.

1. Resolve with David, Psalm. 112. 15. I will meditate on thy precepts and
consider thy ways; Ponder the Word heard or read.
he knew it is not hearing or knowing that discernes between truth and
falsehood, but weighing and discerning in the balance of sound judgment.

Why does the Usurer hold his sins, or the Drunkard, or the Sabbath breaker?
etc. not because they know not what is good, what is evil, or because he is not
taught, but he weighs not, nor considers the word of God; he weighs the word in
his false weights, and not his false ways by the weights of the Word, balance
of the Sanctuary; they weigh not the sin in the sentence of the Law nor by
the bitter end, but present profit or pleasure.

So, why do men generally boulster themselves in all their sins, and
embolden themselves against God and their duty, but because they weigh not the
word? they have promises, and God is merciful, and Christ dyed for Sinners,
etc. but weigh not to whom the promises belong, which are Childrens bread.

As John said to one, what have thou to do with prayer, or with the promises?
God will not be merciful to an obstinate Sinner; they weigh what God is, and
they weigh not themselves, what themselves are; God is a God of mercy, but no^
all of mercy; Christ is a Lamb for meekness, but weigh it that he is a Lion
also, and will tear in pieces all impenitent persons.

Use 2. To comfort Ministers who see their Doctrine slightly regarded for the
present; many they have to hear, almost none consider, but see in Peter, that
an happy use may be made in time of things, which at first were heard
carelessly; so the Disciples heard Christ often speak of his passion, of his
resurrection, and other articles of Religion; but heedlesly for the time,
neither remembered nor weighed, but after made more use of them; sometimes
careless Hearers are brough^ into as great streights as Peter here, and then
they have time and occasion to weigh things better, and rate themselves for
their unprofitable hearing.

He went forth. BY going forth is meant an utter forsaking of the place and
company where he was; he went forth before, after the first temptation, but not
far enough, as now.

He went out.] the first thing in the manner of Peter's repentance.

Quest. Wherefore went Peter forth? Why Peter went forth.


Answ. 1. In respect of the place; the Hall and Porch were no places of safety
or tranquillity, but full of danger and fear and tumult, and not fit place for
consideration.

2. In respect of the company; he sees the longer he stays among wicked men,
the more sins he heaps up against the Lord, and against his own conscience,
and therefore he sees it high time to be gone.

3. In respect of the business in hand; Threefold business he had now to do.
he is to bewail his sin, to weep bitterly for his offense; but the Hall and
Porch are no fit places to weep in.

2. He truly sorrows that he does it sine test secret tears flowing from the
inward affection of his heart, frees his repentance from hypocrisy, in that it
is not done in respect of men, but only in the sight of God and his Angels.

3. Peter is to get out of himself, which he will not do till he get out from
so ungodly a rout, as he is now among.

Doctr. The man that would avoid evil, or set himself about any good, must
avoid evil company, 119. 115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the
commandment of my God; he saw it was a very hard thing among wicked men to
retain any good purposes or practices.

Reas. 1. Bad company are great provokers to evil, great strengthners in evil;
a little bad counsel spreads, and is soon allowed.

If Pilate once speak of Christ's death, it shall be quickly harkened too; if
the Pharise^s once suggest to deliver Barrabas, all the noise will be, not him,
but Barrabas; a little leaven leavens the whole lump. How three Traitors in
Corahs Camp presently prevails with two hundred and fifty Captains, men of
renown, appears in story; how one evil man may kindle an unquenchable fire in
a Town, so evident as one plague soar may taynt a whole City or Kingdom; one
Achan enough to plague a whole congregation; how much more when a Company of
evil persons are knit together?

2. As they are great Drawers to evil, so they are strong Resisters of good;
the darkness in them must needs fight against the light; what they can, they
will hinder, what they cannot hinder, they can scorn.

Peter here durst not acknowledge him a man, whom among Disciples; acknowledged
the Son of God.

3. Our own inclination to evil makes it more dangerous; a little Pitch will
stick to his fingers that touches it; Israel in Shittim will commit whoredom
with the Daughters of Moab, Numb. 25. 1.

Joseph will swear a little by the life of Pharaoh in the Court of Pharaoh;
Peter denies among Denyers, and we are commonly as our company which we choose.

Use 1. To avoid evil company; thrust not into such company when we need not,
nor stay longer then needs must in such fellowship; for,

1. He that will cleave to God, must sever from Gods Enemies; the same grace
that binds us to God, loses us from the wicked; solitariness is better then
bad company.

2. What comfort can a Sheep have among a Herd of Swine, which wallow and
tumble in foul lusts? or a silly Dove among a company of Ravens? how can a
good heart but grieve in their society whose sports and pleasures are in such
things as only grieve the Spirit of God? how can a Christian solace himself
among such as care for none but brutish delights, in eating, drinking,
sporting, gaming, attended with swearing, railing, drunkenness and idleness?
but to speak of God, or of Religion, to discourse of sobriety, temperance,
watchfulness and prayer, is to be unseasonable as Snow in Harvest; can a good
heart be glad among them who can never be merry till God and all thoughts of
him be shut out of doors?

What comfort can a man have among a company of dead men, who as Ghosts are
moved by the Devil? no spirit of grace, no breath, or life of grace, but in
whom the Devil rules effectually; Ephesians. 2. 2.
and the like comfort can the Child of God have among wicked men, dead in sin,
and enemies to the life of God, ruled at the pleasure of Satan.

What safety among evil men, whether we respect themselves or their practices?
for themselves they are so poysonfull, so infectious, as we can hardly
participate with them in good things, and not be defiled; as with some persons
we dare scarce eat or drink wholesome meat or drink of the same cup, because
of some poysonful and infectious disease; we would not take a sweet flower from
some hand; so here.

For their practices how just is it if we join our selves in their sins, that
we should not be disjoined in their judgments? as they that stood with Corah
were all swallowed up together.

4. This has been the practice of the godly, Psalm. 26* 4. I have not haunted
with the wicked; for they know, blessedness is promised to such as neither
walk, stand nor sit with them, Psalm. 1. 1.

He that sees the mischief that has befallen him by such company, will shake
them off.

He that has been drawn to scorn godliness, to reform godliness must
abhor such company.

He that has been taught to swear, lie, be drunk; to reform, must avoid
such company.

Use 2. If we fall among, Directions how to carry our selves in such company.
or be cast into such company, take some directions how to carry our selves,
which our Apostle here omitted.

1. Enter not into their company, fashion not to them, separate in Fashion and
Affection


As Lot among Sodomites, go not to them, but let them come to thee; Peter went
to them, and so fell by them. Prove. 1 10. If Sinners entice, consent not.

2. Consider, who thou art; Peter should have remembered himself to be a
Disciple, by grace separated from this graceless company; so think with thy
self; I am distinguished and severed from the world by grace of Adoption, and
a Son of God; oh what an honor to Peter, or for thee to show thy self a Son
of God in the midst of a naughty generation?

3. Look upon ungodly examples, to detest them, to grieve at the dishonor of
God, to grieve at the wickedness of man made to the Image of God; how did good
Lot vex himself at the unclean conversation of Sodom? 2 Pet. 2. 8.

What a pain was it to David to see the transgressors? Psalm. 119. And make
this use of it, to bless God that thou art not so far given up, whose nature
is as vile as theirs.

4. See them, to stop them if it be possible; if there be hope of doing good,
admonish them, 1 These. 5. 14. warn them that are unruly, warn them of the
wrath of God coming on them that do such things; win them, and pray for them
and their amendment.

5. If there be no hope to win them, yet by thy godly carriage convince them,
check them, confute, shut their mouths.

Let thy light shine in despite of their darkness, to glorify thy Father;
and at least let them see thy watch and godly care to preserve thy self from
their contagion.

6. If thou have been a little tainted and drawn aside by them; go forth
quickly like Peter, and bewail thy sin; to which sorrow of Peter now we come.

And Peter wept bitterly. PETER, Of repentance it self see the tract.
as he had chosen a fit place, so he expressed his repentance by an excellent
token and sign of it, which is abundance of tears, both salt and dry.

Quest. Whether is weeping always true repentance for sin?

Ans. No; Tears no certain signs of true repentance.
for then Esau and Judas had been truly penitent; but where is true sorrow, it
will often wring out tears* which are not repentance it self, but an effect
of true repentance.

Quest. Whether are tears necessarily required in sorrow for sin?

Ans. In true sorrow of sin must be always a deep displeasure with himself,
Whether required necessarily to true repentance.
sighs and groans of a broken and bleeding heart for the displeasure of God,
which is a supernatural motion of the heart.

But as for that bodily and sensible motion of the heart, which produces tears
and crying, it is always commendable where it is, but not always simply
necessary; for sundry things may hinder tears, and yet true sorrow be with dry
cheeks; As,

Reas. 1. Abundance of grief may stop tears; as a man may weep for his
friend, and cannot at the death of his own Son.

2. Sometimes the constitution of the body will afford none, when the
consolation of the heart desires to ease it self by them.

3. Sometimes the Spirit of God supplies joy and comfort in the midst of their
heaviness which abates the sensible smart, although it abates not the
displeasure of our wills against sin, but enlarges it.

4. Tears proceed from many causes outward, as excessive joy, excessive
sorrow, anger, compassion; and in a word, both from fained repentance, and
unfeigned, as we may not count them among the infallible signs of true
repentance and sorrow for sin.

FINIS.

