A Catalogue of Gods just Judgments against such Persons as are mentioned in
the following Treatise.
THE Scots in general. Argile in particular.
The Irish in general. Mac-quire and Mac-mahoon in particular.
The English long Parliament. The Earl of Essex. Hotham the Father, and Hotham
his Son. The Lord Brooks. John Pym, one of the five Members in the Long
Parliament. Col. Hamden. Alderman Hoyl.
Oliver Cromwell, Richard and Henry Cromwell, his Sons. Mrs. Claypool. and The
Lady Frances his Daughters. Col. Ireton, his Son in Law.
John Bradshaw. Col. Dean. Rainsbrough. Reynolds.
Capt. White. Dr. Dorislans. Mr. Askam. Denis Bond. Christopher Love, Mr.
Marshall. Richard Pym. Horrison. Carew. Cook. Hugh Peter's. Gregory Clement.
Col. Scroop. Jones. Seot. Axtel. Hacker. Hulet. Will. late Lord Munson. Mr.
Wallup. Mildmay. Capt. Thomas.
Traitors Condemned, but not yet Executed.
ON^^ Kass. Augustine Garland. Edm. Hare^^y. Hen. Smith. Simon Meyn. William
Heveningham. Isaac Pennington. Sr. Hardresse Waller. George Fleetwood. James
Temple. Peter Temple. Thomas Wait. Robert Lilburn. Gilbert Millington. Vincent
Potter. Thomas Wogan. John Downs.
THE TRAITORS Perspective-glass. OR, Sundry Examples of Gods just judgments
executed upon many Eminent Regicides, who were either Fomentors of the late
Bloody Wars against the King, or had a hand in His Death.

Whereunto is added Three Perfect Characters of those late-executed Regicides,
Viz. OKEY, CORBET, and BARKSTEAD.

Wherein many Remarkable Passages of their several lives, and barbarous
actions, from the beginning of the late Wars, to the Death of that blessed
Martyr CHARLES the first.

Are faithfully delineated by I.T. Gent.

-- Lex non est justior ulla
Quam necis Artifices, art perire sua.
LONDON, Printed by H. B. for Phil. Stephens the younger, at the sign of the
Kings Arms, over against the Middle Temple in Fleet Street, 1662.

THE TRAITORS Perspective-Glass.
WHosoever shall peruse either Sacred, or Profane Histories, will soon find
how just God is in his Judgments toward such as have rebelled against their
natural Sovereigns, or conspired their Deaths. Zimri, when he found his
opportunity, flew his Master Elah; the servants of King Ammon, their own
Prince; Phocas, his Emperor Mauritius; Artabanus Captain of the Guard, killed
his own King and Master Xerxes; Brutus and Cassius, murdered Julius Caesar;
Thessalus poisoned Alexander: But the end of all these was lamentable; for
Heavens Divine Vengeance (at last) pursued each of them close at the heels, and
not one of them but perished miserably; nay, so crying a sin is murder, that
God usually inflicts upon the murderer a punishment answerable to the crime
committed: According to the Law of Retaliation, or that Divine Rule, He that
sheddeth man's blood, shall have his blood shed by man.

Qui struit insidias aliis sibi damna dat ipse.
Who does for others dig a pit,
Often times himself falls into it.
Thus it fared with the Egyptians, who having drowned all the male-children of
the Israelites, were themselves drowned in the Red Sea: And the children of
Israel, when they took Adonibezek, cut off his thumbs, and his great toes,
Judge. 1.6 7. whereupon he said, Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs,
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table; and now as I
have done, so God has requited me. So when Perillus had made his brazen Bull
to torment others, Phalaris thought it just, that himself who made it, should
first taste of his own invention, and he burned alive in it.

-- Lex non est justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
And when Egypt wanted the usual inundation of Nilus, Thracius having told
Busyr^s, that the weath of the gods would be appeased by the sacrificing a
strangers blood; the King knowing him to be an Alien, thought it the justest
act to offer him up first unto the gods: Illi Busyris fies Iovis hostia primus
Inquit, and Aegyptotu dabis hospes aquam.
Since thou a stranger art, Busyris cries,
We first will thee to the gods sacrifice.


So we read, that those Lords who first called the Moors into Spain, to destroy
their King Roderick, were themselves and their families destroyed by the means
of those Moors; and the Britains that rejected their just and lawful King
Aurelius Ambrosius, and sent for the Saxons to aid them against him, were not
long after driven by the Saxons into the Rocky Mountains, where they remain
exiled from their own right to this day.

But if we cast our eyes either upon those that were the instruments of our
late bloody wars, or such as were guilty of shedding the precious blood of that
blessed Martyr Charles the first, we shall find such a series of Gods just
judgment against his enemies, as no History of any times, or any Kingdom
besides our own, can parallel the like.

Gods judgments against the Scots.
I Will first begin with the Scots in general; for they were the first Pomentors
and Ringleaders of the late Rebellion, by raifing not only an Army against
their natural Prince, but by encouraging our Nation to the like, and afterward
in betraying their Sovereign to a Jewish faction of bloody Independants and
Anabaptists, who thirsted after his life: For when the good King upon their
deep (but perfidious engagements) thought he might be safe with those his own
Native Subjects, he resolved to go unto them; and thereupon disguising himself,
with a very great hazard of his own person, he adventured to pass through all
difficulties, and to commit himself into the hands of those men; who very
fai^ly, but fasly, made merchandise of his Majesty, and sold him to his
enemies, at a far deerer rate then the Traitor Judas sold the Savior of the
world, and the King of Kings unto the Jews: And no such wonder neither, for
Judas was but an Ass to Lesley, who had been a Pedlar, or Merchant (as Pedlars
are termed in that Country) before he became Commander of an Army; and
therefore he knew how to sell his ware better then the other; though his sin in
one respect was far worse, for Judas repented of his treachery and brought back
the thirty pieces he had received, and cast it down with a penitent confession
of his fault: But we find not that either Lesley, or any other of these
Scottish Merchants did repent their treacheries, con^ess their faults, or return
one penny of the price they received for their King back again.

But never was any Nation more justly dealt withal for their perj^ries toward
their Sovereign then those perfidious Scots; who having watted against their
King, Covenanted with, and sold him to the Parliament, God was pleased to make
the same Parliament that invited them to these their impieties, to become the
instruments of their punishment; and that dear Brother of theirs Oliver
Cromwell, who not long before made speeches in their commendation, and gratulory
orations for that blessed union betwixt these two Nations, at length proved the
chiefest Agent (another Attalus, called flagellum Dei) whom the Lord used for
the execution of his Fury upon these perjured people: First by fire, in burning
and laying waste their strongest Holds: next by the sword, in cutting off the
chiefest of their Covenanters; and lastly, by famine, in reducing those poor
captive Soldiers (that were taken after Dumbar fight) to such an exegent,
Dunhar fight, Anno 1656. Sep. 3.
that above three thousand of them were at Durham starved to death, and those
who survived were by hunger torced to feed upon the dead bodies of their
Countrymen, to preserve their own lives: And therefore what Martial says of
the Lion, which is the Arms of Scotland, I may fitly apply to these treacherous
Scots, Laeserat ingrato l^^ persidus ere Magistrum,
Ausus tarn not as contaminare manus.
Sed dignas tante persoluit crimine poenas,
Et qui non tulerat verb^^a, tela tulit.
A treacherous Lion hurt his Keeper late,
Daring those well known hands to violate;
But for his foul offense he paid full dear,
Instead of stripes, he felt a killing spear.


Thus you see that God will not suffer any Traitors, or Regecides to go
unpunished; as may further appear by that one remarkable example of Hatto late
Bishop of Mentz in Germany, who having betrayed his near Kinsman Allebert Count
Palatine of Franconia (to whom he had sworn allegiance) into the Emperors
hands, God soon after suffered this Traitor (as you may find in the
Chronological Collections of Petreius) to be carried away by Devils, and to be
thrown into a burning pit in Mount Gebel, a voice in the mean time being heard
to cry ont in the air, Sic peccaudo lues, sicque ruendo rues.

Thus art thou worthily punished for thy wicked deeds.

So heinous are the sins of Treason, and Perjury, and so just is the Almighty
in the severity of his punishments for them, that he suffers none who are
guilty of such horrid deeds, either early, or late to escape unpunished.

And fince I am speaking of these treacherous Scots; give me leave to give you
a short account of the Life, The Marquess of Argsle.
Actions, and End of that ungrateful, and perfidious Traitor to his King and
Country, the late Marquess of Argyle, whose dealings with his Kindred, Friends
and Confederates, ought to be a warning to all Protestants, how they trust such
an Apostate Covenanter, whose ambition and avarice did ruin the King and
Church, together with three flourishing Kingdoms, and in the conclusion
himself. His Father having married a second Wife, and turned Catholic, this
his Son obtains, by his Majessies favor, the possession of his whole estate,
allowing him a small pension to live upon: after whose death, he outed his
brother of his estate at Kyntire, and afterward cheated his Sisters of 12000
l. given them by the last Will and Testament of their Mother in Law; forcing
them all, for want of maintenance, to hazard the loss of their souls, by
forsaking that Religion they were ever nursed up in; and to cloister themseves
up in Nunneries beyond the seas.

Having thus taken a view of his Religious carriage toward his Parents,
Friends and Allies, let us next observe his deportment toward his Sovereign;
and how he kept the Solemn League and Covenant with his Brethren in England.

It cannot be denied but His Majesty did confer many great and Princely
favors upon him at his Father in Law the Earl of Mortons desire, making him
Lord of Lorn, with the additional honor, and title, of Marquess, and a full
pension well paid him ever fince, together with (not only an act of Oblivion,
but) approbation of all his tyranni at proceedings against the Athel men, the
Earl of Aireley, and others.

But his first endeavor in requiral of all these, and many more Royal favors,
undeservedly heaped upon him, was his ent^ing into a conspiracy with his Co^n
Lawers and the Ea^l of Lothian (who married his Niece, and was once heard to
say, That the three Kingdoms would never have peace, so long as King Cha^ls his
head was on his shoulders) to banish Antrim, and the Macdonalds out of Ireland;
for which he had a great gift, and three R^gi^^ h^s sent him from the
Parliament of England: Next he projected to joy^ counsel with Say Pierpoint,
Cromwell and others of the Independent Juncto, against the Presbyte^ians: doing
them that Masterpiece of good service; first under color of loyalty and
friendship, to prevail with his Majesty to return to the Scots Army then at
Newark, Cromwell subtly contributing a pass to his Majesty's g^ides, with a
slack guard, that he might the more freely escape: Secondly, after many loyal
speeches for Monarchy, the Kingdom of Scotlands interest in the person of the
King, and many public and private vows and protestations, not to abandon his
Majesty, without his own consent; Contrary to all which, he and his
Confederates corrupted the loyalty of that once famous Gentleman, Lieutenant
General David Lesley (who had deeply sworn and engaged himself to his Majesty
to convey him safely into Scotland, or to see him peaceably settled in his
Throne in England) sorcing him (and he prevailing with the Soldiers) to
abandon his Majesty: and leaving him behind (now little better then an assured
prisoner) and the whole power of the sword i^ the hands of his bloody enemies,
the Independants and Sectaries, to the ruin and overthrow of the Covenant, and
the Presbyterian cause in the City, and Parliament. Which design of his having
taken the desired effect, he presently by letters encourages the Independent
party to proceed in their dethroning votes, and accusarion of his Majesty,
assuring them that no party in Scotland should be able to hinder their
proceedings: Whereupon they imm-diately imprisoned the King, and next erected a
High Court of Justice to take away his life, and afterward publicly
murdered him.

Thus you see Argyle having overthrown all Laws, tyrannized over the lives,
liberties, and estates of his Country men and contrary to his duty and and
allegiance, conspired to extirpate all Monatchial Government, by betraying his
natural Prince into the hands of his enemies, and opposing all ways of peace to
prevent his Majesty's deliverance, and the settlement of his Kingdoms; (Now
thinking himself secure in his villainies, and having likewise by treachery
gotten the person of the Marquess of Montross into his hands, whose only fault
was loyalty to his Prince) he caused him to be brought with as much ignominy as
possibly he could desire to Edinburgh, and afterward to be barbarously
murdered, just at such time as his Majesty (that now is) was coming into
Scotland; even as it were in despite to his Sovereign. But God having at length
most miraculously restored his Sacred Majesty Charles the second, to the Royal
Throne of his blessed Father, did also put it into his heart to avenge himself
upon this underminer of Princes; insomuch as this arch Rebel was suddenly
seized upon; then committed close Prisoner to the Tower; in which place he
remained till such time as he could be shipped away in order to his trial at
Edinburgh in Scotland; where he was legally convicted of High Treason, and
justly executed, as he justly deserved it.

Gods judgments against the Irish Rebels.
Nor did it happen otherwise with the Irish, then with the beforementioned
Scottish Rebels; who having palpably forged several pretended Commissions under
his late Majesty's Great-Seal, and thereby raised an Army; first impudently
slandred Gods anointed, then openly rebelled against him, and afterward; fell
to butchering of his loyal Subjects, women with child, young infants, aged
Matrons, old Fathers, and all others, of what age, sex or condition soever:
Insomuch, that their barbarous inhumanity far exceeded all the cruelties of
Phalaris, Busyris, Dionysius, and the rest of those Heathen Tyrants, or bloody
persecutors of the primitive Christians, whose bloody slaughters were but
merciful punishments, compared with their Tragic acts; so as they who felt
them, could hardly believe such infernal destruction could be invented, much
less executed by any humane Creatures upon earth.

But exitus acta probat. Mark what is now become of all these Irish Traitors?
were not the chiefest instruments of that Rebellion, Mac-Mahoon.
Mac-Quire, and mac-Mahoon, most miraculously seized upon? and (notwithstanding
their strange escape ou^ of the Tower) how strangely did Gods judgments find
them out, causing one of their servants to be the principal occasion of their
discovery; for which they were shortly after brought to condign puuishment, and
condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn, which was accordingly
executed.

As for the rest of them (together with their wives and children) were they not
either killed banished, or enslaved; and such as remained alive, requited by
Cromwell with the like inhumanity, after the storming of Drogedah, where above
three thousand of them were in cool blood massacred by the lemnian hands of
that unmerciful Tyrant.

Next for that long Parliament here in England, The English Rebellion in the
long Parliament.
which first raised up a Rebellious Army against their King, and at last a High
Court of Justice to take away his life: Did not God stir up their own General,
Oliver Cromwell, a Philistine, amongst these Philistines; and a grand Rebel,
amongst these Rebels; who finding his opportunity, wisely broke in pieces this
Brazen Engine, and with a Herolike courage, dissolved that knot, and scattered
those grand Proditors of their King and Country; as the Lord dispersed the
Jews that were the murderers of his Son (and their own King) over all the parts
of this Kingdom. The whole mass of that long Parliament (who thought to remain
as Kings for ever) being scattered like chaff with the wind, from the face of
the earth; and now made ludibrium, opprobriumque vulgi, the mock-game, and
laughter of this Nation.

But I must now descend from generals to particulars, and show you the just
judgment of God upon the dismembered parts of this great body, and their
adherents, as I find them worthy of observation.

I will therefore begin with him, Earl of Essex.
who was the beginner of our troubles (the first disturber of our peace, and
the General of that late unhappy War) the Earl of Essex; with whom though the
character given by Plutarch of Dionysius King of Sicily, may well agree, that
he was a Tyrant, begotten of Tyrants; as the other was a Traitor, begot of a
Traitor; yet I cannot but say of him, that he was pius inimicus, a noble
Adversary to the King, who confirmed the restoration of him to those Lands and
Honors which were taken from him by Queen Elizabeth, for the Treason of his
Father; and the late King made him one of his privy Council, and Chamberlain of
his Household, which for honor is one of the best Offices at Court, and worth
2000 l. per annum, and conferred many other favors upon him; yet for no other
cause (as is conceived) then ambition of popular praise; or as others think,
for a secret grudge he bore to his Majesty, for giving way to his Ladies being
divorced from him he undertook, when all others refused it, the Conduct of a
Rebellious Army against him; for which act, God never suffered him after to
prosper in his attempts; witness his first fight at Edge-hil, where he was
routed, and forced to hide his head in the day of Battle; and the next day
dishonorably to retreat to Warwick Castle; and afterward in Cornwall, he was
compelled shamefully to abandon his whole Army, and glad to fly away by Sea to
London: For which disasters, the Parliament, who so solemnly swore before to
live and dye with him, do now vote a dispensation of that Oath, and not without
some disgrace, disrobing him of his Excellency, and another General is chosen
in his room: At length, to prevent any mutiny, or discontent that might happen
in him, or the Army, by means of this affront put upon so noble and popular a
person, it is generally reported by all that see him dye, that they applied
more violent physic, then either the quality of his disease, or constitution
of his body would admit of; in giving him a Spanish fig, or some Aconites, that
wrought so strongly upon him, that it soon brought his head into the grave; his
body, so soon as he was dead, being covered over with turfs of green earth, to
prevent the swelling of the poison that was in him. Thus was he rewarded for
his good services to the Parliament, and ill offices against his King; God in
justice suffering the same people that magnified him, to destroy him.

Sr. John Hotham and his Son.
The next persons I shall instance in, are Sir John Hotham, and his Son with
him; whom I shall put together, because both were guilty of the same crime of
disloyalty to their King, and equally tasted of the same sauce, and suffered
the like punishment. This man was the first who so insolently durst presume to
enter into Hull (his Majesty's own proper Town) and there to seize upon the
Kings Magazine; and when his Majesty came in person, and requested admission
into the same, he very undutifully (to say no worse) with much scorn and
contempt, refused to let him in.

But how God approved of these their unjust doings, you may guess by the
subsequent punishment, which both the Father and his Son have since undergone;
for they having first most disloyally played their parts in the House of Commons
against the King; and next more egregiously, by seizing upon Hull, these false
Traitors, greedy of a reward promised by some of the Kings friends, resolved
within a short while after, to play the like game with the Parliament; and to
comply with his Majesty, by redelivering up the Town and Magazine to his use;
but their plot being discovered, and their persons cunningly secured in their
hands; they wrought upon the Son (in hopes to get pardon for himself) to
accuse, and betray his Father; and then with the like subtilty, and for the
like hope, they brought the Father to accuse his Son. So both by mutual
treachery being found guilty, and condemned, had both their heads severed from
their bodies in one day, as the just reward of their former wickedness; God now
rendering to them, what before they had so well deserved, by suffering them
willingly, and wickedly to be the Authors, and Instruments, of each others
punishment.

The Lord Brooks.
The next Member of the long Parliament, that I shall set down in this list of
Disloyal Subjects, is the Lord Brooks; a man, while he lived beyond the Seas,
much debauched, and very loose in his life and conversation; as by several
letters sent from thence to his Uncle Sir Fulk Grevil (afterward Lord Brooks)
may appear; And how he passed from one extreme to another; from a very
dissolute youth, to a most resolute Saint, I know not; only these things were
observed to be remarkable in him, that he was a very obstinate and violent
opposer of the King (who was Pater Patriae, and a very gracious Prince to him)
an extreme hater, and persecutor of the Reverend Bishops, and all the Grave,
and Learned Clergy; a great demolisher of Cathedrals; and so great an enemy to
that excellent Prayer in our Letany, That it would please God to deliver us
from sudden death, that he moved the House to abolish the whole Liturgy;
alleging every man ought to be at all times so prepared for death, as they
need not at any time pray against sudden death.

But here behold and adore the judgment of the just God; how that as Goliahs
head was cut off with his own sword, so judicium suum, super caput suum, this
Lords judgment, and practice fell upon his own head; for in his prosecution of
his hate against his King (as a just reward for his Rebellion) his Lordship
being in Litchfield on St. Chad's day (the Founder of that Church) whilst at a
little window he viewed the College (or Close, as they term it, to the Church
of S. Chad, to batter them down with his Canons,) being harnessed cap-a-pe,
from top to toe; as he lifted up his helmet to see the same more clearly, God
directed the hand of a dumb youth, that was a Prebends Son, with a shot from a
fowling piece, to hit him just in the eye; insomuch as he fell down suddenly
dead, without speaking one word; no, not so much as Lord have mercy upon him.

Mr. John Pym.
The next I shall bring upon the stage, is Mr. John Pym; a man preferred to a
great Office of trust, and of much gain, under the King: But so soon as he
became a Member of the Long Parliament, he proved so active in traducing the
King, that he was the principal of those five against whom his Majesty
demanded justice; a man so bitter, and invective in his malice toward the Earl
of Strafford; that knowing how much he was beloved of the King, and that
whatsoever evil could be conceived against him, would reflect upon His
Majesty; he first with invective Orations, poisoned the greater part of the
House, and the seditious vulgar, with a conceit against the good King his
Master; then never left profecuting the Earl, till he had brought his head to
the block. And now finding how Scelera sceleratioribus tuenda, that great
crimes committed, cannot be safe, but by attempting greater; he secretly
complies with the Scots, to raise an Army to assist him, and the rest of his
seditious Compeers, against his Majesty: But the King having full intelligence
both of his own, and his Partners practices against him, labored to bring them
to a legal trial; whereupon to save themselves, they take Sanctuary in the
City; and in short space so corrupted the Citizens, that they first drew them
(and afterward the whole Kingdom) to engage themselves in a desperate Civil
War against their lawful Sovereign.

But though his Majesty's hand was then too weak to fetch him out of his
guarded palace, to condign punishment; yet the hand of the Almighty, (who is
the Lord of Hosts,) as he raised up a great Army, though composed of little
Creatures, Rats and Mice, who devoured Pepiel the second, King of Poland, Anno
830. for treacherously poisoning of his Uncles, and those worms that destroyed
Herod the King; so he caused infinite swarms of Lice to seize upon this strong
Rebel, who eat him up alive, that he might do no further mischief against his
Anointed.

Hamden.
The like judgment fell upon Colonel Hamden; who for his disloyalty to his
King, was shot to death upon the same plot of ground where he first mustered
his Soldiers against the King.

Alderman Hoyle.
As also upon Thomas Hoil, late Major of York, and a Member of the long
Parliament; a bitter enemy against his Prince, and one who had a great hand in
his death; for which Cromwell caused him to be rewarded with Sir Peter Osborns
place, viz. Treasurers Remembrancer in the Exchequer, valued at 1300 l. per
annum; who on that day twelve months that the King lost his life, made a
Bonfire for joy he was beheaded; but on the same day twelve months after,
miserably hanged himself.

Oliver Cromwell.
But I must not here forget the Arch-Machiavilian Rebel, and prodigious Monster
of men, Oliver Cromwell; who adding strength to the wings of his ambition,
soared an Eagles height; and striving by a grasp of the Scepter to enoble his
Name, and Family to posterity, resolved to put on the purple Robes of Majesty,
though deep-dy'd in the blood of his Sovereign, to whom he had sworn
allegiance, and stood engaged (by many solemn oaths, and horrid execrations
upon himself and his Family) to preserve, and re-settle in his Throne:
Nevertheless, contrary to all his former protestations and promises, he
treacherously caused the King to be kept close Prisoner in Carisbrook Castle;
where he plotted with Rolf to have him secretly made away, though afterward he
was publicly murdered: And that he might palliate the breach of his Faith,
Vows, and Allegiance to his Sovereign, he by a printed Declaration, makes God
the Author of his wickedness, affirming, he could not resist the motions of the
Spirit, which would not suffer him to keep his word with the King, or let his
Conscience rest quiet, till he had taken away hife life: Thus, Sua cuique Deus
fit dira libido.

This Hob-goblin serves all turns; and Oliver was so perfect a Juggler, that he
had got the right knack of Pulpit canting; so as it is was easy for him, under
this mask of Religion (that old stalking-horse of Rebellion) by deceiving the
ignorant sort of people, up to exalt himself up to the usurped Throne of his
Martyred Prince: Into which he was no sooner entered, but this Joshua of the
Saints, was prayed for in every Conventicle, and a day of general Thanksgiving
for his enstallment appointed to God (I think) for his patience in not striking
this Atheistical Tyrant with Thunder and Lightning, for making him a stale to
his premeditated villainies.

But God permitted not this Son of Belial to reign long in his cruelties, but
speedily cut him off, by a miserable, and tormenting sickness; which caused him
two days before his death to roar so loud, and make such doleful clamors, that
his Council being informed, that many persons as they passed by his chamber
window, took much notice of his cries, thought fit to have him removed from the
place where he then lay, to one more private; where with extremity of anguish,
and terror of Conscieence having his soul at the parting from his body
(accompanied with such a hellish tempest, as was by all men judged to be
prodigious,) he finished his miserable life; for he dyed mad, and dispairing,
as the Author of the fourth part of the History of Independency affirms: Out of
whom give me leave to insert this remarkable passage, viz.

That it was believed, and not without some good cause, that Cromwell the same
morning he defeated the Kings Army at Worcester fight, had conference
personally with the Devil, with whom he made a Contract, that to have his will
then, and in all things else for seven years after from that time ( being the
third of September, 1651.) he should at the expiration of the said years, have
him at his command, to do at his pleasure, both with his soul, and body: Now if
any one will please to reckon from the third of September, 1651. till the third
of September, 1658. he will find it to a day just seven years, and no more:
Richard Protector.
At which time he dyed, declaring his eldest Son Richard his Successor, his Son
Henry Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and leaving his Daughter Fleetwood married to
the Commander in chief of the Army under himself.

This was the end of our English Nero: A person of an unlimitted ambition, and
restless spirit; of whom I have heard it credibly reported, by such as attended
upon him in his bedchamber, that after he had embrewed his hands in the blood
of his Sovereign, he was observed to sleep so little, that he scarce took any
repose; but often in the night time would arise out of his bed, take a pistol
into his hand, and call to his guard to watch his door, and have a care of
sleeping.

Nor was his guilty conscience less terrified in the day time, then in the
night; as appears by the testimony of Sir Theophilus Jones; who waiting upon
him one morning in his Chamber, the wind on a sudden blowing up the hangings
before the door, possessed him with such a Panick fear, that he cried out
Traitors! Traitors! and drawing out his sword, could not be persuaded to
disperser his fears, or put up his weapon, till the wind playing the same game
again, convinced him of his error.

The like story I find written by Polidore Virgil, of Richard the third; who
having caused his two Nephews to be secretly murdered, he could never after
(whilst he lived) enjoy any quiet in his mind, but would be still starting,
and clapping his hand upon his dagger. Thus do to mented Consciences
continually carry a Hell about them; as Lucan says the wicked man does.

Nocte dieq, suum gestare in pectore testem,
Hunc omnes gladii, quos aut Pharsalia vidit
Aut ultrix visura dies stringente Senatu,
Illa nocte premiunt, hunc infera monstra flagellant.
Englished thus,

The murderer nor night, nor day can rest,
But bears about a witness in his breast:
He fancies all he sees are Lictors sent,
To bring him to deserved punishment.
Furies reign in his soul --
And Pictorius in his Epigram upon the same subject, says, Illud habet damni
vitium inter coetera, quod men's
Palpitat assiduo flagitiosa mecu.
Semper enim si non deprehendatur in ipso
Sese deprendi posse put at scelere.
Deque suo quoties alterius do crimine sermo est
Cogitat, and credit se magis esse reum;
Inque dies timor hic crescit --
The wicked man this Fate attends, that he
Is never from pursuing torments free;
He dreams he is taken, though he waking find
Himself deceived, fear still torments his mind.
If any talk of others crimes arise,
His guilty Conscience in his face straight flies.
Each day begets new tortures --


But it is time to leave him off, and return to his Children, who have also
drank deep of the bitter Cup of Affliction, for their Fathers perjuries,
according to that of the Poet: In prolem dilatarunt perjuria patris.
The Child often suffers for his Parents crimes.


Richard Protector.
For although before his death, Oliver strived to entail his tyrannical power,
as well in England as Ireland, upon his Son Richard, and Harry: yet God soon
cast them both out, by stirring up their Brother in Law Fleetwood, and their
near kinsman Disborough to effect it. So as this Pageant of Honor continued
few Months in his Protectorship, before he was reduced to such extremity
(being indebted in 290000 l. for his Fathers Funeral) that at the sitting of
the Rump Parliament, he who lately was styled the Nations Protector, is now
necessitated to let his Highness stoop so low, as to beg their protection to
preserve himself from rotting in a Prison. Thus vanished this magni nominis
umbra, the shadow and Puppet-play of a Protector.

Henry Cromwell.
Nor did it fare better with his Brother Harry, who having the Government and
strength of Ireland in his power, and a considerable Army ready to hazard their
lives in his service, might in all probability have resetled his Brother again,
or at least have made himself great in the Kings favor, had he adhered to his
interest; but God struck such a terror into his Soul, as he had not courage
enough left to be an Instrument of good either to his Country, or Prince; b^t
this pitiful cowardly Imp, tamely surrendered up all his power into the R^mps
hands; whereupon he was ordered to return speedily into England, to attend the
pleasure of the House, where (after a tedious waiting upon them at the Commons
Bar) at length he was for his good service stroaked on the head, called a good
Boy, and dismissed; for which kindness, he bussed his hand, made a leg, and
Exit.

The Lady Claypool.
Next for Cromwels Daughters; the strange end of his Darling Child, Mrs.
Claypool is very remarkable: For finding her Father violently bent in
prosecuting the Death of that Learned and Pious Divine Dr. Hewitt, her
Conscience was so extremely troubled at his cruelty that she both night and day
solicited him by prayers and supplications, to spare the life of that innocent
person; But he (who never before denied any thing she requested of him) is now
grown inexorable; and like the Deaf Adder stops his Ears against the charmings
of this sweet Charmer: at which unheard of inhumanity, she took such excessive
grief, that she suddenly fell sick; the increase of her sickness making her
rave in a most lamentable manner, calling out against her Father for Hewitts
blood; and then telling him, that God now laid his heavy punishments upon her
for his heinous crimes, she desired him to repent, and pray for her, till at
length these violent extravagant passions, working upon the great weakness of
her body, carried her Soul into another World, where (doubtless, if we balance
her Christian-like penitency against parents impiety,) we ought charitably to
judge, that her Soul enjoyes the felicity of Heaven, whatsoever is become of
her Fathers.

The Lady Francis.
As for another Daughter of his, though he sought to strengthen himself at home
by intermixing her blood in marriage with that of the heir apparent of the
Earldome of Warwick, yet soon after such an antipathy happened between their
affections, that he hated her perfectly; and at laft by the suddenness of his
death, left his wife the widow of a loathed bed.

I could say much of Bradshaw, Bradshaw.
that notorious Regicide; who being terrified at the turning out of Richard the
Protector, the rising of Sr. George Booth, and the mutining of the City against
the Army, began to suspect he should soon be called to account for his
villainies, insomuch as he quickly hastened his passage into another world, to
prevent his punishment in this. Nevertheless, God did not long suffer the
stinking carcass of this bloody Monster to rest in the grave, but being thence
taken out, together with the bodies of his Master Cromwell, and Ireton, they all
were drawn, hanged, and buried at Tyburn, a fit Tomb for such egregious
Rebels: but their heads were by the Hangman cut off, and set upon
Westminster Hall, over the same place where they erected their High Court of
Justice, and sat in Judgment against His Majesty.

Nor are those memorable Examples of Gods Judgments against Col. Dean,
Rainsborough, Reynolds, White, Dorislaus, Askam, Milton Bond, Marshall, and
Love, less eminent than the former.
Dean.
FOR Col. Richard Dean being made one the those Judges, who actually did sit
upon the Trial of His Majesty, was so vigorous in the prosecution of his Death,
that he complained to the Army of their delays, and against Bradshaw, for not
condemning him without permitting him to speak; and was one of the four persons
to consider of the time and place for the Kings Execution. But God requited him
with a punishment answerable to his own dealings; for he who so lately pressed
the Soldiers to cut off their Sovereigns Head, had soon after his own shot
clear off from his body by a Chain-bullet, in the last Naval fight between the
English and the Flemmings.

Rainsboborough.
HOW strangly was (that Quondam Neptune of the Seas, and Governor of Pomfrett
Castle) Col. Rainsborough stabbed in his own Quarters by unknown persons, in a
strong guarded Garrison, and before the face of some of his own Soldiers, who
having then neither strength to preserve his life, nor power to seize on the
actors; after the deed done, they boldly passed by the Guard, and escaped. This
was he who was employed by the Committee of Derby house to solicit the Common
sort of Mariners, (to whom he gave 12 d. a piece) to subscribe, and present a
Petition to the house of Commons for Justice against the King, wherein they
offered to live and dye with the Parliament, etc. For which traiterous act
against his Prince, Heaven was likewise pleased by a sudden and violent death
to destroy him. And without doubt there was Digitus Dei, the finger of the
Almighty in this action, otherwise it had been impossible for such a bloody
Tragedy to be acted (even at noon day) in such a wel-fortified place, and upon
so eminent a Rebel as this was, without the apprehension of those persons who
committed the deed.

Reynolds and White
THE next in this Catalogue of Traitors, are Col. John Reynolds Commander in
Chief at Mardike, and Col. White, two of Cromwels best beloved Beagles for
Hunting after His Majesty's blood: who embarking themselves at Mardike for
England, to consult with their Master Oliver about Martial affairs, were by a
sudden Tempest cast away upon the Goodwin sands, a place notorious for the
History of that perjured Earl Goodwin, who being treacherous to his Prince, had
all his estate and manners together with himself and family, (as these traitors
were for the like fact) swallowed up in the same place by the Sea.

Dr. Dorislaus.
AS for Dr. Dorislaus, a Saint of Cromwels Rubric, who was formerly a poor
Schoolmaster in the Low Countries, but by his late Majesty's favor translated
from thence to read the History Lecture in Oxford. Where he decrying Monarchy
in one of his Lectures; was complained of, yet forgiven by the benignity of the
King. Then he became Judge Advocate in his Army, against the Scots; afterward
he forsook his Master, and took the like employment under the Earl of Essex,
and next under Sr. Thomas Fairfax, and at last was ordered to be one of those
Counselors who were to assist the High Court of Justice, and draw up the
Charge against the King; but God justly punished this ungrateful Regicide
within four Months after, by suffering him to be stabbed to death (whilst he
was then Agent for the Parliament in Holland) where about 18 Scotch-men
repairing to his Lodging, six of them went up the Stairs to his Chamber, whilst
the other twelve guarded the Stair-foot; whom Heaven sent to revenge the Sacred
Blood of His Majesty, and those four Lords, viz. Capel, Goring, Holland, and
Hamilton, whom he had unjustly before condemned to death.

Mr. Anthody Askam.
THE like Judgment befell Mr. Anthony Askam, another of the Long Parliaments
Creatures, and an active person against his Sovereign, who being sent in the
quality of an Agent into Spain, arrived at the Port of Sancta Maria, Iunij 5.
1650. where notwithstanding he was forwarned of the Danger he was in, and
guarded from thence to Madrid; yet could he not escape the hand of Divine
vengeance upon him, for the next day after he came at Madrid; as he was at
dinner, six men knocked at his Chamber Door, which was immediately opened unto
them, and he rising from the Table to receive them, was stabbed in the head
with a Dagger, so that he fell down suddenly dead upon the ground, together
with his Interpreter, who was likewise stabbed in the belly; they who committed
the fact escaping to a Sanctuary, where they were by the Clergy of Spain
protected against the rigor of the Law, and not one of them punished.

Mr. John Milton.
LIkewise how wonderfully was Mr. John Milton, who writ the seditious
Antimonarchical Book against the King, in answer to Learned Salmasius, stricken
blind soon after, and could never since by any art, or skill, either recover
his sight, or preserve his Books from being burned by the hands of the common
Hangman.

NExt observe what became of Mr. Denis Bond, Mr Denis Bond.
another o^ His Majesty's Judges, and one of Cromwels Counselors. Was he not
in a horrid manner tormented with the Strangury, and much anxiety of spirit
before his death? In-so-much, as he dying about 14 days before his Master
Oliver; some unhappy wits raised a report about the Town, that the Devil had
taken Bond or security, that the Protector should appear before him within a
fortnight after, which indeed proved a prophetic jest, for the third of
September following Oliver dyed.

I shall say little of Love, Mr. Christopher Love.
or Marshall, (those two firebrands of Rebellion) But this; That as Love was by
his own Confession the first Scholar ever heard of in Oxford, that publicly
refused to subscribe to the Canons of the Church, for which he was expelled the
Congregation house: as also the first Promoter of the Scotch War against the
King; so he proved afterward the first Presbyterian Clergyman that suffered
Death in defense of the King, the Covenant, and the Presbyterian cause.

NOR was the end of Marshall (that Turn-coat Presbyter) less observable.
Stephen Marshall.
How active an Instrument was he for the Army? How invective a Rebel against
his Prince? But he who had so long cursed Meroz, and (like Shimei) reviled his
Sovereign, had at length Gods curse brought upon his own head, for falling into
a desperate sickness, he dyed mad, and raving.

Rich. Pym.
THE next in order is Richard Pym, originally a Shoo-maker, afterward an
Innkeeper living at the Bull within Bishop gate, a person so egregiously
malicious, that he could not forbear to vent his passionate treason publicly
amongst such guests as were dining with him at an Ordinary kept in his house,
saying, that he hoped he should live to see the day, when he should wash his
hands in King Charles's blood; which words being taken notice of by one Mr.
Grigory an Attorney who was present, were by him related to some Members of the
Long Parliament; who thereupon caused the said Pym to be committed a Prisoner
to Newgate: But so prevalent at that time was Cromwels power in the house,
that (being a Favorite of his) he speedily obtained his releasement without
being ever further questioned about it. But God would not so release him from
punishment.

For in a short while after he visited his house with a violent Pestilence,
which suddenly swept away his Wife, two Children, and such Servants as remained
in it, who all dyed of the Plague; Hereupon the house being shut up, whether
the loss of his Trade, or the Judgment of God upon him for his sins, were the
occasion of his future destruction, I cannot tell, but this I am sure, that he
who before the uttering of those words against His Majesty, was possessed of a
clear estate in Land, estimated at above 300 l. per annam; as also a great
Trade continually driving within his house, could no longer (notwithstanding
all his care, and industry in the management of his affairs) preserve his
estate, or himself from consuming and mouldering away to nothing, insomuch, as
within five year after he became so poor and indebted, that he was forced to
fly from his house, and sell all his goods, and at last to betake himself to a
Prison; from whence, though he was afterward released, yet he perished
miserably.

The next knot of Traitors, of whose Arraignment, and Condemnation I shall
only give you a brief account; were,
Harrison and Carew
FIrst Harrison, and Carew, against whom it was proved that they did often meet,
and consult together, with others, how to put the King to Death; that they sat
at the time of the Sentence, and signed the Warrant for the Kings Execution,
and were found guilty of compassing and imagining his Death, for which they
were Condemned to be hanged, drawn and quartred, which accordingly was done
upon Harrison between 9 and 10 of the clock in the morning, October. 13th. 1660.
and the like upon the Monday following to Carew, at Chairing-Cross, with their
faces looking upon the Banqueting House at White Hall, the fatal place pitched
upon by those infernal Regicides, for the solemn murder of our late Sovereign
Charles the first, of glorious memory.

THE next in order was Mr. John Cook the Solicitor, John Cook
Hugh Peter's, that Jesuitical Chaplain to the traiterous High Court; it was
proved against Cook, that he examined Witnesses against the King, drew up his
Charge, exhibited it in the name of the Commons of England; that the Charge was
of High Treason; that he complained of delays; prayed the Charge might be
taken pro confesso; and at last that it was not so much he, as innocent blood
that demanded Justice, etc.

Hugh Peurs.
THen Peter was set at the Bar, against whom proof was made, that he did at five
several places, viz. it Winds^r, at Ware, in Coleman-street, in the Painted
Chan ber, and at Bradsraws house, consult about the Kings Death; that he
compared the King to Barrabas, and preached to bind their Kings in Chains,
etc. That he called the Day of His Majesty's Trial a glorious Day, resembling
the judging of the World by the Saints: That he prayed for it in the Painted
Chamber; preached for it at White Hall, St. James's, St. Sepulchers, and other
places. Of all which the Jury finding him guilty, together with Cook of the
former Charge. they were both the 16th of October Executed at Chairing-Cross.

THE next brought to Trial were Scot, Clement, Scot, Clement, Scroop, and Jones.
Scroop and Jones; against Tho. Scot it was proved, that he did sit and consult
about the Kings Death; that he agreed to the Sentence, and signed the Warrant,
whereby the King was murdered: that since he has owned the Kings Death, by
glorifying in it, defending it, and saying, he would have it engraven on his
Tombstone, that all the world might know it; which being aggravations of his
crime, he was sound guilty by the Jury, and Executed the 17th of October
following. Hic exitus, hic vitae finis. This was the deserved end of that Great
demolisher of old Cathedrals, and painful deflowerer of young Maiden-heads.

Clement.
AFter him Gregory Clement, (confessing himself guilty) was Sentenced and
Executed at the same place with the former, and on the same day.

Scroop and Jones.
THen Scroop was tried upon the like Indictment for compassing the Kings death;
against whom it was proved, that he did not only sit in the Court, Sentence
the King, and sign the bloody Warrant, but after the coming in of His Majesty
that now is, justified the committing of that detestable murder; for which the
Jury finding him guilty: As also Mr. John Jones of the like crimes; the Court
gave Sentence of death against them as the former, to suffer as Traitors and
accordingly on Wednesday the 17th of October about nine of the clock in the
morning. Thomas Scot and Gregory Clement were brought on several Hurdles to the
Gibbet erected near Chairing-Cross, and were there hanged, bowelled and
quartred; and about an hour after Adrian Scroop and John Jones together in one
hurdle were carried to the same place, and suffered the same pains of Death.

Axtel.
THese being thus dispatched, and having received the reward of their Treason,
Daniel Axtel, and Francis Hacker were brought before the Court, and tried;
against Axtel it was proved, that when His Majesty was brought to be tried at
Westminster Hall, he bid his Soldiers cry out Justice, Justice, and Execution,
Execution, and bear them till they did it. That he bid shoot a Lady there for
calling Cromwell Traitor, and saying, that not a quarter of the people of
England consented to their wicked Charge. That he said to Col. Huncks upon his
refusing to sign the Warrant against the King: I am ashamed of you, the Ship is
now coming into the Harbor, and will you strike Sail before we come to Anchor;
That he laughted at the Transactions, as applauding them, whilst others sighed;
that after the King was murdered, he kept guards upon the dead body, and knew
who cut off the Kings head, having sent one Elisha Axtel for the Executioner;
upon which proof the Jury found him guilty of the said Treason whereof he stood
indicted.

Hacker.
THen Francis Hacker was arraigned; and by diverse Witnesses it was sworn
against him, that he was Commander of the Halbeteers who kept the King
Prisoner, and would not suffer any access to be unto him; that he guarded him
to their Mock-Court, and after kept him sure till he was murdered; that he was
one of the persons to whom the Warrant for the Execution was erected; and that
he signed it; and brought the King to the fatal Block; and was upon the
Scaffold, being a principal Agent about the Kings Death: for which horrid
Treason the Jury found him guilty. After which, the Court sentenced both him
and Axtel to suffer death as Traitors; according to which Judgment, they were
on Friday the 19th of October about nine in the morning, drawn upon a Hurdle
from Newgate (the common place of Fxecution) to Tyburn, and there hanged; Mr.
Axtel was bowelled, and quartred; but the body of Hacker by His Majesty's great
Grace and Favor, (and at the humble suit, and intercession of his Friends (was
given to them entire, and by them afterward buried.

Hulet.
THE last of this Crew, was Will. Hulet; against whom it was proved, that he was
one of those which came with a frock on his body, and a Vizard on his face to
perpetrate the horrid Murder on the Person of the King; that being so disguised
upon the Scaffold, he fell down before the King, and asked him forgiveness,
being known by his voice, that himself said, that he was the man that beheaded
King Charles: for which deed he had 100 l. and preferment. That Heuson said of
him, that he did the Kings business upon the Scaffold. That he either did cut
it off, or took it up, and said, Behold the head of a Traitor. That being
questioned about the said words, he said, Whosoever said it matters not, I say
now it was the head of a Traitor, with many other things to the like effect.
For which most abhorrid Treason, the Jury found him guilty; and he was
Condemned to be hanged at Tyburn: nevertheless, his Execution (for some
reasons) is hitherto suspended.

This was the end of such Traitors as were then taken; as for those who
surrendered themselves according to the Proclamation set out by the King for
that purpose: viz.

OWen Row. Augustine Garland. Edmund Harvey. Henry Smith. Henry Martin. George
Fleetwood. Simon Meyne. Will. Heveningham. Isaac Pennington. Sr. Hardess
Waller. Robert Tichbourn. James Temple. Peter Temple. Tho. Wait. Rob. Lilburn.
Gilbert Millington. Vincent Potter. Thomas Wogan, and John Downs.
Though they be all attainted, and convicted of High Treason by the Law of the
Land, at a fair and legal Trial, yet are they not to suffer the pains of Death,
until His Majesty by the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, shall order their Execution by an Act to be passed for that purpose.

John Okey
THis was one of Olivers Insecta animalia. A Welsh Salamander, in plain English,
a States Cricker; for he was begot, and bred up in a Brewers Stoke hole. A
Maggot of his new Commonwealth: generated out of putrefaction, (like a Docc
from a Dunghill:) whose chief subsistence depended upon the destruction of
others.

But the States Chronicles speak him of a better extraction; affirming the
Original of this Babe of Grace was (like that of the Goddess Venus) from such
frothy dreggs as were purged, and raked out of the Bung-hole, (of that chosen
Vessel of Reformation,) Cromwell the Brewer, by Pride his Dray-man: who
afterward being listed by Scot, the Brewers Clark, in the Muster-roll of the
Saints militant, he quickly became a Stout Champion for their Good Old Cause.

A Fellow, indeed (give the Devil his due) of excellent courage; full of
valor; but empty of brains. A better Conductor, than a Politician; one whom
Cromwell seldom made other use of, than the Monkey of the Cats foot, to rake
Chef-nuts out of the fire, whilst he devoured them: for in all Battails, or
desperate attempts, the General usually put him in the Van, to break the
enemies wings; but reserved the command of the Rear to himself, for the glory
of the Victory.

February the 22. 1648, It was debated at a Council of War (this Okey then
being one of the Cabab) to massacre, and put to the Sword all the Kings party;
the question was carried in the Negative only by two voices; doubtless they
had otherwise put it in execution.

Nor was he less officious in his combination with some others of the Army
(soon after the siege of Colchester) when they petitioned the House, that two
or three principal Gentlemen of the Kings party by name (of every County) might
be sacrificed to justice, whereby the land might be freed from blood-guiltiness.

A true Disciple, and Imitator of his hotheaded companion Haslerig, who upon
May 14th. 1649.
a report made to the House of the Death of Doctor Dorislaus, (formerly a poor
Schoolmaster, but afterward the Parliament Agent in the Low Countries,
notwithstanding upon the examination of his own Servants, it appeared he was
nabbed by some Scotch-men in revenge of Homiltons Death yet) upon the occasion
of this debate he moved, that six Royalists of the best quality might be put to
death, as a revenge for Dorislaus; and to deter men from the like attempts
hereafter. Which barbarous motion, though it was then rejected, yet the 18th of
May following the House passed this prodigious Declaration;

That if any more Acts of the like nature happened here-after, it should be
retaliated upon such Gentlemen of the Kings party as had not yet compounded.

Yet this not satisfying some of the blood-thirsty Grandees at White Hall, they
consulted (without them) of a way to diminish the number of their opposites,
Royalists, and Presbyterians, by a private massacre in the night time; for
which purpose many dark-Lanthornes, and Ponyards were provided against Anno
1649.
the Winter ensuing; this (Son of Belial) Okey, and his blind brother Hewson,
being designed two of the chief instruments, for effecting it. But the Plot
being by one of their conclave timely revealed to the then Lord Major of
London, and the City alarmed with the danger; these Jesuitical Fauxes, were
forced to hide their horns, and put up their Daggers, for fear of a further
discovery.

Thus you see of what Nature this Canibal Saint was. Ex pede Herculem; by the
footsteps of this Monster you may guess at the proportion of his whole body.

Yet all these his barbarous actions, fell short of those committed against the
precious life of his Royal Sovereign, Charles the first. But, Ne fandum scelus,
majori scelere ad impletur; every heinous offense, strives to secure it self by
a more heinous crime; for When Tyrants Swords in blood are died,
The Scabbards they must throw aside.


This was Machivils rule, and Okeys practice. For Cromwell having before well
flesht, this Beagle of his, in cruelties; he is now made one of the pack, (or
rather Butcher-row of Judges) for the Trial of His Majesly; and by his Master,
hallowed on to hone in full cry after his death. In which he showed himself so
active an instrument; that finding his power; he resolve to improve it to the
uttermost; and to deal with the King, as it fares with a Traveller sallen into
the hands of unmerciful Thieves; who first seized on his purse, and then (to
secure themselves,) take away his life: So he being a Sharer with others in
Crown Lands, that he might prevent the future revenge of his Treasons, and
Rebellions, and preserve his ill-gotten estate, at last determines to seal his
anjust Title with the innocent blood of his natural Sovereign.

Not did his implacable Malice against his Majesty rest here: for, when a
Committee, consisting of four persons, was ordered by the House, to consider of
a fit place (as they styled it) to Execute the King. Okey (being appointed one
of the number) persuaded them to have the Scaffold erected before the
Banqueting house at White Hall; alleging, it was not only the most
convenient place to bring him safe to the block; but probably, it would strike
the more terror into His Majesty, to see himself bronght upon the Stage, to
suffer before his own Palace-door, and so near that place his Father had built,
and He, and his Children formerly enjoyed so much felicity.

In the mean time, to complete this last tragic act of murdering his Prince;
that he might mortify him by degrees, he caused the King to be laid in a room
at White Hall the Sunday night after the day of his Sentence, so near the place
appointed for the separation of his soul from his Body, that he might hear every
stroke the Workmen gave upon the Scaffold, (where they wraght all night)
thinking by that Stratagem to have daunted his patient, and unconquered Soul,
which neither the hellish shapes of his disguised Executioners, nor the Horror
of Death it self, were any ways able to affright.

Nor can I here let pass in silence, what I have heard reported from very
credible persons; That the night before the Kings Death, (having removed him
from White Hall to St. James's, he and Axtel caused a guard of dissolute
Soldiers to be placed in his Chamber; who (with talking; clinking of Pots;
opening, and shutting of Doors; and taking of Tobacco there, (a thing very
offensive to the Kings nature) were ordered to keep him waking; that so by
distempering and amazing Him for want of sleep, they might not only disturb
his present meditations; but so dis-compose his spirits, as he might not the
next day be able, by any premeditated speech, to vindicate the innocence of his
actions to the People.

O! barbarous! and unheard of Cruelty! never hitherto paralleled by any
President in the world! But God at length delivered him up into the hands of
his Majesty, to suffer condign punishment for being guilty of the Murder of
His Father, and to be made an Example to deter posterity from doing the like.
Which Divine vengeance, though he had long escaped; yet he in the end found,
that God does usually recompense the slowness of his coming, with the severity
of his wrath; according to that of the Poet, To piece are sinit siquidem divina
potestas
Temporis ad spatium, parcit quandoque nocenti;
Sed gravius tandem tormentum Rector Olympi
Injungit, parcitque malis delict a nocentum.
Though God permits thy crimes long time to be
Unpunished, and the 'nocent often go free:
It Is but deferred thy torments to augment
For murdering the just, and innocent.


And such was lately the end of this bold and bloody Regecide for being
(together with his accomplices, Barkstead and Corbet brought to the Kings Bench
Bar upon the first day of Easter Term last, they were all by a Legal sentense
condemned to be hanged drawn and quartered, at Tyburn the Satterday following,
which was according-Executed, upon Bark stead and Corbet, but by reason of
Okeys penitent acknowledgement of his crimes and hearty prayers for his
Majesty, his body was by the Kings clemency ordered to be delivered to his
wife, and was buried in the Tower of London.

Miles Corbet.
TO wright his life, or draw his picture in its proper colonus, were to attempt
impossibilities; since neither his actions, or his face can be paralled by any
but the Devil: for he is his own Son; and so like his father; that a Major in
Ireland meeting him upon the road, and by his looks, suspecting him to be
rather a Pursevant of Hell, then one of the Parliaments Judges, forced him to
alight from his Horse, set down upon the ground; pull off his boots, and
stockings; and (at last) to show him his bare feet: which being done, he in a
very merry complement told him, he might now pass for a man, but before he had
searched, whither or not he had Cloven feet, he could not believe him any other
then the Devil.

This is he who was Inquisitor General, to the close Committee of Examinations.
An indigent person at the beginning of the Long Parliament, being indebted for
himself, and his Mother above three thousand pound more then he was worth. The
Prologue to the Hangman, that looks more like a Hangman, then the Hangman
himself; and may, (like Don Quixote) not undeservedly be styled, the Knight of
the ill favored face.

His disposition also holds good intelligence with his looks: you cannot say of
him, as Suetonius of Galba, ingenium Galae male habitat, for they suit so well
the one with the there, that in my life I never met with a better decorum.

Int us Nero: foris Cato; tet sambiguus; monstrum est. A cruel Nero within; a
grave Cate without; always distrustful, and a Monster, Astutam vapido servat
sub pectore vulpem.

His inside is lined with Fox furt; his outside with Sheeps-wool. One who had
deeply engaged himself to live, and dye with his Patron Oliver; for which
reason he was appointed to make a scrutiny into the lives, and actions of all
such persons as he conceived disaffected to the Cromwellian party. A strict
examiner of every man's carriage but his own. So active, and vigorous in the
prosecution of his malice, that when he could not suborne witnesses to take
away the life, of that ingenious writer of the History of Independency, Mr.
Clmenst Walker, he was permitted to be informer, witness, and judge against
him, himself. But finding his defigne at that time fall short of his
expectation, he caused him privately in the night to be soon after seized upon
in his bed, by a Guard of Soldiers, and conveyed far off from the City, to a
close Prison, where being debarred the use of either pen, ink, or Paper, or the
liberty of any Friend to visit him, after six years strick confinement, Death
put a period to this poor old Gentleman's sufferings.

Philip King of Spain, Lord of the Seventeen Belgic Provinces, sent Duke D'
Alva thither (another Cromwell in his cruelties) with a powerful Army; who
taking advantage of some new commotions there, erected a new Tribonal Criminal,
or High Court of Justice, called by the multitude Concilium Sanguinis, or the
bloody Conventicle, consisting of twelve Persons of mean extraction, to whom
were given full power to inquire into, judge, examine, and determine, all
causes whatsoever; and to dispose of the lives and estates of every such person
they as thought fit to destroy, at their wills, and pleasures. Which Counsel,
or inquisition, did supersed all other Courts of Judicature, and made void all
Laws, constitutions, Jurisdictions, and privileges of that Nation, by making
every thing they pleased High Treason.

Corbet taking advantage of this President, persuades Haslerigg to move the
Parliament to put it in execution here in England; which was accordingly done;
and they finding him a fit Agent for such a damnable enterprise, Ordered him (by
an Act passed in the House) to be chief Interpreter to this their State
Puppet-play; commonly called the close Committee of Examinations: erected to
purge the House of such Loyal Members as stood disaffected with their
proceedings. And the first experiment he made of this his Tyranical Power, was
upon the aforesaid Mr. Walker, Mr. Baynton Mr. Recorder Glyn, Commissary
General Copely, and several others of the House of Commons; who without any
legal trial; hearing, or witnesses produced beside himself, (who supplied the
office of a Judge, Prosecutor, Jury, and evidence against them) they were
immediately expelled the House of Commons, and soon after (together with the
Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, Middlesex, the Lord Berkley, Willioughly, Hunsdon,
and Maynyard) impeached by him of high Treason, in the names of the Commons of
England, for leavying a War against the King and Parliament. Wherein this
Blood-hound Corbet, (who of an Examiner, was now become an Advocate General)
moved for judgment to be pronounced against them; like the greedy Horse-leech,
Nec missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris hirudo,

Still thirsting after blood, but never satisfied. For which bold act, and
diligent service, (though it succeeded not) he was afterward recompensed with
a Rich Office of Regester in the Chancery (a place estimated at One thousand
six hundred pound per annum; and next made one of the Judges for the Circuit in
Ireland, (valued at five hundred pounds more per annum,) where he condemned
many persons to the Gallows, whose crimes far less deserved it then his own.

Nor was he less troublesome to the Church, then he had formerly been to the
State. For finding Vespatians Motto, Bonus odor lucri ex re qualibet, (that
wealth was sweet how ill soever got) he obtained another office from his
bountiful Masters at Westminster (worth at least) One thousand five hundred
pound more per annum, viz. to be Chairman for scandalous Ministers. The
Preisis Tormentor; or Master Examiner of all such Clergy men, as were either
already Beneficed, or to be admitted to any Benefice throughout the Nation. In
which place he so well played his Cards, that such of the Kings friends as were
before settled in their livings, were forced to compound with him for their
continuance; and others who came to him for admittance, if he could not object
any thing against their answers to such impertinent questions as he usally
propounded to them; his next artifice was to render them the new Engagement, to
be obedient to Oliver, and maintain the Good Old Cause, against all Kingly
power, or House of Lords; in so much as not one of such as were Learned, Loyal,
or Orthodox Divines, could ever gain his consent to any living; nor indeed any
other (though of his own Tribe and Faction) without giving him a considerable
gratuity, to the full value of their first years fruits (at the least) for a
Bribe.

A perfect Symonaick; one that was able to devour a whole Church at a
Breakfast; and swallow down St. Peter's Patrimony after it, instead of a
Mornings-draught. Always feeding; yet never filled; like Erisict hons bowels
in Ovid, -- Quodque urbibus esse,
Quedque satis poter at populo, non sufficit uni.
What populous Cities might alone
Suffice, is not enough for one.


This was the man who so much applauded Coronet Joyce for surprising the Kings
person at Holdenby house, when he was by Cromwell sent to him with Orders to
bring his Majesty the same night with all speed and secrecy to the Army;
boasting the next day, that since the Army had gotten the Cavalier Idol (for so
he styled his Sovereign) into their power, they would soon put the Parliament,
and all their Enemies, into their pockets.

An insolent slave! whofe Crimes transcending all hopes of Pardon, made him as
violent in the prosecution of his Hellish machinations, as he was desperate of
Heavens mercy in the for giveness of his fins.

But I will not cast any more Ink upon this Aethiopians face, since I find it
impossible (whether I reflect upon his crimes, or his countenance) to represent
either of them to the view of the world, blacker, or more horrid, than really
they are. He is now rewarded for his Treason, so as to speak more against him
were but to wage War with the Dead; which Italian severity, is as much averse
to my nature, as it is contrary to the Principles of Christianity: Therefore no
quid gravius dicam; whether I look upon his actions, or his end, I shall be no
more invective against him.

John BarkRead.
ROom for this Jack of all Trades. A Congregational Saint. The Holy-sisters
Thimble-maker. Cromwels setting Dog.. The Commonwealths Cerberus; Inferna
janitor aulae, The Hellish Gaolor of the Tower, and cruel Tormentor of such
Gentlemen as he could get into it. A fellow cut out, and fitted for all
Designs, Religions, and Fashions, whatsoever: so as you may say of him, as the
Poet of Pretem, Que teneam nodo mutantem Proter a vultum? A Devil incarnate in
his cruelties. No Fury in Hell ever transcended him in his Tyranny over
Prisoners, durinst his Lieutenantship of the Tower.

Witness his inhumane dealings with diverse eminent persons (loyal to His late
Majesty's interest) into whose favors, (under pretense of Eriendship) having
first insinuated himself, he next trappan'd into his snare, by forging lies,
and Plots of his own making, against them, and afterward suborned Witnesses
(as formerly Bradshaew and Mildmay did those two Knights of the Post, Pitts and
Bernard, against Sr. John Gell and Colonel Andrews) to take away their lives
(by a High Court of Injustice) when he could no longer squeeze any profit out
of their bodies.

Witness his private transporting of many hundred of poor Caveliers beyond the
Seas, whom this States spirit, barbarously sold, to be made Gally-slaves to
Turks, and Pagans: which miser able servitude they must inevitably endure,
till Death (more merciful than this Monster,) puts a period to their miseries.

I could instance above two hundred Gentlemen by him clapped in the Tower,
without any accusation, or accusor made known; where some of them were detained
many years, without any legal proceedings or charge against them: he, and his
Master Oliver (who continually furnished him with blanck Warrants for that
purpose) sharing between themselves in the mean time, their Estates, Offices,
and Revenues; whilst these were left to starve, rot, and dye in nasty rooms
(purposely provided to destroy them,) without any relief, or maintenance
whatsoever. For not one of their Friends dare lend, or send them money, or any
of their Kindred come near them, for fear of being committed Prisoners, or (at
least) questioned for malignants. So as his Prison was become a private
Slaughterhouse, and Olivers Court the public Shambles of injustice.

It was the Custom of King Charles the first, and his Predecessors, to grant
all owance to Prisoners in the Tower, during their confinements, according to
their several degrees; viz. 51. weekly for an Esquire, etc. and so
proportionably for every person suitable to his quality. But so far was this
Canibal from giving, or allowing any thing toward their subsistence; that he
converted those Fees to his own use, and caused them to be shut up close
Prisoners, in unwholesome Chambers; denying them the liberty of the Tower, and
b^nefit of the fresh air (the Camelious diet) for their healths, or resort of
Friends for their accomodations.

The Fable of the Promethean vulture was but an Emblem of this Monster: for so
long as his power lasted, he continually knaw'd upon the hearts of such persons
as were under his custody: his Office resembling that of the Sheep-heards Dog,
to worry Sheep first, and afterward drive them into his pinfolds.

He was Cromwels Coy-duck whilst he lived. Offitiosa aliu, exiti sa suis, ever
employed, and very officious to bring store of game into his Masters nets: one
that had learned to give poison into a golden cup; and knew well how to
deceive, even with Scripture plarases: like her in Claudian, Claudian de
voluptate Stiliconis lib. 2.
Blanda quidem vultu, sed quae non tetriox ulla
Interius fucatagenas, and amict a doloru
Illecibris --
An outward Saint; an inward Devil;
A painted face, but full of evil.
One who coveted to be rich, and great in power, that his greatness might equal
his malice: like him in the Poet, Qui tantum ut noceat, cupit esse potens --
Who raised himself out of the dirt,
That he might have more power to hurt.


Base men, when they climb to any height, prove above all others, most proud,
and ambitious; as appeared by this man, who being beggarly born, and of
contemptible Parents, became the most cruel, and fiercest bloodhound of all
Olivers pack.

Asperius nihilest humili, cum surgit in altum.
None are more cruel than mean men raised high,
Or Beggars mounted on a Palfery.
For set but any of these proud Raskals on Horseback, and they will never
rest, till (like their Comerade Pride aux) they have made good the Proverb, and
ride Post to the Devil.

When Traitors are climbing up Fortunes Wheel, Derrick commonly watches
under-neth it to catch them.

-- toll untur in altum
Ut lapsu graviore ruant.
This proved at last his reward, for his horrid villainies, treasons, and
murdering his Sovereign. A Legacy long since given and bequeathed to him by his
fellowsufferers and Brethren in iniquity, Harrison, Scot, Axtel, and Hugh
Peter's; who made the Hangman. Executor to their last Wills, and Testaments, To
whose mercy I leave him and Corbet, concluding with this Epitaph; HEre lies
poor John; who was not beat to death
As Stock Fish are; but only lost his breath.
Whilst he aspired himself on high to raise,
He gained a wreath of Hemp, instead of Bays;
The Fate of Traitors! may all perish so,
That seek their King, and Kingdoms overthrow.
Dun was his Doctor; who thought fit to bind
A Cord about his neck, to keep the wind
From fuming up his head. But, (O! sad note!)
The Rope begot a squinzy in his throat,
Which choakt him up! although some busy tongues
Report, it was the obstruction of his lungs
That caused his sudden Death. Let all who are
His Friends, by his example have a care
How they come under this rude Doctors paws;
Who only practices the Tyburn Laws,
In making falling-bands, or knitting-knots,
That cure diseases, beyond the Galli-pots.
A Rogue so known in Hell; each Sessions thence
They send Fiends to him for intelligence,
What guests are coming to the Sti^ian Court?
Whether the greater? or the meaner sort?
Traitors, or Thieves? to whom he answer makes
When Phoebe once her waining horns forsakes,
And Easter Term begins; I Will send you Corbet.
one
Whose looks shall 'ffright grim Pluto from his throne,
And scare the lesser Devils thence, when there
They see one Blacke^ than themselves appear.
But when Dun named Corbet, they replied
He Is Pluto's Kinsman by he mothers side,
We know him well, bid him make haste; for he
Is welcome to our black Fraternity.


William Munsun, Henry Mildmay, and Rob. Wallup.
As for that female Town-top (and great devourer of of buttered Peason) William
(late Lord) Munson, (formerly a Page, but now a close Prisoner in the Fleet;)
Harry (once Sr. Henry) Mildmay, and Robert Wallup, who did all actually sit as
Judges upon the Trial of their lawful Sovereign King Charles the first; by
reason it appeared that they were absent from the pretended Hight Court of
Justice at such time as Sentence passed to take away the Kings life; His
Masesty was g^atiously pleased to refer the manner of their punishments to His
High Court of Parliament who soon after (upon a Serious debate in both Houses)
passed an Act (too merciful for such ungrateful Traitors, though in some sort
suitable to the quality of their Crimes) viz. That their Estates should be
Confiscated, and their persons drawn upon Sledges from the Tower to Tyburn,
with Ropes about their Necks, and to be degraded of their Honors and Titles,
etc. which was accordingly Executed upon the 27th of January following, An.
1661. (it being the same day that the King was Condemned to death) many
thousands of people being Spectators of their infamy; who, not only at the
Gallows, but as they passed in the streets, bitterly cursed and reviled them;
insomuch; that Wallup (being of that shameful punishment more sensible than the
other of the horrid sin he had committed, as well as of the eternal ignominy,
and general Odium of the people upon him, for being guilty of so barbarous a
Crime) was suddenly after violently surprised with such tormenting passions of
Grief and Despair, that they soon made a separation between his soul and his
Body, so as he finished his miserable life in the Tower, within a few days
after his Procession to Tyburn.

Capt. Thomas.
NOR was the late strange, but just Judgment of God less observable upon
Captain Thomas, that notorious Quaker, and violent Agitator in Cromwels Army;
who having poisoned his Fellow Soldiers with Heresy, and Rebellion, and
persuaded many of them to join with him in promoting the Armies Remonstrance,
for bringing King Charles the first to a speedy Trial; it at length pleased the
Almighty in a miraculous manner, to revenge the innocent blood of that Blessed
Martyr, upon this Phanatick Rebel; for in the beginning of April last past
1661. he (then being in the City of Hereford) went to an Apothecaries Shop,
where he bought some quantity of Acouitum, or Rats-bane, which having put into
Milk, he drank it up privately in his Chamber, but finding it not of so quick
operation as was expected, he went back to the Apothecary to be satisfied,
whether it was right Rats-bane or not, that he had sold him? He answered, it
was; whereupon he replied, Then I have what I desired; and departing back to
his Lodging, the poison began to work so violently upon him, that within few
hours after he in great torment ended his wretched life, whose dead body the
Magistrates of that City, (considering the quality of the person, and the Laws
against self-murder) would not permit to be buried in Christian burial.

Thus Reader you may see how many several ways God has hitherto pleased to
execute his vengeance, upon the persons, and posterity of such men who without
any cause, nay contrary to Reason, Laws both Divine, and Humane, yea, even in
defiance of Heaven, dipped their hands in the sacred blood of their lawful
Sovereign according, to that of the Wise Man, The eye that mocketh his Father
(viz. the King, who is styled Pater Patriae) and despises his Mother (that is
the Church, called Regni pia Matter) the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out.
Which judgment we see has befallen many of the beforementioned Regicides,
their heads in several places being become a Spectacle both to Angels and Men,
and a prey to the Birds of the Air.

I shall conclude all with this Exhortatory Advice, That though God has been
pleased in his wrath to deprive this Nation of the best, and most pious King
that ever before reigned over it, Yet has he fince in mercy restored (even to
admiration) His Son to the Throne of His Blessed Father; (a Prince of such
accomplished Virtues, Piety, Wisdom, and Magnanimity, that render Him the
delight of his Subjects, and a terror to his Enemies;) let us therefore lay
aside all animosities, one against the other: and render (without grudging)
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; acknowledging Him Gods immediate
Vicegerent; without being so impudent as to prescribe Him in what manner or by
what means we will be ruled; or so Rebellious, as to draw our Swords against
Gods Anointed under pretense of Religion, or public good; But rather with
Obedience, and Humility, submit to His Commands, and confess with the Children
of Israel, Because the Lord has delighted in us, therefore He has made Him
King over us.

And finally, let every good Subject pray, that God would send us Peace, and
Truth; preserve His Sacred Majesty, and his Posterity; and confound the wicked
Councels of all such as are Enemies to Peace, Piety, and Monarchy. Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed by Phil. Stephens, at the Kings Arms, over against the
Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.
THE Great Antichrist, never till now fully discovered and proved, to be
neither Pope nor Turk, nor any single person, nor any one Monarch, nor Tyrant
in any Polity, but a pack or multitude of Hypocritical, Heretical,
Blasphemous, and Scandalous wicked men, which have fulfilled those P^ophecies
of the Scriptures, that were fore-spoken of the coming of the Geeat Antichrist,
and especially have united them together by Solemn League and Covenant, to slay
the two Witnesses of God, -- The Supreme Magistrate, and chief Governor of the
Church. -- And the Reader is desired to judge whether the Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, and Lay-Preachers, be not the false Prophet and
Mystical Soul of the Great Antichrist; and the prevalent Faction of the Long
Parliament be not the visible body of the Great Antichrist, in Folio. 7 s.

Seven Treatises; The Murder of Jesus paralleld to K. Charles. the first. 2.
The Tragedy of Zimri, that slew the King his Master. 3. Gods war with Rebels
and Murderers. 4. The lively Picture of these times. 5. The Duties of every
Christian man. 6. The Prerogatives of true Saints. 7. The true cause why we
should love God. Whereunto is annexed a Declaration and just Judgment upon the
Kings Enemies and Friends that neglected him. Together with the Treacherous
Scots, Bloody Irish, the Presbyterians in general, and in particular, the
Members of the Long and Rump-Parliament. Together with Irelands present and
past condition, stated in a Remonstrance to King and Parliament, in Folio. 6 s.
Both written by the Reverend Father in God Grussith, Lord Bishop of Ossory.

Several Sermons Preached at the Temple and elsewhere, proving the Nomothetical
and Coercive power of the King in Ecclesiastical affairs. -- The Episcopal
Office and Dignity, Together with a Vindication of the Liturgy of the Church of
England, by Mr. G. Masterson. in Octavo. 1 s.

An Entertainment for the Holy time of Lent, -- by Nich. Causinus, Author of
the Holy Court. --

A Scripture Combat about business of Religion, between a Roman Catholic Lady
and the Wife of a dignified person in the Church of England.

An Invective against the Army and their Abettors, who Murdered King Charles
the first; by the Reverend Father in God John, Lord Bishop of Exeter.

The Devout Ceremony of bowing toward the Altar Vindicated as Lawful, Pious
and Laudable in a Divinity Lecture at Cambridge; by Dr. Duncon, Chaplain to His
Majesty.


