THE Young Man's GUIDE IN HIS JOURNEY TO HEAVEN OR Traveling Spiritualized.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, 1700.

THE PREFACE TO Young Men.
Man's Life's a Journey, from his Mothers Womb he sets out; this World's the
Country through which he is Traveling: He begins with Crying, as if he foresaw
how difficult and dangerous his Way would be. The Stages, from Infancy to
Childhood, from Childhood to Youth; from Youth to Manhood, which soon declines
and old Age succeeds, in which he will say, I have no Pleasure in them.

Youth need a Guide, here is one offered them at a Cheap Rate, it is not
necessary his Name be known, so that he be skilful and faithful, no more than
the Authors of those two Excellent Books, The Whole Duty of Man, and Divine
Breathings.

Young Men.

Read, Consider and Practice the Directions, and you will not repent your
Purchase, it is not unlikely but Parents and Friends of Young Persons may make
Presents of them, to those who are beginning their Travel through this lower
World. That it may Answer its End in Conducting many to the upper and better
World of Rest and Blessedness, is the desire of

S. T.
April 8th. 1700.
The CONTENTS.
1. A Wise Traveller designs to go to some certain Place, and proposes some
certain End for his going thither. Page 1. 2. A Wise Traveller casts up the
costs of his Journey before he undertakes it. p. 3. 3. A Wise Traveller makes
diligent Enquiry which is the right Way, and is very careful to follow
Directions. p. 6. 4. A Wise Traveller sets out Early in the Morning, that he
may not be benighted before he comes to his Journeys end. p. 10. 5. A Traveller
who has Loitered, or deferred setting out in the Forenoon, must double his
Pace in the Afternoon. p. 15. 6. A Traveller is many Times put out of his Way
by false Directions. p. 19. 7. A careful Traveller is much grieved, when he
finds himself to be out of his Way, and hasts to get into it again, and is
never quiet till he has recovered it. p. 30. 8. A Traveller having been once
out of his Way, will be more wary and careful ever after to keep in it. p. 36.
9. Every Traveller is desirous to have as much Company with him in his Jonrney
as he can, especially of his Relations and Friends. p. 40. 10. A Traveller will
keep Company with such and such only as are going the same way that he is, and
to the same Place. p. 48. 11. He that Travels in a strange Country, must look
to meet with many Affronts and Injuries with many Afflictions and Hardships. p.
59. 12. He that Travels about Business, which highly concerns him, resolves to
go through all Difficulties and Discouragements. p. 64. 13. He that makes haste
in his Journey by Galloping or Running, will cause all the Dogs in the Country
to follow him by Barking. p. 70. 14. He that undertakes a long Journey through
difficult Passages, had need be a strong Man and well provided for his Journey.
p. 74. 15. It is very mischievous when Travelers fall out and quarrel by the
Way, it makes their Journey very uncomfortable. p. 79. 16. A Traveller who
carries Treasure with him, and suspects that he may meet with Thieves will go
well armed. p. 94. 17. He that Travels with a strong Guard, need not fear to be
robbed, or hindered in his Way. p. 100. 18. Though the Traveller find good
Entertainment in his Inn, yet he takes not up his abode there, but is restless
till he come to his own Home. p. 107. 19. Many a Traveller is ready to faint in
his Way, and to fear that he shall never reach his Journeys end, which yet does
attain it with Safety. p. 111. 20. When a Traveller after a long and dangerous
Journey is returned in Safety to his Fathers House: How will his Father embrace
him? How will all his Relations welcome him? What mutual Joy and Rejoicing will
there be. p. 115.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, etc.
MR. Clarkson's Practical Discourses in Folio. Watson's Body of Divinity.
Quick's Synodicon. Baxter's Catholic Theology.
Books written by the Reverend J. Flavel.
THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory. Containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. The Method of
Grace, in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the Father, and
accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the Spirit unto
God's Elect. Being the Second Part of the Fountain of Life. A Treatise of the
Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, Excellent and Immortal Nature of the
Soul are opened, etc. The Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence, etc.
Navigation Spiritualized: Or, A new Compass for Seamen, etc. A Saint indeed:
The great Work of a Christian. A Touchstone of Sincerity: Or, Signs of Grace,
and Symptoms of Hypocrisy: Being the Second Part of the Saint indeed. A Token
for Mourners: Or, Boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends. Husbandry
Spiritualized: Or, the Heavenly Use of Earthly Things. Mr. Philip Henry's Life.
Mr. Reynold's Minister of Notingham his Life. Mr. Mead's Almost Christian. --
Early Obedience. -- Ezekiel's Wheels. -- Spirit^^^ Wisdom improved against
Temptations. -- A Sermon of Union. Mr. Joseph Barrett's Funeral Sermon, to
which is annexed his Life, etc. Mason's Spiritual Songs. Barton's Hymns in Six
Centuries. Allen's Alarm. Allen's (...) Guide. Mr. Adam's Funeral Sermon. A
Discourse concerning the Redeemers Dominion over the Invisible Worlds; some
Part whereof was Preached on the Occasion of the Death of John Houghton
Esquire. Dr. Bate's Funeral Sermon. Mr. Mead's Funeral Sermon. All Four by the
Reverend Mr. John How. Of the Shortness of Time. By F. Fuller. Mr. Bradford's
Eight Sermons Pleach'd at St. Paula, at the Lecture founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil Esquire.
THE YOUNG Man's Guide, etc.
CHAPTER I. A Wise Traveller designs to go to some certain Place, and proposes
some certain End for his going thither.
THERE are but two Places, to which all Men in the World are going, Heaven and
Hell. Now the greatest Part of Men never seriously consider to which of these
the course of their Life leads them, it is said of Abraham, He went out not
knowing whither he went; but it may be said Heb. 11. 8.
of most, that for want of Faith, they go on not knowing whither they are
going. Fools and Mad Men are always Rambling, but can give no account whither,
and therefore many Times run upon Death and Danger; such Mad Men, and worse,
are all profane Men, who never consider whither they are going till they drop
into Hell, but now the serious Godly Christian in the whole course of his Life
designs for Heaven sets his Face Sion-ward, is bound for the Jer. 5. 5.
New Jerusalem, seeks for a better Country, is journeying through the
Wilderness Heb. 11. 16.
of this World to the Heavenly Canaan; every Journey he takes on Earth,
promotes his Journey to Heaen. Every Thought, Word and Action, he sincerely
desires may be so many steps in Heavens way. He aims at Heaven, his Eye is
there, his Heart is there, and he is restless till he be there, where he knows
he shall enjoy Eternal Rest where he shall be freed from all Satan Temptations,
from all his Lusts and Corruptions, from all his Doubts and Fears, from all his
Sorrows and Sicknesses, from all Men's Hatred and Persecution, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
1 John 3. 2.
where he shall be for ever wi^ the Lord; see him as he is, and ser^^ him as he
desires; where he shall behol^ his Blessed Savior, who was Crucifi^^ for him,
Crowned with Glory and Majesty; where he shall with innumera^^ Saints and
Angels, sing Praises and H^lelujahs, to him that sits upon (...) Throne, and to
the Lamb for ever mo^^

CHAP. II. A Wise Traveller casts up the Costs of his Journey, before he
Undertakes it.
SO every true Christian who seriously resolves for Heaven, when he begins his
Spiritual Race, and sets forth in that way which is called Holy, ought wisely
to consider what it will cost him to be Religious, and what difficulty he must
expect to meet with in the way to Heaven. Our Blessed Lord and Savior, who is
Wisdom it self, has taught this Lesson of Heavenly Wisdom to all who will be
his Disciples and follow him, Luke 14. 26.
that they must make their account before Hand, least with shame they revolt
from him afterward; and when they meet with hardship in the way to Canaan,
should meditate their return to Egypt: Every one therefore that minds to be a
Christian indeed, and persevere a Christian to the end, must and will seriously
consider beforehand, that through Acts 14. 22.
much Tribulation, he must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That he must give
all Diligence to make his Calling and Election 2 Pet. 1. 10. Luke 13. 24.
sure. That he must strive to enter in at the straight Gate of Heaven; yea, he
must strive as one that is in an Agony, as the Word signifies: He knows that he
must Meditate in the Law of God Day Psalm 1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
and Night: That he must Pray without ceasing, that his Prayers must be
Wrestlings, and put up with strong Cries and Tears. That he must set a Watch
before Psalm. 141. 3. Pro. 4. 23.
the Door of his Lips, and keep his Heart with all Diligence; and make a
Covenant with his Eyes, that he must walk exactly every step of his Way, and be
1 Pet. 1. 15.
Holy in all manner of Conversation; yea, he reckons that he must pass through
harder Duties yet, and such as are more contrary and thwarting to Flesh and
Blood; and to which Carnal Reason will cry out, These be hard sayings, who Mat.
26. 24.
can bear them? He knows that self must be Denied, the World must be Crucified,
Lust and Corruption must be Mortified, though they be as dear as Right Hands
and Right Eyes. He knows that Mat. 5. 29. Mat. 10. 38.
the Yoke of Christ must be taken on, and the Cross of Christ must be taken up;
He knows that he shall be hated of all Men for Christ's sake; yet he must Mat.
11. 29.
Love them, while they Hate him, Bless them while they Curse him, Pray for them
Mat. 5. 24.
while they despitefully use him, and persecute him. He knows it may come to
that, that he must part with his dearest Friends and nearest Relations, with
his Goods and Good-Name, with his Estate and Liberty, nay with his Life too,
Luke 14. 26.
if he will not be false to Christ and his own Conscience: And lastly, He knows
that this is the Way, that all that have gone to Heaven before him have gone
thither in; He knows that all the Servants of God have been great Sufferers,
and that the Son of God was the greatest Sufferer of all: This and much more he
has deliberately considered with himself, and heartily agrees to the Terms and
Conditions, and thinks them all Holy, Just, and Good; and so he goes on from
Strength to Strength till he appears before God in the Heavenly Zion; and like
another Joshua and Caleb not being frighted with the difficulty of Duties, or
the Danger of Sufferings, he marches on with an holy Resolution, and with a
strong Confidence in Gods assistance (of encouraging others so to do) till he
triumphantly arrive at the Heavenly Canaan.

CHAP. III. A Wise Traveller makes diligent enquiry, which is the right Way,
and is very careful to follow Directions.
THere be many that make the Way to Heaven so broad that none can miss it, as
if they knew the Way thither better than Christ himself, who says Mat. 7. 14.
that straight is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads to Life, and few
there be that find it; but all those who are Followers of Christ do find by
Experience that his Words are true, Ardua est ad Regnum Via, the Way to his
Kingdom is no easy Way; and therefore they are full of Doubts and Fears, least
they should miss it, and are very sollicitous and inquisitive to be directed
and set in the right Way, They ask the Way to Zio^ Jer. 50. 5.
with their Faces thitherward.

First, They run to the faithful Ministers of Christ (who are as Leaders and
Guides, who are as Lights upon a Hi^^^ to show Men their Way to Heaven and cry
out to them as those, Men and Acts 2.
Brethren, What shall we do? And with the Jailer, Sirs, What must I do to be
Acts 16.
saved? And with the Young Man, What shall I do, that I may have Eternal Mat.
19.
Life? They beg of these Samuels to teach them the good and the right Way, and
of these Servants of the most High God, to show them the Way of Salvation.

Secondly, They resort to experienced Christians, who have been longer
acquainted with the Ways of God, and earnestly importune them to communicate
their Experiences; they enquire of them, How they may avoid or overcome such a
Temptation; How they may mortify such a Corruption? How perform such a Duty?
How bear such an Affliction? And how undergo such Sufferings? and many other
such Cases they desire to be resolved in: As they say of Children, they will be
always asking of Questions, so it may be said of the Children of God, they will
not only go to the Ministers and Servants of God for Direction: But,

Thirdly, They will go to the Great God himself, and will beg of him, as David
did, Cause me to know the Way Psalm. 143. 8.
wherein I should walk, for I lift up my Sou^ to thee. Teach me O Lord the Way
of thy Psalm. 119. 33.
Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end show me thy Way, O Lord; teach me
thy Psalm. 25. 4.
Paths; and because he knows that God has fully and plainly revealed his Will
and his Way in his Word: Therefore,

Fourthly, As the Traveller goes to his Map-Book for Direction, so does he to
the Book of God, there he finds every step of his Way chalked out before him.
All the credenda, agenda, and fugienda, what he must believe, what he must do,
and what he must leave undone^ there he finds Direction, how he must walk in
every Condition, in every Relation, in every Age, in every Calling^ in every
Holy Duty: There he finds that he must be Regenerate and Born again, or he
cannot see the Kingdom of John 3. 3. Mark 16. 16. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
God; he must Repent, and Believe, and obey the Gospel, or he cannot be saved*
he must live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present World, if he will
live happily in the World to come. Many such Directions as these, he finds in
tha^ Blessed Book, which will be a Lamp (...) Psalm. 119. 105.
his Feet, and a Light to his Paths: Now as a careful Traveller takes notice o^
every Place he is to pass through, and punctually observes them, cannot fail to
get safe to Heaven. But it is as possible for a Man to carry a Ship to the
Indies without a Card or Compass, as for a Soul to go to Heaven, without
following the Directions of Gods Word.

Fifthly, As the wary Traveller, who would be sure to keep the right Way, will
take his Guide along with him; so will a Child of God, desire to have the
Spirit of God for his Guide to Heaven, that when he is turning to the Right
Hand or to the Left, he may hear that Voice behind him saying, This is the Isa.
30. 21.
Way walk in it, he will pray that the good Spirit of God, will lead him into
the Psalm. 143. 10.
Land of Vprightness: That the Spirit of Truth, may lead him into all Truth: We
read that those who are in Christ, John 16. 13.
do walk after the Spirit, so that the Spirit goes before them, and leads them
in the way. It is said, As many as are led by Romans 8. 1, 14.
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, which is convertible. And it may
as truly be said, As many as are the Sons of God, they are led by the Spirit of
God. Now he that has such an unerring Rule, as the Word of God to direct him
in his Way; and such an infallible Guide, as the Spirit of God to lead him in
his Way, he cannot but get safe to his Journeys end, and that is to Heaven.

CHAP. IV. A Wise Traveller sets out Early in the Morning, that he may not be
Be-Nighted, before he comes to his Journeys End.
CHristian, if thou resolvest for Heaven, learn this Point of Heavenly Wisdom.
Begin thy Journey betimes, set out in the Ways of God in the Morning of thy
Age; least the Night of Death surprise thee before thou have finished thy
Course, and so all thy Hopes perish. Delays are dangerous, especially in
matters of Spiritual and Everlasting Concernment. How many Millions are now in
Hell, that thought to Repent before they Died, but Died before they Repented?
With how many has their Sun set at Noon? With how many in the Morning of their
Days? With how many has Sunrising and Sunsetting come together? O what
Madness is it then to defer thy Repentance till hereafter! Answer me two
Questions.

Quest. 1. Have thou the Command of Time? Surely no! the Time present only is
thy Day, not one Minute of what is future may be called thine; thou may Isa.
4. 14.
as soon recall all the Years that are past, as Promise thy self one Year or one
Hour to come: Thou Fool, this Night Luke 12. 20.
thy Soul may be required of thee: However thy may hear a Voice, Give an
account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no Luke 16.
longer Steward.

Quest. 2. If thou had Hereafter in thy own Hand, and could Promise thy self
longer Life, have thou Repentance in thine own Hand? Surely no! For Repentance
is the Gift of God, and how can thou presume he will bestow it upon thee, who
have so often refused it when it was offered? Can thou think that when thou
have given up thy Youth and Strength to Satan and thy Lusts, that the Blessed
and Holy God will accept of Satan's leavings. Thou would judge that Person to
be Lightheaded, or out of his Wits, that should talk of beginning a long
Journey on Earth, when he is going out of the World. Surely he is worse then
Mad, that defers setting out in his Journey to Heaven, till Old Age, Sickness,
or a Deathbed; thou will have enough to do, when thou art Old to conflict with
the Infirmities of Age, when thou art Sick to conflict with thy Pains, when
thou art Dying to conflict with the King of Terrors, and with Satan, who will
be sure to assault thee with his strongest Temptations; and he that tells thee
now it is too soon, will then tell thee it is too late. An old Convert is a
great Rarity; Can a Jer. 13. 23.
Blackamore change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots, much less can he that is
accustomed to do Evil, learn to do Good; by which Word of God we learn, That a
Young Sinner is more like to make an old Devil, than a Young Saint: The
contrary Proverb, A Young Saint an Old Devil, is a Lesson which the Old Devil
teaches Younger Sinners, that he may deceive them, and rob them of their
Souls. But the God of Truth, teaches us another Proverb.

A Young Saint will be an Old Saint* Train up a Child in the Way wherein (...)
Prove. 22. 6.
should go, and when he is Old he will no^ depart from it. Timothy had learned
the 2. Tim. 3. 15.
Scriptures from a Child, He walked according to that Rule all his Life. John
was a Young Saint, and an Old Saint. It is the Observation of one, that he that
was the Beloved Disciple, and lay in Christ's Bosom was the youngest of all;
Christ loves young Disciples, away then with all delays and imitate good
Josiah, who while he was yet young began to seek after God: What art thou
afraid of being Happy to soon? Surely thou art so, if thou art afraid of being
Holy too soon; for Holiness is the only way to Happiness. Art thou unwilling
Heb. 12. 14.
to part with thy Lusts and sensual Pleasures too soon? that is, as if thou
should say, I am nnder the most vile and cruel Slavery and Bondage in the
World, yet I am unwilling to be set at Liberty too soon. I am deadly Sick of
the Leprosy, or of the Plague, yet I would not be cured too soon. Certainly
Egyptian or Turkish Bondage is Freedom, compared with the Bondage of Sin and
Satan: The Leprosy of the Skin is cleanness and soundne^^, if you compare it
with the Leprosy of the Soul; The Plague of the Body is Health and Ease, in
Comparison of the Plague of the Heart. Well then, be persuaded to set out for
Eccl. 12. 1.
Heaven, in the Morning of thy Days, sacrifice the first Fruits of thy Time to
God, Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. Say not with Austin before
his Conversion, Da Domine Poenitentiam sed non ad huc; Lord give me Repentance,
but not yet. But rather cry out, as he did after Conversion; Lord, why not now,
why not now? Plutarch reports of one who in the midst of his Feasting and
Jollity, received a Letter which gave him notice, that his Life was in present
Danger; he put up the Letter in his Pocket, saying, Seria Cras, I will think of
serious Matters to Morrow, do not thou say after him, least it cost thee the
Life of thy Soul, as it did him the Life of his Body, for he was poisoned at
that Dinner; but do thou labor to say, as another once did: Cur avi in
Juventut^ ut been viverem, in Senectute ut been moriar. I took care in my Youth
to liv^ well, and in Old Age to die well. And learn this Lesson of the Wise
Traveller He that sets out most Early, will fin^ his Journey most Easy.

CHAP. V. He that has Loitered or Deferred setting out his Journey in the
Forenoon, must double his Pace in the Afternoon.
I Have endeavored in the Application of the foregoing Observation, to give
thee serious Advice, to set out in thy Journey toward Heaven in the Morning of
thine Age; and certainly this would make thy Journey, much more easy and
comfortable, and would free thee from many Fears and Doubts, and prevent much
Sorrow and Grief of Heart; but if this Counsel come too late, and thou have
loitered and deferred to begin thy Journey in the Forenoon of thy Day, then
learn this Lesson of the ^arthly Traveller, to make all the speed thou can in
the Afternoon, since thou have set out late, make the more haste now thou art
on thy Way. Run like Ahimaaz, who though he did set out after Cushi, yet
overran him 2 Samuel 18. 23.
and got before him; labor to overtake those who were in Christ before thee,
give double Diligence to make thy Calling 2 Pet. 1. 10.
and Election sure, labor to redeem the Time, and to abound in the Work of the
1 Cor. 15. 58. Phil. 2. 12.
Lord, to make thy Religion thy business, and to Work out thy own Salvation
with Fear and Trembling. And what Advice I give to thee herein, I desire to
give it to my own Soul. For I must acknowledge (and I desire to do it with
shame and sorrow) that in the Days of my Youth, I walked after the Fashion of
this World, and after the Lusts of mine own Heart, and have even wearied my
self in ways of Wickedness; but as for the pleasant Ways and peaceful Paths of
God, my corrupt Heart accounted them too strict, and did wholly decline them
Oh that my Head were Water, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might
weep Day and Night, for my great Folly and Madness: How can I sufficiently
bewail it (if it were with Tears of Blood) that I should so miserably mispend
the Prime of mine Age, and put my self so much behind-Hand in my Journey
toward Everlasting Happiness; that while my Understanding, Memory, Affections,
and all the Faculties of my Soul were lively and vigorous, and fit for ^he
Service of my God, I should serve ^ivers Lusts and Pleasures; and that while I
enjoyed Youth and Health, and ^trength, I should not take one step in
Heavens-way: How did Pride, and ^assion, and Wantonness, and Volup^uousness,
devour my precious Time and ^y Heart too! How often have I spent ^he whole Day
in Hunting or Bowling, and a great part of the Night in Dan^ing and Carding?
sure this was not the ^ay to Heaven. Oh the Infinite Mercy and Patience of my
God, that had not ^hen cut me off, and made me to reap ^he Fruit of mine own
Ways! But O my Soul, how can thou sufficiently admire the free Grace and
infinite Good^ess of my Blessed God! who stopped ^hee in thy Carrear toward
Hell, and ^urned thy Feet into the Way of Peace! Consider now what thou have to
do, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that Psalm. 103. 1.
within me, bless his Holy Name: Who has opened thy Eyes at last, and has
given thee an Heart to forsake the Ways of Death, and to choose the Way of Life.
Be heartily humbled, and bewail, that thou had not set out sooner, in so
Good, so Sweet, and so Holy a way; and that thou did so linger in Sodom, and
were Content to abide so long a^ it were in the Suburbs of Hell, an^ now thou
art in the Right Way wal^ on cheerfully in it; lift up thy feebl^ Knees, and
make straight Paths: Thin^ thou can never do enough for tha^ God, who has
done so much for Thee^ since he has set thy Heart at Liberty, do thou run the
Ways of his Commandments; since thou have done (...) much against him in the
former pa^^ of thy Life, labor to do the more for him in the remaining Part;
that s^ though thou did set out late, tho^ may with Safety and Comfort
arrive (...) thy Journeys end. For shame, do no^ thou whose Feet were as Hinds
Feet (...) the Way of Sin, creep on a Snails pac^ in the Ways of God. Now
Christian (who read these Lines) if thou ha^ obtained that special Grace and
Favou^ to be Converted, and brought into the Right Way in the Days of thy Yout^
O Live in Admiration of the Ri^^ Grace of God, and show thy thankfu^^ness by
walking cheerfully in his Way* But thou art in my Condition, if tho^ have
neglected to seek the Kingdom (...) God in the first Place, and to walk (...)
the way of Holiness, which leads (...) that Kingdom (as I have done.) Let us
now set to it with our whole Heart. Let us now forsake our wicked Ways, and
Isa. 55. 7.
unrighteous Thoughts, and let us return to ^he Lord, and he will have Mercy
upon us, and to our God and he will abundantly Pardon: Let us, who have brought
forth ^one but bitter Fruits in our Youth bring ^orth the Fruit unto Holiness
in our Old Age, and then our End shall be Ever^asting Life. Let us learn this
Lesson from our Horse (for the Lord sends us ^o School to the Bruit Creatures)
though ^e seem weary and tired, yet when he ^nows he is come near his Journeys
End, ^e will mend his Pace, and go with ^ew Mettle and Courage.

CHAP. VI. A Traveller is many times put out of his Way by false Directions.
A Christian had need be very Circumspect in his walking, and or^er his Steps
according to the Infallible Rule of God's Word, for he will meet with many
Seducers and Opposers, who will endeavor to put him out of hi^ way. The three
grand Seducers (...) the Devil, a Man's own Lusts, and the World.

First, The Devil, that old and Ar^ Seducer, who since he was thrown o^^ of
Heaven himself, makes it his work (...) keep others from thence, and to lea^^
poor Souls from the Kingdom of Go^ to his own Kingdom of Darkness. The old
Serpent deceived our first Parent^ and led them out of the way, and ou^ of
Paradise too. He is said to deceiv^ Genesis 3. Rev. 12. 9.
the whole World. He has mill fallen^ arts, a thousand arts to deceive poo^
Souls: he has his (...), Devices; h^^ 2 Cor. 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11. Rev. 2. 24.
(...), Wiles or Methods; his (...) Depths; his (...), Snares. All the^^ to
deceive poor Souls, and to lead the^^ out of their way. Sometimes he
tran^^forms 1 Timothy 3. 7.
himself into an Angel of Light^ sometimes appears as a roaring Lyon^ 2 Cor.
11. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 8.
now he tempts to Presumption, an^ anon to Despair: In Youth he tel^ thee it is
too soon to be Religious, an^ in old Age he tells thee it is too la^^ But his
chief Artifice is to misreprese^ both the way of Holiness, and the w^^ of Sin;
the former he represents as^ difficult, unpleasant, and a melanchol^ way; the
latter as gilded, and sugared over with all the Sweets of Pleasure and
Delight: He will tell thee, That the one is a broad and easy way, the other
(...) strait and narrow way: but he will ^ot tell thee that the broad way leads
Matthew. 7. 13, 14.
^o Destruction, and the narrow way ^eads to Life. He will tell thee that ^f
thou will walk in his way, thou shall ^ave Riches enough, but if thou walk
^n the way of God, thou must look to ^eet with Poverty, Hunger, Thirst, Tears,
Hatred, Separation and Reproach; ^ut he will not tell thee, that Christ
de^ounceth a Woe to the first, and pro^ounceth Luke 6. 20.
the last to be Blessed. He will tell thee that the way of Sin is ^rowed with
Roses; but he will not ^ell thee, that Hell is at the end of that way: He will
tell thee, that the way of Holiness is strowed with Thorns; but ^e will not
tell thee, that Heaven is at ^he end of that way. Well then, Fel^ow-Travellers,
as one advises well in another case, take heed of keeping the Devils Counsel,
so I caution thee in ^his case, take heed of taking the De^ils Counsel, for he
never cease to ^ervert the right ways of the Lord. Acts 13. 10


Secondly, Another grand Seducer, and a dangerous, is the Lusts of thine own
Heart: If thou consult with these, thou will never get to Heaven; they will
advise thee to take the way of Ease, of Self-pleasing, of Self-preservation,
and to shun the ways wherein there are so many strict Duties to be performed;
so many severe Precepts to be observed; so many Hardships to be suffered. They
will persuade thee not to part with present things, for future invisible
things, and such things as thy Senses tell thee are full of sweetness and
delight, for such things as thou did never see, but only have heard of; not
to let go Pleasures and Comforts, which thou have in hand and possession, for
such as thou have only in hope and expectation: And by such false Suggestions
will they endeavor, like an Ignis fatuus, to lead thee out of thy way; then if
thou meet with Sufferings and Persecutions (as thou will be sure to do, if thou
art in the right way) thou will be ready to make a stand, (as the Traveller
does when he comes to a cross Way,) and to enquire which is thy way: Then if
thou consult with Flesh and Blood, that will be sure to show thee a false way:
That will cry out, Save thy self, save thy Estate, save thy Liberty, save thy
Life, but no save thy Soul: That will say, Pity thy Wife, pity thy Children,
pity thy Family, but no pity thy Soul. Therefore, Christian, stop thine Ears
against these Sirens, unless thou have a mind to leave the way of Life, and to
be led into the way of Death and Destruction.

Thirdly, Another grand Seducer is the World, in which one indeed are a World
of Seducers; I shall mention Three, whom I would caution a Christian, who
seriously desires to keep in Heavens way, to take heed of.

First, The Covetous Worldling, who makes Mammon his God, and can think of no
greater happiness, than great Possessions and large Revenues, than full Barns
and full Bags: If thou take his Advice, he will persuade thee to take the way
of Profit, to heap up Riches, to add House to House, and Land to Land, thou
shall have the Reputation of a wise Man whilst thou live, and leave a great
Substance to thy Babes when thou die. Christian, Look to thy Map-Book, and
thou shall see that this is as far from thy way, as the East is from the West,
or as Heaven is from Hell; there thou shall find that thou can not love God
and Mammon; That Mat. 6. 24. 1 John 2. 15. Mat. 19. 24.
if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him; That it is
easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of God; That tells thee, That Mark. 8. 36. Col. 3. 5.
Jam. 4. 4.
if it were possible for thee to gain the whole World to thy self, with the
loss of thy Soul, thou would make but a bad bargain: That tells thee, That
Covetousness is Idolatry, and that it is Spiritual Adultery too; For as the
Love of an Harlot with-draws the Heart from a Lawful Wife, so the Love of the
World with-draws the Heart from God.

Secondly, Another Seducer, or Setter, that the World employs to turn
Christians out of their way, is the Voluptuous Epicure, who can fancy no other
Heaven but to satisfy his Lusts, and to wallow in Pleasures (and indeed it is
all the Heaven he is like to have:) If thou hearken to him, he will counsel
thee to indulge thy Lusts, to pamper thy Flesh, to take thy fill of Pleasure
while thou may, while thou have Youth and Time. Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem
nulla voluptas. Eat, drink and play, after Death no pleasure, (and indeed there
is none for such as he.) He will tell thee how sweet and delightful his way is,
and that Stage Plays, Dancing, Dicing, Drinking, Drabbing, are other manner of
Delights than thine, namely, to be poring in a Book all Day, to be running
after Sermons, to be Solitary, and alone in thy Closet, to punish thy Body with
Fasting. Well, Christian, look to thy Rule again, which is a sure Rule, and
cannot deceive thee, which tells thee; Men are in an unregenerate State, while
they are serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, that are reckoned Tit. 3. 3.
amongst the vilest Sinners; and those that are furthest out of the way, are
those that are lovers of pleasures more 1 Timothy 6. 34.
than lovers of God: That will tell thee, that the Prodigal was out of his way,
(and out of his Wits too) when he took his Journey in a far Country, and there
wasted his Substance in riotous Living, Luke 15. 11.
and with Harlots. And when he came to himself, then he left these Courses, and
returned to his Father. There thou shall find, that Moses chose Heb. 11.
rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season. But there is one Place, which if there were no
more were enough to fright thee from hearkening to these Epicures, and from
following their Courses. Rejoice O Young Man in thy Youth, and let thine Heart
cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in
the sight of thine Eyes; but know that for all these things, God will bring
thee into Judgment. So that thou feast these Sons of Pleasure are not in the
way of Life, but in the way of Death; and are like those Fishes which the
Historian reports of, that they sport themselves so long in the Shallows of the
River Jordan, till the swiftness of the Stream carries them into the Dead Sea
where they all perish. They who are for a short Life and a Merry, will meet
with a long Death and a Sad one: Earthly Pleasures will be followed with Hells
Torments; The Rich Man, who had lived so high was brought to a short Diet:
Those that cannot live without Pleasures here, must live without Pleasure for
ever.

And here by way of Digression, I heartily wish some Eloquent Appollos, some
powerful Orator would speak this Caution so loud, that all the young Gallants
in England might hear it, who (for the Generality of them) live as if they had
been brought up in the School of Epicurus, and not in the School of Christ; as
if they had drank of Circes Cup, and were turned into Swine; they so drown and
soak themselves in Pleasure, that they unfit and incapacitate themselves, not
only for the Service of God, but also for their King and Country: It is a sad
Consideration to think, what Privy Councillors, what Parliaments, what
Magistrates we are like to have in another Age.

A Third Seducer thou will meet with in the World is the Ambitious Person, who
like the Camelion lives upon Air, upon the breath of the Prince, and the
applause of the People, who knows no other Heaven but the Princes Smile, no
other Hell but his Frowns. If thou apply thy self to him for Direction in thy
Way, what Course will he advise thee to, but that crooked Path that himself
walks in? He will advise thee to take the way that leads to Honor and
Preferment in the World: He will tell thee the only Happiness is to be the
Princes Favorite, and the Peoples Darling, to have the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts, and the chief Seats in all Conventions, and greetings in the Market,
and to be called of Men Rabbi, to have the Cap and Mat. 23. (...).
the Knee; where ever thou come to have all Men bow to thee; Digito monstrari
and dicier hic est.

But Christian look to thy Rule, and thou will never be deluded with this
Pageantry: Thou will never be led into this Fools Paradise, that will show thee
the way to true Honor, Them that Honor me, I will Honor. Abraham, 1 Samuel 2.
30.
Moses, Paul, these were honorable indeed. Abraham, the Friend of God; Moses,
the Servant of the Lord; Paul, a Servant of Jesus Christ. These are other
manner of Titles of Honor, than the greatest Grandees on Earth ever attained.
Artaxerxes, who styled himself King of Kings. Ahasuerus that Reigned Ezra 7.
12. Esth. 1. 1.
from India to Aethiopia over an hundred twenty seven Provinces, The Great
Turk, The Great Mogul, The Emperor of the West, The Emperor of the World, are
poor, empty, airy, Titles, in Comparison of this, The Servant of the Lord. All
his Servants are Favorites, and every one of them is a King, and when all
Earthly Crowns shall fade and wither, they shall have a never fading Crown of
Glory, This Honor have all his Saints. Psalm. 149. 9
Then Christian thy Rule will tell thee, what end the way of Ambition usually
leads to in this Life. What became of Herod who was the Peoples Darling? What
became of Haman who was the Princes highest Favorite? the one when the People
had cried him up for a God, Acts 1^. 22, 23. Esth. 5. 11.
died like a Beast, and was devoured of Worms: The other, when he had boasted
one Day, how highly the King had advanced him above all his Princes and
Servants; was the next Day advanced to a Gallows fifty Cubits high, where he
ended his Life and Honor, in a shameful and most Ignominious Death. Certainly
he has read but little History, (nay he has lived but a little while in the
World) who cannot by his own Experience add many Presidents of this Kind, which
should be as so many Pillars of Salt to scare thee from this way, Whosoever
exalts himself shall be abased: Luke 14. 11. Job 24. 24.
They are exalted for a little while, but are gone, and brought low, they are
taken out of the Way as all others. It was a saying worthy of that Christian
Emperor Theodosius, He rejoiced more that he was a Member of the Church of
God, then Gaudere se magis quod esse membrum Ecclesiae Dei quam quod esset
Caput Imperii.
that he was an Emperor of the whole World.

CHAP. VII. A Careful Traveller is much grieved, when he finds himself to be
out of his Way, and hastens to get into it again; and is never quiet, till he
has recovered it.
SO is it with every Christian that is Traveling toward Heaven. 1. He is
exceedingly grieved, when he finds himself out of his Way. 2. He hasts, and is
restless, till he get into it again.

First, When by the Violence of Satan's Temptation, or by the Prevalency of
Corruption, or by the Allurements of the World, he has been drawn aside out of
the Way of Holiness into the Bypath of Sin: How is this Soul filled with
Godly Sorrow and Humiliation? What Sighs and Groans? What Cries and Tears? What
Complaints and Lamentations? What Self-abhorrency and Self-condemnation might
you hear, were you at his Closet Door, when he is pouring out his melting Soul
before God? Nay sometimes he is like to be swallowed up with overmuch Sorrow;
He cries out, he is lost and undone, that he shall never recover his Journeys
end, that he shall never get to Heaven: Was it not thus with David, when he had
so foully lost his way. My Sin is ever before me, I am weary of my Groaning,
all Psalm. 6. 6.
the Night make I my Bed to swim, I Water my Couch with my Tears. My Heart
Psalm. 102. 4.
is smitten, and withered like Grass, so that I forget to eat my Bread: His
Grief was such, that he could neither Eat nor Sleep. Next hear Ephraim
bemoaning himself, Surely after I was turned I repented, Jer. 31. 19.
and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh, I was ashamed, yea
even confounded, etc. Then consider Peter, when fear of Suffering and
Self-confidence had led him out of the Way, and made him deny and forswear his
Lord and Master, He went out and wept bitterly. Mat. 26. last.
I shall add one more Instance, and that is of the Church: It were enough to
melt an Heart of Stone seriously to consider her doleful Complaints in the Book
which is called Lamentations: You may there see, that the ground of it was
because they had departed from God and his Ways, the whole Book is a Proof of
this; but I shall Name a few places to show you her Grief: She weepeth sore in
Lam. 1. 2, 4, 12.
the Night, and her Tears are on her Cheeks, her Priests sigh, her Virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness. Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow
like to my Sorrow. Mine Eyes do fail with Tears, my Bowels Lam. 2. 11.
are troubled, my Liver is poured upon the Earth. Mine Eyes trickle down and
cease not without any Intermission: Here you Chap. 3. 49.
have something of her Grief, but you may have much more if you read that Book;
then to give you a few Places; which show the ground of all this Sorrow and
Complaining: For the Multitude of your Transgressions, her Children are gone
Lam. 1. 5, 8, 18.
into Captivity. Jerusalem has grievously Sinned. The Lord is Righteous, I
have rebelled against his Commandment. I am i^ Distress, my Bowels are
troubled, my Hear^ ver. 20.
is turned within me; why so? For I have Lam. 3. 42, ver. 22. ver. 13.
grievously rebelled. We have transgressed and rebelled: It is of the Lords
Mercie^ that we are not consumed; She confesses it was the Iniquity of the
Daughter o^ her People, for the Sins of her Prophets, and the Iniquity of her
Priests: The Crown is fallen from our Head, woe unto (...) Chap. 5. 16.
that we have sinned: and in the Conclusion of the Book, the last Verse but on^
they Pray, Turn thou us unto thee O Lord and we shall be turned: By which you
see, ^ere was the great Cause of her Lamen^ation, that they were gone out of
their Way; therefore they Pray to be turned unto it again: They had departed
from God, and Pray to be turned to him again; so that the first Point is clear.
That every Child of God, he is making ^or Heaven, and exceedingly grieved and
afflicted, when he finds himself out of the Way.

Secondly, As a Traveller hastes into ^is Way again, and is never quiet, till
^e has recovered it: So it is with every true Christian indeed, a Wicked Man
when he is in the Ways of Sin, and sa^isfying his Lusts, he is where he would
^e; he is in his proper Element; if he might Sin Eternally, he would desire no
^etter Life: but it is far otherwise with (...) Child of God, he finds little
ease in ^he Ways of Sin; when he is drawn out of the Ways of Holiness, he is
out of ^is Element, he has no more quiet then (...) Fish out of the Water: A
wicked Man ^olls Sin under his Tongue like a sweet Morsel, and delights to feed
upon it, as Job 20. 12.
(...) Swine upon Husks; but that which is ^he Sinners Meat, is the Saints
Poison; and if he has at any Time Tasted or Sipt of it, he is never quiet till
he hat^ Vomited it up again by true Repentance* A Swine lies wallowing in the
Mire^ with Delight and Content; but if (...) Sheep step into it, he makes all
the hast^ he can to get out of it: When the Prodigal came to himself, and his
Eyes were opened to see, that he had been out of h^^ Way; Then farewell Pots and
Harlot^ he could feed upon such husks no longer; but resolves to return to his
Father^ House, who had Bread enough for a^^ his Servants. When David had ru^
out of his Way, into those vile Way^ of Adultery and Murder, we see ho^ little
quiet he had, he says, I ha^^ Psalm. 22. Psalm. 38. 8. Psalm. 22. 14.
roared by reason of the disquietness of (...) Heart: All my Bones are out of
Joint, (an^ sure then he could have but little ease^ but though Bones out of
Joint be ve^^ painful, yet broken Bones are mo^^ painful, nay, he Complains of
broken Bones too; but if a Man have quiet (...) Psalm. 51. 8. Prove. 18. 14.
his Spirit, he will sustain his bodily Infi^mities, but a wounded Spirit, who
can bea^^ But he was deeply wounded in h^^ Spirit too? My Soul also is sore
vexed but thou, O Lord! How long? He complains Psalm. 6. 3.
again and again, Why art thou ca^^ Psalm. 42. 5. Psalm. 48. 5.
down, O my Soul! and why art thou disquieted within me. My Soul melts away
for Heaviness: Strengthen me according to thy Word. I could likewise tell you,
what disquiet the Spouse was in, when she had refused to open to her Beloved,
how she ran up and down searching and enquiring after him; and was never quiet
till she found and enjoyed him again; but this is enough to show, that a
gracious Soul that is Traveling toward Heaven is never quiet, when he finds
himself out of Heavens way (that is the way of Holiness.) He can have no more
ease and quiet in his Soul, than he who has all his Bones broken, or out of
Joint, can have in his Body. Therefore Fellow-Traveller, let us take heed how
we go out of our Way into the crooked Paths of Sin, but if we have by Violence
of Temptation, or Power of Corruption been drawn aside; let us speedily and
heartily repent, and be soundly humbled for our Backsliding, and let us give
our Souls no rest, till we have again turned our Feet into the Way of Peace;
and then I shall give thee further Direction in the next Observation.

CHAP. VIII. A Traveller, having been once out of his Way, will be the more
wary and careful ever after to keep it.
AND does not every Relapse of Gods Children make them more watchful and
vigilant for the Future: Does not every fall they take make them look the
better to their Footing? Does not ever Sin they commit increase their hatred of
Sin in their Souls? We have a Proverb, A burnt Child dreads the Fire^ What is
the Reason? But because h^^ fall into it, did breed him so much Pai^ and Smart;
surely falling into Sin bring^ to the Children of God so much Pai^ and Anguish,
that they dread it as much as the Fire of Hell; and therefore, when they
recover out of it, they will tak^ heed how they fall into it again: As (...)
Bird that has broken loose out of the Snare of the Fowler, will scarce be
taken in it a second Time. He is little acquainted with the Word or Way o^ God,
that has not made this Observation, that the fall or falls of Gods Children
(being sanctified by him that can bring Good out of Evil, and has promised,
That all things shall work together for good to them that love God) have done
them good. They have awakened and quickened them to a more circumspect walking,
they have been the more lively in their Duties, more diligent in doing, and
more zealous in suffering the Will of God; they have been the more careful to
keep out Sin ever after. As it is with a Garrison, if the Enemies have entered
within their Works and repulsed them, they will fortify that place, where the
Enemy made a Breach, more strongly than before; so it is with a Christian, if
any of his Senses, as for Instance, his Ear, or his Eye, which have been inlets
to Sin, he will for the future set a stricter Watch upon them; he will stop his
Ears against all corrupt and unclean Conversation, he will with Job, Make a
Covenant with his Eyes; and with David, Job 31. 1. Psalm. 119. 37.
beg of God To turn away his Eyes from beholding Vanity: If his Tongue cause
him to offend, he will bridle it up, and beg of God to set a Watch before the
Door of his Lips: If his Heart betrayed him, he will henceforth set a double
Guard upon it; that is, he will himself keep it with all Diligence, and will
earnestly beg of God to undertake the keeping of it: The falls of Gods Children
have the same Effect upon them, that Paul's Letter had upon the Corinthians: It
makes them sorry after a Godly 2 Cor. 7. 11.
Manner, and this Godly Sorrow, Behold, what carefulness it works in them, yea
what clearing of themselves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what
vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge; in all things ye have
approved your selves to be clear in this Matter: So that it may be truly said
of true Christians, that they get ground by their stumbling; and as to this
Case, We may Answer this Question of our Savior Affirmatively, and say, That
Men may gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles; Mat. 7. 16.
that God with whom nothing is impossible by sanctifying the falls of his
Children (which are in themselves Evil) can make them to bring forth Fruit, as
Godly Sorrow, Self-abasement, Care and Watchfulness, Diligence and Activity in
the ways of God: In a Word, they make them more Holy, Humble, Heavenly-minded
ever after. Peter's Pride brought him to his Fall, and his Fall broke the Neck
of his Pride; see how Humble he was grown, how his Self-confidence was taken
down, when our blessed Savior asked him, Simon love thou me more then these?
(He would no more of that) more then these? He could tell Christ before, Though
all Men forsake thee, yet will not I. But now he gives a more humble, modest
Answer, Lord, thou know that I love thee. The Spouse in the Canticles, when
she had by her drowsiness and neglect of her Beloved caused him to withdraw,
she was restless, till she had found him again, but when she had recovered him,
she resolved never to let him go more, I found Cant. 3. 4.
him whom my Soul loves, I held him fast and would not let him go. So it is
with every Saint after his recovery from a Fall, he labors to lay faster hold
on Jesus Christ, and to keep more close to his Holy Ways all his Life after:
This is a Truth, and a sweet Truth. But I dare not leave it without this
Caution, let none turn this Rich Grace of God into wantonness, this precious
Cordial into Poison. Would any but a Madman go and break his Bones, because he
hears that a broken Bone well cured is stronger then before. Hearken what the
Apostle says, Shall we Sin that Romans 6. 1.
Grace may abound? God forbid: Sure those that belong to God will make a better
use of his Grace.

CHAP. IX. Every Traveller is desirous to have as much good Company with him in
his Journey as he can, especially of his Relations and Friends.
NO Child of God desires to go to Heaven alone, but is of his Saviors Mind;
Would have all Men come to 1 Timothy 2. 4.
the Knowledge of the Truth and be saved: And therefore he will be persuading
Relations, Friends, Acquaintance, Neighbors, Servants, and all with whom he
converseth to keep him Company in the way of Salvation: Certainly who ever is
truly converted himself, will labor for the Conversion of others. When Andrew
had found the Messiah or rather was found of him, he finds out his Brother John
1. 41.
Simon, and brings him to Christ. When our Savior had called Philip, he John
1. 45.
seeks out Nathanael, that he might partake of the same Mercy with him. If that
Rich Man (he was Rich indeed on Luke 16.
Earth, but Poor enough in Hell) if he, I say, was so sollicitous, that his
Brethren might not come to that Place of Torment where he was; much more, and
upon a better account, will those who are going to Heaven themselves be
sollicitous that their Brethren may come to that Place of bliss where they Hope
to be. A Magistrate, who is going to Heaven, will labor to have all his
Subjects to go with him: A Minister all his People, a Parent all his Children,
a Master all his Family, and all his Servants: And every real Christian, all
his Neighbors, and all his Friends.

First, A Godly Ruler or Magistrate, who rules in Righteousness and the fear of
the Lord, will endeavor to bring all his People to fear the Lord, and to have
all his Subjects become the Subjects of Christ: As it was matter of great Joy
to David, when he went with the Multitude to the House of God; so it is to
every Gracious Prince, when he can carry a great Train with him to Heaven.
Moses the Servant of the Lord endeavored to make all the People, over whom God
had made him Governor, the Servants of the Lord; he labored not only to lead
them to an Earthly, but to the Heavenly Canaan. How faithfully does he acquaint
them with the whole Will of God! How solemnly and strictly does he charge them
to walk in all his Ways, and keep his Commandments! How zealously does he
reprove Deuteronomy. 4.
them when they go out of the Way! And how importunately does he beg of God to
Pardon all their Transgressions, Exodus 32. 31, 32.
and does not this show, that he desired to have them to Heaven with him.
Joshua his Successor walked in his Steps, and did not only faithfully serve God
himself, but labored to make all under his Conduct and Government to serve him
also, and he was very successful in it; for it is written, That Israel Josh.
24. 31.
served the Lord all the Days of Joshua; and so careful was he that they should
continue walking in the Ways of God; that when he was taking leave of them, and
this World, and was going to Heaven, he Summons all the Tribes to appear before
him; and gives them most Holy and Heavenly Exhortations to keep and to do all
that was Written in the Law of Moses, and not to turn therefrom, to the Right
Hand or to the Left but to cleave to the Lord their God, as they had done to
that Day; and much to that Purpose, which you may find in the two last Chapters
of Joshua; by which you may see how careful he was to have them to walk with
him in the Way of God, while he Lived, and that they should persevere in those
Ways when he was Dead; he desired to have their Company on Earth and in Heaven.
David a Man after Gods own Heart, he walked so exactly in the Ways of God
himself; there it is said, He turned not aside from any thing he commanded him
all 1 Kings 15. 5.
the Days of his Life, save only in the Matter of Uriah. And he desired, that
not only all Israel, but that all the World might keep him Company in this Good
and Holy Way: And therefore he begs of God, That his Ways may be known upon
Earth, and his saving Health among all Psalm. 67. 2, 5.
Nations. Let the People Praise thee, O God, let all the People Praise thee.
And as his Hearts desire was to see all Men walking in the Way to Heaven with
him: So was his Righteous Soul grieved, when he saw People go out of that Way:
For he says, Rivers of Tears run Psalm. 119. 136.
down mine Eyes, because Men keep not thy Law. Good Josiah did not think it
enough, To make a Covenant before the 2 Chronicles. 34.
Lord, to walk after the Lord, and keep his Commandments with all his Heart,
and with all his Soul, but he caused all Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it;
he was not Content to serve the Lord alone, but he made all Israel to serve the
Lord. So that you see, that Godly Magistrates will endeavor to have all their
Subjects to Heaven with them. Though it be said of Earthly Kings, that they
will admit of no Partners in the Crown; yet it may be truly said of those
Kings, who look after an Heavenly Kingdom; that they would have all to partake
with them in the Crown of Glory. But then,

Secondly, A Godly Minister will labor to carry all his Flock to Heaven with
him; that he may say when he comes there, behold here am I, and the Children
Ephesians. 2. 13.
which the Lord has given me. How does he Preach to them, Pray for them, and
weep over them; how does he beat his Brains, break his Sleep, and even spend
his Strength and Spirits, that he may bring them to walk in the Way of
Holiness, which he goes before them in and to be Followers of him as he is o^
Christ. Paul that blessed Apostle wa^ an eminent Example of this, what Pain^
did he take? What Dangers did he undergo? What a Circuit of Ground did he
traverse on Earth, that he might bring Souls to Heaven, and that all that Rev.
15. 19.
heard him might be such as he was? How zealous was he to have all his
Contrymen to Heaven with him? As appears, Brethren my Hearts desire Romans 10.
1.
and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved; and by that
Hyperbolical Romans 9. 6.
Expression, I could wish my self accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my
Kinsmen according to the Flesh; and this Zeal of his was not confined only to
the Jews, but extended to the Gentiles also, whose Apostle he was, he says, He
testifies to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Acts
20. 21.
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: So that he showed both the Way to Heaven;
he says, He went about teaching ver. 20.
them, not only Publicly, but from House to House. That he ceased not to warn
every ver. 31.
one Day and Night with Tears. I might instance in all the rest of the
Apostles, who did all labor abundantly, though Paul did labor more abundantly
than they 1 Cor. 15. 10.
all. Nay, There is not one faithful Minister of Christ in the World, but makes
it his Work to draw Souls to that Heaven whither he is going: They can all make
their Appeal to the People, You know how we exhorted every one of you, as 1
These. 2. 11.
a Father does his Children: That you walk worthy of God, that has called you
to his Kingdom and Glory: And when they can prevail with them so to walk, it is
their Joy and their Crown of Rejoicing. We ver. 19.
may judge without breach of Charity, that Minister not to be going to Heaven
himself, who cares not whether his People go to Heaven or Hell.

Thirdly, There is the same desire in all Family Relations. How will the
Converted Husband, labor with the Wife of his Bosom, to draw together in the
same Yoke of Christ with him, that they may walk hand in hand to Heaven; He did
never so importunately woo her to be married to himself, as he will woo her
to be married to Christ.

Fourthly, The Parent who is himself going toward Heaven, will labor to carry
all his Children with him; and therefore will Pray with them, and for them; and
will carefully endeavor to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition Ephesians. 6.
2.
of the Lord, and to Train them in the way, wherein they should go.

Fifthly, A Master of a Family who is walking in Heavens Way himself, will have
all his Servants to walk in the same Way with him; He will labor to make them
all the Servants of the Lord Jesus, to make his House a little House of God;
that it may be said of him, as it was of Philemon, The Church which is in thy
House. Phil. 2.
We know what the Lord says of Abraham, I know Abraham that he will command
Genesis 18. 19.
his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the
Lord. We know also what was Joshua's Resolution, I and my House will serve the
Josh. 24. 15.
Lord. And what David's was, He that walks in a perfect Way shall serve me:
Psalm. 101.
He that works Deceit shall not dwell in my House; He that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight.

Fourthly, Every real Christian will be earnestly persuading all his Neighbors
and Acquaintance to accompany him in his Journey toward Heaven. What the Poet
says of the natural Birth, may be truly said of the Spiritual Birth. Nascitur
indigne per quam non nascitur alter. Unworthy to be Born is he, By whom no
others Born be. So he is not worthy to be new Born, who is not Instrumental to
make others new Born; He deserves not the Name of a Christian (and sure he has
but the Name) who does not heartily endeavor to draw others to Christ. I
appeal to all who are going Heavenward themselves, whether they have not a
longing desire to get all the Company they can to Heaven with them; and it is
no wonder, if we consider how sweet the Work is, and what a blessed Reward is
promised to it. And they that Dan. 12. 3.
be Wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. So now it is clear, that
herein the Earthly and the Heavenly Traveller agree, that both labor to have
as much Company with them as they can.

CHAP. X. A Traveller in his Journey will keep Company with such and such only
as are going the same way that he is, and to the same Place.
AND this Christian, calls for thy special Imitation, if thou art resolved for
Heaven, thou must keep Company with such as are going Heavens way, and shun the
Company of those who are going in the contrary way to Hell and Destruction; I
shall begin with the last first.

First, Thou must shake Hands with those who were thy old Companions in the
Ways of Sin; Can two walk together, except they be agreed? And what Amos 3. 3.
agreement can there be between the Children of Light, and the Children of
Darkness; between the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil; between
those who are resolved for Heaven, and those who are at agreement with Hell?
Will Sheep flock together with Swine, or Doves with Vultures? Psalm. 38. 15.
Who would make those his Companions on Earth, who must be Companions of the
Devil and his Angels in Hell for ever? Therefore as the Psalmist says, I have
not sat with vain Persons, so do thou say, I will not walk with vain Persons;
thou will be sure to receive no good by them, but wilt be in danger to receive
much hurt. For it is as impossible for one in pure White to embrace (...)
Chimney-Sweeper, and not to be sul^ied, as for a Man to hold familiar and
^utimate Converse with Profane Men, and not be defiled: That Man is got half
Way to Heaven, that is rid of his wicked Companions. The general Experience of
Christians will Seal to this Truth, that when God has changed the Heart, and a
Man has changed his Courses, he will also change his Companions. Paul, when
the Scales were fallen off his Eyes, and he was brought in to the right Way, he
would have no more Familiarity with his great Friends the Chief Priests, nor
with his old Persecuting Companions, and he left their Friendship. So they
became his bitter Enemies, and when he left persecuting the Saints of God, they
fell to persecuting of him. We read indeed of good Jehosaphat, that he entered
into a strict League and Intimacy with wicked Ahab; but we know that he was out
of his Way when he did so, and it was like to cost him his Life; and though God
preserved his Life, yet he was displeased with his Act, as you may see in the
Story. 2 Chronicles. 19. 22.
Now this is one thing, that thou must imitate the Traveller in; namely, thou
must shun the Company of those who are going in a contrary Way, But,

Secondly, Thou must consort with those who are going thy Way; thou must not
only separate from Sinners, but converse with Saints: Thou must avoid the
Society of the wicked, least they hinder thee in thy Way; and thou must
associate with the Godly, that they may further thee in thy Way: Thou must shun
the one, that they may not be a Bridle or Curb to hold thee back: Thou must
embrace the other, that they may be a Spur to quicken thee and put thee
forward: It is a common Saying, and it may be called a Traveller's Proverb, An
Eloquent or Pleasant Companion on the Way is instead of a Chariot. And Facundus
comes in Via, pro Vehiculo est.
it may be said, that Godly Companions in the Way to Heaven, are instead of
Elias his Chariot, they will be helpful to thee many ways.

First, By their Counsel.
Secondly, By their Holy Example.
Thirdly, By their Heavenly Conference.
Fourthly, By their faithful Reproofs.
Fifthly, By their fervent Prayers.
First, They will forward thee in thy way to Heaven by their good Counsel and
Instruction. The Heathen Poet speaks like a Christian in this,

From good men thou will learn good things. And does not the Word of God speak
to the same purpose from that Divine Proverb, He that walks, with wise men
Prove. 13. 20.
shall be wise, but a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed. We know that
Solomon's Wise man is the good or the Godly man, and certainly there is no such
wise Man in the World as he that is wise for his Soul and for Eternity; so here
is one benefit thou will reap by keeping Company with the Godly, thou will have
good Counsel and Instruction from them, and see what a benefit this was to
Jehoash, He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his days
wherein Jehojada the 2 Kings 12. 2.
Priest instructed him.

Secondly, Thou will be promoted in thy Way by their Holy Example: The Examples
of good Men are more taking Exempla plus prosunt quam praecepta.
than their Instruction: Their Practices than their Precepts: He is like to
write the fairest Hand, who writes after the fairest Copy: If thou can say
with David, I am a Companion of all those that fe^^ Psalm. 119. 63.
the Lord; what a Pattern will thou have for thy Imitation, when thou do
behold their Holy Convesation; when thou do every Day see how careful the^
are to walk by Rule; how Conscientious to perform their Duty before Go^ and
Man? How Holily they behav^ themselves in the World? In their Families? In
their Closets? In their Callings? In every Condition? In every Relation? How
Cheerfully they do? How Patiently they suffer the Will of God? How can this but
stir up thy Mind to an Holy Emulation? And what an help will this be to thee in
thy Way to Heaven?

Thirdly, They will be helpful to thee by their Heavenly Conference, As evil
Communication corrupts good Manners, so good Communication must needs promote
good Manners: It is said, The Lips Prove. 10. 20.
of the Righteous feed many; and this is sweet food indeed. Christ says of the
Church, Thy Lips drop as the Honeycomb. Cant. 4. 11
What Sweet and Holy Discourses will the Saints of God have, when they meet
together? How will they provoke one another to Love and good Works? How will
they communicate their Christian Experiences? How will they like Coals kindle
one another, and raise up one another Affections Heavenward? How will they
encourage one another to hold and persevere in the ways of Holiness, by setting
forth the Joys and the Glory of that Heavenly Country whether they are all
going? As Profane Wretches never meet, but they harden one another by their
lewd and rotten Speeches; so the Children of God never do (or at least never
should) meet but they Edify one another by their gracious Communications. We
may observe, that our blessed Lord and Savior ascended into Heaven, from Holy
Conference with his Apostles; so was Elijah Mark. 16. 19.
taken up in his Fiery Chariot, while he was in Holy Conference with Elisha.
Now as they went to Heaven, while they were in this Holy Duty; so certainly 2
Kings 12. 11.
it will be a great help to thee in thy Way to Heaven.

Fourthly, If thou keep Company with the Saints, they will afford thee no
little help by their Faithful Reproofs. Hear what the Wise Man says, It is
better to hear the Rebukes of the Wise, than to hear Eccl. 7. 5.
the Song of Fools. Faithful are the Words Prove. 27. 5.
of a Friend, but the Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful. And David says, Let
the Righteous Smite me and it shall be a kindness, Psalm. 141. 5
let him Reprove me and it shall be an excellent Oil. And he loved such
Prophets as Nathan and Gad, who would faithfully reprove him, when he went out
of his Way, and deal plainly with him; and tell him, Thou art the Man. It had
been well for Ahab, if he had done so to; if instead of hating good Micaiah for
his faithful dealings, he had hated his Four hundred Court-Chaplains, who
soothed and flattered him to his Destruction. I shall relate thee a Story,
which is not impertinent, and may not prove unprofitable. There was a Man well
known to my self (for he Lived in the same Parish with me) who being at a Fair
or Market (some Twelve Miles from his Habitation) Selling his Wares did Swear
an Oath, one who heard it did step to him, and whispered in his Ear these or
the like Words: Friend, Cannot you Sell your Commodities without dishonouring
God? If you should gain a Penny by that Oath, and lose your own Soul, you would
make but a bad Bargain: Pray think of it. The Man having dispatched his Market,
Rides homeward pondering all the way upon these Words, one while he reasoned
with himself, This Man was a Stranger to me, I know neither his Name nor Face,
sure he could have no other End nor Aim, but my Good. Another while he was much
affected with the Manner of delivering the Reproof, in that he did it so mildly
and privately, as if he were unwilling to put him to open Shame; then he
considered the Words, and was Convinced that they were a real Truth: The Issue
was, that ever after this, he left not only his Swearing, but also all his
other Sins, and became a new Man, and did heartily own the Ways of God, and
walked uprightly in them to his dying Day. Now as this should encourage and
quicken us to a faithful Discharge of this Holy Duty; so it may show what I am
speaking of, namely, what a special Benefit they enjoy, that walk in Society
with the Godly, who will in any wise rebuke their Brother, and not suffer Sin
upon him. As he Lev. 19. 17.
who has a skilful Physician always in his Company, has a great advantage for
the preserving of his bodily Health, because he will oppose the very beginnings
of the Distemper; so has he a mighty Advantage for his Souls Health, who has
a faithful Reprover always in Venienti occurrere morbo, and Principiis obstare.
his Company, who ingruenti malo occurrere stop him when he takes his first
step out of his way, and bring him into his right way again.

Fifthly, The Godly will be exceeding helpful to thee by their ferv^nt Trayers.
It is the saying of one, That, that Child that has a stock of faithful Prayers
laid up for him, has a Rich Portion; and such a Rich Portion has every Child
of God, for he has a share in the Prayers of all the Saints upon Earth. And
what a Privilege is this, if we consider what Promises are made to their
Prayers, Ask, and it shall be given Matthew. 7. 7.
you, (it is but ask and have, if we ask not amiss) Verily, I say unto you,
whatsoever John 16. 23.
you shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it you. The effectual fervent
Jam. 5. 16.
Prayer of a Righteous Man will avail much; and what then will the fervent
Prayers of all the Righteous do? The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous,
Psalm. 34. 15.
and his Ears are open to their Cry; which is repeated, 1 Pet. 3. 12. The
eminent Apostle Paul was sensible of this, and therefore he begs the Prayers of
the Saints for himself, and the rest of the Apostles, Brethren, Pray for us.
And 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Heb. 13. 18. Romans 15. 30.
how vehemently does he beg it, I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the Love of the Spirit; that you strive together with me
in your Prayers to God for me. And you may see, he counted their Prayers to be
very helpful and beneficial. You also helping together 2 Cor. 1. 11. Phil. 1.
1^.
in Prayer. I know that this shall turn to my Salvation through your Prayers.
By these thou may see clearly of what singular Benefit the Prayers of the
Godly may be to thee, that have such prevalency with the Great God. And now I
have showed thee, how the Christian, who is going toward Heaven, must imitate
the wise Traveller, in parting from those who are going a contrary Way, and
keeping Company with those who are going his Way. The Heathen Poet could give
this Advice.

Converse thou not with Men whose Lives are ill,
But let thy Converse be with good Men still.
And this agrees with the Holy Word of God, and with the Example of the Man
after Gods own Heart; for he says, Depart from me ye evil Doers, for I will
keep the Commandments of my God. Psalm. 119. 115.
I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts. ver. 63.


CHAP. XI. He that Travels in a strange Country, must look to meet with many
Affronts and Injuries, with many Troubles and Afflictions.
THE Children of God are all Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; Heb. 11. 13.
they are out of their own Country, far from their own home, and from their
Fathers House, and therefore, they must not think it strange to be used like
Strangers. The World had never any good Will for the People of God; our blessed
Savior has told us, what we must look for from them. The World hates you,
because you are not of the World, but John 15. 19.
I have chosen you out of the World. And the Children of Israel met with many
Dangers and Difficulties in their Passage toward the Earthly Canaan, so do the
Children of God in their Passage through the Wilderness of this World toward
the Heavenly Canaan. And this may be seen in the Example of all the Saints,
that have gone to Heaven before us. I shall Instance in a few. Good Jacob calls
his Life a Pilgrimage, and says, That the Days of it were Few and Evil; Genesis
47. 9.
that is, full of Affliction, and so they were; He was fain while Young to fly
from his own Country, or else his own Brother would have been his Murderer;
Genesis 27. 41, 42.
being gone, what harsh and unfaithful dealings did he meet with from Churlish
Laban? what hardship did he undergo Night and Day, and how ill was he requited?
His Wife was changed once, Genesis 29. 23. Genesis 31. 7.
and his Wages ten Times. At his return, how terribly was he frighted when he
heard of his Brother coming to meet him with four hundred Men? What bitter
Crosses had he afterward in his Children? Reuben defiled his Fathers Bed.
Gadding Dinah was Ravished; Simeon and Levi were Brethren in Iniquity in a
cruel and bloody Act; Judah committed Incest; His Darling Joseph was, as he
conceived, Torn in Pieces with Wild Beasts, and at last he must part with his
Beloved Benjamin too, upon hazardous Terms, or he and his Family must perish
with Famine; all these things were against him, and were like to bring down his
Gray-hairs with Sorrow to the Grave; so that he might well say the Days of his
Pilgrimage were evil. Next see how it was with David, a Man after Gods own
Heart, while he was a Stranger, and a Sojourner here as all his Fathers were.
His Life was so full Psalm. 39. 12.
of troubles, that I believe he enjoyed more quiet while he was a Shepherds
Boy, then he did all his Life after; before he came to the Crown, he was hunted
up and down by Saul; and after he came to the Crown by Absalom: It were endless
to give you a particular Relation of his Sorrows, of Saul's Injuries, of Nabals
Reproaches, Shimei's Railings and Cursings, Michals Mocking, Doegs Treachery,
his great Dangers and Fears while he was with Achish, his very great Distress
at Ziglag, his many bitter Crosses and Afflictions in his Children and Family,
and the trouble he had with his great Commanders the Sons of Zerviah, so thou
see what a troublesome Passage he also had through this Valley of Tears. I
shall mention one more in the Old Testament, and that is Job, a Man who had
this Character from the Mouth of God himself; That he was Perfect and Upright,
and one that feared God, and eschewed Evil: What entertainment did he meet
with, while he was Traveling through this World? How was he used by the
Caldeans and Sabeans? What sad Counsel did his Wife give him? What miserable
Job 2. 9.
Comforters were his Friends to him? But I shall not enlarge, for as the
Apostle says, You have heard of the Patience of Job; so I may say, we have
heard of the Afflictions of Job. If thou desire any more Instances of Old
Testament Saints, Read the 11th Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which is
called a little Book of Martyrs; and there thou will have enough, who all
confessed, They were Strangers and Pilgrims on Earth. Then consider how it was
with 2 Cor. 5. 20.
New Testament Saints, whether they had a more easy Journey or a more smooth
Passage. Paul, and the rest of the blessed Apostles, who were Ambassadors sent
from the great God of Heaven and Earth, to offer poor sinful Creatures, Terms
and Conditions of Peace, and to beseech them in Christ's stead to be reconciled
to God; to proclaim a Pardon, and an Act of Oblivion to Rebels and Traitors, if
they will lay down their Arms, and come in, and accept of it, one would think
should be well treated, and kindly dealt with for their Message sake, but none
were treated worse wherever they came, they were used like Rogues, they were
Whipped and put into the Stocks; nay, as if they had been the greatest
Malefactors, they were cast into Prisons and Dungeons, they were Stoned, and
put to several kind of Deaths; you may see a Catalogue of Paul's Sufferings. 2
Cor. 11. from ver. 22. to 30.


I shall add but one Instance more, and that is beyond all the rest; our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he took our Flesh upon him, and
came into the World upon the most blessed Errand that ever was, viz. to save
Sinners: What Entertainment did he find here? One would think that if they had
no Care of their Souls, yet Christ's feeding their Bodies, and healing all their
Diseases, should have procured him very good Quarter among them; but it was far
otherwise, the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers took Counsel
together against this Christum Domini, this anointed of the Lord, the
High Priest and Priests and People, all conspired together against him, and
they never left, till they had brought him to the Cross: I shall forbear to
mention his particular Sufferings, because I intend Brevity: But in General, he
was persecuted from the Cradle to the Grave, and though he knew no Sin, yet he
knew more Sorrow and Sufferings, then all the Saints that ever were upon the
Earth put together: And he has told us, we must look to be troubled as he was.
So now Isa. 53. 3. Mat. 10. 24.
this is clear, that the Children of God in this World are like Travelers in a
strange Land, where they must look to be dealt with as Strangers, and to suffer
many Injuries and Hardships: But Christian, let not this discourage thee, for
though thou meet with much toil and trouble in the way, yet thou will meet with
none at the end of it, but with Everlasting Rest, Joy and Glory.

CHAP. XII. He that Travels about Business, which highly concerns him, resolves
to g^ through all Difficulties and Discouragements.
A Christians Journey is of vast and infinite Concernment to him: (...) (...)
about business of absolute Necessity, that must be done or he is undone: It
concerns no less than the Eternal Happiness or Misery of his immortal Soul: He
^s Traveling for Heaven, for a Crown, for a Kingdom: He is flying from Hell,
from the Wrath to Come, from Everlasting Burnings, and therefore it concerns
him to Arm himself with invin^ible Courage, to go through thick and ^hin, to
overcome all Oppositions and Discouragements, which he shall meet with in the
Way; and so the Lords Worthies of old have done, approving 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5.
themselves as Servants of God, in much Pa^ience, in Afflictions, in
Necessities, in Di^resses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, in
Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings. A slothful Man says, There is (...) Lion
in the way; Daniel will not fear Prove. 26. 13.
^o go on, though there be a Den of Ly^ns in his Way; this shall not fright
^im, to forbear Praying to his God, though but for a few Days, then to make ^ne
Prayer less then aforetime. So the Three Children of God, would rather Dan. 3.
go into the fiery Furnace, then go out of their Way: Joshua and Caleb were ^ot
discouraged with Walled Cities, and the Mighty Giants, but they were for
Marching into Canaan; and they Numb. 13.
only entered- Canaan, when all the rest were shut out for their Unbelief. When
Paul was told by a Prophet, that he should be bound at Jerusalem, and was Acts
21.
earnestly dissuaded from going thither; this could not put him out of his Way,
but he answers with a brave Christian Resolution. I am ready not only to b^
bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. O that the^ were
still such a Spirit among Christians! But alas, there are too many o^ the Mind
of that King of France, wh^ would venture no further into the Se^ in the Cause
of Religion, then he might recover the Shore, if a Storm should arise! Truly,
the Children of this Worl^ Luke 16. 8.
are wiser in their Generation, then the Children of Light. I have sometime^
(not without wonder) taken notice o^ the great Labor and Industry of some of
my Neighbors, who do constantl^ once a Week many of them (and some twice) all
the Year round, Summe^ and Winter, rise in the midst of the Night, and ride to
a Market near twenty Miles distant from them; and neither Darkness, nor Wind,
nor Weather Storms, Rain, Frost or Snow, can hinde^ or deter them from their
Journey; and all this Pains they take for a poor Livelihood in the World. O
Christian! How may this shame thee and me, that we should take less Pains for
Heaven, than these do for Earth; that we should not be more industrious for an
Eternal Life, than they are for a Temporal? Truly those that profess themselves
Christians, do the Work of the Lord too negligently, and mind the things of
this World too carefully and sollicitously: ^NR^.
That Elegant saying is too true.

By Matters as our Work we Ply,
Our Work as Matters by the by.
If there be a Place of Preferment void ^t Court, what Riding and Posting will
^here be for it, let the Ways and Weather be what they will; and when there ^re
Heavenly Mansions, when there is (...) never fading Crown of Glory, when ^here
is a Kingdom that cannot be sha^en to be had in Heaven, shall we sit still, ^r
walk on heavily, or be deterred with ^e difficulty or unpleasantness of the
Way; especially, when it is our own ^istake only, that makes the way of ^od
seem unpleasant and uneasy, for he has told us, That his ways are ways of
Ple^santness, and all his Paths Peace; and our Savior tells us, That his Yoke
is easy, and his Burden light: If we were Christians indeed, and did live by
Faith, and not by Sense, that one Word Eternity would have a greater Influence
upon us to make us mend ou^ Pace to Heaven. A Painter being asked, why he was
accurate and exact, and took so much pains, and spent so much time in drawing
his Picture; answered, Pingo Aeternitati, I Paint for Eternity: Truly
Christian, thou may with much more Truth say, Vivo Aeternitati, I Live for
Eternity; and therefore thou should take all possible Care to walk accurately
and exactly, and should^ stick at no Pains or Sufferings, so tho^ may finish
thy Course with Joy, di^ we seriously consider, that our Everlasting Condition
depends upon the cours^ we take here in this World, that if w^ walk in the Way
of Holiness and Righ^teousness, we shall be Everlastingly Happy; but if we walk
after the fashion o^ this World, and after the Lusts of o^ own Flesh, we shall
be Everlasting^ Miserable; Methinks this should make (...) to overcome all
Opposition and Difficu^ty, that so we might sit down with Christ on his Throne,
even as Christ also overcame, and is set down with his Father on his Throne.

Had we a real and lively belief of the Invisible Things of the other World (of
the Glory of Heaven, and of the Torments of Hell) it would cause us to slight
all the Opposition and Discouragements we meet with in the World; And to run
with Patience the Race that is set before us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of
God. I do not wonder, that Paul, who was wrapped up into the Third Heavens, did
labor more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles: For a sight of Heaven
would make any Man think no Labor or Pains too great to obtain it: For
certainly, what Pains soever we take, whatsoever Sufferings we undergo, Heaven
will pay for all.

CHAP. XIII. He that makes haste in his Journey by Galloping or Running, will
cause all the Dogs in the Country to follow him with Barking.
AND is it not so with those tha^ are Journying toward Heaven* If any be more
zealous in their Profession, more conscientious in their Practice than others:
If they will not only abstain from Evil themselves, but also persuade and
exhort others so to do; i^ they will be talking of Holiness wherever they
come, and reproving of Si^ in whomsoever they find it: How will the Profane
Rabble open their black Mouths against such? How will they bark at them,
Tanquam Canis ad Lunam, like the Dog at the Moon; and why do Dogs bark at the
Moon? It i^ not, because they see her Spots, but he^ bright shining. So do the
Prophan^ ones of the World Reproach and Revile the Servants of God, not because
they see their Spots and Blemishe^ (which themselves see and bewail) but the
true Cause is, because their bright shining Conversation upbraids and reproves
their Deeds of Darkness: If a Man be a cold, or a lukewarm Professor, and can
be content to let others Sin in quiet (though he will not join with them) and
will, as they say, keep his Religion to himself, he may perhaps find fair
Quarter in the World, and have the good Word of all his Neighbors. But if a
Man will reprove their ^ngodly Deeds, and cannot hold his Peace when he hears
his God dishonored and Blasphemed; if when he sees Men take the ready way to
damn their own Souls, he cannot but give them warning of it, and will not
suffer him ^o go quietly to Hell; such a Man shall ^aise the cry of the whole
Country against him, he shall become the Drunk^rds Song, and the Table Talk of
all profane Feasts and Meetings; He, and ^uch as he is, shall be accounted
Madmen, Fools, Singular, Censorious, Er^oneous, Enemies to Governors, and what
not: Nay, because wicked Men ^an find nothing in their Holy Conver^ation
whereof justly to accuse them, therefore they will most impudently and
impiously invade the Prerogative of the great God, and will undertake to judg^
their Hearts, and to say they are all Hy^ pocrites: But if any one, who hat^
been eminent for Profession, do fall into any scandalous Sin: How will the
whole Kennel open their Mouths in a fu^ Cry, not only against their Person, bu^
also against the whole Party: This (...) one of your Holy Brethren, this is o^
of your great Professors, that would re^prove another if he did but Swear a^
Oath, or if he did but Drink a mer^ Cup or two with his Friends, and no^ he
has done a great deal worse himself you may see what they all are, for the^
are all alike; though some can carry (...) more closely, and smoothly then
other^ What Reason, Ingenuity or Honest^ is there in such arguing? Judas was
(...) Devil; what therefore must all Christ Disciples be Devils? Surely none b^
the Devils Scholars would make su^ an Argument, besides by what fal^ Rule do
they judge the Person offen^ing? For they judge him by one sing^ Act of his
Life (which if he belong (...) God, he will be deeply humbled for and obtain
the Pardon of) when in t^ mean time they condemn those as ce^ sorious and
uncharitable, who judge their present State by a right Rule; namely, by the
constant course and tenor of their whole Conversation. While there be so many
mocking Ishmaels, so many Railing Shimei's and Ranting Rabshekahs in the World,
the Children of God must look for Railing and Reviling. But Christian, despise
them all, and imitate the Traveller, who regards not the Barking of every Cur,
but keeps on his Way till he comes to his Journeys end; or rather imitate the
generous Horse, which when the Dogs follow him with Balling, is so far from
slackning his Pace, that he mends it and Gallops on the faster; so let the
Calumnies and Slanders of evil Men, cause thee to be more careful and wary,
that thou go not out of thy Way, and the more resolutely to hold on thy Way,
till thou come to Heaven, where thou shall have Admission, but Dogs shall be
shut out, Rev. 22. 15.

CHAP. XIV. He that Undertakes a long Journey, and through difficult Passages,
had need to be a strong Man, and well provided for his Journey.
IN the Application of this, I shall endeavor to show.

1. That the Christians Journey to Heaven, is a long Journey. 2. That he will
meet with many Difficulties in his Passage. 3. That therefore he had need to
strengthen and prepare himself for it.
First, A Christians Journey is a long Journey: It is not a Days Journey, or a
Week, or a Months, or a Years Journey, but it is a Life's Journey: His Journey
and his Life should begin, and end together. We should seek the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness in the first Place; nay, we should seek this First and
Last, and all our Life; all our Days on Earth should be spent in fitting us for
Heaven, and making us meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. We read that the Angel said to the Prophet Elijah, Arise and eat, for
thy Jo^rney 1 Kings 19. 7.
is great; and the Angel said to him the second Time, Arise and eat, for thy
Journey is too great for thee: And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in
the Strength of that Meat forty Days and forty Nights unto Horeb the Mount of
God. So I say unto thee Christian, arise and strengthen thy self with Spiritual
Food, for thy Spiritual Journey is great; yea, I say unto thee again, arise and
eat, not of the Bread which Perishes, but of that which endures unto
Everlasting Life; for thy Journey is too great for thee, unless thou be
assisted with Strength from above. Therefore arise and feed by Faith on the
Lord Jesus, who is the Bread of Life; strengthen thy self in the Word of God,
and the sweet Promises of the Gospel, and in the strength of this Meal, thou
shall be able to go all the Days and Nights of thy Life, till thou come to
Heaven; so thou see thy Journey is great.

^condly, Thou will meet with many Difficulties and rough Passages in thy Way;
why else does the Word of God require striving, wrestling, laboring, working,
circumspect walking, giving all diligence, etc. Sure the Way to Heaven is not a
smooth Way, though it be a clean Way: Thou do not know with what hideous and
hellish Temptations Satan may assault thee? Thou know not how impetuous and
unruly thy Corruptions may grow? Thou know not with what outrage and cruelty
the World may pursue thee? And therefore, thou had need to strengthen thy
self with Zeal and Courage, least thy Heart fail thee in thy Journey, as the
Israelites did at the Report which the Spies brought them. What if thy Faith
should be tried as Abraham's was? What if thy Patience should be tried as Jobs
was? What if thy Love to Christ should be tried by this, viz? Whether thou will
leave House, Brethren, Sisters, Father, Mother, Mat. 19. 29. Luke 14. 33.
Wife, Children, Lands, and all thou have for his sake and the Gospels? What if
the fiery Trial should come upon thee? Or thou must resist unto Blood, striving
against Heb. 12. 4.
Sin? Would not these things try what mettle thou art made of? And would they
not require Strength and Resolution to undergo them? And these Christian, thou
may meet with in thy way to Heaven, if thou come there. And therefore,

Thirdly, Since we have a great Journey to go, and since we may (nay we must)
expect to meet with so many and so great Difficulties in our Way; had we not
need to be Men of Courage and Strength, to be strong in the Lord, and in Heb.
6. 10. Gal. 6. 9.
the Power of his might; that so we may not be weary of well doing, but may
persevere in the Way of Holiness, and hold out to the end, that we may be
saved: Had we not need lay aside every weight, Heb. 12. 2, 3.
and every Sin which do so easily beset us, and run with Patience the Race that
is set before us: Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who
for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame,
and now is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God. Therefore
Christian, the work we have to do, if we will keep on in Heavens way, and to
finish our course with Joy, is to follow the Apostles Exhortation, To grow in
Grace, and that is to be done 2 Pet. 3. 18.
two ways, Addendo and Augendo. First, By adding one Grace to another, Giving
Diligence, to add to your Faith Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance
Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and
to Brotherly-kindness Charity. Secondly, By increasing every Grace we have, we
beseech 1 These. 4. 10.
you Brethren, that you increase more and more. Let us get all the Grace we
can, we may have need to use it all before we die: The Times may be such, that
weak Grace will not serve the turn, weak Grace will not be able to encounter
strong Temptations. It is ill trusting to a weak and tattered Ship, when the
Seas are raging, and the Storms boisterous. Weak Grace is next to no Grace,
when Christ came to his Disciples in a great Storm, He says to them, Mat. 8.
26.
Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith; where the same Story is related,
Christ Mark 4. 4.
says to his Disciples, Why are ye so fearful, How is it that you have no
Faith? Little Faith is next to no Faith. Let us labor therefore to be strong
Christians: Let us labor to attain that measure of Faith, which Abraham had,
that Patience which Job had, that Meckness which Moses had, that Chastity which
Joseph had, and that Courage and Zeal which Paul had: Let us labor after such
Faith as may remove Mountains (all the Mountains of Danger and Difficulty,
which may occur to us in our Way) Faith whereby we may quench all the fiery
Dart, Ephesians. 6. 16.
of the Devil, whereby we may overcome the World, and our strongest Lusts and
Corruptions: Let us labor to strengthen Patience too, let Patience have its
perfect Work. The Greek Word (...), Jam. 1. 4.
will teach us what the perfect work of Patience is; namely, to abide under any
Affliction, as long as God will have it to lie upon us; if we can strengthen
these, and all other Graces, and become strong Men in Christ, then we shall be
able to overcome all the Difficulties of our Journey, and to get safe to Heaven.

CHAP. XV. It is very mischievous when Fellow-Travellers fall out and quarrel
by the Way, it makes their Journey very uncomfortable.
O That those that are Fellow-Travellers in the Way to Heaven, did walk
together in that sweet Union, and mutual Agreement, that I might be to seek for
an Application of this Particular: But alas, it is to be lamented with Tears of
Blood (if possible) that this is too applicable to them, though it be strange
as well as sad that it should be so. It is no wonder to see Lions, Tigers, and
Bears to rent and tear one another, because we know they are of a Savage
Nature. It is no wonder to see ravenous Wolves to worry poor Sheep, because
that likewise is natural; but would it not be strange to see the poor Sheep,
which are harmless and innocent Creatures, to bite and worry one another: Even
so we need not wonder to see the Seed of the Serpent, to have such bitter
Enmity against the Seed Genesis 3. 15.
of the Woman; to see those that are born Gal. 4. 29.
after the Flesh, to persecute those that are born after the Spirit; to see the
Children of the Devil, to hate the Children of God: To see those who are
running to Hell, quarrel with those that are going to Heaven: This is no new,
this is no strange thing; but to see those who are walking in the same way,
namely, of Holiness; that are going to the same place, namely, to Heaven; who
are Servants of the same Master, viz. the Lord Jesus; who are Children of the
same Father, viz. the Blessed God; who are of one Family, that is, the Family
o^ the Faithful; who are Members of one Body, that is, the Body of Christ; to
see these strive and contend, to see these full of Bitterness of Spirit one
against another, of Envy, Emulations, Divisions, Hatred; this is strange, this
is sad, -- Quis Talia fando -- Temperet a Lachrimis. Can he that speaks, or he
that hears Such things as these, refrain from Tears?

It is reported by Historians, that the Panther has such a hatred and enmity
against Man, that if he see but the Picture of a Man, he will be enraged, and
most fiercely and furiously fly at it, and tear it in Pieces: This is a lively
Emblem of wicked Men, who have such a perfect Hatred of Holiness, which is the
^mage of God, that they are Enraged against all that bear that Image, and would
not suffer one of them to live in the World, if they could have their Will. But
methinks the Children of God, who are after God created in Righteousness, and
true Holiness (or Holiness of Truth, as in the Original) should love this Image
of God wherever they find it, and should say as one of the Ancients did, I
cannot but love that Person in whom I see aliquid Chri^ti, any thing of Christ,
but as it is said of carnal Brethren -- Rara est concordia fratrum. It Is rare
to see Brethren agree; so it may be said (though it be very sad it should) of
spiritual Brethren. We will now briefly examine the ground of this, whence it
should proceed, and propose some Considerations for the Cure and Remedy of it^
For the Grounds of it.

First, In general, Questionless, that Corruption which is in our Nature, is
the cause of this, as well as of all other Sins; From whence comes Wars and
fightings Jam. 4. 1.
among you? come they not hence, eve^ of your Lusts that War in your Members?
Though Corruption in the Regenerate be in some Measure subdued; yet aliquid
haerebit, there are remainders of it in the best, and we cannot be rid of this
Body of Death, till the Death of our Body; and therefore, where there is
difference in Opinions, there will be Divisions in Affection; but more
particularly, there be these things which are the Ground and Cause of this Evil.

First, Pride and Self-conceit. He tha^ Prove. 28. 25. Chap. 13. 10.
is of a proud Heart, stirs up Strife^ Only by Pride comes Contention. If
every one of us could hearken to that Counsel of the Apostle, which is so
elegant^ ly expressed (which is thus rendered in our Translation) Not to think
of himself Romans 12. 3.
more highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly: This would be one
great means to cure and compose our Differences; for if every one had better
Thoughts of all, and low Thoughts of himself, he would not so magisterially
impose his Conceptions upon others, and quarrel with every one that will not
come up to his Model. If every one did as the Apostle exhorts, Esteem others
better than himself, nothing would be Phil. 2. 3.
done through strife and vainglory.

Secondly, Another cause is Passion. A Prove. 16. 28.
froward Man sows Strife: Men of hot and fiery Spirits are apt to breed
Contention and Quarrel in the Church, as well as in the State; whereas he that
is of a meek and quiet Spirit, will be so far from kindling the Fire of
Contention and Divisions, that he will labor to quench the Flame that others
have kindled. I am persuaded, if Luther had been of Calvin's Spirit,
Reformation of Religion had been carried on to a greater height, and that we
had not had so great Rents and Divisions in the Church as now we have.

Thirdly, Another cause of this Evil, is that which the Apostle blames in the
Corinthians, which caused Divisions among them, and that is the crying up of
one Teacher, to the disparagement and contempt of all others. I am of Paul, I
am of Apollos, I am of Cephas; these were excellent Preachers, and as 1 Cor. 1.
the Apostle says, in the end of the third Chapter, they were all theirs; and
therefore they ought to have improved their several Gifts, for their spiritual
Benefit and Advantage; and to have had them all in singular Love, for their
Works sake, and not by preferring of one, to forsake all the rest: You may
observe, that they who admire and are addicted to one Teacher, or one Party
with undervaluing and slighting all others, are seldom the most profiting or
the most profitable, but never the most peaceful Christians.

Fourthly, I might add another ground of this Evil, and that is the Itch of
Disputing, or that which the Apostle calls, Vain Jangling; of which, as one
^aith 1 Timothy 1. 6.
well, Disputandi pruritus Ecclesiae Scabies. The Itch of Disputing is the
Churches Scab; and I dare add, that it is the bane of Holy Conference, and the
Spawn of Dissension. The Apostle says expressly, that from this doting about
Questions and 1 Timothy 6. 4.
strife of Words, comes Envy, Strife, Railing, Evil-surmisings: But I shall
say no more of this, because I conceive those hot and eager Disputes, which
tend to Divisions, arise either from Pride or Passion, which I have spoken of
before; but modest, sober, and humble debating of Things neither engender
Strife, nor break the Peace. And now having discovered the Grounds and Causes
of this Distemper, what a Happiness would it be if we could prescribe a Remedy?
In order to this, I shall adventure to give Christians one Direction, and some
few Considerations, which may by the Blessing of God be helpful to this
purpose. The Direction is this, That Christians would carefully shun and avoid
those things before spoken of, which are the chief Causes of Quarrels and
Divisions among the People of God; for sublata causa tollitur effectus: Take
away the Cause, and you take away the Effect. Take heed therefore of Pride, and
of an over-weaning Opinion of thine Abilities: Take heed of a Passionate, and
of a froward Spirit: Take heed of having Men's Persons in Admiration, or of
Idolizing a Party: Take heed that thou delight not in wrangling and disputing;
if these things were carefully avoided, there would be more Peace and sweet
Agreement between true Christians. But further, to promote the cure of this
Distemper, I shall desire Christians in the fear of God, seriously lay to Heart
these following Considerations.

First, Consider, how highly it is displeasing to the Blessed God.

First, To God the Father: It is displeasing to an earthly Father to see his
Children always brabbling and fighting each with other; and it must needs be
more displeasing to our Heavenly Father, who is the Father of Mercies, to see
his Children unmerciful (who is the God of Love and Peace) to see his Children
hating and quarrelling one with 2 Cor. 13. 11.
another.

Secondly, It must needs be displeasing to the Lord Jesus Christ, to see those
for whom he has shed his Precious Blood, to be ready to shed one another
Blood; to see the Members of his Body to rend and tear one another.

Thirdly, It must needs grieve the Holy Spirit of God, to see those whom he
Ephesians. 4. 30.
has sanctified, those whom he has sealed for Heaven, to be so like graceless
Persons, to fall out and quarrel by the Way.

Secondly, Consider, it is a great dishonor to our Holy Profession: How did it
Credit Religion, and adorn the Gospel, When the Multitude of them that Acts 4.
32.
believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul? And when the Heathen could say,
Ecce quomodo Christiani mutuo se diligunt! Behold! how the Christians love one
another. On the other side, what a dishonor and reproach is it to Religion,
when the Professors of it are quarrelling and contending one with the other?
What Sport does this make for Profane and Atheistical Men? And how does it
cause the Enemy to blaspheme the Holy Ways of God?

Thirdly, Consider, How contrary this is to our Rule, and to our Pattern. A
Christian should take Christ's Word for his Rule, and Christ's Example for his
Pattern.

Now First, How contrary is this quarrelling Frame of Spirit to our Rule? It is
Christ's new and great Command in the Gospel, that his Disciples should John 13.
34. Chap. 15. 12.
love one another: And this is commanded over and over, I know not how often
times in the New Testament: Be kindly affectioned one to another, with
Brotherly Romans 12. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Heb. 13. 1. Gal. 5. 13. 1
These. 4. 9. Mark 9. 50. Romans 14. 19.
Love, in Honor, preferring one to another. Love the Brotherhood: Love one
another with a pure Heart fervently: Let Brotherly Love continue: By Love serve
one another: You are taught of God to Love one another. And as our Rule injoyns
us Love, so Peace and Quietness: Have Peace one with another: Let us follow
after those things which make for Peace, and things wherewith one may Edify
one another. The Apostle beseeches them, that they study to be quiet. The
Apostle Peter tells 1 These. 4. 11.
them, That the Ornament of a meck and quiet Spirit, is in the sight of God of
great 1 Pet. 3. 4.
Price. So you see clearly, how contrary it is to the Rules of the Gospel, that
Christians should be of a froward, unquiet and contentious Spirit? The Apostle
says, If it be possible, as much as in Romans 12. 18.
you lies, live peaceably with all Men. And certainly, then much more should we
live peaceably with those of the Household of Faith.

Secondly, How unlike does a froward quarrelling Spirit, make Christians to
Christ. Learn of me, says he, for I am Mat. 11. 29.
meek and lowly. Christ was the greatest Pattern of Love and Meekness that ever
was in the World, he was mild and pitiful to his Enemies, And shall we be harsh
and severe to our Brethren? He loved his Sheep, so that he laid down his Life
for them, and shall his Sheep (as if they were turned Dogs) bait and bite one
another? Such a Member of such a Head make Rents and Divisions in his Body,
which is the Church of God; should those who are the Subjects of the Prince of
Peace, make Wars and Feuds among themselves?

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
What Shame is it, that such disgrace should be imputed to us, and that it
cannot be refuted?

Fourthly, Consider the danger of this unnatural quarrel: If ye bite and devour
Gal. 5. 15.
one another, take heed that ye be not consumed of one another. Are not the
Dissensions of those that profess Religion the ready way to betray both
themselves and the Cause of God into the Hands of those who wait for their
Destruction: How justly may God give us up into the Hands of those that hate
us, if we hate one another? Does not a Father part his fighting Children with a
Rod?

Fifthly, Consider, That Love to the Brethren, is one of the clearest Marks and
Characters of a Regenerate Person in the whole Bible; and on the contrary, want
of Love to the Brethren, is made an evident Sign of want of Love to God. By
this shall all Men know, that you are my Disciples, if you Love one Joh. 13. 35.
another. We know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the 1
John 3. 14.
Brethren. And for the other see, He that hates his Brother is in darkness. If
a 1 John 2. 9. 1 John 4. 20.
Man says, I Love God and hate his Brother, he is a Liar, for he that loves
not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen.
Methinks this should be enough to fright the Children of God from Variance and
Disagreement; for what is there, that a Gracious Heart is more sollicitous and
careful about than this, to know whether he be in a state of Grace or no?

Sixthly, Consider, We have Enemies enough, and therefore we need not be
Enemies among our selves; All the World hate us, and therefore we should not
hate one another. If a Company of Christians should live among the Turks or
among Cannibals, would it not be their Wisdom, and their Safety to unite and
combine together; would they not dread private Dissensions and Differences
among themselves, least it should betray them to the common Enemy? Why so it is
with all real Christians: They live in the midst of Enemies, nay of Cannibals,
who would eat them up like Bread; and therefore it concerns them not to quarrel
and fall out among themselves, least it fare with them as with the Mouse and
the Frog in the Fable. Methinks Christians should learn Wisdom from their
Enemies, Fas est ab boste doceri. How well do the wicked agree in their evil
Practices, and in persecuting the Righteous? Herod and ^ilate were soon made
Friends.

Sevis inter se convenit Vrsis.
The Bears as Savage as they be,
Yet do among themselves agree.
Now shall the Bears and Savage Beasts agree with those of their own Kind, and
shall those that are walking on in the Broad-way to Destruction agree together?
and shall those that are going in the way that leads to Heaven and Happiness
disagree, and fall out by the Way? Tell it not in Gath, publish it 2 Samuel 1. 20.
not in the Streets of Askalon, least the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
least the Daughters of the uncircumcised Triumph.

Seventhly and Lastly, Consider What an irrational and absurd thing it is, that
lesser Differences in Opinion which are between the Children of God (when they
agree in necessary and fundamental Truths) should breed an Alienation and
Estrangement in Affection? Were it not Madness for me to quarrel with every one
whose Shoe will not fit my Foot? We may as well expect that all men's Faces
should be distinguished from another, as that their Conceptions and Opinions
should be the same. Methinks when we know that we cannot be of one Mind, while
we are in our Way, but that, that Happy State is reserved for us, till we come
to our Journeys end to Heaven. Methinks I say, this should cause us to bear
with those that differ from us in lesser Matters, and to forbear censuring of
them, much more to abstain from quarrelling and contending with them. Alas! we
differ from our selves from what we were heretofore, and therefore shall we
quarrel with our selves? O now that these and such like Considerations might
make the Children of God to hearken to that sweet Counsel of the Apostle! Put
on therefore as Col. 3. 12, 13, 14.
the Elect of God, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Longsuffering, Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. If any Man
have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. O let us
who profess our selves to be Children of God, and to be traveling to one
Heaven, think that we heard our Heavenly Father saying to us, as Joseph said to
his Brethren! See that you fall not out by the Genesis 45. 24.
Way; or as Moses to the two striving Israelites; Sirs, You are Brethren, Why
do ye wrong one another? And let us say Acts 7. 26.
one to another, As Abraham said to Lot, Genesis 13. 8.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, for we are Brethren.
Let us labor Ephesians. 4. 3.
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. And let all the Strife
and Contention between us be, who shall be the most Holy, Humble,
Heavenly-minded, Self-denying and Charitable Christian; who shall serve God
best, and love one another most; and then shall we walk on ^hearfully and
comfortably, till we come to Heaven where all our Differences shall be at an
end. For there Luther and Calvin are agreed, there the Blessed God and all his
Saints and Angels are of one Mind. Read the 133d. Psalm and hearken to those
Pathetical Exhortations of the Apostle Paul. Now I beseech you 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Brethren by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. If there be
therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship
Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3.
of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies. Let nothing be done through Strife,
or Vain Glory, but in lowliness of Mind, let each esteem other better than
themselves.

CHAP. XVI. A Traveller who carries Treasure with him, and suspects that he
may meet with Thieves, will go well Armed.
THE Application of this Observation will consist of three Parts.

1. To show that the Heavenly Traveller carries precious Treasure with him. 2.
That he will be set upon in his Way, by those that will endeavor to Rob him of
it. 3. That therefore he should be well Armed.
First, A Christian in his Way to Heaven, carries the Richest Treasure with him
in all the World. 1. He carries his God with him, who is the Summum Bonum, the
chief Good in Comparison of whom all the World is not so much as the drop of
the Bucket to the Ocean, or the small Dust of the Balance to the Universe. So
thought the Blessed Apostle Paul, Who counted all things, but loss Phil. 3. 8.
and dung in Comparison of Christ. So thought the Noble Marquess of Vico, as
appears by that Holy and Heavenly saying of his, Cursed be he that thinks not
one Hours Communion with God, is not better then all the Money in the World.
No! every Saint of God may say, what one of them once did, Whether ever I go, I
Quocunque me confero Deum circumfero.
carry my God with me, and is not this an Infinite and invaluable Treasure?
(...). He has another precious Treasure, ^ar more precious then Gold that
perishes, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
and that is Grace, to be rich in Grace is another manner of thing, then to be
rich in Gold. The Riches of this World are 1 Timothy 6. 17.
called uncertain Riches, and we find them to be so; but Grace is called
durable Riches, and it is so; for he that has Prove. 8. 18.
this Treasure on Earth, shall be sure to have Treasure in Heaven for ever
more. 3. A Christian has another precious Jewel to secure in his Journey, and
that is his Immortal Soul, and this alone (even one Soul) is better then all
the World, so our blessed Savior tells us, who knew the worth of Souls, and
paid a dear rate for them. What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
World Mat. 16. 26.
and lose his own Soul, and what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? So
thou see Christian, that thou carriest a rich Treasure.

Secondly, There be some that lie in wait for thee in thy way, and will
endeavor to rob thee of all this rich Treasure, of thy God, of thy Grace, of
thy Soul: I gave thee warning before; under the sixth Chapter, to take heed of
three Arch-Seducers, and they were Satan, thine own Lusts, and the World Now
these are the Thieves that will way-lay thee, and there endeavor to lead thee
out of thy Way, as in order to the robbing thee of thy Rich Treasure; as
High-way-men lead Travelers aside out of the Road into some bye Lane, or Wood,
where they may Rifle them of their Goods. Satan is an Old and Arch Thief, the
other are Setters that will betray thee into his Hands; as the Hostler and
Chamberlain many Times betray the Traveller, whom they find to carry good store
of Money, into the Hands of Thieves. Now thou can not be too careful of the
World, and thy Lusts, least they betray thee; nor too careful of Satan, least
he rob and spoil thee; he is the most dangerous Thief in the World; he lays
wait for thee from the very first step thou take in thy Way, to the end of
thy Journey; and he is a bloody Thief, he never Robs, but he murders; yea, and
it is the worst Murder too, for he Murders the Soul. So now Christian, thou
see that tho^ art like the Traveller who is richly laden, and thou will
surely be set upon in thy Way; and therefore,

In the Third Place, Thou must imitate the Travelers Wisdom, and go well
Armed: I think there is none, who has understanding of Spiritual Things but is
convinced, that he who is Traveling for Heaven, has more need to be well
armed, then he that is Traveling on Earth; in as much, as he has far better
Riches to secure, and is like to meet with more dangerous Enemies and
Assailants. The Earthly Traveller is seldom or never robbed upon the Highway of
all he has, because he cannot carry his Lands and Livings, his House, and
Goods with him; and there, though he may lose some or all his Money, yet he
has something left him: But Christian, thou may say with Bias, Omnia mea
mecum porto. If Satan rob thee of thy Soul, thou art undone: Thy all is gone,
and thou may lie in the dark Dungeon of Hell without a drop of Cold Water for
ever. Tell me then, had thou not need to look to thy self, and go well armed
against this Danger? I shall therefore inform thee, where thou may have
Armor of Proof; where there is a Magazine that will furnish thee completely,
Cap-a-pe, a Capite a^ calicem, and is (...), The whole Armor of God, stand
therefore having your Loins girt about with Truth, and Ephesians. 6. 14.
having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness; Taking the Shield of Faith,
whereby you shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wick^d; and take
the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God;
and to all these, thou must add Prayer; Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit: Here ver. 18.
is complete Armor, which has put Satan to flight many a Time. But it is
observed, here is no one piece for the Back, to show that a Christian must be
armed with Courage, as well as with Weapons, and must never turn his Back: If
thou do not turn thy Back upon Satan, Satan will turn his Back upon thee;
Resist the Devil, and he will fly from thee. Now if thou would know how to
Jam. 4. 7.
Weild this Spiritual Armor, and how to use every Piece of it successfully.
Read Mr. William Gurnal his Christian in Complete Armor, or Doctor Arrowsmith
his Tactica Sacra.

CHAP. XVII. He that Travelleth with a strong Guard needs not fear being robbed
or hindered in his Journey.
EVery Child of God is so strongly Guarded, that he needs not fear all the
Powers of Earth or Hell; neither Hosts of Men, nor Armies of Devils: And they
whose Eyes are opened by Faith, to see this as the Prophets Servants was, to
see The Mountain full of 2 Kings 6. 17.
Horses of Fire, and Chariots of Fire ^ound about his Master, will say, That
they that be with us, are more then they that be with them. David could see
this, for what else ^ould make him say, I will not be Psalm. 3. 6.
afraid of ten thousand of People, that have set themselves against me round
about. (...) will not fear, what Man can do unto me. Psalm. 118. 8. Psalm. 23. 4.
Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, yet I will fear no
Evil But I will show thee, what Guard every Child of God has to keep him safe
til^ he come to Heaven.

First, They have a Guard of Angels He has given his Angels charge over thee
Psalm. 91. 11.
to keep thee in all thy Ways. If thou keep thy Way, the Angels shall keep
thee; but if thou go out of thy Way, thou can not lay claim to this
Promise: See again, Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister
for them, who Heb. 1. 14.
shall be Heirs of Salvation. The Angel of Psalm. 34. 7.
the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them.
Behold, I Exodus 23. 20.
send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the Way, and to bring thee to the
Place that I have prepared. Now what a strong Guard is this, If we consider,
First, Their Power. Secondly, Their Number.

First, Consider their Power, they are said, to excel in Power: They are Psalm.
103. 2 These. 1. 7.
called mighty Angels, and well they may; for we read, that one Angel went out
and slew eighty five thousand in the Camp of the Assyrians in one Night. 2
Kings 19. 35.
And I doubt not, but one single Angel, if the Lord should give him Commission,
could easily smite all the World, and make them all Dead Men: So that you see,
if we had but one Angel to Guard us, while we are Traveling through the
Wilderness of this World to the Heavenly Canaan, we should be strongly guarded.
But (...)

Secondly, How strong is this Guard, if you consider the number of Angels; if
there be so much strength in one Angel, what is there in an Host of Angels?
Jacob calls them Gods Host, Jacob went on his Way, and the Angels of God met
Genesis 32. 1, 2.
him, and when Jacob saw them, he said, This is Gods Host, and they make a
numerous Host; I heard the Voice of many Angels. The Chariots of the Lord are
Rev. 5. 11. Psalm. 68. 17.
twenty Thousand, even Thousands of Angels. Our Savior says, he could have
Mat. 26. 23.
prayed to his Father and should have given him more then twelve Legions of
Angels: If this be not enough the Apostle tells us, that there be an
innumerable Heb. 12. 22.
Company of Angels: So now we see that every true Christian has a strong
Lifeguard, when all the Angels that excel in might, and exceed in number are
charged by the Great Commander of Heaven and Earth to Minister to them: but
they have a stronger Guard yet, for

Secondly, Not only the Angels of God, but also the God of Angels is their
keeper. Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall Psalm. 121. 4, to 8.
neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon
thy right Hand. The Lord shall preserve thee from all Evil. We read, that the
Lords Portion Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27.
is his People, and that he keeps them as the Apple of his Eye (and surely then
they must be well kept) the Chap. 30. 9.
Lord will Guard them before and behind, and round about, and then who can hurt
them? he will be their Vant-Guard, The Lord your God which goes Deuteronomy. 1. 30.
Isa. 52. 12.
before you, he shall fight for you, etc. For ye shall not go out with haste,
nor go by flight, for the Lord will go before them, and the God of Israel will
be your Rereward. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his Psalm. 125. 2
People from henceforth, even for ever: So it is clear, that the Lord will
Guard his People. In the next Place, that he is a strong Guard, I cannot think
any arrived at the height of Atheism and Impudence, as to deny it; for if he
was Impotent, nay, if he were not Potent, he could not be God: But I am
speaking to Christians, who will be satisfied with Scripture. In the Lord
Jehovah is Isa. 26. 4. Job 9. 19.
Everlasting Strength: If I speak of St^ength he is strong. Our Savior uses
this as an Argument why his Sheep shall never perish, My Father which gave them
me is stronger than all, and none is able to Joh. 10. 29.
pluck them out of my Fathers Hand. I could produce many more Scriptures, as
Psalm 24. 8. Psalm 89. 8. but I need not multiply Texts to prove so plain a
Truth; I shall only mention one more. Behold all the Nations of the Earth are
as Isa. 40. 15.
the drop of a Bucket, and are accounted as the small Dust of the Balance. But
this does not sufficiently set forth the Power of the Omnipotent; therefore it
is said, All the Nations before him are as nothing, ver. 17.
but this does not reach it neither, and therefore it follows, they are counted
to be less then nothing and Vanity. So you see what his Word says, but we may
further consider his Infinite Power by his Works. He is the great God who made
Heaven Genesis 1.
and Earth out of nothing, who shakes the Earth out of her Place; And the
Mountains melt before him: Who has gathered the Wind in his Fist? Who has
measured Judge. 5. 5. Prove. 30. 4. Isa. 40. 12.
the Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and ^meted out the Heavens with a Span,
and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and weighed the Mountains
in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance. The Sea retreats at his Command, and
the Rock becomes a standing Water, and the Psalm. 114. 8.
Flint a Fountain. The Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are astonished at his
Reproof; Job 26. 11
and Hell is naked before him. Lo, these are the Parts of his Ways, but how
little a Portion is heard of him? But the Thunder of his Power, who can
understand? Consider further, what Acts of his Power God has put forth from
Time to Time for the Safety and Preservation of his People; He has restrained
the Fire from Burning, and the Water from Dan. 3. Ezekiel. 14. 21. Dan. 6. 22.
Drowning, and the Hungry Lions from Devouring them: He has put a Hook into
the Nostrils of the most enraged Enemies, has reproved Kings for their sake;
yea, for their sake, He smote great Psalm. 136. 17, 18.
Kings, and slew famous Kings. And lastly, He has reserved their greatest
Enemies the Devils in Chains to the Judgment of the Great Day. Behold! what
Jude 6.
safety have all the Saints, who have this God to be their Lord Protector? He
can raise all the Posse of Heaven and Earth, for the safe Conduct of those who
are Traveling to his Kingdom; but if he Arm the least and most contemptible
Creatures, they shall be strong enough to secure them, and destroy their
Adversaries. By this Time, I hope thou art satisfied, that the Children of God
are well Guarded in their Journey toward Heaven, and therefore it will follow
clearly, that they need not fear being hindered in their Way, nor robbed of
their Treasure: What God says to Abraham, he says to all who are Children of
Abraham, Fear not, I am thy Shield. Sure he must needs be safe, who is sub
Omnipotentis clypeo, under the Buckler of the Almighty. Well then Christian, go
on thy Way with Courage and Cheerfulness: What is it that thou Fear? Is it
Satan? Why, the Lord shall trample him under thy Feet shortly, for the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18.
against any of his: Do thou fear Men, the Lord is on thy side, what can
Flesh do unto thee? Thy Protector can look all thy Enemies into Confusion, as
he did Proud Pharaoh and all his Host, or consume Exo. 14. 24.
them with the Breath of his Nostrils: Do thou keep on in Heavens way, and all
the Power of Earth and Hell shall never be able to keep thee out of Heaven, For
the Lord shall preserve thee, by his Power through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet.
1. 5.


CHAP. XVIII. Though the Traveller find good Entertainment at his Inn, yet he
takes not up his abode there, but is Restless, till he come to his own Home.
A Wise Christian looks upon this World as his Inn, and takes it but in
transitu in his Way to a better World. He does not say, It is good to be here,
Let us build Tabernacles, but Mat. 17. 4.
he uses the World as if he used it not: If God gives him Riches, a plentiful
Estate, a convenient Habitation, kind Relations, he blesses God and says,
This is a good Inn: But this is not my Home, this is not my Heaven. I desire to
be thankful that I find so good Entertainment in my Way, but I look for better
at my Journeys End. I have cause to bless God, that I meet with so fair Quarter
here where I am a Stranger; but I expect far better when I come to my Home, and
to my Fathers House, and therefore I long to be there. When a Traveller comes
to his Inn, though he like his Chamber very well, yet he does not send for rich
Tapestry and Hangings, and other Ornaments to furnish and adorn it; for he
considers that he is to lodge there but one Night, and then must resign it to
another. So a Saint of God, who is a Citizen of Heaven, though he may enjoy
comfortable Accommodations here on Earth; yet he looks upon them all as ^uch as
he must shortly part with and leave to others, and therefore endeavors that
his Heart may sit loose from them. If he has a goodly House on Earth, he knows
he must shortly be turned out of it; and therefore he looks out for a House,
not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens, and for a Mansion which Christ is
gone to prepare for him; and though he has 2 Cor. 5. John 14. 12.
a very fair earthly Inheritance, yet he knows he is but a Tenant at will, and
therefore he looks for a Heavenly, For 1 Pet. 1. 4.
an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for him. If he be as Rich as Solomon was, yet he knows that these are
uncertain Riches, and will soon take Wings and be gone; and therefore he looks
after durable Riches, and Treasures in Heaven, which no Rust can corrupt no
Thieves 1 Timothy 6. 17.
rob them of: Though he has Dear Friends and Relations on Earth, yet he Mat.
6. 20.
knows he has better Friends and Relations in Heaven; and upon these
Considerations, he uses the World but as a thorough-Fare, and seeks for a
better Country even a Heavenly. But how is it with Heb. 11. 16.
the greater Part of Men? Do they use the World as if they used it not? Do they
use it as a Traveller does his Inn? Surely no, but they use it as a sottish
Drunkard does the Alehouse, where you may find them Day and Night, where they
spend all their Time and all their Substance too. Alas! most Men make the World
their Home, their Portion, their Heaven, their God. This World has all their
Hearts, all their Thoughts, all their Care, all their Time, all their
Affections. In the mean Time, God, Heaven, and their immortal Souls are wholly
neglected, God is not in all their Thoughts; the Children of God make them
Friends of the unrighteous Mammon, but the Children of this World make Mammon
their God. When the Rich Fools Wealth and Corn came flowing in upon him, he
takes up his Rest in them: Soul, says he, Take thine Ease, thou have Goods
laid up for Luke 12.
many Years. But when God had established good Jehosaphat in the Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 18. 1. 2 Chronicles. 17. 6.
and blessed him with Riches and Honor in abundance, his Heart was not lifted
up with these things, but his Heart was lifted up in the Ways of the Lord. A
real Christian should use all the Comforts and Enjoyments of this World, as
they may be helps and not hindrances to him in his Way to a better World. He
says with Luther, Nolo sic satiari, I will not be so satisfied, I will not be
put off with these things; and with Austin, Domine nolo omnia quae dedisti,
nisi das teipsum qui dedisti omnia. Lord, I will not be content with all that
thou have given me, unless thou give me thy self, who have given me all. His
Soul is unsatisfied with all his earthly Enjoyments, and he is restless till he
comes to Heaven which he counts his Home, to the immediate and Everlasting
Enjoyment of God in Glory.

CHAP. XIX. Many a Traveller has been ready to faint in his Way, and to fear
that he should never reach his Journeys end, who yet has attained it with
Safety.
THis Chapter is very applicable to a Christian in his Journey to Heaven in
both the Parts of it.

First, Is not he subject to fainting fits while he is in his Earthly
Pilgrimage? Is he not full of Doubts and Fears, that he shall never hold out to
the End? Does he not sometimes fear least his evil Heart of unbelief, will
cause him to depart from Heb. 3. 12.
the Living God, least a Promise being made of entering into Rest, he should
Heb. 4. 5.
come short of it? Sometimes his Lusts and Corruptions are so impetuous and
violent, that he cries out, These Sons of Zerviah will be too hard for me!
sometimes the Devil pursues him with such hideous Temptations and Hellish
Injections, that he says in his Heart; I shall ^one Day perish by the Hand of
Satan. Sometime he is under Spiritual Desertion, he sits in Darkness and sees
no Light: He has no Sense nor feeling of the Love and Favor of God, and then
his Heart fails him; and then he says with Jonah, I am cast out of thy sight;
Jonah 2. 4.
and in this Condition he is so far from being Confident that he shall attain
the end of his Journey, that he fears he was never yet in his right Way, he
calls all in Question, and thinks that his Repentance and turning from Sin
proceeded only from legal Terrors, and from the Conviction of a natural
Conscience, and not from the Work of saving Grace: He bears false Witness
against himself, and makes desperate Conclusions, that he is a Hypocrite, a
Cast-a-way; one of the Foolish Virgins that shall be shut out of Heaven for
ever: And this I think does plainly prove the first Point, that a Christian is
apt to be surprised with fainting in his Way toward Heaven, and to fear that
he shall never attain his Journeys End. These things may seem Riddles and
Paradoxes to the Mad World, and may be to them matter o^ Scorn and Derision,
but those who ar^ acquainted with the Ways of God, and with the Method of his
carrying on the Work of Grace upon the Hearts of hi^ People do know that these
are experimental Truths.

But Secondly, Though a Child of God be in this Condition, though he seem to
despair that ever he shall hold out till he comes to Heaven, Yet he shall
assuredly attain it with Safety and Comfort. David said in his Heart (and we
may say in haste too) I shall one Day perish by the Hands of Saul, but we know
he did not; nay, indeed he could not, for the faithful God had promised, that
he should succeed Saul in the Kingdom. So many a precious Saint of God thinks
in his Heart, that he shall sometime or other be foiled and turned out of the
way by Satan, and by his own Corruptions, and so perish for ever, but he shall
not for all that; nay he cannot, for though he seems to let go his hold of God,
yet God will not let go his hold of him, for he has said, I will never, never,
never Heb. 13. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
leave thee, nor forsake thee. And the Election of God stands sure, having
this Seal, for the Lord knows who are his. And the Lord Christ says, Of all
that John 17. 12.
thou have given me, I have lost none. Tho the Righteous scarcely be saved, yet
they shall surely be saved; though with much 1 Pet. 4. 18.
difficulty, yet with all certainty: Though a Christians Condition be sometimes
Dark and Cloudy; yet the Sun of Righteousness Mal. 4. 2.
shall arise upon them with healing under his Wings. Though his Flesh and his
Heart fail, yet God will be the Strength Psalm. 73. 26.
of his Heart, and his Portion for ever; though he seem to faint in the Way,
yet the Almighty will renew his Strength, and will make him to hold out to the
End and be Saved. That is a sweet Scripture, Isa. 40. 31. They that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their Strength, they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles,
they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint: How full of
Spiritual and Heavenly Consolation is this one Word of God? Let us
(Fellow-Travellers) carry this as a Sovereign Cordial with us in our Heavenly
Journey, and it will revive our Drooping Spirits, when we are ready to faint,
and will put Strength and Courage into us, to go on cheerfully of our Way, till
we come to Heaven.

CHAP. XX. When a Traveller after a long and dangerous Journey returns Home in
Safety, how will his Father embrace him? How will all his Relations welcome
him? What mutual Joy and Rejoicing will there be?
CHristian, If my Tongue were the Tongue of the Learned, or as the Pen of a
ready Writer, if I were as eloquent as Apollos, if I had been wrapped up into the
Third Heaven, and into Paradise with Paul. Ye^ I were no way able to express
that transcendent Joy and Happiness which thou and all thy Fellow Creatures,
who (taking the Spirit of God for your Guide, and his Word for your Rule) have
walked in his Ways, and persevered therein to the End, shall enjoy, when you
have finished your Course, when you have fought the good fight, when your
warfare is accomplished. Paul who had a sight or glimpse of it, could not utter
what he heard and saw, he says, he heard unspeakable Words, and doubtless he
saw unspeakable Joies, such as cannot be uttered; yet that thou may be
encouraged to keep on thy way against all Opposition and Discouragements, I
shall endeavor (pro mea tenuitate) to give thee a little taste of what
Entertainment thou will meet with at thy Journeys End, and how thou will be
welcomed into Heaven.

First, The Blessed God, thy Heavenly Father will bid thee welcome into his
Kingdom, as the Prodigals Father did him to his House, Who ran Luke 15. 20.
to meet him and fell on his Neck and kissed him, and expressed all the Tokens
of his Joy and Rejoicing at his return. I know that Parable is a lively
Representation of our Heavenly Fathers entertaining a Penitent Sinner at his
first Conversion: But if he so welcome a Sinner into the Kingdom of his Grace,
how will he welcome a Saint into his Kingdom of Glory? Our Savior tells us, It
is your Fathers good Pleasure to give Luke 12. 32.
you the Kingdom; and if he be well pleased to give us the Kingdom, surely he
cannot but be well pleased to give us the Possession of the Kingdom. If he has
prepared a Kingdom for Mat. 25. 34.
us from the Foundation of the World, he cannot but rejoice to see us inherit
that Kingdom. And as thy Heavenly Father will be delighted to see thee so, How
will thy Soul be ravished with the Beatifical Vision of thy God? If to see but
his Back Parts here, and to see him but darkly in the Glass of Ordinances, be
far the sweetest Enjoyment, that ever thy Soul tasted on Earth? O think and
admire, what it will be to see him as he is, and to be made like unto 1. Joh.
3. 2.
him in Heaven.

Secondly, How will Christ thy Elder Brother welcome thee with an Euge bone
Serve? Well done, good and faithful Servant, enter thou into Mat. 25. 21.
the Joy of thy Lord. Come thou Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom. Thou
have suffered with me, and thou shall reign now with me: Thou have born my
Cross and thou shall wear my Crown: How will Christ rejoice to see those that
were the purchase of his own Blood, to be so advanced and to be where he is,
when he shall thus see the Travel of his Soul, How will he be satisfied? And
then Christian, what Joy and Rejoicing will it be to thy Soul to see thy
Blessed Savior (who was Crucified and Crowned with Thorns for thy sake) to be
Crowned with Glory, and sitting with his Father on his Throne, and attended
with Thousands of Glorious Angels and Glorified Saints?

Thirdly, How will the Glorious Angels meet thee with Joy and Jubilation.
Certainly, if there be Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner
that repents, there will be great Joy over every Saint that is glorified? How
will they rejoice to see those whom they had charge to keep in all their Ways,
to come safe to Heaven, and to be entered into their Society, and to increase
their Chorus, and to join with them in their Hallelujahs.

Fourthly, With what Joy will the Saints meet and embrace? How will Abraham
receive thee into his Bosom? How will all thy Fellow-Travellers and
Fellow Sufferers, all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, and
Saints of the Lord Jesus welcome thee to thine Eternal Rest? And how will it
fill thy Soul with ravishing Joy to think that these shall be thy Companions
for ever? If the Society of the Saints on Earth was so delightful, when they
were so full of Corruption and Infirmities? What will it be in Heaven, where
the Spirits of Just Men shall be made perfect, not having spot or wrinkle or
any such thing, but they shall be Holy and without blemish?

Fifthly, The Place where thou shall arrive at thy Journeys end, and where thou
shall take up thine Everlasting abode, must needs affect thee with admirable
Delight. We have a Description of a City, The Foundations of whose Walls Rev.
21.
were laid with all manner of precious Stones, the Twelve Gates, of Twelve
entire Pearls, the Streets of the City Paved with pure Gold, as it were
transparent Glass. I am not ignorant that some Learned Men have interpreted
this of a glorious Church upon Earth; but Mr. Brightman, who is of that
Opinion, says, Complures interpretantur haec omnia de Ecclesia, qualis est
futura tandem in Coelis. That very many interpret this of the Church as it
shall be in Heaven, We need not contend, contrary Interpreters are in the
right: For if the Church on Earth shall be so glorious, questionless it shall
be much more glorious in Heaven; and let the Interpretation of that City be
what it will, certainly the Court and chief Place of Residence of the great
King of Heaven and Earth, must needs be a Place of unspeakable Glory: And
though that City be set out under the highest Representations that can be
borrowed from natural Things, yet it comes as far short of the Glory of Heaven,
as a Town of Mud-walls and Thatch comes short of such a City. How glorious must
the inside of that Cabinet be, where the outside is Enamelled with so many
bright and glittering Stars? And how glorious will thou be, when thou have all
these under thy Feet? And when the great Ones of the Earth shall go from their
sta^^ly Palaces, even where they did surfeit with all Earthly Delights and
Sensual Pleasures into a dark Hell, where they cannot have a drop of Cold
Water: O what a miserable change will this be! And how will it fill them with
horror and despair? But when a poor Child of God shall go from this Valley of
Tears (where he has been afflicted, despised and persecuted, into a glorious
Heaven, where he shall enjoy Everlasting Rest and Blessedness. O what a happy
Change will this be! And how must he needs be transported with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory? So now I have showed thee (Christian) what Happiness thou
(and all that walk in the Way of Holiness) shall enjoy when you are come to
your Journeys End, namely, all those glorious Privileges which the Apostle
says the Church shall enjoy under the Gospel. You are come to the City of the
Living God, to the Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are Written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant. Now though this be enough to make thy Estate
unspeakably Happy and Joyful; yet there be many other things which thou will
meet with in Heaven, which will make it full measure, pressed down, and running
over; As

First, How many Dangers and Difficulties a gracious God has brought thee
through. Quod fuit durum puti meminisse dulce est: It is pleasant to a
Traveller when he has overcome his Journey to relate what Dangers he has met
with in his Way.

Secondly, That thou have overcome all thy Doubts and Fears, for when thou art
in Possession and Enjoyment, how can thou any more Doubt or Fear?

Thirdly, That thou art freed from all Satan's Temptations, for though he got
into the Earthly Paradise, yet he shall never come into the Heavenly; For there
shall in no wise come into it any thing that defiles. Rev. 21. 27.


Fourthly, Thou shall be set free from all thy Lusts and Corruptions, for when
thy Spirit shall be made perfect, not any Saint on Earth will be made partaker
of the hundredth Part of that Inherent Grace, which the Soul of the meanest
Saint shall be partaker of in Heaven.

Fifthly, Thou shall be freed from the Persecutions of wicked and unreasonable
Men, ^or there the weary are at rest. Job 3. 17.


Sixthly, All the Faculties of thy Soul shall be enlarged to the utmost
Capacity, to know, love, enjoy, delight in and Praise thy Blessed God; When
that which is perfect is come, then that which 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12.
is in Part shall be done away; for now we see through a Glass darkly, but then
face to face: Now I know but in part, but then shall I know, as I also am known.

Seventhly, That Sweet, Holy, Heavenly Work of Praising God, thou shall be
employed in to all Eternity; and shall perform it without the Rev. 4. 8. to the
end Rev. 5. latter end. Rev. 15. 3, 4. Chap. 19.
least lassitude or weariness, nay, with the greatest Delight and Complacency.

Eighthly, Thou shall be cured of all thy Sicknesses and bodily Infirmities;
there shall neither be aching Head, or aching Heart; there shall be nothing but
Joy and Gladness, all Sorrow and Sighing shall fly away. Rev. 21.


Ninthly, Thy Vile Body shall be raised up at the last Day, and be made like
Christ glorious Body. Phil. 3. 21.


Tenthly and Lastly, To conclude all, Thy Body shall be reunited to thy Soul,
and they shall both together to all Eternity, enjoy so much Bliss and
Happiness, as thou will say the one half (nay the one hundredth Part) was not
told thee. For Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither 1 Cor. 2. 9.
has entered into the Heart of Man the things that God has prepared for them
that love him.

FINIS.

