THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM DVBLIN IN IRELAND, Dated March 29. 1642.

By Sir John Temple Knight, Master of the Rolls, and one of his Majesty's
privy Council of that Kingdom, written to D. Temple, D. of Divinity and Pastor
of Battersey, near London:

RELATING THE MANNER OF taking the Castle of Carrick-Maine, six miles from
Dublin, by Sir Simon. Harcourt, and some English under his Command:

Together with the manner of his hurt and death, with some other passages.

London printed for L. B. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter from Dublin In Ireland, Dated March 29. 1642.
Dear Brother,
I Must now with a very sad heart, give you a sad relation of our most unhappy
loss of Sir Simon Harcourt, whom it pleased God to suffer to perish by a Shot
from the Castle of Carrick-maine six miles from this town toward the
mountains. He went out on Saturday morning, only to view, but being as it
seems, extremely provoked by the Rogues within, and finding it in his own
judgment, a matter of no great difficulty to take it in, he there sat down
with a troop of Horse he had with him, and sent for 1000. foot, and two pieces
of Battery. There were many men in the Castle, but not above 12. Musketeers,
but such good markemen, as they scarce shot one shot in vain. They wounded
several of our men, killed near 20. and have very desperately hurt Sergeant
Major Berry, who arrived here but few days before with 400. Fire-lockes, yet
we hope he will recover. Sir Simon Harcourt so placed his Musketeers, that
they played upon the windows and leads so fast, as scarce any durst peep out
to discharge upon them, and he himself lying behind a little thatched house
to give direction, for the planting of the pieces of Battery, and hearing one
say that one of the Rogues had laid a Musket out of the window, stood up to
call to his men to shoot at him; just as the word was out of his mouth, was
himself shot in the right breast, and sinking a little down, recommended with
his first words his soul to God, and in the next place called those Gentlemen
that were by, to bear witness that he gave all he had to his wife, and left
his children to be provided for at her discretion, and being carried into a
little Cabine hard by, he desired the other Commanders to leave him, and go on
to dispatch their business, which they did. But the Soldiers enraged with his
hurt, and seeing the Ordnance did not make so speedy an entrance for them as
they expected; impatient of further delay in taking revenge for their Colonels
shot, took up hatchets, and being gallantly lead on by Captain Woodhouse,
When the Battery had played upon the walls some time, Sir Simon sent out to see
what breaches were made thereby, and heareing of few, sent word that the best
way then to effect their d^signe, was to storm the Gates, which they did
accordingly.
and Captain Congreave, went to the door, and broke it down, although it was
with great obstinacy and violence defended by the Rebels within, As Master
Hammond, Sir Simon Harcourts Ensign relates since his arrival.
who never gave over, but even after they had entered the Castle, killed some
of our men out of the Garrets above, and from the Cellars below, but they were
all quickly made a Sacrifice. And such was the fury of our men, that they
spared neither man, woman, nor child, but put them all to the sword, to the
number of about 300. and blew up the Castle. They brought off Sir Simon
Harcourt to Mirian; Captain Congreave having gotten into the Castle called for
the Master of the house, in whose s tead his Son appeared, of whom Captain
Congreave d^manded the fellow in green that showed himself so often upon the
battlements; but was answered, I know not whom you mean. Yet being further
threatened, he brought him out; and upon their appearance Captain Congreave
having with him a Case of Pistols charged, discharged both upon them, so
killing them with his own hands.
a Castle belonging to my Lord Fitz William his pain so much increasing, as
he was not able to endure to come to this Town. I went yesterday to visit
him, but found his spirits so spent, as he was able to say little to me. Master
Robert Hammond above mentioned relates this.
I find he has caused his Will to the same effect to be set down a little
more at large, and had passed the night in most extreme pain, but full of
comfort, sweet ejaculations, and words expressing the assurance he had of Gods
favor. His friends in England must needs be much afflicted with his loss,
but we here, as we have most cause, must most lament it. His first arrival
here brought us much comfort, and all our undertakings have been blessed with
success, since his coming over. I assure you we do attribute very much
thereof to his courage, zeal to the cause, and wise mannagement of our
Martial affairs, we all acknowledge to owe very much to his memory, and as an
expression of it, when I came back from him to the Counsel Board, and the
news being presently brought of his departure, I moved the Lords, that by our
recommendation of him to the Parliament, we might endeavor to obtain a large
proportion of land to be settled upon his wife and children, as a recompense in
part of the great service he has done here, which motion took so well, that
they all agreed to it, and have fixed upon that particular proportion of Land,
whereon he lost his life. It belongs to one Welsh, and is very good Land, worth
five hundred pounds per annum, which I conceived too narrow a recompense, and
therefore moved our Letters might be of larger extent, which their Lordships
presently condescended unto, and it is resolved we shall write unto the
Parliament, and my Lord Lieutenant on their behalf with all the earnestness
that may be. This is all the service I can do them for the present, you may
assure my Lady, that if it shall lie in my power further to serve her here, she
shall see how high a value I put upon her gallant husband now at rest, and
delivered from the miseries we daily taste of.

Yet I must tell you, it pleases God still to go along with us, and we have
other gallant instruments, that go bravely on to take vengeance of these
accursed villains. I received yesterday a letter from Captain Arrow, now at
Dondalke, with Sir Henry Titchbourne, which he writes to me they have taken in,
and that they have there, and at Ardee slain great numbers of the Rebels, as
I here above a 1000. since the raising of the siege of Tredagh: Captain Marrow
is very zealous and forward, and has already done very good service, since he
came over with his troop, who do sharp execution, and spare none. He had the
Avant-guard when they entered Dondalke, which was defended 12. hours by the
Rebels, and yet he lost but one man in his troop, and there were not 20. of
ours lost in all.

FINIS.

