Gods Controversy with England declared OR A VVARNING-VVORD By way of REPROOF
to the INHABITANTS thereof, Even to such as FORGET GOD, and are adding one Sin
unto another.
UPon the second Day of the fifth Month, 1661. as I Traveled under the
Burdens of the People, the Lord God of everlasting Power, Glory, Wisdom and
Righteousness said unto me with a strong hand, Write my Controversy with this
People of England, who are only Wise to do evil, but to do good have no
Knowledge, who proceed from evil to worse, and Fear not me at all, says the
Lord God; whose Iniquities are greatly increased against me, and to such a
height do the Floods of their Ungodliness make haste to arise, that all the
Channels will be quick^y full; And then Woe, Woe, unto them, says the dreadful
and holy One. For thus says the Lord, I will Overturn, Overturn, until you
wicked and profane multitude be no more; Even until you, O People, whose ears
are wholly shut against the good be consumed and brought to nothing: For your
Iniquities do burden my Righteous soul, says God, and Sodom was not more
grievous to me than you are. For O what studying and ^riving is in thy
Multitude how they may exceed in their Vanities, in their Riotings, Drinkings,
Revelings, and Heathenish Abominations of all forts! Has not my Soul
considered, says God, what you have done, both the last Year and this, under
pretense of honoring your King. What do you think by dishonouring Me, to
honor your King? You and your King (if he allow of your doings) will I
severely Judge, says the Lord God, except ye speedily Repent, and all look
better to your Ways than hitherto you have done. O consider this, ye forgetters
of God, ye filthy hearted People, how have ye made the Land to stink before me,
with your Abominations! O I have seen, says God, how wickedly and with a high
hand, as it were in despite of me you set up your May-poles, that accursed
thing, the last year, and I warned you of it, and called ye to Repentance; but,
as if I had said nothing, you have doubled your wickedness in the same thing
this year also, to provoke my Soul to arise up against you to your hurt: And
the Beesom on the top of some of them, signifies that I will sweep the Land of
evil doers; And surely it shall come to pass, that if ye will not yet repent
of your wickedness, that I will plague you with the Plagues of Egypt, and I
will do such things amongst you in my judgment, and fury poured forth, that
the Nations about that hear thereof, shall stand amazed at thee. O Revolted and
Back-sliden Nation; whither art thou gone already? and whither will thou run,
if thou be suffered to go on? Into the Pit that thou art step already, and into
the nethermost hell thou will fall if I let thee alone. But I will arise, says
God, I will execute Righteous Judgment in thee, with fire and sword will I
plead with thee, and thy mighty men shall fall with thee, who sing thy Song,
and take part with thy Lewdness, and strengthen thy ungodly hands in thy
wicked ways, and say in their hearts, O this is a good day, these are good
Subjects, this is the time we have long looked for; now we reign; now we may do
what we will, and who shall control us? who shall hinder us from filling our
selves with all manner of delights? now we are settled in our way; now will we
Build our decayed Houses, and Restore our fallen Worships; now will we Repair
the broken Fences of our Parks, that we may have Game to the full; now shall
our Horses be well fed for the Race, that they may fully please us; now let the
Cock-pits be looked to, for that (cruel) Sport, and let our Bowling-Alleys be
well Dressed for our daily Recreation; Now shall the Stage Players for our
delight, have their full Liberty, and all the Sons of Vanity have due
Encouragement for the Old things we Love, and that which is New, though never
so much the Better, our souls Loath; We like the Old Ways of our Fathers,
because when they had Lord-Bishops and their Minster Services with Mattens, and
Evensong, with Organs, and Singing-boys, and such like Things, then there was
Peace and Plenty; and when the Neighborhood could meet together and sit about
a Bone-fire or May Pole, or under a Bower, and drink strong drink, and tell
Stories, and Sing and Roar, then there was Love and Agreement; And when Plays,
and Pastimes, and Wakes were duly frequented and observed, then was it a Merry
Time, and a Joyful Land, and all went well in those Days, when such Things were
on foot; And when those that said they feared the Lord, and so could not join
with us, but rather Witnessed against us, and Reproved us for such Things, were
taken a Course withal, O then was it a good Day, say many; And as it was then
so would we have it now, says your Vain and Wicked hearts, O ye fallen sons
and daughters of Adam! And I see you, says the Lord God, with both your hands
endeavoring these Things, and abusing my Power, if possible to set up the
Devils Kingdom with it; And thus quite contrary to my Ordinance, says the
Lord, are you become as a Terror to the Good, and an Encouragement to them
that do Evil, and mine Eye sees you right well; and my Heart considers you
thoroughly, and I cannot Love you, for profaneness and hypocrisy is your
covering, and you are as the clothes of a Menstruous Woman in my sight. Away
with your vain Worships, says God, my soul loathes your Sabbaths and Services
thereon, yea, your Sacraments are a burden to me; I hate your Prayers, Praises,
Professions and Confessions, for you mend not your lives and doings at all; I
will stir up my Jealousy and it shall kindle like flames of fire upon you, and
utterly consume the joy of your hearts, and for joy the bitterest of sorrows
shall seize upon you, and you shall become a burden to your selves, except you
speedily Repent and turn to the Lord God, from whom you are far gone away. For
I have a long time held my peace, says the Lord, but now I will cry like a
Traveling Woman, I will destroy and devour at once, I will lay waste the
Mountains and the Hills, because they have not answered my Power with fruits of
Righteousness to me. And the Multitudes of People who are as Grasshoppers in thy
Bowels devouring every green thing, and spending my Creatures upon their Lusts,
not regarding my Glory at all, shall be as heaps of fuel for the fire of my
Jealousy, and it shall kindle upon them, and none shall quench it, neither
shall it cease burning till I have consumed thy dross, and appeased my Wrath
in the Consumption of thy Wicked Ones, says the Lord God. For Tophet is
prepared of Old, for the Purposes of my heart, according to the Scriptures,
says the Holy One.

Thomas Tailor.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eogle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.


