THE CASE OF Richard Tailor, Esquire a Member of the Honorable, the House of
Commons, and John Clerkson, Esquire the two surviving Trustees of Hannah Knight, an
Infant, Daughter of John Knight, Esquire lately Deceased, by Mary his Wife.
BY Indentures of Lease and Release, 21th. and 22th. of May, 1683.
Sir Ralph Knight late of Langoll in the County of York, Knight, in
Consideration of a Marriage then intended to be had between John Knight, his
Eldest Son, and Mary the Daughter of Robert Clerkson, Esquire did convey the Manor
of Letwell in the County of York, with diverse Lands, and Hereditaments in the
County of Nottingham, to the said John Clerkson, Richard Tailor, Robert Not,
and Nicholas Fownes (which said Fownes and Not are since dead) for the Term of
500 Years to commence from the several Deaths of the said Sir Ralph Knight, and
John Knight, in trust for the raising of Portions for Younger Children of the
said intended Marriage, viz.) if there was but one Daughter (and no issue Male)
then to raise 5000 l. Portion for such Daughter, payable at her Age of One and
Twenty, or day of Marriage, which should first happen, and such Maintenance, as
the Trustees, or the Survivor of them should think fit, not exceeding 60 l. per
Ann.

The Marriage soon after took Effect.

The said John Knight, 21th. of December, 1686.
and Mary his Wife had Issue a Daughter (being the above named Hannah the
Infant) who was Baptized on the first Day of January following.

The said John Knight died, 6th. of May, 1693.
leaving Issue only the said Daughter, and after his Death, the said Trustees (
John Clerkson and Richard Tailor) agreed with the Council of Mary the Mother
(the Infant being then but a little above six Years old) to allow 40 l. per
Annum for her Maintenance, which Maintenance was by them paid to the Mother for
two Years, 2d. of Jan. 1695.
and before the third Year was up, viz. 2d. of January, 1695, the said Mary the
Mother of the Infant inter-married with James Watkinson, a mean Fellow, (who
was her own Coachman, and had been her late Husband's Groom.)

The said Trustees being very much concerned for the Infant (as being not only
Trustees, Tri^i^y (...), 1696.
but related to the Child, having married two of the Sisters of the Infant's
Father) did prefer their Bill in Chancery against the said Watkinson and his
Wife, thereby setting forth the said Trust and the Marriage of the Mother, to
the intent to have the Infant preserved from being made a Prey of by her
Father-in-Law, and that she might not be married to her disadvantage.

Watkinson and his Wife put in their Answer to the said Bill, 3d of August,
1696.
(which was perused and signed by Thomas Gooding, Sergeant at Law) whereupon
the said Sergeant Gooding finding that there was such a Portion settled on the
Infant (though otherways a stranger to the Family) he treated with Watkinson
and his Wife to marry the said Infant to Thomas Gooding his younger Son, who
was then above three and Twenty Years old, and the Infant under Ten (as by the
Answer of Watkinson and his Wife, and perused by the Sergeant, appears) and
accordingly in the long Vacation, and before the Court of Chancery could make
any order concerning the Child.

Thomas Gooding the Younger (in order to get the License at Doctors Commons)
makes Oath, 29th. of September, 1696.
that the said Hannah Knight the Infant, was about 12 Years old, and thereupon
the said Infant was soon after taken into the House of the said Sergeant
Gooding, and he now pretends that she is married to his said Son.

The said Trustees did petition the Lord Keeper concerning the said Infant,
Hilary Term last.
complaining of the Proceedings of the said Watkinson and his Wife, and the
said Sergeant Gooding (pending the said Bill in Chancery) and prayed that the
said Infant might be brought into Court, and committed to some indifferent
Hand, until she should attain her Age of Consent; 12th. of February, 1696.
whereupon the Lord Keeper ordered, that Watkinson, and his Wife, and Sergeant
Gooding should attend him with the Infant on the next Day of Petitions.

The said Parties attended with the said Infant, 12th of Mar. 1696.
and after the Petition and two Affidavits on the Petitioners part were read,
Sergeant Gooding refused to consent to deliver up the Child at that time, but
desired further time, in order to take Copies of the Petitioner's Affidavits,
and to make his defense by Affidavits also; and thereupon the Lord Keeper
ordered that the Child should be brought again, and all Parties to attend him
on the 18th of March then next ensuing, and that all Affidavits on either side
should be filed two days before.

The Petitioners with their Council attended at the Lord Keeper's House
accordingly, 18th. of Mar. 1696.
but after some time Mrs. Watkinson with some of Sergeant Gooding's Daughters
and Family, came with the Infant to my Lord Keeper's House, but before the
Infant was brought into Court, she was taken away from the Company of her
Mother and the Serjeant's Daughters and others of his Family that came with
her, by a Woman who stood there ready, whose name, upon Inquiry, is Passmore,
the Wife of one (...) Passmore a Cook, who lodges in the Strand (which
Passmore was for four Years a Servant in Sergeant Gooding's House) and is
employed to make Mantoes for several of the Serjeant's Family, and had been but
two days before at the Serjeant's House.

My Lord Keeper sent his Messenger to search after this Woman (Mrs. Passmore)
at her Lodgings, but she could not be found, nor the Child; and then the Lord
Keeper did Examine most of the Serjeant's Family, but both he as well as they,
and also Watkinson and his Wife, and Thomas Gooding the Younger, do all pretend
that they do not know where the Child is, nor will they produce her.

It is supposed, that it is the Design of the Sergeant and his Son, and the
other Confederates, either to keep the Child till she comes to the Years of
Consent, and then to compel her to agree to the Marriage; or otherwise, that
if the Child die before she attain her Age of Twelve, that Thomas Gooding the
Son will then be Entitled to take out Administration to the Infant, (under the
Color of this Mock-marriage) and thereby recover the 5000 l.


