THE HISTORY OF GAVEL-KIND, With the Etymology thereof; Containing also An
Assertion that our English Laws are for the most part Those that were used by
the Ancient Brytains, notwithstanding the several Conquests of the Romans,
Saxons, Danes, and Normans;

With some Observations and Remarks upon many especial Occurrences of British
and English History.

By Silas Tailor Gent.

To which is added a short History of William the Conqueror, written in Latin
by an Anonymus Author, in the time of Henry the First.

Theogn. Gn. (...).

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Mitre
in Fleet Street, between the Middle-gate and Temple-Barr. 1663.

TO HIS MUCH HONORED PATRON Sir EDWARD HARLEY, Knight of the Honorable Order
of the BATH, etc.
SIR,
I HAD no sooner Reflected upon this my Resolution of engaging your Name in the
Front of this Treatise; but was Conscious that probably (and perhaps
deservedly) I might hereby attract the imputation of Impudence, not being
confident or assured, that any thing may therein be found, which may afford
either delight or satisfaction to You; or engage You to bestow upon it some few
spare minutes (if such may at any time favor You from your greater or more
serious Affairs). But finding my self in Gratitude deeply bound and engaged to
make this public Testimony (though a slight one) of my thankful
acknowledgments for those many and extraordinary favors, which I have received
from You; the force of this Argument, made void the fear of the former. I have
been much longer about this Task, than at first I did propose; yet I can assure
you Sir, it met with above a years mis-carriage, by reason of my last absence
from England. The first Essay at it was made in Scotland, being immediately
before my going thither by some Friends earnestly thereunto solicited, and
unwillingly engaged; where I found but small leisure from my Employments, to
accomplish their Desires: yet did credit, that your Affectionate engagements of
me afterward in Dunkirk, whilst you were Governor there, would have afforded
some few hours to have rendered this Piece into a better shape and form; but it
is not unknown to You, how and upon what grounds my Expectations were there
also Frustrated; insomuch that these undigested Observations are but those I
could (Raptim) by small parcells catch from my several Obligements. They are I
confess for the most part Nocturnae Lucubrationes, Collected for a kind of
Diversion, when Lassitude and Weariness proceeding from my daily Turmoyl of
employment, invoked a Cessation and Repose; and in this sense only they may be
justly said to smell of the Lamp: withal engaging me to restore again the
Product of this time into your hands, from whom it was at first in some part
Stolen. You have Goodness sufficient to Excuse what in them is amiss; to
Methodize them in your own Thoughts; and to Impute that want of Mercury which I
am assured you will find in them, to the predominancy of my then Martial
planet: it being well known I had more Arms and Provisions of War under my
Care, than Books or Papers in my Custody, which last had been by much more
convenient for such a Work. Should this pass with your Approbation and
Allowance, and stand Protected under your Umbrage; Censure cannot injure him,
who shall think himself greatly honored in being reputed, Much honored,

Your most Obliged and Humble Servant Silas Tailor.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
TO your View and Examination here is presented, not a Law-case upon the Tenure
of Gavelkynd, (for that would have proved beyond the abilities of one that
confesses himself no Lawyer; and professes himself ignorant in that Practice
and Study, as the Author does) but only the History of it; by which the whole
design is, Historically and Rationally to investigate and trace the footsteps
of it from Antiquity; and to inform you, that the exquisite Discourses of that
excellent Person Dr. T. B. afforded freely to me then residing at Hereford, by
his Epistolical correspondencies, gave the first ground and foundation of some
enquiries into the Etymology of this most ancient Tenure. Since which time by
several Friends, who had got a sight of those broken Observations I had made,
and by others who accidentally had heard of them; I have received several
Importunities to make them public. But lastly, a further occasion being
unexpectedly administered, (some while after I had Collected those first Notes
of this Tenure) by that industrious Gentleman Mr. William Summer of Canterbury,
in his late Printed Treatise of Gavelkynd; I have intermingled those first
Observations, with these my Animadversions on his Learned Discourses. I enter
not upon this undertaking to Quarrel with him, (whose Labors, as they are
Pleasant to such, who are Delighted in the Knowledge and Observation of the
Manners and Language of our Forefathers; so have they been, and ever will be
very profitable to all that are studious and inquisitive into Antiquity: for
his success in the Restoration of that our ancient Speech, which had been
almost lost, and in a manner so long buried in Oblivion, is very eminently
known and admired, and shall by me be always gratefully acknowledged) or with a
design to Carp at any thing that he has Labouriously written: it being of all
things the most odious, and as much unprofitable, for any to make that the end
of Writing: (A crime whereof our world of Brytain of later days has been too
too guilty) Far be such a snarling Genius from me! But I was wholly moved upon
those grounds, and steered to those ends, which I have declared in the
Proaemium of the first Chapter; to which (for avoiding needless repetitions) I
freely referr my self, and desire your charitable judgment and ingenious
censure. The whole Discourse relates to a Thesis; by some, not thought
absolutely material, nor to be of general concernment in relation to the
present usage of it; yet it has a little more than a less attentive Reader may
imagine. There will be found in it (I confess) some Reflections upon History;
which though carrying a sense different from most Historians, are not (in my
opinion) devoyd of all probability; they being (I assure you) my real
Cogitations, and such Collections that without force easily arise from the
result of my Reason, and here are submitted to your examination. The mark I aim
at, is to reduce things to their True and Genuine Originals; to which even
nature inclines us by a natural propensity. If the work seem perplexed because
miscellanious, or not pleasing to a severe rigid Critic because so intermixed;
let the Tursss of Augarus (King of Edessa) build my Apology: who being at Rome,
Procop. Hist. Pers. Bell. lib. 2. cap. 9.
(the same I suppose whom Eusebius calls Agbarus) and for his Conversa^ion much
beloved of Augustus Caesar; after some long time of stay there, had an earnest
desire of returning back to his Country; which Augustus being unwilling to
grant; Augarus for diversion used much to Hunt, and in that Recreation
compassing the Countries, took many wild Beasts alive: and from every Country
where he caught them, carried of the same Earth together with the Beasts back
with him to Rome. Augustus (as his manner was) sitting in the Circus, to him
came Augarus, showed him the Beasts and the Earth, and which Country Earth
belonged to every Beast. The Earth he caused to be laid in several parts of the
Circus, and all the Beasts to be let go from one place; whereupon every Beast,
leaving one another, ran to the Country Earth from whence he was taken. The
Emperor beheld it long and earnestly, wondering to see nature untaught, make
even to Beasts their native Earth desirable: of which Augarus made use as an
Argument for his desire to return to his native Country. Augustus overcome with
the Argument, though unwillingly, yet granted his desire. This is that (I say)
to which by Nature we have an inclination, and enforces a certain natural
propensity, which tends us toward our first Original being: shall those Means
then be slighted, which bring things distinctly separated to this first Source
and Fountain? There is a kind of secret impulse, which with pleasure and
delight carries us to this search; but what it is, we know no more than what is
Sympathy. By this I was carried out to this Work, and hope (Courteous Reader)
it will gain your favorable acceptance; at least (by way of excuse) to favor
it with an abatement of your expectation of the exquisite ingredients of
Language and Method; for (seriously) my rude Minerva cannot atchieve them. All
that I pretend unto, is to retire my self unto my Homely-antient-native Earth;
than which, no other Turff at present better pleases me.

If any particular by reason of the irregularity of this Discourse, may seem to
be passed over, it is not the proceed of fear to enter upon the merit of the
cause; or, in the least out of any design to praevaricate; and perhaps in those
cases, (if any such there be) my thoughts are, and I am persuaded you will
find, that such particulars under some one or the like Head have been already
answered. My labor and intentive aim and scope has been, as much as I could,
to avoid Tautologies; which was a difficult task to be performed in such
contests, where the Maxim received proves mistaken, or erroneous: which
frequently ingages a simular resiliency upon all Deductions thence enforced. I
have made choice of such particulars, whereon (I guess) Mr. S. lays the
foundation of his Structure, to be the Texts and Heads of my several Chapters;
wherein is first shown the Probability, that in all first Plantations, there
was the practice of Partition: next, that the Brytains (the Aborigenes and
first Planters of our Isle) had the knowledge and usage of it: And that the
several Invaders and Conquerours of our Island did not alter the ancient Laws
and Customs thereof. That the knowledge and use of the word Savel, is still
among the Cambro-Brytains, (the scope of the whole work being to prove it of a
British Original) and that all their Laws did center anciently upon Partition.
It discourses, when and for what reasons Primogeniture swallowed up Partition,
and had the Preference; with several accidentals relating to the understanding
of ancient History; which intermixture all the Sections and Chapters have; but
in this, I shall referr you to them, or to the Table. The Latin Tract Printed
at the end of this Book, (as I think, and I believe when you have read it you
will be of the same Opinion) was wrote in the time of Henry the First, surnamed
(by our Writers) Beauclerk, the Son of William the Conqueror, made above five
hundred and threescore years since. In which are several matters to be found,
that are worthy remark: among the rest a Catalogue (which I never met with in
any History (before this) extant) of those that contributed Ships in the Great
Norman expedition. I cannot guess at the Author's name; yet by what he
concernedly insists upon in one place, I judge him to be a Monk of Battle
Abbey, founded by William the First, near that place where he had the Victory
over Harald: This is but Guess. However that this Treatise may not be (as it
were) Buried, and to the Lovers of this Study, by reason of its smallness, not
easily found: I have adventured to set it out, to accompany this my Discourse;
for the use of those that are Lovers of Antiquity. I will not be too tedious in
Prefacing, nor oblige any to think, that a plausible Prologue will better a bad
Play; make trial, and if then ( Candid Reader) this finds your Courteous
acceptance, it will engage the not-confident Author in his other Studies to be

Yours, S. T.

A Table of the Chiefest Passages and Denominations in the following Tract.
A.
A Cangre in Hantescira Fol. 66 Adder about the neck of a new born Child Fol.
22 Adultery, the Forfeiture and Punishment of it Fol. 71, 72 Aethelbert King
translated the Welsh Laws Fol. 53 Aethelstan King his Laws concerning the Welsh
Fol. 52 Aetius the Consul, who, Fol. 36 Alban St. his Troubles and Death Fol.
32 Albania Fol. 86 Alured King his Laws of Mulcts, what, Fol. 54 Allegiance and
Fealty by Oath its antiquity Fol. 55, 61 Alcabala or Alcavala in Spain, what,
Fol. 114 Alphredus Magnus Translated the Laws of Molmutius Dunwallo out of
British into Saxon Fol. 54 Alwi filius Turber de Rochborn Fol. 66, 68 Ambrosius
Telisinus the ancient British Bard Fol. 84, 85 Antiquity of the Welsh Laws Fol.
154, 155 Ancient Customs Fol. 70 Arms descend to Brethren by Gavel Fol. 139
Armorica expounded Fol. 146
B.
BArds Fol. 19, 20 Bards Genealogists for the Brytains Fol. 20 The honor due
to them Fol. 23 Base Brytain in France and Cornwall mutual understand each
other Fol. 146 Bastards inherited with the Legitimate of Wales Fol. 28 The like
in Ireland Fol. 153 Beer-Gavel Fol. 119 Bigott, what in signification Fol. 178
Boer, what, Fol. 175 Boadicea, Queen of the Iceni, her speech Fol. 32, 33
Bordmanni, what, Fol. 169, 172 Borough-English Tenure Fol. 102 Brehon Law in
Ireland Fol. 99, 153 Brecknoc Fol. 94 Bristelmestune Fol. 116, 171 Britains
Anciently free Fol. 16, 35 Not exiled out of Kent Fol. 38 Co-inhabit with the
Saxons Fol. 37 Their customs concerning Saints Fol. 91 Expel the Picts from
Scotland Fol. 164, 165 Settle themselves, in the Lowlands of Scotland ibid.
Descended of the Trojans Fol. 83, 84
British Language Fol. 12 British propriety Fol. 16 British Valor feared by
the Romans ibid. British Baskets Fol. 31 British race extended Fol. 48 British
Gavel and German Landscheuten the same Fol. 137 British Laws made by Molmutius
Dunwallo Fol. 154 Collected and Reformed by Howel-dha ibid.
Brute Fol. 84, 85 Brutes partition Fol. 15, 16, 85 Brytania from Bryton Fol.
87 Buildings of the Saxons Fol. 79, 80 Buildings of the Normans ibid. Burgage,
what, Fol. 171
C.
Caer, what, Fol. 134 Castrum or Chester, what, ibid. Caesar's War against the
Britains Fol. 14 Repulsed by the Britains ibid. He Conquered not Britain ibid.
Calumniare in Law, what, Fol. 65 Camolodunum Fol. 34 Cambria, Camber, Cwmrt
Cwmraeg Fol. 86 Cantref, what, Fol. 96 Canutus his Laws of Partition, Fol. 141,
142, 143 Caractacus Prince of the Silures Fol. 34 He asserts the British
Liberty ibid. His Protestation before Battle ibid.
Castles on Borders of Scotland, etc. Fol. 79 Cattle of more Value than Land
Fol. 28 Cattle dischaged Fines and Amerciaments Fol. 29 Cerdiford in Hampshire
out of Domesdey Fol. 65 Cennedl, what, Fol. 132 Characters of Saxon Fol. 76
Charters of Saxon signed by the Norman Kings Fol. 76 Changes from Villenage to
Gavelkind Fol. 157, 158 Chief Justice Fol. 69 Chiefs in Urchenfield Fol. 110
Chedder in Somersetshire Fol. 117 Children no Kindred to the Parents Fol. 131
Churl, what, Fol. 168 Cities their Original Fol. 7 Claudius his Temple Fol. 34
Claim and Recovery of Lands against Normans Fol. 65 Clergymen Gentlemen, by
the Welsh Laws Fol. 173 Clown or Colonus, what, Fol. 168, 177 Cohabitancia,
what, Fol. 7 Conan Tindaethwy, Fol. 26 Conquest and Conqueror, what, Fol. 56
Coverfeu Fol. 74 Constantine the Great Fol. 87 Common Laws Fol. 69, 145
Counties not anciently in Wales Fol. 94 Competition betwixt Kent and
Urchenfield Fol. 106 Cornish understand base British and Welsh Fol. 146
Cottagers and Cottages, what, Fol. 169 Cuntune in Hampshire Fol. 66 Customs
that are ancient Fol. 70, 150 Customs of the Welsh Fol. 71, 132 Cwmmwd, what,
Fol. 96 Custom and Common right Fol. 152
D.
D. DAvies his Welsh Dictionary Fol. 98 Danelaege, what, Fol. 54, 57, 58 Danish
impression on our Laws Fol. 54, 55 Daniel Samuel examined Fol. 57 Deeds for
Gavelkind Fol. 124, 125, 126 Deeds explained, produced by Mr. S. ibid.
Discourses Polemical much irregular Fol. 3 Divisions, intestine facilitate
Conquests Fol. 16 Division of Wales Fol. 96 Domboc, what, Fol. 53, 54 Domesman,
what, Fol. 110, 111 Donald the 5th. lost Scotland to the Saxons, etc. Fol. 163,
164 TH^pihinge, what, Fol. 70 Druids Fol. 16 The British Judges Fol. 17 Their
Learning ibid. Their judicial employments ibid. Their determinations of right
ibid. Caused execution of penal Laws ibid Britain their Gymnasium Fol. 17 They
cease Fol. 19 Dubritius, Prince and Bishop Fol. 90 Dun what it signifies Fol.
116 Dun a paix in Scotland Fol. 165, 166 Dutch Landscheuten, what, Fol. 136, 137

E.
EDgar King his Laws, what Fol. 54, 55 Confirmed by the Conqueror Fol. 58 Edgar
Etheling Fol. 60 Edlin expounded Fol. 49 Edward King his Laws Fol. 55 Confirmed
by the Conqueror Fol. 58, 59
Edward King his Laws concerning the Welsh Fol. 51, 52 Edwin and Morchar Earls
Fol. 6^ Edric Silvaticus or Salvage Fol. 7^ Eldest Son among the Britain Fol.
49 English recover Lands against the Normans Fol. 65, 66 English Normaniz'd
Fol. 76 England Fol. 87 English settled in Scotland Fol. 162 Engine or
Urchinfield their Kings Fol. 44, 45 Errors once received and taken for granted
Fol. 2 Erdisley in Herefordshire Fol. 79 Escuage, anciently Fol. 171 Ethelbert
King his Translation of the Welsh Laws Fol. 53 Ethelred King his Laws of Trial
Fol. 64 Eubages British Philosophers Fol. 20 Exchequer, when erected Fol. 74
F.
FAshions, Saxon and Norman Fol. 74, 75 Fealty or Allegiance very ancient Fol.
55 Fee, feudum or feodum, what Fol. 170, 171. Fee-tayl its original Fol. 170
Feminine conduct amongst the Britains Fol. 33 Feofamentum vetus and novum Fol.
140 Fighting forms changed by the English Fol. 77 For-gavel Fol. 118
Fortifications of Romans, Saxons, and Normans Fol. 77, 78, 79 Forfeiture of
Lands upon what Grounds to King William Fol. 67, 68 Fortalices Fol. 79
Fortified houses ancient ib. Foster-children in Wales divided with
Foster-brethren Fol. 28 Freemen or liberi homines, what, Fol. 108 French do
use partition Fol. 11 French tenure of partition Fol. 12 French, how used in
our Laws Fol. 69
G.
GAbles, Gablum, Gabulum what, Fol. 113, 114, 115 Gabelle among the French Fol.
114 Gablum signifies rent Fol. 116, 117, 158, 159 Gablatores Fol. 117 Gabella
Fol. 123 Galfridus Monumethensis defended against Polydore virgil Fol. 83
Gallick customs Fol. 11 Gallick colonyes Fol. 12 Gavel as Mr. S. expounds it,
what, Fol. 112 Gavel-Gyldam Fol. 119 Gavel-man Fol. 120 Gavelate, a Writ Fol.
121, 122, 123 Gavel in denominations Fol. 89, 90 In the British Dictionary Fol.
92 What it signifies Fol. 92, 93 Not imposed by the Normans Fol. 95 Used in
Welsh subdivisions of Lands Fol. 96 Several sorts of Gavels Fol. 102, 103
Welsh Laws for Gavel-kynd Fol. 103, 104, 105, 106
Gavel-kynd a mark of the Ancient Britons Fol. 152, 153 The hinge of the
British Laws Fol. 155, 156
Gavelkind in Scotland Fol. 159 Gavelkind, Throughout the Kingdom of England
Fol. 4 In all first Plantations Fol. 5 Antiquity of it Fol. 18, 137 Among the
Princes of Wales Fol. 24 The signification of it Fol. 26 The evil and
mischief of it Fol. 27, 81. The best use of it Fol. 27 That it is extra Cantium
Fol. 89, 151
Gavelkind in the Term owes it self to partition Fol. 149 Gavelkind in the
Statute of Wales Fol. 98 Practiced in Urchenfield Fol. 100 Held rent free Fol.
123, 124
Gavel-kind Lands in the King Fol. 128 Granted to Hospitals, how, Fol. 124,
128, 129 Granted to Religious Societies Fol. 129 Not to be forfeited for Felony
Fol. 106, 107
Garrison of Normans in Hereford, before William the first Fol. 78 Gentlemen
by the British Laws Fol. 172, 173 German Customs anciently Fol. 7 German
partition in Principalities Fol. 9. 137 German partition in private Estates
Fol. 9 German partition evicted by a jest Fol. 9, 10 German Landscheutan, what,
Fol. 136, 137 Give-all-kynne Fol. 130, 131 Gildas Camberius translated
Molmutius Laws into Latin Fol. 154 Glamorganshire Conquered Fol. 94 Gothic
work used by the Saxons Fol. 80 Guorongus Viceroy of Kent Fol. 41 Gueily-gord,
what, Fol. 105 Gymnasium of the Druids was in Britain Fol. 17
H.
HAcana and Westanheconi, what, Fol. 44, 45 Hecanae VVulfhardus Episcopus Fol.
44 Hengist and Horsus Fol. 37 Hengists reception of Kent examined Fol. 37, etc.
How Hengist had Kent Fol. 45 He altered not the Kentish Laws Fol. 49
Heutland Fol. 90 Henry the first commands the observation of King Edwards Laws
Fol. 61 His Laws of partition Fol. 144
Hereditary succession amongst the Britains Fol. 18 Heriot Fol. 108
Herring-gable Fol. 116 Highlanders in Scotland anciently Britains Fol. 160
Hony-gavel Fol. 118 Howeldha Fol. 25 He made not the Welsh Laws Fol. 153, 154
When those Laws ascribed to him were compiled Fol. 97
Hugo de port, against Picot Fol. 66, 67
I.
I Arsey Isle Fol. 11. 95 No venomous Creatures therein ibid
Ina King his Laws concerning the Welsh Fol. 50, 51. 64 Joseph of Arimathea
Fol. 32 Irish Rhein-taloon, or partition Fol. 99 Irish and Welsh one Language
originally Fol. 145 Irish and British Laws agree Fol. 153 Irish understand the
Manc and Highland Languages Fol. 146 Ireland and Thule called Britain Fol. 145
Italian partition Fol. 12, 13 Juryes Fol. 61, 62, 63 Juryes among the Welsh
Fol. 64 Jus Angliae both in Socage and Knights-fee Fol. 139
K.
KEntish-British Laws not altered by Hengist Fol. 46 Kent invested in Hengist
Examined Fol. 37 Kent changes her Gavelkind Fol. 81 Kenneth King of Scots
expels the Picts Fol. 163 Kent had four Kings at one time Fol. 45 Kingsland
Fol. 44 King Ethelmund ibid King Pibanus of Ergin Fol. 44. 91 Kings, Gorvodius,
Milfrith, etc. Fol. 45 King's Bench Fol. 69 Kindred, what it is Fol. 130, 131
Knave, whence and what Fol. 176 Gods-cnave ibid
Knight Service in Wales Fol. 103. 107 Knights-fees descended to the Eldest
Fol. 138 Kind Fol. 27. 130, 131. 133
L.
Land-scheutan German Tenure Fol. 135, 136, 137. Land-shifting, Landskistan
Fol. 136 The Saxon denomination of partition Fol. 143 The proper Kentish
appellation Fol. 144, 145
Land anciently not valuable Fol. 6. 28 Languages Of Scotland Fol. 76 Saxon,
English, and French Fol. 75, 76 English not changed by the Norman Conquest Fol.
75 Welsh the remains of the Gallick and British Fol. 17
Laws of King Edward confirmed by the Normans Fol. 58, 59 Lawes-common not
written Fol. 69 Law-cases ibid. Laws of England overthrew Norman intruders Fol.
65 Learning of the Druids Fol. 17 Legales homines, or Yeomen, marg. Fol. 63
Lieutenants of the Saxon shores in Britain Fol. 39 Lempster from a Church of
Nunns Fol. 44 Jews in Sussex Fol. 71 Lesley Bishop of Ross in Scotland an
Historian Fol. 163 Lewis Island in Scotland hold Gavelkind Fol. 160 Liberty of
Englishmen Fol. 81 Liberi Sokemanni, what, Fol. 148 Ll^^, what, Fol. 90
Llanfrawtwt a College anciently founded Fol. 90 Llangattock Gafael Me^bon ibid
Litthfield Chronicle Fol. 58 Loager, Loegria Fol. 86 Lona^^ Fol. 87 London a
Memorial of Troy Fol. 83 London, its Laws very ancient Fol. 55 Lower Germany
uses Partition Fol. 11
M.
MAiles Fol. 120. 133 Mannours or Circuits in Wales anciently Fol. 96
Marqu^ses, Lords Marchers Fol. 42 Mayor, whence derived Fol. 49 Menavians
understand Welsh and Irish Fol. 146 Merewoldus a King Fol. 43 Merimnus a King
Fol. 44 Mercelin a King ibid. Merchenlaege, what, Fol. 54, 57 Mate-gavel Fol.
118 Mickel-gemote Fol. 65 Military fees Fol. 149 Morgan Fol. 132, 133
Monmouthshire Conquered Fol. 93 Mortimer Radulf Fol. 78 Mulcts different in
rate in England Fol. 59 Mulmu^us Dunwallo British Legis^tor Fol. 154 His Laws
Translated into Saxon Fol. 54. 154

N.
NEifes what anciently Fol. 169 Normans Of their Conquest Fol. 56, 57 Of their
Alterations ibid. They altered not the English Laws Fol. 57 Of their Laws in
Normandy or Neustria ibid. Employed in England before William the first Fol.
78 Their entering into Wales Fol. 93 Their original from Norway Fol. 58

O.
OAth of Allegiance Fol. 55. 61 Oate or Oale-Gavel Fol. 113 Doin, what, Fol.
174 Ollavintone in Berkshire Fol. 73 Offa's Ditch a limit Fol. 43 Opinions
received, hardly removed Fol. 1 Ostorius Publius Fol. 34
P.
PAganus, Pagan, what, Fol. 168. 175, 176 Palatinates Cheshire and
Glamorganshire Fol. 94 Pandeborn in Berkshire Fol. 68 Parliament Fol. 65
Parceners per le Custom Fol. 147, 148 Partition Used in first Plantations Fol.
6 Used by the Israelites Fol. 8 Antiquity of it by sacred and profane Authority
Fol. 9, 10 Made use of by Brute to his Sons Fol. 15, 16 The Custom of Wales
Fol. 28. 103. 156 Among Males and Females Fol. 100, 101 Used by the Saxons Fol.
141, 142, 143 Used by the English Normans Fol. 144 Not in the Term Gavelkind
Fol. 147, 148 Whether ratione rei, aut ratione Terrae Fol. 149 Continued in
Wales by Statute Fol. 153 The manner of it among the Welsh Fol. 156
Pencennedl's or chiefs among the Britains Fol. 23. 97. 132 Jews Fol. 23 Scots
Fol. 24 Irish Fol. 97
Pelagian Heresy set against Fol. 90 Penda Pibanus King of Urchenfield Fol.
44. 91 Piben, what, Fol. 174 Picts, They injure and repulse the Britains Fol.
36 The Picts wall ibid.
Planters at first, the condition of them Fol. 5 Placita, what, and Pleadings
anciently Fol. 68, 69 Pleadings in French Fol. 69 Pluntune Fol. 116 Powisland,
Divided, Sub-divided, and Parcell'd Fol. 25, 26 Polydore Virgil examined Fol.
83 Privileges of Urchenfield Fol. 108. 156 Primogeniture preferred Fol. 82. 138
Price Sir John his defens. Hist. Brit. Fol. 84 Pride-gavel, what, Fol. 112, 113
Primogeniture in Scotland, w^y, Fol. 166
R.
Read-gavel Fol. 119 Reguli or petty Kings Fol. 15, 45 Regulus and Rex Fol. 42
Referrees of Howel-dha what they did Fol. 155 Relief Fol. 108 Rents reserved
Fol. 7 Rent how to be understood Fol. 115, 116 Rents several sorts Fol. 117
Rented Land, what anciently called Fol. 119 Rhandir, what, Fol. 96 Rodeley in
Gloucestershire Fol. 112 Roderic the Great Fol. 24 Rogerus Deus salvet Dominas
Fol. 177 Rochborn in Hampshire Fol. 66 Roturier of France Fol. 11, 95 Rowena
Hengist's Daughter Fol. 39, 41 Roman Empire parted Fol. 87, 88 Romans Altered
not the British Laws or Customs Fol. 29 Greedy of Conquests Fol. 30 Their
proceedings in the Conquests of Judaea Fol. 30 Of Greece ibid. Of Britain Fol.
30, 31
They used words of the British Language Fol. 31 Set up a false Will for the
Emperor Fol. 32 The effects of it Fol. 32, 33
They desert Britain Fol. 35

S.
Saisson and Saisnaeg, how to be understood Fol. 86 Saxons, They Co-inhabit
with the Britains Fol. 37 They defended the Picts wall Fol. 38 Whether they
extirpated the Britains or no ibid. They break their Article with the Britains
Fol. 38 Their Piracies Fol. 41 They fail in their trust Fol. 42 They expelled
not the Britains Fol. 47 They borrowed many British words Fol. 48, 49 They used
British Laws and Customs Fol. 49 They intermix their Saxon with British Fol. 50
Their Laws provide for the British Inhabitants Fol. 50, 51, 52 They used
Partition of Lands Fol. 141 Their Nobility, who, and what, Fol. 70 Concerning
their Characters Fol. 76 They wrote Latin anciently in Roman Letters Fol. 76
They change their forms of Fighting Fol. 77
Sand-gavel, what, Fol. 113 Sealing and signing of Charters Fol. 72, 73
Serjeanty Grand and Petit Fol. 171 Servi, what anciently Fol. 169. 172
Servitude not in England Fol. 81 Scottish Language Fol. 76 Scot and Lot, what,
Fol. 78 Scotland Fol. 87 Scotish-Socage-Land Fol. 159, 160 Scottish with their
Language had the Saxon Customs Fol. 161 Scottish tongue before William the
Conqueror ibid. Scots receive the English temp. Willielmi primi Fol. 162
Scottish Tongue when first received Fol. 162, 163 Scottish bounds in Scotland
Fol. 165 Sherborn against Warren Fol. 65 Shires not anciently in Wales Fol. 94
Soc and Sac, what, Fol. 177, 178, 179 Socage Land changed Fol. 139 Socage Land
anciently partible Fol. 89, 139 Spersold in Berkshire Fol. 73 Surnames, when
first used Fol. 176, 177 Suit and Doom in Urchenfield Fol. 111 Swyddog a
Magistrate in Welsh Fol. 93, 173 Swine-gavel, what, Fol. 115, 116, 118
T.
Talaeth, its signification Fol. 25 Tania in Brytania Fol. 85 Teliesin,
Ambrosius Telesinus Fol. 84, 85 Tenure of Wales Fol. 26 Tenures Jocular Fol.
72, 169 Tenures Military, etc. intruders on Gavel-kind Fol. 137 Tenenda's ad
Gavilikendam, what, Fol. 124, 125 Tederlec in Hampshire Fol. 68 Terra ex
Scripto Fol. 144, 145 Thanes, Theynes, what, Fol. 173, 174 Thanes a Military
honor Fol. 140 Theodosius the Emperor Fol. 87 Title of the Conquerours Laws
Fol. 59 Troy, Troinovant, Trinobantes Fol. 83 Trojan Britains Fol. 82. 85
Trojans the Britains Ancestors Fol. 83, 84 Trojan Laws in London Fol. 55
Tribute or Tributum, what, Fol. 115 Tydyn, what, Fol. 156 Tylwyths Their
signification, manner and use Fol. 21 How they were Recorded Fol. 22 Their use
as to Gavelkind Fol. 23

V.
VErolamium Fol. 34 Villages and Villenage the Original of them Fol. 7
Villenage changed into Gavelkind Fol. 157, 158 Villenage lost in England Fol.
81 Villati or Villani Fol. 97 Villains, what, Fol. 168, 172 Anciently among the
Welsh Fol. 107, 108. 174, 175 Before the Norman Conquest Fol. 168. 171. 173,
174 In Kent Fol. 167 No name of reproach Fol. 168
Vortiger King Engages the Saxons Fol. 36 Wageth them against the Picts Fol. 40
His wisdom in waging them ibid. What he gave to Hengist Fol. 45 His Deposition
and Restoration Fol. 40
Urchinfield. Kings of it Fol. 44, 45 Customs of it Fol. 71, 107, 108, 109, 110
A Region Fol. 109 A Liberty Fol. 110 A Hundred ibid. Their manner of judgment
Fol. 110, 111 Their manner of Partition Fol. 156 Their privileges Fol. 108, 156
Usages of several sorts Fol. 102, 103 Vallum Severi, what and where Fol. 165
W.
WAles Fol. 86 VValingford Fol. 115, 116, 71 Wardship among the Welsh
anciently Fol. 104 Warham in Dorsetshire Fol. 101 Welsh, what, Fol. 86 Welsh
Customs Fol. 71, 109 Welsh Juries Fol. 64 Welsh derived from the Greeks Fol. 85
Welsh-men understand the Cornish and Manc Fol. 146 ere, what, Fol. 71, 72
Westsaxonlaege, what, Fol. 54, 57 William the Conqueror Confirms the Saxon
Laws Fol. 58, 59 Takes notice of the old British Laws Fol. 60 Afraid of the
English after his Conquest ibid. Swears to King Edwards Laws Fol. 61 Commands
the Observation of King Edwards Laws ibid. Engages the Normans against the
Welsh Fol. 94
Windsore Fol. 116 Wittangemote Fol. 65 Wulfhardus Episcopus Hecanae Fol. 44
Wulpher King Fol. 43
Y.
YEomen, what, 63. Marg. Younger Brethren by Gavel gives Arms Fol. 140
THE HISTORY OF GAVELKIND.
TO restrain the propensity and violent current of things Natural, is no
trivial or slight attempt: such another undertaking it is to go about to remove
mistakes, when two or three Ages have received them without any dubitation:
impressions of the like nature will not easily be removed; extirpation always
carries a violence along with it; and where there has been a long
irradication, there so much the more of force will be requisite. This Fancy in
people is not a Novelty, Thucydides complained of it in his time, saying, Men
receive the report of things, Lib. 1.
though of their own Country, if done before their own time, all alike, from
one as from another, without examination. Mr. Somner, in his Treatise of
Gavelkind, has laboriously evicted the common Etymologistical notion thereof,
and also Learnedly declared the nature of it: yet because I find a deviation in
him, who has discovered that we were in the wrong way; I think it not only
Charity, but Duty, to examine and question that path he has showed unto us,
lest it should fail us in our Journey; and laboring to avoid one error we fall
into another; by which it may also come to pass, that a mis-conception may pass
to our Generations, by the like misfortune that befell our Forefathers in the
retention of that common construction so long since received and taken for
granted. Yet lest that Learned Gentleman (whose Civilities to me I may not
forget) may think me deservedly reprovable, for making this assault, after his
elaborate Disquisition and ingenious Contention; I shall only Apologize in his
own words, and desire the Candor of them may be a satisfaction to him, and a
defense to me, in these my weak endeavors; and they are those in which he
expresses himself in his 62 page, in these words; Therefore appealing from the
Vulgar, I shall apply my self to the more Literate and Judicious, by intendment
not so tenacious of a specious Tradition, but that they can with patience hear
it questioned, and, if occasion be, refuted: not unwilling to desert it, if,
upon trial, it may prove unsound and spurious; and accounting it as thankworthy
to discover an old Error, as to deliver a new Truth, especially since Truth is
not more often, nor more easily lost by too much altercation, than Error is
contracted and continued by too little. This being by him most ingenuously
urged, I will not Apologize any further; only desire the favor to introduce
that at this time to him, which I formerly made use of to my most worthy friend
Dr T. B. of Q. C. Oxon. upon the self-same Subject I have now before me; and is
that which the incomparable Camden, upon another Subject, not much unlike this
of ours, used in an Epistle to Justus Lipsius: and earnestly request it may be
taken (as it is) for my sincere protest; That this writing of mine is not
altercandi vel calumniandi studio (quod a nobis qui musis and modestiae litamus
procul absit) sed cupiditate quadam cognoscendi; and veritatem si fieri potest
ab injuria vindicandi: and if any thing beyond or besides this can be found in
this following Tract, I shall willingly and readily stand corrected: only
before I begin, I beg the favor of the Reader, that he would not expect from
me in this Work an exact Method, for in such Polemical Discourses it will prove
a very hard task, even upon this ground, that the Foundation being erroneous
and irregular, it must of necessity follow, that the whole Superstructure be in
disorder; by which means the undertaker cannot avoid Tautologies. Yet in it I
will be as careful as I can to shun them. The Method I resolve upon is by
Chapters, deduced into Discourses upon several Corrolaries of Mr Somner's. In
the first place then we will discourse

CHAP. I.
Concerning first Plantations, double Portion to the Eldest amongst the Jews,
Partition Anciently and Modernly used by the Germans, the same custom among the
French and Italians; and all this in relation to the Subject of Partition.

M.S. treating of the custom of Gavelkind, a Tenure by which all the Sons, upon
their Fathers decease, do equally divide and share the Inheritance betwixt
them; says, That he is contented to admit and agree, that Provincially, and
particularly here in Kent, we had such a custom, both before and at the
Conquest; neither (says he) am I against their opinion, who affirm the like
Course and Custom current in those times throughout the Kingdom, etc. And after
presently discoursing upon what by some Authors has been affirmed, viz. That
either the Conqueror, or his Brother Odo brought it thither out of Normandy,
and there planted it by the pattern and practice of his own Country; with much
reason adds, for had it been from thence transplanted, probably it would not
have been confined to Kent, a corner only of the Kingdom, but have spread it
self rather over the whole, by the Conquerors means, whose inclinations and
endeavors to propagate and implant here the Customs of his own Country, are
too eminent and notorious to be doubted of. I may by the same reason argue,
that this Custom being Current in more ancient times, might have its being not
only in the time of the Saxon Government, but its beginning long before. And
for my part I make no question, but in elder times it was the custom of all
Europe, if not of all the World: especially then, when the inhabitants, by
reason of their paucity, could so easily afford Ground and Room to their
branching and spreading Generations. Such thoughts had Thucydides of the first
Plantations and Incolae of Greece; For it is evident (says he) that that which
is now called Hellai, ( viz. Greece) was not of old constantly inhabited; but
that, at first there were often removals, every one easily leaving the place of
his abode, to the violence always of some greater number; -- and every man so
husbanded the ground, as but barely to live upon it, without any stock of
riches; and planted nothing (because it was uncertain when another should
invade them, and carry all away, especially, not having the defense of Walls)
but made account to be Masters in any place, of such necessary sustenance as
might serve them from day to day. They made little difficulty to change their
habitations; -- for, the goodness of the Land increasing the power of some
particular men, both caused Seditions, (whereby they were ruined at home) and
withal made them more obnoxious to the insidiation of Strangers. And a Modern
Author out of Homer writing of those first Salust. cited by Mr. Seldom in his
Mare Claus. l. 1. c. 7. de aborigiaibus in conjurat. Catilinae (says they are)
Genus hominum agreste, sine legibus, sine imperio, liberum atque solutum.
Planters, says, In t^guriis atque antris habitabant, ac sine legibus, sine
certis sedibus, palantes, vagerentur. Et Trojanis temportbus in Sicilia,
describit Homerus illus aetatis imaginem. Nec fora conciliis fervent, nec
judice: tantum
Antra colunt umbrosa: altis in montibus aedes
Quisquesuas regit, uxorem natosque: nec ulli
Incommune vacat, socias extendere curas.


Then was it (I believe) that they prudently used this kind of partition, which
extended it self no further, than a division of Stock and Goods, by it equally
to enable all the Participants to settle to a Livelihood, and decline Rapine;
which was the use and practice of the first Incolae. This is also described by
thucydides, discoursing of the ancient Greeks, reporting, That they in old
time, and such Barbarians as in the Continent lived near unto the Sea, or else
inhabited the Islands, after once they began to cross over one to another in
Ships, became Thieves, rifling the weaker, and made this the best means of
their living, being a matter at that time no where in disgrace. This (says
Thucydides of his own Age) is manifest by some that dwell on the Continent,
amongst whom, so it be performed nobly, it is still esteemed as an Ornament. It
was in those elder times that Riches consisted, not in having a propriety to
Land, but rather in the numbers of Servants to manage and defend their great
Stocks and Herds of Catel. (And this I guess to be the reason, why many have
rationally derived Pecunia from Pecus, and It was long after the first
Plantation of our Island that Money was in use, and longer before the King's
Dues were paid in Money. For Judge Doderidge out of Gervasius Tilburiensis, a
learned man, who flourished in the days of King Hen. 2. in his Dialogue of the
observation of the King's Exch^quer, has in effect as follows: Until the
time (says he) of King Hen 1. the King used not to receive Money of their
Lands, but Victuals for the provision of their House, and toward the payment
of their Soldiers Wages, and such like charges; Money was raised out of the
Cities and Castles in which Husbandry and Tillage was not used and exercised:
But at length, when the King being in parts beyond the Seas, needed ready money
for and toward the furniture of the Wars, and his Subjects and Farmers
complained, that they were grievously troubled by carriage of Victuals into
sundry parts of the Realm, far distant from their dwellings; the King directed
Commissions to certain discreet persons, who having a regard of those Victuals,
should reduce them into reasonable sums of money, the levying of which sums they
appointed to the Sheriff, taking order withal, that he should pay them at the
Scale or Beam; that is to say, that he should pay sixpence over and above every
pound weight of money, because they thought that the Money in time would wax so
much the worse for the wearing. Ex Camden and Littleton Treatise of Nobility,
page 118, 119.
Pecunia in our ancient Saxon Laws is often made use of for Pecus) And then we
must imagine them rather Pastors than Landlords, such who changed their Lands
at pleasure, and their habitations together, for the better accommodation of
their Stocks; w^ose wealth was summed up as Job's, by Servants and Catel. But
as People multiplied, and their numbers increased; so, that they had not
convenience of wandering as formerly, by the reason that Lands were generally
occupi'd, according to the abilities of Families in their Stocks and numbers of
Catel, then did Land also by degrees become impropriated, observing
nevertheless the same manner of partition of such Lands, as before they had
done of Goods: for as before, when they might have had Land enough, what should
they have done with it without Stock? so now when Land was impropriated, what
should they do with Stocks without Land? And for fear of that violence I before
discoursed of, came first of all Cohabitancia, that is, living together in
Society, which, without any disgrace, was Villenage; and so from Families rose
Villages, and from them Cities. By this means we see how men came to be
proprietors both of Lands and Goods: of which, Tacitus makes observation among
the ancient German customs; Caeteris servis (except those only employed about
Merchandis^) non in nostrum morem descriptis perfamiliam, ministeriis utuntur:
suam quisque sedem, suos penates regit. Frumenti modum Dominus, aut pecoris,
aut vestis, ut colono injungit: and servus hactenus patet. Here was their
ancient manner of living, their ancient manner of reserving Rents; not unlike
those which I have met with in Scotland, and believe is in practice in all such
places where Pecus is in greater abundance than Pecunia. And for the Antiqu^ty
of Partition of Lands, we shall find an example thereof in the holy Scripture,
where it seems to me, that the Community of the Law, and the Knowledge of it,
are both taken for granted; this being a Case of Law resolved upon a question,
and it is to be found in the 21 Chapter of Deuteronomy, verse 7. where, though
the Case be in Bigamy, yet there we find an Order of Partition, which was to be
observed, even nolenti patre; If a man has two wives (says the Text) one
beloved, and another hated, and they have born him Children, both the beloved
and the hated, and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated, then it shall
be, when he makes his sons to inherit that which he has, that he may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indeed
the firstborn, but he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the
firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that is found with him; for
he is the beginning of his strength, the right of the firstborn is his. This
Law provides, that the eldestson, notwithstanding the father's hatred, shall
have his right in all whereof the father was possessed, according to the Rule
of Right, which was thus: In case a man had five sons, the father's possessions
were divided into six parts, and the eldest had by right two of those parts: By
this we may observe the Antiquity of the Partition of Lands and Goods,
constituted even amongst those People to whom God himself was Legislator; and
it is observable, that it was at the first Plantation of the Land of Canaan,
where to me it seems, that this Law glanceth at the fundamental of Dividing,
binding up the father to do this rectified Justice to his son got of the woman
hated. Which Law, as Mr. Seldom illustrates it, may seem to be grounded upon
the practice of Noah -- Noachus and tres filii ejus, Semus, Chamus, and
laphetus ( qui velut Adae, in generis humaai post diluvium instaurationem
personam jam simul induerant) Domini pro indiviso rerum omnium sacti sunt.
Formula donationts est Genes. cap. 9.2. Crescite and multiplicamini -- and
replete terram. Pavor vester and Tremor vester erit super omne animal terrae,
and super cunctum volatile coeli, etc. -- Et scimus ex sacris literis Tellurem
a Noachid is seculis aliquot post diluvium esse divisam. A Japeto and filiis
ejus divisae sunt Insulae Gentium in terris suis unusquisque juxta linguam
suam, and juxta familias suas in nationibus suis, Quod in Genes. 10.25. and 3.
ait Moses, Scilicet, a Tanai fluvio usque in Mare Atlanticum s^u per Magnam
Asiae Occidentalis, quae in Septentrionem vergit, partem, praeter totam
Europam, limitibus juxta familiaru^ rumerum designatis, seeds ut Domini privati
accipere. Quemadmodum Chamus posterique ejus, non dissimili modo, quod Austro
and Africo expofitum est; and Semus plagas Orientales usque ad Indiam --
Invaluit etiam Traditio, ipsum Noachum, perinde ac si totius Dominus in solidum
aut Arbiter per comoromissum suisset, distributionis hujus s^^l privati
hujusmodi Dominii post diluvium instaurationis autorem suisse, idque (...),
juxta oraculnm divinitus acceptum, eamque anno aetatis sua 930. (qui a diluvio
erat 330. and ante obitum ejus vigesimus) Testamento firmasse, atque moribundum
illud in Semi silii primogeniti ma^us tradidisse, cunctosque simul monuisse;
nequis little fratris fines invaderet, nec injuria alter alterum afficeret,
quoniam inde, ut discordiarum atque bellorum intestinorum causa oriretur, foret
necessum. Seldom, Mare clausum, lib. 1. cap. 4. To which I think fit to subjoyn
what he writes in the same Book, cap. 8. how this partition was mystically, in
the mist of their inventions observed by the Heathen: Vera sunt quae loquuntur
Poetae ( ut rect e Lactantius) sed obtentu aliquo, specieque velata. Et sic
veritatem mendacio velaverunt, ut veritas ipsa persuasioni publicae nihil
derogaret. Fabuloso, quod diximus tempore devictis scribunt Titanibus, sort
Mundum divisisse Deos fratres, Iovem, Pluronem, Neptunum. Iovi Coelum, Plutoni
Inferna, Neptuno Mare cessisse. Rejectis autem augis illis de sydereo heic
coelo seu aethere, de infernorum seu mortuorum regno, and demum de Terra tota
fratrum omnium, post divisionem communi, quibus patienter sibi imponi vulgus
sinebat, res ips^ quam in larvata hac historia latere veterum aliquot docuere,
alia omnine erat. Non Deos hosce, sed homines fuisse asserunt. Nec coeli, sed
plagae orientalis ex qua mortalibus lux datur (unde and superior visa est
ideoque coelum dictum) Iovem Regem fuisse. Plutonem autem accidentis quae solis
recessum Noctemque ^stendit, unde inferior ea dicta and inferna. Maris denique
and interjectarum Insularum Dominum fuisse Neptunum -- e Lactantio porra
scribit. Jupiter Neptuno imperium dat Maris ut Insulis emnibus and quae loca
essent secus Mare omnibus regnaret -- Iohannis Gryphiander de Insulis Cap. 31.
S. 75. de Tribus Noachi filiis rem totam de tribus Diis narratam fidenter
capiat. Verba ejus sunt; Id ^roculdubio ex partitione Terrarum inter Tres
filios Noachi, ex quibus Japheto Insulae obvenerunt causam traxit.
Sir Henry Spelman (in Verb. Gaveletum) thinking Gavelkind to be of a Saxon
Original, affirms it to be brought out of Germany, and describes the Tenure of
it very justly: Qua omnes filii ex aequis portionibus, patris adeunt
hereditatem; and out of Tacitus proves it to be Mos vetus Germaniae. Out of
whom I shall add by way of explanation, what he in his Tract de Moribus
Germanorum, says, Haeredes tamen successoresque sui cuique liberi: and nullum
Test amentum: si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione, fratres,
patrui, avunculi: This proximus gradus argues precisely for this ancient usage,
although it had not been set down to be Mos vetus Germaniae; and (deduced from
these ancient Times) we find it also to this day (even in regno adeundo) among
the Princes of the German Empire; which was once very wittily evicted by a
merry Gentleman, or, as some say, the Duke's Jester, who perceiving (after the
death of one of the Dukes of Saxony) the Brethren participants (claiming
according to custom their Apportionments and Divisions in the Dukedom with the
Elder Brother) involved into high discontents, and the Council of the Nobility
at a stand what course to take for a reconciliation of them, about the parting
of the Demesns of the deceased Duke; This Man comes in, and borrows of the
young Duke (who it seems has some preference by his Primogeniture) his Gown,
undertaking to show them a way of Composure: The Duke granting (for diversion
rather than from any expectation of solid counsel) his desire; the Jester
retiring into the convenience of a near-adjoyning Closset, with his Penknife
cuts the Gown into long shreds from the shoulders to the bottom, and in this
injured and spoiled form returns with it on, to the Duke and Council; who
wondering at this fancy, He told them, That the Dukedom, as yet, was like the
Gown as it was lately, perfect and in order; but that which was now insisted
upon, was to render the Dukedom as he had done the Duke's Gown. But to prevent
the like mis-hap among other such Participants, in these our days the late Duke
of Brunswick did (during his own life) apportion his Principality to his three
Sons, leaving to each of them their Allotments entire, who also might each of
them have claimed share in one and the same, provided it had not been ended by
Comprimise. The like Tenure among the Heritors of Lower Germany is very
frequent, especially in the County of Flanders. Mr. S. has saved me the labor
of showing the usage of it in France, demonstrating how it takes place even in
Paris it self, where it is called by the name of the Roturier; by which name in
like sort the Tenure is also known and used over all the Island of Jersey,
(excepting some few Families) and in the same manner it overspreads all the
Dukedom of Normandy, this last-mentioned Island being formerly an Appurtenant
thereof. All which considered, makes it seem to me to be nothing but the
Relics of those ancient Gallick Customs, taken up and used upon the Plantation
of this part of the Continent at the first, and from hence in probability it
is, (as some imagine) that the Britans of England must look for their true
Ancestrie, both as to Customs, Language, and Progenitors: concerning which, I
shall refer you to Mr. Camden, whose labors have set up such a light as can
never be extinguished, who discoursing of the first Inhabitants of Britain,
(misdoubting the History of Brute) faith, That hereupon it may be concluded,
That the ancient Gauls, Inhabitants of the Country now called France, and the
Britans of this Isle, spoke one and the same Language; and by necessary
consequence, the Original of the Britans is to be reduced unto the Gauls; for
me must confess, that France or Gaul was Peopled before Britain, as lying
nearer unto Armenia -- And that the Gauls sent out and planted their Colonies
all abroad in Italy, Spain, Germany, Thracia, and Asia; much more then by all
reason and congruity in Britain, so near and no less plenteous than the rest.
And Dubartas does observe, that most probably all Plantations were by Colohies
out of the East, which in time (as it were gradatim) overspread the West and
North; and not Martiaus Zeillerus in his Hispaniae and Lusitaniae Itinerarium,
out of a deseription of France, wrote by Franciscus de Rues, writing of the
Province of Bigo^re, tells us by way of wonder and special remarque, that Mos
hic obtinuit, ut primogenitus omnium bodorum paternorum haeres evadat, sive
nobilis sive ignobilis.
only France, but Italy it self ( the Garden of European Policy, which some
would have to be) a Colony also out of Gau^, thinks no dishonor to retain her
old Customs, in preserving this Tonure of Partition of Lands from her first
Planters. Which was observed by one William Thomas, that wrote a des^ription of
Italy, Anno Domini 1549. who in his third Chapter averrs, That the Inheritance
of Lands in Italy goes by Gavelkind; that is to wit, one Brother as good part
as another: So that if a Conte ( which is as much to say as an Earl) have
twenty Sons, every one of them is called Conte, and the youngest has as good
part in his Father's Lands and Goods as the eldest, unless it be in the Estates
of Princes, as of Mantoua, Ferrara, Urbino, and such others, which the eldest
evermore enjoys. And by this means it is come to pass, that in process of
time, with change from Wealth to Poverty, there be diverse Earls and Marquises
without Land or Goods, retaining nevertheless the glory of that name to them
and theirs for ever. And I have read in a more Modern Author (who does not
ascribe it to any reason, but only relates the bare State) that there be
several Counts in Italy, who at the same time (such is the smallness to which
their Estates are reduced by this partition) are not able to maintain a Horse,
a Hound, and a Whore. Mr. Thomas has happened right upon their Tenure, though he
denominates it by such a Term as is utterly unknown to any Italian, but
observes, that the Tenure is generally among the Families there, excepting
those who of latter days, by force or fraud have wrested themselves from the
Dominion of the Roman Empire, and in such places the eldest Son inherits,
whilst the other Families still maintain their old Customs, though to the ruin
and subversion both of Names and Families. Which Custom cannot fancy to be an
Innovation of latter Ages, but an Impression from the ancient Inhabitants, when
first they did spread themselves in Colonies over Latium. This, for the proof
of the general usage of this Partition of Lands in most parts of Europe, and
the probability of its use amongst the first Planters of any Nation: Proceed we
next to show, as being very consonant to the investigation of the Original of
this Tenure,

CHAP. II.
The Condition of the Britains when Caesar found them; That Gavelkind was
anciently among them: Of (the British Judges) the Druides, of their Bards: Of
their Tylwyths: Of their manner of Partitions and Laws concerning their Gavel.

JUlius Caesar resolving upon a War against the Britains, for their frequent
assisting the Gauls, had in the first place to do with the Cantiani, whom he
Ennoblisheth with the Character of being more civil than the rest of the
Britains, and renders the reason to be their fire upon the Shore, and so the
more adapted for Traffic and Commerce with the Gauls, who were generally then
more civilized than they. These Parts upon Caesar's Beda cap. 2. writing of
Caesar's preparations to invade Britaany, says, Navibus ectoginta praeparatis
in Britanniam transvehitur, ubi acerba primum pugna satigatus, deinde adversa
tempestate correptus, plurimam classis partem, and non parvum numcrum militum,
equitum vero pene omnem disperdidit -- Iterum in Britanniam primo vere
transvectus, dum ipse in hostem cum ingenti exercitu pergit, Naves in Anchoris
stantes, tempestate correptae, vel collisae inter se -- dissolutae sunt. Ex
quibus 40 pericrunt, caeterae cum magna difficultate repar^tae suat. Caesaris
equitatus primo congressu a Britannis victus; ibidem Labienus Tribunus occisus
est.
second Invasion, first yielding themselves unto him: (the Second Invasion I
term it, for he had but ill fortune in the first, as Lucan hints it in that
bold Verse, Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis. Neither can I yield
that Caesar made a full Conquest of our Isle, for when Horace flattered
Augustus, he then calls Britanny untouched: Intactus aut Britannus ut
descenderet
Sacra catenatus via.
And Propertius writes thus, Te manet invictus Romano Mart Britannus.

Tacitus is more plain than all the rest, for he writes Caesarem Britanniam
tantum ostendisse non tradidisse Romany.) In this small Cantle or Parcel of
our Is^e, The same Discourse has Mr. Seldom to another purpose, concerning
these four Kings, which because it is to my purpose in several particulars of
this ensuing tract, I shall here adjoyn as a Marginal note, to which I desire
the Reader to have reference, -- He says thus, Unde sequitur etiam eos qui in
Britanniam e Galliis Druidum disciplinae discendae causa frequenter trajicere
soliti. ia (...) nisi temcritatis poenae obnoxios, venia ab insulae Regulis non
impetrata, ferisse. A Regulis, inquam, maritimis: Nam non unius imperio tunc
suberant Britanni, Maris Domini fuere, qui maritimis civitatibus seu provinc is
imperabant: Veluti Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, Segonax in Cantio; alii
in Regnis, Belgis, Durotrigibus, Damnoniis, Trinobantibus, Icenis, Coritanis
(populis qui Sussexiam, Surriam, agrum Hamtoniensem, Dorsetiam. Devoniam,
Cornwalliam, Essexiam, Norfolciam, Suffolciam, Lincolniensem agrum occupabant)
id demis caeteris. Nam and Caesar ipse interiorem partem Iasulae ab iis
incultam ait, quos imbi natos proditum dicebast; maritimam autem partem ab iis
qui praedae ac Belli inferrendi causa ex Belgio, transierant. Tametsi vero ita
in Singularia dist^aberentur imperia tunc erae maritimae, nihilominus adversus
hostem, seu ad moare tutandum, dubitari nequit, Quin communi uterentur simul
consilio; quemadmodum itidem in aliis rebus in exter^^s hosts bellicis; ut
videre est apud Caesarem, u^i sum^a imperii bellique administra^di communi
Britannorum consilio permissa est Cassivellanno. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Mr. Sclden
applies all to his Subject of the Dominion of the Sea, yet gives an account of
their Fractions, of which hereafter.
Caesar found several petty Kings, which would give me ground to Collect, that
such Fractions were long before Caesar's time, the proceed of this Tenure, and
rationally I cannot imagine, it should be the issue of any thing else; for if
the Story of Brute be allowed, it is observable, that he first ordered a
Partition of this our Island unto his three Sons, Lhoeger, Camber, and
Albanact; which kind of Partition, if in the least probable at that time, or
for some long time after, it is no wonder, that by the time Julius Caesar found
us out, he should meet in that quarter of the Island, with so many Partialities
and Fractions; of which thing himself took a serious remark, and ingenuously
declares it to be one of the main occasions of facilitating his Conquests over
that part of our Country; for (says he) Dum singuli pugnabant, universi sunt
victi, being divided, they could not conveniently come together in Council, or
with assistance to repel the common danger; and notwithstanding he calls them
rude, and reports that they had their Women in common; Yet cannot I find, but
that they much insisted upon their Proprieties; and certainly, their Lands were
not in that Predicament: they were in their Persons, Valiant; for their Valor
was so Renowned, that the Roman Soldiers, some time after Caesar's Life,
through fear of them, made a Mutiny, when they understood they were designed
for Britain, murmuringly alleging, that their Masters sent them out of the
World to War; so greatly was the British Valor in repute among their very
Enemies. Their policy was not to be despised, for their Druids were not only
their Priests, but their Judges; and Camden out of Dio writes plainly, that
they had their own Government and Laws. Annos enim plures ab hoc Caesaris
ingress^; haec insula (de Britannia scribit) suis regibus concessa; and suis
legibus est usa: These Druids were most famous in Britain, though they were at
the same time of great account in Prolegom. D. Briani Walton in Bibl. Polyglot.
1. S. 14. Where he Writing of Languages, says, Quaedam tamen inter linguas
nobis cognitas quasi cardinales e quibus multae aliae pullularunt a doctis
recense^^ur, -- Tartarica, quae long per Septentrionem vagatur, ad quam multae
Europaeorum and Asiaticorum linguae antiquae referendae, si Boxhernie
credendum, ut antiqua Gallica, and Bricannica, cujus reliquiae adhuc in Walli^
manent. Et in Sect. 20. Walli nostri (scribit) sive Cambro-Britanni a Saxonibus
ieter-asperes and incultos montes depulsi, linguam long antiquiss. Britannicam
minime permistam, adhu^ conservarunt, ut scribit Doctis: Cambdemus. Imo ipsis
persuasum est linguam suam aunquam interituram, ut ex Telesini carminibus
liquet.
Gaul, of whom Caesar thus Discourses; It certo anni tempore, in finibus
Carnutum, quae Regio totius Galliae media habetur, considunt in loco
consecrato; huc omnes undique, qui coniroversias habent, convenient: eorumque
(viz. Druidum) decretis and judiciis parant; Disciplina in Britannia reperta
atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur; He says, that Gaul had the
Discipline of the Druids out of Britain; and in another place, this Britain is
accounted the Gymnafium of the Druids; where were taught not only the British,
but the Gallick youth; which Learning of theirs was not preserved in Books, or
by Writing, but as Caesar reports, Magnum ibi numerum versuum ediscere
dicuntur: so that those things that they delivered to their Disciples as
sacred, were not committed to Paper, or Parchment, but unto Memory; and for the
easier fixing of them there, were made into Verse. But now let us consider
their Judicial employments, Caes. Com. de Bello Gallico Lib. 6.
which Caesar also in a short Epitome bestows upon us, in these words, Nam fere
de omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt; si quod est admissum
facinus, si caedes facta, si de haereditate, de finibus controversia est, iidem
discernunt, praemia paenasque constituunt; si quis privatus autem populus eorum
decreto non steterit, Sacrificiis interdicunt; haec poena apud eos est
gravissima; They kept a Court of Right, as well as a Criminal Court, where they
did determine almost of all Controversies, public or private, and what they
adjudged Crime; if Murder were committed, if there arose Controversies of
Hereditary succession, or if bounds were in question, they took Cognizance of
all, and awarded Punishment, or Reward, etc. but that of which I would have an
especial Consideration, and Animadvertency, is in these words, Si de
Haereditate, de finibus Controversia est; can Controversies of Inheritance, or
Hereditary Succession arise, where one of the Sons by Law and Custom Inherits?
can there be any Considerable question of bounds, where one Son takes
Possession of all whereof his Father Died seized, excluding his other Brethren?
in this small Summary of Judgments, under the Cognizance of the Druids, Caesar
places these as the most remarkable Customs and eminent Arricles. The
controversies of Hereditary succession are not considerable where the Land
descends to one Son; for if it be according to Custom, that it should so
descend, I know not with whom the Controversy should be, it cannot be with any
of his Brethren; for they have no right, except it be by our Gavel; nor with
his Sisters; for in case the Father in his Lifetime has not provided for
them, they are left to his mercy; so that the Controversy, (if any there be)
where the Land descends to the one, excluding all the rest of the Sons, must be
with himself. The controversies of single Haeredation, though in Collateral
lines, could not induce such a remark, and notice from Caesar; because such
questions fall out but rarely, even in this well peopled Age; neither does the
Trial upon a Majus jus in one days, commonly occurr. But put the Controversies
together, (as Caesar has joined them) that were submitted to the Judgment and
Sentence of these Druids, which I am persuaded are of one and the same Nature;
for bounds betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor, may be in question; but this (I
say) must not be supposed to be wholly Disjunctive from the rest; for thus it
is expressed, Si de Haereditate, de finibus Controversia est; it is not with
the Connection of Aut, Or and Of, but lies plainly in Conjunction, and Bounds
has some probable reference to the Inheritance, which being to be parted by
our Gavel among the Brethren, would require much use of the Wisdom and
Moderation of the Druids, and also of their Authority, to set out to every
Brother or Participant his portion or part, without giving cause of Distaste to
any. For we see, where this Tenure at this day is in Force, that in case the
Proprietor of such partible Lands, leaves only but one Son after him; there
can be no Quarrel, but that, that only Son enters upon, and possesses the
Land without Competition or Corrivalship. Thus in relation to the Druids, the
Judges in those Ages, I have given a short account: a little after Caesar's
time, they ceased in Gaul, for Pliny, lib. 30. c. 1.
Pliny says, that Tiberii Caesaris Principatus sustulit Druidas eorum; yet in
Britain they were in request long after, even then, when the Romans had almost
made perfect their Conquests, by the atchieving of that memorable Battle in the
Island of Mona, (at present denominated Anglesey.) We now proceed in our
Discourse to the Bardi, who think themselves to be the Loca tenentes Druidum.
These were the British Heralds and Registers, as De Galliis.
Ammian. Marcellinus records them, whom with the Druids and the Eubages, he
thus makes famous; per haec (says he) locis hominibusque paulatim excultis,
viguere studia laudabilium doctrinarum inchoata per Bardos and Eubages and
Druidas; and Bardi quidem fortia virorum illustrium facta, heroicis composita
versibus, cum dulcibus lyrae modulis, cantitarunt. Eubages vero scrutantes
summa and sublimia naturae pandere, conabantur; inter hos Druides ingeniis
celsores, etc. And of these Bards it is, that Lucan in a few Verses has left
so Worthy and Ancient a Memorial, which I will not scruple to Transcribe.

Vos quoque qui fortes animas belloque peremptas
Laudibus in longum vates dimittitis aevum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
Of whom Mr. Camden also adds, Qui praeterquam quo eo munere funguntur, etiam
praetexendis Genealogiis operam imprimis studiose navant; The carefulness of
these Bards from Age to Age has been so great, that there are none who look
into such British Historical concernments, but easily observe it; and also see
by that Learning and Knowledge that is extant in their Writings, how fit they
were to take Care and Cognizance of such matters as concerned their Office, in
relation to descents upon the Tenure of Partition. And although it may take up
too much Paper for this small Volume well to spare, yet will it be much to our
purpose, to understand their manner of Recording their Lines and Genealogies,
so as to six their Pedegrees right, and to preserve them free from confusion in
their Collateral lines; By which care and art, (notwithstanding their Tenure)
they kept all unconfounded. Then first know, that their Genealogies, especially
of their principal Gentry, runs seldom further than to certain Tylwyths, which
as Doctor Davies expounds it, signifies, Familia, famulitium and Tribus, which
Word takes its derivation either from Tyle (i. e.) Locus ubi stetit domus, vel
locus aedificandae domui aptus, or else from Tylath, which signifies Trabs,
Tignus; whether you take it in the first Derivation, then it will afford us the
Signification of a place whereupon to build a House: or if in the second, then
does it hold out in its Signification, a Beam in the Building; either of which
will serve our present purpose: for Tylwyth is a Tribe, or Family, branching or
issuing forth of another, by that which we in our English Heraldry call second
or third Houses; so that in case, the Great Paternal stock spread or branched
it self into several Tylwyths, or Houses, these Bards preserved the Memorial
thereof, and observed this method in their ordinary Memorials of Families. They
carry no second or younger House further than his Tylwyth, (herein they respect
Primogeniture) and there cease; taking it for granted, that the great Paternal
stock, was, or should be so well known, that there should be no need at all to
mention it, referring all the Cadets of a Family, (and sometimes also the Elder
Family it self) to their Tylwyth; by this, Creating in them an exact Propriety
to that Stock; which way (I say) was carefully preserved by these their Bards.
A Specimen whereof (though not of great Antiquity, yet being exhibited under
the hand of one that writes himself Bard,) I shall present to you, and it is
thus.

Mainerch ap Driffyn Lord of Brechnock,

1. Blethin ap Mainarch Lord of Brechnock, was together with King Rees his
Brother-in Law, with many other Gentlemen, slain by the Normans by West of
Brechnock, near the River of Uske; the place is to this day called the Battle.

Ellen Daughter of Theodore King of South Wales, and Sister to that noble Rees
ap Tudore or Theodore.

2. Driffyn ap Mainarch.

3. Drympeck ap Mainarch.

Moreiddig Warwin: he was born with an Adder about his neck, for which cause he
forsook his Paternal Coat, and gave the three Childrens Heads, their Necks
enwrapped about with so many Snakes Proper, etc. and of him are issued the
Vaughans of Brechnock-shire, and many other Gentlemen, who are termed Tylwyth
Voreiddig.

1. Gwgan ap Blethin.

2. Cadivor ap Blethin Gryff. Gwyr: from whom the Families of Brechn. Glamorg.
and Carmatthenshires come: called Tylwyth Howel-Melyn, that is, Howel-Melyns
Posterity.

Owen Gethyn, from whom many Gentlemen in Brechnock-shire are descended, called
Tylwyth Owen Gethyn, that is, the Posterity or Tribe of Owen Gethin.

Here you see this Bard has not only vouchsafed unto us the Tylwyths arising
out of this short Pedigree, but also the very meaning of the word in the
English. Thus were their Memorials preserved by them, who the better to infix
them, and also for a greater stimulum to Heroic Actions, in their Songs
deduced from Age to Age delivered to them from their Predecessors, did
celebrate the Praise of their Worthy Men; which Custom, in some places, they
yet retain. And of so great account were these Bards, that by the Laws of
Howel-dha, an honorable Provision was made for the chief of them in the Court,
who was to reside near the Person of the Prince; and of so great repute was
this Place or Office, that to the Dignity was annexed a particular Refugium.
The use of these Tylwyths was to show, not only the Originals of Families, as
if their work had been merely to run over a Pedigree, but the several
Distinctions and Distances of Birth, that in case any Line should make a
failer, the next in degree (which is the same with the German Proximus Gradus)
may make an unconfounded use of their interest, according to the Rules of
Partition by their Gavel. I told you before, how in all their Pedigrees there
was a preference of Primogeniture, which was only in honor and respect, and
not in unequal divisions of the Patrimony; for in these, the better to carry a
light ^^d luster, they pointed at the Penennedl of each Family, who, as the
Prince of their Tribe and Kindred, was always had in much honor and reverence
among them. Which respect was like that wherewith the Jews did honor their
Chiefs, mentioning them with that title of respect, in calling them sometimes
Heads of their Father's house, other-while Chief men; and in other places of
Scripture they are made known by this account, viz. By their Generations, after
the House of their Fathers; and in this form did they inroll their Bands of
Soldiers for the War, for it is written in the Chronicles, 1 Chronicles 7. and 8
chapters
that David assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the Tribes,
etc. unto Jerusalem. Numb. 25.44.
In like manner it is recorded in Numbers, that the name of the Israelite that
was slain was Zimti, the son of Salu, a Prince of a chief House among the
Simeonites. And in the following verse it is remembered, that, The name of the
Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head of
a People, and of a chief House in Midian. Where this order of Partition was in
force, there is it most necessary that Genealogies should be most exactly kept;
and by the Mosaical Law so great care was taken in this point, that the Tribes
were not permitted to have mixtions together by Inter-marriages. And although
in many of the High-lands of Scotland they have lost this Tenure, yet have they
with much affection retained their respects to the Heads of their Clans,
calling them their Chiefs, to whom in former times they gave more respect, and
were with more obedience commanded, than by their Princes. The Pedigree before
recited I told you I gave, to show their manner of recording their Families of
Gentry, distinguished from their Pen-cennedl. I have another that ^^ows how
tenaciously their Gavel was in force among them, even in Regno ad^un^o, and how
by it, in process of time, that Principality came to great loss and
destruction. Roderick the Great being Prince of all Wales, had three sons,
among whom he divided his Territory; which three sons were called y Tri Twysoc
Talaethioc, (that is) the Three Crowned Princes: because every one of them did
wear upon his Bonnet or Helmet a Coronet of Gold, being a Broad lace or Hatband
indented upwards, set and wrought with precious Stones, which in the British
was called Talaeth, by which name the Nurses do call the Head-band wherewith a
Child's head is bound uppermost, at this time, as Doctor Powel has critically
observed. But that it may be the more plain and perspicuous, take it
Genealogistically, thus:

Roderick surnamed the Great Prince of Wales. 1. Mervyn Prince of North Wales.
2. Cadelh Prince of South Wales. Howel-dha, in whom the Territories of
North Wales and South Wales were united, and was the second Legislator of the
Britans, An. Christi 942. 3. Anarawd Prince of Powis. After several
Successions, which I purposely omit to save the labor of needlessly lengthning
the Line, there from him proceeded one Convyn-Blethin ap Convyn, who being
Prince of Powis-land, divided it to his two sons 1. Meredith ap Blethin, who
divided his appartment of Powis-land betwixt his two sons 1. Madoc, who had
upon the Division that part that was called Powys-Uadoc, or Madoc his Powis; He
died Anno D. 1160. at Winchester, and was called the Prince of Powys: he was a
true friend to the King of England. Susanua, daughter of Gruffyth ap Conan
Prince of North Wales. 2. Gruffyth Prince of Powys, had another share of Powys
land. 1. Gruffith Maelor had for his share Bromefield, Yale, Hopedale, Chirk,
etc. 2. Owen Vachan had Mechain-Iscoid, etc.
2. Cadogan ap Blethin.
1 Owyn Brogynton, a base son of Madoc ap Blethin, had Dynmael and Edeirneon.


And Doctor Powel in his Additaments to the Cambrian History, in those (I mean)
that he has set betwixt the years 808. and 810. gives a full Discourse of the
Primitive use of this Tenure, and also of the Modern abuse thereof. For upon
those great Feuds that arose betwixt the Descendants of Conan Tindaethwy, upon
this account of Partition, He writes thus. Here I think fit to say somewhat of
the Custom and Tenure of Wales; whereof this mischief grew, (viz. the Feuds
betwixt Brethren, the Rending the Government in pieces, etc.) that is, the
Division of the Father's Inheritance amongst all the Sons, commonly called
Gavelkind; Gavel is a British term, signifying a Hold, because every one of the
Sons, did hold some Portion of his Father's Lands, as his Lawful Son and
Successor. This was the cause, not only of the overthrow of all the Ancient
Nobility in Wales, ( for by that means, the Inheritance being continually
Divided, and Subdivided amongst the Children, and the Children's Children, etc.
was at length brought to nothing) but also of much Bloodshed, and unnatural
Strife and Contention amongst Brethren; a^ we have here an Example, (viz. the
History of the Descendants of Conan Tindaethwy) and many other in this History,
( He means in Lancarvan's British History.) I could wish that those Renowned
English Plantations in America would examine of what avail this in probability
and policy may be to them, and in particular to the most famous Plantation of
Virginia, the most fertile and most consonant to English bodies, of any
whatsoever, and will love of greatest use in time to the English Nation.
This kind of Partition (Dr. Powel adds) is very good to plant and settle any
Nation in a large Country, not Inhabited; but in a populous Country, already
furnished with Inhabitants, it is the very Decay of great Families, and as I
said before, the cause of Strife and Debate. The reading of this passage was
it, which, many years since, first set my thoughts at Enmity with the Saxon
Parentage of Gavelkind; I mean that of gip-eal-cynne, give all Kyn. This it was
that gave me not only some examples of the use of it among the Welsh, but also
an interpretation of half the name; for I find the Doctor himself in these
Additaments to this Welsh History, even in this passage I have made use of,
startled at the latter part of the Composition; for he has written (Kind) in
small different Letters, whereas Gavel is wrote in great. But to return to the
Pedigree, by which you plainly perceive the use and the effects of this British
Gavel, and not only so, but the partition, as to descent also to the Legitimate
Children; for the Continuator of Lancarvan's History has this note upon Owen
Brogynton, (viz. his having such an Apportionment of his Father's Lands, being
a Bastard,) That base Sons were not basely esteemed, but with the other had
part of their Father's Inheritance; and so had others through Wales, especially
if they were stout and of noble Courage. I confess this passage did at first
stumble me; with some others of the like nature, till seriously observing and
comparing together the Laws of Howel-dha, I had as to the British History, a
great deal of light administered, which enforced me from my Incredulity, to
admire the Observer or Continuator: I gathered from this Law of Howel-dha, (Si
villanus Regis filium vel optimatis, ex licencia Regis alendum fusceperit;
filius ille particeps erit. Haereditatis cum filiis Villani post mortem ejus,)
That a Bastard may as probably receive a part in his Father's Estate by Law, as
that a Foster-child should have a right to a Division of his Foster-father's
Land: But in these you see, by what means the Prinoipality of Wales crumbled to
nothing; who gave as much opportunity to the Saxons and Normans by this
division to Conquer them, as by the like Fractions their Ancestors did give
facility and occasion to the Romans. But to return to our purpose; This last
division of Roderick the Great, mentioned in our Discourse, is said to be done,
According to the custom of Wales, which being so, then certainly Partition is
according to the custom of Wales. And this I further Collect, that it was not
altogether the Land, which in former times was so much desired, (which I gather
from that vast proportion of waste Land at this day in that Territory) or was
aequivalently considered with the Cattle and Stock wherewith that Land was to
be managed; for those Mulcts and Impositions of Fines and Amerciaments,
mentioned in the Laws of Howel-dha, were very severe; because then they were
imposed, and did proceed from such things as were their greatest Riches; and
was not only in Money, but principally in Cattle of all sorts, which was their
Stocks; and this leads me to examine whether, and to show that

CHAP. 3.
Neither the Romans nor the Saxons altered our ancient Laws. Of the ancient
honor and use of the Reguli. Danelaege, Merkenlaege, and Westsaxonlaege, what
they were.

MR. S. says, p. 61. For my part I conceive it ( viz. Gavelkind) may carry an
Antiquity far greater than the time of the Norman Conquest, etc. If this be
conceded, I shall then go a little further with my Conceptions in this point,
and labor to make it probable, that the Laws and Customs of the Britains were
not altered (at least so much, as by the general current of Writters is
commonly received) by either the Conquests of the Romans, or Saxons: Not that I
deny, but that each of them made some sort of Impression upon them in relation
to their Manners, Laws and Customs, though the main Body of them stood firm and
unshaken; and first for the Romans, who in those times were much Diseased with
that Itch of Conquest, and too too great a desire of Glory, by it being carried
out sometimes to attempt diverse great things, upon the account of Fame, that
were even unprofitable; yet was it not their Manner or Custom, when they
subdued any Country, to alter the Customs or Laws thereof; but rather to settle
the Conquered, upon a Foundation of enjoying their Liberties, only being
subject to the Title of Conquest; so was it in Jury with the Jews, to whom in
Holy writ you find allowed many things, according to their Customs, both in
permitting of the Ceremonies of their Religion, and also in Judicial Affairs:
In the like manner dealt they with some of the Grecian Commonwealths: The
Roman Conqueror showing to one of them a better Division of their Country, in
relation to the more orderly Existency of their Republic, than ever they
themselves had before taken notice of; and not only so, but told them, (being
at that time assembled, and expecting some severe Doom) that if they would
proceed in their ancient way of Government, they should have their Liberty,
provided they owned the Romans their Superiors in right of Conquest; who only
desired such a power over them by their Garrisons, (the burden and charge
whereof should not be considerable to them) that in case they Rebelled, those
they would keep as Doors and Inlets, by which they would pour in such Forces,
as should reduce them to their peace: But that such a Defection, should be the
occasion of the loss of their Freedom. And after this manner was the common
practice observed by the Romans in their Conquests. But to return home, I find
not that either Caesar in his Commentaries, Lucan, or Tacitus, mention or point
out, any Alteration in the Religion, or in the Customs, or so much as the
Ceremonies of the Druids: and though I must yield, that from the Romans the
Britains had most part of their Civility, in the use of Habits, manner of
Warring, Buildings, Baths, etc. yet can I not Collect any innovation as to
their Laws; and can boldly affirm, that in the midst of these Alterations, as
we had the Terms of Art and Appellations of things from them, so again the
Britains left some relics of their Language among the Romans; for what, the
Inhabitants of this Island had, that to the Romans were reputed Rarities, to
them did they accept of British appellations, smoothing them into their own
Idiom. The Britains at that time were famous for their Art in Contexture of
Baskets, being things very much by the Romans desired, who hearing the Britains
calling them in their Language Basgawd, or Bascoed, notwithstanding they had
words of their own whereby to express the like thing, as Sporta, Cophinus,
Corbis, yet Martial makes use of the British word, making it to speak Latin in
this his Distick: Barbara de pictis venit Bascauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.


So Calerva, Britannice, Caturfa. Seld Mare Claus. in interserend. in fine. Sic
ex vocibus illis, Gesum, Trimatcia, Essedum, Petoritum, Braccae, id genus aliis
sive a Gallis sive a Britannis in Romanorum linguam receptis, notissimum
ipsarum rerum quas significant sive in Galliis sive in Britanniis usum satis
iadicari a nemine non agnoscitur.
Trimarcia, Brit. Tri-march, (i.e.) three Horses. Essedum, Brit Essed. Candela,
Brit. Canwyll. The same original may you find of these words, Apennine,
Armorica, Galstum, Bardo-cucullum, and of many others, which Mr. Camden has
Collected, and for brevity sake I omit. Return we then to show how that the
Romans, after a long War being Victors, did not alter the fundamental
Constitutions or Laus of the Inhabitants of Britanny; all Histories that relate
to those Ages, affirm, that they had their Liberty as to the Worship of their
Gods, of whom they had several, with their Fanes and Flamens devoted unto them,
and unknown to the Romans, (who multiplied as many Gods, even those also of the
Nations they Conquered, as any people in the known World:) And at the same
time, (if our Histories fail us not) the Britains had the glorious Gospel of
Christ Jesus, shining in several parts of this Land, by the Preaching of Joseph
of Arimathea, even at such time (I say) when the Romans were scarce warm in
their new Conquests, as the Antiquities of Glastenbury do import. Consider also
the History of Saint Alban our Proto-martyr, who had been participant of the
Honor of the Roman Military Girdle, whose Death is not to be imputed to any
Act of the Roman Government, but wholly to the Unruliness and Impetuosity of a
popular Tumult, which may some times happen in well-formed Governments. And so
great respect had the Romans to what they thought just, that where they had
spread their Conquests, they would never intermeddle to impeach propriety. It
was not the Government, nor the Propraetors, that did that Injury that
exasperated Boadicea, the Queen of the Iceni, but the Toll-gatherers, and
Publicans, who attempted not to force her Land from her, upon the pretense of
Conquest, for her Title to it was too well known, than to be invalidated by
such a design; but they endeavored, under the pretext of a false Will of her
Husbands, to create as false a Title to Caesar, which certainly confirms their
permitting of propriety; for otherwise, by virtue of their Conquests they might
have seized it, without going about to make a Title by a pretended Will. The
effect of which action was such, and had so great an Influence upon the Spirits
of the Britains, that it well near sent the Roman Eagles flying out of this
Island, and still does leave a remarque to Posterity of the great Sense our
Ancestors had of their Rights and Liberties, even in those Elder, Rude, and
Unpolish't times. They doubtlesly would not have run those hazards for the
Roman Laws or Rights; what they did, was out of the sense of their own
Liberties, which is made out by the speech of Boadicea to her Army, transmitted
to us by the care of so Grave an Author as Annal. lib. 14.
Tacitus. The quarrel was, their Liberties violated, upon which she thus
addresseth her self to her Britains; Solitum (says she, when the two Armies
were Ranged) quidem Britannis foeminarum ductu bellare, testabatur; sed tunc
non ut tant is majoribus ortam regnum and opes, verum ut unam e vulgo;
libertatem amissam, consectum verberibus corpus, contrectatam filiarum
pudicitiam ulcisci; and concludes with a Masculine courage; Si copias
armatorum, si causas belli secum expenderent; vincendum illa atie; vel cadendum
esse: id mulieri destinatum; viverent viri and servirent. She endeavors to
clear the Britains of their fears and doubts, which may arise among them, from
her Feminine Conduct; And the more to fire their Valor, declares to them an
incitement from their lost Liberty: and although the success answered not her
resolution; yet hence we may Collect, with how much zeal and courage they did
labor to assert their freedoms, which must (I say) be those that they enjoyed
by their proper and ancient Laws and Customs; and in this affair, (before the
Battle) to such a height their just rage was incensed, that like a furious
Torrent, they overran several Countries, over-bore the Garrison of Verolamium,
and destroyed Camolodunum; rasing to the ground, the Temple therein Dedicated
to Divus Claudius, which Tacitus says, was quasi Ara aeternae dominationis; of
which a Poet of that Age uses this expression unto him, Oceanusque tuas ultra
se respicit Aras,
Qui finis mundo, non erit imperio.


Some time after this ill success of Boadicea, Caractacus the Prince of the
Silures, in the like sense did deliver himself to his Soldiers; even then when
he was about to fight the last deciding Battle for the British Liberty; though
he Capitulates many violations that they were likely to suffer, in case P.
Ostorius with the, Romans should be Victors: Yet mentions not at all the change
of Laws, which had it been the practice of the Romans, without question had
been here accumulated with all the aggravations imaginable. But take it as
Tacitus has reported it; Caractacus huc and illuc volitans, illum diem, illam
aciem testabatur, aut recuperandae libertatis, aut servitutis aeternae initium
fore: vocabat nomina Majorum, qui Dictatorem Caesarem pepulissent; quorum
virtute vacui a securib^ and pributic intemerata conjugum and liberorum
corpora, retinerent. These were their fears, these their doubts; the recovery
of their Liberty and Freedom from bondage, were the arguments then used to
inflame their Valor: no mention of the loss of their Laws, as not fearing it
from their practice; but the argument was enforced, by the gain of their
security from the Rapes, Hatchets, and Tributes of the Romans; as Aegesippus
writing of Claudi^, and cited by Mr. Camden, affirms; Quos (viz. Britannos)
aetas superior ignoravit, didicit Romanorum victoria; serviunt and ipsi, qui
quid esset servitus, ignorabant; soli sibi nati, and semper sibi liberi. Here
again we see the sense the Britains had of their Liberties and Laws; who
notwithstanding they were bridled by several Garrisons and Colonies of the
Roman Soldiers, yet durst show their faces in Battle, (choosing rather Death
than such a Life) in the Vindication of those Liberties conveyed to them from
the prudence and experience of their Ancestors, and continued through all those
times the Romans had interest here. Let us now proceed, to examine how these
Laws and Customs fared in the next grand revolution. After some time that the
Romans had bereaved Britain of those of her youth, that had been tra^^ed up in
Military discipline, which should have been the strength of her Walls, and
force of her Fortresses; and had by reason of those great and dangerous
Diversions into other Lands, left this Island naked, and so consequently to
shift for it self; there was some time passed in Confusions, rather than in
Government; in Usurpations, rather than Settlements; some one or other here
investing themselves with an Imperial Robe, till at last by these troublesome
means the Government hereof returned into a Monarchy, though through many sad
and dangerous Convulsions, as we may gather out of the Lamentations of Gildas.
But on the Person of Vortiger devolved at last we find it, in whose Reign the
Picts, like an impetuous inundation, break in upon the Northern parts: and
notwithstanding that wonderful relic of the indefatigable labor and cost of
the Romans, in that Wall which reached from Sea to Sea, yet through it they
passed, Destroying and Impoverishing all: The Britains unable to confront them,
having lost their Soldiery; and the rest of them so effeminated, Circa Ann.
Salutis humanae 443.
that they durst not try their power against them; and having ineffectually
hazarded and given up their Lives, and long in vain implored help and
assistance from Aetius the Consul, (as he is termed by our Writers;) who was a
Roman General in Africa, together with one Bonifacius, of both which Hist. Bell.
Vand. l. 1. c. 4.
Procopius writes; that they were Valiant and expert Soldiers, inferior to
none of their time; being men so high in Worth and Spirit, that he shall not
err, that calls them the last of the Romans: when the Britains petitioned his
assistance, it was at that time (I believe) that by the means of the Empress
^^^idia, he was revoked from his Command in Africa: but from him they gained
nothing; so that at the last, Vortiger engages to their aid certain This Mr.
Seldom has also Collected by his Observations; Tantundum (says he.) sane
innuere visus est antiquus scriptor Ethelwerdus, de little advensu verba
faciens; Illis diebus, inquit, agilem au herunt Britanni esse in Piratico
genere Gentem Saxonum in tota. Maritima a Rheno fluvio usque in Doniam urbem,
quae nunc vulgo Danemarc nuncupatur, ac in omni armatura robustam: His, igitur
immensa per nuncios munera mittunt, auxilia petunt, societatem pacis
promittunt. Qui antea Mare Britannicum infestare soliti, ad ejusdem tutamen and
ad pacem invitantur. Mare claus. Lib. 2. c. 9.
Saxons, who had enured themselves to Ryracies, and were Rovers at Sea, under
the Command of two Brethren Hengist and Horsus: They with nine thousand Saxons
undertook the defense of the forementioned wall against the Picts; which they
prosperously and successefully performed. The entertainment of these people,
who had will, and by degrees power to enforce and subject them, was the first
Original of those disasters that afterward befell them; but this ought not to
be conceived to be done at this time with these nine Thousand Saxons; for
certainly it was by other means: Vortiger then King of the Britains, although
by the common opinion of Writers he is said to have bestowed upon Hengist the
Kingdom of Kent, by way of remuneration for his services: yet cannot I credit,
that, that circuit should be erected into a distinct Regal jurisdiction, by the
order of one that seemed to be in possession of an entire Regal authority over
the greatest part of this Island; nor can I digest the notion of Susceperunt
ergo qui (viz. Saxons) advenerant, donantibus Britannis, (...) habitationis
INTER EO'S, ca condition, ut hi militarent etc. Bed: Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 15.
They had Lands assigned to them among them; not the Lands and Possessions of
the Britains assigned.
Hengist his forcible usurpation of Kent at this present as a Kingdom for
himself and his heirs. For the first, we must consider Hengist left a very
considerable number of his Saxons to defend the wall against the Picts; and
these must be out of his first number: and how can we then rationally imagine,
that he was able to retain with him, such a considerable force, as could
probably take possession of this Kingdom, against the wills or consents of the
proprietors? for I much question whether all his power conjoined (with many
more) could in probability have been able to supplant so populous, and so
understanding a people as Caesar reports them to be; or that in any likelihood
those inhabitants, upon a contract or gift of Vortigers to Hengist, would have
so tamely submitted themselves to an everlasting exilement from their ancient
seats and places of nativity, or so easily have suffered the loss of them. I
very well understand that it may be strongly objected against me: that these
9000 Saxons being able to effect that which the Britai^s could not, would be
able in probability to master this one County; but in answer thereunto, many
particulars are to be considered, First, that the Saxons were not near that
number they first brought in, (as I said before) by taking notice of a
proportionable force probably left to guard the wall; reflecting upon the
quantity that wall would necessarily require for its defense. These Pictish
Invasions were done at such time, when the Bid reports, lib. 1. c. 13, 14. of
his Ecclesiastical History, that the Britains were very sorely afflicted with a
Famine, and enjoying suddenly a great plenty, fell to Luxury and sloth, and
were so effeminated.
Britains (as Gildas reports them) were in intestine feuds among themselves; by
which it so fell out, that they did not go jointly to assist one another
against this common Enemy; but by those Quarrels left those nearest to the
confines, unto their merciless cruelty: and we find that when the Saxons
observed not their Articles afterward, then the Britains united; (though too
late): and were so united, before that any Saxon recruites were landed in
Britain. And those families under the provocation of expulsion, probably, would
have freely ventured their lives, rather than be exposed to penury and famine
(which are worse than death) in vindication of their estates and livelihoods;
and what could the Saxon opposition do, when in all probability they were
enforced to separate to take possession of those Lands? and if they in their
separation had enjoyed peace and quietness; what can be imagined, such a small
number should have done, with so great a Tract of Land as that is? Certainly
they were not able to manure and cultivate it. Again, if the Britains had been
expuls'd, what became of them? or where were they replanted? this would have
received as great a Or at least such a Note as this action at this Town
received from the Saxon Chronologist, Anno Christi 490. Hic Ella and ^issa
(urb^culam) Andredescester obsederunt, omnesque ibi exinbi habitaruat
oc^idebant: neque ibi exinde Britannus unicus (vivus) relictus fuit.
Note in History as the Planting afterward of the Britains in Armorica: but
that which would cause me most to wonder, is, that in the midst of so many
revolutions, changes and the hard fortune that befell Vortiger, Hengist should
be able to have waded through the many difficulties necessarily attending him,
for the space of three and thirty years, by the influence only (as our
Historians would have it) his Daughter Rowena had upon Vortiger. But to find
out the probability of that which has caused all this noise (not that I am
ignorant, but that afterward the Saxons did reach and grasp the Government of
this Island; and did get themselves into a full power thereof; but what I
discourse of is of that Tract of time in the Reign of King Vortiger) here we
must understand that the Romans toward the latter times of their Government in
this our Isle, had in these parts a Comes or Lieutenant, that was denominated,
Vir spectabil^s Littoris Saxonici; who had in charge the defense of this Shore
against the sudden incursions and depredations of the Saxons, who it seems had
used that Trade of infesting these shores, long before the Romans quitted our
Island; which when they had deserted, these were the men, that Initum namque
est concilium, quid agendum, ubi quaerendum esset praesidium ad evitandas vel
repellendas tam feras, tamque crebe^rimas gentlum ^aquilonarium irruptiones:
placuitque omnibus cum suo Rege Vortigerno, ut Saxonum gentem de transmarinis
partibus in auxilium vocarent, etc. Hist. Eccl. Bed. l. 1. cap. 14.
Vortiger waged against the Picts; prudently believing I guess it, by his wise
placing of them) that his employing and engaging them would at one and the same
time, not only case these Shores from their own frequent depredations; and
preferve them from the inroads of others of the same Country and Trade; but
also engage them (who were a people enured to fights and hardships) against the
Picts, and to this purpose he placed the one part of them upon the Picts-wall
against his Northern Enemies by Land; the other part upon the Kentish shores
against his Northern Enemies by Sea: (the best designment that ever was or can
be cannot ensure success to it;) but what than this could be more prudent? and
more for the benefit and security of his Subjects? And although Vortiger pass
among all writers under the severe censure of high Infamy, yet may there be
much collected in his behalf, out of those clouded notions in History: whether
it was his permitting so great numbers of Saxons to enter his Kingdom, or his
own personal vices, that made him so distastefull to his Subjects, I will not
take upon me positively to resolve; sure I am, I find him expuls'd his Throne;
and yet with much desire and applause restored; and in my conceit, the
restoration of him does more argue for him, than any thing I ever met with
could against him. It is not usual with a people after they have rejected and
divested a Prince, and set up another in his place, to return and reinvest the
old one; unless some visible worth were eminent in him. But whatever the
reasons were; this I observe, that in the way of management of the Government
of his Kingdom, he traced the same path of Prudence chalked out to him by the
Romans. For Mr. Lambert out of William of Malmsbury reports, that in the time
of this King, there was one Guorongus Viceroy or Leiutenant of Kent, and Mr.
Cambden gives us an account thereof (worthy of much note) Vortigernus Guorongum
Cantio praefecit (i.e.) pro-regem sive libertum, quo nesciente (observe this)
hanc regionem ( ut habent Ninnius and Malmesb.) statim Hengisto Saxoni in
gratiam Rowenae, ejus filiae, quam misere deperibat, gratis concessit. I cannot
fancy Rowena to be the price of Kent; nor that the Land of that Country was
bestowed upon Hengist; but the gift or concession was of so much only as
Guorongus did lately possess, which was the Leiutenantship thereof; and seems
to be no other than those Regalpowers, which were formerly granted by the
Romans to the Honor of the Comites, of which Mr. Campden gives several
accounts; for in one place he finds them denominated Comites litoris Saxonici
per Britanniam, and in another place Viri spectabiles; and tells us that in
Maritine Affairs they were so well skilled (writing of the Saxons Pyracies)
that; ad eorum depraedationes coercendas Seldom. Mare claus. in interserend: in
fine.

Mr. Seldom has diligently observed this. In libris Notitiae (says he) it a
legitur, Sub dispositione viri illustris Magistri peditum praesentalis Comites
militum infrascriptorum.

It aliae.

Africae.

Tingitaniae.

Tractus Argentoratensis.

Britanniarum.

Lito is Saxonici per Britannias.

Tam in Alciati quam Pancirolli editione legitur, ut heic, Militum
infrascriptorum. Dubitari nequit, quin pro Militum, limitum fuerit
substituendum. Neque enim ratio officiorum Imperialium patitur ut Militum ibi
locum habeat. Et certissimum est ex iis quae sequuntur, Italiam, Africam,
Tractum Argentoratensem, Britannias, and litus Saxonicum suos habuisse Comites,
ut Comites Limitum, non aliter ac Territoria quae ibi proxime subjunguntur,
velut Mauritania Caesariensis, Tripolitani, aliae itidem provinciae, quae
praeter Britannias, suos pariter habuere Duces, nomine Ducum limitum, etc.


Comites litoris Saxonici per Britanniam and Galliam constituti fuerant: for
the Saxons (I say) had long before Vortigers Reign infested the British shores.
But how Hengist and his Saxons did answer their trust, I need not tell you, for
it is plain they took an ell where but an inch was given; and out of this Hide
did cut to themselves large Thongs. It The Sovereign Power has always had,
and used the privilege of making Kings under them as it pleased them, as Mr.
Sclden observes, Mare claus. l. 2. c. 19. Nec contemnendum est (says he) sine
id, quod in chronicis Coenobii Theokesburiensis occurit de Henrico de Bello
campo, Duce Warwici, in d^gnit atem Regis, ab Henrico Rege Sexto, non solum
Iasulae Vectis, verum and Sarniae and Caesareae, ad quas caeterae in hoc
tractu. civiliter spectant, creato. De Insula Vecti idem memorat vir optimus
Gulielmus Camdenus, idque ex eodem codice. At vero codex ipse ad hunc modum;
Obiit autem Dominus. Henricus Nobilis Dux Warwichiae and primus Comes Angliae,
Dominus te Dispenser and de Abergevenny, Rex de Insulis Wight and Gardsey and
Jardsey, Dominus quoque Castri Bristoliae cum suis annexis. 3. idus Juni^ A. D.
1446. Anno aetatis suae 22. apud castrum de Hanleya, and sepultus est in medio
chori Theokesburiae; and paulo ante, de Eodem; Coronatus est in Regem de Wight
manu Regia; and paulo post; Quemadmodum Richardus Rex secuadus cum Robertum
comitem Oxoniae ( qui and Marchi^ Dubliniae and Dux Hiberniae fait) Regem
Hiberniae creare destinarat, se interea Insulam illam non minore quam Regis
(tametsi Domini nomen tunc, uti etiam usque ad Henrici Octavi tempora
posteriora, Regis ibi vicem omnina suppleret) titulo ac dignitate possidere
proculdubio non dubitavit. By which Custom brought down so near our age, and
deduced from the practice of ancient times, it is no wonder that we find so
many in several ages dignified with that Title, either as an especial mark of
Honor, or by the privilege of descent, as the Earls of Derby at this present
are with the Title of Kings in Man.
was an ancient Custom among the Britains, and after them of the Saxons, to
give the Title of Reguli to all Lords that had the Charge and Custody of From
this it was that in the time of Rich. 2. came up first the Title of Marquesses,
which is a Governor of the Marches; for before time those that governed the
Marches were called commonly Lord Marchers, and not Marquesses, as Judge
Dodaridge has observed in his Law of Nobility and Peerage, under the Title of
Marquesses, page 31. where in that Chapter he also adds this Paragraph well
worth the reading. After the Normans had conquered this Land, it was carefully
observed by them, as a matter of much moment, and a point of special Policy, to
place upon the confines and borders of the Britains or Welsh, etc. not then
subdued, men of much valor, not only sufficiently able to encounter the
inrodes and invasions of the enemy; but also willing to make onset of them,
and enlarge the Conquest; These men thus placed, were of high blood, credit,
and countenance among their Contrymen the Normans, and in whose faith and
power the Conquetor reposed special considence and trust, and therefore in
their Territories given unto them to hold their Tenures, were devised to be
very special, and of great Importance, and their Honors enriched with the Name
and privileges of Earls of Chester, and for the North-border of Wales created
to be a County Palatine, and the Barons of the middle Port of the South
Marches, were adorned in a manner with a Palatine Jutisdiction, having a Court
of Chancery, and Writs only among themselves pleadable, to the intent that
their Attendance might not thence be driven for the Prosecution of
Controversies, and Quarrels in the Law; and as for the other part of the South
Marches, they seemed sufficiently fenced with the River of Severn and the Sea.
My business has been to make it probable that these Reguli were Lords of
Marches and Limits long before the Norman conquest, to which I referr you;
neither were those Welsh limits fenced by Severn; but for many hundreds of
years, by Offa his ditch.
Marches and Limits: the names of many Honored with that Title I can show:
especially such as were Custodes or Keepers of that Famous Limit betwixt the
Mercians and Britains, set out by that Renowned ditch which Offa the King of
Mercia drew; a Memorial of some of them out of an ancient Hist: M S. penes
Author.
M S. Chronicle that I have, I shall exhibit, wherein such persons were not
only called Reguli, but also Reges. Penda (says this Anonymous Author) did
spread his Kingdom of Mercia very far, about the year of Christ 620. for he
slew in Battle two Kings of Northumberland, Saint Edwin, and Saint Oswald; and
three Kings of the Eastangles, Egric, St. Sigebert, and Anna. The said Penda
had by his Queen Kineswith sive Sons, Wolfer, Saint Ethelred, Saint Merewald,
Saint Mercelin, and one other, (This without a Name in this place was his
Eldest Son Peada) and two Daughters, Saint Kynesburg, and Kyneswith; he Reigned
30 years. Wulpher was the first King of the Mercians that received the Faith of
Christ, and he married St. Ermenild the Daughter of Ercombert King of Kent, by
his Queen St. Sexburge: Germanus vero ipsius Westanheconorum Rex Sanctus
Merewoldus: married St. Ermenburg the Daughter of Ermenred the King, Brother of
the said Ercombert, and by her had three Daughters, all of them Saints, two of
their Names were Milburg and Mildrith, and one Son St. Merimnus, who being
dead, his Uncle St. Mercelin did Reign in his stead. Here be several Kings
whose Names you will hardly find in the Chronicles. But M S. vol. 4. in
Biblioth. Bodl.
Leland in his Itinerary reports out of some Books in his time found in
Religious houses, that this Merewaldus, whom he calls King of the Marches,
built a Monastery for Nunns at Lempster (which in the Britsh is called
Lian-Llieni, Lleian signifying virgo Vestalis, Sanctimontalis) in English, the
Church of Nunns, and endowed it with all the Land thereabout, saving only the
Lordship now caulid Kingesland; after these successions in this small Kingdom,
I find one Ethelmund was also King of the West anheconi, who were the
Inhabitants of the North-west parts of Herefordshire; certain to be so not only
by the places mentioned in that Tract of Land, but for that I find one Wlfhard
(who by Bishop Godwin is doubtlesly mistaken to be put as Successor to Utellus,
but should have his place betwixt Podda and Ecca Bishops of Hereford) in his
signing to the Charter granted to the Abbey of Winchelcomb, Anno Dom. 811.
writes himself thus, Monast. Angl. page 127.
(...) Ego Wulfhardus Hecanae ( Quae nunc Herefordiensis dicitur) Episcopus
consensi and subscripsi. And Math. of Westminster writes that he was Bishop of
Hereford in the year of our Lord 765. at that time when Offa King of Mercia
procured of Pope Adrian an Archbishops Seat at Lichfield. Many other Reguli
were in these Merches, for they did consist of several frontier Jur^sdictions:
I have found some very ancient, as of Pibanus King of Ergin (now Urchinfeld)
the Grandfather of St. Dubritius the Archhishop of Caerleon in the Reign of
King Arthur: of one Gorvodius King of the same place after him. But I cannot
let pass that which I found in a Record transcribed into a Register book of one
of the Bishops of Hereford, certifyed as I guess from Innocent the third,
concerning a donation to the Church of Hereford; wherein the Donor is termed
Regulus (his name at present I do not remember, but reforr it to another place)
he is said (to fortify his gift to the Church) in it; to be in plena Regia
potestate. Milfrith, the principal Benefactor, if not Founder of the Minster at
Hereford, is denominated sometimes Regulus, sometimes Rex. Four Reguli in Kent
at one and the same time witnessing to a Charter of one of the Kings thereof.
In the time of Julius Caesar, Cambd. in Brit.
Quatuor erant Reguli qui Cantio praeerant, Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus,
and Sego^ax; upon which Mr. Campden makes a jest, saying of Caesar; quos ille
u^ Reges de vicisse videatur, Reges vocat, cum tantum Reg^li fuerint, vel
melioris no aenobiles. Hence I collect, that these Reguli were a constitution,
at least a Custom anciently among the Britains; that Guoronged was a Regulus
of Kent; and that Vortiger did probably bestow no more upon Hengist than the
said Honor or Command of, (or rather in,) Kent; whether it was under the Title
of King, Count, Regulus, or Lieutenant, it does not much matter; for the
Breaches which the Sa^^ons afterward made upon the Britains were such, as gave
them liberry to take to themselves what Titles, and what of other men's Titles,
it pleased them. Hengist had this Dominion or Province not by Conquest or
force, but assigned unto him, by way of remuneration from King Vortiger, for
his good service against the Picts; or else to preserve and engage him to, and
in his service; and having no more than the like Authority as Guorongus
immediately before possessed, he could not have any color or Power by that
gift to drive out the Britains from their Possessions; or so much as infringe
their Customs; such an Act would much mis-become the interest of Vortiger to
suffer, or consent that his people should be delivered up to the spoil and
slavery of the Saxons; his very restoration (I before spoke of) is a strong
argument against that opinion; for what protection could the Britains have
expected from him, that had (supposing the Story true) joined with strangers
their Enemies, in the dispossossion and destruction of his own people, and
Subjects? the same Improbability do I impose upon the alteration of Customs; I
might ask ad quem finem? to what end should he alter their Laws and Customs?
we must look upon Hengist as an Exile out of his own Country; who methinks
could not but be 'contented, to find himself and his, settled in a way of
livelihood in honor and plenty; rather than venture to put all to Hazard by
needless conrests: so that I believe Hengist found this custom in dispute
among others used by the ancient Britains, and intermedled not therewith; and
this especially, for that I look upon it as a true and genuine Stemm of the
Customs and Usages of the Original Planters, remaining here unaltered, through
these two grand revolutions of Roman and Saxon Power. But a little more to
clear it; let us consider the State and Condition of this Nation, in their
turmoyles with the Saxons; and examine whether the Britains were totally
extirpated from such places in other parts of this Nation, where they did
spread their conquering Arms; I think by comparing the sense of Histories
together, it will appear probable, that where the Saxons are reported to have
constrained the Britains into the Angles of this Island, the Optimates and
military men were they (for the most part) that were so forced, when as the
Agricolae and Villani never moved, but as well as they could, and according to
opportunities, made the best conditions they could for themselves with the
Conquering Saxons. So I find in the In the little History published by Mr.
Whcelock found with the Saxon M S. of Bid, writing of the settling of the
Kingdom of the West Saxons, it is thus Recorded, that Cerdic and Ciaric his
Son, six years after they Landed in Britain, Invaded that Province, and aerdn
tha aerestan Cyningas the est Seaxena land. on ealum geeodan. (i.e.) iique
erant primi Reges, qui Occidentalium Saxonum Regnum INTER WALDOS perdomuera^.
Cities of Excester and Hereford that the Saxons there first placed in
Garrison, were only the Soulders, who permitted the Britains in quietness to
live among them; and so probably, retaining their Lands, to follow their
Tillage and Trades, till an ensuing Peace inclined all to settlement; for
otherwise it had not been possible for so many Saxon Armies as were necessarily
to be employed at one and the same time throughout this Island, for the
erecting of seven Kingdoms, underseven several Generals or Kings, to have
subsisted; had the Country Britains, I say, deserted their Ploughs and
dwellings, and desisted from their Agriculture; neither could so many Villages
be so well replenished by the Saxons only, in so short a time, had not the
Britains made their abode, and stay in rhem, as we may plainly perceive they
were, by those ancient donations of several of the first Heptarchical Kings; in
which are recited oftentimes the British names of the incolae of several
Villages: for the fuller understanding whereof, I referr the desirous Reader to
the most ancient donations to Glastenbury, made public by the Collections in
Monasticon Anglicanum. And I believe my affirmation grounded upon so much
probability, that (notwithstanding the settling of the English Speech so
Generally) the greatest part of the Inhabitants of England at this day, were it
possible exactly to derive their pedegrees from those elder times, would prove
to be Britains; take also into this number, such, that by the time the Saxons
had made their Conquests here, had from the Romans been made Emeriti; having
procured a writ of ease from the Wars, and by this time were ennaturaliz'd
Britains: and seldom do we find or hear, that an invading Army did out-number
the people of an invaded Country; neither is it probable that the Saxons as
soon as they had made way, through much opposition, to attain their desires,
would turn Husbandmen and Grasiers; considering the Britains never surceased
their claims, nor were weary of infesting them, pertinaciously endeavoring to
re-gain their losses. I rather believe they got themselves into possession of
those Villages and Towns, that they had thus wrested from the Britains, and
such of them as had not Spirits by Arms to defend their Country against them,
they kept, to be Instruments of attaining their ends in relation to those
necessary ingredients of War, viz. Money and Victuals: And the multitude of
words and those of great singificancy which the Saxons borrowed of the
Britains, do as so many arguments confirm my thoughts in this point. There was
not probably a continuation of the British denomination of Officers and
Offices, Bright, from the British word Brith which signifies their Waddecolour
which was a lightblew. Minsh.
without the acceptance of the British prudence in founding of them; from them
it is that to this day the Chief Magistrate of a City is called Meyr; not
derived from Major, Greater; but from the British word Miret, which is,
custodire, to keep and preserve; So Edlin which Mr. Somners expounds to
signify Nobilis, splendidus, inclytus; a word found also in the High and Low
Dutch very familiarly, yet Docter Davies tells us whence they borrowed it, and
that it is derived from Ed and Llin, which signifies haeres, or linea Regis;
and till I occasionally met with it in his laborious Dictionary, I confess my
self to have been much troubled, to have found it in the Laws of Howel-Dha;
where it may as well signify all the Kings Children, as one; though even among
the Welsh some Honorable mark was afforded to the Eldest, above the rest:
perhaps as it is found in the German, it may be a relic of the old Gallick
Language. I could tire the Reader by citing numbers of the like; but by these
and the like, it seems to me, that the Saxons co-inhabiting with the Britains,
did by that means graft a mongrel Speech, entertaining much of a mixture,
participating both of the one and the other, British and Saxon; which the
Saxons first received, by observation of a convenience, or at least of finding
nothing repugnant to reason in their Customs and usages; for when they first
came over, they were Barbarous, whereas they found the Britains civil; they
were Heathens, the Britains (mostly) Christians; So that the Saxons, either out
of a desire of quiet, or else upon good liking and approbation, did yield to
the reception of most of those Similiter olim apud Britones temporibus
Remanorum in regno isto Britanniae (...) Senatores, qui postea temporibus
Saxonum vocabantur Aldermann^, non propter aetatem, sed propter sapientiam and
dignitatem, etc. In leg. 35. Edovardi confessoris.
Laws, they found the British possessed of; and those the Saxon Proceres or
Optimates did confirm, as by the comparing of the Saxon and the British Laws
together, I can affirm; yet adding some terms of their own, to cause them to
carry a Signification also to their understandings, as well as to the propriety
of the British; from this reason it is, that we find most of our ancient Law
terms to be British, and not (as they are mistaken) to be, Saxon, as Murder,
Bastard, etc. In Denominations of places, they intermixed the two Languages;
Winfreton (a Village in the County of Hereford) participates of Winsre, which
out of the British turned into Latin, is, Fluxus Vagae, ( Vaga is the Latin
name of the River Wye,) and Ton, which is purely Saxon, being an addition of
theirs, has no affinity with the British; so it is in Wintreton, or Winterton,
which is compounded of the British Wen-tre, (i. e.) Villa alba, with the
addition of the Saxon ton, which is one and the same in signification with the
British Tree; so in Winton, the ordinary used name for Winchester, from the
British Venta; and by the Romans had the addition of Belgarum, to distinguish
it from many other Venta's, Ton being only the Saxon affix to Venta or Went.
These are enough to confirm what I have already said in relation to their
probability of coinhabitation; which being of so great a value to find proved
in relation to our matter in hand, I shall notwithstanding proceed to prove it
further by some Authentic records, which have relation thereunto; this may be
plainly gathered from the Laws and Constitutions of the Elder Saxon Kings; for
Inas in his two and twentieth Law has this expression; Wallus censum pendens
annuum, etc. and again, Wallus virgarum metum duodecim solidis redimito; and
Wallus quinque terrae hidas possidens, 600. solid. estimanaus est; this Inas
was King of the West Saxons; and had, as it plainly appears by these Laws,
Britains dwelling with his Saxons. I purposely pretermit the 55th. Law of the
said King, and the 32. which is only, de Regis equisone Wallo, and was a
concernment only of the King's Posts or Messengers; but there is in the 73d.
Law of the same King, not only a difference of Nations, (as in others) but also
of Estates and Conditions; for there it is that a note is made of Wallus
servilis conditionis, which supposes there were other Walli, that were of a
more free condition; as in the Title of that Law it is manifest, where it is,
Be thon the theo ealH frigne man ofslea, of a servile Welch-man that Kills a
Freeman; though in the Body of that Law this Freeman is called an
Englishman; and in the Title of the 31. Law is this note, Be cirlisces mones
land Haefene, which by Mr. Lambard is thus rendered, De pagano fundum
possidente, and the Law does thus begin, Wallus integram terrae hydam si
possederit, esto, etc. by which Law it seems that these Walli were the only
Pagani; for that the whole Law refers to Wallus: but King Edward the Confessor
give^ us a more particular note hereof, writing what Nations might de jure
claim privilege with the Inhabitants of England, and says, Brytones vero
Armorici cum venerint, in regno isto suscipi debent, and in regno protegi,
sicut probi cives. De corpore regni hujus exierunt quondam, de Sanguine
Brytonum regni hujus, etc. Ita constituit Optimus Ina Rex Anglorum, qui electus
fuit in Regem per Angelum, and qui primo obtinuit Monarchiam totius regni hujus
post adventum Anglorum in Britanniam; primus enim fuit Rex coronatus Anglorum
(observe this) and Btytonum simul manentium in Brytannia, post adventum Saxonum
Germaniae, scilicet post acceptam sidem a Beato Gregorio per Sanctum
Augustinum, etc. Et universi Angli qui tunc temporis exiterunt, uxores suas
ceperunt de Brytonum genere, and Brytones uxores suas de illustri sanguine and
genere Anglorum, hoc est de genere Saxonum. Hoc enim factum fuit per commune
consilium and assensum omnium Episcoporum and Principum, Procerum, Comitum, and
omnium saptentum seniorum and popuiorum totius regni and per praeceptum Regis
Inae praedicti, etc. Et tali modo effecti fuerunt Gens una and popolus unus per
universum Regnum Brytanniae miseratione divina, etc. Universi praedicti semper
postea pro communi utilitate coronae regni insimul and in unum viriliter contra
Danos and Norwegienses semper steterunt and atrocissime unanimi voluntate
contra inimicos pugnave unt, and bella atrocissima in regno gesserunt; by which
it is plain, there was a most ancient accord, and an equal respect to the
Brytains as well as to the Saxons. So may we see in the Laws of King
Aethelstan, where it is provided, that, Si Wallus in eas opes creverit, ut
familiam alat, fundum possideat, annuumque Regi Censum pendat, 220. solidis
valeto; atque si dimidiatam tantummodo terrae hydam possederit, 80. solidis
aestimator: Quin si terram prorsus nullam habuerit, capitis tamen aestimatio
(ac bith freoH, siquidem is fuerit ingenuus, if he be a Freeman) 70. Solidorum
esto. By this we collect the Britains were not expuls'd; that they did
co-inhabit with the Saxons, and maintained a right in their possessions; which
in like manner I hope to find they did in their Laws and Customs. I shall make
use in the first place of what Speed, l. 7. c. 18.
Mr. Speed delivers out of William of Malmesbury, William Thorn, and the
Register of Canterbury, (and has relation to the Kingdom of Kent) concerning
Ethelbert the fourth King after Hengist, of whom he uses these words; This
Noble King having a care for them that should come after, brought the Laws of
his Country, into their own Mother tongue: Observe here, that by this time
(from the Saxons first arrival) it is probable the Kentish spoke the Saxon
tongue; their Language before was British, with the rest of the Island; the
Country of King Ethelbert was Kont, and his Mother tongue was Saxon; now
Ethelbert finding the Laws of his Country British, the Saxon tongue generally
spoke, brought those Laws out of British into Saxon; and this is the naked
meaning of it. I find Bedas Eccl. Hist. l. 2. cap. 5. ait Ethelbertum Cantiae
Regem scripsisse idiomate Saxonice, libellum cui nomen indidit DECRETA
JUDICIORUM, atque judicia illa vel sua memoria tradit suisse observata;
Aluredus in praefatione legum satetur se ex Ethelberto sumpsisse nonnulla. Quid
plura? Asserius Menevensis olim Aluredo REgi familiaris, prodit ipsum Regen
Saxonicis mandasse literis JUDICIORUM DECRETA, verum ad nos non pervenire
injuria temporum; this out of the Glossary to the Saxon Laws, under this word
LIBER JUDICIALIS.
reference in several places of the Saxons Laws, to an Older Book of Laws, as
if these were but only Excerptions out of it; as in the fifth Law of King
Aethelstan, de irruptione in Templum, it is said, Triplicis Ordalii sententia
convincatur, is prout in Libro habetur judiciali compenfato; and this in the
Saxon is called Domboc, (not of the same nature as the Domesday we have in the
Exchequer, of which sort Writers do also mention a former, both of them being
only Surveys, or Descriptions of Lands;) but a Book of Judgment, for so does
Doom signify in the Saxon tongue. The like I find in the fifth Law of King
Edgar, where it is provided, that he that does not observe the Lord's Day, (
funnan dae ges,) poenas in Judiciali libro descriptas pendito; so likewise in
the eighth of King Edovards Laws, Si quis, etc. is etiam id compensationis quod
in Libro judiciali continetur, praestato; Leges Molmutii Duawallo^is Gildas
Cambrius in Latinum sermonem transtulit, and Alphredus Magnus in Saxonicum.
Balaeus in vita ejusdem Molmutii.
which Book I suppose contained their ancient Laws, translated out of the
British, though perhaps since the receiving of Christianity, intermingled with
much of the Mosaical-Judicial-Laws; introduced both by the Brytains and the
Zealous-Primitive-Christian-Saxon Kings; to which Laws, (and perhaps may be the
effect thereof) Eleutherius the Pope or Bishop of Rome counseled and referred
Lucius the Brytain long time before this Age we are now writing of. I am not
ignorant that they had diversities of Laws, (as they are improperly called)
viz. Merchenlaege, Westsaxonlaege, and Danelaege, which not at all relate to a
different Law, Kind, Custom or Usage, but to several sorts of Amerciaments,
Mulcts and Fines, for the transgression of one and the same Law; I say this was
generally so; and so is it to be understood in the second of King Alured's
Laws, in the case of such as violate Sanctuary; and is this, Mulcta, vel ipsa
capitis aestimatione, prout ejus gentis feret consuetudo, etc. This difference
of Fines and Pecuniary impositions I find frequently, but very little besides;
which is also all the impression that I can perceive the rude Danes made upon
the English in relation to their Laws; for during their times, Edward the
Confessor looks not at all upon the Laws as altered, but says, they were
asleep for above threescore years; as in a Discourse concerning them he has
it: and magnifies them so highly, that in his Restoration of them, he would
have them thought to be very Ancient, though he reports them made by his
Frand-father Omnes proceres regni, and milites and liberi homin^s univ^^st
totius regni Britanniae facere debent, in pleno folcmote fidelitatem domino
Regi coram Episcopis regm. Hanc legem invenit Arthuru^, qui quoadam suit
inclytissimus Rex Brytonum, and ita consolidavit and confoederavit regnu^n
Britanniae universum semper in unum. Hujus legis authoritate expulit Arthurus
praedictus Saracenos and inimicos a Regno, lex enimista diu sopita fuit and
sepulta, donec Edgdrus Rex Anglorum illam excilavit, etc. In leg. 35. Edovardi
Confessoris.
Edgar, by which he labors to put a repute upon them; for Edgar was a Wife and
Prudent Prince, and did urgently press the Execution of them; so that King
Edward ascribes them unto him, as these very Laws after the Norman Conquest
were called the Laws of Holy King Edward; and are the same that the Saxon Kings
before Edgar, did use: notwithstanding all which, when he comes to the
Corroboration of the Privileges and Immunities of the Ancient City of London,
as to their Hus^^ings and other Courts, he declares the Antiquity of them to be
far greater than the Reign of King Edgar; and (I believe) are co-etanious with
the ancient British Laws; (if we should grant and allow the same Antiquity to
Towns and Cities, with the first planting of the Isle) he says, Debet etiam in
London quae est caput Regni and Legum, semper curia Domini Regia singulis
septimanis die Lunae Hustengis sedere and (...). ^^nd at a enim erat olim and
aedisicata ad instar and ad ^^^dum and in memoriom veteris Magnae Trojae; and
ufque in bodiernum diem leges and jura and dignitates, libertates, regiasque
consuetudines untiquae magnae Trojae in se continet, -- and consuetudines suas
una semper inviolabilitate co^servat. Here I shall observe, that as well as
London enjoyed her Privileges and Immunities, not at all infringed, from so
great Antiquity, notwithstanding the several revolutions under the Dominions of
the Romans, Saxons, and Danes; other places of the same Island might also
probably enjoy the same favor, and hold their Customs, Laws, and Tenures from
as great Antiquity; but I have done with this revolution; let us now enquire
what probability we have to believe that

CHAP. IV.
William the Conqueror altered not, but confirmed, the Saxon Laws. The
antiquity and different use of Juries. English claim and recover their Lands by
Law against the Normans. Of our common Laws, our Customs, Forfeitures, Sealing,
Coverfeu, Exchequer, Fashions, Language, Writing, manner of Fights,
Fortifications and Buildings.

HAving passed through these mists and clouds of Elder Times, let us now come
to see what loss or alteration, in relation to our Laws and Customs, we
received by the The Denominations here of William the first by Conquestor or
Conqueror, and this the Norman Conquest, have stumbled many, looking upon it
as if it carried with it, the enslaving of the Eaglish by his Victorious
success over Harald, and so are loath to afford it any Courteous reception;
whereas there is no more in it than the plain acquisition or getting of this
Realm of England after his pretenses from King Edward the Confessor were made
known, as in the following Tract appears, by the constraint and force that
Harald put him unto, to get his Settlement by Battle with him; which word of
Conquest is to this day familiarly used in Scotland, to signify Land
purchased; and Mr. John Skene says upon the word, that Conquestus, signifies
Lands, quhilk any person acquiris and possessis privato jure, vel singulari
titulo, vel^ti donatione vel singulari aliquo contractu; Quhilk is conform to
the Civil Law, ubi quae stus dicitur lucrum, quod ex Emptione, venditione,
locatione, conductione, vel generaliter ex opera cu jus descendit. l. coiri. 7.
cum seq. ff. pro Socio; and further writing of Lands so purchased, concludes;
Conquestus dicitur ratione primi conquestoris, and cum transmittitur ad ejus
haeredem, exuit naturam conquestus, and induit naturam haereditatis.
Norman Conquest, concerning which also, we have so great a plenty of Writers,
that they almost extinguish the Truth with their Comments and Conceits; all the
alterations imaginable are fathered upon this revolution, and summed up by Mr.
Samuel Daniel in these words: I come to write of a time, (meaning this Norman
affair) wherein the State of England received an alteration of Laws, Customs,
Fashions, manner of Living, Language, Writing, with new forms of Fights,
Fortifications, Buildings, and generally an innovation in most things but
Religion. I make choice of this Paragraph of so Elegant an Author (as Mr.
Daniel, who has deserved very well from the Commonwealth of Learning, for his
ingenuous Observations) to examine the particulars of this great mutation, so
generally imagined; which enumeration will also afford us the method of our
Discourse, concerning that which happened to the English at that time: and first
of all, concerning the Alteration of our Laws, which is the principal matter of
our enquiry; of which, among many Mr. Camden himself has thus written; Victor
Gulielmus in victoriae quasi Trophaeum, antiquatis pro maxima part Anglorum
legibus, Normanniae consuetudines induxit, causasque Gallice disceptari jussit;
Yet presently adds, propositis igitur legibus Anglicanis; Merchenlage,
Danelage, and Westsaxenlage; quasdam reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans;
transmarinas Neustriae leges quae ad Regni pacem tuendam efficacissimae
videbantur, adjecit. But to evince this, let us have recourse as near as we
can, to the Authors that were of that Age, and seriously weigh what they
deliver unto us concerning this matter. Mr. Seldom our of the Litchfield
Chronicle, cited also by my very much Honored friend, and incourager, Sir
Roger Twysden, introduces these words: Anno Gulielmus Regni sui Quarto apud
Londonias consilio Baronum suorum fecit summoniri per universos Angliae
comitatus, omnes nobiles, sapientes, and sua lege eruditos, ut eorum leges and
consuetudines audiret. Et licet idem Rex Willielmus leges Northfolktae and
Suffolkiae, Grantbrigiae and Deirae (ubi quondam maxima pars Danorum and
Norwegiensium inhabitabant) prius magis approbaverat, and eas per totum Regnum
observari praeceperat, pro eo quod omnes Antecessores ej^s, and fere omnes
Barons Normanniae, Norwegenses extitissent, and quod de Norwegia olim
venissent; Sed postea ad preces communitatis Anglorum, Rex adquievit, qui
deprecati sunt, quatenus permitteret sibi leges proprias, and consuetudines
antiquas habere, in quibus vixerant patres eorum, and ipsi in eis nati and
nutriti sunt, scilicet, leges Sancti Regis Edwardi, and ex illo die magna
authoritate veneratae, and per universum Regnum corroboratae and conservatae
sunt, praecaeteris Regni legibus, leges Regis Edwardi. Unde per praeceptum
Regis Willielmi electi sunt de singulis totius Angliae Comitatibus Duodecim
Viri sapientiores, quibus jurejurando injunctum fuit coram Rege Willielmo, ut
quoad possent, recto tramite neque ad Dexteram neque ad Sinistram declinantes,
legum suarum and consuetu inum sancita patefacerent; nil praetermittentes, nil
addentes, nil praevaricando mutantes. Alderedus autem Eboracensis Episcopus,
and Hugo Londoniensis Episcopus per praeceptum Regis, scripserunt propriis
manibus, omnia quae praedicti jurati dixerunt, etc. Ingulphus Crolandensis
also, who was Chaplain to this King William, and being himself somewhat
concerned in this affair, and so the more to be believed (as an Agent) writes a
little more plainly than the last did, thus; Attuli (says he) eadem vice mecum
Lundoniis in meum Monasterium leges aequissimi Regis Ewardi, quas Dominus meus
inclytus Rex Willielmus autenticas esse, and perpetuas per totum Regnum
Angliae, inviolabiliterque tenendas sub poenis gravissimis proclamarat, and
suis justiciariis commendarat eodem idiomate quo editae sunt, ne per
ignorantiam contingat nos vel nostros aliquando, in nostrum grave periculum
contraire and offendere ausu temerario Regiam Majestatem, ac in ejus censuras
rigidissimas improvidum pedem far, contentas saepius in eisdem, hoc modo; and
the Title of those Laws is this; Ces sont les leis and les Custumes que li Reis
William grantut a tut le peuple de Engleterre; apres le Conquest de la Terre.
Iceles meismes, que le Reis Edward sun Cousin tint devant lui; which is in
English; these are the Laws and Customs which King William granted to all the
people of England, after the Conquest of the Land; and are the same which King
Edward his Cousin did hold before him: And the like account given by the
Litchfield Chronicle, is found in the Laws of King Edward; which, though from
him receiving the Denomination, yet probably were Transcripts of a Date (since
the Norman Conquest) for that in them is found an express of the Norman
Settlement of them: in which is also an account of the difference of the Rate
of Mulc^s, betwixt the Saxons and Danis, or Norwegians; and because of the ^^ar
relation the Normans had to the Danes, it is said, that King William made
choice of those Laws, and would have had them put in Execution as the Law of
England; Quippe cum aliarum legibus Nationum, Brytonum scilicet, Anglorum,
Pictorum and Scotorum praeponderassent: he praised and liked of this Dane-laege
best; (only this observe (if it be worth taking notice of) that not only the
British Laws come into the account, but also they are set in the first place.)
But King Williams desigment had this Effect and Issue, for taking that
resolution, it is said: Quo audito, mox universi compatriotae regni qui leges
edixerant, tristes effecti, unanimiter deprecati sunt, quatenus permitteret
sibi leges proprias and consuetudines antiquas habere in quibus vix runt patres
eorum, and ipsi in eis nati and nutriti sunt, quia durum valde foret sibi
suscipere leges ignotas, and judicari de eis quas nesci^bant. Rege vero ad
flectendum ingrato existente tandem eum prosecuti sunt deprecantes, quatenus
per animam Regis Edwardi, qui sibi post diem suum concesserat coronam and
regnum and cujus erant leges; nec aliorum extraneorum exaudiendo, concederet
eis sub legibus perseverare paternis. Unde consilio habito, precatu Baronum,
tandem acquievit. Thomas vero Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis and Mauritius
Episcopus scripserunt propriis manibus omnia ista praedicta per praeceptum
praedicti Regis Wilhelmi. Ex illo igitur Die multa Autoritate veneratae, and
per universum regnum corroboratae and observatae sunt prae caeteris patriae
legibus leges Edwardi Regis Sancti, etc. Though the King at this time was so
unwillingly moved to the requests of the English; yet we find that afterward
he labored all he could to ingratiate himself with them, as standing in fear
of them. For in the third year of his Reign, Edgar out of Scotland, and the
Earls Edwin and Morchar, with assistance from Denmark, gathered into a body in
the North, and were there defeated; whereupon says Mr. Daniel the most of
these Lords presently after came in upon public faith given them, and were
conducted to Berkhamsted by the Abbot Frederick, who upon their submission, and
oath of Allegiance re-taken, had their pardon and restitution to grace, granted
by the King, believing it his own concern so much, to quiet them, that he again
took his personal oath, before the Archbishop Lanfranc and the Lords, To
observe the ANCIENT LAWS of the Realm, established by his noble predecess^rs
the Kings of England; and especially those of Edward the Confessor. Thus we
plainly see the Laws that were continued and confirmed, were the old Saxon
Laws, as we have it in this decree of William the Conqueror, Ex legib. Guil. 1.
Hoc quoque Praecipio, ut omnes habeant and teneant legem Regis Edwardi in
omnibus rebus, adauctis his quae constituimus ad utilitatem Anglorum. And his
Son, Henry the first, took the very same course; for amongst his decrees it is,
that, Murdra etiam retro ab illo die quo in Regem coronatus fui omnia condono,
and ea quae a modo facta fuerint just emendentur secundum lagam Regis Edwardi,
and presently after he says, lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis
emendationibus quibus eam pater meus emendavit consilio Baronum suorum. But let
us descend to particulars, and view from whence we had our Juryes, the great
pillar of our Laws, and the Bulwark of our freedoms, (certainly upon a great
mistake, said to be brought in by the Norman Conqueror) concerning which Mr.
Campden writing against Polydore Virgil, (who it seems was of that opinion
also) has it thus: Nihil a vero altenius, multis enim ante annis in usu faisse
certissimum est; of so general a concernment also was this way of Judgment,
Cook l. 2. c. 12. Sect. 234. e. For the institution and right use of this
Trial by 12. men, and wherefore other Countries have them not, and this Trial
excels others, See Fortescue at large, cap. 25, and 29. and Glanvil lib. 7.
cap. 14, 15. Bracton lib. 3. fol. 116. a. and in antiont times they were 12.
Knights. This Trial of the fact per duodecim liberos and legales homines is
very ancient, for hear what the Law was before the Conquest, Lamb. verbo
centuria. In singulis Centuriis comitia sunto, atque liberae conditionis viri
duodeni aeta^e superiores una cum praeposito sacra tenentes juranto, etc. Nay,
the Trial in some Cases, per medietatem linguae (as we speak) was as ancient,
in Lamb. fol. 91.3. viri duodeni jure consulti, Angliae Sex, Walliae totidem,
Anglis and Wallis jus dicunto, and of ancient time it was called, Duodecim
virale judicium.
that in the 31. cap. of the Laws of Hen. 1. it is decreed, Unusquisque per
pares suos judicandus est and ejusdem Provinciae. This is the Judgment by our
Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of Nobility, page 110. has this, Whereas it is
contained in the Great Charter amongst other things in the form which
follows: No free mun shall be taken or imprisoned, or diseised of his Free
hold, or his Liberties, or Free-customes, or shall be Outlawed or Banished, or
in any wise destroyed, nor go upon him but by the Lawful Judgment of his
Peers, on by the Law of the Land; by which is to be seen that it was the
ancient Law of the Land; for Magna Charta was only a Confirmation of those
ancient Privileges claimed by the Barons and people from the first Norman Kings.
Peers by which we stand and fall, and is our English Peculiar: for in Normandy
the Civil Law is their known and used Law; and I believe you will hardly find
that that Law takes any Cognizance of Juries; whose number were not in all ages
fixed or certain; but varied into several numbers according to what you shall
find cited in several Reigns. They were for many Centuries together (as at this
time) at 24. of which 12. to be present; and this in the Saxan Laws has
several appellations: But to ascend with these Juries up to antiquity, we will
begin with Hen. 1. and with what he decrees in the 66. Chap. of his Laws. Si
quis Dei rectitudines per vim deforciat, emendet LAHSLIHT, cum Dacis, plenam
Wytam cum Anglis, vel ita neget, assumat undecim, and idem sit duodecimus, and
so presently after concerning Burchot, vel Brigbot, he says, In Denelaga,
sicut stetit antea, vel ita se allegiet, nominentur ei XIIII and adquirat ex
eis undecim. In his vero secundum legem nominati, consacramentales vicini
babendi sunt, quia solus non potuit, etc. and in Cap. LXXIV. concerning a Thief
slain, it is said: juret quod in cognato suo, nullum factum erat, pro quo de
vita fortisfactus esset, and eant alii cum duodecim, and superjurent ei in
munditiam, quae ante dicetur; so in the Laws of William the Conqueror, at Numb.
16. Siquis alterum appellet de latrocinio, and is sit liber homo, and habeat --
testimonium Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of the Barons, page 155 says, The
Yeomanry or Common people for they be called of the Saxon word Zemen, which
does signify Common, who have some Lands of their own to live upon, for a
C^rve of Land or Plough-Land, was in ancient times of the yearly value of five
Nobles, and this was the Living of a Sober man, or Yeoman Cokes 9. part. fol.
124. b. But in our Laws they are called Legales homines, a word very familiar
in Writs and Inquests, etc.
de legalitate, purget se per plenum Sacramentum, and alter qui infamis ante
fuerat, per serment nomed, videlicet XIV. Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of
the Barons, page 155 says, The Yeomanry or Common people for they be called of
the Saxon word Zemen, which does signify Common, who have some Lands of their
own to live upon, for a C^rve of Land or Plough-Land, was in ancient times of
the yearly value of five Nobles, and this was the Living of a Sober man, or
Yeoman Cokes 9. part. fol. 124. b. But in our Laws they are called Legales
homines, a word very familiar in Writs and Inquests, etc.
homines legales, per non si is habere eos poterit, purget se duodecima manu,
etc. so in the next number, against those that break a Church, or, a
Dwelling House it is said, se purget per XLII. Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise
of the Barons, page 155 says, The Yeomanry or Common people for they be called
of the Saxon word Zemen, which does signify Common, who have some Lands of
their own to live upon, for a C^rve of Land or Plough-Land, was in ancient
times of the yearly value of five Nobles, and this was the Living of a Sober
man, or Yeoman Cokes 9. part. fol. 124. b. But in our Laws they are called
Legales homines, a word very familiar in Writs and Inquests, etc.
legales homines nomes se duodecima manu, etc. so it is decreed for a pledge of
any Thief that is fled or escaped, Plegius ejus habebit IV. menses and unum
diem ad eum quaerendum, and si possit eum invenire, juret se duodecima manu,
etc; but this all looks on this side the Norman Conquest; let us therefore pass
beyond it, lest any should be so inconsiderate as to think these cited Laws
were not the Laws of the Saxons before the Conquest; and in the XXXVIII. Law of
King Edward we find this; concerning a person accused; Si testarentur hominem,
de bona vita, and 2 legalitate, purgaret se judicio comitatus, etc. and in the
days of King Ethelred, who was much infested with the Danes; he took order for
the like sort of Trial; which was then one of the sorts of (and was called
also) Purgation; where one that was accused was to take this course; adjunctis
sibi Thanis quinque omnem criminis suspitionem diluito; and presently after, in
the same manner and almost in the same words it is repeated, ascitis sibi
Thanis quinque crimeneluito, etc. In the Laws of King Ina, it is provided, That
there should be such a quantity of Land, containing a certain number of Hydes,
requisite for the judging of some men for mis-demeanour; as in the XLVII. Law.
Si cui objiciatur furto surripuisse rem aliquam, vel furtim subductam
admisisse, is pro ratione LX. hydarum se culpa liberato, si modo dignus qui
juret habetur. Anglus furti postulatus, duplici se purget numero, Wallus majore
juratorum numero non obstringatur. Here you see the two last refert to the
first; and both to the number of Jurates: which what they were, was to them so
well known, that they thought it needless to set it down any otherwise than by
the number of Hydes; which form occurrs frequently up and down in those Laws;
but in the XIX, of the said King Jna's Laws, I find somewhat that gives an
explanation to the former recited Law, where it is said: Regii villici
jusjurandum (if he be a Master of a Family, or a Housekeeper) ejus est momenti
ac ponderis ut cum LX. Terrae hydis exequari intelligatur; in the same manner
was it among the Welsh; where they were to the number of XLII. as in several of
the Laws of Howel-Dha; and in the Epitome of the Customs of Arcenefeld in
Domesday is to be seen; which I shall for brevity sake omit. Again the very
Fabric and make of all our Laws, as now at present, is not at all different
from the ancient way of contexture of them among the Saxons; in their Judge
D^daridge in his Treatise of Nobility writes page 121. of a Treatise which he
calls very ancient, denominated, De modo tenendi Parliamentum tempore Regis
Edw. filii Regis Etheldredi.
Mickel-gemote and their Wittan-gemote, both these together having received the
Norman denomination of Parliament; although the thing is one and the same. But
that which is of greatest persuasion and force with me, is, that they had in
the time of the Norman Conquest, (contrary to the common received opinion) the
same way of making Claim for Lands and Titles as before; which the word
Calumniare does signify, and which Coke upon Lit. lib. 2. cap. 12. Sect. 234.
Sr. Edward Coke says, was a word common to both; if it proves so, then
probably used by the Saxons before the Conquest. The controversy between
Warren the Norman, and Sherburn of Sherburn in the County of Norfolk
(Illustrated by Mr. Campden) shows that all things in that age did not pass
solely according to his will; for notwithstanding the Castle of Sherburn was
given by the Conqueror to Warren (his great favorite) yet upon the allegation
of Sherburn, that he did never bear Arms against him, but was his Subject as
well as the other, and held his Lands by that Law that the King had established
amongst all his Subjects, The King gave judgment against Warren, and commanded
that Sherburn should hold his Lands in Peace. This is cited as almost the only
Act of favor the Conqueror did; whereas it is mistaken, for it was an Act of
justice; and such Cases do frequently appear in that Record called Domesday,
where I find among others, this concerning the Manor of Cerdeford in
Hantescire held by Hugo de Port. In isto Manerio tenet Picot 11. Us. and dimid.
de Rege. Phitelet tenuit in alodium de Rege Edwardo pro Mannerio. Istam terram
calumniatur Willielmus de Chernet, dicens pertinere ad Mannerium de Cerdisord
feudum Hugonis de Port per hereditatem sui Antecessoris; and de hoc suum
testimonium adduxit de melioribus and antiquis hominibus totius Comitatus and
Hundredi, and Picot contraduxit suum testimonium de villanis and vili plebe,
and de prepositis qui volunt defendere per Sacramentum aut per Dei Judicium,
quod ille qui tenuit terram liber homo fuit, Ex Domesdei. Hantescira Tra^
Taino^r. Regis.

Alwi filius Torber tenet Rocheborne. Uluiet tenuit de Rege Edw. in Alodium pro
manerio, de ista hida, i. virg. quam calumniabatur: dicit Hund. quod T. R. E.
quieta and soluta fuit, and inde habet Aluui Sigillum Regis Edw.

Ex Domesdei. Hantescire.

Tra^ Taino^r. Regis.

Edwinus tenet Acangre, and dicit, quia emit de Rege Willielmo, sed scira
nescit hoc, de hoc manerio calumniatur Prepositus Regis dim^. hid. ad pasturam
Boum Regis. Scira vero testatur, quod non potest habere pasturam nec pasnag. de
Silva Regis sicut calumniatur, nisi per Vicecomitem.

By this we see they impleaded their rights against the King.

Ex eodem. in eadem Scira Tra^. Willm^i Arcuarii.

Isdem tenet Cuntune, quinque Teini tenuerunt de Rege Edw. and quo voluerunt
ire potuerant. Aldredus frater Ode calumniatur unam us. terre de hoc Manerio,
and dicit se eam tenuisse die qua Rex Edw. fuit vivus and mortuus: and
disaisitus fuit postquam Rex Willm^us Mare transiit^; and ipse dirationavit
coram Regina. Inde est testis ejus Hugo de Port and homines de toto Hundredo.
Here by these you may gather several manners, and several reasons, and grounds
of claims then.


and potuit ire cum terra sua quo voluit. Sed Testes Willielmi nolunt accipere
legem nisi Regis Edwardi, usque dum definiatur per Regem, etc. Hugo de Port
having the Manor of Cerdiford from his Ancestors; William de Chernet makes
claim in his behalf against Picot who held some part of it, and makes proof of
it by the testimony of the chiefest and best of the Country, and also of the
most ancient of all that Hundred. Picot defendant, produces the testimony of
the villagers, and men of no account, and Reeves or Bailiffs, who offer their
oaths, or the ordinary ways of purgation, (which was their Ordeales) that he
that held that Land was a Free man, et potuit cum terra sua ire quo voluit;
that is, as not dependant of that Manor, nor of the customs thereof, might
dispose of his Land as to him seemed best; but the witnesses of de Chernet
would not accept of the Trial by any Law, but that of King Edward, till such
time as the King had judged it; this you must understand was about the
eighteenth year of the King, the English still insisting upon the Laws of King
Edward; which in case they had been repealed, it had been a great vanity to
have insisted upon them; observe further, that Picot intitles the King to it,
though the proof was de vili plebe, of the scum of the people; but that you may
more plainly see, what was the occasion and ground of forfeiture of Lands in
those days, and what course was taken for claims thereupon, I will exhibit
another out of the same Domesday in the same County, where under the Title of
Terra Tainorum Regis it is Recorded that Alwi filius Turber tenet de Rege
Tederlec, tres liberi homines tenuerunt in Alodium de Rege Edwardo. Dicunt
homines de Hundredo, quod nunquam viderunt sigillum vel legatum Regis qui
saississet Alwinum antecessorem ejus, qui modo tenet de isto Manerio, and nisi
Rex testificetur, nichil habet ibi: duo ex his qui tenuerunt occisi fuerant in
Bello de Hastings. The inquiry then made, for to cause the forfeiture, was
this; whether the Land did belong to any one that was in the battle of
Hastings, and there did take part with Harold, against King William; which is
the same that Sherborn pleaded for himself against the Kings gift of his Land
to Warren, that he did never bear Arms against the King. But in Berrocshire in
the same Record under the Title of Terra Regis it is, that: Pandeborne jacuit
in firma T.R.E. and post tenuit Aluuoldus Camerarius; sed Hundr. nescit quomodo
habuit. Frogerius postea misit in firma Regis absque placito and lege; by which
we may gather, that notwithstanding the entituling the King to the Land, yet
the Candor and Integrity of the Surveyors at that time was such, that they
return it to be put under the Kings Rent absque placito and lege, without
either hearing or Law; that is unjustly; for placita and leges at that time
were as much observed to evince the right of possession as possibly could be
expected. But to come to that common objection, that our Laws are delivered to
us in the French-tongue, I shall not take much pains to confute it; for that it
is evident, our ancient Laws, I mean the Common Laws of the Land, are neither
written or Printed either in French, English, or Latin, or any other Language
that ever I could hear of, but still remain like that which Caesar reports of
the Learning of the Druids (who were our ancient judges of the Law) not
committed to Parchment or Paper, and may (for ought I can perceive) have that
manner and Custom continued and retained from the Ages of the Druids. Certain
reports upon Cases of Law by several excellent Lawyers in our law French are
rendered to us: but we may as well say the Comment is the Text, as imagine those
studious illustrations to be the Law; and some there are that (probably)
believe because our Common-Laws were never reduced into a form or Body so as to
receive a rendition in that or any other Language, that the Kings in those
first Norman times might undestand them, who in their persons did publicly
preside, heard Causes and gave Judgment, that therefore those Cases and
Pleadings in French were preserved; which Cases gave only the reason of the
Justice of the Law as to the diversity of concernments of the Subject; and upon
this it is, that Mr. Campden giving the reason that one of our Courts is called
the King's Bench (Bancus Regius) sic dictus (says he) quod in eo Reges ipsi
praesidere soliti, etc. Judices sunt praeter Regem ipsum cum interesse
voluerit, Capitalis Angliae Justiciarius and alii quatuor; and in likelihood
the King in person sitting there, gave the occasion in those times of the
pleadings in French, which otherwise could not have been understood by those
first Norman Kings that did not understand English; they addicting themselves
in Letters, in Discourses, in Messages and in all things to the French Tongue.
I proceed now to the second particular which is looked upon to receive so great
an alteration, and that is our ancient Customs; though much upon this point
comprehensively in the former discourse of our Laws has been said; where the
Custom was anciently to claim Lands by the Country; it continued so at this
time of the Conquest, as we see in many places of Domesdey-book, where it is
said: Scira dicit, Comitatus dicit, Hundred: dicit, etc. as in the Saxon Laws
all was brought to the Hundreds and Shires, so in the 34. Law of King Edward
there it is of a thrihinga, which is the circuits of three or four Hundreds in
a County, et quod autem in thrihinge definirinon poterat, ferebatur in Scyram,
what could not be judged in the Hundred, was brought to the Shire, where at a
certain place were kept the Pleas of the County, and where were to be present,
(take them as I find them recorded) Episcopi, Comites, Vicedomini, Vicarii,
Centenarii, Aldermanni, Praefecti, Praepositi, Barons, Vavasores, Tungrevii et
caeteri terrarum Domini, diligenter intendentes, etc. So in the Laws of King
Edgar, every year let there be said he ta scirgemot; and thaer beo on thaer
sciregemote bisceo, and se ealdorman. and thaer aegther taecan ge Gods riHte.
ge eoruld riHte (i.e.) at the Shire-gemote let the Bishop and Aldermen be; and
there either of them teach Gods right and the Worlds right; which judgment of
the Vicenage and power of the County, was equally used both in the time of
Saxon and Norman Governments. And so small was the alteration that happened at
this time, that in this often cited Survey Record there among many other of the
like nature is this concern of the Borough of Wallingford in Berrochescire
which concludes thus. Modo sunt in ipso Burgo consuetudines omnes ut ante
fuerant; and so where it Records the Customs of Urchenfield, it says: Hae
consuetudines erant VVallensium T.R.E. id est Tempore Regis Edwardi; for the
men of Urchenfield in ancient Records are called Welsh; as this Region is
called Wales; for in the book of Knights-fees in the Exchequer it is written,
Arcenefeld in Wales respondere tenetur Dao^ Regi, etc. Should I make a parallel
of Customs as well as Laws used in the times of the Saxons and Normans you
would find them all one; and both compared with the Laws of Howel-dha to prove
the same mostly with them also. The pepe in the Saxon Laws is rendered
aestimatio capitis, and those provided, that in case upon an offense it could
not be paid neither by the Criminal nor his Kindred; then was he to undergo a
service for it; somewhat of this nature was in the Norman times, for among the
Customs of JEWS in Domesdey-book, I find that, Adulterium vel raptum faciens,
viii. Solid. and iv. Den. emendat homo, and faemina tantundem. Rex habet
hominem Adulterum; Archiepiscopus faeminam. This is there set down as an
ancient Custom belonging to that Town in the time of the Saxons, but in the
time of Hen. 1. in the 11. cap. of his Laws it is thus upon a general account
set down: Qui uxoratus faciet Adulterium, habeat Rex ejus vel Dominus (I
believe ejus should be set after Dominus) superiorem, Episcopus inferiorem; and
these ere's are sound corroborated by that Name in the Laws of Hen. 1. But in
short you will find by this Domesdey-book that in most places of England it is
certified they had those very Customs in the Norman Government which they had
in the time of Edward the Confessor: I know there be many jocular tenures: but
whether all of them that occurr were invented or imposed by the Normans, it
matters not much, because they did not interfere upon propriety, nor injure
their other Customs. One Custom reported to be brought in, was the Judge
Dodaridge in his Treatise of the Law of the Nobility and Peerage of England, in
his 16 page, shows the manner of Saxon signing to a Charter of Henry 8. to his
Son Edward when he was Created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester, where it
is concluded, These being witnesses the Reverend Father John Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. W. Archbishop of York, etc.
Sealing of Charters; but as I have seen a Charter Sealed before the Conquest;
so since the Conquest I have seen Charters Signed after the Saxon mode, both by
William the first, and his Son Henry, that is to say, with a great number of
Witnesses and Crosses before their Names. Edward the Confessor made a Grant of
some Privileges to the Church of Hereford, and firmed it with a Seal, which in
one of their Register books, is described to be preserved in Panno serico, and
a memorandum also of the circumscription of the said Seal to be this: Hoc est
Sigillum Regis Edwardi; and in very many places of Domesdey-book it is
Recorded, that Lands did pass to several people under the Seal of King Edward,
as in Berckshire under the Title of Terra Ecclesie Abendoniensis; it is
specified, that, Anscil tenet Sperfold de Abbate. Edric Tenuit in Alodio de
Rege Edwardo and potuit ire quo voluit, etc. de hoc Manerio Scira attestatur,
quod Edricus qui eum tenebat, deliberavit illum filio suo qui erat in Abendone
Monachus; ut ad firmam illud teneret: and sibi donec viveret necessaria vitae
inde donaret: post mortem vero ejus; Manerium haberet; and ideo nesciunt
homines de Scira quod Abbatie pertineat; neque enim inde viderunt brevem Regis
vel Sigillum. Abbas vero testatur quod in T. R. E. misit ille Manerium ad
Ecclesiam unde erat and inde habet Brevem and Sigillum Regis Edwardi
attestantibus omnibus Monachis suis; and in that County under the Title of
Terra Henrici de Ferieres, is, that Ollavintone: Godricus Vice-comes tenuit de
Rege Eduuardo; Hanc Terram dedit Rex Eduuardus de sua firma Godrico; and inde
viderunt sigillum ejus homines de Comitatu; praeter istas hidas accepit ipse
Godricus de firma Regis unam v. terre, de qua non viderunt Sigillum Regis. You
see by these that this Sealing was looked upon, in the Saxon times, as of great
strength and efficacy to their validating of Deeds and conveyances. I can
willingly grant that the Coverfeu-Bell (continued in use till our days) was an
Introduction of the Norman Conqueror; and in that there was much Reason and
Policy; for no doubt but that in some places and Countries, the Norman Soldiers
were enforced to lodge dispersedly, and so it would be fit and convenient that
the Country should observe, that timely Decorum and Order, not only
beneficial to themselves, but also to those enquartered, whose Guards would be
the more difintangled, the more they had of freedom from the company and walks
of the Country people; and as the Ringing of the Bell was then; so to the same
end at this day the Taptoo is used in Garrisons and Quarters by the beat of the
Drumm. What the inducement to the observation of the Coverfeu might be I know
not; perhaps it might be, the Knowledge of that entertainment which the English
bestowed upon the Danes on St. Brices Evening; and at this time of the Conquest
there were (in probability) many living that were not only eyewitnesses, but
also Actors in that Tragedy. Another innovation received at this time according
to the account of some, was the settlement of the Court of Exchequer; of which
Campden out of Gervasius Tilburiensis thus writes: that ab ipsa Regni
conquisitione per Regem Gulielmum facta, haec curia caepisse dicitur; sumpta
tamen ejus ratione a Scaccario transmarino; which are all the innovations that
I at present can remember that are imaginable to be introduced at this
juncture: which if more, were not considerable enough for to be a ground of so
much exclamation. I proceed to the third Particular said at that time to be
much altered; and that is, our fashions; of which I cannot say much; and less,
if I were to speak of our Fashions now a days, considering how much we are
become the Frenchmens Apes; but yet I know not whether a serious observer can
find by any probable Record, or by the observation of ancient Monuments, any
such Alteration of Fashion as is here affirmed; the same manner and form,
described to be then in use, continued many years after, if any thing may be
Collected from those Habits expressed in the Monumental Effigies of several
Persons of those Ages. Another Alteration said to have happened is of our
Language, concerning which Mr. Daniel has (not without need) made a
Retractation, and says, that the Body of our Language remained in the Saxon;
yet it came so altered in the habit of the French tongue, as now we hardly know
it, in the ancient form it had; and not so much as the Character wherein it was
Written, but was altered to that of the Roman and French, now used: I know not
what Habit he means, but this I can affirm, that our Language has in it little
of the French from the Norman Conquest; but continued as the Normans found it,
abating only such changes and refinements as Languages receive in the like
space of time; there being not to be found so much in the English, as the very
French it self, from its self, without any such violent Impression, as this
Conquest may seem to enforce: And I would desire of any one that has observed
the Gradual decay of our Primitive English; or Saxon, what remarkable
difference in any thing considerable there is to be found, betwixt that of
Edward the Confessour's time, and that in which Chaucer wrote^ as also how at
this day the Saxon Idiom is yet retained among the Commonalty in many Counties
of England; understand it more especially to have relation to such places that
are most Northern and further distant from London, (a City of great Foreign
commerce, and the usual residence of the English Court for many hundred years)
for it is plain to me, that the present Scottish has very little receded or
altered from the English or Saxon anciently used; and by comparing of the
Writers of several Centuries together, the refining of the English tongue has
not been considerable from Age to Age, till within these last Hundred years: so
that at this instant, I cannot perceive into what habit of the French tongue it
is altered; nevertheless I am not ignorant, how that in those first Norman
times, there wanted not those of the English, who by their Adulation and
Sycophantizing, earnestly labored to get themselves into some repute; of whom
that Age took so great notice, that in great scorn they reproved and reflected
upon them, by that common Ironical proverb; Jack would be a Gentleman, could he
but speak French; and as for the Characters said to be changed, I have seen
Charters of Saxon firmed both by William the Conqueror, and after his Reign by
his Son Henry, surnamed Beauclerk, all wrote in the Saxon Letter; that
Character being yet retained in all such Escripts that concern our Laws, and is
called by the Denomination of Court-hand: And again, in some very ancient
Transcripts and Sermons of Saxon, written before the Conquest in their own
Characters; the Latin therein cited did relinquish the Saxon Letters, and did
espouse the old Roman Characters: I urge this the rather, to show that these
alterations are not properly to be fixed, as an effect of the Norman Conquest;
and that Writers running much upon Hyperbolical expressions, have laid more
upon this revolution than it was truly Guilty of. To what Mr. Daniel writes,
that by this Conquest we received new forms of Fights, Fortifications,
Buildings; and concludes, generally an Innovation in most things but Religion:
for this last particle that is of so great extent, I have said enough already
to show my diffent, to his opinion; and it being so large in the affirmative, I
dare not enter into the discourse of it, for dolus latet in universalibus, and
it would take up too much time; but to return to these three first particulars
now ennumerated, I say, that probably in them there might be some alteration;
for I would not be thought so opiniative, to believe the English were so
tenacious of their own Forms and Modes, as not to relinquish them for better,
they took up afterward new forms of Fight, and came not short of the Normans,
either in Valor or Renown in the use thereof; but to the difference betwixt
the forms used by the Normans and Saxons, I leave the Reader to the Description
of that most remarkable Battle betwixt William the Conqueror, and Earl Harold,
as it is set down by many Historians, by which it will appear that there was
much difference in the Management and Use of Offensitive Arms; But the English
presently by their industry in the practique part of Arms came to be not only
famous, but also terrible to their Neighbors, by their Dexterity and Valor.
Neither will I dispute their Fortifications, yet the Romans left the Brytains
excellent Notions thereof; which afterward came into the possession of the
English, and were not at all short of any the Normans could pretend to be
Authors of, considering the Discipline and Arms of ancient times: yet true it
is, that the English at this time were by case and softness almost reduced to
that Effeminateness, (notwithstanding their Danish turmoils) that like as the
Britains made use of them and their Ancestors against the Picts; so now these
Saxons make use of the Normans against the Britains, for the preservation of
their Welsh Borders; of whom a considerable party lay in Garrison in Hereford,
and were, after William the Conqueror had been here above a year, hard put to
it, under the Government of Scrap, as he is named in Domesdey, by Edricus
Silvaticus, (or Salvage) Lord of Wigmore; who at last was taken by Radulfe de
Mortuomari, his Lands being by the King for this great Service bestowed upon
the said Radulfe; these Normans which I suppose were introduced by Edward the
Confessor, the Conqueror took care of in a Provisional Law, which carries
this Title before it: De jure Normannorum, qui ante adventum Guilielmi, Cives
fuerant Anglicani; where in the Body thereof it is, that Omnis Francigena qui
tempore Edwardi propinqui nostri fuit in Anglia particeps consuetudinum
Anglorum, quod ipsi dicunt Anhlote and Anscote, (i.e. Scot and Lot as we call
it) persolvat: secundum legem Anglorum; but this was not altogether so strange,
if we consider the Warlike disposition of the Normans in that Age, in continual
Turmoils with the French, and the relation King Edward had to Normandy. Their
Fortifications were not of any great Variety; Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise
of Nobllity, p. 118. Writing of Knights their disposing of their Estates in
those Elder times, says, For they did thus order their own Lands and
Tenements, one part they kept in their own hands, and in them stately Houses
and Castles were erected, and made for their Habitation, and defense of their
Persons and the Realm; also Forests and Parks were made there, for the
Pleasures, Solace and Delight.
some were of a round Building of Stone, for the most part Built upon a round
pile of Earth, either Natural, but most commonly Cast up by man's Industry;
others upon a small rising, or a plain Ground, seldom more Capacious than to
receive about twenty or thirty Men, and were made rather to preserve the
Persons and Goods of the Owners and his Servants and Tenants, than to endure a
long Siege: of which sort there are many in Ireland, because of their Ancient
intestine feuds; but more upon the English and Scottish Borders; many of which I
have seen; but with this difference, as I said before, that those the English
did anciently Build were round, and these for the most part square, with one
round Tower at one of the Angles, both sorts of which were anciently called
Fortalices, and seldom made use of for Habitation; because I find their mean
dwelling Houses were made commonly under it, or very near adjoining to it: And
I discern a difference made betwixt those for Habitation, and those I spoke of
that were only for a Safeguard against sudden Inroads and Incursions; for in
Domesdey Book, in the Survey of Erdisley in Herefordshire, it is there
recorded, that, ibi est domus defensabilis, that is to say, there is a dwelling
House fortified, (which is now called the Castle of Erdisley) and was Builded
because of its Vicinity to the Welsh Borders, and was intended by that
Denomination to signify more than one of those small Casties or Fortalices I
lately spoke of; these were the Strengths and Fortifications of those times,
most frequently in use. I come lastly to speak of their Buildings, in which
there was something of an advantageous, or at least an honorable change, by
the difference that was in the Mode of them: I must confess the Norman manner
was very noble and magnificent, which by their Churches may be observed; for
the Saxons made theirs with Descents into them, the Normans with Ascents; the
first made their Lights small and mean, the second made them high and large;
these made their Arches stately with heights proportionable, the others had
their Arches and Coverings low, and made their Walls of so great a thickness,
that they were a great Damage and Impediment to the pleasure of their Lights;
when the Normans made use of no greater thickness or breadth in their Walls,
than would but well serve to bear their Height and Covering. In the ancient
form of the Saxons before mentioned, I have observed several Churches and
pieces of other Architecture; their entrances (especially in their West-ends)
by Descents inwardly, with Arches formed to correspond with those gradual
Declensions and Steps, all which shortning toward the greatest Door at the
bottom of the Stairs; over which for the most part was a finishing of a
Semicircular piece of Gothic work, and together made a kind of an artificial
Perspective. I have hitherto endeavored in this tract to make it appear, that
for the space of 1700. years past, we received no considerable Mutations or
Alterations in our Laws and Customs. That this our Tenure, the subject of our
present Discourse, has had the fortune to continue here, from our British
aborigines, (the first Planters of our Isle) through those several changes and
revolutions of Affairs and Governments that have happened to it since that time;
and although in this Discourse preceding, I may be thought to have walked a
little beside the path, yet I am persuaded I have not missed the way, but kept
and preserved the Goal in my eye. Those alterations that are now found as to
the general usage of this Tenure, (which was the Super-eminent custom of this
Nation) proceed not at all from any Enforcement or Coercion by reason of any of
these forementioned Intrusions or Conquests, but clearly by the consent and
desire of the Proprietors and Persons therein concerned: for in the County of
Kent, where Mr. S. says, this Tenure did generally overspread; there (I say)
in the time of Hen. 8. several Lordships were discharged of this Tenure by Act
of Parliament. I have not all this while pleaded for the settlement or goodness
of the Tenure, to be used in this Age, where Lands are well Peopled and fully
Inhabited, for it would be the destruction both of Lands and Lineage; but my
business has been to enquire into the state of the question, the true
Original, Etymology, and Use thereof. The people of England by degrees have
inextricated themselves from much servitude in their Customs, and are now
instated into a great privilege of Liberty, and more particularly from those
heavy pressures of Villenage; the Slavery of which Custom has received its
Deaths wound, in favorem libertatis, for Sir Edward Coke out of Fortescue has
this note, Impius and Crudelis judicandus qui libertati non favet; and gives
this as the reason of it, Angliae jura in omni casu dant favorem libertati; the
sense of Liberty was of so great force and power, and the favor due unto it,
according to Law and Right of so great respect, that those and the like
pressures have received change and alteration, and by the same power, and
equity, (joined with the consent of the Proprietors) it is so come to pass
also, that this our Gavelkind in most places of England, is turned into the
preference of Primogeniture, for the preservation of Houses and Lands: the next
Chapter shall enquire, though it seems to return far back, whether we have any
ground to believe, that the

CHAP. V.
Trojan Brytains used the Tenure of Partition.

I Could not pass by without taking notice of a Marginal question that Mr. S.
makes in page 54. and it is this; By the way, (says he) how do our Britains
claim descent from the Trojans? Since with them the eldest Son, by Prerogative
of primogeniture Monopolized the whole Inheritance. I know not what Authors Mr.
S. has met with, that he affirms so positively, with our Britains the eldest
Son did Monopolize all; if his, Since with them relates to the Trojans, I have
nothing then left to answer to it, nor do I think it worth the while to concern
my self therein, believing that neither Dares Phrygius, nor Dictys Cretensis,
nor Homer, nor any other pretended Trojan writer, did intermeddle in the
relation of Descent. But I am persuaded, it must have reference to the
Brytains, and that to them it is that he says, Since with them the eldest Son
Monopolizeth, etc. and notwithstanding I have some inducements to believe, that
Mr. S. asks the question (how our Britains claim Descent from the Trojans?)
in Merriment and Jest: yet in their defense to that very question, there may so
much be said, which will carry a greater probability, than any one that rejects
it, is able to produce of another original. I told you before what King Edward
the Confessor writes concerning the City of London, that, Fundata erat olim
and aedificata ad instar, and ad modum, and in memoriam veteris Magnae Trojae,
he calls it veteris Magnae Trojae, as if there were a younger Troy; for perhaps
that Age had the conceit also of its being called Troinovant, founded and built
in the memory of the other old Troy: which in case it should prove to be so
called, what reasons had the first Founders to make it ad modum and in Memoriam
thereof, unless they had been related thereunto? I am not ignorant that the
City of London had its site in the Country of the Trinobantes, the sound of
which name might very probably administer much to the conceit; but my design
now is to weaken the Vulgar opinion begun by the secret Distaste of Polydore
Virgil, and followed by very many; imputing it to be the Fiction of Galfridus
Monumethensis, who was the Translator only of a History out of such a Language
as Polydore did not understand, notwithstanding his being a Canon of Hereford,
and so consequently Living very near to Wales, who setting out his English
History in the time of Henry the eight, in which (as much as in him lay) he
labored to disparage the British Antiquities, and not only so, but under the
Patronage of King Henry, having power to search all Records, is reported to
have seized the most Ancient thereof (that were in being) in the Treasury of
Landaf, and to have Destroyed them; something of which nature I have also seen;
for in a Register book, compiled by Bishop of Hereford.
St. Thomas de Cantilupe, I found three leaves cut out; which by a constant and
consident Tradition of the Registers of the Diocese of Hereford, in whose
Custody that Book was, it is averred that this was done by Polydore: But as
soon as his History was made public, he was encountered by Sir John Price in
his Book entitled, Defensio Historiae Brytannicae contra Polydorem Virgilium;
unto his labors I shall referr the Desirous Reader: but among other things
well worth the View, he shows the probability of the first British Planters
here; their Extraction and Derivation from the Graecians, backed with many
considerable Arguments and unvulgar Observations upon Antiquity, taken from
their Language, Letters, Names, etc. But here we may observe, that the
Conjecture of Trojanism was far more ancient than the Virgilian opinion would
make it to be; not only by what I have gathered out of that Discourse (newly
cited) of King Edward the Confessor, concerning the exemplar of the Foundation
of the City of London; but also long before this, from an Expression of M.S.
pe^es Authorem and citat. a Joanne Prisaeo in Defensione sua Histor. Brit. etc.
Of whom Balaeus among his ancient Writers says, Teliesin, Claruit Anno salutis
humanae 540. Arthur^ adhuc in Brytannia regnante. Mr. Wheelock out of an
ancient M.S. in Trinity Coll. Camb. in his Comments upon ^ede cites this of Him
com the good Bruigt at as the furste man THat louerd ar in Engelond; that is,
of him (viz. Dardan) came the good Brute that was the first man that was
Honored in England, or Lorded there.

Sir Edw. Biss (my honored Friend) in his Notes upon Vpton writes p. 41.
Joannes Hantvillensis, sive Hantwillensis; Nostras, Claruit anno 1200. regnante
Joanne libros de Bruto XVI. ( quemadmodum in Gesnerianae bibliothecae
Simleriana legitur Epitome, sed Pitseus ait, poem^t id libris IX. constare)
ludebat, Archithrenium autem appellavit, etc. -- atqui hinc ipse etiam
Archithreni^^ nominatus. Eum laudat Petrarcha, Giraldus, Vives, Vossius,
Textor, Balaeus and Textor.


Ambrosius Telesinus, a Monk of Bangor, who lived in the first Age of the
Saxons enterprise upon Brytain, and by the Welsh is honored with the Title of
Penbeird (i. e. princeps Bardorum) he, in one of his Cants largely discoursing
of the Saxons, their Violence and Rapine, by an Apostrophe reverting from them,
to give comfort to his Countrymen the Brytains, in the midst of such
Disasters, expresses himself thus: Now will I return (y Weddilion Trojon) to
the relics of Troy, plainly by the ensuing Discourse intending the Brytains,
whom he supposed to be the offspring of the preserved remainder after the
Siege of Troy; and those that have endeavored the reducement of British Words
and Denominations to an Original from the Greek, have done it with good
success, and without any such force as many Etymologists of other Languages
have labored under; and perhaps the Ancient name of this our Island will with
more probability be found from that Language than from any other; for surely
the latter part of it seems to be a Greek Termination, as in several
Appellations, believed to be by them imposed upon places, is to be perceived;
like as in Lusitania, Mauritania, Tingitania, etc. which is taken to signify
Regio, a Region. But to Mr. S's question, strengthened with this position, viz.
That with them the eldest Son by prerogative of Primogeniture Monopolized the
whole Inheritance, I answer, that if our Brytains do claim Descent from the
Trojans, those that had but looked into the Trojan British History, might with
small labor have found, that Brute the Trojan had three Sons, Camber, Loeger,
and Albanact, and having the whole Island at his dispose, Divided it amongst
them; from whose names (it is affirmed by those that write this Story) that the
Triplicite division of Cambria, Loegria, and Albania, first took their
Original; and it is observable, that the Brytains, the ancient Proprietors and
Inhabiters of this Land, know not themselves under the Denomination of Welsh;
North-Gales. Wales. Wallia comes of the Saxon word Wealk, which signifies
Peregrinus or Exterus, for the Saxoas so called them; because in troth they
were Strangers to them; being the remain of the old and ancient Britains, a
wise and warlick Nation, inhabiting in the West-part of England. These men have
kept their proper Language, for above these thousand years past, and they to
this day call us Englishmen, Saisons, (that is) Saxons. Coke upon Littleton.
that Word being as much a Stranger to them, as in its own Natural
signification it is unto it self; for by it do the Dutch call the Bordering
French and Italians unto this day; and is that Appellation which the Saxons
imposed on the Brytains, who (like unmannerly Guests) called their Landlords
or Hosts (the true Proprietors) even (as I may say) in their own Houses, the
Strangers. But the Brytains did anciently, and still do call themselves Cwmri,
their Language, Cwmraeg, and this fancied to be from Camber; the same Brytains
call England in their own Language Lloiger, upon the same fancy as before;
supposed to be denominated from Loeger (another of the Sons of Brute) yet
notwithstanding they call such Inhabitants as live in this part and division by
them named Lloigria or Lloiger (now differenced from the other parts by the
name of England) Saison, that is to say Saxons, who (together with the Jutes a
third sort of Provincials that assisted in the Conquest of this part of
Brytanny) are now under the single Title of Englishmen; these Twmri also, call
the Speech generally spoken in England, Saisnaeg, (that is to say) the Saxon
tongue. Somewhat doubtlesly there is of extraordinary reason, in these names of
distinction and difference of Cambria, Loigria, and Albania, in case we could
recover it: but I am afraid the truth in this point is lost, for the
Denomination of places from the names of men, as it is an old and fond conceit,
so I think it an ill one; As itis remarked by Sir J. B. and may be worth the
Enquiry.
and for my part, I had rather believe that Brytannia is derived from the Greek
word, BRYTON, which signifies Vinum Hordeaceum, (that Brytish Ale, a Drink, how
Con-natural and anciently peculiar to the Inhabitants of this Island, will be
now needless to Discourse) than that London is the refined Issue of Luds-town,
or England of Hengists-land, or Scotland, from one Captain Scoto: But this
ancient Triplicite division, whether the effect of Brutes partition, or no, I
will not maintain, yet it is recorded by the same Pens as give us our History
of Trojanism, and may serve very well in answer to Mr. S's Jocular question,
since his question is a question taken for granted. Neither will I averr or
much insist upon that action of Constantine the Great, who being^^ Brytain, and
so probably experienced in the British Customs; that he, upon this ground or
custom of partition used among the Brytains his Countrymen, did Divide the
then entire Roman Empire between his two Sons; by him (I say) this division and
partition was made, be the reasons or grounds of it what they will; and upon
this Division were differenced and distinguished by the Appellations of the
Eastern and Western Empires, which afterward again returning into a single
Person, came to Theodosius, (whom Procop. Bell. Vandalic. l. 1. c. 1.
Procopius calls a most just Prince, and a great Soldier) he had two Sons, who
after his Death succeeded in the Empire, Arcadius the Elder in the Eastern, and
Honorius in the Western Empires; which is said to have been done, according to
the former division, viz. That which the Emperor Constantine had made; so that
the use or custom of partition in Empire as well as in private men's Lands is of
great Antiquity. I proceed now to show that there is

CHAP. VI.
Gavelkind in other places of the Kingdom of England besides Kent: in the
Principality of Wales. Gavel used in denominations of places; how used among
the Welsh; of the word Llan: of the Normans invasion of the Territory of Wales:
the use of Gavell in the division of that Territory; and exposition thereof in
the Welsh Vocabulary.

Mr. S. is much given to think that this Tenure of Gavelkind, is a singular
appurtenance to the County of Kent. For in the first page of his book as the
Theme of his discourse, he lays down this position: that Gavelkind is a
property of that eminent singularity in the Kentishmens possessions; so
generally in a manner from great antiquity over-spreading that County, as
England this day cannot show her fellow in that particular; and in his 54th.
page, For other Country-mens communicating with us of Kent in the Tenure, I
conceive (says he) it first came up by imitation of our example; in Ireland
especially, and amongst the Welsh-men, in whose Vocabulary or Dictionary the
word is sought in vain, as it is also in that old statute which concern^ them,
viz. Statutum Walliae: To evince this, besides the knowledge of several other
places in England, that have this Tenure eminently unto this day; somewhat that
Mr. S. himself does confess in his Tract will help to clear the contrary; as in
particular where he testifies page 48. that Socage Land in general, and by the
nature of it, is capable of partition, and by Custom may be, and in many
places extra Cantium, is partible. Now so it is, that there is no County in
England but have Lands held in Socage Tenure, and upon that reason are capable
of partition; but more especially in Wales, where the word is in use among
them, and more to a just and proper signification, than in any other place, or
by any other Language, as I shall show anon. But Mr. S. from its very
denomination, (under the notion of it I mean) would persuade us to a belief of
its singularity in Kent; which I cannot admit: for notwithstanding he has not
found any Lands in any other place to pass under that denomination; because
(says he) the Land in any deeds or conveyances has not any appellations of
Gavelkind; yet I say, use and custom has still inviolably retained it; and
the manner of its partition is in several places known under the very Title of
Gavelkind. There are names of places that are compounded of the word in
controversy, only to be found among the Welsh, (the ancient Proprietors of
this Land) from whose Language I shall make it my design to derive its Origin;
and shall begin with this part first, because very much of certainty in
antiquity, is to be drawn from the retained names of place; which if seriously
remarked will afford us a great light to History. There is a Village or Parish
in Monmuthshire that adjoyns to the Territory of Urchinfield in the County of
Hereford, called to this day Llangattok feibon afel, which if any one attempts
to read to a Welshman, let him be sure to pronounce the single f like a V
consonant, and then to be read by this power, Chlangattok vybon avel; but the
common denomination thereof without the variation, proper to the Welsh Tongue,
is, Llangattok gafael meibon. Llan, or, (as it is rendered by our English
writers, to express the idiomatism of the British) Lhan and Chlan, signifies a
Religious dedication, or locus sacer, and Doctor Davies in his Cambro-british
Dictionary upon the same word, says, that, vulgo sumitur pro fano, templo, sed
potius existimo (he adds) significare coemeterium vel aream Templi. Let it be
either Church or Churchyard, it does intimate a Religious dedication, and
notwithstanding there are at this day many places that have the praefix of Llan
unto them, where no Church is to be found, yet if searched into and traced to
their foundation, will discover some such appropriation and intendment. So I
find in the forem ntioned Region of Urchenfield a certain Parish called
Hen-Ilan, (commonly Hentland) which in the English Tongue signifies, the
Old-Church; and in certain Pa^^ures belonging to a Farm in that Parish, there
is a place which to this day is called Llanfrawtwr; which is as much as to say,
The Church or Convent of the Brethren; the Site whereof was upon a small hill,
not half a mile distant from Henland. The ruins of which place, with its old
Foundations are yet to be seen, and was a place dedicated to Holy use, for
there it was, that the great College for one Thousand students, was founded by
St Dubricius the Prince of this Region; to repel the Progress of the Pelagian
Haeresie; who succeeded his Grandfather Pibanus King of Ergin (the old name of
Urchenfield) and in the days of King Arthur, was made Archbishop of Caerleon.
But I am gone too far, my intentional digression was only to show that Llan
was not solely appropriated to Churches, but anciently to any place, intended
for a Pious use and exercise. But to proceed to the other part of the word,
which is very facile, and is the name of the Saint to which this Church was
dedicated; and so the signification in the denomination inferrs no more than
Ecclesia Sancti Cadoci; which strange Saints name may cause some to wonder, as
not finding it in their Calenders; but they must understand, that the Brytains
had amongst themselves, a great number of Saints, who were not canonized by the
Authority of the Pope, but by themselves; and this by a long continued Custom;
which privilege was so familiar among them, that by that Authority and Custom,
almost every Bishop made his Predecessor a Saint; but these denominations of
dedication, compounded with some remarkable distinction, do frequently occurr
among the Welsh, as Llanihangle-Arrow, Llanihangle-Eskle, which are so called
by them unto this day; and by them when they speak English, (as well as by the
English themselves thereabouts inhabiting) are called Michael-Church-Arrow, and
Michael-Church-Eskle, from the two Rivers upon which they are situated, and
afford the true interpretation of their names; their suffixes being (as I said)
to difference them from others of the same Title in the beginning; in like
manner is it with this Llangattok, who for difference sake from several others
of the same dedication in that Country, is called Gavell-Meibon, or
Feibon-afel; but not as it is most corruptly in several Maps of that Country
written; so, that the Welsh could as little be able to retrive the mistaken
writing of that word, as the English could understand the Orthography thereof.
It being Printed Llangattok-vinonavel in most of the Mapps of the Country, and
lies not far from Herefordshire. But the British Norma loquendi gives these
several sounds, as by the familiar transmigration of M into F, which last must
be sounded like an V consonant in the English, or like a Beta or Vita in the
Greek; and such is their manner, that they make these changes, whenever it
happens that certain Consonants end the foregoing words; as Mab ( filius, a
Son) transmigrates into Fab Meibon. (filti, Sons,) into Feibon; so also upon
such accidents by virtue of their idiomatism they leave out the Letter G, as it
has falln out in these two words. But what am I run into? I am got out of
History into Grammar! I shall only to put it out of doubt inform you, that
Feibon afael, is the one and the same with gafael meibon, which together with
its dedication Llangattok-feibonafael signifies Ecclesia Sancti Cadoci de
tenura puerorum, (the Tenure of the Children.) It will fall out conveniently
now to speak to what Mr. S. faith, of the Welsh concerning the word; that in
their Vocabulary or Dictionary it is sought in vain. The word Gafael (or as by
our English pronunciation it receives force and power in the imitation of
sounds is, Gavel) comes from the British verb Gafaelu, which as Doctor Davies
in his Dictionary renders it, is, Tenere, Praehendere; and in the most ordinary
discourse the Welsh to this day have the use of the word, expressing themselves
thus, or in the like manner, Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of the Nobility
says, page 53. o^t of Tho. Thomas Aquinas sets down a more certain Rule
(says he) in vocibus viden. dum non tam a quo, quam ad qu^d sumitur, and words
should be taken, sensu currenti, for Use and Custom is the best Exposition of
Laws and words, quem penes arbitrium et ^^s and norma loquendi; where propriety
and true sound in words meet, this Rule or discourse cannot reach; for,
nomina-sunt omina.
Cymmeroch chwi gafel, which is in English to say, Take hold. I have wrote it
in that manner for the easier reading of it upon the force of the Letters; but
it should have been thus written, Cymeroch ye chwi gafael. In the same sort
they retain the ancient denomination of an Officer, which they call
gafael-swyddog, and was an Officer for Arrest, being derived from this Gafael,
which is no more, than the Officer his holding, or laying hold of a person; (
Swyddog is an Officer; but most commonly it is taken for a Magistrate as in the
Laws of Howel dda.) Lastly, Forceps, a pair of fire-tongs, is nominated in the
Welsh, Gefael, derived still from the verb Gafaelu to hold, and is a
denomination from the use; always provided (as before I have said) you rem
mber the pronuntiation of the single F. But to pass by this, which proves the
word sufficiently in use and knowledge among the Welsh, and to be found in the
Welsh Vocabulary, I come now to an objection which may be made concerning the
denomination of this Parish; which some may fancy to have been a late Act, and
that the additional cognomen of it, might be caused by, and be the proceed of,
some special remark of this Tenure. To which I reply, passing by what before
seems most probable, that all Lands among the Brytains were partible; yet there
may be somewhat in the distinguishing name of this Village, for when most of
this Country was wrested from the Welsh by the Normans; (for till then, the
Welsh did enjoy it) this Village by the favor of the possessing Conqueror, may
probably retain this Custom, and accordingly have its appellation; for we must
understand that King William the first not being able to satisfy the
expectations of all his Assistants, with the forfeited Lands of the English;
gave leave to several persons to get what they could of the Welsh; and it was
not till his Sons days, William the second, that Glamorgan-shire was
attempted; these persons having at that time liberty of constituting
Regalities, and jurisdictions; as I have seen by a Charter to Brechnoc, from
Bernard Newmarch (or de Novomercatu:) and as Cheshire so was Gladmorganshire
erected into a Palatinate. But there is no reason to believe the additional
name of this village was of so novel an imposition, as to carry no greater
antiquity than the Norman Conquest; for in case it were so, it was not probable
the Brytains would give an appellation to it by a name whereof they knew not
the meaning, and crowd this Saxon word (as Mr. S. would have it) in the midst
of Welsh; so that it carries argument along with it, that the word is rather of
a Welsh parentage, and that there is no other conceit in the name, but what
referrs to the Tenure of Partition. The Brytains enjoyed that part of Wales in
the Saxon Governments, and had not any fixed impression upon them, by any,
before the Normans, who over this County at last, stretched their victorious
Arms after many various successes on both parts, and stout defense made by the
Welsh for their Lands and proprieties; enjoying it partly by force, and partly
by composition and agreement; as the private family Histories do manifest which
I have seen: for there are several Family^s of the greatest note in that
Country, that are able to produce testimonies of enjoying their Lands and
Birth in that circuit of Land (for shires and Countries are not of a Welsh
institution) before the Norman Conquest; so that by this it is probable they
did not subvert all, neither were they in quier about Abergavenny after the
Reign of Henry Fitz Empress, Gyraldus Cambrensis relates a series of their
Actions in those parts. But to leave these stories, I think it least of all
probable, that the Normans would borrow a ^entish word, to denominate any thing
to their British Tenants, or plant it there as a Kentish Custom; seeing in
case the derivation according to Mr S's opinion, should prove true; this
denomination was as much unknown to the Normans themselves, as possibly it
could be unto the Britains; and alike to both of them; if the Normans had found
a necessity of making an intelligible expression and appellation of such a
Custom of Partition, certainly I should have met amongst them with the
Roturier; which I understand is in use over all France at this day; and very
frequently in Normandy; the Island of Jersey parcel of the Norman Dukedom
retaining still this Custom to this day under the name of the Roturier, whilst
her Sister Guernesey has no footsteps of it; but are as different in their
Tenures as in the nature of their Soil; for in one (as I am informed (like as
in Ireland) no Toads, Spiders, or Venomous Creatures will live; whilst in the
other they have them in distasteful abundance. But even now I touched upon the
Saxon division of Shires and Countyes, and told you it was not the British
Policy; which puts me in mind of that Order that was observed by the Welsh, and
rectified by Howel-dda in the ordering of his Principality; with the careful
intermixture of civil-descents and military disposition; wherein we shall find
something to our matter in hand worthy the notice; the description as Humfride
Lloyd has written out of the Laws and Ordinances of that Prince, is in short
thus; First a Cantref, which had its Denomination from one hundred Towns (and
signifies as much) under which was so many Commots, which the Welsh call
Cwmmwd, and signifies Provincia, Regio, Cohabitancia, and confisted of twelve
Mannours or Circuits, and two Townships; there were four Townships to every
Circuit or Manor, and every Township comprehended four Gavels, every Gavel
had four Rhandirs, and four Tenements were constituted under every Rhandir. Of
Gavel, I have told you before that it signifies Tenura (a Tenure) Rhandir is a
word that admits not of any proper Sign ficancy in our English speech, but is
by Doctor Davies rendered Pars aut Sors haereditaria, from the Verb Rhannu,
Parti^i, distribuere. These divisions were set out by him, as it were into a
proper and peaccable Conveyance and Conduit-pipe, for the Lands of his
Principality which were liable to this Partition: so that we find in every
Township four Gavels, which were four great Holds or Tenures; out of which I
cannot find the Prince had any Rent, for that the Gentry held their Lands very
free from any base service, only subjected to their Military policy and
provision; the Prince his own maintenance, (that so he might be obliged to a
respect and care of every particular in his Principality) was set out in every
Cwmmwd or Commot, which (as I said before) confisted of twelve Manors or
Circuits, and two Townships, which two Townships were belonging to the Prince,
thorough out each Commot in the Principality of Wales; for in the person of
this Howel the Territories of North Wales and South Wales were united, as
himself in the M S. Penes Authorens.
Prooemium of his Laws does declare. This Gavel in the description aforesaid,
seems to be a large apportionment of Land belonging to a Which by the Irish are
called Canfimiy's, and are the chief of their Gavels or Rhin-taloon. See Davies
his Irish reports.
Pen-cennedl, or chief of a Family or Clan, and does per eminentiam signify
the Tenure, that is to say, their Gavel; this being only (or at the least most
notably) known by them: So that every Pen-cennedl in his Gavel, having four
Rhandirs, that is, sorts or parts Hereditariae, ready divided and apportioned
for his Cennedl or Generation; and not only so, but also a sub-division of many
Tenements under the Rhandirs: shows perfectly a Gavel, Tenure or Hold, exactly
observed even in their general partition of Lands: and this so ancient (at
least) as the time when Howel-Dda collected these Laws, which was about the
year of our Lord 942. so that the true genuine Signification of all is, Tot
parts Hereditariae in Tenura; that is, each Gavel or Tenure did consist of so
many Rhandirs, or Hereditary divisions ready parted; each of these Tenures
being supposed to be so ordered, as to admit of a Division, and if need were of
Sub-divisions also; that so a Township might the more aptly be constituted for
the execution of this common Tenure; and these so holding in, or rather by
their Gafael, were not only the ancient Villati or Villani among the Brytains,
but also the Gentry Lords and Prince himself were subject to it. The use of the
word (viz. Gavel) to a proper Signification I have showed, and that also Extra
Cantium, to which County Mr. S. does labor to Monopolize it, and the use
thereof for several hundreds of year past, even at such a time, when the
Correspondency (in probability) betwixt the Brytains and Saxons was so small,
and the Odium so great, in respect of the unforgotten intrusion of the last;
that in that continued state of War, it was not probable they would have
accepted of any Saxon Customs, by a name so insignificant to the thing, (as
anciently the Etymology of it was received) or so little to the matter, (as Mr.
S's novel Exposition would render it) or to the rational use thereof. But I
have already shown in the foregoing Discourse, in what sense the Brytains have
received it, and also what Doctor Davies in his Cambro-British Dictionary,
(which in my judgment is an Elaborate and Critical piece) has said and
exemplified thereupon; for he it is, that not only affirms Gafaelu (by English
Letters pronounced Gavaily) to signify Tenere, to hold, as before I have said;
But also Gafael (by English Letters spoken Gavel, the word in Controversy) to
be Tenura, a hold. But for the Statutum Walliae which Mr. S. discourses of,
wherein he affirms that the t^tm Gavelkind is not to be found, though the
Castom of partition is there in mentioned, which without any great trouble (all
things considered) might argue it to be a British custom, yet confesses that
the Parliament in the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. can. 26. did make use of the word
Gavelkind. But how? (says he questioning, and then resolving it) only as
b^rrowed, to help to Describe and Ill^strate that partible quality of the Lands
in Wales, therein mentioned; and that it was transmitted by our Lawyers, who
borrowed the term to make use of it for Illustration sake; But (with pardon) I
shall ^ence ^^ferr, that it passed there, as a most natural and genuine
Expression, and is properly a peculiar of their own, upon the grounds before
set down. As for the ancient Customs of the Kingdom of Ireland, I am informed
by the Irish, that their Rhein-ta-loon, which is their parting of Land; is
generally among the Comminalty, and is like that o^ the Country of Flanders,
where Daughters share as well as the Sons, and spreads all over that Country
also; the like to which I shall show you in Wareham in Dorsetshire, in the next
Chapter. R^ein in the Irish is to part, and I believe comes from the British
Rhannu.
I have little to say, except it be, that when King John overthrew the Brehon
Law, Anno Regni sui 12. and then settled the English Laws; that this Tenure of
partition might probably receive a great abatement of its common usage and
force among them, who it seems have the footsteps and remainders thereof very
Visible unto these our days. But in this I shall desire to be excused, as not
having informed my self sufficiently, so as to make a satisfactory Discourse
thereof; confessing my self much ignorant in that History, and shall proceed in
the Discourse

CHAP. VII.
Of soveral Customs of Descent of Lands; of the welsh Laws of Partition; of
Knights-s^rvice and war^ship among them.

STill it is that Mr. S. goes about to confine the Knowledge of Gavelkind to
the Circuit of Kent, and will not allow it Gavelkind in any other Country but
that: For in page 49. he says thus; what, else where, I mean in other Shires
and Counties they properly call by the name of Socage, whether free or base, we
here in Kent are wont to call by the name of Gavelkind, or if you please ( in
Mr. Lambards expression) all Socage-service here properly so called, is
clothed with the apparel of Gavelkind, and under it in a large acception, is
understood all such Land within the County, as is not Knights-fee or
Knights-service-Land; the term serving here to Contra-distinguish it from
Knights-service-Land. But let a man go into Urchinfield in the County of
Hereford, and inquire of an Inhabitant thereof, in what manner Lands there are
held? he will readily and speedily resolve him, that they are subject to
Gavelkind; and as fully inform you of the nature of that their Tenure, viz.
that by it, their Lands are all partible among the Males; (and in defect of
them, among the Females, as other. Lands of Inheritance are throughout
England.) I have met with another kind and fort of Partition, which I dare
venture to call Gavelkind, and is very unusual; because by the Custom of the
place, both Males and Females have a right equally in the Partition. I think it
may not prove displeasing to insert the Record, as it was shown to me by my
Industrious friend Mr. Falconbridge, to whom, for this and many others favors,
I must acknowledge my self with much-gratefulness Indebted, and thus it is in
the Office of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer of Receipt; being the like as I
find it in Flanders, and the same with that in Ireland.

Dorset.

Placita de jurat is and Assiss. Anno 16. Edw. 1. Metingh. Edwardus Kaynel.
Maria filia Roberti de Camma. The Irish have the same manner of Partition.
Davies-Irish reports.
Jobannes Bereset, and Matill. uxor ejus, and Johanna soror ejusdem Matill.
petunt versus Johannem Alfrith de Warham unum Toftum cum pertinentiis in
Warham: de quo Johannes Gerard. consanguineus predictorum Edwardi, Mariae,
Matill. and Johannae cujus heredes ipsi sunt, fuit seisitus in Dominico suo ut
de feodo die quo obiit, etc. unde dicunt, etc.

Et Johannes venit and dicit quod Tenementa in Warham sunt partibilia inter
Mascu^os and Femellas; and dicit quod predictus Edwardus habet quasdam
Gunnoram, Matill. Christianam, Albredam and Eufemiam sorores and participes
ipsius Edwardi and aliorum petentium; and que tantum jus habent in re petita
sicut, etc. and que non nominantur in B^evi; unde petit judicium de Brevi, etc.
and Edwardus and alii non possunt hoc dedicere: Ideo consideratum est quod
praedictus Johannes eat inde sine die, etc. This though it may seem strange,
yet may properly enough be called a Gavelkind: for let the Custom of any place
be according to the usual or unusual way of Partition, it is but the Tenure of
that place, and will come well enough under that Denomination; and that which
Mr. S. brings in his 49th. page, as a Solution to an Objection, viz. That it is
no other than a Custom generally spreading it self throughout the whole Country
in Land of that nature; should have been thus laid down, (without confining it
to the County of Kent) viz. throughout any Country or all Countries in Land of
that nature, for so indeed it is. In the Villages round the City of Hereford,
Item, Lou, per Custonie a^pel. Burgh-English en ascun Burgh, le fits puisn
inherita touts les Tenements, etc. Littleton, Lib. 2. Sect. 211.
I find their Lands are all held in the Tenure of Borough-English; where
(without difficulty I conclude that) it is a Custom spreading it self
throughout those Parishes and Villages in Land of that nature; neither can it
be otherwise but that the youngest Son ought to be, and must by Law be found
Heir, so long as that Land remains under the same Services and Copy-holdings of
their respective Mannours; and the Suitors here do as much stand upon their
Customs, as in Urchenfield they insist upon their Custom of Partition among the
Males, or as Wareham in Dorsetshire among both Males and Females: another sort
of usage in the Tenure of Burgh-English, is mentioned by Sir. Edward Coke, upon
Lib. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 211.
Littleton, in these words; within the Manor of B. in the County of Berk,
there is such a Custom, that if a Man have diverse Daughters, and no Son, and
Dies, the eldest Daughter shall only Inherit; and if he have no Daughters, but
Sisters, the eldest Sister by the Custom shall Inherit, and sometime the
youngest; and diverse other Customs there be in like Cases. And brings in
Britton to strengthen him, (and to confirm what I have said) saying De terres
des ancienes demeynes soit use solonque le ancient usage del lieu, d^unt en
ascun (...) le ^ient leu pur usage: que le heritage soit departable, enter
touts les enfants freres and sores, and in ascun lieu que le eigne avera tout,
and in as^un lieu que le puisne friar avera tout. Here you see several usages,
and the like with the usage of Warham, and all according to the usage of the
place; which is their Gavel or Tenure. But to return to that which is commonly
received for Gavelkind, which is a Partition among all the Males,
notwithstanding the existency of Females; of which sort there are also many
kinds, some that consider the Elder, as that in Urchenfield; others that have a
greater respect to the Younger, as that in Wales; some sort more free, other
sor^ more servile; yet in Wales it was all called per eminentiam Gavel, as
being the common Tenure there; and indeed, by my search among their Laws, I
could not perceive that they had any other. And here I shall recite to you
several Laws of Howel-dda, one whereof inferrs Knights-service, another
Wardship, and all of them their Gavel, under the Community of Partition. Ex
leg. Howeli Boni M S. penes Authorem.
The first is this, Si quis habuit plures filios, and aliqui eorum vel ownes
praeter unum mortui fuerint, ille unus hereditatem omnem habebit, si potuerit
pro heredictate sua Domino respondere: Here by Law care is taken, that in case
all the Sons should Dye, except one, then that that one ought to enjoy the
whole Inheritance, to which certainly he had no right, (that is as to the
whole) had the other Sons lived; and the Law is so general, that it referrs not
especially to the Eldest, or to the Youngest, but to any of the Sons, who all
alike had the same interest and propriety. Nevertheless, this privilege is
under a Condition; and that is, Sirpotuerit pro hered^tate sua Domino
respondere; this answering to the Lord; is a comprehensive term of a Military
duty, and all other referved Exits of the Land; and an those ^aws, is the usual
expression whereby both Military services and Mailes are understood. The Law
for Wardship is this. Si terram hereditatis sue aliqua Parentela (id^est)
Gueily-gord inter se non diviserit, quamvis omnibus aliis defunctis; non nisi
unus unius supersit, ipse terram habebit: at si de Terra illa utpote deficiens,
jura sua Regi prestare non poterit; Rex terram possidebit, donec
illesufficienter pro Terra possit respondere: In this Law is not only an
express of the Tenure of partition, but also the service due to the King from
the Land, and a Title of Wardship to the King until the service by the
proprietor can be sufficiently performed. And although Mr. Campden treating of
the Court of Wards, says, veteri enim instituto e Normannia deducto, and non
ab Henrico tertio; yet this shows the Britains had it before the Norman
Conquest, and that our Policy was not wholly derived from beyond the Seas, (to
make out which, many writers are very fond) but that anciently our Britains had
that wisdom in themselves, and such Politic Customs among themselves, that
show the little need they had of borrowing from others; and I believe this is
as ancient an express of Wardships as may be found; certain I am, it is the
antientest I have met with; and notwithstanding the Britains had it amongst
them before their acquaintance with the Normans: yet that which Mr. Campden
writes may be true, if he means only the Courts of Wards; but the Tenure by
Wardship enjoyes that antiquity I before have showed. But a little to consider
the form and manner used in the composure of these Welsh Laws, I observe, that
frequently it occurrs among them, that the expression of the significatum in
the Latin is explained by the British Term, and was not in those times, (as
some may imagine) an ignotum per ignotius; but a ready and prompt way to make
the Laws facile and easy to the understanding of the concerned Subjects.
Aliqua parentela, does not so fully explain the design of the Law, as it is,
with (id est Gueily-gord) which word turned into Latin signifies ex amore
lecti aut concubitus; and is derived from gwely, lectus and cubile, and gordd,
Malleus, it is, etc. the mawl of the bed; or the effect of beddmalleating; an
expression used by the Brytains to difference such Children as were legitimate,
born in the true bed of Wedlock; from illegitimate, or such as were born in
bastardy; yet for these, there was a provision in the Laws, but that was ex
patris benevolentia; here, in this Law the Title of partition is made out; yet
so that in all cases the Land must not be of necessity subject unto it; for if
the Legitimate Children have not divided the Lands; and it should chance that
all of them dye except one, that one shall have all the Land; upon that
condition before spoken of. But in case that the Land be divided among the
Sons; and after this division one of them dye; what shall become of his part
and apportionment? This objection is solved by another of their Laws; which
that it may not want any thing to the full explanation thereof, I will bestow
the transcribing of it, the rather because in all parts it confirms the British
Tenure, or Gavel and is this: Si aliqua progenies inter se dividerit hered
tatem; and post aliqui eorum defecerint; pars eorum in manu Regis cadet; quia
alii parts suas secundum divisionis rationem habuerint; here it is provided
that the Progenies must inter se hereditatem dividere; and then if any
portioners dye after the partition, the part or portion of the deceased
Escheats to the King; and the reason and ground thereof is there rendered; Quia
alii parts suas secundum divisionis rationem habuerunt; because that each one
had his share or apportionment according to the Rule or Law of dividing or
parting. But because Mr. S. does write of the great privileges belonging to
Kent by this Tenure, I shall make in the following Chapter

CHAP. VIII.
A Competition of Privileges betwixt Kent and Urchenfield.

MUch of my enquiry has, in these last Chapters, been spent about the
singularity of the Tenure of Gavelkind in Kent. I now proceed to show a
competition in privileges betwixt other places subjected to this Tenure, and
Kent. For that Mr. S. says in his 53. page, Kentish Gavelkind consists of many
singular properties; which may as well challenge a share and right in the
customs name as may that of partition, such as dower of the Moiety, not to
forfeit Lands for Felony, and the like. I believe not, either partition, or any
of those mentioned privileges have a share or right in the name of the Custom,
(which I shall discourse hereafter) nor that the singular properties of that
Land in Kent, comes near to that in Urchenfield. Kanc. Rot. Tur. Land. Claus.
8. Rich. 2. m. 2.
I grant they are the same in case of Felony, for I find it Recorded, Rob.
Bonehatch was hanged for Felony; the Sheriff of Kent seizes on his Land in
Chertham, held of the Archbishop in Gavelkind; the King writes thus to the then
Sheriff, Quod Reginaldus Dyke nuper Vic. com. predicti habuit inde annum, diem
and vastum: non obstante quod ex antiqua consuetudine approbata, usitata and
allocata de Ten. que sic tenentur, secundum consuetudinem de Gavelkind: in hoc
casu nos habere non deberemus annum, diem neque vastum; nec capitales domini
inde escaetam, set proximi heredes sic convictorum and suspensorum haereditatem
suam immediate consequuntur, felonia illa non obstante; this is the right of
both, and of all Wales. I will not here compare the extent of the two Regions
together; but yet a small matter would persuade me to believe, that at this
instant day, there is as much Land subject to Gavelkind in Urchenfield as there
is in Kent. And here first let us observe that the Land that is thus partible,
cannot be held or received to contra-distinguish it from Knights-service-Land;
for if it be not held by all or most of those ties and bonds by which
Knight-service-Land is invested; it must then hold by some other servile or
baser Tenures; Therefore the honorable services of the Lands in Urchenfield by
their Tenure are in gross Recorded in Domesdey book thus. In Arcenefelde habet
Rex C. Domesd. penes Came. Sccii.
homines IV. minus, qui habent LXXIII. car. cum suis hominibus; and dant de
consuetudine XLI. Sextarios Mellis, and XX. solid. pro ovibus quas solebant
dare, and X. solid. pro fumagio. nec dant geldam, aut aliam consuetudinem, nisi
quod pergunt in exercitu Regis si jussum eis fuerit. These Ninety six men here
spoken of I reckon them to be liberi homines; yet such as held in Gavelkind;
and the seventy and three Ploughs with their men, I look upon them to be their
villani; and both liberi and villani to hold their Lands in Gavelkind; for that
I find all their Lands in that Territory which consists of two hundreds, are so
held to this day. You find them free from payments and Customs anciently
imposed upon the rest of the Nation, because as a special remarque it is said,
nec dant geldam aut aliam consuetudinem, unless it be to march in the Kings
Army when they are commanded; yet paying (as the rest of Wales does) their
Tatu-fooch, and Talu-ffurn; this last being the fumagium there Recorded, and is
a payment for fire; whether Peter Pence or no, I am not certain; but incline to
the negative: because it is paid still to Lords of Mannours generally over
Wales to this day. But to clear the distinction that I made just now of Freemen
and Villains in Urchenfield, that so I may not seem to speak without book, I
gathered it out of the same Record; which in the next Paragraph gives a further
account in these words: Si liber homo ibi moritur, The first seems to me to be
Relief from those that held by Knightsservice; because his Horse and Arms when
he dyed did belong to the King; the second to be Heriot; both which were
ancient British customs; as you may perceive by the conclusion of all the
Customs. These men had the Chief Honor in the Army given to them; for cum
Exercitus in hostem pergit, they did lead the Vann to fight, and out of the
field brought up the Rear. These honors were not the least in those days I
assure you, no more than in our age: I say, these men enjoyed these and many
other privileges, with their Gavelkind, unto this present day; which being all
compared with the Laws of Howel-dha seem to be the same with them, as for
satisfaction for murder, for burning of houses, etc. all certified in Domesdey,
with this additional Paragraph in the conclusion. Hae consuetudines erant
Walensium tempore Regis Eduuardi in Arcenefeld. I know not what could have been
said more pertinent, they have still this Tenure of Gavelkind, and they have
those other enumerated Customs, derived to them from great Antiquity, (before
the Norman Conquest) which are all certified to have been Consuetudines
Walensium Tempore Regis Edwardi; and this by the convictum est of this Record;
so that it seems plain that this Custom of partition among the rest was
devolved over to them as a Welsh custom; which by the Laws of Howel-d^a, I
find was so paramount, that unto it, as to the Center, all other provisionary
Laws, found among them, do point and have reference; and not probable to be
here planted by imitation of any other foreign nation or people. But to return
again to the competition; this Region, Regio de Arcenefeld.
for so in ancient writings it is called, has not only the like privileges in
respect of Dower of the Moiety; and no forfeiture of Lands for felony; but also
this; that, ibi non currit Breve Regis; and in the Custody of the Chamberlains
of the Exchequer of Receipt there is a Plea thus enrolled, In Placitis coram
Rege.

Pasch. Anno 9. Majus Edw. 1. Heref. 32.

Homines Hundredi de Irchinfeld a tempore quo non extat memoria, placitaverunt,
and placita sua habuerunt de omnibus placitis que ad coronam pertinent: Sive de
Appellis sive de transgressionibus contra pacem Regis, solummodo coram
Vice-comite Heref. and non coram aliquibus aliis justiciaris: this was
exhibited in reference to some appeal made in derogation of the power of
Irchenfeld to the Justices Itinerant, but upon hearing it was adjudged thus;
Ideo Appellum remittitur in Hundredo predicto; it was it seems then called a
Hundred, but in several other pleadings it is called Libertas de Irchenfeld;
and in case of Appeals, or any thing else that was impleaded out of the
Liberty, I find that the Ballivus Libertatis de Irchinfeld came thither, and
oftentimes claimed those Liberties; which were all ordered unto him, (that ever
I yet could meet with) for the use of the Liberty. They have within that
Circuit, a Liberty to Arrest for any Sum of money whatsoever. That whoever
purchases Lands there may bequeath them to whom he pleases, In Rot. 20 Ed. 1.
penes Camer. Sccii Recept.
as that of the 20 Edw. 1. between the Nephews of Philip de Martinestow and
Gloditha^ fill. Mauricii fill. Wasmaeri; which said Gloditha pleads, quod
unusquisque qui terram habet infra Hundr. de Irchenefeld de perquisito suo
potest illud perquisitum legare cuicunque voluerit tenementum, etc. Tenementum
illud leg atum fuit pred. Glodithe. Unde dicunt quod Breve istud non currit
infra Hundred. pred. To this, Jurati dicunt super Sacram. suum quod predicta
Tenementa sunt legabilia; and quod predict. Philippus Tenementa illa legavit
predicte Glodithe; and quod Breve istud non currit infra Hundred. predict. Ideo
Glodithe concessum est inde sine die. They have a formal way of Judgment of
their own, much after the British fashion: The Steward with his Officers
belonging to the Court being seated; there be certain Chiefs among them, whose
Houses and Lands are held of the Lord by Suit and Doom in the Court of that
liberty, and hereupon are called Doomes-men, that is to say, men of Judgment;
or such who judge of matters in Controversy. Rot. quo. War. ibidem.
Therefore in the Quo warranto roll of Irchenfield in the 20 Edward 1. it is
Recorded, that Jurati Hund. de Irchenefeud, Webbetre and Greytr. dicunt, quod
Botholin qui tenuit villam de Comboglin solebat facere Sectam ad Hundr.
predict. and esse unus Domesman de eodem Hundr. etc. and in other Collections
of Antiquity that I have transcribed, there is one Record that is Entitled de
liberate de Domesman. But because my intentions are to be more large upon this
Theme, in a Tract more proper, I shall wave it at this present; only among
other duties reckoned up in Domesdey this is one (that I had almost forgot,) to
carry the Kings Messages into Wales, and to Pray for him in three Churches
every week; and in another Record, which is instar omnium, and by it they as it
were were left to their own Liberty, and are said to be extra Comitatum; not
bound up to any strictness by the Country Laws. Which how far transcending
the Kentish privileges, I leave to any to judge. Now if Dower of the Moiety,
and not to forfeit Lands for Felony, be the greatest privileges Kent has by
the Tenure of Gavelkind; then are the privileges of other places where the use
of Gavelkind is not at this present, far greater: as in some special privileged
Hundreds and Precincts, etc. in the discourse of which it will be besides the
matter in hand to engage. I proceed to the discourse of.

CHAP. IX.
Several sorts of Gavel not relating to the Tenure answered as urged by Mr. S.
How that Gavel was understood; by our late Lawyers; How in Domesdey by
comparing places together, and how among the Saxons; a Discourse upon the Writ
called Gavelet.

MR. S. In his tenth page writes that the word Gavel, as to the main part of
it, frequently occurrs in the old Records of some Mannours out of Kent,
sometimes simply, but for the most part in composition; for example in
Gavel-erth, Gavelate, Gavellond, etc. I make not a Citation of these words, as
if I intended to put a force upon them, as some at the first reading may
imagine, because Mr. S. averrs that the word Gavel does occurr in some old
Records of Mannours out of Kent; which I take not, as there mentioned in
composition to have any relation to the Tenure of Partition; for that which is
applied in those compositions for several uses, as in For-gavel, Mete-gavel,
Gavel-rip, Swine-gavel, Werk-gavel, Hunig-gavel, etc. is little to our purpose.
Several such I have met withal, and diverse different from what Mr. S. has
reckoned. I have encountered with a Pride-gavel; which in the Lordship of Redely
in the County of Gloucester is used and paid unto this day, as a Rent to the
Lord of the Manor, by certain Tenants; in duty and acknowledgment to him for
their Liberty and Privilege of Fishing in the River Severn for Lamprayes; and
in the same Lordship is also another called Sand-gavel, which is nothing else
but a Payment due to the Lord, for liberty granted to the Tenants to Digg up
Sand for their uses. Many such the Reader might be furnished withal, did I
conceive they would redound in any measure to our discourse; for my judgment
is, that this Gavel in these Compositions, and Gavel in the Tenure, are very
different in their acceptations, as I shall show anon. But to examine Mr. S's
Collections and Observations concerning these compounded Gavels; where in his
Paragraph of Oate-gavel (in page 21.) he declares this was a certain proportion
of Rent-oates served into the Lord, sometimes in Kind, and other while, by
composition redeemed with Money; and out of South-Malling Custumal urges this,
quod omnes operarii debent reddere annuatim quod dicitur Gavel-otte in xlm2.
(i. e. in Quadragesima) and in another account roll of the same manor, it is
said concerning a certain Tenant, that, respondet de Octo quarteriis, etc.
receptis de Gabulo Custumariorum, etc. and again, de Avena de Gablo vendita
iiis. and xs. vid. de quinque quarteriis, etc. de Gavel-ote de redditu
venditis. This charge of ten shillings six pence upon five quarters, etc. sold,
de Gavel-ote de redditu, I guess it to be nothing else, but an Imposition, an
Excise, or an Assess; (which is the proper signification of the word Gablum or
Gabulum) and so to be understood: as the Excise or Assess upon the Corn sold by
the Tenants, when for Rent they should have paid Oats in kind. Which receives a
little explanation by the precedent account; where it is said, that respondet
de octo quarteriis, etc. receptis de Gabulo Custumariorum; and again, iiis. de
Gablo de Avena vendita: the Excise or Assess upon the Customary Tenants for
viii quarters sold, and the iiis. to be understood in the like manner, that is,
an Imposition or Excise for Oats sold. Certainly Gablum or Gabulum is not a
word so much out of use, that we had need to grope, or were forced to search
after it, as it were in the Dark; for even in these our days with ease we may
produce the use of it; bearing the same Signification as I have now given to
it; to the same purpose and sense do I find it used in that prodigious
insurrection at Naples, within these few years under Massaniello a Fisherman;
where the Story translated (in this point I may say Literatim) gives the ground
of it to be a certain Payment or Excise upon Fish, which the Italians call
Gabelli; and we have transmitted unto us in the Translation, Gabells; known in
Spain by the term Martinus Zeillerus in his ^inerarium Hispaniae out of
Mariana, lib. 16. cap. 9. and lib. 17 cap. 8. Et Hugo Linschoten, says, Anno
1341. Introductum est vec^igal H^s^ans, i. e. Alcavala and Italis Gabella
dictum, quod aliquoties postea auctum suit. Ejus vi coguntur subditi decimas
pendere, quotiescu^que merces, bona, praedia, aedes and agei ven^untur. Eidem
obnorii sunt cujuscunque generis op^^ices, ut sutores, sartores, lanii, and
quicuaq^e officinas a^^^as habent. Vinum quoque sive uvae colliga^tur, sive
ipsum in R^g^o divendatur, sive in exteras regiones navibus deseratur, etc.
page 78.
Alcabala or Alcavala, which as Minshew does expound it, is, Datio, Redditus,
Census, Tributum, Vectigal, Portorium; and in English is rendered, an Impost,
Custom, Tax, Toll or Tribute; and from our use of it is called Gabell, Gabella,
Gablum. He adds, that it comes of the French word Gabelle, that is, Vecligal,
and has the same Signification among our Old Writers, as Gabelle has in the
French; and then concludes, Gabella, as Cassan. defines it, de consuet. Burg.
f. 119. est vectigal quod solvitur pro bonis Mobilibus; id est, pro iis quae
vehun^ur; distinguishing it from Tributum, for this reason, quia Tributum est
proprie quod fisco vel Principi solvatur pro rebus immobilibus: and is the fame
which Mr. S. page 23. upon Swine-gavel does cite, Et de viis. xd. de tribus
porcis de gablo venditis; in which place this de Gablo signifies for Gables, or
upon the account of that Imposition; and certainly may without any force upon
the word be rendered at large, as Mr. S. has done it, A Rent: for Rent in Latin
is, Redditus, which is, a Payment made or given for any thing whatever; and Sir
Edward Coke upon Littleton, writing of Rents, says, L. 2. c. 12. s. 213.
That bysome, Redditus dicitur a redeundo, quia retro it and quotannis reddit,
etc. for reddendo inde, or reservando inde, or the like, is as much to say, as
that the Tenant or Lessee, shall pay so much out of the profit of the Lands;
for, reddere, nihil aliud est quam acceptum aut aliquam partem ejusdem
restituere, seu reddere est, quasi retro dare; and hereof comes redditus, for
a Rent; and adds this to it; Here note (says he) for the better understanding
of ancient Records, Statutes, Charters, etc. that Gabell or Gavel, Gablum,
Gabellum, Gabellettum, Galbellettum and Gavillettum, do signify a Rent,
Custom, Duty or Service yielded or done to the King or any other Lord; and then
cites Domesdey book, which he has thus; Wallingford continet Cclxxvi Hagas (i.
e.) domos reddentes IX liberas de gablo (i. e.) de redditu. The which I my self
Transcribing out of the Original book, find it to be thus; In Burgo de
Wallingeford habuit Rex Edw. Viii. virgat. terre and in his erant 276. Hage
reddentes XI. lib. de Gablo; so that Liberas should be corrected and read
Libras. The other difference betwixt the two Citations is only Sir Edward Coke
his Comment or Construction of it; XI. Lib. de Gablo, and qui ibi manebant
faciebant servitium Regis cum equis vel per aquam usque ad Blidberiam,
Reddinges, Sudtone Besentone, and hoc facientibus dabat prepositus [conredium]
mercedem non de Censu Regis sed de suo. Ex Domesd In Berrochescire.
but this it seems he takes for granted, that Gablum has no other
signification than Rent: for by the same Record, to be sure that that Rent of
xil. (not ixl.) should come into the King's Coffers, there is a Paragraph, that
provides for it, where it is written, what and how the Soldiers that the
Burrow shall find upon all occasions for the King, shall be provided for, and
is thus ordered; [Conredium] Mercedem non de censu Regis sed de suo; all the
Cens or Rent that the King had, that I could find, is that Gablum of eleven
Pounds; and this Gablum was not always paid in Money. For in Sudsexe, under the
Title of the Lands of William de Warene in the same Record, is this, that
Radulfus tenet de Willielmo (that is of William of Warren) Bristelmestune.
Brictric tenuit de dono Godwini Comitis T. R. E. in Dominio, etc. De Gablo IV.
milia Alletium; and under the same Title it is there remembered; Pluntune, Hugo
filius Ranulsi tenet de Willielmo, etc. ibi, etc. Silva de XX. porc. De gablo
XVII. porc. But that Gablum did as well relate to Money as to other things in
kind, either Herrings or Swine, is very plain by that Record in Domesdey book,
in Windesore in Berkshire, where it is said, Rex Willielmus tenet Windesores,
in Dominio. Rex Edw. tenuit, ibi XX hide, etc. and adhuc sunt in villa C. Hage
V. minus; ex his sunt XXVI. quiet de Gablo, and de aliis exeunt XXX. solid.
And lastly, (out of the same Book I still write) in Sommersetshire it is thus
expressed under the Title of Terra Regis, which I desire the Reader to observe;
Rex tenet Cedre (I suppose it is that Chedder so famous for its Cheese) Rex.
Edw. tenuit; nunquam Geldavit, nec scitur quot hide sunt ibi, etc. in Dominio,
etc. XX. Board. cum XVII. car. and VII. Gablatores redd. XVII s. These seven
Gablatores did pay for Rent 17 Shillings; and from their paying of Rent were
termed Gablatores. To me it seems probable, that this Gablum is to be
distinguished from a Rent or Payment made upon Contract or Bargain; and have
Relation to such an one as was imposed by the Power and Will of the Lord; and
these different sorts of Payments are passed in Domesdey book under several
expressions, according to the nature of them; where sometimes it is written,
that one reddit to such an one so much, without any other addition; and this I
believe is Rent upon Agreement and Contract. Another, reddit de Consuetudine so
much; and a third, red it de Gablo so much; and if the Oate-gavel, and the
Werke-gavel, be taken into this Observation, with all the rest by Mr. S.
mentioned, they will prove to be of the Offspring of Gablum, and should have
rather been writ with a B. than a V Consonant; which Transmigration is so
familiar in our Europaean Languages, that nothing more frequently occurrs; and
not only among these, but also in most of the Oriental Languages, where the
Beth or B Masculine does pass after the same effeminate manner into V.
especially where in the Hebrew and Chaldaick there is to be found the
difference, by the interposition of the Dagesch or Prick in the Letter, without
which it is sounded as an Aspirate; and so likewise is the F. familiarly turned
again into V Consonant; as it falls out in most Languages, especially in the
British. But to return to this word Gavel, which if it shall receive a common
acceptance, and that according to what Mr. S. has rendered it, which he
labors to make out to be the chief Acme of his design, and all is, to have it
signify a Rent or Imposition, in which we are agreed; but then in this we
differ and dissent, that there ought not to be allowed to it any relation to
the Tenure of Partition, (which is my opinion) and which Mr. S. will hardly
admit. But to run over some more of his Gables. That which he discourses of in
his 30th. page is a For-gavel, which is rightly rendered foris Gabulum, and is
defined to be quasi extra (vel praeter) Gabulum quod Domino capitali debetur:
and this corresponds with what before I have said, that it was a Rent or a
Duty, besides, over and above, or beyond the Original contract or bargain. The
like is in Mete-gavel, which is Cibi Gablum, a Rent of meat or food;
Swine-gavel, which is porcorum Gablum, a Rent of Swine. Werke-gavel, and
Werke-gabulum, which is operis Gablum. Hunig-gavel, which is Gabulum mellis,
For before that Sagar was from the Indies brought among us, the use of Honey
was frequent instead thereof: So that I have observed in some very ancient
Rentals, as great a proportion of Honey as there would be required of Sugar to
se^ve such a Family; and much reserved to the King in most Counties, as appears
by Dom^sdey.
Rent Honey; of which sort in Domesdey you may find much; and in the 60. Law of
King Ina, we find a bere-gafol, which is a Rent of Beer or rather Barley, as
Mr. Lambard expounds it. For in some Countries of England, and in Scotland,
they to this day call Barley, Beer. There is also in the 66. of King Ina's Laws
(...), (speaking of a yard of Land) which Mr. Lambard renders to signify
Mercede conductam, that is hired for Rent or Wages: So is it in the Covenants
betwixt King Alured and Guthrun the Dane, In the second Article, where it is
said, bu tan thaem c^o^le de on gafollande rit, which Mr. Lambard renders thus:
Siquidem is Rusticus censum annuum impendens non fuerit, which I think in
English is, provided, that that Countryman does not sit on Rented Land: for
But in the old English, as well as to this day in the present Scotch,
signifies, without, or wanting, etc. There I find gafollande is turned into
Census; which is as much as I have need to make use of, or take notice of. In
the Laws of King Aethelstan it is thus, ealisc monnes, etc. that He tham cyng
gafol-gyldan maeg, which is thus Translated; Wallus si in eas opes creverit,
etc. ut annuum Regi censum pendat; which is, if a Welsh-man increases so in
Riches, etc. that he can or might yield a yearly Rent to the King: Such a one
perhaps as we call a Subsidy man, or a Man in the King's Books. So in the sixth
of King Ina's Laws, (...), which is, if any one Fights in the House of one that
pays Rent; and in the 22. of the same King, that so often recited Law; ealH
gafolgylda Hund t lftig ^cill, which is turned into Latin, thus; Mr. S. page 33.
Wallus censum pendens annuum, etc. in the same sense is the word Gavel-man
cited by Many there are that with Mr. Seldom account gafol to signify several
things, as tributum, etc. but not in the least with reference to the Tenure; he
cites the A^^ales Anglosaxoas In Bibliotheca Cottoniana, Anno 1012. THa that
gafol gelaest sae and frith athas asporene aeson tha to ferde se Here i would sa He
aer gegaderode as. THa bugon to tham cynge of tham Here fif and feoertig scypa.
and Him beHeton that Hi oldon. thysne eard Healoan and He Hi fedan sceolde and
scydon. id est. Tributo soluto, and amicitiae juramentis praestitis, excrcitus,
ut ante erat congregatus late dispergitur. Maneb vit vero cum Rege ex ipso
exercitu quadraginta quinque naves ipsique side data promiserunt se Terram hanc
d^fensuros, modo eos aleret and vestiret Rex. Danorum Rex tunc Swanus crat,
quorum ita pepigit Ethelredus. Utrumque autem praestationis quam diximus genus
Danegeld, Danegeldum seu Danageldum, id est, Tributum Danicum dicebatur. Seld.
Mar. claus. l. 2. c. 11. Here we may observe that geld is most properly
Tribute, though in the former part of this Saxon citation, Mr. Seldom renders
gafol by Tributum, and properly it does signify a payment.
Mr. S. which has no more in signification than one that pays a Rent; and
relates not at all to the Tenure; and I believe if seriously looked into, that
many of these compounds, who have this similitude of sounds, do not hold under,
or by the Tenure of partition; which if so, here were nomen sine re; and this
last may be a Term as significant for any one that pays a rent in Cumberland,
as in Kent. In this recited page it is, that Mr. S. has rightly fixed his
Gavel; for (says he) one thing more I have to note before I leave Gable,
Gavel, etc. that with Mala it fignifies Rents, Services or Customs; and in his
35th. page he adds, by this time the Reader is satisfied (I hope says he)
touching the true construction of Gavel, Gafol, Gable, or how ever else he
shall chance to find it written, in each importing Cens, (i. e.) a Rent, either
in Money, Provision or Works. To conclude, I am of the same opinion with Mr. S.
that these intermixtures and compounds do all hold a reference to gafol,
Gablum, or Gabulum; that all of them have one and the same exposition; yet that
none of them have any relation to the Tenure of partition, or to any other
Tenure besides the Renting or paying of a Rent for Land, etc. There is only one
thing more left to be considered, which may seem to have in it some strength;
and that is in the 31. page of Mr. S. where he cites this, and postea per
quandam consuetudinem quae vocatur Gavelate, usitatam in Comitatu isto (viz.
Kanc) de terris and tenementis de Gavelkynde, pro redditibus and servitiis quae
a retro fuerint de eisdem; per plures annos; devenerunt eaedem terrae in manus
cujusdam Abbatis, etc. Now this consuetudo de Gavelate used in the Lands and
Tenements held in Gavelkind, seems the one to have relation to the other; for
Mr. S. in the beginning of that Paragraph tells us, that this Gavelate was not
a Reut or a Service, but betokens a Rent or a Service withheld, denied or
detained, causing the Forfeiture of the Tenement to the Lord; and whereas that
Record says, it was used in that County upon Lands and Tenements held in
Gavelkind; Sir Edward Coke (as Mr. S. himself cites him) says; Gaveletum, is
as much as to say, as to cease or let to pay the Rent; Breve de Gavelleto in
London, est Breve de cessavit in Biennium, etc. pro redditu ibidem, quia
Tenementa fuerunt indistringibilia. So that this Brief lay in London as well as
Kent; and Minshew in his Dictionary upon the word Gavelet exemplifies it by a
Case: That if any Tenant in Gavelkind, withold his Rent and his Services, of
the Tenement which he holds of his Lord; let the Lord seek by the award of
his Court from three weeks to three weeks, to find some distress upon the
Tenements until the fourth Court, always with witnesses; and if within that
time, he can find no distress in that Tenement, whereby he may have Justice of
his Tenant, then at the fourth Court, let it be awarded; that he shall take
that Tenement into his hand in the name of a distress, as if it were an Ox or a
Cow; and let him keep it a year and a day in his hand, without manuring it;
within which term, if the Tenant come and pay his arrearages, and make
reasonable amends for the withholding, then let him have and enjoy his Tenement
as his Ancestors and he before held it; and if he do not come before the year
and the day be past, then let the Lord go to the next County Court, with his
witnesses of his own Court, and pronounce there this process to have further
witnesses, and by the award of his Court (after the County Court holden) he
shall enter and manare in those Lands and Tenements as in his own; and if the
Tenant come afterward and will rehave his Tenements; and hold them as he aid
before, let him make agreement with the Lord; according as it is anciently said,

Nighesith yield and Nighesith geld. (i. e.) Let him nine times pay, and Nine
times repay.


Has he not since any thing given? nor has he not since any thing paid? let
him pay V. lib. for his error, before he become Tenant or Holder again. See
hereof, 10 Hen. 3. Fitz. Cessavit. 60. and statute 10. Edw. 2. of Gavelet in
London. In the Collection of Statutes London 2. matter much tending to this
purpose; that by this word Gavelet, the Lord shall have the Land for the
Ceasing of the Tenant. I have read much to this purpose in Mr. Lambards
perambulation of Kent; but the whole hereof, relates to a Writ of Recovery for
default or non-payment of Gafol or Gable, or Rent; the word Gavelet which is
nothing but the let, hindrance or withholding of Gavel, Gable or Rent; which
Writ runs in London as well as in Kent; and all of it, nothing to our Tenure in
Question. To the same purpose is that which Mr. S. urges in his 12th. page;
where he gives a Learned exposition; which serves for a fortification as well
as an explanation upon the word Gafol; which he describes varied in the
Dialect, Testament. Saxonic.
being written, gafol, gavel, gaful, and gafel, and shows how it passes in
Matthew. 17. Verse. 24, and 2, and cap. 22. verse. 17, and 19. to signify Tribute;
which I think may prove an acceptance thereof naturally enough; and in Matthew.
25. verse. 27. it serves to express advantage or usury; and in King Withreds
Laws of Sr. Henry Spelmans Edition of his ancient Councils, it is expounded to
us, by what it is commonly received Redditus vel persio; and Mr. Seldom in his
notes upon Eadmerus, renders ge^^ic gaful, to signify Solitus census; the
wonted or usual Payment or Rent. But Mr. S. concludes thus. To be short (says
he) Gafol is a word, which as Gablum in Domesdey book, the skillful in the
Saxon tongue (with Sir Henry Spelman else where) turn by what Gabella is
expounded abroad, viz. vectigal, portorium, Tributum, exactio, census, etc. in
Latin; but in English with Verstegan, Tribute, Tax or Custom, whereunto Mr.
Lambard and Sir Edward Coke agree; upon which and to all Mr. S. craves leave to
add Rent, which I shall not in any wise deny him; provided, as I said before,
he will be contented with that exposition to signify Rent, and not go about
for the sound sake to impose it on the Tenure; for in this I would beg an
information, or rather satisfaction, whether Gavelkind-land may not be, and is
not held without Rent? which if it be found to be, as I know it is generally
used in Urchenfield, and perhaps in other places also, then does it destroy the
very nature of the Etymologye. But with this part, upon the mistake of the word
Gavel, in those compounds mentioned, I have spoken sufficiently; and further I
will not trouble the Readers patience about it. In the next place here are

CHAP. X.
Several Deeds cited by Mr. S. that have their Tenenda's ad Gavilikendam
examined and expounded.

I Am constrained to run over the Examination of several Deeds produced in
Transcript by Mr. S. and having finished the Discourse of the word Single, and
in Composition, I am come to experiment the Trial of it in the Term proper,
with its affix, of which Mr. S. says, page 38. Thus (for example) in a number
of Deeds and Conveyances, which I have seen recorded in the leiger-books of the
Cathedral at Canterbury, and St. Austins late Abbey there; phrased all of them
after this manner: Tenendum ad (or, in) Gavelikendam, etc. I presume he has
cited the principallest of them; and if so, then (I assure you) I am not
stumbled at any of them; and first, Page 39.
for that Deed of the Sons of Wibaldus; who did grant, Infirmis de Herbaldune
unam acram and dimidiam terrae, scil. Langenekre cum fratre suo Wiberto infirmo
in perpetuam Eleem^synam; and to Gavelkynd: Reddendo sibi duos denarios, etc.
Mr. S. rightly collects from the mold and cast of that Deed, the binding of the
Heirs in relation to their gift; for these Sons of Wibaldus, and their Sons and
Heirs, and their Daughters, do all join in the alienation of this Acre and an
half to Herbaldune Hospital. I will not trouble my self about the Deed to
Quarrel at their Scrivener; who seldom found dimidiam written for dimidium; or
believe that he might in his intermixture of (and to Gavel-kynd) make an
ignorant coherence; we will grant it all right and straight, and take along
with us what Mr. S. says, page 51. that such an expression as Tenendum in (or,
ad) Gavel-kynd, or the like, was necessary to render the granted Land partible,
after the Custom of Gavelkind, without the help of prescription, requisite in
partible Land else where out of Kent; and hereupon referrs to the pleading of
Burga the wife of Peter de Bending; put down and published in the appendix to
his book Script. 5. But the first he would have to be a gift or grant in
perpetuam, but not in puram Eleemosynam; there is no more than perpetuam; which
whether it be or not is nothing to our purpose; but the Reddendum as well as
the Tenendum in that Deed has somewhat not familiar; for it is said there,
Reddendo sibi duos denarios, etc. which Sibi has relation to Wiberto infirmo,
the last immediately before mentioned, rather than to any other in that Deed:
for all other persons therein comprehended, are by doubles; as, Nos filios
Wibaldi Herbwinum and Eilwardum; Heredes suos Thomam and Paganum; with this
also, Hoc concedunt filiae suae Basilia and Hawisia; so that sibi in the
singular number has not relation to any else, but to the infirm Wibert. To him
it was that the two pence was to be paid; and the profits of the Lands in
common to all the infirm of that house in perpetual Alms; And to Gavel-kind;
that is to say, that all the Brethren of that Hospital should, have the like
share and propriety in that Acre and the Half; as the Sons of any one could
have, in their Fathers Land of that nature; and if not by this way, I can find
no other to make any sense of it: for this clause, And to Gavel kind, has
reference clearly to the concession and Habendum, and not to the Reddendum; and
if so, who are those that should hold it in Gavelkind? The Infirmes? no; for
they were a body (though sickly) that could not dye. Nor the Sons or
Grandchildren of Wibaldus; for they had divessed themselves of this Land, and
invested their decrepit brother Wibert, with the rest of the infirmes of that
Hospital with it. Nor could the Tenant claim any right by this Deed; for that
it has not relation to any Tenancies; besides, Hospitals in those days did
not use to create unprosetable Tenures to themselves; and where Land is said to
be held in Gavel-kynd, there is an Estate of Inheritance; they are
Syncategorematical or relatives. In the like sense is that Deed, which Mr. S.
makes his Script. (...) page 184. where Radu^s From wadidit and concessit (...)
and Fratribus Hospitalis Sancti Laurentii juxta Gantunriam (by his Deed) septem
acras terrae meae (says he) tenendas in Gavel-kynde, de me and heredibus meis
^^ber^. and qui^^^, reddendo inde annuatim, mihi vel beredibus meis XLII.
denarios, etc. pro hac donatione and confirmatione, dederunt mihi praedicti
fratres and heredibus meis quinque Marcas ^ierlingorum. All that I can gather
out of this, is, that Ralph Erone sold to the Brethren of St. Lawrences
Hospital, seven Acres for five Mark, and reserved a Rent of two and forty
pence, the Land to be held of him and his Heirs in Gavel-kind; which, as in the
other of Herbaldune so was this to be understood, to be, to the common land
(...) and behalf of all the Brethren; for if not so, I desire (...) informed
how it could ru^ into the Tenu^e of Glaver-l^ynd amongst them any other way?
and here also^e^ me caution you, to observe, that in the first Deed it is sai^
to be granted, in perpetuam Eleemosyndm, And (...), and then comes in with the
Reddendum; so like wise in the second Deed where the Tenondum and the Reddendum
are at a distance; that by means thereof it is not probable at all, that
Gavel-kynde should have any relation to the Reddenda in either; and seriously
considered, do plainly contain a different use from either Rents or Purchase.
But to proceed to those several grants produced by Mr. S. in relation to the
Term as that of R. dei gratia Sancti Augustini Cantuar: Script. 4.
shere somewhat is wanting, I believe it should be (...) and ejus^am loci
conventus, made to Jordanus ^e S^res much his Heirs of XL. acres of Marsh-land
be longing to their Manor of Cistelet; Script. 6.
and that of Alan the Prior and the Convent of Christ-Church in Canterbury unto
Theb. de Einesford and his Heirs of fourscore Acres of Land in their Lordship
of Northocholt, by them to be holden, by rent and Suit of Court at Orpinton; ad
Gavilikende; Script. 7.
as also that of the same Prior and Convent to Stephen de Kinardentone of
(...). Acres and to his Heirs ad Gaveli^hinde. Again that Deed of Gaufridus the
Prior and the Convent of Christ-Church Canterbury to Joni and his Heirs of a
Sheep Pasture in Osmundeseye: Tenend. Script. 8.
(say they) de nobissuccessive ad Gavel-kynde by Rent; and that his Heirs
successively shall give de relevio LVIs. and Suit of Court at Leysdum. All
these Grantees had by the virtue of these several Grants an instatement into
the Tenure of Gavel-kind, which was an Estate of Inheritance, and was to runn
in a Parallel line with Lands of the like nature; that is, that the Sons or
Children of the Possessor (when Deceased,) should hold those Lands according to
the Rule of partition in Gavel-kynd; and there is no difficulty in them, as I
can perceive; all that I find is, that the Granters have Created an Estate of
the Tenure of Gavel-kind in case there had been none before; none of them to my
apprehension carry with them any notable Antiquity. Least of all to the purpose
is that, Script. 5.
in page 178. where it is said, Predecessores Dni. Regis concesserunt Manerium
de Wells in com. Cant. postea concessum erat in puram and perpetuam
Elcemosynam; nunquam partitum fuit nec est portibile; that is, it was never
parted, nor is partible; to which, all that I can say is, that it never was,
nor is like to be (so holding) Gavel-kynd-land. But the passed discourse in
this Chapter only shows the Nature and Tenure of such Lands; And makes nothing
at all to the Etymology or the investigation of the true derivation of the word
in contest. To conclude, Mr. S. in page 150. draws from his several discourses
a double Consectary (as he is pleased to term it.)

1. That the King may hold Land in Gavel-kynde.

I must needs approve of it; and in case the King does hold such Lands, and at
his decease leaves several Sons behind him, they must part it; and that Princes
have so done, I have already proved by the several examples of the Princes of
Wales, and of the German Empire.

2. That the King holding Land in Gavel-kind, in case he shall grant it away to
any Religious House in puram and perpetuam Eleemosynam (in frank Almoign) it
remains notwithstanding partible; as before it came to the Crown; in their
hands at least, whom the Religious men shall infeoff with it.

The first part of this I grant: for if such Lands be given to any Religious
society they remain partible, as to the profits of them, that is to say, among
the Society; and so does Land of any other nature whatever, in the same manner
being vested, pass into a partible Quality; that is, the whole body having an
Interest, all members of that body receive part and share of the benefit: but
for any other sort of partition, I cannot fancy how it should be among them.
And then again, it does not necessarily follow, that those that are by this
Society interessed with the holding of those Lands under them, should hold them
in the Tenure of Gavelkind: for by such a Grant, (as I said before) in this
Tenure of Gavel-kind, the said Society or body divest themselves of the
fee-simple; and invest the taker with an estate of inheritance. And again, this
must have a full reference to the Society their manner of granting it; and then
it may even as well (if it were formerly Gavelkind-land) by their grant receive
an extinction of its Tenure; for that in such cases (where it is (I say) so
vested) it is wholly depending upon the force of the contract betwixt the
persons concerned; and again, this same specifical Land may so fall out, as to
be made the very site of the house, and the gardens of this religious Society
or body; and how in such a case it will be capable of partition (except as I
before have spoken, in the members their participation of an equal benefit) I
know not. The progress exhibits

CHAP. XI.
Some offers at the termination (Kind) affixed in Composition to the word Gavel.

MR. S. in his 37th. page says, that Gavelkynd is a word compounded of Gavel
and Kind; the latter Syllable whereof comes, and is contracted of the Saxon
word, gecynde; which by several good Authors is rendered, Nature. Mr. S. in his
10th. page says, that Gavel is the main part of the word; Which if so, then I
hope I have dispatched the main part of my work, and could willingly join with
Mr. S. in his Exposition of the latter part; for in what I shall declare my
self in this Chapter, shall be only Skepticism. But I am confident of my
opinion in the first and main part; and here I must take notice of, and give to
Mr. S. his due honor for his ingenuous Ratiocination upon the common received
Interpretation of Mr. Lambard, and all those that follow him, concerning the
latter part of it, which he would have to signify Kindred; and that the whole
word together is of a Saxon Original, and is, (...) that is, give to all the
Kindred; which flatly opposes the very nature of the Tenure; because where
such Lands are, that are subject to this partible quality, the Kindred do not
share; nor are they partible at all among them: but in the common case of the
failer of Issue, then the next of Kindred in the nearest Line. And in this
pretended interpretation, the word Kyn, supposed to be Kindred, does seem to
nullify by it, the known use of the Tenure: for if the Kindred be to part
those Lands, then must it so fall out, that either the Children part them with
the Kindred, or the Kindred without the Children; for if the Title by this
Denomination be in the Kindred, it must be one of the two; and upon serious
consideration I would think, that it deserves a Censure for any to affirm that
Children are of Kyn to the Father; for that Kyndred or Kin betokens a more
distantial relation than a Son is to the Father; which (should it take place in
that Notion) would carry with it the confusion of Alliances; In Latin Kindred
is called Cognatio, quia Cognati, quasi una communiter nati; vel orti ab eodem
progenitore. These Cognati or Kindred, that are so distanced, may be said to be
Sanguine conjuncti, and Consanguinei; be cause they proceed from one
Progenitor; yet are well known, not to participate of the same privileges with
the Children. For the Children of one Brother do not divide or part Lands with
the Children of another Brother, by this our Tenure; but if the Land should
thus pass, then by what Right or Title can the Children expect any part of it?
for that according to this interpretation it should pass to the Kindred; and so
(as I said before) being eminently implanted in them, it does plainly seem to
Debarr the Children, and Vacate the common use of Partition among the Sons:
which is the more plainly Evicted by this, in that Daughters (in case it be
insisted upon in relation to Kindred) are as much of Kindred to the Father as
the Sons are; and yet in this Tenure of Partition, the Daughters have commonly
no share, when there be Sons existing. Mr. Verstegan, who would willingly
(observing some inconveniences in the Latitude of Mr. Lambards exposition)
restrain it; would make (Kind) to signify Sons or rather Children; which if in
the last, then I say, that Daughters as well as Sons at the same time are very
rarely participants in the Partition of Lands together, except in those cases I
formerly showed. Doctor Powel in his Additaments to the Cambrian History,
(which I cited fully before) says; Here I think fit to say somewhat of the
Custom and Tenure of Wales, etc. that is the Division of the Father's
Inheritance among all the Sons, commonly called Gavel-kynd; the Doctor writes
Gavel in great and large Characters, and Kind in small; as being Dubious of the
Connaturality of them. Gavel, he affirms to be British; but not knowing what to
make of Kind, passes it over in silence. I shall be far from Peremptoriness
in my own sentence concerning it. One while I thought it might have been
derived from the British word Tennedl, which signifies generatio aut familia;
as in that commonly used word Pen-cennedl, which is received and expounded to
signify Princeps Generationis aut familias, the chief of a Kindred or Blood;
who among the Welsh are reverenced and observed, as I told you the Lords or
Chiefs of Clans were in the High-lands of Scotland; and so Gavel-kennedl, might
signify Tenura familias aut Generationis: Which that I may bring it a little
nearer to the ringing of the pronunciation; is by some reported to have been
sounded Tennedh, which with great case in the composition may retreat into
Gavel-kynd, and is of the same use in that signification: Somewhat of that
manner was anciently observed among the Britains, (though it seems to be lost)
for Morgan was a name of great use among them heretofore, as it is at this day;
which signifies, Got of the Sea, Mergan signifies got of the Sea.
as some Critics in that Language do report; and was thought to be the proper
name of that Arch Heretic, who in imitation of this his name was by the Greeks
called Pelagius; which termination BEGAN (in the Welsh name I mean) is the fruit
of Genned; from whence with a soft mutation may come the latter part of our
word enquired after, viz. Kind. The other imagination was this, That the Saxons
upon their first Co-habitation with the Britains, did borrow many of their
words, by which they expressed the Denominations of places and things; I have
already showed several of them in this Tract, and could produce so many, as
that by themselves they would fill a Volume; and not only is there to be found
this intermixtion with the Saxon tongue, but also much of the relics thereof
in the very French; (being the remainders of the ancient Gallick,) which at
this day is the most entirely kept by the Brytains of North Wales; for all
things that related to Nobility, to Propriety, to terms of Law, to Customs, to
Offices, etc. are in British carried through many ages from the Brytains by the
Saxons down to us: The Saxons call some rents Mailes, the same word the Scots
use to this day; Page 34.
and is as Mr. S. observes originally British, coming of their Mael, which
(says he) in the Welsh Vocabulary is in Latin rendered, Lucrum, emolumentum,
quaestus: as Maelio the Verb, Lucrari, quaestum facere; and yet this Welsh word
was not only made Saxon or English, but for the great use they had of it, a
sort of Latin also; for we find some Lands were held anciently, per Gablum and
malum. The names of Towns were like the ancient Nuptials of which King Edward
the Confessor speaks, betwixt the Saxons and Britains; by which they became
one Nation. So that the Denominations of ancient Cities and Places did, and do,
for the most part participate of both; as in Durham, Dunholne, Dorchester; the
first Syllables being British, the later Saxon. Chester is a Saxon imitation of
the Latin Castrum; for which the Brytains had a word of their own, viz. Taer;
and all those Denominations of places with the faid Saxon termination of
Checter, are Demonstrations of Roman Fortifications in the time of the
Brytains, as well as notes of the Saxon intermixtures; of which sort there are
very many. In the like manner may it fall out with this Termination of our Word
in Controversy; that in case, Kind should chance to be a Saxon affix, such a
mixture would not prove a thing unusua^ in their practice; and may very
properly be so Conjoined. If Kind, or as it is in the Saxon gecynd, signify
the same thing as in Man-kynd; (and is in Latin rendered Genus humanum aut
natura) it may then be supposed, that the Saxons meeting with the British
Gavel, and understanding it to be their common Tenure, added something to
express it to their own apprehensions; which being set together would signify
and that properly enough, Genus Tenurae: For that Kind of Tenure deserved to
have a Denomination of greatest remark, it being (if not the only) yet the most
eminent and most general Tenure amongst them. But having already herein
professed Skepticism.
Skepticism, I will not attempt to impose upon the Reader either the one or the
other; though either of them may pass, without the least injury to the Tenure;
leaving it to the investigations of some more at leisure: Provided that you
conceive me not to have forsaken my ground, or given back in the concernment of
the main part of the word, and that which is most material to the original of
Gavel; although it had as many Terminations as either a Latin or Greek word
declined in its several cases; and therefore leave it, only desiring an
acceptance of this Essay in good part; without a Condemnation thereof; until
a better can be produced. And so I pass my Discourse over to treat somewhat

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the German Land-scheutan, and their ignorance of Gavel-kynd.

NOtwithstanding the uncertainty we labor under, as to the Termination, in the
precedent Chapter; yet in this we shall show how that the Saxons and the
Germans having the use of this partible Tenure from great antiquity, have a
particular Denomination for it; not making use of any part of the word in
question; and Mr. S. himself in his 45th. page writes thus; That, such is the
nature and condition of Gavelkind-land; being not only subject and liable to
what the Civilians in their phrase are wont to call Judicium; or Actio familiae
herciscundae, de communi dividundo; the ^eudists, Adaequatio, Paragium; we in
our Language call it Coparcenary-land-shifting, and the like. But withal so
subject to it, as that Partition does always accompany Land of that nature; and
is indeed as inseparable from it, as the contrary from Knights-service-land.
What is here called Coparcenary-land-shifting will afford us one glimpse of
Light more to our undertaking. For if the Actio de communi dividundo, according
to the Civillians, joined with Adaequatio and Paragium, according to the
Feudists; be put in parallel with Land-shifting, they will all prove to express
the same thing as Gavelkind does. For although the Germans have this Tenure of
Partition, as I have said; yet understand they not, nor know any thing of the
word Gavel-kynd, nor of its sound; which had it been of a Saxon pedigree,
assuredly they would have found out the Kindred and Relation it had to their
Speech; and how all Germany should so irrecoverably lose the Denomination of a
thing of so great consequence, as this Tenure has been, and is at this day,
and nominate it by a word that has not any affinity of sound to our
Gavel-kynd? and notwithstanding all this, that this Gavel-kynd should be of a
Saxon original? and fostered and known in our Island? and after many Centuries
of years again Fathered upon them, who neither by themselves, nor by their
Neighbors can fasten any acquaintance with it? are Considerations very strange
and wonderful to me. The Tenure they have, and express it (I say) by a genuine
and significant word of their own, calling it Land-skiftan, as I find it most
commonly written; which some expound to signify Part-land; and I think is
improperly written, Land-shifting. For Lands are as well said to be shifted,
when upon the Father's Decease they descend to one Son; as when they are parted
among many; so that shifting does not so properly signify a Partition, as it
does an Alienation. But properly I find it to be the procedure of a word in
Dutch, named Scheut, (or as in the plural number it is, Scheuten) which is the
Denomination for that which the Latins call Surculus; and believe that hence
it is, that we in our English call young Twiggs or Branches, Shoots: so that
Land-skiftan or Land-scheutan is the same in signification with Gavel-kynd:
both signifying Tenura or Terra familias, Progenici, Stirpis aut Surculorum,
which is the Tenure or the Land belonging unto the young Twiggs or Branches of
a Family or Generation; If you grant me the entire British interpretation
thereof. But whether it be Denominated, as Mr. S. and others have it,
Land-shifting, or this way which I adhere unto, I will not make it my business,
about it to contend; only let me re-mind you, that this Custom is so far and
freely owned among the Germans, even among their Princes, in relation to the
Dividing and Parting the Lands of their Principalities, as ever it has been in
former times among the Welsh; and that all those other Tenures by which Lands
are now held, are to be reckoned and esteemed but as so many Intruders and
Novices over all Europe; they being for the most part the effects of the
policies of Conquerours, for the more secure Settlements of their Militia's.
Which ushers in the matter of the next Chapter, which shall be to show

CHAP. XIII.
When and for what Reasons Primogeniture had the preference.

ALthough this Theme might give me occasion to look very far backwards, to the
first granting preference to Primogeniture; yet I shall undertake no further
than to discourse upon it, in contemplation of what Mr. S. says in his page,
viz. The Conqueror consented to the succession of the Eldest Son alone, partly
for his own and the Realms better defense and strengthening, and partly for the
upholding and maintenance of Gentile familyes. Which if true, then it was that
primogeniture was first set into a peculiar esteem and account; and this an
innovation of the Norman Conqueror; and our Gavelkind probably the general use
before. But in this Case we had best use moderation, and admit that neither the
one nor the other had in those times the sole pre-eminence and singularity; but
as there were diverse uses in forfeitures under West-Saxen laege, Dane-laege and
Merchen-laege; so I believe that there were then several Customs, and usages
as to the descending of Inheritances; all of which may with small courtesy be
allowed to be according both to Law and Custom; for Sir Edward Coke upon
Littleton, in the place thereupon cited by Mr. S. to confirm his assumption,
says: Qui prior est tempore potior est jure; and affirms that in King Alfreds
time, Knights fees descended to the Eldest Son, and gives this as the reason,
for that by division of such fees between Males the defense of the Realm might
be weakened; but in those days Soccage-fee was divided between the heir Males;
and here Sir Edward Coke is of the opinion that it was the general Custom of
all England; and so continued, till by fractions it should seem that the
military settlements were infringed. And to strengthen this opinion, he
introduces Glanvill; of which words Mr. S. has also made use in his book, and
are thus. Cum quis haereditatem babens moriatur, etc. si plures reliquerit
filios^; tunc distinguitur, Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of Nobility, p.
119. says: It was anciently ordained, that all Knights fees should come unto
the Eldest Son by succession of Heritage, whereby he succeeding his Ancestors
in his whole inheritance might be the better enabled to maintain the Wars
against the Kings Enemies, or his Lords. And that the Soccage Fee should be
partible among the male Children to enable them to increase into many families,
for the better furtherance in and increase of Husbandry, haec. ex. Sr. I. Coke.
utrum ille fuerit miles sive per feodum militare tenens, aut liber Sockmannus,
quia si miles fuerit aut per militiam tenens, tunc secundum jus Regni Angliae
Primogenitus filius Patri succedit in toto, etc. Si vero fuerit liber
Sockmannus, tunc quidem dividetur haereditas inter omnes filios, etc. The last
part of this Paragraph has reference to secundum jus Regni Angliae, as well as
the first; and this partition seems generally diffused, as if all England had a
propriety therein; and out of Fortescue he adds, Haereditas inter Masculos jure
Civili est dividenda; this relation it has to the Civil Law; as it shows its
Universality, so also its Antiquity. And notwithstanding, this may be thought
not much to the purpose, yet something (that is not much from it) may be from
hence observed and collected: as much certainly as Sir Edward Coke shows in his
Chapter of Villenage upon Littleton, concerning a sort of Gavel-kynd in the
bearing of Arms; for they (says he) descend to all the Sons, every Son being
a Gentleman alike; which Gentry and Arms do not only descend to all the
Brethren; but also to all their posterity: but jure primogeniturae, the eldest
shall bear as a badge of his birthright his Fathers Arms without any
difference; for that as Littleton says, Sectione -- he is the more worthy of
blood; but all the younger Brethren shall give several differences; and additio
probat minoritatem. I have only this to observe, though (I believe it) not
unknown to any one, that knows any thing of Tenures (yet perchance it may not
be un-necessary to make mention of it) to inform some that have not taken
notice of it; and that is of a twofold sort of infeoffment found anciently
concerning Lands; the one is called Vetus, the other Novum; both of them
erections of military services, upon such persons as were thought worthy the
degrees of In Domesdey in Dorsetshire, there is this, Tre^ Tainorum Regis, in
one Title, and in the next it is thus for the same thing, Tre^ Servientium
Regis.
Thanes. The first was that, founded before and by William the Conqueror; the
other was that, which was in erecting betwixt the time of William the Conqueror
and Henry the third, and in his survey of Knights-fees is called novum
feoffamentum. Both I believe spun out of Gavel-kind, for I find

CHAP. XIV.
Partition of Lands by the Saxon Laws; those Lows continued and confirmed after
the Conquest; the correspondence and progression of the British Language.

ALl that I have aimed at principally, is to show that inheritances were
anciently and generally partible, and would suppose them so, from the most
ancient inhabitants of our Island, who were the Britains; and so deduce the
probability of the denomination of the Tenure (viz. Gavel-kynd) from them. What
I have already said in this matter, I will not trouble the Reader with a
repetition thereof; only in this place take notice that the Saxons had their
Lands commonly partible among them; (except it were in their Military Tenures)
to which Mr. S. has subjoined in his 78. page thus: Now (says he) it is true
and not to be denied, that by the Laws of Canutus inheritances were partible;
but how? it may be equally (like our Gavel-kind) but it is not so expressed,
nor do the words enforce it. Its ordered there indeed, that a partition of the
estate be made, in the one, between, or among the Wife, Children, and next of
Kin by the Lord; in the other by the Heirs among themselves; in both not sith
emne, or, rsithe, efen, i. e. equally; but fsithe riHte; in the former more
explicitly thus; elcum. be thaer maethate, etc. i. e. (according to the old
version in Brampton) unicuiquesecundum modum, qui ad eum pertinet. Here is now
no equal division spoken of, no equalling the younger with the elder Brethren,
or the like; but the estate is to be shifted rithe riHte, i. e. according to
right, justly, or if you will (after the old version of the latter Law in
Brampton, being the same verbatim with that in Mr. Lambard elsewhere) recte:
every one to have his due, happily after a Geometrical, not Arithmetical
proportion. Mr. S. says that it is not to be denied but that they were so; by
the Laws of King Canutus. That at which he makes a hesitation, is, because it
is not expressed, how they were partible, and would have it to be only like
the Kentish-gavel-kind: for which I cannot imagine there can be any reason
produced, nor Authority found, why it should not be the same; or why the
Kentish Gavel-kynd should not be like that in other Countries; but he gathers
it and inferrs it from this, for that it is not expressed to be Divided by even
or equal Portions, but according to Right; to this I answer, I have showed
before several sorts of partible Tenures, and none of them opposite in
Condition or Nature, but that they may all come under the Genus of Gavel-kynd;
and all those Partitions, although not by equal Portions, yet are all according
to the right of Gavel-kynd, which I think is sufficient to make them appear
Members of this Tenure. But let us examine under what consideration the Saxon
Kings had this Tenure, (as it was diffusive over England) in their Laws. And
first of all, those Laws of King Canutus, (wherewith Mr. S. is so ill
satisfied) He, after he had very piously taken care for what concerned the
Worship of God, by the counsel and advice of the Wisemen of his Kingdom; on
thaem Halga^ midintres tid on intanceastre, in the holy Mid-winter-tide at
Winchester, (which Mr. Lambard expounds to be Christmas) enacted several Laws
with this Proaemium before them: THis is thonne seo orldcunde gerednes. theic
ille mid minan itenan raede. that man Heald ofer eal Englaland, that is, This
is then the worldly behest; that by the counsel of my Wise men, that men hold
over all England; by which we may perceive his Laws had an Universal extent
over the whole Kingdom, and them we find to be Built upon the Basis of
Partition: So in his 68th. Law, which is thus rendered, Sive quis incuria, sive
morte repentina fuerit intestato mortuus; Dominus tamen nullam rerum suarum
partem (praeter eam quae jure debetur Hereoti nomine) sibi assumito, verum eas
judicio suo uxori liberis and cognatione proximis, just (pro suo cuique jure)
distribuito, which in the Original is, Ac beo be His diHte seo aeHte gescyft
sith siHte, thife, and cildan, and neh magon, aelcum be thaer maethe de Him
togebyrige, which is as I conceive thus; And by his judgment let the Estate be
shifted (or rather divided) according to right; Wife, and Children, and next of
Kinn, to each one according to that proportion that belongs to them; this
Shifting (if the word signifies so) or Division, must be according to Right.
Where by the way note, that the Saxon word to them known was (...), and that
they made no use of the word Gavel-kynd. But this was a general Law, and (as I
said before) several places had their several manners and proportions of this
Tenure of Partition; yet all those Custom; were to be parted and descend
according to Right. We find somewhat to the same purpose in the 70th. Law of
King Canutus; Porro autem quam maritus sine lite and controversia sedem
incoluerit, eam conjux and proles sine controversia possidento: Sin quae in
illum lis fuerit illata viventem; eam heredes ad se (perinde atque is vivus)
accipiunto; and in the 75th. Law it is provided, that if any in the Army before
or in the presence of his Lord, Dye fighting, (...). (...).
Let his Heriot be forgiven, and let his Heirs succeed him in his Goods and his
paternal Lands, and let it be Shifted or Divided according to Right. Which Law
seems to be word for word found among the Laws of Edward the Confessor; where
I find, and qui in bello ante Dominum suum ceciderit, sit hoc interra, sit
alibi, sint ei relevationes condonatae, and habeant haeredes ejus pecuniam and
terram ejus, sine aliqua diminutione, and recte dividant inter se. Which Laws
did also take place among those that William the Conqueror confirmed, as in
the 36th. Law that passes under his name. Si quis intestatus obierit, liberi
ejus haereditatem aequaliter dividant. Now the collection from hence lies
naturally thus; that that Law, which generally reaches to the behoof of his
Children, or the Descendants of such as Dye Intestate, is the most genuine Law;
for this Law provides, that upon some emergent accidents, as dying Intestate,
or in Battle, or some such sudden Chance; that these notwithstanding, the Land
shall run in its proper Chanel of Partition, so that these occasions should not
attain the power of altering the course thereof; which not meeting with such an
Obstruction, would have without any scruple had its natural course of
Partition. The like was not only in the Knight-service-land spoken of to be in
King Alfred's time, but also in all their Bocland; and other Lands that had the
force put upon them by Testaments or Deeds. This partition came yet a little
nearer to us; for in the 70th. Law of Hen. 1. upon the account of Partition or
Dividing; Provision is made, that Si mulier absque liberis moriatur, parents
ejus cum marito suo partem suam dividant; by which I understand a Division of
parts upon a part before received. And he that wrote the Glossary to the Saxon
Laws, upon the word, Terra ex scripto, says, Haereditatem vero temporibus
illis non (quemadmodum apud nos) solus aetate Maximus adibat, verum ad filios
omnes aequaliter fundus lege veniebat, quod illi (viz. Saxones) Land- fcyftan
dixerunt; and Cantii hac nostra memoria eodem vocabulo to shift Land; id est
herciscere and fundum partiri, appellant. By which it seems the proper Kentish
word is, Shifting-land; as by this Glossators judgment, who I understand is a
Kentishman; which, if so, let them be content with their Saxon Land-shifting;
and let us alone with our Gavel, unless they will be pleased to own their true
The Britons.
Patrons. The Laws I confess that I have lately cited, do rather glance upon
the Custom of Partition, because it is supposed, and taken for granted, that
that Custom was so Paramount, that there was little need of expressing thereof,
which lies so Couched there, as it does amongst the Welsh Laws. And are like
our common Laws, known to all, yet not expressed: generally received, yet not
written. In the 78th. page of Mr. S. (we are still upon the Tenure in question)
is cited Davies his Reports, of the Irish custom de Gavel-kind, (which Book I
have seen) and to it I say, if the Irish know the word by which Davies
denominates the Custom among them; it further confirms me in my opinion of the
British Etymology thereof; Seld. Mare Claus. lib. 2. cap. 1. Scotland and
Ireland were anciently reputed Britain, Hiberma (...) dicta est Ptolomaeo.

Mahumedes Acharranides Arabs -- Mathematicus egregius qui ante annos 900.
floruit, Terrae latitudinem, inquit, observantes a loco lineae aequalitatis
(Aequinoctialis) versus Septentrionalem partem, insula Tile quae est in
Britannia, ubi est majoris diei longitudo 20. herarum, eam determinari
deprehenderunt; Eriam and alii Thulen pro ipsa Britannia usurpacunt seu Anglia,
-- and Albategnius de Oceano qua ab Hispanis respicitur, verba faciens; In co,
inquit, a Septentrionali part sunt Insulae Britannicae quae sunt XII. and post
haec ab inhabitationibus elongatur, and quo procedat, ignoratur.


for the difference betwixt the two Languages is not so great, but that we may
upon good reason believe they were one and the same anciently; nor so great a
Dissonancy at this day between them, but that the footsteps of a former union,
may easily be observed; and Mr. Seldom observes a little of the use in the
Defusedness of the ancient Language, saying; Corwallensea in Anglia, lingua
semper usi sunt Cambro-britannica, saltem velut Dialecto variata, uti etiam
Aremorici in Galliis, Manniae item Insulae incolae Hibernica, unde tamen nemo
est hominum qui velit sequi aut hanc Angliae Regibus, qua Hiberniae sive Domini
sive Reges fuerint, parere, aut illos ex Cambro-Britannici principatu jure
aliq^ principibus suis subjacere. Marc Claus. lib. 2. cap. 19.
the progress of Languages is a thing very well worth the observat on. For by
sundry, discourses with several intelligent persons, concerned in the
Languages, and somewhat upon my own Observation, I can make it out, that if one
of Base Brytany, meets a Cornish-man, that speaks the Cornish, they with small
difficulty will each understand the other; the very Denomination of that
Country being British, (for Armorica is derived from At Mor, which has no
signification but from the Welsh, and is upon or near the Sea, with which the
situation also agrees) let a Cornish-man pass into Wales, he will understand
the Welsh, and be understood of them. A Welsh-man meeting with an Inhabitant of
the Isle of Man, that speaks the Manc-language, both of them will understand
one the others meaning. An Inhabitant of this Isle (a Menavian) meets in
Ireland among the Irish an agreeable Intelligence; and the Irish with great
facility communicate with the High-land Scots in their several Dialects
intelligibly. So that animadverting this Progression, as I have linked them,
much may be inferred of Originals, Customs and Manners; among all of them
having found the footsteps of Gavel-kind; by the Saxons deduced to the
Normans, and not altered by them. Concerning which, I have been larger before;
and in my next Chapter show

CHAP. XV.
That in the Term (Gavelkynd) is not Partition; Of free Socage and other
Customs; concerning Gavelkynd extra Cantium; of the Antiquity of the Laws of
Howeldha.

THat in the Term (viz. Gavel-kynd) there is not any Partition, is plain, both
by what Mr. S. apprehends of it, thinking it to be derived from Rent, and to
signify Genus Gabli, vel redditus; nor, by what I have given in, and exhited
for my sentence, that it signifies Tenura the ^enure, (per eminentiam) of the
Family, or Genus Tenurae, and so consequently may serve for an answer to one
part of the question put by Mr. S. in his 42d. page, where he says, Our next
enquiry shall be whether Partition owe it self to Gavelkind; either ex vi
Termini or ratione rei? and gives his opinion with me, that ex vi Termini,
partition does not owe it self to Gavel-kynd; and in some considerable cases,
it is not enforced in the very use of it; for, in case a Father Dies possessed
or seized of such partible Gavel-kynd-land, and leaves but one Son behind him,
this Land is not then to be parted; which if it had been, ex vi Termini, it
must have either ceased its use and force, or else there must have been found
out some other near Relations with whom the sole Heir had been constrained to a
Partition; the like whereof I could never read or hear was ever done. This was
very well understood by Littleton, Lib. 3. Sect. 265.
and explained by Sir Edward Coke, in that Chapter of Parceners per le Custom;
for Sons (says Sir Edward) are Parceners in respect of the Custom of the Fee
or Inheritance, and not in respect of their persons, as Daughters and Sisters
be, etc. And out of Bracton cites this; Et sunt participes, quasi partem
capientes, etc. ratione ipsius rei quae partibilis est; and non ratione
personarum, quae non sunt quasi unus haeres and unum corpus, sed diversi
haeredes, ubi tenementum partibile est inter plures cohaeredes petentes, qui
descendunt de eodem stipite, semper solent dividi ab antiquo; for such Lands
belonging to a Family, relate only to the Males, (in case of their existency);
but if not, then to the Females. So also we have it observed by Glanvil, who
denominates such as hold by this Tenure of Partition, Liberi Sokemanni, of whom
he writes; quibus mortuis, dividetur hereditas inter omnes filios; si fuerit
Socagium, and id antiquitus divisum; salvo tamen capitali messuagio primogenito
pro dignitate Aesneciae suae; ita tamen quod in aliis rebus satisfaciet aliis
ad valentiam. Si vero non fuerit antiquitus divisum, tunc primogenitus secundum
Quorundam consuetudinem totam haereditatem obtinebit; secundum autem quorundam
consuetudinem, postnatus filius, here is est. I shall not enforce any thing from
the Custom of preference of Primogeniture to Socage Lands, which were such as
were non antiquitus divisae, and those to be but secundum consuetudinem
Quorundam; which expression signifies a diminution, both in respect of Age and
Community; nor of the Tenure which we call Burgh-English; which, whether
brought in by the Saxons, (because of its name) I cannot tell: But concerning
that which Glanvil sets down as the most common Custom of the Kingdom, and
most ancient, (as in his time it was received to be) and the intent of his
Paragraph; which is, to Counter-distinguish the Tenure of this partible Land,
from the Tenures of the Military fees, where the eldest Son in England still
Inherits; of which sort there were not so many, when William the Conqueror
took his Survey of the Kingdom, as after times did bring them unto; when that
no Land was permitted to be held free from the Military tenure; not excepting
the very Lands of the Church: But he being so plain, I shall not trouble you
with a Comment; and return to the subject of this Chapter, which is, that
Partition ex vi Termini does not owe it self to Gavelkind; no, rather
Gavel-kind to Partition; for I believe, when at first this Partition was used
and received into a common Custom, those Users were enforced and obliged to
find and invent a word by which their Custom might be intelligibly expressed,
rather than to make a Custom to the signification of the word; but where the
Custom of Dividing under the Title and Term of Gavel-kind was once received and
settled with its appurtenances, there it inferrs Partition, and passes as a
common Law; not only in Kent, but in Christendom also. To what Mr. S. says by
way of objection out of Bracton; that he is express for a Partition, ratione
rei vel ratione Terrae; if by it, Relation is had to the condition and quality
of the Land, in saying, Page 374.
Sicut de Gavel-kynd, vel alibi ubi terra partibilis est ratione terrae; then
would I be informed what they mean by this ratione terrae; for if the ratio rei
signifies the Tenure, then the ratio terrae, should have relation to the nature
of the Soil; for sure it cannot have relation to the distance or difference by
the Caelestial degrees: I cannot (I confess) apprehend the nicety of the
distinction; and therefore pass to that which Mr. Page 44.
S. says; that that property alone of the Lands being Gavel-kynd, or so
called, does not suffice to render it Partible; if the question be so far
obtained and granted, that Gavel-kind signifies natura redditus; and that that,
is the genuine Etymology thereof; then must it be true, and conceded: But on
the contrary, I know much Gavel-kynd Land, that is not subjected to Rent; how
will it then answer the Tenures derivation and signification? whereas in this
exposition of the ^erm that I have given, (viz. Tenura progenici aut familias)
Division significantly resides in its name and nature; I am sure the inference
is so strong, that where there is Gavel-kynd, there is Partition: and it may as
properly be said, that the Tenure of Burgh-English, by the intrinsecal Value of
its Name, does not import, the youngest Son should Inherit the Land; as that
Gavelkind does not infer a regular participation upon Partition by the
Parceners, which to strengthen it the more, is now become an ancient Custom;
and this Sir Lib. 2. Sect. 165.
Edward Coke says, is one of the main Triangles of the Laws of England; these
Laws being divided into Common Law, Statute Law, and Custom; of the last of
which he adds out of Bracton; that Consuetudo quandoque pro lege servatur, in
partibus ubi fuerit more utentium approbata; and vicem leg is obtinet: long ae
vi enim tempor is usus and consuetudinis, non est vilis Autoritas, longa
possessio (sicut ejus) parit jus possidendi and tollit actionem vero Domino: So
that its continuance for so long a time to be a Custom, gives it a Privilege
without any Impropriety of Speech to be called a Law, notwithstanding the
several usages in this Tenure; and although Mr. S. seems startled at what is
before cited out of Bracton; Sicut de Gavel-kynd vel ALIBI, ubi terra est
partibilis, etc. there is no reason that this Alibi should so offend him, as to
call it an improper expression; for I believe there is scarce a County in
England, but has this Tenure more or less; besides what places I have already
cited in this discourse; I know there is much in Shropshire; yet take one more
upon the other side of the Kingdom, in the County of Norfolk, which is thus
Recorded in the Chamberlains Office of the Exchequer. Placita coram Rege. Anno
20. Edw. 3. Term. Hillar. Norfol. 97. Asss. in qua Johs Buxkyn chr. profert
scriptum relaxationis Johis de Pickering, and Willielmi fratris ejus Gallice
factum de medietat. vi. Mess. etc. and iiii. Tercellorum in Clipesby, Billokby,
etc. In hoc placito patet quod Tenementa quae sunt de feodo de Pickering sunt
partibilia inter Masculos; So that turn into what part of the Kingdom you
please, I believe you will find Gavel-kind. But Mr. S. proceeds by way of
wonder, saying, We are told that this Custom of Gavelkynd Partition takes place
(has done at least) in other Counties; and Sir Edward Coke in the same manner,
has lapsed into the like mis-apprehension; for upon these words of Littleton:
En le County de Kent, he makes this note; for that (says he) in no County of
England, Lands at this day be of the nature of Gavel-kind of common right,
saving in Kent only; But yet (he presently adds) in diverse parts of England,
within diverse Mannours and Seigniories, the like Custom is in force; for my
part I must acknowledge I am to seek, as to the neatness of the distinction;
first (saying) that no County of England has Land, (it is not said all the
Land of the County) of the nature of Gavel-kind of common right; and yet that
in diverse parts of England, within diverse Mannours and Seigniories the like
Custom is in force: if the Salvo lies in this word, viz. of common right. I
would willingly be satisfied, whether Lands in Gavel-kind do not pass, both
according to common Right as well as common Law: Certain it is, that the common
Law of that County, Hundred or Seigniory, where Gavel-kynd is in force, makes
the Children Participants of that Land by common Right; and it is the common
Law, by which that common Right is or can be claimed. In Pages 53. and 54. Mr.
S. speaking of what Littleton instanceth in North Wales, that this Custom of
Gavel-kind partition takes place; besides Kent; he introduces it from that
Authority, not as his faith and belief, but with a, We are told. But let not
the Scruple be so great, when I declare what before I have showed; that it is
in South Wales as well as North Wales; and in other places as well as there.
But then he proceeds to question, thus; What custom I pray? if you enquire of
Littleton, he will tell you it is the Custom of Gavelkind partition; or enquire
of the Customers; you will find them no Strangers to the Denomination of Gavel;
and the word in use among them, even to express the Tenure. Littleton's words
are these, Auxy tiel custom est en autres Lieux Dengleterr. and auxy tiel
custom est en North-gales, etc. which is as much as to say; Also such Custom
(he writes of Parceners by Custom, which is Gavel-kind there) is in other
places of England, and also such Custom is in North Wales, etc. and the like
Custom as our Author mentions to be in North Wales, he says, was also in
Ireland; for there (he adds) the Lands also ( which is one mark of the ancient
Brittons, mark this) were of the nature of Gavel-kind; for that by their
Brehon-law, the Bastards inherited with their Legitimate sons; but as to the
Bastards, that Custom was abolished. Agreeing with Littleton in this point, see
an old Statute. Aliter usitatum est in Wallia quam in Anglia, quo ad
successionem haereditatis, eo quod haereditas partibilis est inter haeredes
maseulos, a tempore cujus non extitit memoria partibilis extitit, Dominus Rex
non vult quod consuetudo illa abrogetur, sed quod haereditates remaneant
partibiles inter consimiles haeredes sicut fieri consuevit; and fiat partitio
illius sicut fieri consuevit. To that which Sir Edward Coke wonders at, which
is the Participation of Bastards by the Brehon-law in the Lands that are
partible; I have already shown, it was a Law or a Custom among the Britains:
But Sir Edward concludes, that Gavel-kynd Custom in Ireland is one mark of the
ancient Brittons; Let not therefore our Professors and Students of the Law,
take it ill, that I have thus trespassed upon their Province; since all I have
said, receives so great a Buttress or Prop by these words of Sir Edward Coke.
The coherence and agreement betwixt the British and Hybernian Laws, makes me
think that anciently they were Governed by one and the same Law; which if
granted, then have we one Argument more to reinforce the Antiquity of those,
that were only refreshed by Howel-dha. But because I have had occasion so often
to mention these Welsh Laws, ascribed to Howel-dha; (as the Norman Kings did
our Laws to Edward the Confessor, and as Edward the Confessor did the same
Laws to his Grandfather Edgar, etc.) I think it not amifs to give the Reader
some account thereof: They are mentioned by all Lancarvan, Lloyd, Dr. Powel.
Writers of British antiquity with a great respect, who generally agree that
they were taken out of the Laws of Mulmutius Dunwallo; who is generally
acknowledged the great Legislator of the Brytains; of whom, take what Balaeus
writes, placing him in his Catalogue of Writers, with this Encomiasticon:
Dunvallo Molmutius, Clotenis Cornubiensium Ducis filius, sapientia and
pulchritudine proavos omnes long exuperans, devictis Loegriae, Cambriae and
Albaniae Tyrannis, solus apud Brytannos Tertius and Vicesimus Rex imperabat,
etc. Protulitque tandem sermon suo vulgari Brytannico, pro his perpetuo
servandis Statuta Municipalia -- lib. 1.

Leges judiciarias -- lib. 1.

Has post mortem patris, Belinus Rex confirmavit, jussitque Molmutinas vocari.
Easdem etiam Gildas Cambrius, in latinum sermonem transtulit, and Alphredus
Magnus in Saxonicum Fatum obivit postquam 40 annis magnifice regnavit, ad
Templum Concordiae, quod condiderat ^renovanti sepultus, etc. ante servatorem
natum, 430. King Howel (Surnamed dda, i. e.) the good, who flourished in the
year of Christ 942. perceiving his Brytains under a kind of constraint; being
pent up in the two western extremities of the Island; is said to have made new
Laws, and fitted the old to the exigence and behoof of those times; and Dr.
Powel in his Additaments to the Cambrian History, says, That he did reform the
Laws and Customs of Wales: then it seems that these Laws, were Laws; and these
Customs, were Customs before the Reign of Howel; who only took upon him
Reformation, not alteration or innovation: and the Doctor further discoursing
of those Referrees, (to whom Howel had committed the care of this work; who for
that end were to meet at a place called Ty-gwyn in Caermarthenshire;) says,
these had in charge to examine the old Laws and Customs of Wales, and to
gather out of those, such as were meet for the Government of the Country; who
fully did discharge their Commission; thus: in reteining those that were
wholesome and profitable: expounding the ambiguous and doubtful; and abrogating
the superfluous and hurtful. By what has been here said it seems these Laws
are some what improperly ascribed to Howel-dha; since the charge to the
Referrees was to examine and gather the old-Lans; and the accomplisnment of
that charge was reteining, expounding and abrogating; no mention at all of
introducing any new Laws or Customs; this considered, with the turmoyls the
Brytains had from the time of Julius Caesar to the Reign of Howel-dha; and
observing their unsettled fluctuating conditions from time to time through all
those Ages, may afford us sufficient reason to subjoyn; that these in
probability were those ancient constitutions, Laws and Customs, which without
any difficulty may be allowed to be the procedure of the legislature of
Mulmutius Dunwalle. Other M S. Copies thereof I understand to be in the Custody
of some Welsh Gentlemen; one whereof is in Welsh and Latin one sot anent the
other. My Copy, bestowed upon me some few years since, has the initial Letters
of each Law, handsomely rubricated; and carries antiquity in the transcript
thereof: among whom I observe this Gavel or Tenure of Partition is made the
very hinge or Axis, upon which the whole body of them move. I think it will not
be taken amiss if I transcribe one more, that carries with it not only
partition, but also the very manner of it, prescribed so anciently, and it is
this:

Cumfratres inter se hereditatem dividant; Ex legibus Howeli boni.
Tydyn and edificia potris and octo acre terre cedent juniori, cum calderio,
Securi, and cultro sui patris; hec tria non potest pater nisi Juniori dare; and
si in vadimonia sint data, possunt redimi and nunquam amitti: Tydyn est domus.
quilibet frater debet Tydyn and; octo acras: Junior debet dividere hereditatem
inter fratres; senior autem primo eligere debet; postea secundum aetatem suam
unusquisque ad minorem.

In like manner there are certain Principals (for so they call them) in
Urchenfield, that (like heir-looms) pass to the Eldest (and herein, the Welsh
and this does disagree) and are not subject to partition; such as is the best
beast of any sort; the best bed and furniture; the best table, the best dish,
etc. which are like the caldron, hatchet and knife, that cannot by the
aforecited Law be given away from the youngest Son, nor so much as set to pawn:
by which Law it is provided, that after the setting out of eight acres with the
Fathers Tenement or dwelling house, then is the partition to be made by the
youngest Son: the Eldest and so the rest according to seniority first making
their choice. Here are two different usages in the same Tenure of partition,
and no wonder is it that we find in that old forementioned Statute, Aliter
usitatum est in Wallia quam in Anglia; when that the different usages in
England are so many; but this Aliter usitatum est, must not be imagined to
argue that in England it was not at any time used; the Aliter referrs to the
time when the Statute was enacted: yet this notwithstanding Mr. S. would not
have it Gavel-kynd custom taken in its true, plenary and complete acception;
here be many qualifications, but yet (not to repeat what I formerly upon this
urged) it will prove to be the true, plenary and complete acception of the
custom that is taken and received in other places extra Cantium, having all
those qualities and conditions that are comprehended in that used in Kent;
which to avoid repetition I shall pass over, and inform you how that

CHAP. XVI.
The Changes very considerable from the Tenure of Villenage to the Tenure of
Gavel-kind.

Mr. S. having several times met with Deeds that express the change of Lands
held in Villenage into Gavelkind; I think it not amiss to show of what
consequence this exchange was. He, in his 58th. page, says: It Is true indeed
at this day and time out of mind (happily from Richard the seconds time) such
servile works (properly called villein-services) have been, as they still are,
intermitted, or rather quite ceased; insomuch as all our Gavel-kynd-land, in
point of service, now differs nothing from free Socage: being such ubi fit
servitium in denariis. That there were changes out of Villenage Tenures into
others, more free, and less servile, is frequently to be found; but by that to
lay any force upon the in erpretation or Etymologye of the word; or that upon
the account of those citations brought in by Mr. S. it should signify Genus
gabli aut redditus; because there was a tent fixed upon the change: I cannot
yield unto it. To what he observes in his 59th. page, out of the Customal of
Eastry Manor in Kent, of the changing Octo Cotarii pro Gavel-kende; since
that Gavel-kind in Kent is received as a Tenure far less servile, than their
ordinary Villenage, this change, I say, was very considerable, and did well
deserve, a sum of money in Gersum to the Lord; for that these Cotarii before
this change, being by Tenure Villeins, and so consequently their Lands not
descendable to their Children; their persons, not scarce their own; their
acquisitions got by the sweat of their brows, at the will of the Lord, by this
change these cotarii being invested into a propriety of this Land; and this
Land made to descend as in Gavelkind; the mutation was very advantageous to the
occupant. But yet there appears somewhat further to me to confirm my
affirmation; and it is thus to be considered: Mutati sunt octo Cotarii Pro
Gave-kende, Medleferme tenet unum messuagium, tres acras, quae solent esse
cotar, modo reddit XL. den. de Gablo. These Cotarii had their Lands changed
into Gavel-kend and Medleferm tenet unum messuagium, que solent esse Cotarii;
modo reddit XL. den. de Gablo. They are changed into the Tenure of Gavelkind;
and pay rent XL. den. de Gablo. this last, notwithstanding the propinquity of
sound cannot have any relation to Gavel-kende; for then it had been a
Tautologie; but Gavel-kind and Gablum are set forth into different and distinct
uses. The Tenure was changed into Gavel-kind, with the reservation of an annual
Rent of XL. den. de Gablo; that is to say, upon the account of that imposition
made at the agreement; by way of acknowledgement for creating this Land,
Gavel-kind-land. The last has relation to the rent reserved and the
acknowledgement, the other to the manner of holding in relation to the change,
and to the future descent. So likewise is that other citation out of the
Archbishops accompt-roll; in the year 1230. where it is thus entered, and d^
XIIIs. IVd. de fine Cotariorum, ut Coteriae suae ponerentur adredditum; that is
to say, that their Cotages may be fixed and certain in relation to their Gables
or Reat, for which they paid a fine; whereas the first citation had relation
both to Tenure and Rent. I shall now take my progress northward, and inform
you, that there is also as the remainder of the ancient planters

CHAP. XVII.
Gavel-kind in Scotland; when the English tongue and the Customs were first
planted in Scotland.

MR. S. in his 53d. page, reports That the Tenure of Gavel-kynd in other
Countries besides Kent, is a custom indeed; but yet like to that in Scottish
Socage Land; to which he produces as a Test. Skenaeus. I find by Mr. S. that
Gavel-kind shall be permitted in other Countries to be like unto that in Wales,
like that in Ireland, like to Scottish Socage-land, rather than like to it self
or to the same. Yet Mr. John Skene says in his Chapter, de linea recta
descendentium thus, Gif any man deceasis, and leavis behind him maa Sons nor
ane, either he is Succomaanus, and haldis not his Lands be service of Ward; and
then his Heretage is divided amangst all his Sonns, or he is miles -- la the
quhilk case, the eldest Son succeedis in the ha^ Lands; quhilk heretably
perteined to his father, etc.
What the manner of the Scottish-Socageland is, or has been anciently in
Scotland, I am not certain; but of this I am assured, that there are sevcral
Ma^nours heretofore belonging to certain Bishops of Scotland, where there is
the same usage of partition of Lands as in Gavel-kind; which shows that those
Lands belonging in those ancient times to the Church did not feel the severity
of the War; but enjoyed this Custom and Tenure from their most ancient
proprietors. Which is also plainly to be perceived by the retention of this
Tenure (yet in force) amongst the ancient Britains of the Isles; who by reason
of their site were most free from the fury of the War. I call them Brytains
(though now they are called High-landers) because upon trial of words and
denominations of places, I find that Language and the British so cohaerent, as
that there is not much difference between them to a serious observer, (as I
have before treated) consideration being had to such words as have suffered by
the Saxon converse. For this Island at its first plantation, did certainly upon
the increase of families, who first settled in the Easternmost parts thereof,
remove their increase Westward and Northward, till such time as by this means
both Cornwall and the Orcades were also planted; and then the Saxons in process
of time enforced the Brytains to leave these their ancient Seats in the Eastern
parts of the Isle; (yet not all (as I showed before) who retired by their force
either into Cornwall, Wales, the Scottish Highlands, or Base Britainy in
France, where they in their offspring do occupye these places, (with Ireland
also) unto this day. There lies a large Island named Lewis, belonging to the
Earl of Seaforth, between the Hebrides and the Orcad^s; which wholly holds by
this Tenure of partition; by what name there called, I could not understand,
for their Language there, is Irish-British; but if according to Mr. S. the name
were Saxon in its original, what hinders, but that all Countries where the
Saxon Language is in use, should have the knowledge of the word? and upon this
ground it is, that I may with moroprobability ( e contra) infer; that because
it is not so universally known in those places where the Saxon tongue is
spoken, it administers more reason to believe and conceive it should have
another origin; than to be so easily lost among the very users of the
Language; and in no such place to be found (as Mr. S. would have us believe)
but within the Septs of Kent. The time of planting the Saxon Customs in
Scotland is difficult to be known; but if the planting the Language argues any
probability of the planting of Customs; then we had best make the time of the
planting the Saxon tongue the matter of our enquiry; thence being able probably
to deduce, that at that time the Customs were received: for it was far
otherwise in the Saxon settlement in Scotland than in England. For here they
planted and settled with the Brytains; there they drove out the Picts totally,
and seated themselves in their places; upon which account it was, that they not
having any persons with whom they might co-inhabit, and so participate of their
Customs, were upon their settlement constrained to create new Customs, or
else to revive their own, for their best security. I think them much in an
error who affirm that the Identity of Language betwixt us and Scotland, was
occasioned from the multitude of the Profugi, or such as for the security of
their persons fled under the protection of Malcolm Canmoir King of Scotland in
the time of William the Conqueror; certainly, considering the old animosities
betwixt the two Nations, it would have ill become the courtesy (at least the
policy) of the Scotc^ King, to have received so many English guests, a by their
number or multitude might have been able to plant their Language among his
people, so different from their own. I must confess, that notwithstanding this
national enmity, some he did receive, out of whom, he chose his wife, Margaret
Sister to Edgar Etheling; and bestowed Lands upon diverse of them. A Catalogue
of several of them the Bishop of Rosse has given to us by their Surnames, of
whom he reckons the families of Calder, Lokert, Gordon, Seaton, Lauder, Waun,
Meldron, Shaw, Lermount, Libertoun, Straquhin, Rettraye, Dundas, Cockeburne,
Myrtom, Inglis, Leslye, Cargill, Cuilra, Mar, Menzeis, Abercrumy, Lindsay,
Vaus, Ramsay, Loval, Torris, Preston, Sandelandis, Bissat, Foullis, Wardlou,
Maxuell, etc. These are the most and principallest in that account, from whom
it cannot be rationally expected that that Kingdom should receive a mutation
of their Mr. S^ene under the Title of Scotia, says, That King David (...)
first, in the third zier of his Reight, Ann Dom. 1126. Be his Charter maid,
Omnibus Scottis and Anglis, tam in Scotia, quam in Lodoneio constitutis, gave
to St. Cuthbert and his Mo^ks in Durh^m, the Laods of Coldingham, etc.
Language, and therefore I shall fix it upon a greater-probability. Speed
says, that Hengist sent for Octa and Ebissa two principal Captains (among the
Saxons in Germany) who being embarked in forty Pinaces, sailed about the Picts
Coasts, wasting the Isles of Orcades, and got many Countries beyond the Trith;
Yet this was not a settlement, for that it is not probable they fixed here at
this time; again they had much War with the Saxons, when the Kingdom of
Northumberland was planted in their neighborhood; which may possibly afford
some small Knowledge of the Language one to the other, but not enough to
confine the Scottish tongue within the Mountains and Highlands of Scotland.
What I find in the Scottish History, written by John Lesley Bishop of Rosse, (a
person of great repute, being Ambassador for Mary Queen of Scots in the Court
of Queen Elizabeth in England,) whose book was Printed at Rome in the year of
our Lord 1578. is that, out of which I shall collect this ensuing Discourse.
Kenneth the 69th. King of Scots, who flourished about the year of Christ 840.
defeated the Picts near Storling; and improving his Victory into
Northumberland, prosecuted them with Fire and Sword so closely, that (you shall
have it in his own words) omnes incolas promiscue nulla sexus habita ratione
obtruncat, and Picticum nomen prope extinxit: Qui autem evasere, in Daniam,
Norvegiamve, alii in Northumbriam se abdiderant; and presently after concludes;
Sic Pictorum Gens post Centesimum supra Millesimum ex quo in Albionem venerat
annum, tantum non deleta est; here we find the Pictish Nation in Scotland
almost expired, who had very long before this been intruders into this part of
the Island; and during this Kings life, those Lands upon which they had lived
were re-occupied by the old Irish or British inhabitants of the Hills, who
were constrained to live in those mountains and fastnesses during the time the
Picts kept possession of the Lowlands; and at that time the Scots changed the
names of those Regions given unto them by the Picts and their Princes, into
other different appellations. But Kenneth dying in the twentieth year of his
Reign, and in the 855. year of Christ, to him succeeded Donald the fifth, who
is said to be Germanus Kennethi; for Buchanan observes, that the Custom of
Scotland then was, If the Sons of the deceased King were Minoris aetatis.
under age, they elected the most aged, and greatest experienced of that Kings
line to be their Prince; so that this Donald was chosen into the Marble-Chair
which Kenneth his Predecesser had brought from Argile and placed in Scone (the
same that at this present remains as a Relic and a Trophy in the Abbey of
Westminster) Donald proved very offeminate and vicious, and puffed up with his
felicity, so over-flowed with vices, that he by them gave the opportunity and
occasion of the ruin of that, which Kenneth by his valor had achieved; the
Picts who all this while lay close in Northumberland, understanding his
carelessness and looseness, istam suae libertatis asserendae occasionem
arripientes (says the Bishop) cum Auxiliaribus Saxonum and Britannorum in
Scotiam irrumpunt. Donaldus, collecto exercitu, hostibus prope Jedburgum
occurrit: initoque prelio, illos in fugam compulit Rex, nostrique milites
victoria infolentes, ^cctem sequentem, sine excubiis, supi^t; sine ordine,
sparsi; sine disciplina, negligentes; sine timore, stulti; in luxu and
compotationibus consumunt. Hostis de hac re certio^ factus, and ad omnem
occasionem intentus, illos media nocte somno vinoque sepul^os, opprimit:
interfectisque circiter viginti millibus ipsum Donaldum cum nobilibus domum
captivum ducit. Denaldus, ut se in libertatem assererel, omnem regionem inter
Strivelingum and Cludam amnem inte jectam, BRITANNIS and SAXONIBUS dedidit;
annuaeque pecuniae, tributi nomine pendendae condition sese astring it. Here I
observe, that this los^ that Donald received gave opportunity to the Britains
and Saxons their planting themselves in the Low-lands; the Scots being reforced
into the Highlands. But concerning the limits and bounds betwixt these and the
Scots, he gives us a particular account; and shows in what parts the one
inhabited, and in what part the others, and informs us that these Angli-Saxones
in hujus pugnae memoriam, Strivelingi Arcem prius dirutam iterum extruxerunt:
Fortheam quoque ponte munierunt; quopostea in loco crucem, tanquam victoriae
signum sustulerunt; cui ii versus aetatem illam satis redolentes affabre
insculpti sunt, Ang los a Stotis separat crux ista remot is,
Arma hic stant Brutti, stant Scoti sub hac cruce tuti.


Interea Picti, qui Scoticae cladis Auctores fuerant, tota Albione a Saxonibus
praecipites ejiciuntur; and to this Buchanan adds; that durae conditiones
praepositae, quas tamen praesens rerum status tolerabiles faciebat vidert: ut
omni agro qui inter vallum Severi esset, Scoti cederent; ut limits essent,
infra Sterlinum, Fortha; infra Britannodunum, Glotta: inter duos amnes, vallum
Severi. ANGLI enim and BRITONES agros relictos inter se partiti sunt, Glotta
eis dirimente. The Picts for some time, after they had in vain from their
Assistants expected Restoration, and seeing themselves deluded, ad Cimbros and
Scandianos, (id est) ut nunc loquimur, in Daniam and Norvegiam transmiserunt.
This Severus (says Bedc) a caeteris indomitis gentibus non muro (ut quidam
estimant^) sed vallot distinguendam putavit and Hit begyrde and gefaestnade mid
^ice and mid eorthealle, f^ am sae to ae, that is, and did girt it and firmed
it with a Dike, and with an Earth-wall from Sea to Sea.
V^llum Severi was not that Wall which reached from Carlisle to Tinmouth; But
that, the Vestigia's whereof are to be seen, ab Abircorno, per Glasgoensem
agrum ad Cl^dae fluvii ostia, ubi nunc castrum Dunbritonum situm est. This Wa^l
was made of Turf; without it, is at this time remaining a small-Building, not
very Ruinous, which the Scots call Dun a paix; which some there say does
signify, the Hill or Memorial of peace; about which are still to be seen above
twenty Tumuli or Lowes. ( Dun indeed in our ancient Language signifies a Hill,
by which name the Inhabitants in and about Dunkirk call the adjoining Hills;
and the name of the Town from its situation among those very Hills takes its
Denomination) But that noted remain is thought to be a Temple Dedicated to the
Deus Terminus, Built by the Romans at their Non plus ultra. These are those
parts of Scotland, inhabited by the Saxons and Britains; distinguished from the
ancient Scots (now called High-landers from their site among the Hills) by the
name of Low-landers and Saxons; who settled at this time not only their Language
in these parts, but their Customs also; which by my small Observation, seem
most of them to be such, as were in use before the Normans invaded the Southern
parts of this Island; and no wonder if you find through several Ages among them
a succession in the preference of Primogeniture, since their Militia's did
require it by reason of their continual Broyls. These achievements with their
Customs they maintained under a Diversity of Kings, both Scots and Saxons; for
the revolutions were very frequent and various: Yet such I say, is the
Deduction to be made from this Chapter, that if any thing proves the Tenure to
be the ancient one of the original Planters, the finding of it in these Corners
and Angles, in these remote Islands, and in these privileged Lands of the
Bishops, is the greatest argument that I can fancy or imagine. Before I
conclude, I shall speak a little to some other particulars, and first of

CHAP. XVIII.
Villenage; the meaning of it, the antiquity thereof. Of the ancient words,
Clown, Pagan, Knave. Of Surnames; of Soc and Sac.

MR. S. In his third proposition (in his 61. and 62. pages) taking it for
granted, that the Term Gavel-kind is of a Saxon Derivation and Parentage,
sixeth its entrance into our Isle with the coming in of the Saxons; concerning
which I have formerly Discoursed, and therefore in this place shall pass it by:
Only take notice, that he deservedly. Censures, and Confutes such as have
labored to fix its introduction among us, by the coming of the Normans; of
which number Mr. Seldom has happened to be one; as in his illustrations upon Mr.
Draitons Poly-olbion; who, out of Spot, (St. Austins Chronicler) relates the
Story of the Kentish-men, with their green Boughs, treating with the Norman
Conqueror, with which Story many persons have been well pleased; and yet by
what I understand of it, it shows rather a procurement of a Confirmation of
this Custom among the rest, than a Creation thereof at that time. But he having
sufficiently evicted the improbability of that Story, passes in his 72. and
73. pages, to show Spots mistake in averring there were no Villains in Kent;
which he confutes by a Citation of an ancient M S Chartulary in Sir Thomas
Cottons Library; and by certain Observations out of the Kentish Survey in
Domesdey. The same mistake was lately among many others generally received, as
that Villenage was the Badge of the Norman Conquest; but this I can affirm from
my own Reading, that the name carried with it no such Odium and Reproach in
Elder times, as it has done in later Days. For what was Villanus, more than a
Villager to such or such a Lord? what their Villenage, but their Duties and
ustom-services belonging to a Village for the Lord's use? So that the
intrinsecal yalow of the word Villain, is only one that inhabits or lives in a
Village. The like is of Colonus (a Clown) which is no more than one that Tills
then Land so also of Paganus, called in the Saxon Tongue 18. Leg. Regis Inae.
(...) from whence came their Ceo^^ep; now called Churls, which is not much
different in Denomination from Villanus, and is one that dwells in a Village;
and not as we take Pagan commonly, to signify one that is of an Ethnical
Religion. But to Discouse of them in order as they lie before us; Villain is a
Villager, of whom, Minshew upon the word says, Galli suos rusticos and
villicos proprie dicunt villains; villanus in uit Budaeus, dicitur, quod
villae adscriptus, and colonoriae conditioni^^ aut ipse addictus, aut majores
sui fuerint; quod tamen nomen loquentium inscitia, in contumeliam jam vertit.
But Mr. S. out of the Mirroir speaks them thus; Cultivers de fief demorants en
villages uplande; car de vill est dit villeine; but (as I said in another
place) there is to be found almost in every Leaf in Domesd y-book, not only an
account of what Villains were in each Manor at the time of that Survey; but
also how many there were in the time of Edward the Confessor; and as Mr. S.
has observed, there is a name or two found in that Record, that has much more
of Servility than Villenage carries with it: One of which is there termed
Servi, and were more immediately dependant upon the Lord's will, than the
Villani were, which were those Nief's or Neif's, they had in ancient time,
which were Bondmen, or little better than Slaves. Mr. S. is of opinion, that
the word or term Villanus was not in use before the Norman Conquest; for in his
126th. page he says, as afore-time the Saxons had their Ceorles, Gebures,
Polcmen, etc. so afterward the Normans their Villani, Bordmanni, Cotarii, etc.
certainly, these three names the Normans found here: First for the Bordmanni,
if that name as well as Cotarii be not Saxon, I know not what is; for the
Bordmanni were such as lived upon the Bordlands, which were (according to
Bracton Bract. Lib. 4. Tract. 3. cap. 9. number. 5.
) the Demesnes that Lords kept in their hands, to the maintenance of their
Board or Table; and Cotarii were Cottagers, such as dwelt in a Cottage, Anno 4.
Ed. 1. Stat. 1.
(that is to say) a House without Land belonging to it, and comes from the
Saxon word (...), which is the same with Tugurium and Tectum, in Latin, a
^egendo; so as this is in signification a Cover or Shelter; because those small
Habitations were only made to cover them from the Sun and Weather. I am not
ignorant of that great mistake, the whole Current of Writers have run into,
those whose Works have been published within these last 300 years; where they
generally endeavor to load all the indignities of Tenures of Servility and
Vassalage upon this Norman change. I deny not but that some were at that time
introduced, especially many Jocular Tenures, which were the effects of private
contracts betwixt the Lord and his Tenants; and not of any general concernment;
but hence I cannot yield to conclude, that all Tenures of Servility were of
their introduction. Mr. S. continues in his opinion in the 104th. page, where
he writes; That Fee-simple, Fee-tayl, Fee-farm, Grand and petit Serjeanty,
Escuage, Burgage, Villenage, etc. being all of the Norman plantation; and we by
them (says he) at least since their Conquest of us brought acquainted with
them, etc. perhaps those compounds might be the effect of the consultations of
some of the Kings of the Norman race; but for the word (Fee) Minshew
discourses very well upon it, for (says he) our ancient Lawyers, either not
observed from whence the word grew, or at least not sufficiently expressed
their knowledge, what it signified among them from whom they took it. Feudum,
(whence the word Fief or Fee comes) signifies in the German Language, In
like manner does Mr. S. labor to deduce it from a Saxon original, p. 107.
Beneficium cujus nomine opera quaedam gratiae testificandae causa, debentur;
and our of Hotoman (says) that by this name go all Lands and Tenements that
are held by any acknowledgment of any superiority to any higher Lord; so is all
the Land in England (except the Crown land) held, that is of Feudum or Fee: for
he that can say most for his Estute, says but this; Seisitus inde in Dominico
meo ut de seudo, which is, I am seized of this or that Land or Tenement in my
demain as of Fee; which is no more than if he should say, It is my Demain or
proper Land after a sort, because it is to me and my Heirs for ever; yet not
simply mine, because I hold it in the nature of a benefit from another: and
Feetayl as distinguished was not an introduction of the Normans, for that
Minshew observes it to have its Original from the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 1.
which was made Anno 13. Edw. 1. The word Feud is used familiarly to this day in
the Higher and lower Germanyes. For what concerus grand and petit Serjeanty, I
believe the words to be French, and so introduced by the Normans, to express
those Services that were due to the Kings of England before the Conquest; such
Services being reserved by the Saxon Kings. The service of Escuage was before
the Norman Conquest, though not known by that name; the like was of Burgage,
which is no more than a yearly Rent, whereby men of Cities and Burrows held
their Lands or Tenements of the King, or any other Lord, which was in use
before the Conquest. Concerning Villenage, Mr. S. does cite out of Mr. Lambards
Perambulation of Kent in Mepham, under the Term of Agenes-land, this, as a very
ancient passage, which had been enough to have convinced me, that there had
been Villains before the Norman Conquest; and it is this; Et si Villanus ita
crevisset sua probitate, quod pleniter haberet quinque hidas de suo proprio
alledio, etc. and in his 114. page cites an old Version of the 19. and 21. of
King Ina's Laws of the word (...), which is made thereby to signify Villanus
or Colonus; and it is convicted by Domesdey Book Survey in Sudsexe thus;
Radulfus tenet de Willielmo (viz. de Warene) BRISTELMESTUNE. Brictric tenuit de
dono Godwini Comitis T. R. E. and modo se defendit pro V. hid. and dim. Tra^
est III car. In dni^o est dimid. car. and XVIII villi^. and IX Bordarii cum III
car. and uno servo. De gablo IV milia alletium. In eadem villa tenet VVidardus
de Willo VI. hid. and unam Us. and pro^tanto se defendit. Tres Aloarn tenuerunt
de Rege Edwardo and potuerunt ire quolibet. Unus ex eis habuit Aulam and
Villani tenuerunt parts aliorum Duorum. Here is an express of a Servus, and
also of the Villani, who held this Land in the time of Edward the Confessor.
Besides this, I could allege many more; but Sir Edward Coke upon Littleton,
says, that Villani in Domesday are not there taken for Bondmen; but had their
name de Villis, because they had Ferms; and there did works of Husbandry for
the Lord; and they were ever before named Bordarii, (which is contrary to Mr.
S. in what I cited before of him concerning Bordmanni, which I believe is one
and the same thing with Bordarii) and such as are Bondmen are called Servi.
Thus Sir Edward Coke. But I believe the Normans found these Villains here, even
by their name, by which I believe they were of a very ancient standing; for
that I find them known by the Britains by that Title, as they are often
mentioned in the Laws of Howel-dha; in a Law which before in this (...) I
mentioned, is notice taken of a King's Villain, and of a Nobleman's Villain;
and then another that gives a right to the Foster-children, of dividing Land
with the Children of the Villein; but a little more plainly to bring the proof,
in those Laws it is Demonstrated how that Tres homines promoveri possunt u^a
die; that is to say, (as I guess it) they are made Gentlemen in one day; (here
you must take the Latin as I found it,) Captivus si movetus in Swyd de XXIV.
officialibus: Swyd is dignitas, dignity; so that the sense of it is this; if
the Prince bestows upon a Caprive, the dignity of being one of the twenty four
Chief officers of his Court, it is an advancement peculiar; or he becomes by it
a Gentleman. Secundus, filius villani si sit clericus (our common Law does
differ from the Civil Law, which says, Partus sequitur ventrem, where as the
Common Law has it, partus sequitur Patrem) but here provision is made that the
Son of a villain being a Clergy man should become a Gentleman; which is
somewhat explained by the next. Tertius: Homo ex captiva villa, si villa habeat
a Domino patrie licentiam Ecclesiam aedificare, and in Cimiterio ejus corpora
sepeliri; tunc villa si^, and omnes homines de ea postea sunt liberi; that is
to say, perhaps they were as servi before, or villani, and now they become
liberi. Much to the same purpose Mr. Lambard shows us out of an old piece of
Saxon; where the reputation of a Thane consisted, in having among other things
a Church, a Hall, a Porch, etc. which shows the cohaerence of the Saxon
Customs with the British; and thus by Judge Dodaridge (out of him) it is
rendered in his Treatise of Barons, page 152. It was sometimes in the English
Laws, that the people and Laws were in reputation, then were the wisest of the
people, worship-worthy in his degree, Earl and Chorle, Theyne and under-Theyne;
and if a Chorle so thrived, that he had fully five Hides of Land of his own, a
Church, and a Kitchen, a Bell-house and a Gate, a Seat, a several Office in the
Kings Hall; then was he from thenceforth the Theines right-worthy. And if a
Theyn so thrived, that he served the King on his message, on his journey-ward,
in his Household, if he then had a Theyn, which him followed, who to the Kings
experience had five Hides, and in the Kings Palace his Lord had served; and
thrice with his errand had gone to the King, he might afterward with his
fore-oath, his Lords part play at need, and if a Thein that he became an Earl,
then was he from henceforth the Theins rightworthy. And if a Scholar so thrived
through Learning, that he had degree, and served Christ, he was thenceforth of
Dignity and Peace, so much worthy as thereunto belonged; unless he forfeited,
so that he the use of his degree ne might. Again, among the same Laws, for
forfeitures for burning of Houses, it is thus provided; that for the burning of
Odin Regis dimid. libre. Optimatis LX. den. Villani Regis XXX. den. Villani
Optimatis XXIV. den. hoc de illis est intelligendum qui Piben habent, de aliis
tercia pars pretii cadit. For the understanding whereof that Odin is translated
formax; which in this place signifies a Kilne wherewith to make Malt, because
that Piben signifies a Kilne-hole; the burning of which sorts of Kilne is that
which is here meant; which unless it has a Kilne-hole the third part of the
prescribed forfeiture decreaseth. That which I cause it to shoot quite blank
against, is the opinion of no Villeines before the conquest, which this Law
shows to the contrary; in giving you an account of such even at this time of
the Collection of these Laws; Kingsvilleins and Noblemens-villeins. In another
Law it is, that, Si filia Villani eat in rapinam cum aliquo; postea ab eodem
sit repudiata, reddat (...) animalia tria supradicte etatis; another Law
provides what the Wife of a Nobleman might bestow without her Husbands consent;
and what she might lend without his consent; But enacts that, Uxor Villani
nichil potest dare sine lioentia Villani; nec mitram; nec aliquod accommodare
nisi cribrum tam long, quod vox ejus possit audiri stans in limine domus sue
dum clamat propter illud. All these Laws are of several concernments; but do
all expressly prove Villenage above one hundred years before the Norman
Conquest, and so by what I have said before concerning the Laws of Howel-dda,
probably to be an ancient British usage. For the word Clown, thought to be
derived from the Latin word Colonus, from when^e also is the British word
Klwn; And is the same with the Dutch word Boer, which by a syncope is used for
Bouwer, from the word Bouwen (id est) arare, colere agrum, as Minshew has it;
what reproach could there probably be in that denomination? yet now what
ignominy does it carry with it? The like may be said of the last which is
called Paganus in Latin, but in English Pain, which became a Surname to a
family, and a Christian name to several great persons. But Minshew has this
Story of the Original of the Name, which carries in my Judgment no great store
of probability with it; but as it is I will transcribe it; under the word Pagan
(he says) A Judaeis deflux^ss^^mos hic and appellatio rei videtur; cum enim
inter Judaeos H^erosolyma tantum civitas erat, nullisque nisi Judaeis ad illam
dabatur accessus; reliqur ownes Hebraeis erant Pagani, in pagis, quasi extra
cioitatem and populum Dei constituti; and out of the eighth book of Isid. he
brings another story much to the same purpose. Pagani, inquie, ex ^^agis
Atheniensium dicti, ubi exorti sunt; ibi enim in locis agrestibus and Pagis
gentiles lucos, idolaque statuerunt; and a tali inilio vocabulum sortitisunt. I
am persuaded that Paganus comes from Pagus; but I find that Cyflifc the Saxon
Pagan had greater Priveleges than a Villain, for that he was bound to military
services; as in the 52d and 64th. Laws of King Ina, which for brevity sake I
shall pass by; only take notice that of all such denominations there has risen
terms of disgrace, which were not so, in the first usage thereof; so is it
familiarly given to us, concerning the common denomination of the Term Knave;
which is a word taken from the Britains, who called a Household servant, or
rather such a one as attends upon the person of another, in their Language
Knaf, and is also one that is not yet properly said to be a man, but is betwixt
a boy and a man. In the sense of a servant it is used in Stat. 1. cap. 3. An.
14 Ed. 3. but in its corruption, and as it is now received it is a word of
great disgrace, and expresses one that falsifies his trust. M S. Obit. Eccles.
Heref penes Authorem. Paul in our elder Translation is rendered the Knave of
Jesus Christ, to express that which we now read the Servant of Jesus Christ.
In an old Obit book that I have, formerly belonging to the Church of Hereford,
there is mention of a benefactor called Simon Gods-^nave; from whom I believe
at this day a certain place in the City of Hereford is called Gods-knave-inne;
which certainly has no more in the signification, than, the Servant of God. By
this we see, that from such like words and denominations as these are, Surnames
were derived; though it may now seem strange to us to meet with such
appellations; it appears that they were not so curious of procuring excellent
ones to transmit to their posterities; but accepted of any serious or jocular;
some from shapes of body; others from qualityes of the mind; some from Trades,
Offices, etc. But I cannot let that pass without notice, which for a Surname I
met with in the second volume of Domesdey, in the Survey of the Connty of
Essex, being there Registered as one of the Tra^s Tenentes of that County, where
it is thus Recorded; The Land of Roger God save the Ladies, for the word
Domina, says Judge Dodaridge in his Treatise of the Barons, page 151.
signifies Ladies or Dames, so women after fourteen years of age were called
Dominae; as also those which were anciently navigeal women, (in earnest that is
a hard word) and by our English Poets, Dames, etc. sed vid. Seldeas Titles of
Honor, 1 part. fol. 53.
Terra Rogeri Deus salvet Dominas. But I have done with the Tenure of Villenage
and the antiquity thereof; of the use and abuse of ancient denominations and
appellations I shall only add one or two words; as a mite cast into Mr. S's.
Treasury; which is by way of approbation of what he has learnedly discoursed
concerning Sok and Sak, evicting that common received opinion which makes it
signify the service of the Plough: But Minshew upon the word says, that Soca
is a word signifying a power or liberty of Jurisdiction, as appears by these
words out of Bracton; sunt quidam Barons, and alii libertatem habentes, scil.
Soc and Sac. Tol and Thean. Infangthefe and utfangthefe; and isti possunt
judicare in curia sua eum qui inventus fuerit infra libertatem suam, seisitus
de aliquo latrocinio manifesto. The self-same interpretation does Mr. Lambard
give it in his Translation of the Saxon-laws; for amongst the rest in those of
King-Ina, Be cyfic socnum is rendered, Leg. 24.
de immunitate fani; and in the Laws of Henry 1. it is said, Nullus enim Socnam
habet impune peccandi; that is, no one has liberty of sinning without
punishment. In the second of King Alureds Laws, Be cy ficena socnum is by the
interpreter rendered de immunnitate Templi; so likewise in the Laws of King
Edmund Hamsocn^ or Hamsocnum is translated there immunitas domus; the
privileges which men take themselves to have, in their own houses; for that
every man's house was his Castle. In the said sense it is, that I understand it
in Domesdey to be received; for in Essex under the Title of Terra Rogeri Bigoti
(which is in English I think, The Land of Roger the Zealous) it is thus
Recorded, Westunam tenet Hugo de Hosdene quod tenuerunt IV liberi homines T. R.
E. qui fuerant de Soca Algari, etc. Sac (Sacha vel Sacca) Minshew renders, to
signify a Royalty or privilege touching plee or correction of Trespasses of
men within a Manor; and says, that he was informed that this word (Sac) in
the Saxon Tongue, does properly signify as much as (Causa with the Latins)
Sake; whence we in English still retain that expression; for whose sake, etc.
that is for whose cause; but in the Laws of Edward the Confessor they are both
of them thus expounded.

Sacha est quod si quilibet aliquem nominatim de aliquo calumniatus fuerit;
and ille negaverit, forisfactura probationis vel negationis (si evenerit) sua
erit.

Soca est quod si aliquis quaerit aliquid in terrasua,
etiam furtum, sua est justitia si inventum fuerit, an non.

I shall also exhibit an Exposition of them both, out of a very ancient M S
book, M S. Penes Autorem.
in which are Registered several Donations to a Cathedral Church in England;
where after the recital of a certain Charter granted by Edward the Confessor
to them, Cum Saka and cum Sokna; there follows an Exposition of them both, in
red Letters thus.

(...) Equitur expositio illorum Terminorum Soka and Saka.

(...) Oka. hoc est Secta de hominibus in curia vestrasecundum consuetudinem
regni.

(...) Aka. hoc est placitum and emenda de transgressionibus hominum in Curia
vestra.

The first is only the suit of Court due by the inhabitants of a Lordship or
Manor, and Sac is the liberty of Holding Pleas and imposing Mulcts and
forfeitures upon Transgressors in that Court. Mr. S. has learnedly discoursed
this and the Erymologye thereof; and because not in controversy I will not
therewith further trouble the Reader. I am now come to the end of this
immethodical discourse, and desire his pardon, and acceptance of the intention
for the thing done: for I could wish if this subject should prove pleasurable
or delightful to any, that it had been better ordered, and clothed in better
style and language. But now, jacta est Alea: it must take its fortune, and pass
under the censures of many; some will except against the boldness of the
Author, in that he is not afraid to Question received opinions and to examine
the ipse dixit of the Law; I hope such cannot say that it was immodestly or
irreverently done: some will think it too long; others perhaps too short; many
to be needless; so perchance it may fall out that I may escape with the
Country Priest, who coming to a village of Husbandmen, that had newly buried
their Pastor; and over-hearing them complaining that he had not by his Prayers
procured them rain or fair weather according to their occasions. The stranger
thereupon offers unto them, that if they would procure him the Benefice, he
would satisfy them in that point; which being obtained, several of them came
to him, some for continuance of fair weather, others for some showrs of rain to
refresh their almost burnt-up grass; and every one according as they were
engaged in their several necessities and requisites of Husbandry: He told them
he could not at the same time obtain fair weather and rain, but if they would
agree together, then he would content them. If any carpingly disposed, stumble
upon this Tract; I shall only desire them to meet, and agree upon their
verdict, and I then will undertake to please them. To the Ingenuous, I have
this only to add; let Them accept of it as either an Essay, or under any other
Title, or denomination whatsoever, and I have done.

Errata.
Page 5. line 7. for Hellai r. Hellas. l. 24. vagerentur r. vagarentur. p. 22.
l. 2. for Drympeck r. Drympenocke. p. 70. l. 25. read bis ceo^. p. 77. l. 25.
read offensive. p. 78. l. 12. for Scrap r. Sc^up. p. 94. lin. ult. for
Countries r. Counties. p. 130. l. 20 for ip r. if p. 157. l. 10. read The
changes are very, etc Some literal escapes a judicious Reader may encounter,
which are easily amended with his pen.

In the Latin.

Page 208. line 12. for Gemmetiam read Gemeticum. p. 209. l. 22 for Deurons
read Deurous.

BREVIS RELATIO DE WILLELMO, Nobilissimo Comite Normannorum, Quis fuit and unde
Originem duxit, etc.

Ab Authore Anonymo, Temp. Hen. Primi.

LONDINI, Typis Guil. Wilson pro Johanne Starkey, apud quem prostant vaenales
sub Signo Mitrae in Vico vulgo dicto Fleet Street. 1663.

Dignissimo Henrico Norwood uni Armigerorum pro corpore Caroli Secundi Regis
Angliae, etc. and Amoenae Coloniae Virginianae Thesaurario, etc.
Vir Amplissime,
TUam erga me beneficentiam, licet pensare nequeam, lubens tamen recognosco; in
Magnis quippe voluisse Satis. Libellum hunc Nomini Tuo mihi Honorato perinde
and charo inscribere ausim. Inter Quisquilias justo diutius Blattis and Tincis
damnatum, fortuito inveniens; tandem emancipavi. Vetus hujus Anonymi Authoris M
S. in Atchivis Bibliothecae publicae Oxoniensis ( prece tamen CL. V.D. BARLOW)
quatuor aut quinqae circiter ab hinc retro annos seposui; Quod patrocinio tuo
simul ac luce jam primum gaudet: Nihil illi subtraxi, nihil illustrationis peno
addidi, nihil denique praeter transcribendi cur^^ mihime^ arr^^o. Argumentum
minime vulgar continet, Genium mihi quamvis Monasticum videtur redolere;
verbis enim nonnullis obsoletis, and Nugis (quamquam paucis) coinquinatum est:
veru^^^men quia. Tractatui praecunti Taedam quasi praefert, comitem eidem and
socium manumissione liberum reddidi. ( irca medietatem Regni Henrici Filii
Gulielmi Angliae Conquestoris, (uti suspicor) compositum and collectum erat; ut
patet ex animadversionibus de captivi^ate Rodberti fratris ej^s, cum Comite
Moritomi, e Normannia in Angliam ducti and incarcerati: sub fine enim hujus
libelli de eis scriptum est: EOSQUE ADHUC in captione tenere decernit; and
paulo inferius: HIC est autem status Angliae and Normanniae ADPRESENS: qu^
autem posthaec in his Terris futura sint; Posteritas videbit. Insuper; ut Animi
mei specimen, in hujusmodi venerandarum reliquiarum (Diu nimis temporum injuria
neglectarum) a Tenebris vind catione, exhibeam; hoc pignus and Arrham libenter
tradidi. Interim vale: ejusque votis fruere; cui nihil est antiquius quam ut
vivere possit,

Tui favoris studiosissimus Silas Taylorius.
IV. ID'. Mart. MDCLXII.
INCIPIT Quedam Brevis Relatio de WILLELMO Nobilissimo Comite NORMANNORUM; Quis
fuit, and unde Originem duxit; and Quis erat -- sibi Armis adquisivit.
PATER hujus Willelmi fuit Rodbertus Dux Normannorum, vir omni probitate
conspicuus; erga superbos feru^: sed erga pauperes largus atque Pius. Sed
quamvis erga omnes pauperes misericors and pius, maximam vero compassionem
semper habebat de his quos Elefantiosus morbus vexabat: ita ut ipsi Elefantiosi
sepius eum frarrem vocarent ob nimiam pietatem quam de miseriis eorum habebat.
Hic autem Rodbertus sic quidam dictus Dux Normannorum extitit in quinta
Generatione ab illo Dano qui Rollo vocatus, Terram que modo vocatur Normannia
armis cepit. Ab isto itaque Rodberto Comite viro tam nobili, tamque pio egenis,
progenitus est iste Willelmus de quo loqui institui. Dilexit autem eum pater
suus multum, partim quia hullum habebat filium nisi illum, partim quia secundum
suam etatem idem filius suus multum erat strenuus atque decorus.

Eodem vero tempore Rodbertus comes mente compunctus, fecit votum eundi in
Jerusalem, and videre locum illum; ubi Dominus suus crucifixus fuit mortemque
pro peccatoribus sustinuit.

Paratis itaque omnibus que ad hujus itineris negotium pertinebant; antequam de
Normannia recederet, congregari fecit Barons Normannie, eisque commendavit
Willelmum filium suum ut nutrirent and custodirent illum, donec sciret and
posset Terram tenere and regere: Eum enim heredem faciebat post se de terra
Normannie, ut si casu aliquo ipse non red^^ and filius suus Wills in paterna
hereditate sine ulla contradictione succeder and.

Dispositis ergo omnibus que illius vie necessitas poscebat, and commendato
Willelmo ^ilio ^uo B^^ onid^^s suis; quem heredem de Normannia fac^ebat,
porrexit Jerusalem Comes Rodbertus^: sed cum inde rediret: in urbem que vocatur
Nica diem clausit extremum; in quo loco honorifice sepultus est: and sicut
poste^ quidam retulerunt, ad sepulchrum ejus quedans signa virtutibus similia
contigerunt.

Libet vero memory trad re quoddam signum bonitatis Rodberti Comitis quod vice
quadam in ipsa via -- his -- qui cum illo ibant ostendit, ut ex hoc uno
patenter cunctis manifestum sit, quam humiliter injurias que ei fiebant pro
amore Dei pertulit.

Quadam nanque die contigit eumque venire ad quendam locum ubi Musellas and
Tributum debebat pro se and pro pauperibus qui in ejus comitatu erant,
persolvere; Dum itaque ibi cum suis hominibus expectaret donec omnes pauperes
quos secum ducebat transire fecisset; quidam de paganis qui eas Musellas
accipiebat, i^atus contra eum arrepco fuste fortiter super dorsum percussit
illum; homines vero illius videntes quid Rodberto Comiti paganus fecisset; mox
illum voluerunt percutere, and percutiendo Dominum suum vindicare. Rodbertus
vero Comes non parum letus de injuria quam pro Dei amore susceperat, compescuit
fuos homines; eisque dixit: Nichil mali ei faciatis, quia per animam ventris
mei magis sum letus de ista dorsata quam mihi dedit; quam si mihi magnam
pecuniam dedisset.

Ut ergo ad id unde digressus sum redeam; Barons Normannie ut audierunt
Rodbertum Comitem esse defunctum, non parvas injurias Willelmo filio suo facere
ceperunt. Willelmus tamen Juvenis non diffidens de adjutorio and misericordia
Dei; sicut melins poterat secundum tempus quod tunc erat, se in omnibus
habebat; ad ultimum vero postquam vidit, quia Normanni hereditatem suam ei
auferre volebant, assumptis secum quibusdam Normannis qui ei fideles erant,
contulit se ad Regem Francie. Sed quam citius potuit in Normanniam rediens, in
loco qui dicitur Ualesdunaes contra Normannos illos qui eum exheredare
volebant, pugnavit: quos and ibidem Dei auxilio fretus pugnando superavit.
Quibus devictis and in fugam ire, in brevi post hec totam hereditatem suam quam
ei auferre conati sunt ex integro recuperavit: Deinde aliquanto tempore decurso
accepit in conjugio filiam Balduini Comitis de Flandria, nomine Mathildam,
mulierem multum honestam and sapientem, ex qua plures filios and filias
generavit.

Quis vero facile refer possit toto illo tempore quo super Normannos
Willelmus Comes dominium tenuit; quam strenue, quam sapienter in omnibus se
habuit; quos enim bonos and honestos videbat, cujuscunque ordinis essent non
parum diligebat, quos autem criminosos and inhonestos esse audiebat a consortio
suo semper fugabat. Eo itaque tempore dum Willelmus Comes sic strenue and
prudenter regnum suum gubernaret, atque undique per circuitum terram suam
viriliter protegeret, contigit ut Heraldus filius Goduini de Anglia navigare
vellet in Normanniam, sed in terram que vocatur Ponteium devenit; Quem Wido
Comes ejusdem patrie cepit and in custodia tenuit, donec industria Willelmi
sapientissimi Comitis Normannorum eum liberavit, quem liberatum and ante se
adductum, idem Comes honorifice suscepit, and susceptum aliquanto tempore cum
magno honor secum retinuit.

Interim vero dum cum eo conversatus est; ei homagium and fidelitatem fecit
Heraldus, and etiam sicut dicunt multi tria sacramenta super FILACTERIUM quod
vocabant OCULUM BOVIS; quod ei fidem and promissionem quam ei faciebat, been
custodiret. Peracto itaque negotio propter quod Heraldus venerat in Normanniam;
quam eitius potuit rediit in Angliam; post aliquantum vero temporis dum
Edwardus Rex Anglorum in Natali Domini festivitatem coronae suae Lundoniae apud
Westmonasterium ageret; contigit ut tactus gravissima infirmitate vitam
presentem finiret. Dicunt autem quidam, quod tunc Heraldus quasi oblitus
sacramentorum que Willelmo Comiti in Normannia fecerat antequam Rex Edwardus
Obiret, ad eum venit; ^um rogavit ut ei coronam Regni Anglie concederet; Quo
audito Rex Edwardus, non immemor quod Willelmo Comiti Normannorum cognato suo
regnum Angliae jamdudum concessisset, respondit Heraldo hoc nullo modo se posse
facere, quia inde Willielmum Comitem Normannorum Heredem fecerat. Veniens vero
Rex Edwardus ad finem suum, diem clausit extremum.

Adhuc autem erat corpus ejus super terram sicut illi postea retulerunt qui hoc
se videre dixerunt, cum Heraldus quasi insanus, atque proponens quicquid
Willielmo Comiti de Regno Anglie juraverat, videlicet quod ei fideliter illud
post mortem Regis Edwardi servaret, consentientibus sibi Civibus Lundonie,
multisque aliis insanie ejus faventibus; apud Scm Paulum in civitate Lundonie,
contra omnem rectitudinem coronam Regni Anglie arripuit. Non longum vero tempus
fuit, quod iste Rumor ad aures Willielmi Comitis Normannorum pervenit, quod cum
audisset and pro certo didicisset, quod Heraldus in omnibus que juraverat ei
perjurus effet, quam citius potuit Barons Normannie ad concilium convocari
fecit; esque ostendit quomodo Heraldus coronam regni Anglie sibi impossuisset,
de quo Rex Edwardus cognatus suus eum Heredem fecisset, and quomodo etiam idem
Heraldus de sacramentis que sibi in Normannia fecerat ^ll^ perjurus modo
existeret. Normanni autem hoc audito, non parum irati de tanta contumel a, quam
Heraldus Domino illorum and sibi fecisset, communiter ei consilium dederunt, ut
de Heraldo perjuro suo se vindicare percuraret, coronamque illum injuste
ademptam, si aliter non potuisset, per bellum saltem restitueret. Quo consilio
suscepto, precepit ut quam citius possent, omnes Barons Normannie unusquisque
secundum suam possibilitatem naves prepararent, quibus ipse and omnis militia
quam secum ducturus esset in Angliam transvehi posset: Quas in valde breviori
spatio quam unquam sperari posset, preparatas adduci precepit ad Sctum
Walericum in Summam que juxta illud fluit.

Dispositis itaque omnibus que ad hujusmodi negotium pertinebant, eisdem
navibus conscenfis, Anno ab incarnatione Domini Millesimo, Sexagesimo, Sexto,
IIIIto Kal. Octobris; cum magna alacritate anim^ Willelmus Comes transiens in
Angliam appulit Deo favente ad Castrum quod vocatur Pevenesel; sed non diutius
ibi moratus, cum omni exercitu suo venit ad alium portum non long ab isto
situm; quem vocant Hastingas: ibique omnem suam militiam requiescere jussit.

Inter^m vero dum ibi Comes Willielmus cum exercitu suo esset terramque Anglie
ex illa part invaderet, Nuncius ab Anglis ad Heraldum concite missus est; qui
eo tempore contra frat^em suum perexerat; qui in altera part Anglie cum magna
multitudine pugnatorum intraverat: volens Angliam super Heraldum fratrem suum
conquirere and conquisitam possidere; Pugnans vero Haeraldus cum fratre suo,
interfecit cum, and eos qui cum illo venerant. Non parum itaque exultans
Heraldus de hac victoria, ignorabat quid in brevi ei eventurum erat: cum ergo
audisset quod Willielmus Comes Normannorum cum exercitu in Angliam transisset,
quam citius potuit Lundoniam venit: ibique loquens cum Anglis and Danis quos
secum habebat, contemnens and pro nichilo ducens quicquid Willielmo Comiti in
Normannia juraverat: jussit omnes suos homines citissime preparari, ut
Normannos cum Duce suo willielmo antequam de Anglia fugerent, invenire posset;
putabat enim insania plenus, quod Normanni non auderent eum expectare, nec ad
pugnam contra eum venire.

Sed aliter contigit, and non solum Normannos invenit, sed pugnando contra
Normannos expertus est, quod Normanni non propterea in Angliam
transnavigassent, ut inde fugere vellent.

Heraldus itaque cum omni exercitu suo exiens de Lundonia, pervenit usque ad
locum qui nunc vocatur Bellum; antequam vero ad hoc Bellum pervenisset, fertur
dixisse, quod nullam rem unquam amplius libentius fecisset, quam hoc, quod ad
hoc Bellum veniebat. Ignorabat enim furore cecatus, quia verum esset quod
Scriptura dicit: ante ruinam exaltatur cor; ante ruinam enim exaltatum est cor
Heraldi insani: qui tam insipiens and vanus fuit, ut providere and sapienter
intelligere non posset, quod omnipotentis Dei justicia superbos and vanos, nisi
a maliciis suis resipiscant, semper hum liare and ad nichilum deducere solita
sit.

Postquam vero Comes Willielmus and Normanni pro certo intellexerunt quod
Heraldus perjurus contra eos ad pugnam venire. and veniendo se auderet
preparare, preparaver unt se, and ipsi ut melius potuorunt, ex toto cord
invocantes Dominum; ut eis nunc ad^utor esset; nec eos propter peccata sua, in
tante necessitatis articulo despiceret.

Pervenientes itaque usque ad collem un^m, qui erat a part Hastingarum contra
illum collem in quo erat Heraldus and exercitus ejus; ibi ut erant armati,
paulisper substiterunt intuentes Anglorum exercitum. Dignum est autem ut
memory litterisque tradatur unum verbum, quod Christianissimus Comes
Willielmus cum lorica sua indueretur, dixisse fertur: cum enim ei quidam candem
loricam suam porrigeret, ut ex ea se indueret, ex improviso ei illam inversam
porrexit; quod ille animadvertens, vultu placido, quietoque animo, militibus
qui in circuitu ejus erant, dixit: Si ego in sortem crederem; hodie amplius in
Bellum non introirem: Sed ego nunquam sortibus credidi, neque Sortiligos amavi;
in omni enim negotio, quodcunque agere debui, Creatori meo semper me
commendavi. Hoc dicens, atque in Creatorem suum sicut semper facere solitus
erat totam suam fiduciam ponens, induit se armis suis. Armatus itaque, and se
and totum exercitum suum Domino commendans; cepit inquirere a quodam milite qui
juxta eum erat, ubi Heraldum putaret esse: Respondit autem ille; quod putabat
illum esse in illo spisso agmine, quod erat ante eos in montis summitate; nam
ficut putabat Heraldi Standartrum ibi videbat: Tunc Willielmus Comes fertur
dixisse, creed in Omnipotentis Dei misericordia, cujus judicia etsi sunt
occulta, sunt tamen justa: qui hodie justitiam faciet mihi de Heraldo qui
perjurus existens hodic contra me audet venire ad pugnam. Hec dicens; Equum
super quem sedebat calcaribus urgens; super Anglos irruit: unumque ex illis
percutiens interfecit. Non multo vero post quidam cuneus Normannorum fere usque
ad mill equites ex altera part Anglos invadentes, super illos cum horribili
impetu currere ceperunt, quasi illos percutere volentes; sed dum illi usque ad
illos pervenissent, quasi timerent eos, fugere se simulaverunt. Angli vero
illi, putantes eos vere fugere, ceperunt post eos currere; volentes eos si
possent interficere: quod videntes Normanni qui erant cautiores bello quam
Angli, mox redierunt, atque inter illos and agmen unde se disjunxerant, se
immiserunt; omnes illos mox interfecerunt, atque hoc modo Norhmanni and Angli
invicem pugnare ceperunt; pugnantes itaque toto illodie fere usque ad vesperum
Northmanni cum Anglis; tandem Angli victi fugerunt, et qui fugere non
potuerunt, extincti^ibi remanserunt.

Interfectus est autem in illa pugna Heraldus, and duo fratres ejus, and cum
else maxima pars de nobilitate Anglorum. Facta autem est hec pugna, Pridie idus
Octobris in eo loco ubi Willelmus Comes Northmannorum, postea vero Rex Anglorum
Abbatiam construi precepit; ob memoriam hujus victory; and absolutionem
peccatorum omnium illorum qui ibi interlecti sunt. Victis vero Anglis, ad
castra sua Willelmus comes rediit, maximas Omnipotenti Deo gratias reddit, qui
ei per mifericordiam suam victoriam concessit de inimicis suis. Non diutius
vero ibi commoratus, versus Lundoniam, principalem Civitatem Anglie cepit ire;
and sicupsam terram Anglorum conquirere. Deinde ad eum paulatim ceperunt venire
Angli plurimi, and cum eo pacem facere; In brevi itaque cum eo majori part
Anglorum pacificata, fidelitatem illorum suscepit; and quibusdam little suas
terras reddidit, quibusdam vero non reddidit; eo quod illis nondum se been
credidit.

Tandem ad Nativitatem Domini Lundoniam convenientibus Erancis and Anglic,
illisque omnibus concedentibus, co^^am totius Anglie, and Dominationem
suscepit. Constitutus itaque sapienter and cum magna discretione Regnum quod
acceperat, disponere cepit; atque in Ecclesiis Anglie in quibus pastores non
erant, pastores secundum Dominum ponere curavit. Deinde post aliquantulum
temporis Uxorem suam de Northmannia in Angliam venire fecit, at Reginam de
Comitissa esse constituit; illaque jam REgina filium genuit, quem Henri^um
voca^i fecit: Quapropter sicut postea multi dixe^^^, justumfuit ut ipse Rex
Anglie post patrem suum fuisses, quide part Rege and matre Regina genitus
extitisser.

Post hec autem Willie lmus Rex non immemor quam misericordiam de Regno Anglie
sibi Dominus fecisset; cogitavit quia Dorbbernensem Ecclesiam in honorem
Christi ab antiquo tempore constructam, que principatum and auctoritatem super
omnes Ecclesias Anglie tenebat, fecundum voluntatem Dei disponere: Proinde non
parum inde cogitans si in regno suo inveniret cui Dorobernenfem Ecclesiam
utiliter committere posset; tandem invenit Lanfrancum Abbatem Cenobii Sci^
Stephani Cadomi, virum valde religiosum, and omni probitate consprcuum, and non
solum de his que ad honestatem and ad Deum pertinent; sed etiam de his que
secularia requirunt prudentem and cautum.

Mittens itaque propter illum in Normanniam fecit eum voni^e in Angliam; eique
consensu and consilio omnium Baronum suorum, omni^mque Episcoporum, and
Abbatum, totiusque populi Anglie commisit ei Dorobernensem ecclesiam, us eam
sicut melius sciret and posset secundum voluntatem Domini, and utilitatem
plebis cujus curam suscipiebat, regeret. Quam utiliter vero ipsam Ecclesiam
gubernavit quamdiu vixit; and quantum in ejus tempore ipsa Ecclesia est
elevata; que per incuriam Antecessorum non parum erat vilis and abjecta, and
fere ad magnam inopiam redacta, omnes qui tunc fuerunt, noverunt. Preter hec
autem non est silentio pretereundum quod largus fuit and erga homines seculi
and erga pauperes Christi, and quomodo ipse exemplo sue largitatis in Anglia,
multos ad Elemosynam accendit: propter largitatem itaque animi ejus
dicebantquidam, eum merito vocatum esse Lanfrancum; id est ferentem cor largum,
co-quod largus and bo^us erga omnes homines fuit. De Rege vero Willielmo and
Lanfranco Archiepiscopo dicebant homines qui tunc vivebant, quod tales duo
simul in una terra non invenirentur quales essent Rex Willielmus and Lanfrancus
suus Archiepiscopus.

Sed ut jam de Lanfranco dimittam, and ad ea que de bona Rege Willielmo cepi,
redeam: Rex Willielmus ut vir prudentissimus, Deumque valde amans, in omnibus
que and secundum Deun and secundum seculum agere disponebat, divinum semper
auxilum requirebar; omnesque quos bonos and religiosos intelligebat non parum
semper diligebat, quos autem prave agere vel turpiter vivere omnino destruebat,
and nisi a Maliciis suis resipiscerent and honestatem diligerent, etiam de
Regno suo expellebat. Sed quicquid fecisset de aliis malefactoribus, hereticos
and quos exurgere videbat contra usum and auctoritatem sce^ Ecclefie omnino
destruebat.

Ejus enim tampore expulsa est de Northmannia, que quosdam ibi maculaverat
clericos, Heresis Berengarii, conantis auferre veritatem corporis and sanguinis
Domini. Sed quis posset refer vel scribere omnia bona que bonus Rex
Wil^ielmus fecit, omnemque exaltationem sancte ecclesie, que quamdiu ille
vixit, in regno ejus duravit?

Quicquid vero fuisset in aliis regnis, in regno ejus pax semper fuit; nec erat
ullus tam fortis vel potens, qui pacem quam in terra sua posuerat, auderet
infringere: vel si infringere^, in ea remanere. Nulla enim alia redemptio de
illo esse poterat, qui pacem vel Treviam Terre illius violasset, nisi ut exinde
exiret. Quamdiu itaque vixit carus and amabilis omnibus bonis hominibus fuit.
Vixit autem postquam coronam Regni Anglie suscepit viginti and uno anno, quibus
expletis presentem vitam finivit in Norhmannia apud Rotomagum IIIIto Idus
September. Antequam vero finiret, fecit heredem de Normannia Rodbertum filium
suum. De Anglia autem Willielmum alterum filium suum; qui quam citius potuit in
Angliam transiens; post concessionem patris, susceptus ab Anglis and Francis,
Sacratus est Rex Anglie a Lanfranco Archiepiscopo Lundoniam apud
Westmonasterium in Ecclesia Beati Petri Apostoli. Frlio autem suo Henrico dedit
Rex Willielmus cum ad mortem venit, quinque mill libras de Anglicis denariis.

Defunctus autem Rex Willielmus sicut ordinaverat, Cadomi translatus est;
Sepultus ante majus Altar in Ecclesia beati Stephani Prothomartyris; quam ipse
construxerat a fundamentis. Fuit autem post hec non parva discordia inter
Rodbertum Comitem, and Willielmum fratrem suum Regem Anglie. Tunc Henricus
remansit in Norhmannia cum Rodberta fratre suo qui dedit ei quandam terram in
Norhman ia, sed non ^iutius inde gaudium habuit. Non parvo post tempore,
inventis quibusdam vilibus occasionibus ei illam abstulit. Post hec autem
aliquanto tempore transacto; concordiam ad invicem fecerunt Willielmus secundus
Rex Anglie and Rodbertus Comes Normannie: and cum frattem suum Henricum
debuissent adjuvare, eique providere, ut honorabil^ter inter illos sicu^ frater
little and fill us Regis posset vivere, non hoc fecerunt; sed de tota terra
patris sui expellere conati sunt: Sed quamvis inde multum conati fuissent,
tamen non potuerunt facere sicut volderunt: sed contra voluntatem eorum tenuit
castrum quod vocatur Danfrunt, quod non parva industria ceperat, nec postquam
illud captum habuit, ei ulla vi auferre potuerunt: Dominus vero sicut multis
visum est adjuvabat Henricum; de quo postea disponebat de tota Anglia and
Norhmannia heredem facere and Dominum.

Contigit vero postea ut Rodbertus Comes Normannie Jerusalem iret.
Normanniamque totam fratri suo Willielmo Regi Anglorum invadiaret, and tunc
Henricus fratri suo Regi Anglorum omnino se conferret atque cum eo ex toto
remaneret. Dum itaque cum eo esset, post aliquantum temporis contigit ut quadam
die Rex: u: Willielmus venatum iret; ibique nescimus quo judicio Dei, a quodam
milite sagitta percussus, occubuisset: Quem statim Henricus frater suus
Wintoniam deferri fecit; ibique in ecclesia Sancti Petei ante majus Altar
sepulture tradidit. Quo sepulto Lundoniam venit, atque apud Westmonasterium
annuentibus ^unctis, Francis and Anglis coronam regni Anglie suscepit;
cunctique letati sunt quod modo Regem natum de Rege and Regina^^ natum and
nutritum in Anglia habere meruissent: Ordinatus sicut intelligimus per
voluntatem Dei Henricus Anglorum Rex; cepit magnam justiciam per Angliam
tenere; and ut legaliter viveret, accepit uxorem, filiam Regis Scocie; de qua
primum unam filiam habuit; quam postea Imperatori Alemannie in matrimonium
junxit, habuit etiam de eadem uxore sua unum filium qui non diu vivens huic
vitae finem fecit.

Non longum autem tempus suit postquam Henricus Rex coronam Anglie suscepit,
quod frater suus Rodbertus de Jerusalem red^it, atque suam Norhmanniam quam
fratri suo Willielmo invadiaverat, recepit. Audiens itaque quod Henricus frater
suus Rex Anglorum esset constitutus cepit indignari adversus illum, multum ei
minari, quod Regnum Anglie suscipere ausus fuisset; non recte cogitans neque
intelligens quid Scriptura dicit: quia nulla potestas nisi a Deo est: Hac
igitur de causa, cepit nav gium preparare quale poruit, quo preparato, in
Angliam transnavigavit; Henricus autem Rex, cujus fiducia tota erat in Deo,
magnam militiam Anglorum congregans; velociter venit adversus eum; paratus eum
and omnes qui cum eo venerant de terra Anglorum expellere, quod profecto
annuente Deo in brevi fecisset, nisi frater suus cum eo concordiam egisset;
facta itaque inter cos concordia, aliquanto tempore demoratus est Comes
Rodbertus in Anglia; in qua postquam tam diu fuit quantum ei placuit: in
Normannia remeavit.

Non din autem duravit inter ^os ista concordia. Rodbertus vero Comes plus
justo credens illis qui magis volebant inter eos discordiam esse quam pacem,
iterum cepit occasiones querer^; fratrem^ue suum ad discordiam commovere; Rex
autem Henricus non diutius hoc ferens, quam citius potuit mare transivit; atque
non multo post, non parvo exercitu congregato obsedit civitatem Baiocas eamque
citius capiens fere omnem destruxit. Deinde cepit Cadomum. Post aliquantum vero
temporis cum obsideret quoddam castrum Comitis Moritonii quod vocatur
Tenerchebrai; atque obsidendo laboraret ut illud caperet; frater ejus Rodbertus
Comes, and Comes Mori^onii cum magna multitudine militum, putantes se de Rege
Henrico vindicare; eumque omnino de terra delere, cum magno impetu irruerunt
super eum and super eos qui cum illo erant, sed judicio Dei super eos veniente,
capti sunt ambo, and multi alii cum iis, ab hominibus Regis Henrici atque ante
eum adducti.

Fin^ta itaque hac obsidione atque illis in captione sua retentis; Rex Henricus
totam Normanniam and omnia castella Comitis Moritonii in suum Dominium
suscepit: atque ita omnis terra sedata, rediens in Angliam Rodbertum Comitem
fratrem suum and Comitem Moritonii, and quosdam alios quos ei placuit secum
adduxit, eosque adhuc in captione tenere decernit.

Hic est autem Status Anglie and Normannie ad presens, que autem post hec in
his terris futura sint, posteritas videbit.

Seriem vero hujus Generationis and Ordinem ab illo Dano qui Rollo vocatus,
Terram que vocatur Normannia super Regem Francie conquisivit, and conquisita
ille and heredes post eum possederunt usque ad Henricum qui modo eam regit and
possidet; sic quidam computare solent. Rollo inquiunt hujus Genealogy primus
fuit. Willelmus vero filius ejus qui vocatus est Longaspata secundus extitit.
Ricardus vero hujus Willelmi filius tercius fuit. Ricardus hujus Ricardi fil^us
qui Abbatiam Fiscanni construxit in quarto loco post Rollonem Norhmannos rexit.
Rodbertus vero fil^us Ricardi qui Jerusalem perrexit sed dum inde reverteretur
apud Nicam vitam presentem finivit hujus generationis quintus Comes Normannorum
extitit. Willemus vero hujus Rodberti filius qui non solum Normanniam sed etiam
Angliam possedit in Sexto loco successit.
Post illum autem in septimo loco fuerunt filii ejus ex quibus solus Henricus
modo Normanniam and Angliam possidet: Quis vero post eum has terras possidebit,
and possessas Gubernabit, Generatio que tunc erit videre poterit.

Ubi sepulta jacent Horum Corpora.

Rollo and Willelmus filius ejus jacent Rotomagi in ecclesia Beat Marie que
est caput Archiepiscopatus. Ricardus vero filius Willemi and alius Ricardus
jacent Fiscanni. Rodbertus vero filius Ricardi qui rediens de Jerusalem vitam
presentem finivit in Nica civitate sepultus quiescit. Wi^^elmus vero fil^us
Rod^er^ jacet Cadomi in ecclesia Beati Stephani quam ipse edificavit.
Fecit autem iste Willelmus tres Abbatias de suo Domimo, duas Cadomi; unam de
Monachis ubi ipse Jacet, aliam de Sanctimonialibus ubi Uxor ejus Mathildis
Regina sepulta est: fecit autem and terciam in Anglia, in eo loco ubi ei
Dominus victoriam tribuit de inimicis, que multo minoris pretii est quam
fuisset, si eam dedicate potuisset: Cum enim eam primum incepit, cogitavit eam
facere unam de Majoribus and ditioribus eccles^s Anglie: sed preventus mo^^e
non potuit facere sicut cogitaverat. Ex cujus rei eventu discimus: Quod
sapienter agit, qui bonum quod agere disponit quam citius potest perficere
satagit. Nullus enim novit si hodie vivit, si crastinum diem videre poterit:
and ideo prudentius agit, qui bonum quod in crastico agere disponit, hodie
faciat si possit. Securius enim gaudemus de bono quod factum habemus, quam de
bono quod facere disponimus, and nondum fecimus. Multotiens enim quibusdam
accidit, ut dum differunt bonum facere quod volunt, eis deficiat and voluntas
and possibilitas. Que autem de his Comitibus unde locutus sum a quibusdam
foleant referr^; si ego scribam fortassis quibusdam non displicebit.

Rollo qui hujus Generationis primus extitis, antequam Normanniam cepisset,
sicut quidam dicunt Paganus erat; sed predicatione cujusdam Archiepiscopi
Rotomagi fidem Christ suscepit, qui quoque baptizatus est: leges Christianas
quam diu vix^^ and ipse been custodivit, and omni populo suo been custodite
fecit. Quante vero humilitatis fuit, post^uam fidem Christi suscepit, ex una re
quam fecit patenter cunctis innotuit: Quodam tempore postquam paci^icatus est
cum Rege Francie; vementes ad cum ^om^^es ^otomagi, ceperunt eum rogare ut de
Francia faceret corpus sancti Audoeni redire, quod propter tin^orem ejus illuc
olim fuerat transtatum; antequam cepisset Normandiam: Tristes enim and mul^um
dolentes sumus, quod sic Archiepiscopum nostrum predictum habemus: hoc audiens
Comes mandavit Regem Francie, ut ei suum presbiterum redderet, quod si non
faceret, proculdubio sciret quod nullo modo pacem cum eo habere posset: tunc
Rex Francie nolens ei de hac re facere contrarium, reddidit ei sicut petebat
suum presbiterum: tunc Comes precepit ut inde reduceretur Sanctus Audoenus
sueque redderetur ecclesie unde fuerat asportatus: Monachi igitur qui custodes
ejus fuerant dum in Francia fuit, reportaverunt eum usque ad quandam villam que
est ad unam Leuuam juxta urbem Rotomagi: Ibi Itaque cum pervenissent, non parum
de via lassati: Manserunt in illa, nocte; Ut, mane surgentes, si possent,
sanctum Audoenum ad suum locum reportarent; Cum itaque mane surgerent, eumque
ad Civitatem portare vellent, nullo modo potuerunt: tunc tristes Monachi
nimiumque dolentes de hoc quod eis acciderat, mandaverunt civitati quod Sanctum
Audoenum nullo modo poterant movere de loco illo ubi jacuerant illa nocte: quod
cum Comiti qui tunc erat Rotomagum nuntiatum fuisset, respondit: quia merito
hec tribulatio de corpore Sancti Audoeni eis accidiss^t; quia si^recte
cogitassent, sensumque rectum habuissent, ad processionem and cum magna
devotione, contra eum venire debuissent. Post hec precepit Comes Archiepiscopo
omnique populo Rotomagi; ut in langis and nudis pedibus cum eo ad sanctum
Audoenum pergerent; ejusque pietatem quam devotius possent exorarent, quatinus
ad stultitias eorum vel negligentias non respiceret, sed propitius illis
fieret, seque de loco illo ad Civitatem ubi Archiepiscopus fuisset transferri
permitteret. Tunc ipse Comes primus sicut aliis preceperat in Langis nudisque
pedibus usque ad villam ubi Sanctus Audoenus erat, pervenit.

Quo cum pervenisset, protinus cum omni populo, qui cum eo erat coram feretro
ejus prostratus, hec orando dixit: Sancte Audoene, Bone Archiepiscope and
Advocate noster, permittito vestrum corpus ad civitatem transferri; ubi
Presulis officio functus fuisti, and sacras benedictiones sepius fecisti; and
Ego Do Ecclesie vestre and vobis -- totam terram que adjacet ab isto loco usque
ad menia Civitatis: Tunc continu^ Comes and populus summissis humeris feretrum
in quo Sanctum corpus erat facillime deportare ceperunt; and sic usque ad
ecclesiam suam, gaudentes and exultantes deportaverunt: ex hujus rei eventu
dixerunt quidam illam villulam vocari longum Peanum, eo quod Comes illud tam
longum iter nudis pedibus perexisset. Si quis hoc factum non esse signum magne
humilitatis asserit; de eo veraciter dici potest; quia quid sit maxima
humilitas nescit.

Quiddam vero aliud dicitur eidem Comiti accidisse eo tempore quo primum
pacificatus est cum Rege Francie; quod non ideo scribo ut certus sim hoc verum
esse, sed quia a multis audivi, hoc referri: qui asserebant id veraciter
evenisse: Quodam die dum sicut dicebant, erat idem Comes Rotomagum, ad vesperam
ipsius diei stabant plurimi homines ante domos suas que erant juxta ripam
Sequane; illic vero cum essent, eandemque aquam aspicerent, viderunt unum
equitem transire super aquam quasi iret super terram, and usque ad eos
pervenientem: Hac igitur de re non parum obstupefacti, cum ad eos pervenisset,
ceperunt inquirere ab eo quis esset and unde venisset; ille vero respondens;
videtis inquit quod ego unus homo sum, and hodie multum mane motus sum de
Rethnis in Brittan^ia; Abrincas vero ad Sex^am horam comedi; ad vesperam autem
hucusque sieut videtis perveni. T^^c ^andaverunt Comiti, qui, sicut dixi, tunc
erat in civirate, de illo homine qui sic transierat super aquam sine ulla
lesione; Comes vero audiens rem tam insuetam, mandavit ei, ut illi loqueretur
antequam hinc recederet: tunc ille remandavit Comiti; quia in crastino eum
usque ad primam expectaret: Ille autem in crastino mane surgens viam suam
tenuit, and nichil locutus est Comiti; Comes vero ut audivit eum recessisse
dixit; eum mentitum esse, and ideo putare eum aliquod fantasma esse; qui sic
eos voluisset deludere: tunc dixerunt quidam qui affuerunt; quia non prima
Comitis sed prima sua ei mandasset; prima enim ejus multo citius esset quam
prima Comitis, and ideo verum fuit quod dixit. Dum vero in illa nocte sederet
ad focum su^ hospitis; and suus hospes de multis eum interrogaret, and maxim
de illo Comite, si generatio illa diutius maneret; respondit, illam diutius
manner; illudque imperium usque ad septimam generationem viril^ter durare: Cum
itaque hospes inquisisset quid post septimam generationem ^uturum esset; nichil
voluit respondere; sed de uno fussello quem manu tenebat, cepit per cineres
foci quasi reias facere; and cum hospes suus vehementer ab eo exigeret, quid
post septimam generationem eveniret: de ipso fussello quem manu tenebat
commiscuit rei^s quas in cineribus fecerat; ex quo signo quod fecerat,
arbitrati sunt, quod post septimam generationem illud imperium vel deficeret,
vel magnas pateretur dissensionum tribulationes.

Willelmus vero filius ejus sicut quidam dixerunt interfectus est per
traditionem a quodam Comite in Ponteio; quem cum interfectum Franci audissent,
mox ejus filium Ricardum ceperunt, and in Franciam in captionem duxerunt. Hic
Willelmus habebat unum scriniolum de quo ipse semper portabat claviculum, quod
diffirmantes postquam interfectus est, nichil in eo aliud invenerunt, nisi unam
stamineam quam solebat, sicut dicebatur, in Quadragesima vel in aliis diebus
afflictionis portare. Dani autem audientes quod Franci interfectum habuissent
Willelmum parentem illorum, non parum irati de hoc, quam citius potuerunt cum
magna multitudine pugnatorum, transnavigantes in Normanniam ad portum Dive
arrivaverunt, contra quos Rex Francie cum non parva multitudine militum venit;
si forte posset illos pugnando de terra Normannie expellere; veniens itaque
fere usque ad illos, timuit cum eis pugnare, sed quesivit cum eis pacem; facere
illumque Comitem qui Willelmum interfecerat cum eis concordare. Dani autem ad
horam finxerunt se illam concordiam suscipere: Sed ut viderunt illum qui
parentem illorum interfecerat, non curantes de concordia quam Rex Francie
querebat; impetum facientes super eum, interfecerunt illum and plurimos de eis
qui cum illo venerunt; Regem vero Francie fugere compulerunt, quem fug^entem
homines Rotomagi cepetunt atque captum duxerunt Rotomagum. Postea vero communi
decreto Franci and Dani talem Concordiam inter se feeerunt; ut Dani redderent
Regem Francie: and Franci redderent Ricardum filium Willelmi Comitem
Norhmannie. Tunc in illa concordia auxerunt and augendo creverunt Norhmanniam
Dani, ab aqua que vocatur Ardella usque ad aliamo aquam que vocatur Etta. Alii
tamen dicunt ab Etta usque ad Isaram. Constitutum est etiam and aliud in illa
concordia, quod Comes Norhmannie nullum servitium faceret Regi Francie de terra
Normannie, nec ei aliter serviret, nisi Rex Francie Feudiam daret ei in
Francia, unde ei servire deberet. Quapropter Comes Normannie de Normannia
tantummodo facit homagium Regi Francie, and fidelitatem de vita sua, and de
terreno honor suo: Similiter and Rex Francie facit fidelitatem and de vita
sua, and de terreno honor Comiti Normannie, and nichil aliud differt inter
illos, nisi quod homagium non facit Rex Francie Comiti Normannie, sicuti Comes
Normannie Regi Francie facit. Hanc libertatem adquisierunt tunc Dani parentibus
suis Comitibus Nothmannie.

Post istum Ricardum alius Ricardus filius ejus tenuit Normanniam. Hic Ricardus
fuit pater patrie: Toto enim tempore ejus abundavit Normannia omnibus bonis,
and tanta pax fuit in Normannia ejus tempore, ut nec etiam carrucarii de campis
suis auderent ferra carruce ad suas domos reportare, and si alicui furata
fuissent, preceperat Come^ ut ad eum venirer, and quicquid furto perdidisset,
ipse ei ex integro totum redderet: Quod audiens uxor cujusdam carrucarii,
probare volens si verum esset hoc quod Comes jussisset, quadani die furata est
ferra mariti sui: Carrucatius vero in crastino veniens ad carrucam suam, and
ferra sua non inveniens; venit ad Comitem, ei^^ retulit, quod ferra catruce sue
ei furata essent; tunc Comes precepit ei dare denarios, unde posset alia ferra
emere. Ille itaque rediens domum, retulit uxori sue quid ei Comes fecisset;
tunc dixit ei ux or ipsius quod modo been esset; quia and ipse denario^ and
ipsa ferra haberet. Carrucarius vero hoc audiens ^e infideliter ageret,
reportavit Comiti suos denarios; eique retulit quid uxor sua fecisset. Comes
vero retinens Carrucarium aliquanto tempore misit et precepit, ut uxori ejus
eruerentur oculi propter furtum quod secerat: cum itaque Carrucarius domum suam
redisset, inveriens quod uxori ejus oculi essent eruti, cumiindignatione dixit
ei: Noli amplius furari, and a modo disce observare precepta Comitis. Hic Comes
edificavit Ecclesiam Fiscanni, illamque non parum terris and ornamentis divitem
fecit. Hic erat solitus fere omni tempore suam curiam in Pascali folemnitate
apud Fiscannium tenere; and tunc quando ei placebat in ipsa solemnitate solebat
unam Tinam plenam textis turibulis, candelabris, and quibusdam aliis
ornamentis; and coopertam quodam optimo pallio, ipse and uxor sua ante altar
sancte Trimtatis (...), ipsaque pro suis peccatis ibi Deo offerre.

Ipse vero die post missa^ antequam ad curiam suam iret, atque cum Baronibus
suis comederer, veniebat cum duobts filiis suis Ricardo and R^dberto in
refectorio Monachor^^ and illi filii sui apportantes de fenestra coquine
scutellas sicut solent Monachi facere, porrigebant patri suo, and ipse per
seipsum prima fercula ante Abbatem and postea ante Monachos ponebat: quod cum
perfecisset, cum magna humilitate, veniebat ante Abbatem, and sic ab eo accepta
licentia, letus and gaudens ibat ad curiam suam. Aliquando vero de sua mensa,
mittebat Abbati scutellam argenteam plenam piscibus, and mandabat ei ut came
retineret, atque inde suam voluntatem faceret. Iste bonus Ricardus, non solum
Ecclesie Fiscanni multa dedit, sed etiam alus Ecclesiis. Quadam vero nocte
jacuit apud Genmetiam, mane vero furgens, sicut sua consuetudo semper erat,
perrexit orare ad monasterium; qui post orationem, posuit super altar unum
fussellum: recedente vero illo venerunt Secretarii ad Altar, putantes se ibi
esse inventuros vel marcam Auri, vel unciam, vel aliquid hujusmodi: invenerunt
itaque fuffellum; atque quid hoc significaret non parum mirari ceperunt; ad
ultimum inquisierunt ab eo quid hoc esset, quod super Altar illum fussellum
posuisset: Tunc respondit eis, quod hoc esset Vimonastimum, scilicet quoddam
manerium quod ipse illis pro anima sua dabat. Hec de Ricardo Comite dicta
sufficiant, quamvis non possint facile omnia bona que fecit referri.

De Rodberto vero Comite filio ejus, and de Willelmo filio Rodberti Comitis,
qui Angliam conquisivit; quia inde jam satis diximus; non est opus amplius quid
dicere. De Willelmo tamen hoc audivi; quia cum natus fuisset, and super quoddam
stramen quod ibi erat casu poneretur, ambas manulas suas super stramen
projecit; easque illo stramine plenas super pectus suum apposuit.

In Calce hujus Libelli in eadem scriptara; adjititur Catalogus suppeditancium
naves ad expeditionem Gulielmi Comitis in Angliam.
Willelmus Dux Normannorum veniens in Augliam ob adquirendum Regnum jure sibi
debitam habuit. A.

Willelmo dapifero filio Osberni sexaginta naves. ab Hugone postea Comite de
Cestria totidem. ab Hugone de Mumfort quinquaginta naves and sexaginta milites.
rumi a Romo Elemosinario Fescanni postea episcopo Lincoliensi unam navem cum
viginti militibus. a Nicholao Abbate de Sancto Audoeno quindecim naves cum
centum militibus. a Roberto Comite Augi sexaginta naves. a Fulcone Dauno
quadraginta naves. a Geroldo Dapifero totidem. a Willelmo Comite Deurons
octoginta naves. a Rogero de Mumgumeri sexaginta naves. ab Odone Episcopo de
Baios centum naves. a Roberto de Morotemer centum and viginti. a Waltero
Giffardo triginta cum centum militibus.
1 Extra^^d (...) computata simul M. efficient, habuit Dux a quibusdam suis
hominibus secundum possibilitatem unius cujusque multas alias naves.

Matildis postea Regina, ejusdem Ducis uxor, ad honorem Ducis fecit effici,
navem que vocabatur MORA: in qua ipse Dux vectus est: In prora ejusdem navis
fecit fieri eadem Motildes infantulum de Au^o; dextro indice monstrantem
Angliam; and sinistra manu imprimentem cornu eburneum ori; pro quo facto Dux
concessit eidem Matildi Comitatum Cantie.

Ut Generationes in Historiola precedenti clarius intelligantur, hanc
Collationem ad illustrationem Stemmatis Normannici lubens subjecit Silas Tailor.
Guion nobilis Dacus cum duobus filiis Rollone and Gourino e Dania precepto
Regis irati discedere ordinati erant; qui, non solum istud mandatum spernentes,
sed etiam and bellum contra ipsum movebant: quo, and Guion pater, and Guorinus
filius ejus, interfecti fuerant: and Rollo cum participibus suis sibi novas
seeds quaerere coactus erat.

Guion. Gourinus qui etiam and Gurim est dictus a Willelmo Gemeticensi, fatis
cecidit ut antea. Popee and popa filia Guidonis -- Comitis Silvanectensis,
capta in obsidione urbis Bajocensis. Walf uxor secunda.* * * -- Rollo, qui
etiam and Rodbertus ad fontem baptismalem dictus est a Rodberto Duce Francorum,
Anno Dom. 912. quo tempore factus erat Comes Normanniae, a Septentrionalium
invasione sic dictae, quae anten Neustria vocata erat, Rotomagi sepultus jacet.
-- Guilla aut Gilla filia Caroli Francorum Regis. Gemet. and Speed. * * *
Willielmus Longaspata; Dux Normanniae aedificavit Ecclesi am Gemeticensem,
interfectus erat insidiis Arnulfi Flandriae Comitis apud Pinchimacum super
fluvium Sompne and Rotomagi in ecclesia B. Mariae juxta patrem est sepultus, e
Guliel. Gemet. obiit 16 Kalend. Jan. 944. ut e Thoma Walls. sed 943. e Willelmo
Gemetic -- Sporta filia Huberti Sentilicensis Comitis; Herberti in Walsing. in
ypod. Neustriae. * * * Gunnora e nobilissima prosapia and sanguine Dacorum
orta, in vita primae uxoris ejus Concubina erat, ypod Neust. sed postea eam in
uxorem duxit. -- Ricardus primus etiam and durus dictus: vivente patre Ducatui
praeficitur, obiit, Anno Dom. 996. in Regimine illius, Otho Imperator obsidione
Rhotomagum cinxir, ubi Norm^^ni (portis patefactis impetu repentino
proruentes,) tanto turbine depopulati sunt adversarios ut tentoriis complicatis
in conticinio noctis dimissa obsidione, cum morte nepotis Imperatoris, gressus
retorquent. Fiscanni sepultus jacet. -- Agnes quae and Emma dicta, filia
Hugonis Magni (aut le Grand) Comitis Parisiensis, Abbatis Sancti Germani, and
patris Hugonis Capeti Regis Franciae, fine prole mortua est: ypod Neustr.
Robertus Archiepiscopus Retomag. Havisa nupta Gorffrido Britanorum Comiti.
Alanus. Guido aut Eudo, fibi intendens Ducatum Norm tempore Gul. Conq.
interfectus erat.
Emma nupta (postea Canuto Regi Angliae.) -- Ethelredo Regi Anglorum. Edwardus
dictus Confessor obiit sine prole. Rex Angliae. Aluredus qui dolls and insidiis
Goduini Comitis interemptus erat.
Matildis nupta Edoni Comiti de Chartres. Malgerius and duo alii filii. * * *
Ricardus bonus comes Normanniae secundus, qui cum patre suo, Fiscanni Sepultus
jacet. -- Juditha Soror Gorffridi Britannorum Comitis. Estrica uxor secunda
soror Canuti Regis Angliae fine prole. Pavia uxor tertia a qua Gul. Comitem de
Arques and Maugerum Archiepiscopum Rotomagi (in filios ut volunt alii, sed alii
in Nothos) genuit. Adeliza uxor Reginaldi Comitis Burgoniae e quibus. Guido
Comes de Briorne and Vernon.
Alianora uxor Balduini quarti Comitis Flandriae. Baldvinus -- quintus Comes
Flandriae.
Ricardus; cujus in hac historiola nulla est mentio, quem dicunt a Rodberto
fratre suo veneno interemptum fuiffe; ferturque eum iter istud Jerosolymitanum,
pro expiatione hujus peccati suscapisse. * * * Rodbertus Dux Normanniae qui
rediens a terra sancta mortuus est, and in Nica civitate inhumatus jacet, ex
hist. preced. -- Arletta (cujus nec meminit historia nostra) fuit ut plurimi
volunt concubina ejus, etsi alir eam postea Duci nuptam esse asserunt. --
Herlino homini ignotae conditionis secundo nupta erat: is, in fragmento
Stephani Cadomensis nominatur Herluinus de Contavilla. * * * Willelmus dictus
nothus Dux Normanniae, postea conquestu Rex. Anglorum sepultus jacet Cadomi in
Ecclesia B. Stephani. -- Matildes Ducissa Norm. postea (secundum historiam
nostram) Comitissa Cantiae, denique Regina Angliae. * * * Robertus Dux
Normanniae. Willemus secundus Rex Angliae, sepultus in Ecclesia Sancti Petri
Winton. requiescit. * * * Henricus primus Rex Angliae and Dux Normanniae. --
Malda sen Matildis filia Malcolmi Canmoir tertii, Regis Scotorum and Margaretae
Sotoris Edgari filii Edvardi. Matildis Imperatrix.

Odo Episcopus Bajocensis a Rege Willielmo fratre suo uterino in dignitatem
Comitis Cantiae in Anglia promotus erar. Robertus Comes Montaigniae, sed
Moritonii dicitur in frag. Steph. Cadomensis vir crassi and hebetis ingenii ut
apud Willielm. Taylyur de Rotomag. Emma uxor Ricardi Comitis Auranchiae in
Normannia, quibus genitus erat Hugo Lupus Cestriae Comes Palatlnus.


-- filia Willielmi ducis Normanniae nupta Herberto Comiti Giromandorum.
Girlotta, nupta Gulielma Pictaviensi Comiti, quae and Gerloc dicitur. Th.
Walls. in ypod. Neustr. and Gul. Gemet.


Books Printed for and Sold by John Starkey at the Miter betwixt the middle
Temple-Gate, and Temple Bar in Fleetstreet.
Folio's.
THe Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries; whereto are added the Travels of John
Albert de Mandelslo from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and
finished in 1640. the whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and figures,
and written by Adam Olearius Secretary to the Embassy. The World Surveyed, or
the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent de Blanc of Marseilles, into the East
and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa,
and the principal Provinces of Europe. A Practical and Polemical Commentary, or
Exposi^ion upon the third and fourth Chapters of the ^atter Epistle of Saint
Paul to Timothy, by Thomas Hall. B. D. Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact
Collection of approved forms of all sorts of Judicial Writs in the
Common-Bench, together with their returns, by Rich. Brownlow. Thesaurus
Brevium, or a Collection of approved forms of Original and Judicial Writs in
the Kings Bench, with their special Directions, by J. C. Action upon the Case
for Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands of Cases in the Law, of
what words are Actionable, and what not, by William Shepherd, Esquire. Guillims
display of Heraldry. Blundels Treatise of the Sybells.
Quarto's.
A Collection of Declarations, Messages, Speeches, Remonstrances, etc. which
passed betwixt King Charles the first, and the long Parliament, in the years
1641, 1642, 1643. Richard Baxters Treatise of Saving Faith. Lawsons Politica
Sacra and Civilis, or a model of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government. The
History of Gavelkind with the Etymology thereof, containing a vindication of
the Laws of England, together with a short History of William the Conqueror,
by Sylas Tailor.
Octavo's.
An Historical and Geographical description of the great Country and River of
the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof, Translated out of French.
The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral, by Walter Mountague. Aminta, the famous
Italians Pastoral, translated into English. Ploudens Queries, or a Moot Book of
choice Cases in the Common Law, Englished, methodized, and enlarged by H. B. An
Exact Abridgement of all the Statutes in force and use, made in the 16th, 17th,
and 18th. of King Charles the first, and in the 12th, 13th. and 14th. of King
Charles the second, viz. from the 4th. of Jan. 1641/2. to the 81th. of Febr.
1662/3; by William Hughes, Esquire. Finche's Discourse of the Law in four books.
Engl. Tho. Goodwin. Opuscula Theolog. Tho. Hall Apologia pro Ministerio
Evangelico. -- Translation of the second book of Ovids Metamorph. -- Treatise
against the Millenaries.
Twelves.
Tho. Hookers Missellanies in Divinity. Rich: Baxters Call to the Unconverted.

