ERRATA.
The Author's distance from the Press has occasioned some Mistakes, which the
kind Reader is desired to Correct.
TItle Page, read (...), not (...). page 5. l. 1. r. Practices. p. 17. l. 11. r.
God for end. p. 21. l. 7. r. is strong enough. p. 27. l. 7. r. contended. p.
40. l. 3. dele 6. p. 58. l. 27. for have, r. heart. p. 61. in Marg. for Wire,
r. Wyvel. p 62. l. 20. for alone, r. along. p. 63. l. 5. for to, r. by. p. 86.
l. 7. dele in. p. 87. l. 2. dele by. p. 91. Marg. for Halak. r. Habak. p. 94.
l. 7. r. it is an. p. 95. l. 8. r. An Earnest. and l. 20. r. Give and forgive.
p. 96. l. 17. for Active, r. alive. p. 101. l. 28. r. invisible Grace. p. 109.
l. 22. 23. r. of, and dele and. p. 118. l. 23. for Omne Corpus, r. cum E
Corpo^^. p. 122. l. 18. for Diviners, r. Divi were. p. 129. l. 15. for Fumus,
r. Funus. and l. 18. r. mansueti. p. 130. l. 11. for fides, r. fide.

PAIDOA'PTISOS 'OPTHOA'PTISOS: OR, THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS Vindicated by
Scriptures and Reasons. Humbly offered in Order to a Composure of Differences
at this Juncture of Time.

By Nath. Tailor, M. A.

Mark 10.13. And they brought young Children to him, that he should touch them;
and his Disciples rebuked those that brought them.

14. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, suffer
the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of God.

15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a
Little Child, he shall not enter therein.

16. And he took them up in his Arms, put his Hands upon them, and Blessed them.

London, Printed for Richard Butler next door to the Lamb and Three Bowls in
Barbican, 1683.

To my Dissenting Brethren, the Anabaptists in England, A perfect understanding
in all things.
THE Grand concern of Christianity, and the danger the Protestant Religion is
apprehended to be in, by all its Professors, may call for our serious
Considerations, how imprudently we expose our selves to our Enemies by our
causeless Divisions; and how justly God (provoked by the Separations and
Contentions among our selves) may permit a Wolf to devour us scattered Sheep,
of which Mischief I would gladly hope your selves grow more sensible than
formerly some of that Party (and they of no small note) having declared by
Word, Writing, Grantham's Friendly Epistle to the Bish. of the Church of
England. Gal. 5.15 Romans 16.17.
and in Print their inclinations to a Compliance with our Church. An Union much
to be desired, and by these Pages sincerely endeavored for the sole ends of
Gods Glory, and the good of the Souls whose unhappiness or Folly I know not
which most to lament.

Your unhappiness in separating from that Church, the Purity of whose Doctrine
your selves do not deny, unless chiefly in that one Article about Infant
Baptism; and that has not been thought cause enough to separate from us, by
several, who with your selves opposed Infant Baptism, but wrote against you for
your Separation from our Church on that account, 2 Timothy 3.
thereby hindering your selves from the Advantages of a joint Communion, and
exposing your selves to those Judgments Sacred Writ denounces against such as
cause Divisions.

Nor yet your Folly (if you please to excuse the word) appear less upon an
impartial enquiry what occasion, your dividing about Infant Baptism. It seems
to be either about the Subject to be Baptized, or the Mode of Baptizing; for
the Essence or Form of Baptism I may affirm is Practiced by us more consonantly
to the Commission of our Savior given to his Apostles, In the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.
than by you, who give a Liberty (in your Printed Articles) to Baptize In the
Name of Christ alone: The Error of which I have endeavored to manifest.

And as for the Subject of Baptism, the great mistake between us about it,
seems to arise from your not considering of, and distinguishing between the
state of Christ's Church when gathering (in Christ's and his Apostles days) and
of it now gathered. For though the Apostles could not admit as Members of
Christ's Church, either the Jews, who Crucified our Savior, or the Heathen, who
had not heard of Christ, without a preceding Repentance and Profession of Faith
by those Adult Persons to whom they Preached: It being necessary they should
give a Testimony of their Conversion to Christ, and believe on Christ, before
they were Baptized into Christ, or owned as Members of his Church.) Yet upon
their Conversion, their Children also were received to Baptism, according to
the will of God under the Law, the extent of the Covenant of Grace and other
Arguments urged in this Tract.

And accordingly our Church (when Heathens or Jews are Converted, or when
Parents professing Christianity, bring up their Children unbaptized) does
prescribe an Instructing of them, and a requiring from them a Confession of
Faith, before they be Baptized. But they being Baptized, our Church (for the
same Reasons Gods Church of the Jews and Christians ever did) does receive the
Posterity or Seed of such Converts to Church Membership and Baptism. So that by
Christian Moderation ye may see your Error in Separating from a Church
Baptizing Believers as well as you pretend to do.

As to the Mode of Baptizing, I not a little admire Men of such Reason, as some
of you are, should so place the whole of Baptism (a it were) in an external
Mode and Circumstance of its Administration, and that no where expressed in
Scripture. As to cry up your Dipping for the sole way of Baptizing, esteeming
ours no Baptism, because not so performed. Nor can I see what cause ye can
modestly plead you have to Separate from our Church, which allows of Dipping or
Sprinkling, as being both the import of the word Baptize, as will in due time
be manifested.

These things considered, be pleased to take notice how uncharitably ye deal
with us, in denying us to be Members of Christ's Church, or in a visible way of
Salvation, so as ye cannot hope we shall be saved, in the way we are in,
thereby exposing us in your present thoughts to Satan's Kingdom here, and his
Infernal Regions hereafter, from which, that the good Lord would deliver you
and us, is my hearty Prayer. And I hope your impartial and considerate perusal
of what is here offered, will more influence your Charity toward us, whose
Churches Prayers in her last Fast, December. 22. 1680. were for all our Unions
here, and Glory hereafter.

And I assure you, nothing is in these Pages written with the least design of
Controversy, or with the least prejudice against any of your Persons: But
seriously to state the Controversy, Ephesians. 4.1. to 7.
and propose the Truth, with an earnest desire that we who all own the same God
of Peace, to be Members of the same Christ, 2 Cor. 13.11. Gal. 5.22. Heb.
12.14. 1 Cor. 3.4.
the Prince of Peace, to be acted by the same Spirit of Peace, to walk by the
same Gospel of Peace, and to enjoy the same Heaven hereafter, where we shall be
at Peace together, may, if possible, be United here, that our Divisions may no
longer rent the Church of Christ, to the great hindrance of the Conversion of
both Jew and Gentile, and the apparent exposing our Church and State to Ruin
and Confusion by the Fury of our Adversaries. But that our unanimous Prayers
may Deprecate apprehended Judgments, and prevail for our continued enjoyment of
Gospel Mercies. And may these Pages be in any respect serviceable to these
Ends, so God have the Glory, and his Church the Advantage, I have my end, who am

Thy Faithful Friend.

The PREFACE TO THE Paidobaptist,
AMongst the many Parties our Church and Nation abounds with, the Anabaptists
are not the least considerable, who not only deny Infant Baptism, but proceed
so far, as to Separate from our Communion on that unwarrantable ground; nor
contented with that, they (as if acted by Infallibility) confine the Church of
Christ to their own People, denying our Ministers to be either Members or
Ministers of Christ, and declaring our selves and our People to be in no
visible way to Salvation, which sad expression being daily whispered into the
Ears of the People committed to my Care, did not a little disturb several of
them, who thus were almost seduced from our Church. And to add to my trouble,
one of the chiefest of their Teachers gave me frequent Challenges to a Public
Disputation, which I declining (as not yet seeing any good to have been the
issue of such Disputes) he and my Neighbors supposed my refusing to dispute,
to preceed from my sense of the weakress of the cause, or from my inclination
to their Opinion.

These and such like things (Christian Reader) occasioned my endeavor to
discharge my Fidelity to my Peoples Souls, and my own Conscience, by Publishly
Preaching on Infant Baptism, enquiring into its Necessity, as to Salvation and
Church Membership, in order to the satisfying my Peoples troubled minds. And
then inquiring into the Form, Subject, and Mode of Baptism, to Vindicate the
Doctrine and Practice of our Church, and to clear my self of those Aspersions I
met with; which being completed, I endeavored to solve all those Objections I
have yet met with from their Mouths or Writings.

Which Sermons God was pleased to make so successful, as to satisfy my
Auditors, so that hitherto they have created me no more trouble. And that
Person who had so often Challenged me to Dispute the Point, having a little
private Discourse with me, assured me he would no more trouble me or my People,
which Promise he has hitherto kept, and has declared his desires, and (as he
said) the inclination of the most Eminent of their Party, to a Compliance with
our Church, to promote which, I know there have been some endeavors.

Let then your Candor, I humbly beg, excuse me, if when God has been pleased
to make my Endeavors Instrumental to the keeping my People and others from
straying from us, if not to reduce some from them to our Church. And if after I
have been sometimes requested to expose my Thoughts, I now at length (finding
their inclinableness declared by word and writing, to a closure with us) humbly
offer them, such as they are (after my submitting them to my Diocesan's
Judgment) to the Service of Gods Church, in promoting his Glory, and Peace, and
Union in our days.

And may my sincerity in this design obtain your Pardon for what may be amiss
in this Tract, humbly devoted to the Service of every of your Souls, by one who
daily Prays for, and by all endeavors labors to promote the good of our
Church and State, it shall ever Oblige

Yours in the Service of God and Souls.

Baptism OF INFANTS VINDICATED.
Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you.


OUR Savior Christ, who was the Messiah promised to the Jews, and also a
Savior Prophesied to the Gentiles; being, when manifested in the Flesh, to
gather a Church to himself of both Jews and Gentiles, did while he was on Earth
Commissionate his Apostles to Teach, or Disciple all Nations, by acquainting
them with the Rudments of his Gospel. And then Ordered the Reception of them as
Members of his Visible Church (as by Circumcision under the Law) so by Baptism
under the Gospel, Genesis 17.10.
which in the words premised is directed to.

1. As to its Form, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. As to its Subject, (...), All Nations.

3. As to its manner of Performance, (...), Baptizing them.

Before I come to the Consideration of the parts of the Text, I shall premise
this Grand Enquiry, with its Solution.

Enq. How far Baptism is necessary as to Salvation, and Church Membership:
which I shall Consider, 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

1. Prop. 1.
I shall assert, that this Baptism of Water is not absolutely necessary to
Salvation, so as that it is impossible for a Person to be saved who is not
Baptized: which Proposition I shall thus prove.

1. Genesis 17.10, 14.
Because the Children of Israel under the Law (to whom Circumcision was as
strictly enjoined, as Baptism is, or can be to us) were Forty Years without its
Practice; they being not Circumcised all the time of their sojourning in the
Wilderness, lest their soreness thereby occasioned, might hinder them in their
Travel toward Canaan, Josh. 5.2, 3, 4, 5.
yet doubtless we dare not entertain thoughts that they who dyed in the
Wilderness uncircumcised were all Damned.

2. Salvation in no place of Scripture is annexed to Baptism, but to the
Covenant, whose Tenor is not, Be Baptized, and thou shall be Saved, but
Believe, and thou shall be Saved: Not was Christ given, that all who were
Baptized, might have Eternal Life, John ^.16. Mark 16.16.
but that all who Believe on him. As for that place Objected against us, and
Pleaded by the Anabaptists, Mark 16.16. it must either, if strictly taken,
include Infants as Believers, and so as subjects capable of Baptism; or else
exclude them as Unbelievers, and render them as Persons liable to Damnation,
according to their own Argumentation; which if they evade by saying, they who
are capable of believing, do believe, and are Baptized shall be saved. Order
for Baptism of Riper Years.
I oppose to this the Practice of our Church, which requires actual Profession
of Faith of all Persons who are capable of doing it, and have been brought up
unbaptized. And again, this Text when it respects Damnation, does not mention
Baptism, it says not, He who is not Baptized shall be Damned; but he that
believes not. Salvation is annexed to Faith, and Damnation is the Punishment
of Unbelief. Baptism therefore is not absolutely necessary to Salvation, nor
its want absolutely exposing Souls to Damnation.

3. This would be to tie God to means, and to make it in Man's Power to Save or
Damn whom he pleased: For if it be impossible any should be saved without
Baptism, then would it follow that it is Baptism more than Gods free Grace that
saves, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that it is in the Power of the Minister by Baptism to save whom he please,
and by denying it, to damn whom he will Yea then, this Ordinance will be
supposed to confer Grace, Ex Opere Operate, which Assertion detracts from Gods
Glory, disagrees with Truth, and is injurious to Souls, who may be hereby
brought to rely rather on a Creatures Baptism than their Creaton Mercy for
Salvation.

4. Then all Children, and those who dye unbaptized must be supposed not to
appertain to Christ, nor to be saved by him, which to believe of all Infants is
dreadful, whom I cannot implead of sin in not being Baptized, being not capable
of desiring it. And though I cannot but think the Parent highly to Offend in
slighting the Ordinance where it is to be obtained, yet cannot I suppose it to
be by God imputed as a sin to the Child so dying, for which he will damn it,
which is the Genuine, though Dismal Consequence of that Position, That Baptism
is absolutely necessary to Salvation.

5. The Baptism contended for is but an outward sign of that inward Grace which
Entitles the Soul to Heaven, John 3.5.
and to which Glory is annexed; the sign then cannot be so Essential, as that
they who have received the things signified, and inward Grace, without Baptism
should still be excluded Heaven because they are not Baptized: Acts 10.47.
Which is as much as to assert, that though a Soul should partake of all
Christ's Benefits to be bestowed on a Worthy Communicant, yet unless he actually
Eat the Bread, and Drink the Wine, which are the External Elements in the Lords
Supper, and Representatives of those inward Benefits, yet he could not be
saved. A Thesis deservedly to be exploded, Rubric 3. after Comm. (...)
as nullifying Christ's Merits to Idolize External things: And our Church is
clear against it.

6. By this Assertion it would follow, that many Thousands of Christians shall
be Damned, who duly, and perhaps, more circumspectly walk in Obedience to God
than we, in, and amongst the Turks and Pagans, who probably by Reason of their
Persecuted Condition, or the non-settlement of a Church and Ordinances amongst
them, are, and so dye unbaptized. But how sad this would be to a Christians
Eat. I leave every one to judge.

7. When ever Baptism is taken as so necessary to Salvation in Scripture, it
has respect to the Internal thing signified by it, so St. John 3.9.
John has chiefly respect to the Baptism of the Spirit, whereby the Soul is
Regenerated and reduced to a state of Grace (nor can the Baptism we contend
about be there meant, this being not Instituted till after our Saviors
Resurrection, which was some Years after these words were spoken by our
Savior.) And this Baptism of the Spirit is other where called A Baptism by
Fire, Mat. 3.11.
denoting the cleansing and purifying Nature of the Graces of the Holy Ghost,
which purifies the Regenerated Soul from its Corruption, and burns up its
drossie Lusts. In comparison of which Baptism St. John accounts his of Water
(the Subject of our present Controversy) so mean as only to have a Relation to
it, as Precedaneous, not as Competitour. Again, Ephesians. 1.26, 27.
St. Paul joins the Word of God with this Baptism, in order to the Purifying
Christ's Church; that acting on the Soul, and this terminating on the Body. And
St. Peter's Assertion is clear, 1 Pet. 3.21.
that it is not the Water Purifying the Flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God that saves us: And indeed the Trope of using the sign
for the thing signified, is not unusual in Scripture.

8. The All-wise God has determined the Controversy, in that He in diverse
places of his revealed Will, Asserts, Gal. 6.15 1 Cor. 7.19.
that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avail any thing, but a New
Creature. It is not the being an unbaptized Person that will expose any one to
Condemnation; for there is not one Woe denounced against any as such: Nor is
there one Promise in all the Divine Writ Infallibly annexing Salvation to
Baptism: 2 These. 1.8, 9. John 3.16.
All Threats of Misery are to those who believe not, and Obey not the Gospel of
Christ. And all Promises of Eternal Mercies are to those who by Faith close
with Christ, and live the life of Christians. So that I dare not say, all who
are Baptized shall be saved, and all who are not Baptized shall be damned. But
I dare affirm, that whosoever remain, and dies in unbelief shall be damned
though he be Baptized. And whoever believes truly on Christ, and lives
answerably to that Faith, though for some Persecution, or other Causes he
cannot be Baptized, he shall be saved.

Whence will appear, That Baptism is not absolutely Necessary to Salvation, so
as that one cannot be saved without it.

As I have hitherto endeavored to remove the great Censure of the Anabaptists
of our being in no visible salvable way (because not Baptized after their Mode)
by giving my Reasons why Baptism is not so absolutely Necessary to Salvation.
So I proceed to prove,

That Baptism of Water is not absolutely Necessary to Church Membership, Prop.
2.
so as that they cannot be Members of Christ's Church unless Baptized: Which
will appear thus.

1. Wills against Danvers, p. 49.
There was ever a Church before Baptism or Circumcision were Administered: They
being both External signs to be acted on visible Professors and Church Members
in the Church of Christ, there is necessarily presupposed an existence of a
Church, containing Members to be Circumcised or Baptized, and Persons to
perform these Offices. So that these signs are not the (...) esse of a Church,
or the Essential Constituents of its visibility. Noah, Seth, and those Holy
Patriarchs before the Flood, who Lived some hundreds of Years before the
Institution of Circumcision, Genesis 17.24.
were doubtless Members of Gods Church. And Abraham also doubtless before he
was Circumcised, which was in the 99th. Year of his Age, and about the 2107
Year of the World, was a True Believer, and a Member of the True Church. And if
it be alleged, they were Members of the Invisible Church, we may grant them a
Membership in the Visible, from that known Axiom, Omne majus in se continet
minus. Their being of the Invisible Church being greater than their being
Members of the Visible Church: Yea, it is apparent the Promises were made to
Abraham above Twenty Years before Circumcision was Instituted, which Promise he
believed, Genesis 15.4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 4.11.
and received Circumcision as a Seal of his Faith, whence undeniably follows
that Circumcision was not absolutely Necessary to the Visibility of Gods Church
among the Jews.

2. Neither Circumcision nor Baptism are absolutely Necessary to the Being of a
Church, because a Visible Church may be without them, and yet be a Church
Visible, as in the Instance of the Israelites, whom we proved to be forty Years
together Uncircumcised in the Wilderness, and yet were they all that time the
Visible Church God had on the Earth.

3. If Persons be not Church Members before Circumcision or Baptism, and be so
after, it will infer an Operation from the Ordinance not allowable, for then
these being Circumcised or Baptized would entitle the Heathens to be Members of
the Church of God and Christ.

4. The Jews did first Proselyte or Teach the Nations the Rudiments of their
Law before they Circumcised them, and so owned them to be received amongst
them. So that they were Proselytes and Members as such, of their Church before
they were Publicly declared and owned to be so by Circumcision. According to
which, our Savior Advises his Disciples in the Text, Mat. 28.19.
(...), Going to Disciple all Nations, Instruct them in the Principles of my
Religion; and then being Disciples, Baptize them: So that there is a
Discipleship and Visible Church Membership preexistent to Baptism. And indeed
the premising the word Disciple implies none to be capable of Baptism who are
not Disciples of Christ, and Members of his Church, which also in due time
Infants will be proved to be.

5. If Baptism be absolutely Necessary to Church Membership, that none belong
to Christ's Visible Church but who are Baptized, what shall we think of that
innumerable number of Professing Christians dispersed over the Face of the
whole Earth, and scattered amongst Heathen People, whose Princes and Governors
will not permit this or any other Christian Ordinance to be Practiced among
them: Shall we unchurch these, or count them as Heathens? What will then become
of that Article of our Faith, The Belief of an Holy Catholic Church? Do not
the Anabaptists herein imitate others, who while they believe a Catholic
Church, confine it to their own Synagogues, not considering the Catholic
Church of Christ comprehensive of all Christian Professors through the whole
World, nor weighing the sad Consequents of denying Persons to be Visibly of
this Church of Christ, making them thereby Visible Members of Satan's Kingdom,
and exposing those Persons in their Thoughts to Eternal Ruins, which Thoughts
are too severe to entertain of those who Profess the same God and Christ, but
are not Baptized because probably the Ordinances are not permitted in the
Territories wherein they Reside.

6. If Baptism give a Visible Form to Church Membership, Wills against Danvers.
p. 50, 51, 52.
then must it be often repeated, even as often as any Person is Excommunicated,
or else Baptism is nullified, for it being the Christian Practice of the
Apostles and their Successors even to our Ages, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
to exclude their Assemblies, and Excommunicate Persons, which was termed a
giving such over to Satan who were guilty of scandalous Offenses, 2 These. 3.6.
Mat. 18.17.
till by their Humiliation they had Evidenced their Repentance, and so were
received again into their Assemblies. If that Excommunication can Exclude the
Person from being a Member of the Church (as it ever did) then it nullifies
Baptism, or else Baptism is not Essential to the Form of Visible
Churchmembership, because it would then follow, that the Person even
Excommunicated, is still a Member of the Visible Church, which is a
contradictory Solecism, or else that his Baptism is nulled, and then must
Rationally be repeated at his Reception into the Church again; and so as often
as any being guilty of a Crime, is for it Excommunicated, and afterward
received into the Church again, so often must he be rebaptized, Ephesians. 4.5.
which is opposite to the Scriptures Assertion of but One Baptism.

Thus have I endeavored to prove Baptism contended for, to be not so
absolutely Necessary to Salvation or Church Membership, as that none can be
saved, or be of Christ's Church unless they be Baptized, to remove the
unchristian Censures the Anabaptists have of us. But

Lest on the other side I should detract from the Ordinance and its due worth
by rendering its use needless.

I proceed to prove that the Practice of Baptism is very Necessary as an
Ordinance of Christ in any Church of his where it may be had, Prop. 3.
and that the slighters and contemners of it are really Culpable. Which I prove
thus.

1. Christ has Commanded its Performance in his Churches under the Gospel to
the end of the World: Mat. 28.19.
And all his Ordinances and Commands ought by us to be Observed.

2. Christ himself was subject to it, Mat. 3.16. Acts 10.47.
and therefore none can pretend to be above it, though they have already
received the Holy Ghost.

3. The Apostles Practiced it. Mat. 3.1.
St. John from hence was called the Baptist. And whenever the Gospel was
Preached to the Gentiles and unconverted Jews, Acts 10.48. Acts 2.38, 41. Acts
16.31, 32. Acts 16.15. 1 Cor. 1.16.
and received by them. The General way whereby the Apostles owned the Converts
was Baptism; and we find not only single Persons, but whole Families Baptized.

4. It is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace which when made to and received by
Abraham, he also received Circumcision as a Seal of it. And Baptism succeeding
Circumcision denotes probably our greater Privileges by Christ than the Jews
had before Christ, Romans 4.11.
who was of the one Sex, and derived our Nature from the other by this
Sacrament admitting both Sexes to equal Privileges, that of Circumcision only
belonging to the Males. And Baptism may as significantly be a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, as Circumcision, Acts 2.38. Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3, 4, etc.
the Person Baptized being said to put on Christ, which Phrase implies his
being Invested with a Right to the Privileges of Christians, and the Benefits
of Christ. And thus it is of great Use.

5. Many of the Converts to Christianity have soon after their being Baptized,
received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.16, 17.
to whose Baptism this seems precedaneous and preparatory. And Gods usual way
of working in an Established Church and Ordinances, Baptism being a Public
Sign manifesting the Persons Baptized to be Publicly owned as Members of
Christ, and Children of God, to which this Spirit of Adoption is promised. Gal.
4.4, 6, 7.


6. This serves as a distinguishing Mark in a settled Church to know Professors
of Christianity from Jews, Turks, and Heathens, so that all who would manifest
themselves to be of Christ's Church, should desire to partake of, and submit to
this Ordinance of Baptism. And all Christian Parents ought to desire it for
their Children, since none beneath Heaven can be above Gods Ordinances. Christ,
though without sin, and the Converts who had received the Holy Ghost, we have
premised to have submitted to Baptism, Romans 6.
the wilful Refusal and Contempt of which where in an Established Church it may
be had, is a Contempt of Christ and his Precepts, and as much as lies in us, a
depriving of our selves or Children of the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace,
and a reducing us into a state of Heathenism, or at best an unwillingness to be
owned as Christians.

7. It serves as an Oath and Obligation on Souls to be, and continue Christ's
Faithful Soldier and Servant to our Lives end. Our Life is often in Scripture
called a warfare, wherein we are engaged to fight against the World, Flesh, and
Devil, to engage us against whom, the Lord of Hosts, the chief General of the
Field, and Christ the Captain of our Salvation, List all their Soldiers, the
Members of the Church Militant here on Earth, to Fight under their Banner, till
they have their Writs of Ease by Death, and have their Quarters removed from
the Church-Militant on Earth to the Church Triumphant in Heaven: Into which
Militia this Ordinance is the Public way of our Admission, and is as it were
our Matriculation, or taking the Oath of Allegiance to our God, Col. 2.6, 7.
thereby discriminating us from Rebels and Traitors, and engaging our Fidelity
to our Lives end.

8. The uncircumcised Child was to be cut off from Israel, which Punishment
respects either its Exclusion from the Church of Christ, Genesis 17.14.
and so its cutting off from the Israel of God: Or else a punishing of the
Child by Death, and so taking it away from among the People. Or, Lastly, it
signifies an Eternal Excluding it from Heaven, and a cutting it off for ever
from Gods People and their Portion. Now, though probably the Punishment in the
Text on the Uncircumcised Child may not denote its being thereby Miserable to
Eternity, for what it could not help: Yet to engage the Parents care to observe
the Covenant and Gods Ordinances in having the Child Circumcised, it might be
punished both the other ways, which could not but be a great trouble to the
Parent, whose remisness or neglect of the Ordinance might cause himself in his
Child to be Punished, either with his Child's Death, or if it Lived, by its
being esteemed not of the Church of God, but to be looked on as an Heathen. And
so under the Gospel, although the Child shall not probably for the want of
Baptism (it being guilty of no contempt of it) suffer Eternally; Walkers Modest
Plea. p. 147.
yet may the Parent justly fear to be severely Punished for slighting and
contemning the Sacred Ordinances of God and Christ, commanded to be Observed.

Thus are the Enquiries premised considered, and the Necessity of Baptism
stated.

I proceed more closely to adhere to the Exposition of the Parts of the Text.
1. Part of Text. 1. Form.
Wherein we Observed,

1. The Form or Essence of Baptism. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And I esteem this the Form or Essence of
Baptism, because though there be a subject capable of Baptism, and Water be
used to Baptize, yet is the Baptism Null unless in the Name of the Trinity,
according to Christ's Commission in the Text, which is never Repealed in any
part of the New Testament.

As for the Baptizing Persons into the Name of Christ mentioned sometimes, Acts
2.38. Acts 8.16.
that does not derogate from Christ's Commission in the Text, those places not
relating to the manner of Administering the Ordinance, but to the end of
Baptism, for the Jews, who were pricked in their hearts for the Crucifying of
Christ (whom St. Peter had proved to be the Messiah) and enquired what they
should do to be saved. The Apostle Exhorts them to believe on a Crucified
Savior, and to be Baptized in, Acts 4.12. Acts 10.48.
or into his Name, as a Token of their owning him as their Messiah and Savior,
without whom no Salvation was attainable. And those other places mentioning the
Baptizing in the Name of the Lord, or in the Name of Christ, have the like
respect, denoting the Converted Jews and Gentiles, being by Baptism received
into the Name or Religion of Christ. And they do not in the least infringe our
Saviors Commission of Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. And therefore the Anabaptists seem to be blameworthy, Article 11. 1660
given to our present King
who in their Printed Principles give Order indifferently to Baptize in the
Name of the Trinity, or in the Name of Christ alone, which Practice is directly
contrary to this Precept of our Savior, by which the Person to be Baptized was
Baptized (...) into the Name, Profession, and Service of the Sacred Trinity.
The Acknowledgment of the ever Blessed Trinity, and the Grounds of the Souls
hope of enjoying all the Promises and Benefits of Christ's Death, Regeneration
and Grace being thereby Ratified and Scaled to the Soul, Epl. es. 5.1.
who is also thus engaged to act as a Child of God, 1 Cor. 6.18, 19, 20. Romans
6.11.
a Member of Christ, and a Temple of the Holy Ghost.

The Form or Essence of Baptism being Proved, 2. Part of Text. Subject
we come to consider the Subject of Baptism, (...), all Nations; which in
Scripture is spoken either,

1. Exclusively as to the Jews, and Inclusively only of the Gentiles, who were
through Christ to be received into the Church of God, Ephesians. 2.2, 12, 13, 19.
and be made Members of Christ, were admitted to partake of the Benefits of a
state of Grace through Christ, and by him also were made Heirs of Glory. So
that through Christ they were admitted to equal Privileges with the Jews, Acts
2.3, 7, 9. Acts 10.34, 35, 49.
which thing, though it caused an astonishment to the Jews, yet was in
Remarkable Evidences verified; so that now all the ends of the Earth have seen
the Salvation of God, who is become God of the Gentile as well as Jew, Romans
3.29.
and without Respect of Persons has Respect to all those, whether Jews or
Gentiles, who truly serve him.

2. Inclusively of the Jews also, for that Christ who was so long before his
manifestation Promised as a Messiah and Savior to the lost sheep of the House
of Israel, Mar. 10.5, 6.
would not, when manifested, exclude them, but being to Collect a Church to
himself, Mark 16 16. Acts 26.17, 18. Acts 13.46, 47. Acts 28.28.
he did Personally, and by his Apostles first promulgate the Gospel to the
Jews, and they rejecting it, he Commissioned his Apostles to go to the Gentiles
as well as Jews, who discharging their Office, prevailed with great Numbers of
both to accept of Christ; to show the equality of Christ's proceedings, and the
freeness of Gods Mercy to both Jew and Gentile, that of both all and every one
who will believe on him should be saved by him.

And in this Inclusive sense, as comprehending both Jew and Gentile, even all
Nations, these words, (...), are to be taken, and accordingly (both Jew and
Gentile being to be Discipled to Christ) our ever Blessed Savior seems to
adapt his Commission suitably to the Practice of the Jews in their gathering of
their Church; for whereas they observed three things therein, so our Savior in
the Text by three words seems to observe this Method in gathering his
Gospel Church. For,

1. The Jews did first Proselyte the Heathen, by acquainting them with the
Rudiments of their Law, and thereby inducing them (...) to come over from
Heathenism to the Jews Religion, and to embrace that. So Christ Commands his
Disciples, that they going to Constitute a Church out of all Nations, should
first endeavor (...) to Disciple them by Preaching to both Jews and Gentiles
the verity of Christ manifested in the Flesh, the Reality of his Death and
Resurrection, the Rationality of all those things which the Scriptures relate
to be done or suffered by Christ, Acts 2.37. Acts 16.31. Isai 53.
and the Necessity of all Persons adhering to this Crucified Christ as their
Savior; how that the sufferings of Christ were foretold concerning the
Messiah to the Jews, and the Gentiles Sacrifices might re-mind them of their
Thoughts, sin could not be expiated but by Death; and thus the Occasion of
stumbling at, or deriding of the Gospel of Christ being removed from Jew and
Gentile, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. Mat. 18.11.
the Apostles urged a closure with Christ by the free and full Mercies tendered
through him to all returning sinners, and the Grand Privileges of such a state
of Grace, together with the exceeding weight of Glory reserved in Heaven for
Christ's People. 2 Cor. 6.1.
And thus preunited with many (through Gods co-working) to become Christ's
Disciples.

2. As the Jews did by Gods Command Circumcise, so the Disciples did by Christ's
Order Baptize the Proselyte or Convert, and so received him as one of the
Church. Genesis 17.12, 13.
And as the Jews did not only Circumcise the Aged Proselyte, but all his
Children, so Christ Commands the Discipled Persons to be Baptized; nor did he
only admit as his Disciples the Aged and Adult Persons, Mark 10 13. Mat. 19.15.
Luke 18.15.
but (...) and (...), little Children and Infants (...) to come unto him, or
become his Proselytes, as the very import of the words denote, which
Proselytism or Discipleship, renders them capable of Baptism, Acts 2.38.
as will in due time be more fully proved. And indeed the Apostles having
Discipled or Converted the Master or Parent of a Family, we frequently find
them Baptizing the whole Family, Acts 16.15, 31.
in which several Families it may as Reasonably be presumed there were some
Children, as it can be confidently denied.

And as for the change of the mode of Admission of Proselytes under the Law,
and of Converts under the Gospel into the Church of God and Christ, Euxtorf.
cap. 2. de Sin. Jadai. Godwin. Awiq. of Prosel^tes Dr. Hammond's Query of
Infant Bap. Mr. Wall ker's Plea, p. 9.
from Circumcision to Baptism, it may probably appear rather a Sacramental
Confirmation of an Ancient Custom, than an Innovation of a New Rite: For if
Learned Authors may be Credited, or their Citations believed, the Practice of
Baptizing Proselytes was used by the Jews, who thereby as by one means received
them into their Church; yea, as to Females it was the chief, if not only way of
their Admission. Which washing or Baptisin of the Proselyte Scripture seems to
give us some Reason to think the Jews expected to be by the Messiah made
Sacramental, Wills against Danvers, p. 7. John 1.25, 28.
else what may their Enquiry of St. John mean? when they asked him why he
Baptized if he was not the Messiah that should come? Rather scrupling his
Authority to Baptize, than in the least Questioning the Lawfulness of the
Ordinance: Which Enquiry certainly sounds as much as a Tacit acknowledgment of
their Practicing it, though not as a Sacrament till the Messiah had confirmed
it.

3. The Jews having Circumcised their Proselytes, brought them up in the
knowledge of the Law. And our Savior having Ordered his Disciples to Disciple
all Nations, Baptizing them, does afterward command their Teaching, (...),
Teaching them to Observe all things which he had Commanded, Mat. 18.20.
to Edify them in the Holy Faith, in which Work he promised himself their
co-worker to the Worlds end.

The Jews did first Teach, and then Circumcise their Proselytes, but they first
Circumcised, and then Taught the Children of those Proselytes: And so all
Nations are first Taught to bring them to a state of Discipleship before
Baptism: But the Children of such Converts and Disciples are first Baptized,
and then Taught, and that on good Warrant, which I endeavor to prove thus.

Arguments for Infant Baptism.
ARGUMENT I.
IF our Christian Privileges be as great as the Jews were, then our Children
are rightly Baptized. But our Christian Privileges are as great as the Jews
were, therefore our Children are rightly Baptized.

In this Hypothetical Argument the Minor is to be proved; and I shall endeavor
to manifest that our Christian Privileges are as great as the Jews were, which
being proved, I shall prove the consequence thence following, that our
Christian Privileges being as great as the Jews were, our Children are rightly
Baptized.

1. Our Christian Privileges are as great as the Jews were, as will thus
appear.

1. The same Covenant of Grace made through Christ with the Jews is also made
with the Gentiles, Acts 2.39. Ephesians. 2.13, 19. Genesis 17.10.
whereby God promises himself to be the God of his People, and of their Seed:
It is called a Covenant of Grace, to the full extent of which, Gentiles as well
as Jews are now through Christ admitted.

2. Else our Condition is worse since Christ than the Jews state was before
Christ, nor is Christ then a Mediator of a better Covenant, as he is said to be
in Scripture. Heb. 8.6.


3. Scripture Witnesses the Gentiles being received to the same and equal
Privileges with the Jews, Romans 11. Romans 3.29. Ephesians. 2.13, 19.
and that now both are Coheirs through Christ of the Promises.

4. Else could we scarce persuade a Jew to become a Christian, who might well
Plead against his Conversion, the Privation of those Privileges he was
Invested with by the Law, whereby his Child as well as himself was within the
Covenant with God, and admitted by God to the Seal of the Covenant, while he
remains a Jew. But if by his espousing Christianity he must part with this
Privilege, and exclude his Child the Covenant, and cannot admit it to Baptism,
the Seal of it, now under the Gospel, few Jews would become Christians.

Then surely they are to blame who suppose Christians Privileges since Christ
are not as great as the Jews were before Christ. Which being granted, Baptism
of our Children must follow. Therefore,

2. If our Christian Privileges being as great as the Jews were, our Children
are rightly Baptized, as will appear by these Reasons.

1. The Children of the Jewish Proselytes were with their Proselyted Parents
Circumcised, to which Baptism succeeding in the Church, the Children of
Disciples and Professors of Christianity ought to be Baptized, as will be
farther manifested from my next Argument drawn from Circumcision.

2. None were Excluded the Covenant of Grace among the Jews, or amongst
Christians, or are incapable of its Seal, Circumcision or Baptism, Romans 11.20,
21.
but actual Unbelievers; of which Crime Children of Jews or Christians could
not, nor can be impleaded.

3. The Believing Jews and their Children kept their Privileges after their
Conversion to Christianity that they enjoyed before: Acts 2.39. Romans 11. at
large.
And therefore their Children might as well be Baptized after their Parents
became Christians, as they might have been Circumcised before, or else their
Privileges by Conversion were infringed, and their case worse than before,
because,

1. Their Children were before their Conversion to Christianity, within the
Covenant, and had Right to, and were admitted to the Seal of it, but now by the
Parents espousing Christianity, the Child would be debarred the Seal, which
implies its Exclusion from the Covenant.

2. They and their Children were esteemed the People of God before their
Conversion to Christ; but since, though the Parents were received as Converted
Christians, yet the Children would but be accounted as Heathens till they
became Men, or were able to give an Account of their Faith, and so be Baptized.

3. This would leave the Converted Jew but small grounds for the hopes of his
Childrens Salvation, if they dyed Young; because they would not be looked on as
Members of Christ's Church, Ephesians. 2.12.
within the Covenant of God, or to have Right to its Promises.

4. The same Promises made to the Jews are also made to the Gentiles, which
Promises include their Seed or Children as well as themselves. Acts 2.39.
The Promise was to the Jews who were near, and to their Seed, and to the
Gentiles who were afar off, and to as many as the Lord our God should call, and
to their Seed, which Promise gives our Children Right to Baptism as well as it
did the Jewish Children to Circumcision.

5. The Children of the Jews as well as the Aged, in Order to their Public
Reception into the Church of God, were Circumcised; therefore the Children of
the Gentiles Converted together with the Jews to Christianity may justly have
Baptism, it being the Sacrament of Admission into Christ's Church under the
Gospel, as Circumcision was under the Law. And that the former is true, to wit,
that the Children with the Parent were under the Law Circumcised, the Scripture
is so plain, that none will deny it; and that our Children then may be, yea,
ought to be Baptized, must be granted from a Concession of our Privileges
being as great as the Jews.

But this will still be clearer in my next Argument.

ARGUMENT II. Those who were Circumcised under the Law may be Baptized under
the Gospel. But Children were Circumcised under the Law, therefore Children may
be Baptized under the Gospel.
THis Argument is Categorical, whose Conclusion cannot be denied if the
Premises be granted, I shall therefore prove each Proposition.

The Minor Proposition, Maour preved.
That Children were Circumcised under the Law is so undoubtedly true, relying
on the express Precepts and Practice of God and his People, Genesis 17.10, 11, 12.
that I suppose it will not be denied.

And the truth of the Major Proposition I shall endeavor to demonstrate these
two ways: 1. By Arguments for it. 2. Solving Objections against it.


1. I shall prove by Arguments, That those who were Circumcised under the Law
may be Baptized under the Gospel.

1. Baptism succeeded Circumcision, and as that was the Sacrament of Admission
into the Church under the Law, so is this under the Gospel, Col. 2.11, 12.
having this Privilege above the other, that it may be Administered to either
Male or Female, Mat. 28.29.
and may be performed to all Nations, Gentile as well as Jew.

2. Our Children are now as capable of being Baptized as the Children of the
Jews were then of being Circumcised at Eight days old: Ours understand the ends
of Baptism as much as theirs did the ends of Circumcision; and ours are as
capable of Testifying their Conversion to Christianity, as the Proselyted Jews
Children were to Evidence their being Proselyted; nor can any Objection be
framed against our Childrens Capability of Baptism, but it is equally Valid
against their Childrens being capable of Circumcision.

3. The Precept of God for the receiving Parent and Child into Covenant, Genesis
17. Acts 2.39.
stands unrepealed to this day, nor can the least jota be produced to forbid
Children of Professing Christians Baptism, or that Christ, who was the Messiah
and Savior of both Jew and Gentile (and had admitted the Children of the Jews
all along to the Ancient Seal of Circumcision as a Diagnostick of their being
his People) would, or did exclude them in his Gospel Dispensation from Baptism.
But many Reasons may be offered why their Baptizing is not expressly Commanded,
which I shall propose in due time. At present let us consider since there is no
restraint or countermand of the Ancient Jewish Practice of receiving Children
to Circumcision. And since Baptism is an Ordinance succeeding it, it seems to
me apparent, that they who were Circumcised may be Baptized.

4. Christ is proposed as a Mediator of a better Covenant, not of a worse, Heb.
8.6.
founded on better, not on less Promises; enlarging, not infringing his Peoples
Privileges, continuing still God, a God in Covenant with his People and their
Seed, and then doubtless this great Privilege is not Repealed, but Children,
the Seed of his People, may Lawfully be Baptized, as being still within the
Covenant of Grace, whereof Baptism under his Gospel Dispensation is a Seal:
Else our Children have no greater Privilege by being Born of Christians, than
the Children of Turks and Pagans, Jews and Infidels enjoy.

5. Express Scripture avers the Inclusion of Believers Seed with themselves in
the Covenant. Nor can the word Calling, Acts 2.37, 38, 39.
in the place Cited, be restrained to the word Seed, as if they only were in
Covenant with God (of the Seed of the Righteous) whom God called and Converted,
which would be no other Privilege than the Heathens may enjoy, who when
Converted are admitted into Covenant. But the word, I presume, may well be
referred to the present Believer, who is called and his Seed, and of Gods
owning all Believers, whom in future Ages he should call, and their Seeds. So
that if the Children of us, as well as the Jews be in Covenant with God, and
Baptism now, as well as Circumcision then, be a Seal of the Covenant, to be
Administered to all in the Covenant, then certainly it must follow that Children
of the Jews, as in Covenant with God, being admitted to its Seal, Circumcision,
the Children of Christians being equally in Covenant, may and ought to be
admitted to its Seal, which now is Baptism.

Thus is the Major Proposition proved, and those who were Circumcifed under the
Law, manifested to have a Right to Baptism under the Gospel. I proceed,

2. To Receive and Answer the Objections I have met with against this Argument.

Object. 1. They Object, The Covenant then made, was a Carnal Covenant, but
this through Christ is a Spiritual Covenant, and therefore though Infants may
be capable of one, yet not of the other, till Regenerated and become Believers.

Answ. 1. The Covenant then made was a Covenant of Grace, permanent to the
Worlds end, Genesis 17.10, 13.
made through Christ the Promised Seed, and is the same Covenant we are now
admitted to, nor shall it ever be Repealed while Christ has a People on Earth.
Which thus appears.

1. It was made with Abraham, who in Scripture is often called the Father of
the Faithful, Romans 4.11.
and it was made with him as a Believer: Therefore it was a Covenant of Grace.

2. It was made through Christ, Genesis 17.7.
in whom all the Families of the Earth should be Blessed, who was that Promised
Seed, to proceed from Abraham.

3. It is often called an Everlasting Covenant, and therefore this Covenant of
Grace has been often in succeeding Ages urged to God by his People to re-mind
him of his Promises made to Abraham. And God also in diverse Ages has declared
himself to his People by the Title of the God of Abraham.

4. The Tenor of that Covenant is the same with ours now, Gal. 3. latter end.
Heb. 11.
that God will be a God of his People and their Seed, and that they who believe
on him, shall be accepted by him.

5. Scripture Attests Circumcision to have been to Abraham a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.1.
which implies that Covenant made with Abraham to have been a Covenant of Grace.

Object. 2. But they Object again, That the Seed here in the Covenant, and that
had Right to Circumcision, the Seal of it, was a Spiritual Seed, and therefore
Believers ought only to be Baptized. To which I Answer,

Answ. 1. The Seed in the Covenant denoted not only the Spiritual Seed, but all
the Natural Seed of Abraham, all proceeding from his Loins, Genesis 17.23, 13, 14.
Ishmael as well as Isaac was Circumcised, and every Male Child Born of all the
Strangers that were Proselyted to the Jewish Religion.

2. The Natural Seed as Men belonged to the Visible Church of God, and so were
in a Capacity to receive that Seal and Mark distinguishing them from the
Gentiles and Heathens, which was only an Ordinance belonging to a Visible
Church, of which Men might Judge.

3. The Uncircumcised were denied many Common Privileges; yea, it was a
Scandal for the Jews to Associate with them, or to join in Affinity with them,
which Privileges could not be granted only to the Spiritual Seed, Genesis 34.14.
because it would be much injurious to Humane Society, nor indeed could their
Spiritual state, or their being the Spiritual Seed of Abraham come under Man's
Cognizance.

4. This would crect Men as Judges of our Hearts and Spirituality, which cannot
be discerned by any Mortal Eye, Jer. 17.9, 10. 2 Timothy 2.19.
but is only known to that Immortal God, who tries the Heart, whence proceeds
that distinction of an Invisible Church, consisting of true Believers only,
whom God alone knows, and of a Visible Church, containing all Christian
Professors, whose Members are discernable by Men.

5. If Baptism or Circumcision be only applicable to the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, true Believers, the Ordinances would soon be null as to their
Administration, because we know not then whom to Baptize, not dare we say, this
Man, or Child, is a true Believer, and one of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham,
and the other is not; and probably may thus admit those to the Ordinances who
are Hypocrites, while we reject those who are true Believers. Cen. 17.22. Acts
8.13, 18, 23.
There have been Persons Baptized and Circumcised, who yet doubtless were not
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, witness the instances of Ishmael and Simon
Magus.

6. The Children the Anabaptists refuse, may be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham
for ought they or we know. Jeremiah and St. John were Sanctified from the Womb,
and known by God to be his before they were Born, and so before they could be
under Man's Cognizance. And who dare say, that the Children they refuse are not
partakers of the Holy Ghost, or by God accounted as Believers? What would be
the Result of such Expressions? Should those dye in their Infancy, who dare say
they are Damned? Nay, the Anabaptists grant them a Capability of Salvation, and
say, all Children dying Children shall be saved; and then surely they esteem
them the Spiritual Seed of Abraham: And if so (the Children not Acting any
thing to render them incapable) they might by their own Arguings be Subjects
fit to be Baptized.

ARGUMENT III. Those who are within the Covenant of Grace may be Baptized. But
Children are within the Covenant of Grace. Therefore they may be Baptized.
THE Major of this Argument is verified, in that Baptism is now the Seal of the
Covenant between God and his People, as Circumcision was under the Law; and
therefore those who are thus in Covenant with God, Col. 2.11, 12.
may be admitted to the Participation of its Seal as those were.

The Minor, That Children are within the Covenant of Grace, is thus undeniably
confirmed.

1. Gods Grace is Universal, appertaining to Children as well as Adult Persons;
Christ dyed for them as well as Men and Women, and they partake of his Benefits
as well as the other, and shall be saved hereafter as well as grown Persons.

2. Children were ever in the Covenant with God, and never rejected or cast out
by Christ, nor that Covenant Repealed, and we have already proved the Covenant
including Children as well as Parents to be a Covenant of Grace, and so
everlasting: Therefore Children are still in the Covenant of Grace.

3. They never Excluded themselves, Romans 11.20.
because not actual Unbelievers, and none but such were rejected, therefore
they are still in the Covenant.

4. They have the Promises of the Covenant belonging to them, Acts 2.37, 38, 39.
and renewed to them with their Converted Parents, which would not be unless
Christ still comprehended them as well as their Parents within the Covenant.

5. They are termed Holy, though Born but of one Believing Parent. And this
Holiness cannot be understood of Legitimacy or Lawfulness of Birth (as I have
met with the Anabaptists Glossing) as if the Child by being Born of one
Believing Parent, 1 Cor. 7.14.
was thereby no Bastard: For this would have been no Obligation on the
Unbelieving Husband or Wife to Co-habit with the Believer, it being a
Privilege common to all Unbelievers as well as them to have the Children Born
in Lawful Wedlock to be esteemed Lawful. But this Holiness in the Text must be
understood of a foederal or Covenant Holiness, whereby the Children would be by
God esteemed as Holy, and in Covenant with him: They being as Children not yet
capable of acting Holiness.

6. If Children were in Covenant before Christ, and are rejected since Christ,
then would follow,

1. That we lose and gain not Privileges by the Incarnation and Death of our
ever Blessed Savior, Heb. 8.6. Ephesians. 2.12, 13.
it being no better, but a worse state which excludes Thousands, even all
Children, though of Believing Parents, the Covenant of Grace, which did include
them.

2. Then is there no difference between the Children of Believers and the
Children of Turks and Infidels, who when at Are, and are Converted, may be
esteemed Christians, and be Baptized, and outs cannot be Baptized according to
their Assertion before.

3. Then cannot we propose an encouraging Motive to a Jew to become a
Christian, whereby his Child, as yet within the Covenant, would be excluded.

4. Then can we have no good Visible grounds for the hopes of our Childrens
Salvation. If they be out of the Covenant of Grace, they are debarred of the
Benefits of Christ, which I suppose will seem harsh to any considerate
Christian. Nor can I see how the Anabaptists can think all Children shall be
saved, unless they be within the Covenant of Grace; and if they so think, I
humbly suppose they cannot deny Baptism to them, which is the Seal of the
Covenant.

ARGUMENT IV. Those who have Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, have Right
to Baptism. But Children have Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, Therefore
they have Right to Baptism.


1. Circumcision was, and Baptism is accounted as a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, confirming to the receiver of it Gods Reception of his Soul into a state
of Grace and Favor, and a ratifying the Promises through Christ made, that if
the Soul walked answerably to the Covenant of being Gods Servant, Romans 4.11.
God would make good his part, in being his God.

2. The Blessings of the Covenant are greater than an Admission to the External
Seal of it, and therefore to whom God grants the greater, them he certainly
esteen's fit to receive the less. If Christ be pleased to make over the
Blessings of the Covenant of Grace to Infants, then it is his pleasure they
should not be denied an Admission to the Seal of that Covenant, whereby in the
Eye of Man they may even in their Minority be received and owned as Members of
him; and they when they come to Age may be satisfied of their Reception into
that Covenant wherein God engaged to be their God, and they engaged to be his
People.

3. The Seal properly belongs to them who have Right to the Covenant and its
Blessings, else would it be set to a Blank. They who are not in the Covenant,
not have any Right to its Blessings, can have no Plea for their Admission to
its Seal: But they who have both the former, cannot surely be denied in Justice
this latter.

4. Children are capable of having Mercies assured to them, though they
understand not the act of Assurance, or what is Assured to them. We often in
Civil concerns Entail Estates on Children, and make Provision for Infants even
unborn, and why shall we in Spirituals debar them of Blessings, which in Gods
esteem they are capable of.



1. Acts 2.39.
The Promises of the Covenant are made to them.

2. Christ assures us they are his Disciples, Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and shall be saved; nay, he often proposes, in order to our Salvation, the
imitation of them in many things, Mat. 19.14.
and doubtless, if others shall be beloved of God and saved, because like
Children, God will save, and does love these whom those are like. If I promise
my Favor to one, because he is like my Friend, it Argues me to have a greater
Love for my Friend, which makes me Love what is like him.

3. If they have no Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, then have they no
Interest in Christ's Death, nor Right to Salvation, which is a sad
consideration; and if these latter be granted, the former will follow.

4. The Anabaptists are forced to grant them within the Covenant of Grace, and
to have Right to its Blessings, and to be Heirs of Heaven, else they foresee
their Doctrine would be exploded with hiffing. And certainly, if they have
Right to these Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, they have a just Right to
Baptism, the Seal of this Covenant, whose Blessing they are.

5. The Concession of our Adversaries proves their having Right to all the
Privileges of the Covenant, in that they believe all Children dying so, though
unbaptized, shall be saved; and then let them Answer why they may not be
Baptized. Surely there is not more required to fit one for Baptism than for
Salvation, if Faith and Repentance be, as they plead, necessary in order to
Baptism, they are surely much more necessary to Salvation; and Children having
what in Gods esteem fits them for the greater, have surely what qualifies them
for the less.

ARGUMENT V. Those who are Capable of being engaged in Covenant with God, are
Capable of Baptism. But Children are Capable of being engaged in Covenant with
God. Therefore Children are Capable of Baptism.
and Servant. And God Promises or Covenants to be the God of that Soul and of
its Seed, according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. And,

That Children are capable of being engaged in Covenant with God, Minor proved.
will be easily granted from the consideration of these Reasons.

1. That Children are in the Power of the Parent to dispose of, as to Temporals
and Spirituals.

1. As to Temporals, what is more usual than to take a Lease for our own and
Childrens Use, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.1, 4.
to ensure an Estate to our selves and Children, and to engage our Children. to
perform Covenants, or pay Debts, who are thereby, by the Law of God and Man
engaged to perform the Covenants to their Power and Ability, if Lawful and
Honest, or else to lose the Benefits that might accrue to them by Observance of
that Covenant.

2. As to Spirituals, Parents are Obliged to take the greatest care imaginable
of their Childrens Souls, Ephesians. 6.1, 4.
for their Education in the Fear of God, who also has commanded the Parents to
engage their Children in Covenant with him, and to bring them up in his Service.

2. God esteems Children capable of engaging in Covenant with him, Deur. 29 11,
12, 14. Romans 10.5. to 10. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14
and gives command for all the Little Ones to stand before him to be entered
into Covenant with him, who were as capable of being engaged in Gods esteem,
and were as much engaged as those Captains, Men, and Women, that stood with
them, and were not engaged in Covenant, as was once impertinently urged to me
by our Adversaries, from a Critical Observance of the Particle Thou; as if one
alone in the stead of all others had been engaged: To which Criticism I
returned (besides the premised Argument of Childrens being equally capable of
being engaged as all the others, who being present were not engaged, and that
the engagement of one in stead of all did no more infringe the capability of
Children then it did that of those Captains, Men, Women, who were by, and not
engaged) that I thought the Particle Thou, might reasonably refer to every
individual Captain, Man, Woman, and Little One, who I suppose to have been
particularly concerned, and the Commandments were instanced in, which concern
all, yet are given in the same second Person singular. Nor was this Covenant
any other than a Covenant of Grace, the same Covenant now remaining as to its
substance, only freed from the encumbring Ceremonies, and altered as to its
External Administration of its Ministry, Sacrifices, Baptism, etc. as has been
proved, and the Marginal Citations compared, will manifest.

3. 2 Chronicles 20.13. Joel 2.16. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12, 13.
The Jews Children were formerly concerned in the Duties of the Covenant, as in
Fasting, Prayer, and God accepted of them as capable of entering into Covenant,
of Hearing, Learning, Doing his Will; surely then we may esteem so.

4. Our Children are as capable now as the Children of the Jews were then; nor
can an Objection be against ours, but it is equally valid against theirs; and
if God accepted theirs, we have the same Covenant, and God of Mercy, and so the
same Reason to believe he will receive ours; and then why should we esteem them
incapable of being engaged in Covenant with God by Baptism?

ARGUMENT VI. Those who are Members of Christ's Church ought to be Baptized. But
Children are Members of Christ's Church. Therefore Children ought to be Baptized.
THIS Argument has no small force in it, as will appear by considering each
Proposition distinctly.



1. Because this is the usual way of Solemn Admission into Christ's Church, Acts
2.37, 38,
and the Apostles usually Practiced thus, Administering Baptism upon their
receiving any into the Church of Christ.

2. If Baptism be not Administered at the Admission of Persons into Christ's
Church, then must it be done after, or not at all: The last is not true,
Christ's Ordinance ought not to be neglected; and there is no Instance or
Precept in Scripture what time after a Persons Conversion, and becoming a
Churchmember, it should be done: Therefore it must be done as the Apostles
Practiced it at the Receiving any into the Church of Christ.

3. Our Adversaries, the Anabaptists, acknowledge none Members of a Visible
Church of Christ but those who are Baptized, and Baptize (as they call it)
those whom they receive as Church Members, at their first Admission, whence
directly follows from their own Practice, that those who are Church Members
ought to be Baptized.

4. Christ's Church is to be Purified with the washing of Water by the Word:
Ephesians. 5.26.
If then Children are of his Church, they ought to be Baptized.



1. The Children of the Jews were with their Parents Church Members under the
Law, Baxter's Infant Church-Memb. p. 26. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12.
which Law is not yet Repealed by Christ.

2. The Children of the Converted Jews lost not their Privileges, but still
remained Church Members, for Christ did not infringe, but rather enlarge the
Privileges of his People. And St. Peter seems to use this as a great motive to
induce the Jews to close with Christ, Acts 2.37, 38, 39.
that though they had Crucified the Lord of Life, their Promised and Expected
Messiah, yet they Repenting and being Baptized, might be saved, and might find
Mercy for themselves and their Seed also; for the Covenant and Promise is still
to You and to your Seed.

3. The Gentiles are through Christ admitted to equal Privileges with the
Jews; Romans 11.11, 15, 25. Eaxter, p. 20.
the Children of Parents who did not believe, were Excluded, therefore the
Children of Parents believing, were received.

4. The Jews shall with their Children be recalled into a state of
Church Membership at their Conversion, Romans 11.25, 26, 27.
therefore doubtless the Children of Believing and Converted Gentiles are
Church Members.

5. Children are either Members of the Visible Church of Christ, or else are
visibly of Satan's Kingdom. There is no Medium between these two, all appertain
either to Christ or Satan. Now, let them and us consider how dismal a Doctrine
theirs is, which makes all the Children of the World of the Visible Kingdom of
Satan, and so denies us any good grounds for the hope of their Salvation. And
how strangely their Thoughts are linked together in granting Children all the
Privileges of Church Members, as Pardon of sin, and Eternal Life, and so
esteem them of Christ's Invisible Church, and yet Excommunicate them out of his
Visible Church; Art. 11. of their Principles. Grantam's Works, l. 2. p. 67. c.
5.
and to countenance this, they calumniate Scripture, and say, the Old
Testament-way of bringing of Children into the Church is cast out; and that
Children are not mentioned as received in the New Testament, about which the
Author Cited spends some leaves, which Calumny may easily be wiped off, and his
leaves blown away, as to the force of their Arguments against us; for it can
never be proved that Children are in any place by Christ rejected and excluded
the Covenant, Discipleship, and Church Membership; and it is fully proved, and
must be granted they were in the Covenant, were Disciples and Church Members
before Christ. But if by the Old Testament-way of bringing in Children into the
Church being cast out They mean not to infringe the Privilege of Children, the
Subject of this Argument, but to show the way of their Admission into the
Church to be altered, Grantam's Christians Primitive, etc. l. 2. p. 2. cap. 2.
sect. 2. p. 6. to 17.
we grant it, it being formerly done by Circumcision, and now by Baptism. As
for the several Leaves premised, the sum of all of them is to prove that in the
Churches at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, etc. to which the Apostles wrote, there was
no mention of Children: Therefore he gathers Children not to be Church Members,
and to have no Right to Baptism. The force of which Arguing may be rendered
invalid two ways,

1. By showing Reasons why Childrens Baptism and Church Membership are not
mentioned in the New Testament, which I shall do in due time.

2. By distinguishing between the Church then and now. Then it was in
Gathering, and now Gathered: Then only the Heads of Families, Masters, Parents,
and other Adult Converts are written to, and taken Notice of to be Baptized,
Acts 16.15, 31. 1 Cor. 1.18. 2 Timothy 4 19. Romans 16.11, 15. 1 Cor. 16 19. 1 These.
4.15.
and to be accounted Church Members; but yet we find whole Families Baptized,
and several Saints greeted with the Church of God in such an House, which may
as reasonably inser the Children and Servants of such Families to have been
Baptized, and to have been reckoned Church Members, and we may as reasonably
believe there were Children in some of their Houses and Families who were
Baptized, as they can confidently deny it. So that I see not what force those
many words in several Leaves have against our esteeming Infants Church Members;
and if that be granted, we have proved the Rationality of their being Baptized.

ARGUMENT VII. They who are Disciples of Christ may be Baptized. But Children
are Disciples of Christ. Therefore Children may be Baptized.
IF that Proposition of Childrens being Christ's Disciples be made good, none
will surely deny them Baptism. Yet lest such Opposers may occur, I shall prove
both Propositions. And,



1. This was the way of Discipling or Collecting Persons out of Heathenism or
Judaism to Christ. A distinguishing Mark between Christ's Disciples and Heathens
or Jews. Therefore Disciples of Christ may be Baptized.

2. Express Texts of Scripture commanding it, especially the subject of this
present Discourse, Mat. 28.19.
the words of our Saviors Institution of Baptism being, Go Disciple all
Nations, Baptizing them.

3. The Apostles Practice was suitable, who Baptized all the Converts as soon
as they were Converted, Acts 16.15, 31.
and so became Disciples. And by this treble cord may our

Children are Disciples of Christ.

1. God and Christ owns them as such. Acts 15.1, 2, 10.
The Yoke that the Jews would have laid upon the new Converted Gentiles was
Circumcision, which pertained to Children who were to be Circumcised the Eighth
Day, and yet is laid too upon the Disciples Necks. Nor was it an casie Yoke,
but might admit of what the Texts express about it, that it was a Yoke which
neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear. Moses was called by his Wife,
Exodus 4.25. Genesis 34.24, 25.
A Bloody Husband, because of it. And the Shechemites found it an intolerable
Yoke, in that they were slain, when Circumcised, before they were whole.

2. They are Disciples, in that though Man cannot Teach them, yet God can, and
may, yea, he has given us some instances of his Teaching several from the
Womb: It is not in the Power of the most Eloquent Preacher by the strongest
Arguments, or most inviting Motives, to Disciple a Soul to Christ without Gods
co-working; who, 2 Cor. 6.1.
who, as he is pleased ordinarily to work by means, yet can, and has wrought
without means, having reserved this Heart-work to himself. And he can, and has
Taught several Children, as Jeremiah and St. John may instance; Jer. 1.5. Luke
1.15. Isa. 54.13. John 6.45. Acts 10.47.
yea, he has promised to Teach them. And how dare we forbid Water to Baptize
those who may have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Nay, probably may be
more Disciples of Christ than our selves. What would this be but a setting our
selves in Gods stead, and determining who are his Disciples, and consequently
who shall be saved?

3. Luke 18.16, 17. Mat. 19.13. Luke 9.47.
Christ commands the Receiving them in his Name, and owns them as Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and assures us, that they who receive them, receive him,
which surely declares their Discipleship. And how know we but we may refuse and
reject a Christ in them by refusing of them.

4. They are capable of being Subjects in Earthly Kingdoms, and Members of
Christ's Church and Kingdom, are owned by God as his Servants, and then we may
own them as Disciples. And methinks the Anabaptists, who grant to them their
enjoying of those Blessings Christ has Promised to his Disciples, may well
account of them as Disciples, and if that be granted, certainly it is very
Reasonable to admit them to Baptism.

ARGUMENT VIII. To whom Christ grants imposition of Hands, to them be longs
Baptism. But to Children Christ grants imposition of Hands. Therefore to them
be longs Baptism.
THIS Argument may admit of some Explanation, my Design being here to introduce
Scripture, and Christ's Example. It was between Christ and his Apostles, as
between Superior and Inferior Ministers in the Church, Christ exercised the
chiefest, they the other Offices in the Church and Ministry. Christ Baptized
none himself, the Apostles Baptized, John 4.2.
and he Confirmed, or laid Hands on the Baptized. So that if Christ grant
imposition of Hands to Children, it in the Order of Ordinances presupposes
their Baptism, or cap city for Baptism; because,

1. Heb. 6.2.
In the Order of Ordinances imposition of Hands, or Confirmation succeeds
Baptism.

2. It is a Confirmation by a Superior of the Truth of that Doctrine into
which the Person was Baptized by an Inferior Minister, and also a Testifying
of the receiving the Baptized Person into Christ's Church.

3. The very Anabaptists Practice imposition of Hands after Baptism, as
likewise did the Apostles, and all Christian Churches do, so that from the
Practice of themselves I presume they will grant those to have a Right to
Baptism that are capable of being admitted to the other Ordinance of Laying on
of Hands.

Therefore I shall prove my Minor.

That Christ granted imposition of Hands to Children, which appears,

1. From the express Texts declaring the Subject on whom Christ laid Hands,
which was not Adult Persons, Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. Mark 10.13, 16.
Men and Women, but by the Testimony of two Evangelists, little Children: They
were (...), which is a diminutive of (...), and denotes little, little
Children; and indeed the Gesture of Christ toward them declares as much, in
that be took them up in his Arms; nor is the Action of the People
inconsiderable in this matter, who brought them to Christ, both which imply
they were Little Ones, who could not come alone, else need they not to have
been brought; nor stand alone, else Christ might have laid his Hands on them
standing, without taking them up into his Arms.

2. The Ordinance it self declares it, it was imposition of Hands; Christ laid
his hands on them, and Blessed them, says the Text, which

1. Heb. 6.2.
Is in the very words the Holy Ghost expresses that Ordinance of Christ's
Church, Confirmation, both in the Original Text and our Transiation, Mar. 19.15.
(...), laying on of Hands. And Christ laid his hands on them.

2. That this imposition of Hands was an Ordinance and no common Laying on of
Hands, may easily be gathered, because here is no mention of the Childrens
being ill, or laboring under any Malady, to be Cured by Christ's touch, which
might move Christ to lay Hands on them, in order to their Cure.

3. Christ did not at any time lay hands on, Pray, and Bless for the healing
any Malady, as he did at this time.

4. It refers to a Spiritual good by our Saviors Reason given why he laid
hands on them, Theirs, or of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. They belong to my
Church here, and shall partake with me of my Glory hereafter.

Besides this Argument, these Texts admit of many more for Infant Baptism, so
that our Church has Prudently chosen it as one Reason for its Practice,
wherein is,

1. A double Precept tending to it, 1. Affirmatively, Suffer little Children to
come unto me. 2. Negatively, Forbid them not. By both which our Savior shows
the earnestness of his desires, Children should come, and his unwillingness
they should be hindered, (...), from coming to him, or becoming (as the very
words import) Proselytes of him.

2. It was to a visible Mercy; Christ could have bestowed on them Internal
Favors, nor could his Disciples have hindered them from receiving them, or from
being Members of Christ's Invisible Church, but because they obstructed their
coming to Christ to accept of a Visible Mercy, and of an outward Privilege
belonging to Christ's Visible Church, he is displeased.

3. The Displeasure of Christ against his Disciples for this fault is
Emphatically expressed, Mark 10.14.
(...), He was very Angry with them, so as severely to chide them for it, as
the Public Reproof they had declares. Let us take heed we incur not the like,
by keeping from him those whom he bids to be be admitted to him.

4. The expression of Christ concerning the Children whom he Blessed, declaring
[(...)] of those very Infants or Children, and of their Species is the Kingdom
of Heaven, a^ it includes the present state of Grace, and the future state of
Glory.

5. Their coming to Christ is their becoming his Disciples or Proselytes,
Suffer them, (...), to be Proselytes to Me, or let them be received as my
Disciples. And how can Children be brought to Christ, or come to be his
Proselytes and Disciples under a Gospel Economy, unless by Baptism, as the
Jews were formerly under the Law by Circumcision.

This Text rightly considered might silence all Opposers, and gain their
consent to our Practice.

ARGUMENT IX. If the Faith of the Parents entitles the Children to the
Covenant, it entitles them to Baptism. But the Faith of the Parents entitles
the Children to the Covenant. Therefore the Faith of the Parents entitles the
Children to Baptism.
IN this Argument, the Grand Enquiry is, the Benefits resulting to the Children
of Believing Parents, from their Parents Believing. And it being manifested
that the Parents Faith entitles the Children to the Covenant, we have Proved
the Consequence, That they being in Covenant, ought to be Baptized.

And that the Faith of the Parent does entitle Children to the Covenant and its
Blessings and Privileges, I thus Prove,

1. Scriptures seem clear in it, when St. Peter had Converted the Jews, Acts
2.37, 38, 39.
he proposes to them, a Believing on Christ, and adds the Covenant then to be
to them and to their Seed. And that place already urged manifests the Child, 1
Cor. 7.14.
though but of one Believing Parent, to be in Covenant with God, and so
esteemed Holy.

2. If Children of Believers had no Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, in
vain are our Prayers for them; but we believe and know that our Prayers are
helpful and serviceable to them, and obtain Blessings for them.

3. The Faith of Parents amongst the Jews entitled their Children to the
Covenant, Romans 11.26. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Genesis 17.10.
the Belief of the Proselyte rendered all his Children capable of Circumcision;
and the like Promises and Privileges are granted to and enjoyed by Christians.

4. We find the Jailer instructed to Believe, Acts 16.33.
and presently (...), in the very same hour, not only him, but all with him
(...) forthwith were Baptized.

5. Else there is no difference observed between our Children and those of
Turks and Infidels, Ephesians. 2.12, 13.
but ours would be equally with theirs without Christ, which is a Mystery
unknown to the Jews, and a thing not to be credited by us since Christ.

6. Lydia and the Jailer, Acts 16.15, 31, 33. Genesis 17.7.
etc. being instructed, we may suppose believed the Doctrine made known, yet on
their Believing, their whole Families were Baptized, agreeable to what has
been premised concerning Abraham and others, who believing among the Jews, were
Circumcised and all their Families. So that I humbly suppose we may genuinely
infer from these Reasons, that Children by Right of the Faith of their
Believing Parents are received into Covenant by God, and have been, and ought
to be received to the Seal of that Covenant by Man.

ARGUMENT X. Those who are Capable of the Kingdom of Heaven are Capable of
Baptism. But Children are Capable of the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore Children
are Capable of Baptism.


1. The greater includes the less: But it is a greater thing to be fit Subjects
for Heaven, than to be fit for Baptism. Many are Baptized, who shall not be
saved, but all who shall be saved, are fit for and capable of Baptism.

2. The Requisites for Baptism are far more necessary to Salvation, Heb. 11.6.
Rev. 21. last. Mark 16.16.
as Faith, Repentance; and if Children in Gods esteem be such, who are capable
of enjoying Heaven as well as Believers, then sure we may account them Subjects
fit for Baptism.

3. The Kingdom of Glory, of which they shall be partakers hereafter, implies
and presupposes their being in a state of Grace, and of the Church of Christ
here, Ephesians. 5.26.
and if of Christ's Church, they may be Baptized.

4. It seems unreasonable and unchristian to deny an external sign to those to
whom Christ has granted the internal Grace, and declares he will receive to
eternal Glory.

So that Reasonably it may be granted, those who are capable of the Kingdom of
Heaven, are capable of Baptism.



1. From our Saviors express words, Mat. 19.15. Mark 10. Luke 18.16.
(...), of these very Children, and (...), of such like Children also is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

2. From the Consert of the Anabaptists, who grant Salvation to all Children,
and therefore are the more to blame to deny them Baptism.

ARGUMENT XI. All who are Believers ought to be Baptized. But Children are
Believers. Therefore Children ought to be Baptized.




1. All to whom Christ will impute unbelief, Mark 16.1^.
shall be damned, but according to their own Arguings, all Children shall be
saved: Whence follows, that Christ and they esteem them not as Unbelievers.

2. Christ expressly calls them Believers. He took a little Child [(...)] and
set him in the midst of the Company, Mat. 18.5, 6. Mark 9.36.
and said, whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that Believe on me,
it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he should
be sent into the depth of the Sea. Here is a little Child, or, as the word
properly signifies, a very little Child, and yet a Believer on Christ. Let us
then take heed of offending such by denying them Baptism, as if they were
Unbelievers, because we know not but that very Child we refuse as an
Unbeliever, may be in Gods esteem a Believer. For,

3. God has Chosen, Called, Sanctified some from the Womb, Jer. 1.4, 5.
and so may he have done those Infants we refuse to Baptize, for ought appears
to us to the contrary.

4. Luke 1.15. Romans 5.1. John 3.16. Acts 2.39. Heb. 11.6. Bev. 21.8.
God grants to them what he Promises to Believers. He accepts of them into
Favor, imputes to them the Benefits of Christ's Death, is the God of them, and
will receive them to Heaven and Happiness, which he would not do it he esteemed
them as Unbelievers, since without Faith he has declared none can please God,
or shall be saved.

5. Though they have not Actual Faith demonstrable to Man, yet they may have
the Seed of Faith and its habit wrought on them by God, since they are in his
esteem accounted as Faithful, and have the Privileges of Believers.

6. They are in Covenant with God, as we have already Proved, which Covenant is
betwixt God and Believers; and if we esteem them not as such, we grant them no
Privilege as Children above the Turks and Pagans.

7. If only true Believers be subjects of Baptism, then is there no subject on
whom the Minister can confer Baptism discernable to Men, because we know not
who are true Believers, and may Baptize Hypocrites, while we pass by true
Believers. And it seems to be an Usurping of Gods Prerogative of Judging our
Brother, in censuring some to be Unbelievers, and rejecting them from Baptism,
whose Souls may be equally Precious to God with those we admit.

8. If the Judgment of Charity be admitted, and these ought to be Baptized, on
whose Profession of Faith we have Reason in Charity to think Believers. Then
surely it is very Rational to Baptize Infants, whom in Gods and Christ's esteem
we have Proved to be Believers, to whom they will not impute the sin of
Unbelief, on whom they are pleased to bestow the Mercies promised to Believers,
and who can neither play the Hypocrite with God, Wills against Danvers, p. 34.
58.
nor dissemble with us; whereas Adult Persons, whose Hearts we cannot search,
may make a Profession of the Faith of Christ for some finister ends, and
self-respects, to affect a singularity, and to obtain others Charity, and yet
they may be Hypocritical before God.

Thus have I endeavored to Prove Insants Believers, and then according to the
very Anabaptists own Plea they ought to be Baptized. And here we may lament
their Folly, who Dissent from us, when as in Christian Moderation Believers are
Baptized by us as well as them. And they having no just cause of Separation,
are indeed the more culpable.

ARGUMENT XII. They who are capable of the Ends of Baptism, may be Baptized.
But Children are capable of the Ends of Baptism, Therefore they may be Baptized.
THE Major seems directly to prove Baptism; for if the Minor be true, That
Children are capable of the Ends of Baptism, nothing seems to hinder their
being Baptized. And therefore I shall chiefly aim to Prove Children capable of
the Ends of Baptism, which are these,

1. Toward God, the Ends of Baptism are,

1. To be as a Covenant between God and the Soul. And Children may be admitted
into Covenant, their Youngness does not hinder their enjoying any Mercy from
God, nor deprive them of being devoted to God.

2. As a Seal to Ratify the Promises of the Covenant, which may be applied to
Infants. We are careful to Ensure our Estates to our Children in this World;
and though they be Young, yet are they not thereby deprived of their
Birthright, or rendered incapable of having an Estate made sure to, or entailed
upon them. And yet some are unwilling that God should Ensure and Seal to them
the Benefits of Christ by the Seal of the Covenant of Baptism.

3. It is a sign of God and Christ's receiving Children as their Disciples and
Servants, Deu. 6.6. Ephesians. 6.1, 4.
to which state Children are capable of being admitted, and whom God has
engaged the Parents so to Devote.

4. It is a distinguishing note between Christians and Heathens; but the
Infancy of our Children does not so incapacitate them, as we should look on
them but as Heathens.

5. It is an entering of the Soul into Covenant with God, to continue his
Faithful Soldier and Servant to his Life's end. And thus they are capable of
being engaged, seeing it is the great Duty of Christianity to perform it,
containing nothing more than what Religion calls for. A ceasing from sin, and
doing well.

6. They are as capable of all the Ends of Baptism, as the Children of the Jews
were capable of the Ends of Circumcision. And then these may as reasonably be
Baptized, as they were Circumcised.

2. The Ends of Baptism, relating to Man, are,

1. That Parents might devote their Children to Gods Service by this Baptismal
Engagement, which they are capable of, in that they are in the Power of the
Parent to dispose of and Educate (as God has commanded) in his Fear.

2. That the Baptized might enjoy the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace through
Christ, of all which Benefits, even of Heaven its self, Children are capable.

3. That the Baptized might be amongst Men owned and reputed as Christians and
Members of Christ's Church; and this also Children are capable of, whom it seems
hard to account as Heathens, when they are the Children of Christians.

ARGUMENT XIII. Whom the Church of Christ has ever received to Baptism, may
still be Baptized. But the Church of Christ has ever received Children to
Baptism. Therefore Children may be Baptized.
AS for the Church of God among the Jews, it is evident that they received
Children to Circumcision, to which Baptism succeeds. Nor has the Church of
Christ since its Institution ever denied Children Baptism, as will appear,

1. In that for many hundreds of Years the Question was not moved, Walkers
Modest Plea, p. 219. to 254. Walkers Doct. of Baptism, p. 118.
nor the Point doubted of as to its Lawfulness. And indeed there was little
Reason for such a doubt, considering that Children were Circumcised under the
Law, and so admitted into Covenant, who were equally incapable of that, as our
Children are now of Baptism; nor was that Covenant Repealed, of Children any
where excluded it, or our Privileges by Christ infringed, but rather enlarged.

2. Harmony of Confession.
The Reformed Churches, who have espoused Christ's Doctrine most purely, have
unanimously Practiced it, as their several Confessions attest: And in our
Nation, in our Saxon King Ina's time, Walkers Doctrine of Baptism. p. 126.
about 692 Year of Christ, a Child was to be Baptized within Thirty days, under
pain of the Forfeiture of Thirty shillings.

3. In the series of Scriptures, History, and the Practice of the Church, what
concerns the Baptizing of Believers, and Sinners Confessing their sins, has
respect to those Adult Persons Converted from Judaism or Gentilism when the
Church was first Constituting: And in all Ages those who were brought up
unbaptized through their Parents or others Negligence, or contempt of the
Ordinance, Order for Baptism of those of Riper Years.
or are Converted to Christianity, have given account of their Faith, and still
do in the Practice of our Church, before they are Baptized. But after a Church
is Constituted, and Persons Converted, those thus in a Constituted Church had
their Children ever esteemed capable of being admitted to Baptism.

4. The deferring of Baptism amongst the Ancients was not from their
Questioning the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism, Walkers Modest Plea, in Preface.
but from several Opinions they had about the Efficacy of Baptism, as to the
Pardon of Sins by it, and the danger of sinning after it. So that these
Opinions, whereof some might be erroneous, cannot take away what was justly and
Lawfully Practiced by Gods People before Christ, Walker's Modest Plea, p. 219.
to 254.
and even from the Philpot the Martyr. Fox Acts v. 3. 607, 608, 609 at large.
Apostles time since Christ. Therefore not only from Scripture and Reason, but
from good Antiquity Children are Lawfully Baptized.

This Argument drawn from Antiquity and the Practice of the Church of Christ
for so many Centuries, so universally by all true Christian Churches, by
Reformed as well as Popish. Though it has not so great force with the Vulgar,
who are incapable of the Rational deduction of its Lawfulness from this
Practice, yet to the Judicious Christian it prevails much, the Practice being
no ways opposite to, but agreeing with Scripture, easily deduced from it, the
receiving of the Practice by the Apostles implies its Practice in Christians,
and from Him and Them has it been received and retained in the Church to our
days, and will be while Christ has a Church upon Earth.

ARGUMENT XIV. That Doctrine which introduces many unchristian Consequences is
erroneous. But the Doctrine of the Anti-pedobaptists introduces many
unchristian Consequences. Therefore the Doctrine of the Anti-pedobaptists is
erroneous.


Anti-pedobaptists, whereby they deny Baptism to Infants, introduces many
unchristian Consequences, as appears.

1. It opposes the whole current of Scripture, nullifies many Scripture
Promises and Privileges, and destroys the Covenant of Grace, as the premised
Pages manifest.

2. It reduces the World into Gentilism or Heathemsm again, and makes Christ's
Church always gathering, never gathered; always instituting, and never
established.

3. It excludes Children the Covenant of Grace and its Seals, denies their
Fellowship or Membership with Christ and his Church, they owning no visible
Church of Christ on Earth but their own Synagogues, and esteem all us who are
not of their way, as Persons who are not visible Members of Christ; whence we
may easily guess their Charity and hopes of our Salvation.

4. It introduces genuinely a despair of Salvation of our Children; for we
cannot have any good grounds for the hopes of Salvation of those whom we think
not to belong to the Covenant of Grace, so as to be incapable of its Seal, out
of the Church, so as to be unfit for Baptism; out of the way to Salvation, so
as to be no Disciples of Christ, nor Believers, which implies our esteeming
them as Unbelievers, whose end is eternal Misery. And though they will not say
so of our Children, yet I am sure some of their Teachers have said so of
themselves, that we are no visible Members of Christ's Church, nor are in a
visible way to Salvation.

5. This Doctrine is injurious to Christ, and renders him a kind of Impostor,
who hereby is made not a Mediator of a better Covenant than that with the Jews
before him. And while he Promises to admit the Gentiles to equal Privileges
through him, to what the Jews had before him, makes both the Jews and our
Privileges less by the excluding the Children of us, and of all Converted
Jews, the Covenant, and debarring them the Seal of it, Baptism, when as the
Jews before their Conversion had their Children reckoned in the Covenant, and
received to its Seal, Circumcision.

6. It equals the Children of Christians with the Children of Turks and
Heathens; and then sure this Doctrine must be Erroneous.

The Form and Subject of Baptism being hitherto considered, and the
Christianity and Rationality of Infant Baptism declared, together with the
Anabaptists corruption in respect of the Form, and the absurd Consequences of
their Doctrine as to the subject of Baptism being detected, I proceed to
consider

The Mode of Baptizing laid down by our Savior, Third Part of Text.
and expressed in the word (...), Baptizing them; whence the Anabaptists Plead
solely for dipping, and account that no Baptism which is not so performed. And
our Church admits indifferently of either dipping or sprinkling. I shall
therefore show,

1. The Indifferency and Lawfulness of each Mode in Baptism.

2. The unreasonableness of that Absolute necessity of that dipping the
Anabaptists have espoused.

3. The Reasonableness of performing it by sprinkling.

1. The Act of dipping or sprinkling may indifferently be used in Baptism
without nullifying the Ordinance: As appears thus,

1. It is as an indifferent thing left to the Prudence of the Church of Christ,
whether to dip or sprinkle, neither of them being commanded, nor either
absolutely forbidden by the Precept Baptizing.

2. It cannot nullify Baptism, being but an external Ceremonial part and mode
of performing it, the Form or Essence of Baptism remaining in the Baptizing of
a fit Person in the Name of the Sacred Trinity. Therefore our Dissenting
Brethren are to blame to make our Baptism to be essentially corrupted, and not
to be accounted Baptism, because not performed by dipping. Nor is their Folly
less deplorable, in Separating from that Church where Baptism is perfectly and
rightly administered as to the Essence of it, on the account of a bare external
mode of Administration.

3. The word by which the manner of Administration of this Ordinance is
expressed (...) equally admits of both significations, dipping and sprinkling,
Walker's Doctrine of Baptizing, p. 6. to 64.
as is granted by the best Critics, and is obvious to the Observant Eye of any
Intelligent Reader of Sacred Writ, in too many places to be cited, as the
Marginal citation at large proves. Either Act then may be intended by Christ in
the Word, and be Practiced by Christ's People in the Church.

4. Number. 19.18. Exodus 12.7. Heb. 9.13. Heb. 10.22. Romans 6.3, 4. Col. 2.11.
The Sacramental Washings under the Law were by both dipping and sprinkling,
which might Typifie the Indifferency of either in our Baptizing.

5. Both answer what is signified by Baptism. A Washing or Purifying from sins,
filth, and an evil Conscience; and a Burying with Christ in Baptism; which
place, though Objected against us, has little or no force in it against our
Practice. For,

1. Earth is poured on the dead Body in its Burial, and it is not put under the
Earth. Therefore this rather Pleads for our Practice of puring Water on the
Baptized Person, than for its being dipped or plunged under Water.

2. If it be urged that the Person Buried is under the Earth, therefore the
Baptized Person, in conformity to his being Buried with Christ by Baptism,
should be under the Water. I Answer, that the Interred Corpse is but under part
of the Earth, and the Baptized Person by our Adversaries can plead no more than
being under part of the Water wherein he was Baptized; and the Child or Person
Baptized by us is under part of Water, also being under that Water which is
sprinkled or thrown upon it.

3. The Allusion respects more the Spiritual Ends of Baptism than a Litteral
sense, and implies the Baptized ought to dye to Sin, and live to Righteousness;
not must a literal sense be strictly understood, for then in conformity to our
Saviors Burial, the Person might reasonably Quaery, whether he ought not to be
part of three days under Water, Romans 6.
as Christ was in the Grave, which would gain few Proselytes. And as to the
Spiritual ends of Baptism, which St. Paul seems to tell us is the meaning of
the place.

6. Each Action of dipping or sprinkling is equally Obliging: Nor is a Person
more engaged to Observe them who is dipped, than he who is sprinkled; as in the
Lords Supper, a Morsel of Bread, and a small quantity of Wine received is
equally Obliging of the Communicant as an whole Loaf, or a full draught, unless
we make the inward Grace, or outward Obligation of the Sacraments depend upon
the Mode of an outward Administration, which is unreasonable, and unchristian.
Therefore either dipping or sprinkling may be indifferently used.

To require Dipping as so absolutely necessary in Baptism, Dipping not
absolutely necessary.
that the Ordinance is null unless so performed (as the Anabaptist pleads) is
an unreasonable Error. Because,

1. There is not one place of Scripture which in express words commands
dipping. And here they are much to blame, who while they cry out against us for
want of Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism (whereof this Treatise has
endeavored to manifest us not destitute.) Adhere to the Practice of this Mode
of Baptizing by dipping, without the least command in Scripture, and yet with
so great Zeal or Prejudice, as to declare us unbaptized Persons, because not
dipped; when as our Saviors Precept, and the Apostles Practice was to Baptize,
which word admits of both significations, nor is it mentioned by which they did
it.

2. This is to Idolize a Ceremony, and make that the whole of Baptism, which is
but an outward circumstance of the Act, not determined by Christ, but left
indifferently to his Church to be used, nor were obliging to the Soul, nor more
representing the ends of Baptism to the Soul than sprinkling.

3. This Act cannot be used in the performance of Baptism in all parts of the
habitable World, there being many places where so much Water cannot be gotten
for many Miles together, as will suffice for the dipping of Persons over Head
and Ears; as in hot Countries and Mountainous Places: Nor is it consistent with
Christian prudence to suppose Christ would limit such an Ordinance to such an
Administration as could not be in all places at all times performed. Nor indeed
does he, for by his Commanding only to Baptize, he limits the act to neither
Dipping nor Sprinkling but the word admitting of both, he leaves it to the
prudence of his people to use which was most convenient, who might probably in
all habitable Towns get so much water as might suffice to Sprinkle, though
perhaps not so much as might serve to dip Persons in Baptism.

4. Dipping or plunging the body over Head and Ears, Baxters Infant
Churchmember. Walkers Doctrine of Bapt. cap. 10. p. 179.
seems to be an indecent action while either it is performed naked, or in
transparent Garments too suequently, an act through the pravity of our Hearts
too apt to create such thoughts, as become not the Sacredness of the Ordinance,
whence some had made it a Breach of the Seventh Commandment.

5. Nor is it a little injurious to the body, exposing it by reason of the cold
temperature of the Climate, to not a few distempers in our Nation. But, as one
observes, the Adversary is so Carnally Prudent, Wills against Danvers.
as not to Practice their Baptizing till warm Weather. But how consonant to
Christ's Rule, let all judge who know it was the Practice of the Apostles
usually to Baptize Converts immediately upon their Conversion; Mr. Walker's
Doctrine of Bapt. cap. 8. p. 61.
and if that should happen in Winter, in Frost and Snow amongst us in our Cold
Region, and the Convert be plunged over Head and Ears in cold Water, who can
suppose it consistent with the Persons Health? Nay, must we not reasonably
think it may endanger his Health and Life too, unless God work a Miracle in his
Preservation, Baxtess Infant Churchmember.
whence some have made it a breach of the Sixth Commandment. Now, since Christ
has Commanded no such Circumstance which is so indecent, and may prove so
injurious to our Bodies, they are very blameworthy to use it, and the Church
of Christ may prudently omit it.

6. Wills against Danvers, p. 260.
Plunging or dipping the Person Baptized over Head and Ears renders him
incapable of understanding what is done and said for some time, stupifies or
amazeth the Person, and hinders his knowing either the Person Administering, or
the Sacrament Administered, as Experience may attest. Now, certainly Christ
would have his Ordinances performed by an external Administration, wherein the
Subject might be in the nearest capacity of understanding the ends and actions
of it; and would not limit it to such a Mode that is so injurious to the
internal and external senses of the Person under its Administration.

7. We cannot reasonably think that the Apostles did dip all they Baptized,
because it was a thing of great Labor, if not impossible for one Man to plunge
in one day Three Thousand Persons, as we find St. Peter Baptized. Acts 2.41.
So that I cannot apprehend what Reasons can be offered to show the absolute
necessity of Dipping in Baptizing, and I know I may say they have no Scripture
Precept for it. Therefore I presume to conclude. That Dipping is not absolutely
necessary in the Administration of Baptism, but it may be rightly performed,
though not by dipping.

There remains that I show the Lawfulness and Resonableness of Baptizing by
sprinkling: 3. Sprinkling Lawful.
Which I shall thus do.

1. Sprinkling is equally with Dipping signified by the word in which our
Savior expressed the manner of the Administration of this Ordinance, Wills
against Danvers, p. 254. Walkers Doctrine of Bapt. c. 4. p. 16. Dan. 4.3.
Baptize, (...): Yea, and more congruous with its genuine signification than
dipping. For (...) being a derivative, can admit of no larger signification
than its Primitive, (...), which we find in the History of Nebuchadnezzar, when
like a Beast (...), as the 70 renders it; He was wet with the Dew of Heaven, as
our English Translates it: Nor can we think he was prunged over Head, or dipped
in the Rain or Dew, but rather it seems more Rational to think that the Dew did
besprinkle him.

2. This Represents the Ends of Baptism as well as dipping. Acts 2.5, 6, 7.
The pouring out of the Holy Ghost was by effusion on, not by the immersion of
the Subject. The Blood of Christ is applied to us by the expression of
sprinkling; Heb. 9.13. Heb. 12.24. Heb. 10.22. Walkers Doct. of Baptism, c. 9.
Exodus 12
and the end of being Buried with Christ, has already been proved, answered in
our being sprinkled.

3. Texts of Analogy confirm its Rationality, wherein the Type under the Law,
and the thing Typified under the Gospel by Baptism, are declared by sprinkling.

4. There is no Virtue or Efficacy to be placed in the Element more largely
Administered, to confer Grace, or oblige us: But sprinkling as well as dipping
being a submission to the Element, equally Lawful by Christ's Command, it is
equally officacious and significant.

5. Sprinkling renders the Sacrament capable of being Administered at all times,
in all places, without that indecency and danger dipping, as I have proved, is
guilty of.

6. The Church of Christ was never confined to that Mode of dipping, Walkers
Doct. of Baptism, c. 10. p. 74. to 158
but had several ways of Baptizing, dipping or sprinkling. Whereby may appear
the freedom of the Church of Christ in the indifferent use of dipping or
sprinkling, and the Practice of our Church may be seen agreeable with other
Christian Churches. So that the Anabaptists extremely err in accounting us as
unbaptized, and in nullifying our Ordinance of Baptism, because not Administered
by dipping, which is not so absolutely necessary in the Administration of it,
but that sprinkling may be Lawfully used, as I have endeavored to prove.

Jordan, and after Baptism, to go up out of the Water, which implies his being
dipped in the Water. To which I Answer,

Jordan (...) to Jordan, Mat. 3.13.
declares not his going into the River, but as it is Translated, to the River.

2. His ascent after Baptism is not (...), out of the Water, but (...), as from
the Water, which does not at all infer his being in the Water: But since the
Rivers are in Valleys, a Person going to the River, may well be said (as Christ
is said) to go down to the River. And that other trite place Objected against
us concerning Philip and the Eunuch, Acts 8.38.
which is Translated, they both went down into the Water is expressed thus,
(...), they both went down to the Water; the Preposition (...) signifying ad,
to, as well as into, and so it respects rather the Mountainous place they went
down to the Waterside from, than their going into the Water. And so Christ's
ascent (after Baptism) up out of the Water being (...) signifies no more than
his going up from the Waterside.

3. Though we grant Christ and the Eunuch did go into the Water, yet cannot it
thence be inferred that they were Baptized by dipping, whereof there is not one
Syllable in the Text, nor any other place of Sacred Writ, nor any thing to
favor such an Opinion. And to deduce such a Consequence from the Text, Christ
and the Eunuch went into the Water at their Baptizing, therefore they were
dipped or plunged over Head and Ears, as it is groundless, so is a far more
remote and dis-ingenuous Consequence than our most remote Conclusions for
Infant Baptism.

John Baptized in Enon near Salim, John 3.23.
and the Reason is given, because there was much Water there.

To which I Answer,

John's determining a place for Baptism was respecting the Commodiousness for
the new Converts, who might come thither, as to a place appointed for that
purpose.

2. There being much Water there, made it a fit place for the Baptizing the
Numerous Company of Converts resorting thither to be Baptized.

3. This does not infer their being dipped and plunged in their being Baptized
there; Wilson's Christian Dictionary on Enon. Heylin's Cosmog. in loc.
for Enon in its signification denotes but a little Fountain, and being near
the River Jordan, it is said to have much Water by reason of the scarcity of
that Element in that Country, part of Jordan its self being usually dry in
Summer time, and Jordan its self, that Famous River, was not Navigably deep.
And the Water by Enon is by others accounted as a little Foord, over which one
might stride or leap; or however not containing so much Water as might fit it
to dip or plunge over Head and Ears so many as were in those days Baptized.

4. The expression of much Water being thus, (...), signifying many Waters,
denoting the confluence of those two Springs or Waters, Jordan and Jalor,
causing rather some Stream, rather than so much as might suffice to dip or
plunge Persons in; for it is not (...) nor (...), to signify there was much
Water. And had it been so expressed, according as our Translation renders it,
yet a little Stream may be esteemed much Water in that hot and dry Country,
whose Famous River Jordan was not Navigable, and therefore it self almost
incapable of serving to the dipping of so many as were Baptized.

5. Supposing it to be a place of much Water, and that it was fit for Persons
to be dipped or plunged in it, yet there being no mention at all of such a
dipping or plunging, but only that St. John Baptized there, it can give no
color to the Anabaptists for their dipping whom they Baptize. Nor can it be
deduced from thence, the force of their Objection lying in there being there
much Water, only denotes the fitness of the place to Baptize the many Converts
in, and gives an equal Latitude for Baptizing them by pouring water on them at
the River side, as it does for dipping them in the River, for which Practice
the Anabaptists are wholly destitute of Scripture Precept or President, and are
therefore blameworthy to Separate from our Church without Cause, Baptism being
rightly Administered by us according to that due form, on that fit Subject, and
after that Lawful manner Christ appointed.

Thus have I performed the design of the Text, and discovered the Necessity,
Form, Subject, and Manner of Baptism. It remains Lastly, that I Answer those
Enquiries made by the Anabaptists, as Objections against things pertaining to
our Practice. As,

If Infant Baptism was Lawful, Christ or his Apostles would have Commanded and
Practiced it: And if Lawful, why is it not mentioned in Scripture? To this I
Answer,

John 4.2. John 3.22.
nor must that in John 3. oppose this, so as to render it untrue; for Christ
did Baptize as he Ordered his Apostles to do it, and did it by them, but in his
own Person himself Baptized none; yet did Christ grant to Children what was
greater than Baptism, the Holy Ghost and Eternal Life, and admits them to the
Ordinance of Laying on of Hands, which presupposes their being Baptized, as
has been largely proved.

2. The Consequence is invalid, a non dicto ad non factum, John 21.25.
for St. John acquaints us many things were done by Christ and his Apostles
that are not written, and so might this be Practiced, though not expressed.

3. As great Essential matters to the Church of Christ are not expressed either
by way of Precept or Practice in Scriptures. The whole Scriptures afford not
one Instance of a Woman's Receiving the Lords Supper, or of the Apostles
themselves being Baptized, or of any Children of Believers or Converts being at
any Age Baptized, but it solely relates the Baptism of Heathens when Converted
to Christ, or of Jews embracing Christ as their Messiah. But yet we believe on
good grounds that Women ought and may partake of the Lords Supper, and that the
Apostles of Christ were Baptized, and that Baptism is as necessary to be
Practiced by, and upon the Posterity, Seed, and Children of Believers and
Professing Christians, as it was upon the new Converted Jew or Gentile, though
these and other things as material be not mentioned in Scripture.

4. The Anabaptists, who put this Enquiry to us, as if nothing ought to be done
but what is the express Precept of, or President in Scripture, do themselves
Practice Baptizing by Dipping, without any Scripture Precept or Example.

5. Genesis 17.
It was largely Commanded in the Old Testament, that the Children of Gods
People should be, and they were also admitted unto the Seal of the Covenant,
Circumcision; and Christ abundantly manifests our Privileges to be as great as
theirs, Ephesians. 2.13, 19. Heb. 8.6.
whence, as we have proved at large, directly follows our Childrens Right to
Baptism.

6. There needed no new Command for it, Christ being a Savior to Jew as well
as Gentile, and admitting both to equal Privileges, would not, did not
abrogate any of the Jews Privileges they enjoyed before his coming; nor did
Christ speak one Syllable against their Childrens Baptism, but only gave
Precepts for the Collecting a Church of both Jew and Gentile by Believing in
him, and being Baptized into the Faith of him: And the Covenant between God and
the Jews through their Messiah to come, being un-repealed by him when come,
still gives the Children of the Converted Jews and Gentiles (they having equal
Privileges) right to Baptism, which is warrantably Practiced, nor can it be
unlawful, it being against no Law, and so not an (...).

7. 1 John 3.4. Mat. 19.13, 14, 15.
All the Spiritual and Eternal Mercies the Covenant of Grace contains, and
Baptism Seals, are expressly Promised and applied in the Scriptures of the New
Testament to Children.

8. It is more than probable that Children were Baptized, in that we Read of
several whole Families Baptized by the Apostles, and that only on the account
of the Parents or Masters Professing the Faith. Abraham Believed, and he and
all his, Genesis 17. Acts 16.15, 31, 34. 1 Cor. 1.16.
Ishmael and Isaac, etc. were Circumcised: The Jailer, Lydia, Stephanas, etc.
Believed, and presently they and their whole Families and Households are
Baptized; whence we have Infant Baptism tacitly employed in Scripture.

9. And Lastly, Scripture is silent as to a Precept for Infant Baptism under
the New Testament Dispensation, because it was the Practice of Jews to Baptize
their Proselytes, both Parents and Children (as we have proved) though not
Sacramentally till Christ's Commission for it: So there needed not a New Command
to promote an Old Practice, continued from Abraham's time to Christ, and no
ways by him or his Apostles spoken against; only there needed a Precept and
Commission from Christ to make those Baptismal washings to be a Sacrament of
his Gospel Church, Mat. 28.19, 20.
which was done by our Savior in the words of the Subject of this Discourse,
as appears in that it was not a Precept to Administer Baptism (save only as to
the Gentiles) because it was Practiced upon Christ and by St. Mat. 3.17. John
1.25, 26. John 4.1, 2.
John on several others before this Commission was given, though by this
Precept and Commission it became first a Sacrament to both Jew and Centile. And
these Reasons may suffice why Infant Baptism is not expressly Commanded in
Scripture. And this small Treatise will prove the great Reasons Scripture gives
us to receive them to the Sacrament of Baptism, nor does Scripture afford any
tittle against it. Therefore surely it may be Lawfully Practiced.

If Children be received to Baptism, why are they not also received to the
Lords Supper? I Answer,

Jews were admitted to Circumcision, but not to the Passover.

2. Children, though capable of having Baptism Administered to them, yet are not
capable of Manducation, or eating Bread.

3. Baptism precedes the Lords Supper, as Regeneration does our growth in
Grace; and in a Natural state, a Child is first Born before he can be Nourished
externally in order to his Growth.

4. Though Children are capable of Baptism and the Sealing the Blessings of the
Covenant of Grace to them thereby, yet are they not capable of performing the
Duties requisite to be Acted by any Communicant, as self-examination, and
discerning the Lords Body.

If Infants are capable of being engaged in Covenant with God by Baptism, what
need have they of Godfathers and Godmothers?

Jews had at the Circumcision of their Children several Persons by, Godwin.
Antiq. lib. 6. Buxtorf. Jud. Syn. c. 2. p. 82. Genesis 17. Isa. 8.25. Luke 1.58.
Platina in vita Hygini, Isaackson, Chr. An. 153.
as Witnesses to Testify the Child's Circumcision, and thereby its Reception as
a Member of Gods Church, and to remind the Child Circumcised when it came at
Age, of what a Covenant it was concerned in between God and its Soul.

2. We find this Practice Recorded in Scripture as Witnesses, at the first
Institution of Circumcision, and afterward continued even to the Circumcision
of St. John.

3. The rise of Godfathers and Godmothers in the Christian Church was taken
from the Practice of the Jews before Christ, and was of an early Institution.
Especially Eyginus, Bishop of Rome, about 153 Years after Christ, who
considering the frequent Persecutions attending the Church of Christ, whereby
the Christian Parents often were taken away, and the Children brought up in
Heathen Idolatry, or Jewish Superstition did Prudently order in the Church
Persons to be engaged at Baptism with the Parents to take care of the Child's
Education, that if the Natural Parents dyed, or were taken away by Persecution;
or else if they Apostatized from the Faith, or were Ignorant, and could not; or
wicked, and would not bring up the Child in the Principles and Practice of the
true Religion, these might endeavor their being so Educated, that Christianity
might be propagated, and Children brought up in the fear of God.

4. Nor is this contrary to Gods pleasure, Ephesians. 6.1. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Deuteronomy.
6.6 Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15.
who Commands and Commends the Parents and Friends engaging their Children in
Covenant with him; yea, their Saves and Servant were to be engaged by them to
be God Servants. And we find Godly Parents and Masters Practicing this Duty in
their Families in their several Ages.

5. Children are in the Power of their Parents or Guardians to engage in Civil
Contracts, and to be Invested with any Privilege or Estate. Therefore our
Churches Prudence is Commendable in taking care that with the Child Baptized
there should be Persons who should stand in the behalf of the Child engaged to
God and the Church of Christ.

1. As Witnesses to take notice of the Child's Reception into the Church as a
Member of it, and to Witness to the Child (the tenor of that Covenant it was
engaged in) when it grows up, and that thereby it stands obliged to be a true
Christian. And also to satisfy the Child that it has been Baptized, and may
proceed to other Ordinances.

2. As Sureties to engage as much as in them lies, to see the Child brought up
Virtuously, to lead a Godly and a Christian Life in Principle and Practice.

3. As Godfathers and Godmothers to engage themselves as it were to God, and
for his sake and cause, to endeavor his Religion may be promoted in the Pious
Education of those Children, that the succeeding Age as well as the present may
serve him.

6. Sureties. Godfathers and Godmothers are now as necessary as ever, for
though through Gods goodness we are not under Persecution for the Cause of
Christ, yet the sad Schisms and Divisions amongst us in Principles and the
lamentable Debauchery and Profanenets in Practice of Professing Christians
plead it necessary to retain this Commendable Order of our Church; and they
call aloud on all who stand thus engaged to God and the Church for any Child or
Persons Education, that they speedily and diligently labor after a discharge
of their Duties in a diligent endeavor that those they are engaged for may be
reclaimed from Impiety to Holiness, and reduced from Error and Heresy to the
true Faith. For the neglect of those who are thus engaged renders the Order
(though it be in it self so good) to be accounted as a mere Ceremony, and as a
burdensome Circumstance, rather to be laid aside than continued. But were the
Persons engaged for Children thus, Conscientious in the discharge of that great
Trust they have undertaken, the great good that would thence flow to the Church
of Christ, would make even its Enemies to be in Love with this Order and
Constitution.

Are Infants Obliged to perform that Covenant wherein they were by Baptism
engaged, since it was not their act, but the act of other Persons in their
behalf, to which they gave no Consent.



1. Nothing was then engaged but what is Christian and Reasonable to be done. 1
Pet. 5.8. Tit. 2.11. 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 John 5 4.
If we would be Happy, we must be Holy, which is the sum of that Covenant then
entered; for Holiness will engage our Mortifying the Flesh, Crucifying the
World, and Renouncing the Devil and all his Works: So that these Duties of our
Baptismal Vow are Commanded by God in Scripture, as well as their observance is
engaged by us in Baptism.

2. Every one has care of his own Soul, and therefore what was in our
Childhood engaged for (...) and every of us, when we come to Years of (...)
standing, and retain the Christian Religion, 2 Timothy 2.19. Tit. 2.14.
are obliged to perform; and we oguht to endeavor it, if we expect Salvation,
nothing being promised but what our Religion obliges to, A ceasing from sin,
and a living the Life of Godliness. And here, how may the desires of all
Christians be for the Christian Practice of that Solemn Ordinance of
Confirmation of Persons of Ripe Years. That they being instructed in the Vow of
Baptism engaged in their Childhood, may Publicly in the Congregation own that
Religion they were Baptized into, and be Solemnly in their own Persons engaged
to the performance of it. This certainly would much dis-engage the engaged
Godfathers and Mothers, and much Oblige the Catecheumen to abstain from all
sin, and to perform all Duties, when as every Person in the Congregation is a
several Witness of his Solemn Engagement, it will shame him out of Sin, nor
will he dare wilfully to act contrary to the Gospel-Rules. But

3. A Child is frequently obliged in Civil Contracts to perform what the Parent
or Guardian engaged for it; as in a Bond, Lease, or the like, or else he is
liable to the Law, and debarred from receiving any Profit or Advantage by any
such Contract made for him. So in Spirituals, The Child is doubtless engaged by
the Covenant made in his Name and behalf in Baptism, to be Holy, or else he
will be deprived of the Benefits of this Covenant, which is Eternal Happiness,
and be exposed to the Law and Curse of God; for as the Commands of God obliging
the Parents to engage their Children in Covenant with God, are not impertinent.
So, since the Duties they were then engaged in are but what God by Precept to
the Children when at Age expects from them: Their nonperformance of that
Covenant, incurs Gods Anger, and Forfeits Heaven and Happiness.

(...) If they Labor not to perform the Duties of (...) Covenant, which is
their Reasonable Service. their Parents and Friends Care for the engaging them
in Covenant with God, and their devoting of them to God, and their Labor in
Educating them in true Christianity, will Witness against them, aggravate their
Sin, and add to their Torment.

FINIS.

