A Faithful WARNING TO Outside Professors, And Loose Pretenders to
CHRISTIANITY of all Sorts.
COme all ye Professors of Scripture upon the Face of the whole Earth under
what form soever, what have ye learned hitherto of all that ye profess? have ye
learned to Fear God and keep his Commandments? have ye learned thus to Love
God? and do you love your Neighbor as your selves? do ye not profess to love
God above all things, and your Neighbor as your selves? is this done? what?
will a profession of words commend you to God, where the obedience is awanting?

O thou that art called Christendom, how art thou fallen! how art thou become
the Plant of a degenerate Vine! how are thy Grapes become as those of Sodom!
who shall bring healing to thee, who have rejected the balm of Gilead, that the
Father brought to thee.

O Thou foolish Child! how have thou triffled out thy precious Time about Toys
and Triffles, and have not regarded the Voice of thy Maker, who has waited all
day long to gather thee, and to do thee good; but thou would not! Thou have
Chosen the worse part, in that thou have forsaken the Lord the Fountain of
Living Waters; and have hewed and chosen to thy self a Cistern, that will hold
no Water. Thou art gone into the ways of the Old World, upon whom the Flood
came: And which of those sins, for which Sodom burned, are a wanting in thee?

O! The pure River of Life, that would quench thy thirst, how is it slighted
and neglected by thee! And therefore art thou utterly unsatisfied, in
whatsoever thou do, or attempts to do. Thou art never able to sati^te thy
soul with husks: Thou must come into the Fathers house before thou have Bread
enough.

But thou say in thy heart, Thou art a Queen, yea, That thou art Rich, and
endued with goods, and have need of nothing: When as alas in the true Light,
that loves thy soul, thou art seen to be miserable, poor, wretched, blind and
naked. A long Course have thou run; but the promised end thou have not reached:
thou have been like a bewildred sheep, running from Mountain to hill to find a
resting place, where no rest is. Thou came indeed a little out of Egypt: but
O! how soon did thou turn back again thither, from whence thou came, and
loved the Fleshpots of Egypt, yea, the Onyons and Garlic better, then God's
Manna in the Wilderness: Thou should have followed the Lord perfectly unto
the Land of Rest in patience, and silence of Spirit under his voice, and
teachings.

But thou grew weary of waiting upon thy God, and saw Images of things on
Earth, and Images of things in Heaven, and bowed thy heart to them, and did
not keep thy heart to the power that broke through the Darkness for thee. Nor
did thou keep thy eye to the Light of Life, that freely shined out of
Darkness for thee to have guided thee through the dark-howling Wilderness to
Sion. But thou being careless, and selfish, thou lend thy ear to the voice of
the stranger, that cried, Lo here and Lo there: and so wast thou led out of the
Way into By-Pathes of sin and death, where thou have been lost from the true
Life, and true Light, and Spirit, that wrought in thee in the beginning. And
thou have not to this day throwly considered thy loss; nay very little is thy
nakedness and wretchedness laid to heart in thee.

And now therefore thou, that art called Christendom, What is the Wood of thy
Vine (seeing thou have lest off to bear Fruit to the Lord) better, then the
Wood of another Tree? nay, it is not so good as any. For, if the Salt, that
should season other things, have lost its Savor, wherewith shall it be salted?
and of what use is it, but even to be trodden under feet of men. O! that thou
were wise to consider, at least in this thy day the things of thy peace in this
great day, wherein the Bridegroom, which has been as one traveled into a far
Country, is come again, and is appeared in his ancient love, power and
perfection to visit thee, and to seek thee up out of every place, where thou
have been scattered from sin in the long Night of Apostasy, to see, if any of
the pure love, that was in thee in the day of thy Espousals, may be recovered
to himself out of thee: that he may know, how to do thee good, and how to make
manifest his ancient love unto thee, which burned the hearts of his simple
Israel into such love of his goodness, as to follow the Lamb wheresoever he
went in the beginning.

But O thou polluted Woman, how art thou wandered away from the true Sheepfold!
how art thou gone a whoring from under thy God! how art thou covered with the
shades of Night! and how art thou lost amongst the Countries, and mingled with
the Heathen! yea, thou have chosen thy own ways, and worshipped the works of
thy own hands, and have cast the pure law of God behind thy back. Yea, the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, which has shined to thee, and would
have gathered thee up to God, thou have rejected, and have not liked to retain
God, nor his light in thy knowledge. And so thou art become vain in thy mind,
and thy foolish heart is become so dark, that thou worships thou knows not
what, like those that know not God; and art become a prey to every Beast of the
Field, and art bowed in thy heart to the creatures, more then to the living God
the Creator.

And therefore will he arise in thee in great Majesty, and dreadful Power, and
will yet again bring to pass his Act, his strange Act in thee. And he will not
meet thee as a man, but as a consuming Fire: because thou have rejected his
goodness, patience and forbearance. And have heaped to thy self teachers after
thy own heart, who have rocked thee asleep with their false voices crying
peace, peace, when t^eir was no peace: for Their is no peace to any wicked on,
says the True God, forever, profess what they may.

For the Lord is come to look for Fruits. And now Woe, Woe to the Fruitless
Trees, to the Briers and Thorns! for the fire of the Lord God will consume
them. And now will the Lord God bring to nothing all thy Might, Wisdom, Glory,
and Greatness, whereby thou have exalted thy self, and dishonored him; and the
meek shall inherit heaven and earth. And blessed is he, that overcomes that
evil and wicked spirit, that so much reigns and rages in thee, for he shall be
called God's Son and shall inherit all things, as says Scripture. For the end
comes: and who shall stop the course of the everlasting Sun of Righteousness,
whose day is dawned, blessed for evermore.

O thou Corrupted Earth, who wallowes in the blood of thine Iniquity! who art
become Deaf to the heavenly voice, and art become an Enemy to nothing so much,
as to that good thing that would unburden thee of thy corruptions! O! O how
has Hell enlarged it self for the multitude of those wilful transgressors in
thee, that are posting on in their sins this day to the Chambers o^ death! who
are making provision for the fleshly lusts, which war against the soul! who
will not believe, what their miserable state shall be, though one come from the
dead to declear it in true experience to them.

But O thou Little Remnant of Wheat amongst such a heap of Chaff! O thou lovely
Seed of God, which brings forth Fruit of Righteousness to his glory, and so
shines forth as Lights in the sore said dark world. Do thou rejoice, and be
thou glad forever in the Lord thy Savior, who has loved thee with an
everlasting love, and by his Arm of Power has raised thee up to be his
servant, and has gathered thee into his Bosom of Safety to lie down, and rest
in peace with himself for evermore.

So be it, even so be it, says the Spirit and the Bride. So do thou, O Lovely,
Holy Seed begotten to God in Righteousness; do thou trust and rejoice in the
Lord thy God for ever.

And be not troubled nor dismayed at the roarings of the Waters of Babylon; but
be still, be still, be at rest and Peace in the Arms of the Lord God Almighty,
blessed blessed for evermore.

From a Lover of God's Everlasting Truth, Thomas Tailor.

PEOPLE,
THis know, That the Entrance into Righteousness is the Only and Alone Entrance
into the Kingdom of God, and there is not another. Christ is Gods
Righteousness, and so the Door: He that enters not in by me, says Christ, is
a thief and a robber. So, see all people, where you are? I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, also says Christ, and no man comes to the Father, but by
me. So consider all people: Is Christ your Way? and is nothing Truth to you,
but Christ? and have you a Life in nothing at all, but in Christ? Deal honestly
with your own souls, and deceive not your selves; for God will not be mocked.
Bring your deeds to the Light, and seek not to hide your sins from the Lord:
for Their is nothing secret, which shall not be made manifest.

Drunkard, bring thy deeds to the light. Thou know by the Light, thou
should not be Drunk, nor spend God's Creatures upon thy Lust. Here thou have
learned thy Condemnation, and the Wrath of God abides upon thee in this
Condition, profess what thou may. And all thy Prayers and Performances are
Abomination to the Pure God, whilst thou abidest in the Lust of Drunkenness;
for it defiles.

And all ye Unclean-Hearted Ones, who burn in your Lusts one toward another,
and are as the Bruit Beasts, who know neither Guide nor Rule over your Minds;
but are in the Evil Liberty, to follow your own Evil Hearts. Bring your Deeds
to the Light, and it will let you see, you should not be so: It will tell you,
That the Unclean shall not enter God's Kingdom; and Without Holiness none can
see God. Here ye may see your Way to be to the Chambers of Hell and Death, and
not to Christ.

And all ye Swearers, Vain and Obscene Talkers, and Foolish Jesters, whose
Tongues run through the World: and as you know no Limit to your Lusts, so you
know no Bridle to your Tongue. Your Religion is Vain, Jam. 1.26. Bring your
Deeds to the Light; there you may read your Condemnation. For there is that in
your Conscience tells you according to Scripture, that For every Idle, Vain,
Unclean or Profane Word, that Men shall speak, they must give Account thereof
to the Pure and Just God in the Day of Judgment.

Howl then ye Guilty, and be Humbled for your Sins, lest that Day come suddenly
upon you, as a Thief in the Night, and sweep you all away; as it did the Old
World, who regarded not the Day of their Visitation, but went on in their Sins,
until there was no Remedy.

Awake, awake, ye Dead and Careless-Hearted, who put the Day of the Lord afar
off, and cry Peace, when there is no Peace. For, what Peace to the Wicked?
There is no Peace to the Wicked, says the true God; but Peace only upon Zion,
and to such as turn from Iniquity in Jacob. So let not one take the Name of
Christ in their Mouth any more, until they depart from Iniquity. For such, as
go on in the Custom and daily Practice of Sin, and yet think to cover
themselves with an Outward Profession of Christ, do but deceive themselves, and
increase their Condemnation, adding Sin to Sin. This is God's Truth, which he
that has an Ear, let him hear; and he that has any Desire in him to return to
God, let him consider of, and give Glory to God by Repenting of that, which
does any way dishonor God.

Also this know for truth, That your Invented, Licentious Gaming for Vain
Delights and Pleasures is not of God; but an Invention of that Wicked One, who
is called the Devil and Satan, invented to please the Vain and Empty Minds of
his Children and Servants, which are out of the Law and Truth of God. But the
Children and Servants of God are full of Goodness, and are exercised in the Law
and Truth of God Day and Night; and so deny the Devil and his Works. So let no
Man deceive any of you, neither be deceived in your selves; for the Judge is at
the Door. And the True light is arisen, which makes manifest every Work, and
the Reward of it forever.

And all ye Stage Players, Puppit-Players, and the Authors and Inventors of
such things, with all that love such Heathenish things, yea, and give your
Money for them, that thereby ye may feed the Covetous Lusts in the Players,
that thirst after Money; and the Vain Lust of your own defiled Eyes and Ears,
which are after Pleasures more then the Lord God, that made you. Know this,
That your Works are all weighed in an Equal Balance, and by the Light of
Christ you are all seen to be out of the Doctrine of Christ in the Heathenish
Nature, upholding and practicing those things, which Christ came to destroy.
Yea, and by the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, when you are a little
sober and still in your Minds, you know, you should not do such things: Here
you also have learned your Condemnation, and cannot in this State stand before
the Lord, because of your Sins.

And all ye, that can please your selves with beholding one Creature hurt, and
torment another, yea, sometimes even to Death, as at Bull-Baitings,
Bear-Baitings, Cock-Fightings, and the like. O! what Minds have ye, and how
contrary are ye herein to the Tender Nature of Christ, and all Christians,
truly so called, who could never Rejoice in any such things, by reason of their
tender, pitiful and merciful Nature! O ye Children of Cruelty! when will your
Hearts break, your Stony Hearts melt into Tears before the Lord for all your
mighty Sins? and when will you bring your Deeds to the Light, that ye may see
the Ugliness of your Sins, and repent of them; lest the Judgments written fall
upon you for them, as it did upon all such from the beginning of the World, and
there be no escape?

O England, England! How have thou defiled thy self by thine Iniquities! How is
the Flood-gate of Sin broken open in thee to the polluting of thy Land! O, how
art thou wholely overspread with Briars, and Thorns, and Weeds! so that the
Lord must arise to purge thee by Fire; seeing thou have refused to wash in that
pure Water of Life, that sprung up in thee. So if thou have an Ear, hear,
before it be too late, and the Door be shut.

T. T.

YE Feasters, ye Gamesters, ye Drunkards and Gluttons, ye False Christians,
whose God is your Belly, and whose Care is how you may satisfy your Ungodly
Lusts; you are Enemies to the Cross of Christ. Yea, you crucify Christ afresh
to your selves, and put him to open Shame by your Lewd Living.

The Hand of the Lord is against you, ye profane Esaus, who have sold and are
selling your Birthright for a Mess of Pottage. When will ye Awake, when will
ye Arise from off your sinful Bed, where you cry Peace to your selves in your
Sins.

When will ye lay to Heart the Apostle's Doctrine, ye Common Sinners, who
proudly boast of your Common Prayers, and yet depart not from your Iniquities?
Is not the Sacrifice of the Wicked an Abomination to God? and will God regard
your Prayers, whilst you so love and regard your Iniquities, and walk so
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ?

Does not the Appostle say, Make no Provision for the Flesh, to satisfy it in
the Lusts thereof; and ye in a direct Opposition and Hatred to this Doctrine,
make all Provision for the Flesh to fulfill and satisfy it every way in the
Lusts thereof. And so your Table is the Table of Devils, and not of Saints; and
ye cannot both partake of the Table of Devils, and the Table of Christ, the
Apostle being Witness.

So howl ye Sinners, and Ungodly People, and be Humbled for all your
Lewdnesses; and Repent of all your Whoredoms, whereby ye have gone away a
Whoring from the Life of Christ, and his Saints. And let your Feastings be
turned into Fastings, and your Laughters and Merriments be turned into
Lamentations and bitter Mournings for the Misery that is to come upon you from
the Presence of the Lord, in the Day of his Fierce Wrath, which is ^igh to
come, and be revealed upon you in Flames of Fire for all your mighty Sins.

O ye, that are so contrary to Christ, be humbled before the Lord for all your
Hypocrisies, who say, You are come out of Popery, and yet continue in some of
their Idolatrous Customs, as this profane keeping of the time, which ye in
Imitation call Christmas (among other Superstitions) whereby ye show your
selves to be too near of kin to that Whorish Woman, which has defiled the
Earth with her Abominations. Ye make haste to fill up the measure of your
Iniquities, as though the time would fail you to make your selves perfect in
Wickedness. And ye seem to entertain Christ as the Heathens of old did their
Idols, who thought, The more Vain, Lustful and Wanton that they were, the more
they Pleased their Idols, and offered a more Acceptable Sacrifice to their
Gods. But O! be humbl'd for these things, lest the Lord carry you back again
into the Belly of Egypt and Blackness of Babylon's Darkness, whither ye have
manifested too much a Mind to return. And as a Just Recompense for all your
Unrighteousness, he swear in his Wrath, That ye shall never enter into his Rest,

Thomas Tailor.

THE END.

