A Reply as true as Steel, To a Rusty, Railing, Ridiculous, Lying Libell;
which was lately written by an impudent unsoder'd Ironmonger and called by the
name of An Answer to a foolish Pamphlet Entitled, A Swarm of Secta^ies and
Schismatiques. By JOHN TAYLOVR.

The Devil is hard bound and did hardly strain,
To shit a Libeller a knave in grain.


Printed Anno Dom 1641.

A Reply as true as Steel, To a Rustie, Railng, Ridiculous, Lying Libell.
What Dogs Infernal Snaps and Snarleth thus?
(Begot by Tripleheaded Cerberus)
No it is a pretty Puppy, with one head,
A Red haird whelpe, that can both Write and Read.
Sprung from the devil and a mad Dun Cow,
Nurse in a Dunghill where he sucked a Sow,
This Amsterdam'd cur, has strange Libels flirted
And much foul Ink besquitterid and Besquirted
That every where his Roguish Pamphlets flies
That England's all embrodred over with lies.
And late this cankerd viperous hownd of hell
His toadlike malice did against me swell,
And did a poysnous lying libell frame
Against me, but durst never set his Name.
An Annagram Denominotes him well Look into the tenth line following, and there
in Capital letters you shall find that these three wicked words are his
Anagram.

Three scurvey words, a KNAV, REVILER, HELL,
These show his name, his nature and his end
(Except before he is hanged he means to mend.)
For who is fitter for black hell to have
Then a reviler and a railing Knave,
And not to hold you in suspense much longer
This fellow is a Quondam Iron-monger
And now his coppies Chaung'd, crackd Like a shell
In Gracious street, does Graceles libells sell.
If I would be an Idle babbling talker
Perhaps I then should name him HENRY WALLKER.
But it is no matter, I Will a while forbear
He Will hang himself if I should name him here;
He in his title page, six times sets down
My name, but never once, durst write his own
And though his libell be one Sheet (no more)
And Prose and Verse the lines are but eightscore,
Ye fifty of these Roguish lines (pray know it)
He stole from FENNER, the dead Rimcing Poet.
And yet the mungrill Dogg's wits was to seek
That he was feign to pumpe Above a week.
To answer me, but this reply was soon
unwrit and writ in half an Afternon.
And what sweet stuff his Giant muse brought forth
Those that will read may quickly know the worth.
He lays about him bravely with his Ink
And taxes me with drabs and to much drink
But those that know me well, do know me so
That I to both those vices am a foe,
But were I given to the veneriall crime
I would have seen his wife before this time,
If he be Iellious, he deserves for that
To wear a fair Ox-feather in his Hat; The Rascal says that I was invited to
dinner, a^ the Tower it is know I was a servant there 14. years.

The Archbishop nor his men did me invite
Nor for a meal did I the book endite
For it is to sundry gentlemen well known
That I did write that book three years agone.
Let trencher knaves (like Walker) Scrape for scrapps
And with the snuffes of Greatmen Rince their chappes,
No Bishops not in England living be
That I have cause to thank for gifts to me.
He that takes part with Rome, let him have Hell
And there is Room enough, there let him dwell:
But though those lines may show sincerity
Yet they are far from Christian charity,)
I hate no person, (Layman, or Divine)
Nor Against misguided souls do I repine,
I hate men's crimes, nor do I love mine own,
(And charity begins at home it is known)
As men transgress, so punish the offender
As men are men so men should pity tender;
This shallow pated fool that railes and raves
I pity him and all his brother knaves
Sure if they had wit they would descry
Good manners must not be Idolatry,
That Popery is not railes, though too much railing
Has showed Romes mingle mangle wrangling failing.
Thou filthv fellow, do thou make no ods
Between a Stable and a House of Gods,
I think the devil fears that doomes day's near
And therefore he those adverse Sects does rear
And Buzzeth sundry forms of strange Religions
That he may catch the most of them like Widgeons;
For what a lamentable case is this
When such mad fools (whom wisemen scorn and hiss)
Dares take upon them to reform and teach
Various Rell^gions, all beyond their reach.
And this rare Rascal, (in his zeal discreet)
Went lately to the Owl that is in Kings street
There was his Bible paund (for what I pray)
For one quarte of Metheglin left to pay.
Was not this Rogue raped with some spright devine
To pawn Gods word for poor Welsh Muscadine.
He talks of whipping, and of Iayles to me
Of gallowses, and things called Pillorie,
And such od whimsyes, which the Gentleman
Does hammer in his Perricranian,
Yet late Greatmen of Government thought fit
To clap him in the fleet with all his wit,
And being thence released, he afterward
Was kept in Wood-street-Counter with good guard
For why it was a matter most unmeet
His precisous Pamphlets should bestrow the street.
And make some old men, that for got almost
To ride a Horse, to ride each Pissing Post,
And all his patience could not be content
To stay for order from the Parliament,
I hold it manners to forbear a while
Till that High Court our wrongs can reconcile
To wait with patience, and with prayers desire
That God that Blessed Senate would inspire
With Grace, true wisdom, courage, saving health
For Heavens Great-service, King and common wealth.
But Master Walker and such Knaves as he
To wait their leasures cannot quiet be:
But they must Libell rail, and keep a Rut,
And (as they please their own ways out to cut,
And like unmaunag'd wild untoward Iades
Lay by their laudable and lawful Trades,
And sawcily to preach, prate, rore, and lie
Against all order rule and descencie;
And all such as are not seditious
To call them Papists, and idollatrous,
As Froggs and Toades do breed from Putred slime
So do these Vermin feed upon men's crime
Like Swine ith'mire, they love to wallow in
The Sordid Loathsome Excrements of Sin.
And though offenders suffer worthily
Yet will these varlets malice never die,
For though unhappy Strafford be struck dead
They mount him up a cock-horse sans a head.
And this most precious youth, with tongue and pen
Is chief amongst the devils serving men,
For with his serpents tongue and poysned breath
He does his worst to torture after death,
And sure because thou can do Ill so well
Thou must expect to have thy hire in hell,
This stinking Vermin (mounseir overthwart)
Quite oposite to Nature, Law and Art,
Holds it not fit he should be kept in awe
Within the Rules and limmi^s of the Law,
And therefore if the Law should bid him stand
Then he would kneel, (contrary to command)
And when to kneel, good manners holds it fit
In opposi^ion he would stand or sit;
For nothing his rebellious mind contents
That is not mixed with disobedience
A sister as she chanced to set her eye on
The Kings Arms in the Church, the Rampant Lion,
She said his Priap moved unlawful motions
Which did disturb and hinder her devotions,
But when her husband came to be Churchwarden
He caused some forms of flowers from field or Garden
Or sedge and flagges, 'twixt the Beast legs be painted
To hide his whim wham, which her mind had tainted.
This was done really, and it is no fable
To prove it so I quickly can be able,
And now thou poisoned pickthank pestilent
That writ'st and Rimest so poor so violent
Me think this my reply may answer thee,
If not, thou art like to have no more of me
I scorn and loath, that er'e my pen or tongue
Should write or speak to such a lump of dunge;
Yet thou, (well skild in foolish impudence)
Against these retorting lines will take offense
And with Mockado mouth and judgment Rash,
And tongue of Say, thou wilt say all is but trash,
And that it is pity, I should thus disperse
A business of such consequence in verse,
Indeed, with thee it cannot stand for good
Nor can it well by thee be understood,
Thou hat'st the muses, yet do love to muse
In railing terms thy betters to abuse,
Verse must have method, measure, order, feet,
Proportion, cadence, weight and number, sweet
But thou that hat'st good verse, and libels make
Do with the Devils cloven foot thy measure take
And where thou have no power thou do deride
(so will all Rogues that verse cannot abide)
But let such know, that heaven bred Poetry
Despises mundane poor fellicity,
Nor for Vaust air will like a mag-py Chatter,
Or for ^he Crummes of greatness Lie and flatter,
I could write lines, (thou foul ill looking elfe)
Should make thee (in Jambicks) hang thy self,
Thou Art foul within, and my sharp lancing quill
Can make Incision, and with Art and skill
Search deep for dead flesh and Coroded Cores
And from corruptions clear and cleanse thy sores.
Thou Art almost Gangrened, and I surely think
No Balls^m's better then a Poets Ink,
My pen can lash detraction and I can
Be valliantly bold, and wrong no man,
But wherefore (like a Mountebank) do I
Spend time and Ink upon such rascal frye
As is this gad-flye. It Is not Sergeons Art
Can help him, it perhaps may make him smart.
But he will be uncured, as he has bin
Except he first be Cleansed and purged within:
So, Walker, Walk Knave and more Roguery brew
And farewell and be hanged, that is twice adieu.
FINIS.

