Vera Effigies Johannis Tayl^r


Thesaurarium Mathematicae, OR THE TREASURY OF THE MATHEMATICS. CONTAINING
Variety of useful Practices in Arithmetic, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy,
Geography, Navigation and Surveying.

AS ALSO The Mensuration of Board, Glass, Tiling, Paving, Timber, Stone, and
Irregular Solids.

LIKEWISE It teaches the Art of Gauging, Dialling, Fortification,
Military-Orders, and Gunnery; Explains the Logarithms, Sines, Tangents and
Secants: Shows their use in Arithmetic, etc. To which is Annexed a Table of
10000 Logarithms, Log-Sines and Log-Tangents.

Illustrated with several Mathematical Sculptures on Copper Plates.

By JOHN TAILOR, Gent.

-- Deus regit Astra; feruntur
Illius arbitrio Sydera, Terra, Fretum.
LICENSED, June 26. 1686. Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for W. Freeman at the Artichoke next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1687.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord DARTMOUTH, Master of the Horse to K. James
II.

Master General of His Majesty's Ordnance and Armories, One of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

This small Mathematical Treasury is humbly Dedicated and presented by

My LORD, Your Honor's most humble and obedient Servant John Tailor

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOW admirably profitable the study of the Mathematics has been to these
British Islands, and to all other parts of the Universe in which any kind of
good Learning has been esteemed and practiced, is well known to all wise and
judicious men. And indeed it is an undeniable truth, that among all humane Arts
and Sciences whatsoever, the Noble Science Mathematical has obtained the
greatest evidence of certainty, as being the Queen of Truth that imposes
nothing on her Subjects but what she proves by most infallible Demonstrations.

Now this prerogative results from the verity and perspicuity of its
Principles, which consist of Definitions, Postulats and Axioms. Hence comes it
to pass that all Propositions that are proved by those most infallible Precepts
are called certain demonstrative truths; for which cause it has been the
endeavor of sundry Philosophers to make the force of their Arguments (as far
as the quality of their discourse would admit) amount unto Mathematical
Demonstrations, as being the most convincing proof of a Proposition that by
humane reasoning can be given.

Now having for diverse years (amongst my other Studies) been conversant in the
study of the Mathematics, and for my own private use compiled this Treatise,
never in the least intending it should have appeared in public in this nice
and critical Age; but it by chance falling into the hands of some of my
Mathematical Friends and Acquaintance, I have at their requests condescended to
publish it, though not without a great aversion in my own mind to expose my
self in any public thing.

But this difficulty being overcome, I shall give the Impartial Reader to
understand that I have faithfully compiled this Treatise from the best of
Authors (and my own Experience) that I have contracted their various Works into
this little Cabinet or choice Compendium of the Mathematics, in which thou
shall find the whole Subject clearly and intelligibly handled: I have used a
plain and easy method: I have labored to be as plain and perspicuous as
possible: I have applied such Examples to each as may best demonstrate their
Operation, be most easy for memory, and applicable to practice; here is indeed
Multum in Parvo, the whole Marrow of the Mathematics is in this Tract afforded
thee, which is as a true and Golden Key to unlock the choicest mysteries in
those Arts contained.

Thus, Reader, I have laid my labors before thee, and must entreat thee to use
me as thou would be done by, which is the Spontaneous act of every good man.

But if this shall chance to fall into the hands of any curious conceited
person, who thinks himself wiser than the rest of the world, and so he
begins enviously to carp hereat, and like a Country Cur bark at my
backside, to him I shall in modesty only say, -- Facilius est unicuivis
nostrum aliena curiose observare: quam propria negotia recte agere. It Is much
easier for those captious Readers to carp than to copy.

If the Collections of Authors shall offend any, and so procure the same
censure with the Jackdaw, as our learned Poet has long since cautioned against
--

Ne, si forte suas repetitum venerit olim Grex avium plumas, moveat
cornicularisum, Furtivis nudata coloribus.

I would have such contentious Readers know that I have robbed no man of the
honor of his Works, but have given to each his due; only I have borrowed some
choice things of them, which is no more than what the most learned have always
done.

Thus, Courteous and Impartial Reader, it is only for thee that I have taken
these pains, and have submitted to the publication hereof, and it is to thee
the future parts of my study shall be serviceable, hoping that thou will find
success in all thy Studies according to thy desire and endeavor; which are and
shall be the hearty wishes of him who is

London, July 12. 1686. Thine and Urania's Servant, John Tailor.

To the READER.
BEing desired to peruse this Mathematical Treasury, accordingly to gratify
the Request of my Friend I did, and I must confess with no small satisfaction
to my self to see so much Practical Matter of useful Mathematical Arts so
neatly and compendiously digested into this Portable Volume; 'twill be useful
not only to Learners and mere Tyro's, but to others also who have made some
considerable progress in these Studies. It Is well Methodiz'd, very Concise, yet
Plain and Perspicuous, so that any person of a pregnant fancy, may without a
Tutour (in some reasonable time) wade through the whole, or any part thereof,
and such as would be more expeditious may take the assistance of a Teacher to
instruct them.

The Author is wholly a stranger to me, but to give him his due, in my opinion
he has discharged himself like a Master in these Arts, and an Ingenious
Mathematician, to whom I return thanks for this his generous offer in
presenting his Mathematical Treasury to the Public, and remain From my House
in Baldwin's Court in Baldwin's Gardens, over against the Old Hole in the Wall.


October 25. 1686. A true Lover of the Mathematical Sciences, and all such that
really delight in those pleasing (but useful) Speculations, Henry Coley.

Courteous Reader,
I Have perused this Treatise, and find that the Author has in every respect
discharged himself like an Artist; the Work throughout the whole, is very plain
and easy, nothing being omitted that might render it Intelligible to the
meanest capacity: And indeed, I know not any Treatise of this nature extant
that is more Practically handled, so that I doubt not but that it will be very
serviceable to the Public; and that thou in particular may find
encouragement in the perusal thereof, is the hearty wish of him who is

Thine and Truths Servant, John Hawkins, Philomath.
October. 30. 1686. 2h. 40' P. M.
To his learned and ingenious Friend Mr. John Tailor, in the deserved Praise of
his Excellent Book entitled The saurarium Mathematicae.
ATlas and Hercules whom Poets feign,
The heavy load of the Earth to sustain:
If so? great Toil and Labor then they took,
Yet not so much as thou have in thy Book.
Not like to them thy Labors, fictions are,
Thy works so true ingenious and so rare,
That seldom yet such works from man did flow,
For thou by them do teach us all to know
The secrets of all Sciences and Art,
Which freely unto us thou do impart.
Thou show us how Numbers to understand,
And how the Speech of Numbers to command.
Geometry, the Queen of truth, did cease
The Egyptian trouble, and did cause a peace;
When proudly Nile had overflown their ground,
And all their Bounds and Landmarks did confound:
By it, each man his proper Right did gain,
And Peace by it great Egypt did obtain.
This Art so conspicuous thou have made,
That to thy Glory it can never fade.
By Sines, Tangents and Secants thou do show
Us all the parts of Triangles to know.
Thy lofty Genius viewed the Stars on high,
So that full well thou know Astronomy.
All motions of the Sun and Planets thou
Do understand, thy works do show it now.
For thou such Rules and Precepts do apply,
In this thy Book unto Astronomy;
Demonstrated by rules so rare and plain,
That he is a Dunce that cannot it now obtain.
Thus having viewed the Spheres of Heaven well,
Then on our Mother Earth thy Genius fell.
Thou viewd'st her round, even by inspecting all
The known parts of the Cosometick Ball.
And here in this thy Book thou let'st us see,
How Nations all most disagreeing be.
The Seaman he adores thee as his Friend,
So liberal unto him thy Art does lend;
And thou from him wilt not thy Talent hide,
Thy Book's a Light-house Mariners to guide.
Surveying thou do teach and that so plain,
That any one that Art may well obtain:
And by that means Injustice to disband,
Attending Lord and Tenant of the Land.
To thee the Brooks and Springs do all submit,
And they will glide to that place thou think fit.
Thou show Mechanic well to apprehend,
To measure Board or Glass, nay as a Friend,
Teach them how both Timber round and square,
And Stones to measure of what kind so e're.
Therefore to thee they praises still will give,
And tho 'thy Body's dead thy Fame shall live.
The Art of Gauging thou do plainly teach,
And farther far than worthy Oughtred reach
Into the Mystery of that curious part,
And noble Branch of Mathematick Art.
Thou measurest the course of times short stay,
Thus Dials show us how time flies away;
That thereby we may mind our fading breath,
And preparation make for certain death.
Thy Book's also prepared Mars to withstand,
In raising Forts for to defend the Land.
In ordering Armies in Battle array,
And them Encamping when they make a stay.
The Gunner's Magazine lies in this Tract,
From whence directions he may have to sack,
Or storm a Town, or batter down a wall,
Or make a Breach and at the joyful fall
Of Turrets high Huzza's to make for joy,
And entering in, his Enemies destroy.
These curious Arts with more than here are named,
In this rich treasury so neatly framed,
Our friendly Author does to all impart,
Wishing success, and that with all his Heart.
But stop my Muse let us not be so rude,
We'll only wish him well and so conclude.
May thou, O Author of this Treasury,
Reap to thy self profit and praise thereby;
And may thou ever, ever happy be,
That we more of thy Learned works may see.
Live thou in splendid comfort to thy end,
So prays thy humble Servant, and thy Friend,
July 20. 1686. Geo. Barrow.

To the Learned Author my much respected Friend Mr. John Tailor on his
Herculean labors in the Composure of this Excellent Mathematical Treasury.
I ncrease our Muse, rouse up ye Sisters nine,
O n us bestow your Art that we may praise
H is works, his worth and his real design;
N ot honor vain, but skill aloft to raise.
Vain Glory's to him but a trifling Toy,
It Is Art alone, It Is that which is his Joy.
T he Earth he has traced, the Spheres of Heaven viewed
A nd Stars and Seas whose billows loud do roar;
Y et is he not nor can he be so rude,
L ike many others to lock up his store,
O h he does not! his Treasure open 'doth stand:
R eceive it as a Jewel from his Hand.
Our noble Friend and Author what is thy due?
Honor thou slight'st, Treasure's too vain for you.
Thy mind is fixed on Sciences above,
Thou art Urania's favorite and love.
Thou know her ways, her Art's at thy command,
She smiles upon thee, guides thee by the hand:
For which thy Name we will extol and praise,
As far as Phoebus sends his golden rays.
Therefore in happiness let thy time run,
And rest in Peace when that thy Period's come.
Sept. 27. 1686. Tho. Robinson.

An Acrostick on the Name of my much respected and ingenious Friend Mr. John
Tailor.
I f Mathematics be the Art to teach,
O by thy Book the Learned then may reach
H eavens Poles, and Circles without doubt or fear,
Not to find out each Star it is Hemisphere.
T hough Archimedes has much glory got
A among the Syracusians, why not,
Y ea Statues be erected to thy Name?
L et Eagles wings tower and soar thy fame.
O happy may thou be, and this thy Book
R eaders instruct when e're they in it look.
London, July 29. 1686. Fran. Pierce.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A LL Gentlemen, or other Persons that shall have occasion for any sort of
Mathematical Instruments, either for Sea or Land, may be furnished by John
Worgan, Mathema^ical Instrument-maker; under St. Dunstan's Church ^n
Fleet Street, London.

At St. George's Church in Southwark are taught Writing, Arithmetic, Merchants
Accounts, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy, Navi^ation, Surveying, Dialling,
Gauging and Gun^ery by John Hawkins, Philomath.

Arts and Sciences Mathematical, professed and taught by HENRY COLEY,
Philomath. at his House in Baldwins Court over against the Old Hole in the
Wall, in Baldwins Gardens near Grays-Inn-Lane.

ARITHMETIC in Whole Numbers and Vulgar Fractions. Decimal, and by Logarithms.

GEOMETRY. The Rudiments thereof, also the Demonstration and Practice,
according to the best Authors.

ASTRONOMY. The use of the Globes Celestial, and Terrestrial. To project the
Sphere in Plano to any Latitude several ways. To calculate the Longitude and
Latitude of the Planets, with their Declination and Ascension. Also the true
Time, Quantity, and Duration of Eclipses of the Luminaries for any time past or
to come.

TRIGONOMETRY. Or the Doctrine and Calculation of Triangles, both. -- Plain and
Spherical. With the Application of the several Cases thereof in the most useful
Questions in. -- Geometry. Astronomy. Geography. Navigation. Dyalling, etc

NAVIGATION. In either of the three principal kinds of Sailing, viz. by the
Plain and Mercator's Chart Great Circle.

DYALLING. Geometrically Instrumentally Arithmetically by The Sector, and other
convenient Scales. The Logarithms, Sines and Tan.

SURVEYING. Several ready ways to measure a Plat, and divide Land, etc. also
the taking of Altitudes, Profundities, Distances, etc. together with the
Mensuration of all manner of Superficies, as Boards, Glass and Pavement: also
all Solids, viz. Timber, Stone, etc. Regular and Irregular.

GAGING. To find the just quantity of Liquor in any Cask, whether full or
partly empty. Also the content or solidity of Brewers Vessels, etc. Tuns,
Coppers, Backs, Coolers, etc.

ASTROLOGY. In all its parts, and according to the best Authors, with several
varieties therein, not known to every Professor. Non nobis nati sumus.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. OF Arithmetic Page 1. CHAP. II. The Explanation and Use of the Table
of Logarithms. p. 18. CHAP. III. The Explanation of the Sines, Tangents and
Secants. p. 28. CHAP. IV. Of Geometry. p. 32. CHAP. V. Of Trigonometry, or the
Doctrine of Triangles. p. 59. CHAP. VI. Of Astronomy. p. 96. CHAP. VII. Of
Geography, with a Geographical Description of the Earthly Globe. p. 122. CHAP.
VIII Of Navigation. p. 186. CHAP. IX. Of Surveying. p. 214.

CHAP. X. Of Measuring Boards, Glass, Tiling, Paving, Timber, Stones and
Irregular Solids, such as Geometry can give no Rule for the Measuring thereof.
p. 242. CHAP. XI. Of Gauging. p. 250. CHAP. XII. Of Dialling. p. 255. CHAP.
XIII. Of Fortification, according to the modern and best ways now used by the
Italian, Dutch, French and English Inginiers. p.279 CHAP. XIV. Of Military
Orders, or the Embattelling and Encamping of Soldiers. p. 301. CHAP. XV. Of
Gunnery. p. 306. A Table of Logarithms. p. 337. A Table of Proportional Parts.
p. 401. A Table of Artificial Sines and Tangents. p. 417.

Arithmetic.
CHAP. I. Of ARITHMETIC.
ARITHMETIC is Omnia quaeeunque a primaeva rer^^m natura constructa sunt,
Numcrorum vid^ntur ratione formata. Hoc enim fuit principale in animo conditor
is exemplar. Boetiu^ Arith. lib. 1. cap. 2.
an Art of numbering well, for as magnitude, or greatness, is the subject of
Geometry, so is multitude, or number, that of Arithmetic.

I shall not in this place trouble you with the first Rudiments of Arithmetic,
as Numeration, Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and Division: because
they are already largely handled by many, as Mr. Leybourn, Mr. Wingate, and
diverse others, and also that then this Book would swell to too big a bulk for
the Pocket, and so my design would be frustrated; I shall therefore only
propose and operate some principal Propositions, that are of Special moment in
Arithmetic, and which most immediately concern the other following parts of
this Treatise.

SECTION I. The Explication of some Arithmetical Propositions.
PROPOSITION I. To three numbers given, to find a fourth in a Direct proportion.
To operate this proportion Multiply the^ third term, by the second term, and
their product divide by the first term, the Quotient shall be a fourth term
required. Examp. 1. Admit the Circumference of a Circle whose Diameter is 14
parts be 44 parts, what is the Circumference of that Circle, whose Diameter is
21 parts? Now according to the Rule if you multiply the third term 21, by the
second term 44, it produces 924; which divided by the first Term 14, the
Quotient is 66, and so the Circumference of the Circle, whose Diameter is 21,
will be 66 parts, and so for any other in a direct proportion.

PROP. II. To three numbers given, to find a fourth in an Inversed proportion.
To operate this proportion, Multiply the first term, by the second term, and
their product divide by the third term, the Quotient is the fourth term
required: Examp. Admit that 100 Pioneers, be able in 12 hours to cast a More of
a certain length, breadth, and depth; in what time shall 60 Pioneers do the
same? Now if according to the Rule, you Multiply the first term 100, by the
second term 12, their product is 1200; which divided by the third term 60, the
Quotient is 20, so I say that in 20 hours, 60 Pioneers shall do the same, and
so for any other in an Inversed proportion.

PROP. III. To three numbers given, to find out a fourth in a Duplicate
proportion.
The nature of this proposition is to discover the proportion of Lines, to
Superficies, and Superficies, to Lines; for like Plains are in a duplicate
Ratio; that is as the Quadret of their Homologal sides; therefore to Operate
any Example in this proportion, Square the third term, and its square multiply
by the second Term, their product divide by the square of the first Term, the
Quotient is the 4th. term sought; Examp. Admit there be two Geometrical
squares; now if the side of the greater square be 50 feet, and require 3000
Tiles to pave it; what number shall the lesser square require, whose side is 30
feet? To operate this according to the Rule, I square the third Term 30, whose
square is 900: then I multiply it by the second Term 3000, its product is
2700000, which divided by 2500, the square of the first Term 50, the Quotient
is 1080, and so many Tiles will pave the lesser square, whose side is 30 feet.

PROP. IV. To three numbers given, to find a fourth in a Triplicate proportion.
THE nature of this proposition is to discover the proportion of Lines to
Solids, and Solids to Lines; for like Solids, are in a Triplicate Ratio, that
is to the Cubes, of their Homologal sides: Therefore to operate any Question in
this proportion, Cube the third Term, and his Cube multiply by the second Term,
and their product divide by the Cube of the first Term; the Quotient is the
fourth Term sought. Examp. Admit an Iron Bullet whose diameter is 4 Inches,
weigh 9 pounds; what is the weight of that Bullet whose Diameter is 6 Inches?
Now to operate this proportion; first according to the Rule I Cube the third
Term 6 whose Cube is 216, then I multiply its Cube by the second Term 9, the
product is, 1944, which divided by 64, the Cube of the first Term; the Quotient
is 30 24/64 pounds which is equal unto 30l. 6 ounces: which is the weight of
the propounded shot; and so for any other.

PROP. V. To two numbers given, to find out a third, fourth, fifth, sixth, etc.
Numbers in a continual proportion.
To operate this proportion, you must multiply the second number by it self,
and that product divide by the first Term, the Quotient is a third
proportional: Again you must multiply the third Term by it self, and its
Quadret divide by the second Term, the Quotient is a fourth proportional, and
so after this manner a fifth, sixth; or as many more proportionals as you
please may be found: Examp. Let it be required to find six numbers in a
continual proportion to one another; as 4 to 8. To operate this first according
to the Rule, I multiply the second Term 8 by it self the product is 64, which
divided by the first Term 4, the Quotient is 16: so is 4, 8, and 16 in a
continual proportion; And so observing the Rules prescribed, proceed in your
operation until you have found your six numbers in a continual proportion;
which in this Example will be 4, 8, 16, ^2, 64, and 128, and so will you have
formed six numbers in a continual proportion.

PROP. VI. Between two numbers given, to find out a mean Arithmetical
proportional.
THIS proposition might be performed without the help of the rule of
proportion: nevertheless because it conduces to the Resolution of the next
ensuing proposition, I insert it in this place; To operate it this is the Rule:
add half the difference of the given Terms, to the lesser Term, so that
Agragate, is the Arithmetical mean required: Examp. Admit 20 and 50 to be the
two numbers propounded: Now to operate this proposition, first according to the
Rule, I find that the difference of the two given Terms 20, and 50, is 30,
whose half is 15, which being added to the lesser Term 20, it makes 35, so is
35, a mean Arithmetical proportion betwixt 20, and 50, given.

PROP. VII. Between two numbers given, to find out a mean Musical Proportional.
BOETHIUS has this Rule for it, wherefore take his own words: In his second
Book of his Arithmetic and the 38 Chapter; where he says that this proportion
has, Magnam vim in Musici modulaminis temperamentis, and in Speculatione
naturalium questionum: i. e. Great force in Musical composition, (or in the
Composure of Music) and in the discovery of the Secrets of Nature.
says he, Differentiam terminorum in minorem terminum multiplica, and post
junge terminos, and juxta cum qui inde confectus est; commit illum numerum,
qui ex differentiis and termino minore productus est, cujus cum latitudinem
inveneris, addas eam minori termino, and quod inde colligitur medium terminum
pones. That is, Multiply the difference of the Terms, by the lesser term, and
add likewise the same Terms together: this done if you divide the product, by
the sum of the Terms, and to the Quotient thereof, add the lesser Term; the
last Sum is the Musical mean desired: Examp. Admit the two numbers given be 6,
and 12. I say that if the difference of the Terms which is 6, were Multiplied
by the lesser Term 6, it would produce 36; then if you add the two terms 6, and
12, together: their sum would be 18, now if you divide 36, by 18, the Quotient
is 2; lastly if to the Quotient 2, you add the lesser Term 6, the sum thereof
will be 8, which is a Mean Musical proportional required.

PROP. VIII. How to find the Square-Root of any whole number, or Fraction.
Defin.
To Extract the Root of any Square number propounded, is to find out another
number, which being Multiplied by it self, produces the Number propounded. Now
for the more easy and ready Extraction of the Square-Root of any number given,
This Table here under annexed will be useful; which at first sight gives all
single Square numbers, with their respective Roots.

ROOT. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 SQUAR. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

The Explication of the Table.

In the uppermost rank of this Table, is placed the respective root of every
single Squarenumber, and in the other the single Squarenumbers themselves; so
that if the Root of 25 were demanded, the Answer would be 5, so the Square root
of 49, is 7, of 81 is 9; and so for the Rest, and so contrarily the Square of
the Root 5 is 25, of 7 is 49, of 9 is 81, etc.

Example: If the Square root of 20736, were required, first they being wrote
down in order as you see, draw the Crooked-line, As you use to do in Division
to represent the Quotient.
then to prepare this or any other number for Extraction, make a point over the
place of Unites; and so on every other figure toward the Left Hand; as you see
in the Margent. Then find the Root of ^
the first Square 2, which is 1; place it in the Quotient, and also under 2;
then draw a line, and substract 1 from 2, there remains 1; which place under
the line, then to the last remainder 1, bring down the next Square 07; and then
there will be this number 107, which number I call a Resolvend: Then double the
Root in the Quotient 1, whose double is 2, which 2 place under the place of
tens in the Resolvend, under 0; so is this 2 called a Divisor; and 10 called a
Dividend.

Then demand how often the Divisor 2, can be had in the Dividend 10, it
permits but of 4, which place in the Quotient, and under 7 the place of
Unites in the Resolvend, and there will appear this number 24; Then Multiply
this 24, by 4, (the last Square placed in the Quotient) it produces 96, which
place orderly under 24, as you see, and this 96 is called a Ablatitium; (but
some calls it a Gnomon:) then draw a line under it, and substract 96, the
Ablatitium, out of the Resolvend 107, there remains 11, which place orderly
under the last drawn line, then thereunto bring down the next Square 36, so
will there be a new Resolvend 1136; then double the whole Root 14 in the
Quotient, whose double is 28; place it under the Resolvend 1136 as was before
directed; so shall 28 be a new Divisor, and 113 be a Dividend; then I find the
Divisor 28 can be had in the Dividend 113, 4 times, which four place in the
Quotient, and under the place of Unites in the Resolvend, so there appears
this number 284, which number, multiplied by 4, the last figure in the
Quotient, produces a new Ablatitium 1136; which place orderly under the
Resolvend 1136, and then draw a line, then substract the Ablatitium 1136, from
the Resolvend 1136; and the remainder is 00, or nothing: and thus the work of
Extraction being finished, I find the Root of the Square number 20736, to be
144; and so must you have proceeded gradually step by step, if the number
propounded, had consisted of some 4, 5, 6, or more Squares; still observing the
aforegoing Rules and Directions.

NOTE.
BUT when a whole number, has not a Root exactly expressible by any rational
or true Number, then to find the fractional part of the Root very near; To the
given whole number annex pairs of Ciphers, as 00, 0000, or 000000, then esteem
the whole number, with the Ciphers both annexed thereunto, as one entire whole
number: and Extract the Root thereof according to the foregoing Directions,
then as many points as were placed over the Integers, so many of the first
figures in the Quotient must be taken for Integers; and the remainder for the
Roots fractional part in Decimal parts, and so you may proceed infinitely ne^r
the true Root of a Number.

To Extract the Square-Root of a Vulgar or Decimal Fraction, and a Mixt-number.
First if the Fraction propounded be not in its least Ter^^, reduce it, and
then by the Rules aforegoing, find the Root of the Numerator for a new
Numerator; and of the Denominato^ for a new Denominator; so shall this n^w
Fraction be the Square-root of the Vulgar Fraction propounded, so the
Square-root of 16/^ is 4/(...)

But many times the Numerator and Denominator of a Vulgar Fraction has not a
perfect Square-root; to find whose Root infinitely The manner of Extracting the
Square-root of a Decimal Fraction.
near, you must reduce it into a Decimal Fraction, whose Numerator must consist
of an equal number of places, to wit, 2, 4, 6, etc. Then Extra^^ the
Square-root of that Decimal, as if i^ were a whole number, and the Root that
procee^eth from it is a Decimal Fraction, pre^^ing the Square-root of the
Fraction proposed, infinitely near: so the Root of 13/16 (whose De^^ma is,
81250000) will be found to be (...) which is very near, for it wants not
1/10000 of an Unite of the exact Squareroot, of 13/16 propounded.

Now having a Mixed Number propounded whose Ro^^ is required, ^o find which
reduce it The manner of Extracting the Square root of a M^x^-Number.
into an improper Fraction, and then Extract the Root thereof as before.
Suppose the Number propounded be 75 24/54; its improper Fraction is 679/9,
whose Square-root I find to be 26/3. or 8, very near, etc. But if it had not an
Exact Square-root, then reduce the Fractional part of the given Mixt-number
into a Decimal Fraction, of an even number of places, and then annex this
Decimal to the Integers, and so Extract the same, as a whole number; and
observe that so many points as were set over the Integers, so many of the first
figures in the Quotient must be esteemed Integers; and the Remainder for the
Roots Fractional part.

PROP. IX. How to find the Cube-Root of any whole Number, or Fraction.
Defin.
To Extract the Cube-Root of any Number propounded, is to find out another
Number, which being multiplied by it self, and that product by the number
again, shall produce the number propounded; Now for the more easy and ready
Extraction of the Cube-root of any number propounded, this Table hereafter
annexed will be useful, which at first sight gives the Cube-root of any whole
number under 1000; which are called single Cube-numbers.

ROOT. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 CUBE. 1 8 27 64 125 216 343 512 729

The Explication of the Table.

In the uppermost rank of the Table is placed the respective Roots of every
single Cube, and in the other the respective single CubeNumbers; for if the
Cube-root of 512 were desired, the Answer would be 8, of 64 is 4; and so of the
rest: and if the Cube of the Root 7 were desired, it would be found 343; of 9
it would be 729, etc.

Examp. Admit the Cube root of the Number 262144, were required, first they
being wrote down in order as you see, draw the Crooked-line.

Then place a point over As you use to do in Division, to represent the
Quotient.
the place of Unites, and another over the place of Thousands; and so on still
intermitting two places between every adjacent point; and observe that as many
points, as in that order are placed over any number propounded, of so many
figures does the Root consist of: so that in this ^
Example, there being two points, therefore the Root consists of two places
as you see in the Quotient; Now first find the Root of the first Cube 262;
which permits but of 6, place 6 in the Quotient, and subscribe its Cube 216,
under 262, and then draw a line under it, and substract 216, out of 262, and
the remainder is 46, which place in order under the last drawn line as you see.
Then to the Remainder 46, bring down the next Cube-number 144, so will there
appear 46144, which I call a Resolvend: then draw a Line under it, and square
the Number in the Quotient 6, whose square is 36; Then Triple it and it will be
108, Then subscribe this Triple square 108, under the Resolvend, so that the
place of Unites in the Triple Square 8, may stand under 1 the place of Hundreds
in the Resolvend: Then Triple the Root in the Quotient 6, whose Triple is 18,
Then subscribe the Triple 18, under the Resolvend, so that the place of Unites
8 in the Triple, may stand under 4 the place of Tens in the Resolvend, and so
draw a Line under neath it, and add the Triple Square 108, and the Triple 18
together in such order as they stand, their Sum is 1098, which may be called a
Divisor, and the whole Resolvend 46144, except 4 the place of Unites a
Dividend; then draw another line.

Then seek how many times 1098 the Divisor, can be had in 4614 the Dividend, it
permits but of 4, which subscribe in the Quotient; Now Multiply the Triple
square 108, by 4, it produces 432, which in order subscribe under the Triple
square 108: Then square 4, the figure last placed in the Quotient, whose square
is 16; and Multiply it by 18 the Triple, it produces 288, which subscribe
under the Triple orderly, then subscribe the Cube of 4 (last placed in the
Quotient) which is 64, in Order under the Resolvend. Then draw a ^ine
underneath it, then add the three numbers, viz. 432, 288, and 64, together in
such order as they are placed, their sum is 46144: Then draw another line under
the Work, subtracting the said total 46144, from the Resol^end 46144, there
remains 00, or nothing, which remainder subscribe under the last drawn ^ine,
thus the work being finished I find the Cube root of 262144 the number
propounded, to be 64: And thus you must have proceeded orderly step by step, if
the number propounded ^ad arisen to some 3, 4, 8, 10, or more places, observing
the direction prescribed until all had ^bserved completed.

NOTE.
BUT when a whole number, has not a Cube-root expressible by any true or
Rational number, then to proceed infinitely near the Exact truth annex to the
number Tenaries of Ciphers as 000, 000000, 000000000, etc. then esteeming the
whole number with the Ciphers annexed as one entire whole Number, Extract the
root thereof, as is before taught. Then as many points as were placed over the
Whole Number, so many places of Integers will there be in the Root, and the
rest expresses the Root his Fractional part very near.

To Extract the Cube-Root, of any Vulgar or Decimal or Mixed Fraction consisting
of a Whole Number and a Fraction.
To Extract the Cube-root of any Vulgar Fraction, you must first reduce it into
his least terms, and then according to the former directions Extract the
Cube-root of the Numerator, the Root found shall be a new Numerator so likewise
the Root of the Denominator shall become a new Denominator; so shall this new
Fraction be the Cube-root of the Fraction propounded, so I find the Cube-root
of 8/125 to be 2/51 and so for any other Vulgar Fraction.

But many times the Numerator, and Denominator, The manner of Extracting the
Cube-Root of a De^imal Fraction.
has not a true Root: Then to find the Root thereof infinitely near, you must
reduce the Fraction given, into a Decimal, whose numerator is Tenaries of
places, and then Extract the Root according to the former Directions, so shall
the Root found, be a Decima^ Fraction expressing near the Cube-root of the
Fraction propounded, so I find the Root of 8/12 or, whose Decimal is,
666666666, to be, 873/1000 very near the Root of 8/12 or propounded.

Now having a Mixtnumber propounded, The manner of Extracting the Cube-Root of
a Mixt-number.
whose Root is required, first reduce it into an Improper Fraction, and then
Extract the Cuberoot thereof, as is before directed, so the Cuberoot of 12
10/27, Improper 343/27, will be found to be 7/3 or 2.

But if it has not an Exact Cube root, Then Reduce the Fractional part of the
given Mixtnumber into a Decimal Fraction, which shall consist of Tenaries of
places, Then to the whole number annex the Decimal Fraction, and Extract the
Cube-root of the Whole, and observe that so many points as are over the
Integers, so many of the first places in the Quotient must be Esteemed
Integers, and the rest Expresses the Fractional part of the Root in Decimal
parts of a Fraction, so the Cube-root of 2, Decimal 2, 375000000 etc. will be
found to be 1, 334, or 1 334/1000, and is very near the true Root, and so for
any other Mixt-number of this nature.

CHAP. II. The Explication, and use of the Tables of LOGARITHMS.
SECT. I. The Explication of the Tables of the Logarithms, and of parts
proportional.
THE Logarithms, were first invented, Defin.
found out and framed, by that never to be forgotten and thrice Honorable
Lord, the Lord Nepeir: which Numbers, so found out and framed by his diligent
industry he was pleased to call Logarithms; which in the Greek signifies the
Speech of Numbers, I shall not here trouble you with the manner or the
Construction of those Tables of Logarithms but shall first lay down some brief
and general Rules, that thereby the better you man Understand those Tables, and
then I shall e^plain their manifold uses, in sundry Examples Arithmetical, etc.

PROP. I. Any Number given under 10000, or 100000, to find the Logarithm
corresponding thereunto.
1. If the number propounded consist of one place whose Logarithm is required
to be found, as suppose (5,) look for 5, in the top of the left hand Column
under the Letter Signifies the Number, or figure sought.
N, and right against 5, and in the next Column under LOG. Signifies the
Logarithm answering to the number Opposite.
you will find this number or rank of figures, 0698970, which is the Logarithm
of the number 5 required.

2. If the number consists of two places as if it were 57, look 57 under N,
and opposite to it and under LOG. you will find this number 1. 755875, which is
the Logarithm of 57, the number propounded.

3. If the number propounded consist of three places as 972, look for 972,
under N, and opposite to 972, and under ^o) the Column, you shall find this
number 2. 987666, which is the Logarithm of 972, the number which was
propounded.

4. But if the number consist of four places as 685, look the three first
figures 168, under the Column N, and opposite to that, and un^er 5 at the top
of the page, you will find this number 3. 226599, which is the Logarithm of
1685, the number propounded.

5. But if the number Note this Rule well, for this explains the use of the
Table of proportional parts, printed at the end of this Book.
given be above 10000, and under 100000, you may find its Logarithm by the
Table of parts proportional, printed at the latter end of this Book. Thus if
the Logarithm of 35786, be sought, first seek the Log. of 3578, which will be
553649, and the common Difference under D is 121; with this difference 121,
Enter the Table of parts proportional, and finding 121 in the first Column
under D, you may then lineally under 6, find the number 72, which add to the
Log. of 3578, that is 553649, it produces, 553712, which is the Log. of 35786
the number propounded: now because the number propounded 35786, arises to the
place of X. M. therefore there must be the figure 4 prefixed before its
Logarithm, and then it will be thus 4, 553712, which 4, is called the Index, as
shall be hereafter showed.

Now before we proceed to find numbers corresponding to Logarithms, it will be
necessary to explain the meaning of the first figure to the left hand of any
Logarithm placed, Mr. Briggs calls it a Characteristick Definition. The Rule
to find the Characteristick or Index appertaining to any Logarithm.
or Index, which does represent the distance of any the first figure of any
whole number from Unity, whose Index is 0, a Cipher; so the Index o^ 10 is 1,
and so to 100 whose Index is 2, and s^ to 1000 whose Index is 3, and so to
10000 whose Index is 4, and so if you persist furthe^ the Characteristick is
always one less in dignity than the places or figures os the number propounded.

PROP. II.
To find the Logarithm belonging to a Vulgar Fraction, and a Mixed number.

First as is before showed if it be a Vulgar Fraction, find the Log. of the
Numerator, and the Log: of the Denominator, then substract the Log: of the
Numerator, from the Log: of the Denominator, the remainder ^
is the Log: of the Fraction propounded: Now if you would find the Logarithm of
5/7, do as is prescribed whose Log. I find to be 0. 146121, Now to find the
Log. of a Mixed Number, reduce it into an Improper Fraction, and then do as
before, so the Log of 15, Improper 77/5;, is 1, 187, 52, and so do for any
other Mixed number.

PROP III. A Logarithm propounded to find the whole, or Mixed number,
corresponding thereunto.
For the more speedy finding the number, answering unto the Logarithm
propounded, observe that if the Index be 0, then the Number sought may be found
between 1 and 10; If 1, between 10 and 100; if 2, between 100, and 1000; if 3
between 1000 and 10000, and so on still observing the Rules of the
Characteristick, or Index, therefore loo, in the Table until you find the
Logarithm proposed, and against it in the Margent according to the aforegoing
directions under N, you shall find the number belonging thereunto. This Rule
holds in force in Mixed Numbers also.

Thus. 0. 845098 1. 556302 2. 130334 3. 980276 Are the Logarithms of, 7 36 135
9556

NOTE.
But if you cannot find the Logarithm exactly in the Table, as in many
operations it so happens, you must then take the nearest Logarithm Number to
the Logarithm propounded, and so take the number belonging thereto ^or the
desired number.

SECT. II. Of the Admirable use of the Logarithms in Arithmetic.
PROP. I. To Multiply one number by another.
Admit 90, be to be multiplied by 42, what is the product? To find which first
find the Log. of the Multiplicand 90, whose Log. is 1. 95424: Then find the
Log. of ^
the Multiplier 42, whose Log: is 1 62324, then add these two Log: together,
viz. the Log: of the Multiplicand, and Multiplier, their sum is 3, 57748, which
is the Log: of 3780, the product of 90; and 42, Multiplied together.

PROP. II. To Divide one number by another.
Admit the Dividend (or number to be divided) be 648, and the Divisor 72, what
is the number that the Quotient shall consist off? To find which, first write
down the Logarithm of the Dividend 648, which is 2. 81157 and also write down
the Logarithm of the Divisor 72, which is 1. ^
85733. Now substract the Log: of the Divisor, out of the Log: of the Dividend,
the remainder is 0. 95424, which is the Logarithm of 9, so I conclude that the
Divisor 72, is contained in the Dividend 648, 9 times, and so do for any other.

PROP. III. To find the Square-Root of a Number.
Admit it be required to Extract the SquareRoot of the Number 144, to perform
which first write down the Log: of 144 which is 2. 15836. Then take the half
thereof which is 1. 07918 which number 1. 07918, is the Log: of 12, the Root of
144 propounded, and so do for any other.

NOTE.
Now on the Contrary by doubling the Log. of any number, you have the
Geometrical Square thereof.

PROP. IV. To find the Cube Root of any Number.
Admit it be required to Extract the Cube Root of 1728, to perform which, First
write down the Log of 1728 which is 3. 23754, then take the third part thereof
which is 1. 07918, which is the Log. of 12; which is the Cuberoot of the Number
propounded 1728, and so for any other. Note on the contrary if you multiply the
Log. of any Number propounded by 3, it produces the Log. of the Cube thereof.

PROP. V. A Sum of Money being forborne for any number of years, to find how
much it will amount unto, reckoning Interest on Interest, according to any Rate
propounded.
Admit 300 pounds Sterling, be put out for 4 years, for Compound Interest at 6
l. per Cent. what will it amount to when the four years are expired? To find
which substract the Log of ^00 l. the principal, whose Log. is 2. 477121, out
of the Log. of 318 l. Principal and Interest for a year whose Log. is 2.
502427, the remainder is 0. 025306, which being multiplied by 4, the number of
years of its continuance, produces 0. 101224, which added to the Log. of the
principal 300l. to wit, to 2. 477121, makes ^, 578345, which is the Log. of 378
l. 14 s. 10d. 2q. very near, and so much will 300 l. amount to.

PROP. VI. A Sum of Money being to be paid hereafter, to find what it is worth
in ^eady Money.
Admit 100 pounds Sterling, to be paid at 30 years end; I demand how much it is
worth in ready Money? after the rate of Interest of 6 l. per Cent. To find
which substract the Logarithm of 100 the principal, whose Log. is 2. 000000
from the Log. of 106 Principal and Interest, whose Log. is 2. 025306, the
remainder is 0 025306, which Multiplied by 30 the number of years to succeed,
produces 0. 759180, which subtracted out of 2. 000000, leaves 1. 240820,
which is the Log. of 17 411/1000, which shows the said 100 l. is worth but 17
l. 8s. 2d 3q. fere.

PROP. VII. A yearly rent, or Annuity to continue any number of years, to find
what it is worth in ready Money, at any Rate of Interest propounded.
What is 100 pound per annum to continue 30 years, worth in ready money at 6 l.
per Cent. To find which first substract the Log of 100 l. the principal, which
is 2. 000000 from the Log. of 106 l principal and interest for a year, whose
Log. is 2. 025306 the remainder is 0. 025306: Then Multiply 0. 025306, by 30
the number of years of its continuance, it produces the number 0. 759180; Then
Divide 100 l. by 6 the rate of interest and the Quotient is 16 6667/10000, etc.
which: 16 6667/10000, is the proportional parts of 100 l. the principal, then
add the Log. thereof which is 1. 221829 to the former Log. 0. 759180 it
produces 1. 981009, which is the Log. of 95 7215/10000 parts the Arrearages
with the said some for that Time, then from those Arrearages 95 7215/10000,
substract the parts proportional of 100, to wit 16 6667/10000, the remainder is
79 ^^48/10000, which is the bare Arrearages for that proportional part; Then
take the Log. of 79 0548/10000, which is 1. 897929, out of the which take the
Log. found by Multiplication of years, to wit 0. 759180, there remains 1.
138749, which is the Log. of the value of the Arrearages in ready money, Then
to the Log. 1. 138749, add the Log. of 100 l. principal, 2. 000000, it
produces this number 3. 138749; the Log. of 137 6 48/100, reduced is 1376 l.
9. sh. 7d. 80/100 or fere: and so much is the said Annuity worth in ready money.

CHAP. III. The Explication of the SINES, TANGENTS, and SECANTS.
SECT. I. Of Right Signs, Tangents, Secants, Cosines, Tangents, and Secants: Of
any Arch, or Angle of a Triangle.
PROP. I. To find the right Sine, or Tangent of any Arch or Angle of a Triangle
containing any number of Degrees and Minutes.
IF the Angle or And here'tis necessary to understand, that every Circle is
supposed to be divided into 360 Equal parts which are called Degrees, and every
of those Degrees into 60 Minutes, and every Minute into 60 Seconds, and every
Second into 60 Thirds, etc. so that a Semicircle contains 180 Degrees, and a
Quadrant 90 Degrees; Now an Arch or Angle of a Triangle, is the Intersection of
its two sides, and the measure thereof, is an Arch of a Circle, which cutteth
each of the two sides equidistant from the Angular point, (which is the
Center.) Now the Logarithm Sine, or Tangof any such Arch of a Triangle,
containing any Number of Degrees or Minutes of the Quadrant, may be found in
the Tables, printed at the End of this Book, where they are plainly expressed,
and are found as directed in the precedent Rules.
Arch of the Triangle propounded beless than 45 Degrees. the Sine, or Tangent
belonging thereunto, is found in the Column under the Title SINE, or TANGENT,
at the top of the Table; and if there be any Minutes annexe^d unto the Degrees,
you must find them out in the first Column under M. signifying Minutes, and
opposite to those Minutes, and under the title aforesaid, you shall have the
Logarithm of the Sine or Tangent, of the Arch or Angle required.

But if the Arch or Angle of a Triangle exceed 45 Degrees, you must then look
for the Sine or Tangent belonging thereunto, in the bottom of the said Table,
and if thereunto are Minutes annexed, you must look for them in the first
Column to the Right hand under M. and so opposite to those Minutes in the
Column above the Title, Sine, or Tang; there have you the Log. of the Sine, or
Tangent, of the Arch or Angle, of the Triangle propounded.

Examp. Suppose it were required to find the Log-Sine or Log-Tangent; of an
Angle of 25 D. 37 M. whose Log Sine, whereof according to the former directions
I find to be 9. 635833. and Tangent thereof to be 9. 680768. and so for any
other under 45 degrees.

Again, suppose it were required to find the Log-Sine or Log-Tangent, of an
Angle of 64D. 23M the Sine whereof, I find to be this number'9, 955065, and the
Tangent thereof, 10. 319231, and so for any other Arch, or Angle of a Triangle,
above 45 degrees.

PROP. II. To find the Cosine or Co-Tangent of any Arch, or Angle propounded.
Defin.
The Cosine or Co tangent, of an Angle or Arch, is the remaining part of the
Angle propounded, to a Quadrent or 90 Degrees; and is by some called the
Complement of an Angle, thus the Arch or Angle of 64D. 23M. taken out of 90D.
leaves 25D. 27M. for its Complement, on the contrary if 25D. 37M. were taken
out of 90 Degrees, there would remain 64D. 23M. for its Complement. So you see
that these two Angles, are the Complements of each other, because they two are
equal to a Quadrent or 90 Degrees.

Now the Logarithm of the Complement, may be exactly found with ease, for the
Sines and Tangents of every degree, and Minute of the Quadrent in one Column is
joined with his Complement in the next Column, so that without substracting the
Angle from 90D. you may readily find the Complement thereof either the Arch in
Degrees and Minutes, or the Log. Sine, or Tangent thereof, as you have
occasion: Thus the Log. of the Sines Complement before mentioned, to wit, 64D.
23M. Comp. is 25D. 37M. is 9. 635833, Tang. is 9. 680768; so 64D. 23M. is the
others Compl. whose Sine is 9. 955065, and his Tang. is 10, 319231; so for any
other.

PROP. III. To find the Secant of any Arch or Angle propounded.
In this little Book I have not room to set down the Tables of Artificial
Secants at large, as I have done with the Sines and Tangents: Nevertheless I
will not here omit to show how they may be easily found out, by the Tables of
Sines. The method is thus, substract the Logarithm Sine, of the Sines compl of
an Angle, from the double Radius of the Tables, and the remainder shall be the
Secant required: As if I desire the Secant of 25D. 37M. I find the
Logarithm-sine of his complement to be 9. 955065, which subtracted from the
double Radius, that is 20. 000000: there remains 10, 044935 which is the Secant
of it, and so the Secant of 64D. 23M. is 9. 955065; which is the Complement of
the former, because they both are Equal to 20. 000000, the double Radius; and
so may any other be found out.

CHAP. IV. Of GEOMETRY.
Defin.
THE End and Scope of Geometry is to measure well: for as Number or Multitude,
is the Subject of Arithmetic: so is Magnitude that of Geometry: to measure
well is therefore to consider the Nature of every thing that is to be measured;
to compare such like things one with another: and to understand their Reason
and proportion, and also their similitude: And this is the End and Scope of
Geometry Quod quaeritur cognoscendi illius gratia, quod semper est, non and
ejus quod oritur, quandoque and interit. Geometria, ejus quod est semper,
Cognitio est. Ac tollet igitur (o Generose vir) ad veritatem, animum: atque
ita, ad Philosophandum prepar^vit cogitationem, ut ad supera convertamus: quae
nunc, contra quam decet, ad inferiora dejicimus, etc. Plato lib. 7. de Rap.
.

I shall not trouble you with the Definitions of Geometry, they being largely
handled by many, and herein every one meanly conversant in the study of the
Mathematics is acquainted, but shall immediately fall in hand with the
principal Propositions, which chiefly concern the other following parts of this
treatise.

SECT. I. The Explication of some Geometrical Propositions.
PROP. I. To erect a perpendicular on any part of a line assigned.
LET the Line be A, B, and on the point D, Fig. 1,
it is required to raise a perpendicular to A, B, To operate which first open
your Compasses to any convenient distance, and placing one foot thereof in D,
with the other make the two marks C, and E, equidistant from D; then open the
Compasses to some other convenient distance, and set one foot in E, and
describe the Arch FF; then likewise in C, describe the Arch GG, then through
the Intersections of these two Arches, and to the point D, draw H D,
perpendicular to A B; as was required.

PROP. II. To Erect a Perpendicular, on the End of a Line.
Let the given line be A B, and on the End Fig. 2,
thereof at B, it is required to raise a Perpendicular line: To perform which
open your Compasses to the distance B D, then on B as a Center, describe the
Arch D, E, F, then from D, to E, place BD; then placing one foot in E, describe
the Arch CF, then remove your Fig. 2.
Compasses to F, and draw the Arch CE; Lastly through their Intersection draw C
B, which is a Perpendicular to AB, on the end B; as required.

PROP. III. From a Point above to let fall a Perpendicular on a Line.
Let the line given be B A, and it is required Fig. 3.
from the point above at C; to let fall a Perpendicular to the said Line: To
perform which place one foot of your Compasses in C, and open them beyond the
given line A B, and describe the Arch OF; divide OF, into two parts in D;
Lastly draw CD, which shall be perpendicular unto AB, falling from the point
above at C, as was so required.

PROP. IV. To draw a right line Parallel to a right line, at any distance
assigned.
Let the distance assigned be O E, and the Fig. 4.
Lime given be A B, and it is required to draw C D, Parallel to A B; at the
distance O E: To perform which, take in your Compasses the distance O E, and on
A, describe the Arch H, and on B, the Arch K; then draw C D, so as it may
justly touch the two Arches, but cut them not, so shall C D; be parallel to A
B, at the assigned distance O E, as was required.

PROP. V. To Protract an Angle of any Quantity of Degrees propounded.
Let it be required to Protract, or lay down an Angle, of 40 degrees: To
perform which first draw a right line as A B, then open y^^r Compasses to 60
degrees, in your line of Chords: and with that Distance on A, describe Fig. 5.
the Arch E F, then take 40 degrees in your Compasses out of your line of
Chords, and place it on the Arch, from F, to H; Lastly through the point H, and
from A draw A C; so shall the Angle CAB contain 40 degrees as required.

PROP. VI. To measure an Angle already protracted.
Let the Angle given be C A B, and it is ^equired to find the Quantity thereof:
To ^erform which take in your Compasses 60 de^rees from your line of Chords;
and on A, Fig. ^.
^escribe the Arch OF; then take in your Com^asses the Distance FH, and apply
it to your (...)ne of Chords; and you will find the Angle, (...) AB to contain
40 degrees.

PROP. VII. To divide an Angle into two Equal parts.
Let the Angle given be BAC, and it is required to divide it into two equal
parts: To perform which do thus: first take in your Compasses any convenient
distance, and placing one foot in A, describe the Arch FKHE, Fig. 6.
then on H, describe the Arch KK, and on K, the Arch HH; lastly through the
Intersections of these two Arches, draw the line AD, to the Angular point A; so
shall the Angle BAC, be divided into two equal parts, viz. BA^, and DAC; as
required.

PROP. VIII. To divide a right line into any Number of Equal or Unequal parts;
or like to any divided line propounded.
Let the line A B, be given to be divided into 5 equal parts; as the line CD.
To perform which do thus: first on the point C, draw out a line making an Angle
with CD at pleasure: then make CF, equal to AB; and join their Extremities FD,
then draw Parallel lines Fig. 7.
to FD, through all the 5 points of CD, (by the 4 prop. aforegoing) which shall
divide AB, into 5 equal parts; as required: This way is to be observed, when
the line given to be divided, is greater than the divided line propounded.

CASE II.
But if AB, be shorter than the given divided line CD; take the line AB, in
your Compasses, and on D strike the Arch F, then Fig. 8.
draw the Tangent CF, then take the nearest distance from the first division of
CD, to the Tangent-line CF, which distance shall divide AB Those two
propositions well understood, does demonstrate many other propositions, and
thereon is grounded the use of the Sector.
into 5 equal parts, as the given divided line CD; as required.

PROP. IX. How to Protract or lay down any of the Regular Figures, called
Polygons.
To perform which divide 360 degrees, (the number of degrees in a Circle) by
the number of the Poligon his sides: as if it be a Pentagon by 5, if a Hexagon
by 6, etc. the Quotient is the Angle of the Center; its Complement to 180D. (or
a Semi circle) is the Angle at the Figure, half whereof is the Angle of the
Triangle at the Figure: Now I will show how to delineate any Poligon three
ways, viz. 1 by the Angle at the Center, 2. by the Angle at the Figure, 3. by
the Angle of the Triangle at the Figure: I have hereunto annexed a Table, which
gives at the first sight, (without the trouble of Division) 1. the quantity of
the Angle at the Center; 2. the quantity of the Angle at the Figure; and 3 the
Quantity of the Angle at the Triangle of the Figure, from a Triangle to a
Decigon.

Names of the Poligons. Sides Angles at the Center Angles at the Figure Angles
at the Trian. D M D M D M Triangle 3 120 00 60 00 30 00 Square 4 90 00 90 00 45
00 Pentagon 5 72 00 108 00 54 00 Hexagon 6 60 00 120 00 60 00 Heptagon 7 51 43
128 34 64 17 Octogon 8 45 00 135 00 67 30 Nonigon 9 40 00 140 00 70 00 Decigon
10 36 00 144 00 72 00

CONSTRUCTION I.
First by the Angle at the Center, to delineate a Hexagon, whose Angle at the
Center is 60 degrees, first lay down an Angle of 60 degrees. (...) 9.
(by prop. the 5. aforegoing) making its sides of a convenient length at
pleasure, then take such a distance from O the Center of the figure, equally on
both sides, as may make the third side equal to the side of the Poligon given;
which here is 100 parts: But this in a Hexagon need not be done, because the 3
sides of the Triangle are equal, but in all other Poligons it must be done.
Then divide the third side equally into two equal parts, and draw a line
through it, from the Center: set each half of the side of the Poligon 100, to
wit 50, on each from the middle of the third line. But if the third line do
exceed or be short of the side of the Poligon propounded, then by parallels on
each side, cut the sides of the Triangle, till you have found by those
Intersections where to set the line proposed, in any Poligon, etc.
thus having placed the side of the Hexagon PP, 100 parts, in order; describe
the whole Hexagon PPPPPP, as was required.

CONSTRUCTION II.
Now by the Angle of the Figure, to delineate any regular Poligon, Let it be
required to protract a Hexagon, whose side as before is 100 parts; first I draw
a line and make it 100 of those parts, then I sind in the precedent Table the
Angle of a Hexagon at the figure to be 120 degrees: Then on each side of the
drawn line, I lay down an Angle of 120 degrees. (according to the 5 precedent
propositions) and so work 6 times, (or as many times as your Poligon has
sides) making each side 100 parts, Fig. 10.
and each Angle 120 degrees; so shall you have enclosed the Poligon PPPPPP, as
required.

CONSTRUCTION. III.
To Protract or lay down a Hexagon, or any other regular Poligon, by the Angle
of the Triangle, do thus; First draw the side of the Fig. 11
Hexagon P P, make it 100 parts. I find in the precedent Table that the Angle
of the Triangle is 60 degrees; then at each end of the line P P, I lay down an
Angle of 60 Observe these Rules well, for you will find them of infinite use in
Fortification, etc.
degrees. (by prop. 5. precedent) and continue the two lines PO, and PO; until
they intersect each Fig. 11.
other in O: then on O, as a Center (OP: being Radius) describe a Circle, and
within it describe the Hexagon PPPPPP, as you see in the figure: and so may you
delineate any other Poligon: whose Angels from a Triangle, to a Decigon, are
all specified in the precedent Table.

PROP. X. To divide a line according to any assigned proportion.
Admit the right line given to be AB, and it is required to divide the same into
two parts, bearing proportion the one to the other as the lines E, and F does:
To perform which, first draw the line CD, equal to the given line AB: Then draw
the line HC, from C, to contain Fig. 12.
an Angle at pleasure. Then from C to G, place the line F, and from G, to H,
place the line E: Then draw the line HD. And lastly, draw GK parallel to HD,
(by the 4 prop. precedent) so is the line DC, equal to AB, and divided into two
parts, bearing such proportion to each other, as the two given lines E, and F,
as was required.

PROP. XI. To two lines given, to find a third proportional to each of them.
Admit the two given lines be A and B, and Fig. 13.
it is required to find a third proportional to A, as A, to B: First make an
Angle at pleasure; as HIK. Then place the line B, from I, unto P; and the line
A, from I, unto L; and draw PL. then also place the line A, from I unto M, and
draw QM, parallel unto LP, (by 4 prop.) so shall the line IQ, be a third
proportional unto the two given lines A, and B, as was required. For as B, is
to A, so is A, unto the proportional found IQ.

PROP. XII. To three lines given to find out a fourth proportional unto them.
Admit the three given lines to be A, B, and C; and it is required to find a
third proportional to them, which shall have such proportion unto A, as B, has
unto C. To perform which, first make an Angle at pleasure as DKG, now seeing
the line C, has such proportion to B, as the line A, unto the line sought:
Therefore place Fig. 14.
the line C, from K, unto H and B, from K, to F, and draw FH. Again, place the
line A, from K, to I, and draw IE, parallel unto FH, (by 4 prop.) until it
cutteth DK, in E; so have you the line KE, a fourth proportional, as was
required. For as C, is unto B, so is A, unto the found line KE.

PROP. XIII. To find a mean proportional Line between any two right lines given.
Let the two given lines be A, and B, between which it is required to find a
mean proportional line. To perform which, first join the two lines A, and B
together, so as they make the right line CED: Then describe thereon a Fig. 15.
Semicircle CFD. Then on the point E, erect the perpendicular OF, (by 1 prop.)
to cut the limb of the Semicircle in F, so shall OF, be a mean proportional
line, between the two given lines A, and B, as required.

PROP. XIV. To find two mean proportional Lines between any two right Lines
given.
Let the two given lines be A, and B; between Fig. 16.
which it is required to find two mean proportionals. To perform which, first
make an And this of all other the Inventions of Plato, Apollonius, Sporus,
Architas, Diocles, Nicomedus; and many other famous Geometricians and
Philosophers, I like best for the ready performance of this Conclusion, whose
several Methods I could here describe, but for brevity sake do omit them.
Angle containing 90 degrees. making the sides CD, and CE of a convenient length:
then from C, place the line B, unto F, and the line A, from C, unto G; and draw
FG, which divide equally in H, and describe the Semicircle F K G. Then take
the line B in your Compasses, and placeing one soot in G, with the other make a
mark in the limb of the Semicircle in K, then draw ST, in such sort that it
may justly touch the Semicircle in K, and may cut through the two sides of the
Angle, equidistant from the Center of the Semicircle H; so shall SF, and TG,
be two mean proportionals, betwixt the two given lines A, and B, as required.

PROP. XV. To make a Geometrical square equal to diverse Geometrical squares.
Let there be given the 5 sides of five Geometrical Squares, viz. A, B, C, D,
E; and it is required to make one Geometrical Square, equal to the said five
Sqares: To perform which first make a Right Angle as ABC, making its contained
Fig. 17.
sides of a convenient length. Then from B, place A, to D, and from B, place B,
to E, and draw Ed. Then place Ed, from B, to F, and C, from B, to G; and draw
GF. Then place GF, from B, to H, and D, from B, to I; and draw ^H. Lastly from
B, unto K, place IH, and from B, unto L, place the line E; and draw LK. So
shall LK, be the side of a Square, equal to the five Squares propounded.

PROP. XVI. To make a Circle equal to diverse Circles propounded.
Let the two Circles propounded be A, Fig. 18.
and B, and it is required to make a third Circle, ^e^ual to the said Circles
propounded. To perform which, first take the Diameter, of the lesser Circle A,
and place it as a Tangent, on the Diameter of the greater Circle B, at right
Angles; Fig. 18.
as ECD. Then draw the Diagonal ED, which divide equally in F, on which as a
Center describe the Circle K, making E D, the Diameter of which Circle K shall
be equal unto the two given Circles A, and B, as required So after the same
manner, may diverse Circles be added into one by the help of the former
proposition well understood.


SECT. II. Of Planometry, or the way to measure any plain Superfice.
PLanometry is that part of the Mathematics, derived from that Noble Science
Geometry, by which the Superficies or Planes of things are measured, and by
which their Superficial Content is found, which is done most commonly by the
Squares of such Measures, Viz. a Square Inch, Square Foot, Square Yard, Square
Pace, Square Perch, etc. That is whose side is an Inch, Foot, Yard, Pace, or
Perch Square. So that the Content of any Figure is said to be found, when you
know how many such Inches, Feet, Yards, Paces, etc. are contained therein: Thus
the End and Scope of Geometry is to measure well.

PROP. I. To find the superficial Content of a Geometrical square.
Let the side of the Square AA be 4 Perch, Fig. 19.
what is the Area, or superficial content thereof? To find which multiply its
side 4, by its self, it produces 16, which is the content of that Square AAAA,
propounded.

PROP. II. To find the superficial content of a Parallelogram, or long Square.
Multiply the length in parts, by the breadth in parts; the product is the
content thereof. So in the Parallelogram, or long Square ABCD, the length of
the side AB, or CD is 20 Paces, Fig. 20.
and the breadth AC, or BD is 10 paces, and his superficial content is
required. I say therefore if according unto the Rule, you multiply the length
20, by the breadth 10, it produces 200 Paces; which is the content of the
Parallelogram or long Square ABCD.

PROP. III. To find the superficial Content of any Right-lined Triangle.
Although right-lined Triangles are of several kinds, and forms; as first in
respect unto their Angles, they are either Right-angled, or Oblique-angled, i.
e. Acute-angled, or Obtuseangled. Secondly in respect of their sides, they are
either an Equilateral, Isosceles, or Scalenium Triangle: But now seeing they
are all measured by one and the same manner, I shall therefore add but one
Example for all; which take for a general Rule: which is,

Multiply the length of the Base, by the The Rule.
length of the Perpendicular, half their product is the Area or superficial
content thereof. So if the content of the Triangle ABC, be required. To find
which first from the Angle B, let fall the Perpendicular DB, on the Base AC,
(by prop. 3.. 1.) let therefore the length of the Fig. 21.
Perpendicular BD be 24, and the Base AC 44 parts. Now if the Base AC 44, were
multiplied by BD 24, the product is 1056, half whereof is 528, the Content of
the Triangle ABC, propounded.

PROP IV. To find the superficial Content of a Rhombus.
First let fall a Perpendicular from one of the Obtuse-angles, unto its
opposite side, (by prop. 3.. 1.) and then Multiply the length of the side
thereof, by the length of the Perpendicular, their product is the Content
thereof.

So in the Rhombus ABCD, the side AC, or BD is 16 Inches, and the Perpendicular
KC is Fig. 22.
14 Inches, which multiplied into the side 16, produces 224 Inches; which is
the Area, or superficial Content, of the Rhombus ABCD, propounded.

PROP. V. To find the superficial content of a Rhomboides.
Frst let fall a Perpendicular, as in the former proposition, then the length
thereof multiply by the length of the Perpendicular; the product is the Area,
or superficial content thereof. For in the Rhomboides EDAH, whose length AH, or
ED is 32 Feet, and the length of the Fig. 23.
Perpendicular HK is 16 Feet, which multiplied together produces 512 Feet,
which is the Area or superficial content of the Rhomboides AHED, propounded.

PROP. VI. Te find the superficial Content of any Poligon, or many equal sided
Superficies.
First from the Center unto the middle of either of the sides of the Poligon,
let fall a Perpendicular, (by 3. prop. 1.) Then multiply the length of half the
Perifery, by the Perpendicular, the product shall be the Superficial Content of
the Poligon.

Admit the Poligon to be an Hexagon AAAA Fig. 24.
AA, whose side AA is 22 Feet, and the Per^end^cular BE 19 Feet; now, if 66
half the Perifery, be multiplied by 19 it produces 1254 Feet; which is the
Content of the Poligon AA, etc. as required.

PROP. VII. To find the superficial Content of a Circle.
Multiply half the Circumference, by one half of the Diameter, their product is
the superficial Content thereof.

Admit the Circumference of a Circle ACBD, be 44 Inches, what is the Area or
Content thereof. (by the 9. prop.. 2.) I find the Diameter Fig. 25.
to be 14 Inches, therefore I say if 22, half the Circumference, be multiplied
by 7, half the Diameter, it shall produce 154 Inches; which is the superficial
Content of the Circle ACDB, as required.

PROP. VIII. By the Diameter of a Circle given, to find the Circumference.
Suppose the Diameter be 14, what is the Circumference? The Analogy or
Proportion holds thus, as 7, to 22, so is 14, unto 44, the Circumference
required.

PROP. IX. By the Circumference of a Circle given, to find the Diameter.
Suppose the Circumference of a Circle be 44 what is the Diameter? the Analogy
or Proportion is, as 22, to 7, so is 44, unto 14, the Diameter required.

Now the proportion of the Diameter, unto the Circumference is as 7, unto-22;
or as 113, to 355; or as 1, unto 3, 1415926, etc. so is the Diameter to the
Circumference.

PROP. X. By the Content of a Circle given, to find the Circumference.
Suppose the Content of a Circle be 154, what is the Circumference, the Analogy
or Proportion?

As 7, unto 4 times 22, which is 88, so is 154 the Content of the given Circle;
to the square of the Circumference 1936, whose root being Extracted, as is
taught (in prop. 8.. 1. chap. 1.) gives the Circumference 44, as required.

PROP. XI. By the Content of a Circle given, to find the Diameter.
Suppose the Superficial Content of a Circle be 154 parts, what is the Diameter
thereof? to find which this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 22,

To 4 times 7, which is 28,

So is 154, the given Content,

To the Square of the Diameter 196, whose Root being Extracted (by 8 prop chap.
1.. 1.) ^iveth the Diameter 14, as required.

PROP. XII. By the Diameter of a Circle given to find the side of a square
equal thereto.
To find which this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1, 000000,

To 0, 886227.

So is the Diameter of the Circle propounded.

To the side of a Square, whose superficial Content, is equal unto the
superficial Content, of the Circle propounded.

PROP. XIII. By the Circumference of a Circle given, to find the side of a
square equal to it.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1. 000000,

To 0. 282093.

So is the Circumference of the Circle propounded, to the side of a Square
equal to the Circle.

PROP. XIV. By the Content of a Circle given to find the side a square equal to
it.
To do which, Extract the Square-Root o^ the Content propounded, (by prop. 8
chap. ^^. 1.) so is the Root, the side of a Geometrica^ Square, equal thereunto.

PROP. XV. By the Diameter of a Circle given, to find the side of an Inscribed
square.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1. 000000,

To 0. 707107,

So is the Diameter of the Circle propounded, To the side of the inscribed
Square.

PROP. XVI. By the Circumference of a Circle given, to find the side of an
Inscribed Square.
This is the Analogy, or Proportion.

As 1. 000000,

To 0. 225079.

So is the Circumference of the Circle propounded, To the side of the inscribed
Square.

PROP. XVII. ^o find the Superficial Content of an Oval, or Elleipsis.
Let the Oval given be ABCD, and it is re^uired to find the Area or Superficial
Content (...)ereof? To do which multiply the length A (...) 40 Inches, by the
breadth CD 30 Inches, the Fig. 26.
^^ is 1200. Which divide by 1. 27324; (...)e Quotient is 942 48/100 parts.
Which is the (...)ea or Superficial Content of the Oval ABCD (...)opounded

PROP. XVIII. To find the Superficial Content of any Section, or Portion of a
Circle.
Multiply half the Circute of the Section, by the Semidiameter of the whole
Circle, and the product thence arising is the Area or superficial Content
thereof.

Suppose there be a Circle whose Diameter is Fig. 27.
14 parts, and the Circute of the Quadrent ABC is 11 parts, and the Content of
the said Quadrent is desired? To find which multiply 5 or, 5., 5 half the
Circute of the Quadrent, by 7 the Semidiameter, the product is 38 5/10, which
is the Content of the Quadrent ABC propounded.

SECT. III. Of STEREOMETRY, or the way how to measure any Regular Solid.
STereometry is that part of the Mathematics, springing from Geometry, by
which the Content of all Solid Bodies are discovered by two Multiplications, or
three Dimention and is valued by the Cube of some famous Mea sure; as an
Inch-Cube, a Foot-Cube, a Yard Cube, or a Perch-Cube, etc.

PROP. I. To find the solid Content of a Cube.
Multiply the side into its self, and that product by its side again; their
product is the solid Content thereof.

Suppose there be a Cube A, whose side is Fig. 28.
2 Feet; and his solid Content is required? I say if his side 2, be multiplied
by its self, it produces 4, which again multiplied by 2, it produces 8 Feet,
which is the solid Content of the Cube propounded.

PROP. II. To find the solid Content of a Parallelepipedon.
First get the Superficial Content of the End, (by prop. 1, or 2,. 2.) which
multiply into the length, the product is the solid Content.

Suppose there be a Parallelepipedon B, whose Fig. 29.
sides of the Base is 40, and 30 Inches, and length 120 Inches, and his Solid
Content is demanded? I say if you multiply 30, by 40, the product is 1, 200,
which is the superficial Content at the Base. Which multiplied by the length
120 Inches produces 144000 Inches, which is the solid Content of the
Parallelepipedon B, propounded.

PROP. III. To find the solid Content of a Cylinder.
First get the superficial Content of the Circle at the Base, (by prop. 7.. 2.)
and by it multiply its length, their product is the solid Content thereof.

Suppose there be a Cylinder as D, whose Fig. 30.
Diameter of the Circle at the Base is 7 parts, and the length of the Cylinder
is 14 parts, and it is required to find the solid Content thereof? First I find
the superficial Content of the Base to be 38. 5, which multiplied into 14 the
length, gives 539 parts, which is the solid Content of the Cylinder propounded.

PROP. IV. To find the solid Content of a Pyramid.
First get the superficial Content of the Base of the Pyramid, (by some of the
aforegoing propositions in Planometria) and then multiply that into of his
Altitude, the product is the solid Content thereof.

Suppose there be a Pyramid H, whose side of the Base is 4 parts, or 4 5/10,
and his Altitude 12 parts, and his solid Content is required? First I find, (by
prop. 1.. 2.) the superficial Content Fig. 31.
of the Base to be 20 25/100 or 20, which multiplied by 4, (which is of the
Altitude 12) produces 81 parts, for the solid Content of the Pyramid
propounded.

PROP. V. To find the solid content of a Cone.
First find the superficial Content of the Circle at the Base, (by prop. 7..
2.) then multiply it by of its Altitude or Height, the product is the solid
Content thereof.

Suppose there be a Cone as B, whose Diameter Fig. 32.
of the Base is 7, and his Altitude or Height is 15 parts, and his solid
Content is required? First I find the superficial Content of the Base to be 38
or 38. 5; which multiplied into 5, of its Altitude or Height) produces 192.
5, or, which is the solid Content of the Cone propounded.

PROP. VI. By the Diameter of a Globe to find his solid Content.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 6 times 7, which is 42.

Is to 22,

So is the Cube of the Diameter of the Sphere, or Globe propounded.

To the solid Content thereof.

Suppose there be a Sphere or Globe, whose Diameter is 12 Inches; what is the
solid Content thereof? say, (see the Globe R.)

As 42,

Is to 22, Fig. 33.


So is 1728, the Cube of the Diameter,

To the solid Content 905 6/42 or 1/7 of the Globe, or Sphere propounded: This
and all other such Note that every Sphere is equal unto two Cones, whose Height
and Diameter of the Base is the same with the Axis of the Sphere. And a Sphere
is two thirds of a Cylinder, whose Height and Diameter of the Base is the same
with the Axis of the Sphere; according unto the 9th. Manifestation of the first
Book of Archimedes of the Sphere and Cylinder
like Propositions, are performed by the help of the first Proposition, of the
first Chapter of this Book.

PROP. VII. By the Circumference of a Sphere, or Globe, to find his solid
Content.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1. 000000,

To 0. 016887,

So is the Cube of the Circumference of the Globe or Sphere propounded

To the solid Content thereof.

PROP. VIII. By the Axis of a Globe, to make a Cube equal thereunto.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1. 00000,

To 0. 80604,

So is the Axis of the Sphere propounded,

To the ^u^^-Root, which shall be equal to it.

PROP. IX. By the Circumference of a Globe, to make a Cube equal thereunto.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As 1. 000000,

To 0 256556.

So is the Circumference of the Globe propounded,

To the Cube-Root, which shall be equal to the Sphere, or Globe, propounded.

PROP. X. By the solid Content of a Sphere or Globe, to make a Cube equal
thereunto.
Extract the Cube-root of the solid Content of the Sphere or Globe, (by prop.
9. 1. chap. 1.) so shall the Root, so found, be the side of a Cube, equal unto
the Globe or Sphere propounded.

PROP. XI. A Segment of a Sphere being given to find the solid Content thereof.
To find which first say, As the Altitude of the other Segment, is to the
Altitude of the Segment given: so is that Altitude of the other Segment
increased by half the Axis, unto a fourth: Then say, As 1, to 1, 0472, so is
the product of the Quadrant of half the Chord of the Circumference of that
Segment, multiplied by that fourth, To the solid Content of the Segment
propounded.

CHAP. V. Of TRIGONOMETRY. Or the Doctrine of Triangles.
SECT. I. Some general Maxims, belonging to plain or Right-lined Triangles.
TRIGONOMETRY is necessary in most parts of the Mathematics, and herein indeed
consists the most frequent use of the Logarithms, Sines, Tangents, and
Secants: It is conversant in the measuring of Triangles, Plain or Spherical,
comparing their Sides, and Angles together; according unto their known
Analogies, or Proportions: So that any three parts of a Triangle being given,
the other parts may be found out, and known: Now in the Doctrine of Right-lined
Triangles, it will be necessary to know these Maxims following.

1. That a Right-lined Triangle, is a Figure constituted, by the Conjunction,
or Intersection, of the three Right, or Streight-lines thereof; in their Angles
or Meeting-places. So that every Triangle has six distinct parts, Viz. Three
Sides, and three Angles.

2. That all Right-lined Triangles, are either Fig. 34.
Right-angled, That is, which has one RightAngle, as ABC Fig. 34. Or
Oblique-angled, whose three Angles are all Acute; that is, less than a
Quadrant, or 90 degrees; or else they have One Angle Obtuse, or greater than a
Quadrent: So all Triangles, that have not one Right-angle, Fig. 36.
are called Oblique-Triangles; as Fig. 36. to wit, the Triangle ABC.

3. That the three Angles, of any Right-lined Triangle, are equal unto two
Right-angles; or 180 Degrees. So that any two of their Angles being known, the
third Angle is also found, being the Complement of the other two; unto 180
Degrees: But this is more readily found in a Rectangled Triangle, for the
Rectangle being a Quadrent, or 90 degrees, one of the acute Angles therefore
being given, the other is readily known, being the Complement thereof unto 90
Degrees.

4 That the three sides, comprehending the Fig. 35.
Triangle, some call Legs, others Sides, but in Rectangled Triangles, as in
the Triangle ABC, I call AB, the Base, BC the Cathetus or Perpendicular; and AC
the Hypothenuse.

5. That the Sines, of the Angles are proportional unto their opposite Sides;
and their Sides, to their opposite Angles. So that if the Side of a Triangle
were desired, put the Sine of the opposite Angle in the first place. Also if an
Angle be required, put the Logarithm of his opposite side in the first place.

6. That the sides of any Rectangled Triangle may be measured by any Scale of
equal parts, as Inches, Feet, Yards, Poles, Miles, Leagues, etc.

7. That if an Angle propounded, be greater than 90 degrees. and so not to be found
in the Tables, take the Complement thereof, unto 180 degrees. and work by the Sine,
or Tangent thereof, and the work will be the same.

And here for the more short, and speedy performance of these conclusions in
Trigonometry; I have annexed, and used, these following Symbols; which I would
have you take notice of.

= Equal, or Equal to. + More. - Less. x Multiplied by. Degrees as 15. '
Minutes as. 40'. cr. A Side. crs, Sides. V An Angle. VV Angles. Z Sum. X
Difference. S Sine. Sc Cosine. T Tangent. Tc Co-tangent. Se Secant. Sec
Co-secant. Co. Ar. Compl. Arithmetic. R A Right-angle. 2R Two Right-angles. Q
Square.
SECT. II. Of Plain Rectangled Triangles.
PROP. I. Two Angles and the Base of a Rectangled Triangle given, to find the
other parts.
ADmit the Triangle given be ABC: Now Fig. 34.
the Angle at B, is an Angle of 90, or a Right-angle; And the Angle at C is 57
35', and the Base AB; is 736 parts.

Now first I find the Angle at A, to be 32 25': it being the Complement of the
Angle at C, unto 90: Secondly, to find the Cathetus, or Perpendicular, this is
the analogy or proportion. ^


Add the Log. of the third and second Terms together, and from their Sum,
deduct the Log. of Observe this for a general Rule in Trigonometry.
the first number, so is the Remainder, the Log. of the fourth Term, or Number
sought, as you see in the aforegoing Example.

Thirdly to find the Hypothenuse AC, the Analogy or Proportion hold thus.

As S. V, C 57 35',

To Log. Base AB 736 ^arts. Fig. 34


So Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypothenuse AC 871 8/10 parts required: Thus are the three required
parts, of the given Triangle ABC found, viz. the Angle A to be 32 25', the
Cathetus BC to be 467 4/10 parts, and the Hypothenuse AC to be 871 8/10 parts,
as was so required to be found.

PROP. II. The Hypothenuse, Base, and one of the Angles Of a Rectangled
Triangle given, to find the other parts thereof.
In the Triangle ABC, the Hypothenuse AC is 871 8/10 parts, the Base AB is 736
parts, and the Angle at B, is known to be a Right-angle; or 90: First to find
the Angle at the Cathetus C, the analogy or proportion holds thus.

As Log. Hypothen: AC 871 8/10 parts Fig. 34.


To Radius or S. 90.

So Log. Base AB 736 parts,

To the S. V. at Cathetus C 57 35'.

Secondly, now having found the Angle at the Cathetus C, to be 57 35'; I say
the Angle of the Base A is 32 25', being the Compl. of the Angle C, unto 90.

Thirdly to find the Cathetus BC, this is the ^nalogy, or proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypothen. AC 871 8/10 parts,

So S. V. at Base A 32 25'. Fig. 34.


To Log. Cathetus BC, 467 4/10 parts required. It may also be found, as in the
former Proposition.

PROP. III. In a Rectangled Triangle, the Base, and Cathetus given to find the
other parts thereof.
In the Triangle ABC, the Base AB is 736 parts, and the Cathetus BC is 467 4/10
parts, and the Angle B, between them is a right angle o^ 90: And here you may
make either side of the Triangle, Radius, but I shall make BC the Cathetus
Radius, and then to find the Angle at the Cathetus C, this is the Analogy or
^^^portion.

As Log. Cathet, BC 467 4/10 parts, Fig. 35.


To Radius or S 90.

So Log. Base AB 736 parts,

To T. V. Cathe C 57 35', as required.

Secondly, I find the other Angle, at A to be (...)
32 25', it being the Complement, to C 57 35', unto 90.

Thirdly, To find out the Hypothenuse AC this is the analogy or proportion.

As S. V. Cathe C. 57 35',

To Log. Base AB 736 parts,

So Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypothenuse AC 871 8/10 parts, (...)quired. But making the Base AB
Radius, yo^ may find the Hypothenuse AC, by this anal(...) or proportion.

Plate 1 Page 65


As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Base AB 736 parts.

So Sc. V. Base A 32 25',

To Log. Hypothenuse AE 871 8/10 parts required, Fig. 35.
and thus you have all the parts of the Triangle propounded.

PROP. IV. The Base, and Hypothenuse, with the Angle between them given, to
find the other parts of a Rect-angled Triangle.
In the Triangle ABC, the Base AB is 736 parts, and the Hypothenuse AC is 871
8/10 parts, and the Angle A included between them is 32 25'. First to find the
Angles, and first remember that the Angle B is a right Angle; or 90. Secondly,
that the Angle at C, is the Complement to the Angle at A 32 25' unto 90: Fig.
35.
and therefore is 57 35': Now these being known, you may find the Cathetus, by
this analogy or proportion.

As S. V. Cathe. C. 57 35',

To Log. Base AB 736 parts.

So S. V. Base A 32 25',

To Log. Cathe. BC 467 4/10 parts required. Thus I have sufficiently explained
all the Cases of Plain Rect-angle Triangles, for to these rules they may be all
reduced.

SECT. III. Of Oblique-Angled Plain Triangles.
PROP. I. Two Angles, and a side opposite, in an Oblique-Angled Triangle given,
to find the other parts thereof.
IN the Triangle ABC, the Angleat A is 50, and at C is 37, and the side AB is
30 parts, and opposite to the Angle C

First, to find the Angle B, remember that (as it is said, in the third Maxim
aforegoing) it is the Complement, to the Angles A 50, and C 37, to 180, and
therefore is the Angle at B 93.

Secondly, having thus found the Angles, the Fig. 36.
two unknown sides, may be found by the proportion they bear to their opposite
Angles, for that proportion holds also in these; thus to find the side BC, this
is the analogy or proportion.

As S. V. C 37 00',

To Log. side AB 30 parts.

So S. V. A. 50 00',

To Log. side BC 38 19/100 parts required to be found.

But it may be more readily found, and performed in such case as this, where
you have a Sine, or Tangent, in the first place, by the Arithmetical Complement
thereof, and so save the Substraction.

Now the readiest way to find the Arithmetical The Rule to find the Complement
Arithmetical, of any Logarithm Number.
Complement is that of Mr. Norwood, in his Doctrine of Triangles; which is
thus: begin with the first Figure toward the left hand of any Number and write
down the Complement, or the remainder thereof, unto 9: 9. 962398.
And so do with all the 0. 037602.
rest of the Figures, as you see here done. Saying 9, wants of 9, 0: and again
9, wants 0: 6, wants 3; 2, wants 7: 3, wants 6; 9, wants 0: only when you come
to the last Figure to the right hand, take it out of 10, so 8, wants 2; of 10:
Thus you may readily find the Co-Ar. of any Sine, almost as soon as the Sine it
self.

But if you want the Complement Arithmetical of any Tangent, you may take the
Co-tang. which is exactly the Co-Arith. of the double Radius, so that the
Tangent, and Co-tangent, of an Arch makes exactly 20. 000000.

Now if the Radius be in the first place, then there is no need of taking the
Co-Arith. of the first Number, only you must cut off, the first I, to the left
hand thus X, and you will have the Logarithm of the Number desired.

Thirdly, now to find the side AC, by the opposite Angle B; which is 93 00':
And see(...)ng the Angle B, exceeds 90, you must work (...)y the Complement to
180) as in the seventh (...)ork in page 61 is taught.

Thus having found all the parts of the Triangle [^]
Fig. 36.
propounded, Viz. The Angle B, to be 93 00', the side AC to be 49 78/100 parts,
and the side BC to be 38 19/100 parts, as was required to be found.

PROP. II. Two sides, and an Angle opposite to one of them in an Oblique-angled
Triangle given, to find the other parts thereof.
In the Triangle ABC, the side AB is 30 parts, and the side AC, is 49 78/100
parts, and the opposite Angle C, is 37 00'.

First, To find the Angle at B, this is the Analogy Fig. 36.
or Proportion.

As Log. cr. AB 30 parts,

To S. V. at C 37 00'.

So Log. cr. AC 49 78/100 parts,

To Sc. V. B 93 00', as was required to be found.

Now seeing that the Angle C, is 37 00', and the Angle B, is 93 00', which
makes 120 00', therefore must the Angle A be 50 00'; the Complement to 180: so
having found all the three Angles, you may find the other side CB, Fig. 36.
38 19/100 parts, as before in the first proposition, by his opposite Angle.

PROP. III. Two Sides of an Oblique-angled Triangle, with the Angle included
between them given, to find the other parts thereof.
In the Triangle ABC, the side AC is 49 78/100 parts, the side DB is 30 parts,
and the Angle A between them is 50 00'; and it is required to find the other
parts of the Triangle propounded. To resolve this Conclusion, let fall a
Perpendicular DB, from the Angle B, on the side AC; (by prop. 3.. 1. chap. 4)
and then proceed thus.

First, Seeing the Oblique-angled Triangle, Fig. 37.
ABC is divided into two Rectangled Triangles, Viz. ADB, and BDC: Now I will
begin with the Triangle ADB, in which is given the Angle A 50 00', and the
Angle D is a right Angle, or 90, and the side AB 30 parts, and the sides AD,
and DB, and the Angle at B, are required.

First to find the Angle at B, remember that it is the Complement unto the
Angle A 50 00', unto 90 00', and therefore must the Angle B be 40 00'; Now for
to find the Cathetus BD, (as in prop. 1. and 2. 2. chap. 5.) by the Rule of
opposition, the Analogy or Proportion holds thus.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypoth. AB 30 parts.

So S. V. at A 50 00',

To Log. Cath. BD 22 98/100 parts sought.

And AGAIN, say.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypoth. AB 30 parts.

So S. V. at B 40 00',

To Log. Base AD 19 28/100 parts sought.

Thus in the Triangle ADB, you have found the Angle B, to be 40 00', the
Cathetus BD, to be 22 98/100 parts; and the Base AD to be 19 28/100 parts, as
was so required.

Now for the other Triangle which is BDC, in which there is given the side BD,
22 98/100 parts, and the Angle at D, is a Right-angle, or 90, and the sides DC,
and CB, and the Angles B, and C, are required.

First to find the side DC, substract AD, 19 28/100 Fig. 37.
parts, out of AC, 49 78/100 parts; there remains the Base DC; 30 50/100 parts:
Thus have you the two sides of the Triangle, to wit the Base DC, 30 50/100
parts, and the Cathetus BD, 22 98/100 parts, and the Angle D between them is a
Right-angle or 90. Now you may find the Angle at B, by the Tangent (as in prop.
3.. 2. chap. 5.) thus.

As Log. Cath. BD, 22 98/100 parts,

To Radius or S. 90.

So Log. Base CD 30 50/100 parts.

To T. V. B. 53 00'.

Secondly, For the Angle C, remember it is the Complement of the Angle B, 53, to
90; and therefore is the Angle C, 37 00', required.

Thirdly, To find the Hypoth. BC, this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As S. V. B. 53 00',

To Log. Base DC 30 50/100 parts.

So Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypoth. BC 38 19/100 parts: Thus have you found all the required parts
of the Triangle ABC propounded, viz. the Angle C to be 37 00', the Angle B, to
be 93 00', That is equal unto the two Angles B 40 and B. 53 as before in the
former Proposition.
and the Side BC, 38 19/10^ parts, as required to be found.

Another way to perform the same.

Take the Sum of the [^]
two sides, and the difference of the two sides; and work as follows.

Now to find the two Fig. 37.
Angles B, and C, this is the Manner, and by this Analogy or Proportion, they
are found out and known.

As Log. Z. crs. AB, and CA, 79 78/100 parts,

To Log. X. crs. AB, and CA; 19 78/100 parts,

So T. of VV unknown, 65 00',

To T. X. of VV, 28 00'.

This difference of Angles 28 00', add unto 65 00', (half the difference of the
unknown Angles) and it shall produce 93 00', which is the greater Angle, and
subtracted from it, leaves 37 00', which is the lesser Angle C: so have you
the required Angles.

PROP. IV. The three sides of an Oblique-angled Triangle given, to find the
Angles.
In the Triangle ABC, the side AC, is 49 78/100 parts, the side AB, is 30
parts, and the side BC, is 38 19/100 parts; and the three Angles of the
Triangle are required.

The resolution of ^
this Conclusion is thus. Take the Sum and Differ. Fig. 37.
of the two sides AB, and BC; And then work as follows: To find a Segment of
the Base AC, to wit CE; say:

As Log. Base AC, 49 78/100 parts,

To Z. crs. AB, and BC; 68 19/100 parts,

So X. crs. AB, and BC; 8 19/100 parts,

To Log of a Segment of the Base AC, to wit C E 11 22/100 parts.

This Segment of the Base CE, 11 22/100 parts, being subtracted from the whole
Base AC, 49 78/100 parts, the remainder is EA 38 56/100 parts, in the middle of
which as at D, the Perpendicular DB, will fall from the Angle B; and so divide
Fig. 37.
it into two Rectangled Triangles, to wit, ADB, and CDB, whose Base DA is 19
28/100 parts, which taken from AC 49 78/100 parts, leaves the Base of the
greater Triangle CD 30 50/100 parts.

Now having the two Bases of these two Triangles, and their Hypothenuses; to
wit CD 30 50/100 parts, DA 19 28/100 parts, CB 38 19/100 parts, and BA 30
parts; you may find all their Angles, by the Rule of Opposite sides, to their
Angles as before.

I. In the Triangle CDB.
To find the Angles, this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Log. BC 38 19/100 parts,

To Radius or S. 90.

So Log. DC 30 50/100 parts,

To S. V. B 53 00': whose Complement is the Fig. 37.
Angle at C 37 00' unto 90: or a Quadrant.

II. In the Triangle ADB.
To find the Angles, this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Log. AB, 30 parts,

To Radius or S. 90.

So Log. AD 19 28/100 parts,

To S. V. B, 40 00'.

The Complement whereof, unto 90 00', is the Angle at A 50 00'.

Now in the first Triangle CDB, there is found the Angle C, to be 37 00', and
the Angle B, to be 53 00'.

In the second Triangle ADB, there is found the Angle A; to be 50 00', and the
Angle B, to be 40 00'.

Now the two Angles at B, to wit 53 00'; and 40 00'; makes 93 00', which is the
Angle of the Oblique-angled Triangle ABC, at B: Thus the three Angles of the
said given Triangle ABC, are found as was required, viz. the Angle A to be 50
00', the Angle B to be 93 00', and the Angle C to be 37 00', as sought.

Thus I have sufficiently, fully and plainly explained all the Cases of Plain
Right-lined Triangles, both Right and Oblique-angled: I shall now fall in hand
with Spherical Triangles, both Right and Oblique-angled.

SECT. IV. Of Spherical Rectangled Triangles.
And here first it will be necessary also to understand those few general
Maxims or Rules, that are of special Moment, in the Doctrine of Spherical
Triangles.

1. THat a Spherical Triangle is comprehended and formed, by the Conjunction
and Intersection of three Arches of a Circle, described on the Surface of the
Sphere or Globe.

2. That those Spherical Triangles, consists of six distinct parts, viz.
three Sides and three Angles, any of which being known, the other is also found
out and known.

3. That the three Sides of a Spherical Triangle, are parts or Arches of three
great Circles of a Sphere, mutually intersection each other: and as plain or
Right-lined Triangles, are measured by a Measure, or Scale of equal parts: So
these are measured, by a Scale or Arch of equal Deg^ees.

4. That a Great Circle is such a Circle that does bessect the Sphere, dividing
it into two equal parts; as the Equinoctial, the Ecliptic, the Meridians, the
Horizon, etc.

5. That in a Right-angled Spherical Triangle, the Side subtending the
Right-angle we call the Hypothenuse, the other two containing the Rightangle we
may simply call the Sides, and for distinction either of them may be called the
Base or Perpendicular.

6. That the Sum of the Sides of a Spherical Triangle are less than two
Semicircles or 360.

7. That if two Sides of a Spherical Triangle be equal to a Semicircle; then
the two Angles at the Base shall be equal to two Right-angles; but if they be
less, then the two Angles shall be less; but if greater, then shall the two
Angles be greater than a Semicircle.

8. That the Sum of the Angles of a Spherical Triangle, is greater than two
Right-angles.

9. That every spherical Triangle is either a Right, or Oblique-angled Triangle.

10. That the Sines of the Angles, are in proportion, unto the Sines of their
opposite Sides; and the Sines of their opposite Sides, are in proportion unto
the Sines of their opposite Angles.

11. That in a Right-angled Spherical Triangle, either of the Oblique-angles,
is greater than the Complement of the other, but less than the Difference of
the same Complement unto a Semicircle.

12. That a Perpendicular is part of the Arch of a great Circle, which, being
let fall from any Angle of a spherical Triangle, cutteth the opposite Side of
the Triangle at Right-angles, and so divides the Triangle into two
Right-angled Triangles, and these two parts (either of the Sides or Angles) so
divided must be sometimes added together, and sometimes subtracted from each
other, according as the Perpendicular falls within or without the Triangle.

PROP. I. Case 1. A Side and an Angle adjacent thereunto being given, to find
the other Side.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Side AB 27 54'; and the Angle A 23
30', and the Side BC is required, to find which this is the Analogy or
Proportion. Fig. 38.
^


PROP. II. Case 2. A Side and an Angle adjacent thereunto being given, to find
the other Oblique-angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Side AB 27 54', and the Angle A 23
30', Fig. 38.
and the Angle at C is required, to find which say by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the Radius or S 90 00',

To Sc. of cr. AB 27, 54.

So is S. V. at A 23, 30,

To Sc. V. at c 69, 22 required.

PROP. III. Case 3. A Side and an Angle adjacent thereunto being given, to find
the Hypothenuse.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Side Fig. 38.
AB 27 54', and the Angle at A 23 30', and the Hypothenuse AC, is required;
which may be found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To Sc. of V. at A 23, 30.

So is Tc cr. AB, 27, 54.

To Tc. Hypothenuse AC, 30, 00 required.

PROP. IV. Case 4. A Side and an Angle opposite thereunto being given, to find
the other Oblique-angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Side Fig. 38.
BC 11 30', and the Angle A 23 30', and the Angle C is required, to find which,
say by this Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. cr. BC, 11 30',

To Radius or S. 90, 00.

So is Sc. V. at A, 23, 30,

To S. V. at C. 69, 22, as required.

PROP. V. Case 5. A Side and the opposite Angle given, to find the Hypothenuse.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Fig. 38.
side BC 11 30', and the Angle at A 23 30', and the Hypothenuse AC, is
required, which may be found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As S. V. at A 23 30',

To Radius or S. 90, 00.

So is Ser. BC 11. 30,

To S. Hypothenuse AC 30, 00. as required.

PROP. VI. Case 6. A side and the opposite Angle given, to find the other side.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the side BC 11 30', and the Angle at A 23
30', and the side AB is required, to find which this is the Analogy or
Proportion.

As Radius or S 90 00', Fig. 38.


To Tc. of V. at A. 23. 30,

So is T. cr. BC 11, 30,

To S. of cr. AB 27. 54 as was required.

PROP. VII. Case 7. The Hypothenuse, and an Oblique Angle given, to find the
side adjacent thereunto.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Hypothenuse AC, 30 00', and the Angle
A 23 30', and the side AB, is required, which is found by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To Sc. V. at A, 23, 30. Fig. 38.


So is T. Hypoth. AC, 30, 00,

To T. cr. AB, 27, 54, as was required.

PROP. VIII. Case 8. The Hypothenuse, and an Oblique-angle given, to find the
opposite Side.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Hypothenuse AC, 30 00', and the Angle
at A 23 30', and the Side BC, is required, which is found by this Analogy or
Proportion. Fig. 38.


As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To S. Hypoth. AC, 30, 00.

So is S. V. at A, 23, 30,

To the S. cr. BC, 11, 30. which was required.

PROP. IX. Case 9. The Hypothenuse, and an Oblique-angle given, to find the
other Oblique-angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Hypothenuse AC 30 00', and the Angle
A, 23 30', now the Angle at C, is required, which may be found by this Analogy
or Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To Sc. Hypoth. AC, 30, 00.

So is T. of V. at A, 23, 30, Fig. 38.


To Tc. of V. at C. 69, 22, as was required.

PROP. X. Case 10. The sides given, to find the Hypothenuse.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the side AB 27 54', and the side BC 11
30', and the Hypothenuse AC is required, to find which say by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00', Fig. 38.


To Sc. cr. BC. 11, 30.

So is Sc. cr. AB 27, 54,

To Sc. Hypothenuse AC 30, 00. required.

PROP. XI. Case 11. The sides given, to find an Angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given, the side AB 27 54', and the side BC 11
30', and the Angle at A, is required, which may be found by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00', Fig. 38:


To S. cr. AB. 27, 54.

So is Tc. cr. BC. 11, 30,

To Tc. of V. at A. 23. 30. as required.

PROP. XII. Case 12. The Hypothenuse, and a side given, to find the other side.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given, the Hypothenuse Fig. 38.
AC 30 00', and the side AB 27 54' and the side BC is required, which may be
found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. cr. AB. 27 54',

To Radius or S. 90 00.

So is Sc. Hypothenuse AC. 30 00',

To Sc. cr. BC. 11 30' as required.

PROP. XIII. Case 13. The Hypothenuse, and a Side given, to find the contained
Angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Hypothenuse Fig. 38.
AC 30 00', and the side AB 27 54', and the Angle at A is required, which may
be found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To T. cr. AB. 27 54'

So is Tc. Hypoth. AC 30 00',

To Sc. of V. at A, 23 30', as required.

PROP. XIV. Case 14. The Hypothenuse, and a Side given, to find the opposite
Angle.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Hypothenuse AC 30 00', and the side AB
27 54', ^ow the Angle C, is required, which may be Fig. 38.
(...)ound by this Analogy or Proportion.

As the S. Hypoth. C, 30 00',

To Radius or S. 90 00'.

So is S. of cr. AB, 27 54',

To S of V. at C. 69 22, as required.

PROP. XV. Case 15. The Oblique Angles given, to find either Side.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Angle A 23 30', and the Angle at C 69
22', and the side BC, is required, which may be found by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the S. of V. at C, 69 22', Fig. 38.


To the Radius or S. 90 00'.

So is the Sc. of V. at A, 23 30',

To the Sc. of cr. BC, 11 30', as required.

PROP. XVI. Case 16. The Oblique-angles given, to find the Hypothenuse.
In the Triangle ABC, there is given the Angle A 23 30', the Angle C, 69 22',
and the Hypothenuse AC, is required, which may be found by this Analogy or
Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90 00', Fig. 38.


To Tc. of V. at C. 69, 22',

So is Tc. of V. at A, 23 30,

To Sc. Hypoth. AC, 30 00, as required.

SECT. V. Of Oblique-angled Spherical Triangles.
PROP. I. Case 1. Two Sides, and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to
find the other opposite Angle.
IN the Triangle ADE, there is given the Side Fig. 39.
AE, 70 00', the Side ED, 38 30', and the Angle A, 30 28', now the Angle at D,
is required, to find which this is the Analogy or Proportion.

As S. cr. DE, 38 30',

To S. V. at A, 30 28.

So is S. cr. AE, 70 00,

To S. V. at D, 130 03, Note that in these Operations, for the more facility of
the learner, I omit Seconds, which does belong unto the Angles, etc.
required.

PROP. II. Case 2. Two Angles and a Side opposite to one of them given, to find
the Side opposite to the other.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Angle Fig. 39.
at D, 130 03', the Angle E, 31 34', and the Side AE, 70 00', now the Side AD,
is required, which may be found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As S. V. at D, 130 03',

To S. cr. AE, 70 00.

So is S. V. at E, 31 34,

To S. cr. AD. 40 00, required.

PROP. III. Case 3. Two Sides and an Angle included between them being known,
to find the other Angles.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Side Fig. 39.
AE, 70 00', the Side AD, 40 00', and the Angle A 30 28', Now the Angles D, and
E, are required, which is thus found: take the Sum and Difference of the two
Sides, and work as follows, saying. ^


As S. Z. crs. AE and AD, 55 co',

To S. X. crs. AE and AD, 15 00.

So is Tc. V. at A, 15 14, And here observe that if the Sum of the two
contained Sides exceed a Semicircle, then substract each side severally from
180, and proceed with those Complements, as with the sides given, the Operation
produces the Complements of the Angles sought, unto a Semicircle or 180
Degrees.


To T. X. VV. D and E. 49 1430".

AGAIN.

As Sc. Z. crs. AE and AD, 55 00',

To Sc. X. crs. AE and AD, 15 00'.

So is Tc. V. at A, 15 14',

To T. Z. VV. D and E, 80 48 30".

This difference of the Angles unknown D and E, 49 14' 30", being added unto
the half Sum of the Angles 80 48' 30", (unknown) produces the Greater Angle D
130 03', and subtracted from it, leaves the Lesser Angle E, to wit 31 34'.

PROP. IV. Case 4. Two Angles, and their Interjacent side being known, to find
the other sides.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Angl^ Fig. 39.
at A 30 28', and the Angle at D 130 03', and their Interjacent-side AD 40 00',
and the Sides DE and EA, are required: Which is thus found.

Take the Sum and Diffference of the two Angles, And here observe that if the
Sum of the two given Angles excede a Semicircle or 180, substract them from a
Semicircle, and proceed with the Residues, the Operation will produce each
side's Complement to a Semicircle, or 180 Degrees.
and work as follows, saying.

As S. Z. of VV. A and D, 80 15' 30", Fig. 39.
^


To S. X. of VV. A and D, 49 47 30.

So is T. cr. AD, 20 00 00,

To T. X. crs. DE and EA, 15 45 00.

AGAIN Say.

As Sc. Z. of VV. A and D, 80 15' 30",

To Sc. X. of VV. A and D, 49 47 30.

So is T. cr. AD, 20 00 00,

To T. crs. Z. DE and AE. 54 15 00.

Add the half Difference of the Sides DE and AE, 15 45', unto half the Sum of
the Sides DE and AE, 54 15'. It produces the greater Side, the Side AE 70 00',
but if deducted from it, leaves the lesser Side ED, which is 38 30', as was
required.

PROP. V. Case 5. Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to find
the third side.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Side Fig. 39.
AE 70 00', the Side DE 38 30', and the Angle A 30 28', the Side AD is required.

First by Case 1. Prop. 1. I find the Angle at D to be 130 03', and then
proceed thus

First take the Sum and Difference of the two Angles; then also find the
Difference of the two Sides given, and then work as follows. ^
^


Now say,

As S. X. VV. D and A, 49 47' 30",

To S. Z. VV. D and (...), 80 15 30.

So is T. X. crs. AE and ED, 15 45 00,

To T. cr. AD. 20 00' 00": which doubled gives the Side AD, 40 00 00, as was
required.

PROP. VI. Case 6. Two Angles and a Side opposite to one of them given, to find
the third Angle.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Angle Fig. 39.
A 30 28', the Angle D 130 03', and his opposite Side AE 70 00', and it is
required to find the Angle at E.

First by Prop. 2. Case 2. I find the Side DE, opposed to the Angle A; to be 38
30', then proceed thus.

First find the Sum and Difference of the Sides. Then find the Difference of
the Angles. ^
^


Now say,

As S. X. crs. DE and AE 15 45',

To S. Z. crs. EA and DE 54 15.

So is T. X. VV. D and A 49 47 30",

To Tc. V. at E 15 47' 00". which doubled gives the Angle at E 31 34, as
required.

PROP. VII. Case 7. Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to
find the Included Angle.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Side Fig. 39.
AE 70 00', the Side ED 38 30', and the Angle opposite thereunto at A 30 28',
and the Angle E is required.

First by Prop. 1. Case 1. I find the Angle D, opposite to AE, to be 130 03',
then proceed thus.

First find the Difference of the Angles, then find the Sum and Difference of
the Sides. ^
^


Now say,

As S. X. crs. AE and ED 15 45',

To S Z. crs. AE and ED 54 15.

So is T. X. of VV. D and A 49 47 30", Fig. 39.


To Tc. V. at E 15 47'. Which doubled is the Angle at E 31 34', as was required.

PROP. VIII. Case 8. Two Angles and a Side opposite to one of them being known,
to find the Interjacent Side.
In the Triangle ADE, there is given the Angle E 31 34', the Angle D 130 03',
and his opposite Side AE 70 00', Now the Side ED is required.

First by Prop. 2. Case 2. I find AD opposed to E, to be 40 00', and then work
thus.

Take the Sum and Difference of the Angles, then also find the Difference of
the two Sides: Fig. 39.
^
^


Now say,

As S. X. VV D and E 49 14' 30",

To S. Z VV D and E 80 48 30.

So is T X crs. AD and AE 15 00 00",

To T. crs. ED, 19 15' 00", which being doubled is the Side ED 38 30', as
required.

PROP. IX. Case 9. Two Sides and their Included Angle being known, to find the
third Side.
In the Triangle APZ, there is given the Side Fig. 40.
ZP 38 30', the Side PA 70, and the Angle P, let be 31 34, and the Side AZ is
required.

The Resolution of this Case depends on the Catholic proposition of the Lord
of Marchiston, by supposing the Oblique-Triangle to be divided (by a supposed
Perpendicular falling either within or without the Triangle) into two
Rectangulars.

Now in the Triangle AZP, let fall the Perperpendicular ZR; so is the Triangle
AZP divided into two Rectangulars ARZ and ZRP. Now the Side AZ may be found at
two Operations thus: say,

As the Radius or S. of 90 00'

To Sc. of the included V, P. 31 34.

So is T. of the lesser Side PZ. 38 30,

To T. of a fourth Arch. 34 08.

If the contained Angle be less than 90, take this fourth Arch from the greater
Side; but if it be greater than 90, from its Complement unto 180, the Remainder
is the Residual Arch: Now again say,

As Sc. of the fourth Arch. 34 08'

To Sc. Residual Arch. 35 52

So Sc. of the lesser Side PZ. 38 30

To Sc. AZ the Side required. 40 00

Note that if the Angles at the Base be both of one kind, that then the
Perpendicular falls within the Triangle: if of diverse kinds, without the
Triangle.
But note that many times the Perpendicular will fall without the Triangle, as
it does Fig. 41.
now within; in such case the Sides of the Triangle must be continued, so will
there be two Rectangulars, the one included within the other: as in the
Triangle HIK, the Perpendicular let fall is KM, falling on the Side HE, and so
the two Rectangulars found thereby will be IM K, and KMH, and so by the
directions in the former proposition find out the Side IK, if required to be
found.

PROP. X. Case 10. Two Angles and their Interjacent Side known, to find the
third Angle.
In the Triangle AZP, there is given the Side ZP 38 30', the Angle P 31 34',
and the Angle Z 130 03', and the Angle at A is required.

First the Oblique-Triangle AZP, being reduced into two Rectangulars ARZ, and
ZRP, by Fig. 40.
Case 9 aforegoing, I find the Angle RZP, to be 64 19', (in the Triangle ZRP.)
which taken out of Angle AZP 130 03', leaves the Angle AZR 65 44': Now the
Angle A is found by this Analogy or Proportion.

As S. V. PZR, 64 19',

To S. V. AZR 65 44,

So is Sc. V. at P 31 34,

To Sc. V. at A 30 28: which was required to be found out and known.

PROP. XI. Case 11. Three Sides given, to find an Angle.
In the Triangle APZ, the Side AZ is 40 00', the Side ZP is 38 30', the Side AP
is 70 00', and the Angle Z is required. To find which do thus.

Add the three Sides: together, and from half Fig. 40.
their Sum, deduct the Side opposite, to the required Angle: and then proceed
as you see in the Operation following. ^
Fig. 40.


Sum is 65 07' 30", the Sc. V. at Z which doubled is 130 03' 12"; the Angle at
Z required.

PROP. XII. Case 12. Three Angles given, to find a Side.
In the Triangle AZP, the Angle A is 30 28' Fig. 40.
11", the Angle Z 130 03' 12", the Angle P is 31 34' 26", and the Side AZ,
opposite to P, is required.

This Case is likewise performed as the former Case or Proposition, the Angles
being converted into Sides, and the Sides into Angles, by taking the Complement
of the greatest Angle unto 180: see the work. ^
Fig. 40.
which being doubled, gives the Side AZ 40 00 required to be found out and known

But if the greater Side AP were required the Operation would produce the
Complem(...) thereof unto a Semicircle or 180; therfo(...) substract it from
180, it leaves the remaining required Side sought.

Thus I have laid down all the Cases of Triangles, both Right-lined and
Spherical; either Right, or Oblique-angled; I might hereunto have annexed many
Varieties unto each Case, and some fundamental Axioms, which somewhat more
would have Illustrated and Demonstrated those Cases, and Proportions; but
because of the smallness of this Treatise, which is intended more for Practice
than Theory, I have for brevity sake omitted them, and refer you for those
things to larger Authors, who have largely discoursed thereon to good purpose.

CHAP. VI. Of ASTRONOMY.
Defin.
ASTRONOMY is an Art Mathematical, which measures the distinct course of
Times, Days, Years, etc. It shows the Distance, Magnitude, Natural Motions,
Appearances and Passions, proper unto the Planets, and fixed Stars, for any
time past, present and to come; by this we are certified of the Distance of the
starry Sky, and of each Planet, from the Center of the Earth, and the Magnitude
of any fixed Star or Planet, in respect of the Earth's Magnitude.

SECT. I. Of Astronomical Definitions.
Defin.
1. ASphere or Globe is a solid Body, containing only one Superficies, in
whose middle there is a point (called the Center,) from which all right or
straight lines drawn unto the Circumference or Superficies, are Equal. 2. The
Poles of the World, are two fixed points Fig. 42.
in the Heavens Diametrically opposite the one to the other, the one called the
Artick or NorthPole; noted in the Scheme by P. The other is called the
Antartick, or South-Pole; as S. and is not to be seen of us, being in the lower
Hemisphere. 3. The Axis of the World, is an imaginary Fig. 42.
line drawn from the North Pole, through the Center of the Earth, unto the
South-Pole, about which the Diurnal motion is performed, from the East to the
West; as the line PS. 4. The Meridians are great Circles, concurring Fig. 42.
and intersecting one another, in the Poles of the World, as PES, and Pc S. 5.
The Equinoctial, or Equator, is a great Circle, 90 degrees. distant from the Poles
of the World, cutting the Meridians at Right-angles, and divides the World
into two Equal parts, called Fig. 42.
the Northern, and Southern Hemispheres, as E Q. in Scheme 42. 6. The Ecliptic
is a great Circle, crossing the Equinoctial, in the two opposite points Aries
and Libra, and makes an Angle therewith (called, its Obliquity) of 23 30',
represented by. This Circle is divided into 12 Sines, each containing 30 00':
As Aries Fig. 42.
, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, (which are called Northern Sines) Libra;
Scorpio, Sagitarius; Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces; these are called
Southern Sines. 7. The Zodiac is a Zone or Girdle, having 8 degrees. of Latitude
on either side the Ecliptic, in which space the Planets make their revolution.
This Circle is a Circle which regulates the Years, Months, and Seasons, Which
is by the Greeks called (...), i e. bring Life; because the life of all
Creatures depend on the cause of that Circle, for the Sun ascending in it and
moving toward us, brings the Generation of things, and in descending the
Corruption of all things sensible, and insensible, which are below the
concavity of the Moon, etc.
and is distinguished Fig. 42.
in the Scheme by the 12 Sines. 8. The Colures are two Meridians, dividing the
Ecliptic, and the Equinoctial, into four equal parts; one of which passes by
the Equinoctial Fig. 42.
points Aries, and Libra, and is called the Equinoctial Colure, as P S. The
other by the beginning of Cancer, and Capricorn, and is called the Solstitial
Colure, as P, S. 9. The Poles of the Ecliptic are two points, 23 30' distant
from the Poles of the World, as I and K. Fig. 42.
10. The Tropicks are two small Circles, Parallel unto the Equinoctial, and
distant therefrom 23 30', limiting the Sun's greatest declination. The Northern
Tropic passes by the beginning of Cancer, and is therefore called the Tropic
of Cancer, as a D. The Southern Tropic Fig. 42
passes by the beginning of Capricorn, and is therefore called the Tropic of
Capricorn; as B b. 11. The Polar Circles, are two small Circles parrallel to
the Equinoctial, and distant therefrom 66 30'; and from the Poles of the World
23. 30'. That which is adjacent unto the North Pole, is called the Artick
Circle, as G d I. and the other the Antartick Circle, as Kd M. Fig. 42.
12. The Zenith, and the Nadir, are two points, Diametrically opposite the one
to the other: the Zenith is the Vertical point, or the point over our heads, as
Z, The Nadir, is opposite thereto as the point N. 13. The Azimuths or Vertical
Circles are great Circles of the Sphere, concurring and intersecting each
other, in the Zenith, and Nadir, as Z f N. 14 The Horizon, is a great Circle,
90 degrees. Fig. 42.
distant from the Zenith, and Nadir; cutting all the Azimuths, at Rightangles,
and dividing the World into two equal parts, the upper and visible Hemisphere,
and the lower and invisible Hemisphere, represented by H R. 15. The Meridian of
a Place, is that Meridian, which passes by the Zenith, and Nadir, of Fig. 42.
the place as P Z S N. 16. The Alinicanthars, or Parallels of Altitude, are
small Circles, parrallel unto the Horizon, (imagined to ^pass through every
degree and minute of the Meridian, between the Zenith, and Horizon, B a F. 17.
Parallels of Latitude, or Declination, are small Circles parallel unto the
Equinoctial; they Fig. 42.
are called Parallels of Latitude, in respect to any place on the Earth, and
Parallels of Declination, in respect of the Sun, or Stars, in the Heavens. 18.
The Latitude of a place, is the height of the Pole above the, Horizon; or the
distance between the Zenith and the Equinoctial. 19. The Latitude of a Star, is
the Arch of a Circle, contained betwixt the Center of a Star, and the Ecliptic
line: this Circle making Rightangles, with the Ecliptic, is accounted either
Northward or Southward; according to the Situation of the Star. 20. Longitude
on Earth is measured by an Arch of the Equinoctial, contained between the
Primary Meridian, (or Meridian of that place where Longitude is assigned to
begin) and the Meridian of any other place, counted always Easterly. 21. The
Longitude of a Star, is that part of the Ecliptic, which is contained between
the Star's place in the Ecliptic, and the beginning of Aries, counting them
according unto the succession of Sines. 22. The Altitude of the Sun or Stars,
is the Arch of an Azimuth, contained betwixt the Center of the Sun, or Star,
and the Horizon. 23. Ascension is the rising of any Star, or part of the
Equinoctial, to any degree above the Horizon; and Descension is the setting of
it. 24. Right Ascension, is the number of Degrees and Minutes of the
Equinoctial; (i. e. from the beginning of Aries) which comes unto the
Meridian, with the Sun or Stars; or with any portion of the Ecliptic. 25.
Oblique-Ascension, is an Arch of the Equinoctial, between the beginning of
Aries, and that part of the Equinoctial which rises with the Center of a Star;
or with any portion of the Ecliptic in an Oblique Sphere: and Oblique
Descention, is that part of the Equinoctial, tha^ sets therewith. 26. The
Ascentional difference, is an Arch of the Equinoctial, being the difference
betwixt the Right and Oblique-Ascension. 27. The Amplitude, of the Sun or
Stars, is Fig. 43.
the distance of the rising or setting thereof, from the East or West point of
the Horizon. 28. The Parallax, is the difference between the true and apparent
place of the Sun or Star; so the true place in respect of Altitude, is in the
line ACE, or ADG, the Sun or Star being at C, or D, and the apparent place in
the Line BCF, and BDH, so likewise the Angles of the Parallax are ACB, or ECF;
and ADB, or GDB: also in the said Scheme, ABK represents a Fig. 43.
Quadrent (of the Globe or Earth,) on the Earth's Superficies: A the Center of
the Earth, and B any point of the Earth's Surface. 29. The Refraction of a
Star, is caused by the Atmosphere, or Vapourous thickness of the Air near the
Earth's Superficies, whereby the Sun and Stars seem always to rise sooner, and
and set later than really they do.
SECT. II. Of Astronomical Propositions.
PROP. I. The Distance of the Sun from the next Equinoctial point (either Aries
or Libra) being known, to find his Declination.
THE Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To S. of the Sun's distance from the next Equinoctial point,

So it S. of the Sun's greatest Declination,

To the S. of the Sun's present Declination sought.

PROP. II. The Sun's place given, to find his Right-Ascension.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To T. of the Sun's Longitude from the next Equinoctial point,

So is the Sc. of his greatest Declination,

To T. of his Right-Ascension from the next Equinoctial point.

PROP. III. To find the Sun's place or longitude from Aries, his Declination
being given.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As S. of the Suns greatest Declination,

To Radius or S. 90 00',

So is S. of his present Declination,

To S. of the Suns Place or Longitude from Aries If the Sun's Declination be
North, and increasing, this Proportion finds the Sun's distance from; but if
decreasing from in the northern Sines. But if the Sun's Declination be South,
and increasing from; if decreasing from, among the Southern Sines.


PROP. IV. By knowing the Suns Declination, to find his Right Ascension.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Tc. of the Suns greatest Declination,

So is T. of the Declination given,

To S. of the Suns right Ascension required From the next Equinoctial point
either, or.
.

PROP. V. By knowing the Latitude of a Place, and the Suns Declination, to find
the Ascensional Difference.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Tc. of the Latitude given,

So is T. of the Suns Declination given,

To the S. of the Ascensional difference required.

Note that if you reduce the degrees, etc. of the Ascensional difference into
hours, it will show you how much the Sun rises, or sets before, or after
six a Clock, in that Latitude.

PROP. VI. To find the Suns Oblique Ascension or Descension.
First find the Ascensional Difference by the 5th Proposition, and his
Right-ascension by the fourth: Now if the Suns Declination be Northerly, deduct
the Ascentional Difference out of his Right Ascension, from the beginning of,
(for the six Northern Signs) it leaves the Oblique Ascension; and added unto
the Rightascension, gives the Oblique-descension.

But if the Suns Declination be Southerly, the Ascentional Difference, added to
the Right-ascension, (for the six Southern Signs) gives the Right-ascension,
and subtracted there from leaves the Oblique-descension.

Plate 11 Page 105


PROP. VII. By knowing the Suns Declination, and the Latitude of a Place, to
find the Suns Amplitude.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. of the Latitude,

To the Radius or S. 90.

So is the S. of the Suns Declination,

To the S. of the Amplitude from the East or West Points of the Horizon.

PROP. VIII. By knowing the Suns Declination and Amplitude, from the North part
of the Horizon, to find the Latitude.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. of the Amplitude from the North,

To Radius or S. 90 00'

So is S. of his Declination given,

To Sc. of the required Latitude.

PROP. IX. By knowing the Latitude of a place, and the Sun's Declination, to
find at what time the Sun will be on the true East or West Points.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As T. of the given Latitude,

To T. of the Sun's Declination propounded,

So is Radius or S. 90 00',

To, Sc. of the Hour from Noon.

PROP. X. By knowing the Sun's Declination, and Latitude of a place, to find
his Altitude at six a Clock.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90 00',

To S. of the Sun's Declination,

So is S. of the Latitude of the place,

To S. of the Sun's Altitude at six a Clock.

PROP. XI. By knowing the Latitude of a place, and the Sun's Declination, to
find the Azimuth at six.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90 00',

To the T. of the Sun's Declination,

So is Sc. of the Latitude of the place,

To the T. of the Azimuth sought.

PROP. XII. By knowing the Latitude of a place, and the Sun's Declination, to
find the Sun's Altitude when he i^ on the true East or West points.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As S. of the Latitude,

To the Radius or S. 90 00',

So is the S. of the Declination,

To the S. of the Sun's Altitude being due Ea^^ or West.

PROP. XIII. To find the Sun's Altitude at any time of the day.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As Radius or S. 90 00',

To Tc. of the Poles height,

So is S. of the Sun's Distance,

From the Hour of Six,

To the T. of an Arch: which being subtracted from the Sun's Distance from the
Pole; say,

As Sc. of the Arch found,

To Sc. of the remaining Arch of the Sun's Distance from the Pole,

So is S. of the Poles height,

To the S. of the Sun's Altitude at the Hour required.

PROP. XIV. By knowing the Latitude of a Place, with the Sun's Declination, and
Altitude, to find the Hour of the Day.
To solve this Conclusion do thus: get the Sum of the Complements of the
Latitude, Declination and Altitude given As in Case 11 of Oblique Spherical
Triangles.
, Then find the Difference betwixt their half Sum, and the Complement of the
Altitude; then say,

As Radius or S. 90 00',

To Sc. of the Sun's Altitude,

So is Sc. of the Latitude of the Place,

To a fourth Sine: then again say,

As the fourth S.

To the S. of Z. of the Lat. Declin. and Alt.

So is the S. of X. of the Altitude to the Z,

To a fifth S. unto which Sine, if you add the Radius or 90 00', half that Sum
shall be the Sine of an Arch, whose double Complement is the Hour from the
Meridian.

PROP. XV. To find the Time of the Sun's Rising or Setting, and consequently
the Length of the Day or Night.
To resolve this Conclusion, first by prop. the 5. find the Ascensional
Difference, which reduced into Hours, and Minutes of Time, by allowing for
every 15 Degrees. one Hour, and for every Degrees. less than 15, 4', of Time, and for
every 15 Min. one Minute of Time.

Secondly, If the Sun's Declination be Northerly, the Ascentional Difference
added unto 6 Hours, gives the Time of Sunsetting, and subtracted therefrom,
leaves the Time of SunRising: On the contrary, if the Sun's Declination be
Southerly, the Ascentional Difference added unto 6 Hours, gives the Time of
Sunrising, and deducted therefrom, the Time of Sunsetting.

Thirdly, If you double the Time of SunRising, it gives you the length of the
Night; and the Time of Sunsetting, the length of the Day.

PROP. XVI. The Sun's Declination, Altitude and Azimuth known, to find the Hour
of the Day.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As the Sc. of the Sun's Declination,

To the S. of the Azimuth,

So is the Sc. of the Altitude,

To the S. of the Hour from Noon: which converted into Time, will show the Hour
of the Day.

PROP. XVII. By knowing the Sun's Declination, Altitude, and Hour from Noon, to
find the Azimuth.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As Sc. of the Sun's Altitude,

To S. of the Hour from Noon,

So is Sc. of the Sun's Declination,

To the S. of the Azimuth, required.

PROP. XVIII. By knowing the Latitude of a place, the Altitude of the Sun, and
the Hour from Noon, to find the Angle of the Sun's Position.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. of the Sun's Altitude,

To S. of the Hour from Noon,

So is Sc. of the Latitude,

To S. of the V. of the Sun's Position, at the time of the Question.

PROP. XIX. By knowing the Sun's Altitude, Declination, and Azimuth; to find
the Latitude.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As S. of the Sun's Azimuth,

To S. of his Distance from the North Pole,

So is S. of V of the Sun's Position,

To Sc. of the Latitude required.

PROP. XX. To find the length of the Crepusculum, or Twilight
The Crepusculum or Twilight, is nothing else but the Refraction of the Sun's
Beams in the Density of the Air. Which the Learned Pet. Nonnius found the
length of the Crepusculum (by his many strict observations Watched the Time
after Sunsetting when the Twilight in the West was shut in, so that no more
Twilight than in any other part of the Sky near the Horizon appeared there:
then by one of the known fixed Stars, having found the true Hour of the Night,
he found the length of the Twilight, to be as in the rule is mentioned.
) to continue from the time of the S(...) passing below the Horizon of a place,
until the Sun had run below the said Horizon 18 00', and then followed the
shutting in of the Twilight, and until the Sun was departed so low the
Twilight continued. -- To find which observe this Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the Sun's Declination,

So is Sc. of the Poles-height,

To a fourth Sine: which keep.

Then out of the Sun's Distance from the South-Pole, subduct the Complement of
the Pole; and of that remains and the degrees 62, being added to it, their Sum
and Difference found, say again.

As the fourth Sine found,

To S. Z of the remainder and 62 00',

So is S. X. of the remainder and 62 00',

To a Number, which being multiplied by the Radius is equal unto the Quadrat of
the Sine of the Angle of the Sun's Distance at the Ending of the Twilight, from
Noon next ensuing.

Then from the Sun of the whole Angle converted into Hours, substract the Hour
of the Sun's setting Or Diurnal Arch.
, it gives you the length of the Crepusculum, or Twilight.

But the Sun being in the Winter Tropic, makes the Twilight longest of any To
find the length of the least Crepusculum or Twilight.
Twilight, the whole Winter half year: Now in a certain Parallel, betwixt that
Tropic, and the Equinoctial is the shortest Crepusculum: the Declination of
which Parallel, is thus found.

As the Tc. of the Pole,

To the S of the Pole,

So is the T. of 99 00',

To S. of the Declination of the Parallel, in which the Sun makes the shortest
Crepusculum of the Year.

But before the Crepusculum come to be shortest, there is another Parallel, in
which the Crepusculum is equal to that of the Equinoctial: the Declination of
which is found thus.

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To S. of the Poles Elevation or Altitude,

So i^ S. of 18 00',

To S. of the Declination of the Parallel, in which the Sun makes the
Crepusculum equal to that in the Equinoctial.

PROP. XXI. To find the Quantity of the Angles, which the Circles of the 12
Houses make with the Meridian.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As the Radius or S. 90,

To T. of 60: for the 11th, 9th, 5th and 3d House, Or to the T. 30 for the
12th, 8th, 6th, and 2d House,

So is the Sc. of the Pole,

To the Tc. of any House with the Meridian.

PROP. XXII. To find the Right Ascension of the Point in the Equinoctial: and
also the Point in the Ecliptic; called Medium Coeli or Cor Coeli.
First, To find the Right Ascension of the Point of the Equinoctial; called
Medium Coeli, vel Cor Coeli, find out the Sun's Right Ascension, by prop. 2.
Then reduce the whole Time from Noon last past into degrees, which add unto the
right Ascension of the Sun, so shall their Agragat, be the right Ascension of
the point, which in the Equinoctial, is called Medium Coeli, vel Cor Caeli,
required to be found.

Secondly, By the 2 propositions aforegoing, you may find the right Ascension
of the point in the Ecliptic Culminant in the Meridian, called Medium Coeli
vel Cor Coeli, which is the Cuspis of the tenth House: and his Declination by
prop. the first.

PROP. XXIII. To find the Angle of the Ecliptic with the Meridian.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As the Radius or S. 90,

To S. of the Sun's Greatest Declination,

So is Sc. of the Sun's right Ascension, from the next Equinoctial point,

To Sc. of the V. of the Ecliptic, with the Meridian.

PROP. XXIV. To find the Angle of the Ecliptic with the Horizon.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the Altitude of Cor Coeli,

So is S. of the V. Ecliptic with the Meridian,

To Sc. of the V. of the Ecliptic and Horizon sought.

PROP. XXV. To find the Amplitude Ortive of the Ascendent, or Horoscopus.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To S. of Altitude of Med. Coeli,

So is T. of V. Ecliptic with the Meridian,

To Tc. of the Amplitude Ortive of the Ascendent, or the distance of the
Azimuth from the Meridian.

PROP. XXVI. To find the Ascendent degree of the Ecliptic, or the Cuspis of
the first House.
The Amplitude Ortive of the Ascendent, is equal to the Distance of the Azimuth
of 90, from the Meridian, wherefore the Cuspis of the first House, or Ascendent
Degree of the Ecliptic, may be found thus.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the V. Ecliptic with the Meridian,

So is Tc. of the Altitude of Med. Coeli,

To T. of the Distance of Med. Coeli, from the Ascendent Degrees.

PROP. XXVII. To find the Distance of the Cuspis of any House, from Med. Coeli.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Sc. of the remaining part of V. of the Ecliptic with the Meridian, (found
by prop. 28.)

To Sc of the former part of the V,

So is T. of the Altitude of Med. Coeli,

To T. of the Distance of the Cuspis of that House sought, from Med. Coeli.

PROP. XXVIII. To find the parts of the Angle of the Ecliptic with the
Meridian, cut with an Arch perpendicular to the Circle of any of the Houses.
The Analogy or Proportion is:

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. Altitude of Med. Coeli,

So is T. of the Circle of any House with the Meridian,

To Tc. of that part of that Angle which is next the Meridian:

Then substract that part found, out of the whole Angle, for the remaining or
latter part

PROP. XXIX. To find the Pole's Altitude, above any of the Circles of the
Houses.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

As the Radius or S 90,

To S. of V. of the Circle of the House with the Meridian: (found by the 21
prop.)

So is the S of the Poles Elevation, above the Horizon of the Place,

To S. of the Altitude of the Pole, above the Circle of Position.

PROP. XXX. By knowing the Latitude and Longitude of any fixed Star, to find
his Right Ascension and Declination.
The Analogy or Proportion is.

1. As Radius or S. 90,

To S. of the Stars Longitude from the next Equinoctial point,

So is Tc. of the Stars Latitude,

To T. of a fourth Arch.

Which compared with the Arch of Distance betwixt the Poles of the World and
the Ecliptic 23, 30'; And if the Latitude and Longitude of the Star be both of
one Dignity, i e. when the Star has North Latitude in the six Northern
Sines,,,,,,, or South Latitude in the six Southern Sines,,,,,,: Then shall the
difference between this found Arch, and the Page 216 Plate III
Distance of the Poles be your fifth Arch: But if the Latitude and Longitude of
the Star be of contrary qualities, i. e the one Northern, and the other
Southern, then add this fourth Arch to the Distance of the Poles 23 30', and
the Sum thereof shall be your fifth Arch; with which,

AGAIN, say.

2. As S. of the fourth Arch,

To S. of the fifth Arch,

So is T. of the Stars Longitude,

To T. of the Stars Right-ascension from the next Equinoctial point.

3. As Sc of the fourth Arch,

To Sc. of the fifth Arch,

So is S of the Stars Latitude,

To S. of the Stars Declination.

I might also show how by having the Latitude and Longitude of any two fixed
Stars, to find their Distance: but because it is the very same with finding the
Distance of any two Places on Earth, I refer you to the Directions of Prop 1, 2
and 3. of Chap. 7, ensuing, where you will see the plain Demonstration thereof.

PROP. XXXI. By knowing the Pole's Altitude, to find when any fixed Star shall
be due East or West.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To T. of the Stars Declination,

So is Tc. of the Pole,

To Sc. of the Stars Horary Distance from the Meridian.

PROP. XXXII. By knowing the Poles Altitude, to find the Elevation of any fixed
Star above the Horizon, being due East or West.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As S. of the Poles Altitude,

To Radius or S. 90,

So is S. of the Stars Declination,

To S. of the Stars Elevation, above the Horizon, at due East or West.

PROP. XXXIII. To find out the Horizontal Parallax of the Moon.
The Analogy or Proportion.

As the Moons Distance from the Center of the Earth,

To the Earth's Semidiameter,

So is Radius or S. 90,

So S. of the Moon's Horizontal Parallax in that Distance.

PROP. XXXIV. The Horizontal Parallax of the Moon being known, to find her
Parallax in any apparent Latitude.
This is the Analogy or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To S. of the Moon's Altitude,

So is S. of the Moon's Horizontal Parallax,

To S. of the Parallax in that Altitude.

PROP. XXXV. By knowing the Moon's Place in the Ecliptic, (having little or no
Latitude) and her Parallax of Altitude, to find the Parallaxes of her Longitude
and Latitude.
First, If the Moon be in the 90 of the Ecliptic, she has then no Parallax of
Longitude, and the Parallax of the Latitude, is the very Parallax in that
Altitude.

Secondly, But if the Moon be not in the 90th. Degree of the Ecliptic, to find
the Parallaxes of the Latitude and Longitude, the Analogy or Proportion is,

1. As Radius or S. 90,

To T. of the V. of the Ecliptic and Horizon,

So is Sc. of the Moon's Distance from the Ascendent, or Descendent degrees. of the
Ecliptic,

To Tc. of the Ecliptick's V, with the Azimuth of the Moon.

AGAIN say,

2. As the Radius or S. 90,

To S. of that V. found,

So is the Parallax of the Moon's Altitude,

To the Parallax of her Latitude sought.

LASTLY say,

3. As the Radius or S. 90, 00'

To Sc. of the former V. found,

So is the Parallax of the Moon's Altitude,

To the Parallax of his Longitude sought, which being added to the true Motion
of the Moon, if she be on the East part of the 90 of the Ecliptic. Or from it
to be deducted if she be on the West part of the 90 of the Ecliptic.

PROP. XXXVI. How by knowing the Refraction of a Star, to find his true
Altitude.
For the speedy performance of which I have annexed this Table of Refractions
of the Stars observed by Tycho Brabe a Nobleman of Denmark, and a most famous
Astronomer.

A Table of the Refraction of the Stars observed by Tycho Brabe.
Altitude. Refraction. o 30' 00" 1 21 30 2 15 30 3 12 30 4 11 00 5 10 00 6 9 00
7 8 15 8 6 45 9 6 00 10 5 30 11 5 00 12 4 30 13 4 00 14 3 30 15 3 00 16 2 30 17
2 00 18 1 15 19 0 30 20 0 00

The USE of which Table is thus.

EXAMPLE.
Suppose the Altitude of a Star were found by Observation to be 13; the
correspondent Refraction is 4' 00", which subtracted from 13 leaves 12, 56',
which is the true Altitude

CHAP. VII. Of GEOGRAPHY.
Defin.
GEOGRAPHY is an art Mathematical, which shows how the Situations of
Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns, Villages, Forts, Castles, Mountains, Woods,
Havens, Rivers, Creeks, etc. being on the Surface of the Terrestrial Globe, may
be described, and designed, in commensuration Analogical to Nature, and Verity:
and most aptly to our view may be represented.

Ptolomy says of Geography, (...). That it is a description of all the known
Earth, imitated by writing and delineation: with all other things belonging
thereunto. Of all which I shall say somewhat, as to its Situation, Commodity,
Customs, etc. concerning which Ovid says, Met. lib. 2. Terra, viros, Urbesque
gerit, frugesque, ferasque, Fluminaque; haec super est Caeli fulgentis imago.

In English Thus.
The Earth, Men, Towers, Fruits, Beasts, and Rivers bears,
And over these are place'd the Heavenly Spheres.
SECT. I. Of GEOGRAPHICAL Definitions.
Defin.
1. THE Globe of the Earth is a Spherical Body composed of Earth, and Water,
and is divided into Continents, Islands and Seas. 2. A Continent is a great
Quantity of Land not separated, interlaced or divided by the Sea, wherein are
Kingdoms, Principalities and Nations, as EUROPE, ASIA and AFRICA, are one
Continent: and AMERICA is another. 3. An Island is such a part of the Earth
that is environed round with Water on every Side, as the Isle of Great Britain,
Java, Wight, etc. 4. A Peninsula is such a Tract of Land which being almost cut
off from the Main Land, and encompassed round with Water, yet nevertheless is
joined unto the firm Land, by some little Isthmus, as Peloponesus, Peruviana,
Taurica, Cymtryca and Morea in the Levant. 5. An Isthmus is a little narrow
Neck of Land which joyneth the Peninsula unto the Continent. 6. A Promontory is
some high Mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea, the utmost end of
which is called a Cape: as Cape-boon, Esperance, Cape d'Verde, and Cape
d'Coquibocao. 7. The Ocean is a general Collection of Waters, which environeth
the World on every side, and produces Seas, Straits, Bays, Lakes, and Rivers:
Of which and other Waters Ovid thus speaks in his Metamorphosis. Tum Freta
diffudi^t, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Jussit, and ambitae circundare littora terrae.
He spread the Seas, which then he did command
To swell with Winds, and compass round the Land.
8. The Sea is part of the Ocean, to which we cannot come but through some
Strait, as the Mediterranean, or Baltic Sea. 9. A Strait is a part of the
Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, yet opens a way to the Sea, as the
Straits of Gibralter, Helespont, etc 10. A Creek is a crooked Shore thrusting,
as. it were, two Arms forth to hold the Sea; as the Adriatic, Persian, and
Corinthian Creeks: from whence are produced Rivers, Brooks and Fountains: which
are engendered of Congealed Air in the Earths Concavity, and seconded by
Seawater creeping through the hidden Cranies of the Earth. 11. A Bay is a
great Inlet of Land, as the Bay of Mexico, and Biscay. 12. A Gulf is a greater
Inlet of Land and deeper than a Bay, as the Gulf of Venice, and Florida. 13. A
Climate is a certain space of Earth and Sea, included within the space of two
Parallels; and there have been anciently accounted these seven: viz. 1. Dia
Meros, 2. Dia Syenes, 3. Dia Alexandria, 4. Dia Rhodes, 5. Dia Rhomes, 6. Dia
Boristhenes, and 7. Dia Ripheos. 14. A Zone is a certain space of Earth
contained betwixt certain Circles of the Sphere, of which there are five: viz.
The Torrid or Burning Zone, two Temperate, and two Frigid or Frozen Zones.
The Torrid Zone is that which lies on each side the Equinoctial, whose bounds
are the two Tropicks of and.

The two Temperate Zones are those which lies betwixt the two Tropicks of and,
and the Palar Circles.

The two Frigid Zones lies between the Artick and Antartick Circles, and their
respective Poles: Of which Ovid thus speaks.

Metam. 1.

Utque duae dextra Coelum, totidemque sinistra
Part secant Zonae, quinta est ardientior illis:
Sic onus inclusum munero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, totidemque plaga tellure premuntur:
Quarum quae media est, non est habitalis aestu;
Nix tegit alta duas: totidem inter utramque locavit
Temperiemque dedit mista cum Frigore Flamma.
SECT. II. Geographical Descriptions of the Earth.
THE whole Earth is divided into four parts.

VIZ.
EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA and AMERICA.
EUROPE, the first part of the World, is Europe.
divided from ASIA by the Mediterranean Sea; bounded on the West with the
Western Ocean; East with the River Tanais. It is lesser than ASIA, or AFRICA,
yet does excel all the other parts, in Worthiness, Fame, Power, multitudes of
well builded Cities, strong Fortifications, full of a Wity and Learned People,
Courageous Wariours, and the knowledge of God, better than all the Riches of
the World. It once had the dominion of ASIA and AFRICA, and in it were fourteen
Mother Tongues, and does contain these Provinces: Viz. Italy, Spain, Alps,
France, Britain, Belgia, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Poland, Hungary,
S^lavonia, Dacia, and Greece, with its several Islands, which shall be
mentioned in their due places.

Italy Which Pliny has adorned in these words (says he) Italia terrarum
omnium alumna, eadem and parens, numine Deum electa, qua Coelum ipsum clarius
faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia, ritus molliret, tot populorum discordes
linguas sermonis commercio ad Colloquia distraheret, and humanitati hominem
daret, i. e. Italy (says Pliny) is the Nurse and the Parent of all Religion,
was elected by the Providence of the Gods, to make (if possible) the Heavens
more famous; to gather the scattered Empires of the World into one Body, to
temper the Barbarous rites of the Nations, to unite so many disagreeing
Languages of Men by the benefit of one common Tongue: and in a word to restore
Man to his Humanity.
the Mother of Latin learning, is bounded Europe.
East with the Adriatic and Tuscan Seas, West with France, North with Germany,
and South with the River Varus, and the Alps. It has had seven kinds of
Governments: First Kings, Dictators, Consuls, Decimivires, Tribunes, Emperors,
and lastly Popes. It far excels all the other Lands in EUROPE in
fruitfulness and pleasantness. The Inhabitants are witty and frugal, yet hot
and lascivious, and very jealous of their Wives; they are of the Popish
Religion, and its chief Commodities are Rice, Silk, Velvets, Sattins,
Taffeties, Grogerams, Arras, Gold and Silver, Thread, Venetian Glasses, etc.

Italy at this day contains the Kingdom of Naples, Sicily, Sardina, the Lands
of the Pope, now Innocent the XI. the Dukedom of Tuscany, Urbin, the Republic
of Venice, Genoa, and Luca. The Estates of Lumbardy, being the Dukedom of
Millain, Mantua, Modena, Parma, Mountferrat, and the Principality of Piemont,
of all which we shall treat in their order.

The Kingdom of Naples is environed with Europe.
the Adriatic, Ionian, and Tuscan Seas; except where it is joined to the Lands
of the Church, from which it is separated by a line drawn from the mouth of the
River Tronto, falling into the Adriatic, and to the springhead of Axofenus,
taking in all the East of Italy, 1468 miles. It is very fertile, abounding with
all things necessary for the life of Man, delight, and Physic: from hence come
the Neopolitan Horses. It has had 13 Princes, 24 Dukes, 25 Marquesses, 19
Earls, and 900 Baronets, and 26 Kings of several Countries of the Norman and
Spanish race, whom it is now under: here the Disease called the French Pox
derived its Original: the Arms are Azure Seem of Flower-d'-lices, or a File of
three Lables Gules; its revenues are 2500000 Crowns, 20000 of which belongs to
the Pope, and the rest are employed to maintain the Garrisons against the Turks;
so that scarcely 60000 Crowns falls to the King of Spain s share; it has 20
Archbishops, and 124 Bishops Sees.

Sicily is situated under the fourth Climate, it shoots forth into the Seas
with three Promontories; the Inhabitants are Eloquent, Ingenious, and Pleasant,
but very unconstant, and Talkative; the first Inventors of Oratory. It Is a
fruitful Soil, it yields Wine, Grain, Oil, Honey, Gold, and Silver, Agats,
Emeralds, Allom, Salt, Sugar, and Silks. Here is the Hill Aetna, supposed to be
Hell, and by the Papist Purgatory, because of its vomiting Smoke and Fire: it
has many Cities, Rivers, Lakes, whose descriptions must here be omitted; it
has had eight Kings; the first were of the Arragon Family, and began Rule Anno
1281. But it is now united to the Crown of Spain; its Revenues are 800000, or a
1000000 of Ducats, which is disburst on the Europe.
Account of the Viceroy, and Defense of the Country; the Arms are four
Pallets Gules, Sable for Aragon, between two Flanches Argent, charged with as
many Eagles Sable beaked Gules. It has had seven Princes, four Dukes, thirteen
Marquesses, fourteen Earls, one Viscount and fortyeight Barons, they are of the
Romish Religion, and have three Archbishops, and nine Bishops.

The Kingdom and Isle of Sardina, lies West from Sicily and Cap Bara, whose
length is 180, and breadth 90 Miles; the People are low of Stature, and of a
swarthy Complexion, rude, slothful, and rebellious, their diet mean, yet rich
in their Apparel, they are of the Romish Religion; but have an ignorant and
illiterate Clergy. It belongs to the King of Spain, and governed by a Viceroy,
under whom are two Deputy Spaniards: but other inferior Officers may be
Natives. It has neither Wolf, nor Serpent, nor venomous Beast, but the Fox
only, and a little Spider, which cannot endure the light of the Sun; they are
destitute of Water, and are therefore forced to keep the Rain that falls in
Summer for their Use in Winter, the Air is unhealthfull and Pestilential; the
Soil Fertile, but ill manured; it has plenty of Cattle, their Horses will last
very long, the Natives ride on their Bullocks as we on our Horses, here is also
a Beast called Mufrones, resembling a Stagg, whose Hide is used as Armor, and
an Herb which eaten produces Death with excessive (...)aughter, it yields to
the King of Spain but a small Revenue. The Arms are Or, a Cross Gules betwixt
four Sarazens Heads, Sabled Curled Europe.
Argent, it has several Isles belonging thereunto, it has three Archbishops,
and fifteen Bishops.

The Lands of the Church or the Pope's Dominion in Italy, lies West of Naples,
extended North and South from the Adriatic to the Tuscan Seas, bounded on the
North with the River Trontus; on the South-east with Axofenes: hy the Rivers
Poe and Frore, separated from the Republique of Venice, on the South-west by
the River Piscio; by which it is divided by the Modern Tuscany, it is in the
middle of Italy, its breadth is 115, and length 300 Miles, it is most exceeding
fruitful, very Populous, there have been 15 Exarches of Ravena in Romandiola,
17 Dukes and Marquesses of Ferata; the Revenue thereof to the Pope is 250000
Crowns, there has also been 6 Dukes of Urbin, its Revenue are 100000 Crowns,
but the most splendid Glory of Italy is the City of Rome, sometimes the Empress
of the World, and was the Seat of the past Popes, and the now present Pope
Innocent the XI. the inferior spiritual Governors, are these, Viz. Cardinals,
Friars of the Order of St. Basil, Austin, Jerome, Carmelites, Crouchedfriers,
Dominicans, Benedictines, Franciscans, Jesuits and Oratorians; and of Nuns, the
Order of St. Clear and Bridget, which to name wholly does deserve a particular
Treatise, here are 44 Archbishops, and 57 Bishops.

The Republique of Venice, lies Northward of the Popes Dominions, from
Romandiola to the Alps, limited on the South with the Territories of Ferrata,
and Romandiola; on the West with the Dukedom of Millain; on the North with the
Alps; and on the East with the Adriatiok Sea, Europe.
and the River Arsia. It is a very fruitful Country, well peopled, their
Government Aristocratical, and popular, their Religion Popish, they baptize the
Sea yearly; they have had a hundred Dukes, they have two Principal Orders of
Knighthood of St. Mark the Patron of the famous City of which the Poet speaks.

Viderat Adriacis venetiam Neptunus inundis
Stare Urbem, and toto ponere jurae mari:
Nunc mihi Tarpeias, quantumvis Jupiter, arces
Objice, and illa tui moenia martis ait.
Sic Pelago Tibrim praefers, urbem aspice utramque
Illam bomines dices, hanc posuisse Deos.
Instituted 1330, and renewed 1562, they are to be all of Noble Blood: their
Motto is Pax tibi Marce. The other is of the Glorious Virgin, iristituted 1222,
their Duty is to be a refuge to Widows and Orphans, and to procure the peace of
Italy; their Habit a White Surcoat over a Russet Cloak, representing Religion,
as well as Belliarcity, there are two Patriarchs, and sixteen Bishops.

The Dukedom of Florence, being the Seat of the Great Duke of Tuscany, is
bounded on the East by the River Pisca; on the West by the River Macra, and the
Fort Sarzana; on the North by the Appenuine Hills; and on the South with the
Tuscan Seas. Its length is 261 Miles, and breadth not known; the Order of
Knighthood is that of St. Stephen, instituted 1567, they are to be Nobly born,
and in lawful Wedlock, without Insamy: their Robe is of White Chamblet, with a
Red-Cross on the left Side of Europe.
their Midway Garment, their Number I cannot certainly know, the Grand Duke is
their Sovereign; the Revenue of this Country is great, their Duke is also a
Merchant, and receives Excise of all Commodities, the Arms is Or, five
Tortecax Gules, two, two, and one, one, on chief Azure charged with three
Flowerde-Luces, of the first. They are of the Popish Religion, and they have
three Archbishops, and twenty six Bishops.

The Estate of Luca, lies betwixt the Estate of the Grand Duke, and the
Republique of Genoa: The Government is Aristocratical, and Democracy, their
Principal Magistrate is called, Gone Fatinere, and is changed every second
Month: being assisted by a certain Number of Citizens, which are changed every
six Months, during which time they lie together in the Common Hall; their
Protector is Elective from some Neighboring Prince: they are a very generous
People, good Merchants, they sell rich Cloths of Gold and Silver; the Revenues
yearly are 80000 Crowns, it can raise for War 15000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, they
are of the Popish Religion, and have two Bishops, and acknowledge the Bishop of
Florence for their Metropolitan.

The Republique of Genoa, lies West of Tuscany, from whence it is divided by
the River Macra, it was formerly a large State but have now only Liguria, and
the Isle of Corsica; the Inhabitants are good Warriors, Merchants, and subtle
Userers; here the Women have the most ^iberty of any in all Italy, so that they
may convense with whom they will, either publicly, or privately; from hence
arises a Europe.
Proverb, That Genoa is a Country of Mountains without Woods; Seas without
Fish; Men without Faith; and Women without shame. They have a Duke, with Eight
Assistants, all subject to the General Council of 400 Men; which hold but two
years, they are of the Popish Religion, and have one Archbishop, and fourteen
Bishops.

The Estates of Lumbardy is bounded on the East with Romandiola, and Ferrata;
on the West and North with the Alps; and on the South with the Apenuine hills:
Now as Italy is the Garden of EUROPE, so is Lumbardy of Italy, for its
exceeding Fruitfulness.

The Dukedom of Millain has on the East the State of Mantua, and Parma; on the
West Piemont, and part of Switzerland; on the North Marca Trevigana; and on the
South the Apenuine, parting it from Liguria: it was once the chief Dukedom in
Christendom, and is now in the Spanish Territories; its Revenues are 8000
Ducat's, their Arms are Argent, a Serpent Azure Crowned, Or, in his George an
Infant Gules, their Religion is Popish, they have one Archbishop, and six
Bishops.

The Dukedom of Mantua, is bounded West with Millain; East with Romandiola;
North with Marca Triugiana; and South with the Dukedom of Parma. The Country
yields good store of Corn, Fruit and Wine, the Inhabitants are rustic, foolish
in their Apparel, it is a free state and has had many Dukes, the Order of
Knighthood is that of the Blood of Christ: instituted 1608, it consists of
twenty Knights, the Mantuan Duke is their Sovereign; the Collar has threads of
Gold, laid on with Fire, Europe.
with this Motto Domine probasti, to the Collar are pendent two Angels,
supporting three drops of Blood, and circumscribed with this Motto, Nihil ista
triste recepto. Its Revenue is 500000 Ducats; Its Arms are Argent, a Cross
Patere Gules, between four Eagles, Sable membred of the second, under an
Eschucheon in Fife, charged quarterly with Gules, a Lion Or, and Or, three
bars Sable: Their Religion is Popish, here is one Archbishop, with four
Bishops.

I shall pass by the Dukedoms of Modena, Parma and Mountferrat, they being but
small Estates of Italy, having but four Bishops: they are of the Popish
Religion, the Arms of Modena and Parma are as Ferrata; and the Arms of
Mountferrat, a chief Argent.

And here we should describe Piemont the last part of Italy, but being but part
in Italy, and the Alps belonging to the Duke of Savoy, I shall defer it to the
Alpian Descriptions.

Now Italy has these most famous Cities, viz. Genoa, Milain, Venice, Florence,
Rome, Bologne and Naples, the Rivers most famous are Arnus, Po and Tiber, and
so much for Italy.

The Alps begin about the Ligustick Seas, and crosses all along the Borders of
France and Germany, and extend as far as the Gulf of Cornero; It has these
Provinces, viz. the Dukedom of Savoy (to which Piemont belongs) Geneva,
Wallisland, Switzerland, and the Country of the Grizons, of all which I shall
give a short and plain Description.

Piemont is part of the Alps, situated at the Foot of the Mountains, bounded
North with Europe.
the Switzes; East with Millain and Mountferrat; West with Savoy; and on the
South it runs into a Narrow Valley to the Mediterranean, having Mountferrat
on one side, and Province and part of the Alps on the other: it is very
fruitful compared with Savoy, but yet inferior to any part of Italy: The Arms
are Gules, a Cross Argent, charged with a Lebel of three points Azure.

Savoy is bounded East with Wallisland and Piemont; West and South with
Daulphin, and LaBress; and North with Switzerland, and the Lake of Geneva: this
is a Mountainous Country, very healthful, but not very fruitful. The
Inhabitants are dull and slothful, it has had thirty Dukes and Earls, it is a
place of Natural strength; its Revenues is yearly 1000000 of Crowns. The order
of Knighthood is that of Anunciado, instituted 1480, their Collar has 50
links, (to show the Mystery of the Virgin) appendent to it is her Effigies, and
instead of a Motto these Letters F. E. R. T. i. e. Fortitudo ejus Rhodum
tenuit, which is engraven on each link of the Chain, interwoven like a
True-loversknot. The Number fourteen, besides the Duke Sovereign of the Order,
their Arms are G. a Cross A.

Geneva was a City of the Dukedom of Savoy, but now a free State: having both
cast off the Duke and his Holiness the Pope, with all the Clergy. They are now
Calvanist Protestants: their Government Presbyterial; their Language the worst
of French, they are an industrious People, and good Merchants.

Wallisland reaches from the Mount De Burken, to the Town of St. Maurice,
where the Hills do shut up the Valleys, so that a Bridge Europe.
is lain from one Hill to 'tother, under which passes the River Rosue, which
Bridge is defended by a Castle and two strong Gates; on the other side it is
surrounded with steep and horrid Mountains; covered with a Crust of Ice not
passable by Armies; the Inhabitants are courteous to Strangers, but unnatural
to each other: they are of the Romish Religion, and subject to the Bishop of
Sion; the Deputies of the seven Resorts, have voices in his Election, and join
with him in Diets, for choosing Magistrates; desiding Grievancies, and
determining matters of State. The Valleys of this Country is very fruitful in
Saffron, Corn, Wine and Delicate Fruits, they have a Fountain of Salt, many hot
Baths, and Spaw-Waters, they have plenty of Cattle, with a wild Stag footed as
a Goat, and horned as a fallow Deer: who in Summer is blind with heat.

Switzerland is bounded East with the Grisons; West with Mount-Jove and the
Lake of Geneva; North with Suevia; and South with Wallisland, and part of the
Alps; this Land is a very Mountainous Country, but yet has some rich Meddows.
It is 240 in length and 180 Miles in breadth, the Inhabitants are rich, but
rugged like their Soil: good Soldiers: they are some Papists and some
Protestants, others Zwinglians, yet have they toleration under a Popular
Government.

The Country of the Grisons is bounded East with Tyrol, North with
Switzerland, South with Suevia, Switzerland, and Lumbardy; it is a very
Mountainous and Barren Land, their Religion Protestant, their Government Europe.
Popular; there are in this Alpin Provinces two Archbishops, and thirteen
Bishops. Its chief Cities are Turin, Geneva, Basil and Zurich, in all of which
are Universities.

France is bounded East with Germany; and South and East with the Mediterranean
Seas and Alps; North with the British Seas; It has been esteemed the worthiest
Kingdom in Christendom, it yields plenty of Grains and Wines, wherewith it
supporteth other Lands, it consists of many great Dukedoms and Provinces. It
has great and mighty Cities, the People are Ingenious and good Warriers, the
Government is Monarchial, their Religion Popish, but intermixed with
Protestants, which of late has endured grievous Persecutions. Their Orders of
Knighthood are that of St. Michael instituted 1409, consisting of 300 Persons,
their Habit is a long Cloak of White Damask down to the Ground, with a Border
interwoven with Cockleshels of Gold, interlaced and furred with Ermins, with a
Hood of Crimson-velvet, and a long Tippit about their Necks, and a Collar woven
with Cockleshells, with this Motto, Immensitremor Oceani, to it hangs appendent
the Effigies of St. Michael conquering the Dragon. Their Seat is St. Michael's
Mount in Normandy. 2dly the Order of the Holy Ghost instituted 1579, so that
whosoever was admitted to the Order of St. Michael, must and was first
dignified with this; proving their Nobility by three Descents; and be bound by
Oath to maintain the Romish Religion; and persecute all Dissenters thereunto.
Their Robe is a Black Velvet Mantle, portrayed with Lillies and Flames of Gold:
the Europe.
Collar of Flower-de-Luces, and Flowers of Gold, with a Dove and Cross
appendent to it. The Arms of France, are Azure three Flower-deLuces, Or; It
has seventeen Archbishops, 107 Bishops, 132000 Parishes, and has these
Magnisicent Cities, viz. Amiens, Rouen, Paris, Troys, Nants, Orleans, Diion,
Lions, Bordeaux, Toulose, Marsailles, Grenoble and Anverse; the Rivers of most
Note are the Loyre, Garone, Rhone and the Seyne.

The Pirenean-hills lies betwixt France and Spain, and are two Potent
Kingdoms, esteemed 240 Miles long, the People are barbarous and scarce of no
Religion at all.

Spain is separated from France by the Pirenean-hills; on all other sides
environed with the Sea; this Land yields all sorts of Wine, Oil, Sugars,
Grains, Metals, as Gold and Silver, and it is Fertile; the Inhabitants are
Ambitious, Proud, Superstitious, Hypocrites and Lascivious, yet good Soldiers;
by enduring Hunger, Thirst, Labor, etc. It contains diverse Kingdoms. 1.
Goths. 2. Navars, it has had 41 Kings. Their Arms are Gules, a Carbuncle Nowed
Or, their Order of Knighthood was of the Lilly, their Blazon a Pot of Lillys,
with the Effigies of the Virgin on it, their Duty is to defend the Faith, and
daily to repeat a certain Number of Ave-Maries. 3dly Biscay and Empascon, has
had nineteen Lords, their Arms Argent, two Wolves Sable, each in his Mouth a
Lamb of the second. 4ly Leon and Oviedo has had thirty Kings, the Arms Argent,
a Lion Passant crowned Or. 5ly. Galicia has had ten Kings, the Arms Azure Sema
of Cressels siched a Chalice Europe.
crowned Or. 6ly. Corduva has had twenty Kings, the Arms Or, a Lion Gules
armed and crowned of the first, a Border Azure charged with eight Towers
Argent. 7ly. Granado has had twenty Kings, the Arms Or, a Pomgranet slipped
Vert. 8ly. Marcia. 9ly. Tolledo has had eleven Morish Kings. Ioly. Castile
has had twenty Kings, the Order of Mercia is his chief Order, here the Arms
is a Cross Argent, and four Beads, Gules in a Field Or, their Habit white, the
Rule of their Order that of St. Augustine, they are to redeem Captives from
Turkey. 11ly. Portugal (the Native soil of the most serene Catharine Queen
Dowager) has had 21 Kings, the Orders of Knight here is first Avis, wearing a
Green Cross, 2dly of Christ instituted 1321, their Robe is a black Cassock
under a white Surcoat with a Red Cross hanging in the midst a white Line, and
their Duty is to expel Mores out of Boetica, the Arms are Argent, on five
Escucheons Azure, as many Befants in saltire of the first pointed, Sable within
a powder Gules, charged with seven Towers Or. 12ly. Majorica has had four
Kings. 13ly. Arragon has had twenty Kings, their Order of Knighthood is of
Mintesa, their Robe a red Cross on their Breast, the Arms Or, four Pallets
Gules, all which Kingdoms are now united into one Monarchy, under the King of
Spain, their Religion Popish: the King is not rich by reason of his great
Expenses to keep his Dominions, in which are eleven Archbishops, and 52
Bishops, and has these most notable Cities, viz. Toledo, Madrid, Leon, Fax,
Siville, Grenado, Mursy, Saragosa, Bracelon, Pamphelune, Europe.
Bilbo, Priede, St. James of Compostella, and Lesbone, and Rivers famous are
the Dower, Tagus, Gadian and Guadalguinr.

Great Britain consists of England and Scotland, and is the Biggest Isle in
EUROPE, and the Glory thereof; it is a temperate Soil, a sound Air, and
yields all manner of good things, it is environed all round with the Seas; I
shall begin first with England.

England has many pleasant Rivers well stored with Fish, excellent Havens,
commodious Mines of Silver, Lead, Iron and Tinn, abundance of Woods, good
Timber, plentiful in Cattle, good Wool of which is made fine Cloth, which
serves not only themselves but vended into other Countries, the chief City is
London, in which are two of the Wonders of the World, viz. the Monument and
Bridge over the Thames, the People are brave Warriers, both by Sea and Land, as
Europe has felt and can testify to their Grief, they are learned in all manner
of noble Sciences; the Order of Knighthood is that of St. George, or the
Garter, there are 26 Knights of it, whereof the King is the Sovereign, their
Ensign is a blue Garter buckled on the left Leg, with this Motto -- Honey Soit
Qui Mall (...) Pense, and about their Necks they do wear a blue Ribbon, at the
End of which hangs the Image of St. George, upon which day this Order is
Celebrated: secondly of the Bath, instituted 1009, they use to be Created at
the Coronation of Kings and Queens, and at the Enstalling of the Prince of
Wales. The Knights thereof distinguished by a red Ribbon, which they wear about
their Necks, their Duty is to defend Religion, Europe.
Widows, Maids and Orphans, with the Kings right. Thirdly of Barronets and
Hereditary Honor, the Arms are Mars, three Lions Passant, Gardant Sol, their
Religion is the Protestant; they have two Archbishops and twenty Bishops. The
length of England is 320, and breadth 250 Miles, it has 857 famous Bridges,
325 Rivers, it is defended and environed with Turbulent Seas; guarded by
unaccessible Cleves and Rocks; and defended by a strong and Puissant Navy; so
that of it may well be said,

Insula praedives, que toto vix eget Orb;
Et cujus totus indiget Orbis open.
Insula praedives, cujus miretur and optet
Delicias Solomon octavianus opes.
Its chief Cities are London, York, Bristol, and Rivers are the Thames, Severn,
Humber, and the Ouze.

Wales is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except toward England on the
East; it is a barren and mountainous Country: Its chief Commodities are their
Freeze, and Cottons. The Inhabitants are faithful in their promises to all
men, but yet much inclined to Choler, and subject to Passion, which Aristotle
calls (...). It contains 14 Shires, 13 Forests, 36 Parks, 230 Rivers, and
1016 Parishes. They are so resolute and valiant (says Henry III. writing to
Emanuel then Emperor of Constantinople) That they dare encounter Naked with
armed Men, being ready to spend their Blood for their Country, and pawn their
Life for Praise. They are Protestants, and have four Bishops Europe.
but no Towns of Note.

Scotland is the Northern part of Britain, environed all round with the Sea,
unless where it is joined to England. Polydore says it is 480 in length, and
60 miles in breadth, divided into Highlands and Lowlands: the Highlands are
Irish-Scots, and the Lowlands English-Scots. It is not so fruitful as England;
the chief City is Edenbrough. Its Commodities is course Wool, and Cloth, Malt,
Hides, and Fish. The Order of Knighthood is that of St. Andrew, the Knights did
wear about their Necks a Collar interlaced with Thistles, with the Picture of
St. Andrew appendant thereunto, having this Motto -- Nemo me impune lacessit.
2. Of Nova Scotia instituted by King James, Anno 1622, hereditary the Knight
hereof distinguished by a Ribbond of Orange-tawny. The Arms of Scotland is Sol,
a Lion Rampant, Mars within a double Tressure counterflowered; they are
Protestants, and have 2 Archbishops and 12 Bishops. The Cities most Famous are
Edenbrough, Sterlin, Aberdeen and St. Andrews: and they have the Famous Rivers
Tay and Tweed.

Ireland is on all sides environed round with the Irish Seas, and St. Georges
Channel. In length is 300 and breadth 120 miles. The Natives are strong and
nimble, haughty, careless, hardy, bearing cold and hunger with patience and in
a word, if they are bad you shall never find worse; but if good scarcely find
better. The Wild Irish have a custom to kneel down to the New Moon, praying it
to leave them in as good health as it found them. They received the Christian
Faith 435. The Soil is fruitful Europe.
and it has good Pasture, yet full of Boggs and Woods, and multitude of Fowls,
and in it will dwell no venomous Creature. The Revenues yearly have been 40000
li. The Air is Temperate, cooler in Summer, and hotter in the Winter than in
England. Their Arms are Azure an Harp or stringed Argent, they are some
Protestants and Papists mixed: they have 4 Archbishops, and 19 Bishops; the
chief City is Dublin.

The Islands belonging to Great Britain, are 1. Wight (the place where I first
drew my Breath, and the Land of my Nativity) 2. Surlings, 3. Garnsey, 4.
Jersey, 5. Anglesey, 6. Man, 7. Hebrides, 8. Orcades, 9. Portland, 10.
Sunderland, 11. Holy Island. And thus I have done with the British Empire; all
these Parts described belong to it, and are under the Royal Scepter of his
Sacred Majesty JAMES the Second (whom God long preserve.) Thus I have finished
the description of Great Britain having this only to say -- Quae Deus conjunxit
nemo separet.

Belgia, or the Low Countries, consists of several wealthy Provinces: viz.
The Dukedom of Brabant, Guelderland, Lymburge, Flanders, Artois, Henault,
Holland, Zeland, Mamen, Zukfen, the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, Freezeland,
Michlen, Ouserisen, and Graving. All which Lands are very fertile and populous,
having 208 Cities, and 6300 Villages, with Parish-Churches, Castles, and Forts;
and is watered with the Rhine and the Mose, the Mara and the Sheld. It has
commodious Havens, the Inhabitants are brave Warriors, good Mechanics, Europe.
their chief Commodity is Rhenish Wine, Linen and Woollen Cloth, Camericks,
Lace of Gold and Silver, Silk, Taffatys, Velvet, Grogerams and Says, all
manner of Twined threads, refined Sugars, Buff, Ox-hides, Spanish-leather,
Pictures, Books, Cables, Ropes and Herrings. Now Belgia is bounded East with
Westphalen, Gulick, Cleve, and the Isle of Triers; West with the Main Ocean;
North with the River Ems; and South with Picardy and Champagne. The People are
of the reformed Religion all except Flaunders and Artoise, and they have the
Popish Tenants, here are three Archbishops, and fifteen Bishops. The Order of
Knighthood is that of the Golden Fleece, instituted 1439. their Habit is a
Collar of Gold, interlaced with Iron, Or. Ex far Flammam, at the end thereof
hangs a Golden Fleece. Their chief Cities are Mentz, Antwerp, Amsterdam,
Roterdam, and Rivers are the Shield and Mosa.

Germany is the greatest Province in all EUROPE, and is bounded East with
Russia, Poland and Hungary; West with France, Switzerland and Belgia; North
with the Baltic Seas, and part of Denmark; and South with the Alps and parted
from Italy: it contains Bohemia and Pragu, it is adorned with Magnificent
Towers, strong Fortifications, Castles and Villages, very Popular; the Soil is
Fertile; many Navigable Rivers do to it belong, Good Spaws, Hot Baths, Mines of
Gold and Silver, Tinn, Copper, Lead and Iron; they are some Papists, others
Protestants, Zwinglians, Calvinists, and Lutherans. The Arms is Sol, an Eagle
displayed with two Heads, Saturn armed, and Europe.
Crowned Mars. There are six Archbishops, and 34 Bishops. They are a People
much given to drinking; which made the Poet say --

Germani possunt cunctos tolerare labores,
O utinam possent tam been far sitim.
The chief Cities of Germany are these, viz. Strasborough, Cologn, Munster,
Norimbergh, Ausburg, Numick, Vienna, Prague, Dresda, Berlin, Stetin, Lubeck;
Its chief Rivers the Rhine, Weser, Elbe, Oder, and the Danow, and Cities of
Bohemia, are Cutenberg, and Budrozu.

Denmark and Norway, are two great Regions and bounded South with Germany; they
have North Latitude 71 30', toward the East they border on Sweden; and
elsewhere environed with the Sea. Their Commodities are Oxen, Grain, Fish,
Tallow, Sand, Nuts, Oil, Hides, Goatskins, Fir-trees for Masts, Boards, etc.
Pitch, Tarr and Brimstone: they are Lutherans. The Order of Knighthood is that
of the Elephant, their Badge a Collar powdered with Elephants Towred,
supporting the Kings Arms; having appendent the Effigies of the Virgin Mary;
the Arms of the Land are Quarterly. 1. Or, three Lions passant Vert, Crowned of
the first, for the Kingdom of Denmark. 2dly, Gules a Lion Rampant, Or, Crowned
and Armed of the first, in his Paws a Dansk hatchet; Argent, for the Kingdom of
Norway. There are two Archbishops, and 13 Bishops; its chief City is
Coppenhagne.

Sweden is a mighty Kingdom, is bounded East with Muscovia, West with the
Dorfirin hills, North with the Frozen Ocean, and South with Europe.
Denmark, Liesland and Mare Balticum; the Commodities are Copper, Iron, Lead,
Furr, Buff, etc. They are brave Warriers, their Religion is Lutherans. The Arms
Azure three Crowns Or, it has two Archbishops, and eight Bishops.

Russia is bounded East with Tartaria, West with Livonia and Finland, North
with the Frozen Ocean, and South with Lituania, and Mare Caspium, This Country
is extreme cold: but yet Nature has counterpoized it by supplying the Land
plentifully with the best of Furrs, viz. Sable, White-fox, Martin, etc. It Is
subject to the Emperor of Russia; a vast Tract, and as wild a Government. The
Inhabitants are Base and Ignorant, Contentious and Foolish, they deny the
proceeding of the Holy Ghost, they bury their Dead upright, with many other
foolish Ceremonies; Muscovia is the Seat of the Empire. Its Commodities are
Furrs, Flax, Ropes, Hides, Fish, and Whales-grease. The Arms are Sable, a
Portal open of two Leaves, and as many degrees Or, they are of a mixed Romish
Religion, not observing Learning as any thing: They have one Patriarch, two
Archbishops, and eighteen Bishops. Its chief Cities are Mucon, Wolodimax, St.
Michael, Cazan, and Astracan, it is chief Rivers are the Dwine, Volaga, and the
Tana.

Poland is bounded South of Moldavia and Hungary; East with Moscovia, and
Tartaria; West with Germany; and North with the Baltic Seas. The Commodities
are Spruce-Beer, Amber, Wheat, Rye, Honey, Wax, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tarr; it has
Mines of Tinn and Copper; their Religion is partly Romish, and partly of the
Greek-Church, Europe.
and so there are of the Greek Church, two Archbishops, and six Bishops, and of
the Romish Church three Archbishops, and nineteen Bishops: The Arms are
Quarterly. 1. Gules an Eagle Argent Crowned and Armed Or, for Poland, and two
Gules a Chevalier armed Cap-a-peid, advancing his Sword Argent, Mounted on a
Barbed Course of the Second, for the Dukedom of Latuania. Its chief Cities are
Cracovia, Warsovia, Damzerk, Vilna, Kion, Cameneca, and Smolensco; and Rivers
are Vistula, Niemen, Dunae and the Boristhenes.

Hungary is bounded East with Transylvania, and Walachia, West with Stiria,
Austria and Moravia, North with the Carpathian Mountains, and South with
Sclavonia and part of Dacia. The People are valiant, and show their Antiquity
to be Scythians by their barbarous Manners, and neglect of Learning Their Sons
equally inherit without Privilege of Birthright, and their Daughters portion
is only a New Attire. Its Commodities are Colors, Wheat, Beef, Salt, Wine and
Fish, the German Emperor and Turk has it between them. The Arms is eight
Bars Gules, and Argent, they are some of the Romish, and others Mahometans.
There are two Archbishops, and thirteen Bishops, and its chief Cities are
Transylvania, Valastia, Moldavia, Buda, Presbrough, Hermonstada, Tergoguis,
Czuchan, Craffa and Bargos. Its Rivers are the Drin, Oxfeus, Peneus, Vardax,
Marize and the Danubus.

Sclavonia is bounded South with the Adriatic Seas, East with Greece, North
with Hungary, and West with Carniola. It is fruitful of all Europe.
those Commodities found in Italy, and is under several Governments, viz.
Turks, Venetians, Hungarians and Austrians. The Arms are Argent, a Cardinals
Hat, the strings Pendant, and Pleated in a True-lovers-knot, meeting in the
Base Gules. They are some Christians, and some Mahometans. There are four
Archbishops, and twenty six Bishops. Its chiefest Cities are Nova, Zara,
Nonigrad, Tinu, Sebenico, S. Nicolo, Trau, Spalato, Salona, Almisse, Starigrad,
Vesicchio, Catara, and Doleigne.

Dacia is bounded East with the Euxine Seas, on the West with Hungary and
Sclavonia, North with Podolia, and South with Thrace, and Macedonia. The Soil
is fruitful in Corn and Wine. It yields medicinal Plants, they have plenty
of Fowls, both wild and tame, very Populous and of Nature like the Hungarians;
they are all Mahometans; Its most famous Cities are Triste and Pedena.

Greece is bounded East with Propontick Hellespont, and Aegean Seas, West with
the Adriatic, North with Mount Haemus, and South with the Ionian Seas. It was
once the Mother (...) Arts and Sciences, but now the very Den (...) the Turkish
Empire. The Soil is very fruitful (...) well manured, which made the Poet say
--

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes? en queis consevimus arva
Its Commodities are Gold, Silver, Copper, (...) Wines, Velvets, Damask; here
is the Mount of Parnassus: Here was the Temple of Delphos, consecrated to
Apollo; where the Devil Europe.
through the Oracle did deceive the People, but after the Crucifixion of Christ
the Oracle ceased. Augustus (says Suidas, in whose time Christ was born)
consulting with the Oracle, received this Answer --

(...)
(...)
(...)
An Hebrew Child, whom the blessed Gods adore,
Has bid me leave these Shrines, and pack to Hell,
So that of Oracle I can no more:
In silence leave our Altar, and farewell.
Their Religion is mixed but they are chiefly Mahometans. The Arms of this
Empire were Mars a Cross, Sol, between four Greek Beta's of the second; Bodin
says the four Beta's signified (...).

The most famous Cities in Greece are Buda, Salonique, Adrianopolis, Scutary,
Durazzo, La Valone, L'Armiro, Brevezza, Larta, Lepanto, Setines or Athens,
Thebes, Corinth, Patras, Misira or Lacaedomia.

I shall pass over the Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, Candia and Corsica: and
thus we have finished the description of the first part of the World, called by
the Name of EUROPE.

ASIA. Asia.

ASIA the second part of the World is bounded on the North with the Northern
Ocean; South, with the Red Sea; East, with the East Indian Ocean; and on the
West with the Flood Tunais. It is bigger than EUROPE, or AFRICA, and is far
more rich, Viz. in Precious Stones, and Spices, and has been renowned by the
first and second Monarchs of the World. Here Man was Created, placed in Eden,
seduced by Satan, and redeemed by our Blessed Savior. In it was done most of
the History mentioned in the Old Testament. It has been Ruled by the Kings of
China, of Persia, the Great Turk, and the Emperor of Rushia, and contains
these Provinces. Viz. Anatolia, Cyprus, Syria, Palestine, Arabia, Chaldea,
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Turcomania, Media, Persia, Tartaria, China, India and the
Oriental Isles.

Anatolia is bounded West with the ThracianBosphorus, Helespont and the Aegean
Seas; East with Euphrates; North with the Black Sea; and South with the
Rhodian, Lydian and Pamphylian Seas. Its length is 630, and breadth 210 miles;
the Air is sound, the Soil fruitful, but in some places desolate: it is
inhabited by Greeks and Turks. It has these Cities of note. Viz. Anatolia,
Bruce, Chiontai, Augoure, Trebisond, Sattalie: and Rivers are Alie, Jordan,
Euphrates, and Tygris.

Syprus is bounded all round with the Syrian and Sicilian Seas; whose length is
200, and compass 550 miles. It is stored with plenty of Asia.
all things, so that it wants no help of other Nations. Its Commodity is
Wine, Oil, Corn, Sugar, Cotton, Honey, etc. for which plenty of all things
'twas Consecrated to Venus, as Ovid says:

Festa dies Veneris, tota celeberrima Cypro,
Venerat; Ipsa suis aderat Venus aurea festis.
The People are Warlike, Strong and Nimble, and very hospitable to Strangers
Their Arms are Quarterly. 1. Argent, a Cross, Patent, betwixt 4 Crosses Or. 2.
Cross-wise of 8 pieces Argent, and Azure, supporting a Lion Passant, Azure
Crowned Or. 3. A Lion Gules. 4 Argent a Lion Gules: they are of the Popish
Religion, and have 2 Archbishops and 6 Bishops.

Syria is bounded East with Euphrates; West with the Mediterranean Seas; North
with Cilicia; and South with Palestine and Arabia. Its length is 525 miles, and
breadth 470. They are inhabited by Mahometans, Christians, and Pagans. They are
a stout and warlike people. In this Country there are said to be Sheep whose
Tails weigh some 30, and some 40 pounds; the People are also gluttenous; it is
almost overrun by the Turks: Its most famous Cities are Aleppo, Te, Tripoly and
Damal.

Palestine is bounded West with the Mediterranean Seas; East with the Arabian
Deserts; North with the Anti-Libianus; and South with Arabia. The Inhabitants
are of a middle stature, strong constitution, yet a stiff necked and murmuring
People and Idolaters. In this is the Land of Canaan, and the famous City
Jerusalem, though Asia.
now a Den of Idolatrous Mahometans. It abounds with all good things.

Arabia is bounded East with Chaldea and the Gulf of Persia; West with
Palestine, Egypt, and the Red Sea; North with Euphrates; and South with the
Southern Ocean. The Inhabitants are Mahometans. Job's Habitation was here. It
yields Frankincense, Precious Stones, etc. It is now under the Great Turk's
Scepter. The most famous Cities are Herac, Ava, Medina, and Mectar: and it has
the famous River Cayban.

Chaldea is bounded East with Susiana; West with Arabia Deserta; North with
Mesopotamia; and South with the Persian Bay. The Country is exceeding
fruitful; in it is supposed to have been the Garden of Eden; they were great
Southsayers, and therefore flouted by the Satyrist. --

Chaldeis sed major erit fiducia, quicquid
Dixerit Astrologus, credent a font relatum
Ammonis, etc.
The Inhabitants are stout and valiant; they are Mahometans. Here Julian the
Apostate breathed his Soul out to Satan, in these dying words, -- Vicisti
tandem Galileae: the chief Cities are Babylon, Bagdad, Balfora, and Sipparum,
with the famous River Fazze.

Assyria is bounded East with Media; West with Mesopotamia; South with Susiana;
and North with Turcomania and Chaldea. This is a very plain and level Country,
and very fruitful, having good Rivers: the Natives are brave stout Warriors,
formal in their Habit. Asia.
It is under the Turk's command, and governed by one of his Bassa's; who is
able to bring into the Field at any time 100000 Soldiers: here are also a Sect
of the Nestorians, and fifteen Christian Churches: its most famous Cities are
Calach, Cittace, and Arbela.

Mesopotamia is bounded East with the River Tigris; West with Euphrates; North
with Mount Taurus; and South with Chaldea, and Arabia Desertae. It abounds
with all good things necessary for the life of Man; they are Mahometans, and a
people unable to defend themselves but by the assistance of their Neighbors:
It belongs to the Mohammedan Empire. Its chief Cities are Edessa, and
Cologenbar. I shall not describe Mount Taurus, because it is of no moment.

Turcomana is bounded East with Media and Mare Caspium; West with the Euxine
Seas, Cappadocia, and Armenia major; North with Tartaria; and South with
Mesopotamia and Assyria. It is a very mountainous Country; the people are
handsome, stout and brave Warriors: the Women are good Archers. It has Gold
and Silver Mines: It yields Grain, Fruit and Wine; and in Colchis (a part
thereof, and in Assyria) they sell their Children: The Arms are the Half Moon
Or. It is inhabited by Mahometans, and under the Turkish Empire. Its chief
Cities are Musol, Bagded, Batfora, Sanatopdy, and Derbent; with the famous
River Arais.

Media is bounded East with Parthia; West with Aremenia; North with Mare
Caspium; and South with Persia. The Country is of a Asia.
large extent and very different, even to a Miracle, for in the North part it
is cold and barren, their Bread is dried Almonds, and Drink the Juice of Herbs
and Fruits. Their Food is Venison, and other Wild Beasts, which they catch by
hunting. And in the South side the Country is of a rich Soil, plentiful in
Corn, Wine, etc. They have been brave Warriors, and it was a custom with them
to poison their Arrows, in an Oil called Oleum Mediacum: they are Mahometans.

Persia is bounded East with India; West with Media, Assyria, and Chaldea;
North with Tartaria; and South with the Southern Ocean. This is a mighty rich
Country governed by the Sophy, the people are strong and valiant, and though
Mahometans, yet they War with the Turks for the Mohammedan Religion in
expounding the Alcoran. From hence comes Bezoars and other precious Stones,
Pearls, and Silk Works. It has these famous Cities with Media: Viz Taurus,
Gorgia, Cogsolama, Hysphan, Erat, Sus, Schiras, and Ormutz: and these Rivers
Tiriditiri, and Bendimuz.

Tartary bounded East with China, the Oriental Ocean, and the Straits of Anian;
West with Russia and Podolia; North with the Frozen Ocean; and South with
China. Now the Tartarians are divided into certain Collonies, and differ in
manners and Trade of Living, and are Men of a Square Stature, broad Faces, and
look a Sq^int; they are hardy and valiant; they will eat either Horseflesh or
Man's Flesh. They drink Blood and Mares-milk; their Habit is very homely; they
are some Mahometans, and Asia.
some Pagans; their chief Commodity is rich Furrs, and they are governed by the
great Cham of Tartary, and has these famous Cities, viz. Zahasp, Samarcanda,
Thibet, Cambalu and Tatur; and Rivers famous are Joniscoy, Oby, Chezel and
Albiamu.

China is bounded East with the Oriental Ocean; West with India and Cathay;
North with Altay and the Eastern Tartaries; and South with Canchin-China. It
has 591 Provinces, 1593 Walled Towns, 1154 Castles, 4200 unwalled Towns, and
such an infinite Number of Villages, that the whole Country seems as one Town.
It is reported that the Prince can bring into the Field 300000 Foot and 200000
Horse. The Land is fruitful in Grain, full of wild and tame Beasts, it yields
Silk, Precious Stones, Gold, Copper, etc. The People are ingenious and great
Artists, Witness their Wagon made to sail over the Land driven by the Wind: and
Historians tells us, that the Art of Printing and of making Guns, is more
Ancient with them than with us. They are Idolaters and worship the Sun, Moon
and Stars, also they worship the Devil himself, that he may not hurt them. And
it has these most famous Cities, viz. Paguin, Quinjay, Caneun, Macao, Mancian
and Magaia, with the great River Quinam.

India is bounded East with the Oriental Ocean, and part of China; West with
the Persian Empire; North with Mount Taurus; and South with the Indian Ocean.
This Country has an Exact temperature of Air; two Summers and a double
increase, blessed with all things necessary for the Life of Man. It has Mines of
Asia.
Gold and Silver, Precious Stones, Spices, and Medicinal Druggs, abundance of
Cattle, and Cammels, Apes, Dragons, Serpents, also multitude of Elephants; a
Creature of a vast Bigness, some of which are said to be nine Cubits high, and
as many long, and five Cubits thick. It is a Creature of wonderful Sense: for
it is reported of the Elephant on which King Phorus sat in the Wars of
Alexander, finding his Master strong and lusty, rushed boldly into the thickest
of the Enemies Army: But when he once perceived him to be faint and weary, he
withdrew himself out of the Battle, kneeled down, and into his own Trunck
received all the Arrows, directed at his Master. It also is of a most
prodigious strength, for it is reported to carry a Wooden Tower on his Back,
with thirty fighting men besides the Indian that Rules him. The Sea yields
variety of Pearls and Fish; here is also the Leviathan or Whale, of which Pliny
says there are some of 960 Foot long; here is the Rhinoceros also found: (such
as has of late been publicly showed at the Bellsavage Inn on Ludgate Hill in
London) a deadly and cruel Enemy to the Elephant, for though he be less, yet he
will whet his horn against the Rocks, and then therewith strive to rip up the
Elephants Belly, and is by many Naturalists supposed to be the Unicorn, for all
the parts of his Body, especially his Horn, is a sovereign Antidote against
Poison. This Country is inhabited by Indians, Moors, Arabians, Jews, Tartars
and Portugeze. The Natives are Tawny, tall and strong, and very punctual to
their word. They eat no Fish nor Flesh, but Asia.
live on things without life; being Pythagoreans. It is also reported that when
the Husband dies, and is burning on the Funeral Pile, that then the Wife leaps
into the Fire, and so the living and the dead burn together, which made the
Poet say --

Et certamen habent lethi, quae viva sequatur,
Conjugium; pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices, and praebent pectora flammae,
Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
In India these are the chief Cities, viz. Amedabur, Cambaia, Gouro, Diu,
Bengala, Pangab, Agra, Goa, Calicut, Visnagor, Pegu, Arracan, Malaca, Camboge,
and Faefo. The fairest Rivers are Indus, Ganges and Mecon.

The Oriental Islands are these, viz. 1. Japan, 2. The Phillepinae Isles, 3.
The Maluccose, 4. Bantam, 5. The Selebes, 6. Borneo, 7. The Isles of Java, 8.
Sumatra, 9. Zeiland, and other lesser Isles of which we shall not treat.

1. Japan is a rich Island abounding with Gold: So that Paulus Ventius says,
that in his time the King's Palace was covered therewith. It is a Mountainous
Country, a healthful Air; here the Wheat is ripe in May. It Is full of Woods
of tall Cedars, abundance of Beasts, Wild and Tame; and also Fowls. The
Inhabitants are strong, and witty, and have but one Language. They are
Christians, and Idolaters, and the chief Cities are these, viz. Bungo, Meaco
and Sacay.

The Phillipine Isles are in Number 40, called so in honor to Philip II. King
of Spain, and are now inhabited by the Natives, and Spaniards, Asia.
they are in a good Air and stored with rich Commodities; and in them are these
Cities, Lusor, Manille, and Mindanao.

The Moluccoes Islands are many in Number, their Commodity is Cinnamon, (which
grows in whole Woods; it is the Bark of a Tree, stripped and laid in the Sun till
it looks red; and in three years time the Tree receives his Bark again.)
Ginger, Nutmegs, Mastick, Aloes, Pepper and Cloves: now the Clove grows on a
Tree like a Bay Tree; yielding blossoms first white, then green, and at last
red and hard, and then are Cloves. In it is also found the Bird of Paradise,
and no where else, which for the strangeness and fairness of Feathers exceeds
all the Birds in the World. The People are Pagans. Here is a Mountain of a
prodigious height, above the Clouds, and agreeing to the Element of Fire, which
it seems to mount unto, through Flames, wherewith, a dreadful Thunder, and a
dark Smoke it sends forth continually.

The Isles of Bantam are in Number seven, one of which is continually burning,
the Inhabi^ants are Barbarous, Weak of Bodies, Slothful, Dull, and lying most
confusedly together, without Rule, and are Mahometans. Its Commodities are
Nutmegs, and both the yellow and white Saunderses. Now the Nutmeg grows on a
Tree like a Peach Tree, the innermost part of whose Fruit is the Nutmeg, and is
covered over with a Coat which ripe is called Mace; they yield their Fruit
thrice in the Year, to wit, at April, August and December.

The Selebes are a Number of Isles full of Barbarous People, and Man-Eaters,
they have abundance of strange Birds: It yields Sugar, Asia.
Cocanuts, Cloves, Oranges, etc. In some of these Isles they make Bread of the
Pith, and Drink of the Juice of the Tree called Sagu: It has these chief
Towns, viz. Senderem and Macassar.

Borneo lies West of the Celebes, and is in compass 2200 Miles, the Country
yields Asses, Oxen, Herbs of Cattle and Horses. It yields Camphire, Agarick,
and Mines of Adamants: They think the Sun and Moon to be Husband and Wife, and
the Stars their Children, they reverently salute the Sun at his first rising.
Their Affairs of State they Treat of in the Night, at which time the Councellor
of State meets, and ascends some Tree, viewing the Heavens till the Moon
arises, and then they go to their House of State. In it are these Towns, viz.
Borneo, Taiopura, Tamaoratas, Malno and Sagadana. It is under the Government of
the Kings of Borneo and Laus; the People are Idolaters.

Java Major, and Java Minor, are two Islands opposite to Borneo. They have
plenty of Fruits, Grains, Beasts, Fish and Fowls, Gold and Precious Stones. The
Natives are of a middle Stature, broad faced and tawny, their Religion
Mahometans, and they will eat their nearest of kin: the chief Town is Panarucan
near a burning Hill, which in 1586 broke forth, and cast huge Stones into the
City for three Days together, and destroyed much People. From the top of this
vast high Mountain the Devil environed with a white and shining Cloud, does
sometimes show himself unto his Worshippers, which live about those Hills.

Sumatra lies North of Java Major, betwixt it and the straits of Sincapura,
its length is 900 Miles, and breadth 200; it is full of Fenns Asia.
and Rivers, with thick Woods, and has a very hot Air; it is not fruitful in
Grain. Its Commodities are Ginger, Pepper, Agarick, Cassia, Wax, Honey, Silk,
Cotton, Iron, Tinn and Sulphur. It has also Mines of Gold, and is supposed to
be Solomon's Ophyr. The King's Furniture of his House, and Trapping for his
Elephants was beaten Gold, and he intituleth himself King of the Golden
Mountains. Here is the notable Mountain Balalvanus, said to burn continually;
out of which or not far off do arise two Fountains, the one is said to run pure
Oil, and the other Balsamum Sumatra; the People are Mahometans. The chief City
and Seat of the King is Achen, beautifyed with the Royal Palace, to which you
pass through seven Gates one after another, with green Courts betwixt the two
outermost; which are guarded with Women, that are expert at their Weapons, and
use both Sword and Guns with great dexterity, and are the only Guard the King
has for his Person. The Government is Absolute and Arbitrary, merely at the
King's pleasure.

Zeiland lies West of Sumatra, it is a good Soil, and yields these Commodities,
viz. Cinnamon, Oranges, Lemmons, most delicate fruit, Gold, Silver and Precious
Stones, it is full of wild and tame Beasts, Fish and Fowls, yet destitute of the
Vine: the People are strong and tall, given to Ease and Pleasure, and are in
general Mahometans. The chief Towns are Candia, Ventane, and Janasipata. They
have Fish-shells passing current for money, there are other lesser Isles which
we do for brevity sake omit, and thus Asia.
we have done with the description of the second part of the World called ASIA.

AFRICA. Africa.

AFRICA the third part of the World is bounded East with the Red Sea; West with
the Atlantick-Ocean; South with the Southern-Ocean; and North with the
Mediterranean Sea; and contains these Provinces, viz. Egypt, Barbary, Numidia,
Lybia, Terra-Nigritarum, Aethiopia-superior and Aethiopia-inferior, with the
Islands thereto belonging. Its Commodities are Balm, Ivory, Ebony, Sugar,
Ginger, Dates, Myrrh, Feathers, etc.

Egypt is bounded East with Idumea, and the Bay of Arabia; on the West with
Barbary, Numidia, and Lybia; North with the Mediterranean Sea; and South with
Aethiopia-superior. Its length is 562 Miles, and breadth 160. The Natives are
of a Tawny Complexion, their Wives are the Merchants, whilst the Husband
attends the Household Affairs. They were the Inventers of Mathematical Sciences;
they were also Magicians, and are still endued with a special Dexterity of Wit:
They worship in every Town a particular God, but the God by them most adored
was Apis. This Land is very fruitful in all manner of Cattle, Cammels, and
abundance of Goats; they have plenty of Fowls both wild and tame: It has
Metals and Precious Stones, Africa.
Good Wines and rare Fruits, as Oranges, Lemmons, Cittons, Pomgranets, Figgs,
Cherries, etc. Here also grows the Palm Tree, which grow the Male and Female
together; both put out Cods of Seeds, but the Female is not fruitful unless
she grow by the Male, and have her Seed mixed with his. The Pith of this Tree is
good for Sallads, of the Wood they make Bedsteads, of the Leaves Baskets, Mats,
and Fanns, of the outward husk of the fruit Cordage, of the inward brushes. Its
fruit is the Dates, good for food, and finally it is said to produce all things
necessary for the Life of Man, and its Branches are worn in token of Victory,
as says Horace.

-- Palmaque nobilis,
Terrarum Dominos evebit ad Deos.
It has many other Rarities which I am forced to omit. In it are these famous
Cities, viz. Sabod, Cairo, Alexandria, Rascha, Damietta, Cosir and Surs, with
the famous River Nilus, which by its overflowing makes the Land fertile,
according to that of Lucia. --

Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis,
Aut Jovis; in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
Barbary is bounded East with Cyrenaica; West with the Atlantick-Ocean; North
with the Mediterranean, the Straits of Gibralter, and part of the
Atlantick-Ocean; and on the South by Mount Atlas. It is full of Hills and
Woods, stored with Wild Beasts: as Lions, Bears, etc. Large Herds of Cattle; it
has Dragons, Leopards, Africa.
and Elephants; beautiful, swift, and strong Horses; it is the fruitfullest
Country ^^ the World in some parts of it; for ^liny says that not far from
the City Tacape, you shall see a great Palm Tree overshadowing an Olive; under
that a Fig Tree; under that a Pomgranat; under that a Vine; and under all
Pease, Wheat and Herbs; all growing and flourishing at one time, which the
Earth produces of it self: Its length is 1500 Miles, and breadth 300 Miles,
the Natives are of a Tawnyish Color, rare Horsemen, crafty and unfaithful,
and above measure Jealous of their Wives. It contains these Kingdoms, Viz.
Tunis, Algiers, Morocco and Feze, and it has these Isles, Viz. Pantalaria,
Carchana, Zerby, Gaulos and Malta, the two latter of which Isles are inhabited
by Christians, and are of the Romish Religion; but for the other parts of
Barbary, they are either Mahometans or Pagans. The most famous Cities are
Morocco, Feze, Tangier, (which formerly was a Principal City of Barbary; but is
now demolisht and lain level with the Ground, by the Command of His late
Majesty Carolus II. of blessed Memory, and performed by the indefatigable skill
and industry of the right Honorable George Lord Darmouth Anno, 1683.)
Teleusin, Oran, Algi^r, Constantine, Tunis, Tripoly and Barca, with these
famous Rivers, Ommiraby and Magrida.

Mount Atlas is a ridge of Hills of no small length, but of an exceeding
height, above the Clouds, and is always covered with Snow, Summer and Winter,
full of thick Woods, and against ASIA so fruitful, that it affords excellent
Fruit of it is natural growth; it received Africa.
it is Name from Atlas a King of Mauritania, fain. ed by the Poets to be turned
into that Hill, by the Head of Medusa; he was seigned to be so high that his
Head touched Heaven: The ground of this Fiction I suppose was from his
extraordinary knowledge in Astronomy, which Virgil seems to intimate --

Jamque volans apicem and latera ardua cernit
Atlantis duri, Coelum qui vertice foluit.
N^vidia is bounded East with Egypt; West with the Atlantick-Ocean; North with
Mount Atlas; and South with Libia Deserta. The Natives are a wandering and
unstable People, for they spend their Lives in Hunting, and continue not above
four or five Days in one place, but so long as it will graze their Camels. Here
grow abundance of Dates, with which they feed themselves, and with the Stones
fat their Goats. The Air here is so sound that it will cure the Fr^nch-Pox
without any Course of Physic. They are Mahometans: its chief Provinces are
Dara, Pescara, Fighig, Tegorarin and Biledulgerid; and its chief Cities are
Taradath, Dara and Zev; they belong to the Scepter of M^rocco.

Lybia is bounded North with Numidia; East with Nuba; South with
Terra-Nig(...)tarum; and West with Gualata. This is well termed a Desert, for
in it may a man travel eight or ten Days and not see any Water, no(...) Trees,
nor Grass. So that Merchants are forced to carry their Provision with them on
Camels, which if it fails they kill their Camels, Africa.
and drink the Juice of their Entrails It contains these Provinces, Viz.
Zahaga, Zv^nz^ga, Targa, Lembta and Bordea. They are governed by the chief of
the Clans, and are a People only differing from Brute-Beasts, by their Shape
and their Speech.

Terra Nigritarum is bounded East with Ethiopia-superior; West with the
Atlantick-Ocean; North with Lybia; and South with the Ethiopick-Ocean. The
Country is under the Torrid-Zone, full of People, and most excessive hot; the
soil is exceeding fruitful, brave Woods, Multitudes of Elephants and other
Beasts: they have Mines both of Silver and Gold, very fine and pure; the
Natives are ColeBlack, or very Tawny, and are now some of them Mahometans, but
most of them Pagans. It has now these Provinces, Viz. Ora, Anterosa, Gualata,
Agadez, Cano, Ca^^na, Sanaga, Gambra, Tombrutum, Melli, Gheneoa, G^ber,
Gialofi, Guinea, Benin, Guangara, Bornum and Goaga, (in which grows a Poison,
which if any eats but the tenth part of a Grain it will end his Days) Bito,
Temiano, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Gothan, Medra and Daum. And in it are these most
remarkab'e Cities: Gue, Eata, Gueneha, Tomta, Agad^s, Cu(...)a, Tuta, Waver and
Sanfara. The Rivers here that are most famous are Sernoga, Cambua and
Ri^-Degrand.

Aethiopia-superior is bounded East with the Red Sea, and Sinus Barbaricus;
West with Lybia-inferior, Nubia, and Congo; North with Egypt, and Lybia
Marmarica; and South with Monta-Luna. Now its length is said to be Africa.
1500 Miles, and Circute 4300. It is under the Command of the Abassine
Emperor: here the Air and Earth is so hot and pieircing, that if the
Inhabitants go out of their Doors without Shoes they lose their Feet; here they
also roast their Meat with the Sun: they have some grain, their Rivers are
almost choked up with Fish, their Woods stuffed with Deer, yet they will not
trouble themselves to catch them. The Inhabitants are Lazy and destitute of all
Learning, ^hey are of an Olive Tawny: here is also a Fountain, that if a man
drinks thereof he either falls mad, or else for a long time is troubled with
a continual Drowsiness, of which Ovid thus speaks --

Aethiopesque Lacus; quos si quis faucibus hausit,
Aut furit, aut patitur mirum gravitate saporem.
And it contains these Provinces, Viz. Guagere, Tigremaon, Angote, Amara,
Damut, Gojamy, Bagamedrum, Barnagasse, Dancali, Dobas, Adel, Adea, Fatigar, Xoa
and Barus. Now as for the Government of these Empires'tis merely Regal: here is
the Order of St. Anthony, to which every Father that is a Gentleman, is to give
one of his Sons: out of which they raise about 12000 Horse, which are to be a
standing Guard of the Emperor's Person: their Oath is to defend the Frontiers
of their Kingdom, to preserve Religion, and to root out the Enemies of their
Faith; the Principals of their Religion are these. First, they circumcise their
Children both Males and Females. Secondly, they Baptize the Males at 40 and
Females at 80 Days after Circumcision. Thirdly, after the Eucharist they are
not Africa.
to spit till Sun set. Fourthly, they profess but one Nature and one Will in
Christ. Fifthly, they accept but of the three first general Councils. Sixthly,
the Priests live by the own labor of their hands, and are not to beg.
Seventhly, they baptize themselves every Epiphany in Lakes or Ponds, because
that Day they say Christ was baptized by John in Jordan. Eighthly, they eat not
of those Beasts which Moses pronounced unclean, keeping the Jews Sabbath, with
the Lord's Day. Tenthly, they administer the Lord's Supper to Infants presently
after Baptism. Eleventhly, they teach the Reasonable Soul of Man comes by
Seminal Propagation. Twelfthly, that Infants dying unbaptized are saved, being
sanctified by the Eucharist in the Womb, and finally they produce a Book of
Eight Volumes, writ as they say by the Apostles at Jerulalem for that purpose,
the Contents whereof they observe most solemnly, and thus they differ from the
Papists.

Now the chief Cities in this Empire are these, Viz Barone, Caxumo, Amarar,
Damont, ^^^^tes, Narre, Goyame, and Adeghena with the famous Rivers Zaire and
Quilm^nei.

Aethiopia-inferior is bounded East with the Red Sea; West with the Aethiolick
Ocean; North with Terra-Negritarum, and the higher aethipy; and South with the
Main Ocean And it contains these Provinces, Viz. Zanzibar, M^nomotapa,
Cafravia, and Manigongo. The Natives are Black, with curled Hair, and are
Pagans. In it are great Herds of Cattle, abundance of Dear, Antelopes,
Baboons, Foxes, Hares, Ostriches, Pelicans and Herons, and in a Word what
Africa.
else is necessary for the Life of Man. In it are these most famous Cities,
Viz. Banza, Loanga, S. Salvador, Cabazze, Sabula, Simbaos, Butua, and Tete. The
Rivers are Cuama, Spiritus Sancto, and Dos Infant.

The Islands in AFRICA are these, Viz. the Aethiopick-Isles, Madagascar,
Socofara, Mohelia, Mauritius, St. Helens, the Isles of Ascension, St.
Thomas-Isles, the Princes-Isles, the Isles of Annibon, the Isles of Cape
d'Verd, the Canaries, Madera, Holyport and the Hesperides. The Description of
all which I am forced to omit because I have been so very large in the
Description of the third part of the World called AFRICA.

AMERICA.
America.
AMERICA, the fourth part of the World, was first discovered by Christopher
Columbus, Anno 1492, but it has received its Name from Americus Vesputius, who
in the year of Christ 1597 did fail about it. Now this fourth part of the World
is bounded East with the Atlantic Ocean; West with the West-Indian Ocean;
South with the Magellanick Sea; and on the North with the Northern Ocean.

When first the Spaniards had entered on America they found the people without
Apparel, and their Bread was made of the Jucca-Root, whose Juice is a strong
poison: but it being squeezed out and dried it makes Bread. They worshipped
Devilish Spirits, which they call Zema; in remembrance of which they keep
Images made of Cotton Wool, to which they did great reverence, supposing the
Spirits of their Gods were there; and to blind them the more, the Devil would
cause these Puppets to seem to move and to make a noise, so that they feared
them so greatly that they durst not offend them; which if they did, then the
Devil would come and destroy their Children. They were so ignorant that they
thought the Spaniards to be immortal; but the doubt continued not long, for
having taken some of them Prisoners, they put them under Water until they were
dead, and then they knew them to be mortal like other Men. They were quite
destitute of all good Learning, reckoning their Time by a confused knowledge of
the course of the Moon; America.
they were honest and kind in their Entertainments, encouraged thereunto by an
Opinion that there was a certain place to which the Souls of those that so
lived, and dyed for the defense of their Country, should go to, and there be
for ever happy. So natural is the knowledge of the Soul's Immortality, and of
some Ubi, for its future reception, that we find some tract of it in the most
Barbarous Nations. The Americans were of a fair and clear Complexion. This
Country is very plentiful in Spices, and Fruits; and such Creatures which the
other parts never knew: So fu l of Cows and Bulls, that the Spaniards kill
thousands of them yearly only for the Hides and Tallow. Blessed with abundance of
Gold, that in some Mines they have found more Gold than Earth. They have Gray
Lions, their Dogs snowted like Foxes, neither can they bark; their Swine has
Talons sharp as Rozors, and their Navel on the ridges of their Backs; the Stags
and Deer without Horns; their Sheep are so strong that they make them carry
burdens of 150 pound weight; they have a Creature with the forepart as a Fox,
and hinder as an Ape, except the Feet which are like a Man's; beneath their
Belly is placed a Receptacle like a Purse, in which their young remains till
they can shift for themselves, never coming thence but when they suck and then
go in again. The Armadilla is like a barbed Horse, armed all over with Scales
that seem to shut and open. The Vieugue resembling a Goat, but bigger, in whose
Belly is found the Bezoar, good against Poison. A Hare having a Tail like a
Cat, under whose America.
Skin nature has placed a Bagg, which she uses as a Storehouse: for having
filled her self she puts the residue of her provision therein. Pigritia, a
little Beast that can go no further in fourteen days than a Man will cast a
Stone. For their Birds they are of such variety of Colors and Notes, which are
so rare and charming, that they surpass all other Birds in any other parts.

Now America is divided into two parts, viz. Mexicana, whose compass is said to
be 13000 miles, and that other part called Peruana, whose Circumnavigation is
esteemed 17000 miles. The Provinces of Mexicana are these: Viz Estotilant,
Canada, Virginia, Florida, Califormia, Nova-Gallicia, Nova-Hispania, and
Guatimala. Peruana contains these Provinces: viz. Castella-Aurea, Nova-Granado,
Peru, Chile, paragnay, Brasila, Guiana, and Paria. To Peruana belongs these
principal Isles: viz Hispaniola, Cuba, famaica, Porto-Rict, Barbados, the
Charibe-Isles, Insula-Margaretta, Molaque-Isles, Remora, Insula Solamnis, and
some other small Isles. But first of Mexicana.

Estotilant has on the East the Main Ocean; South Canada; West Terra
Incognita; and North Hudson's Bay. It comprehends Estotilant, so principally
called, Terra Corterialis, New-foundland, and the Isles of Baccala^s. It is
well stockt with all things necessary for the life of Man: the Natives are
barbarous, fair, swift of Foot, and good Archers. They are Pagans.

Canada is bounded North with Cortelialas; South with New England; East with
the Main Ocean; and West with Terra Incognita. It America.
contains these several Regions: viz. Nova Francia, Nova Scotia, Norumbegne,
and four small Isles adjoining thereto. The people when first discovered were
very rude and barbarous, going Naked only a piece of Fishes Skin to cover their
private parts, and had two or three Wives a piece, which never Marry after the
death of their Husbands The Soil is fruitful, and yields all manner of good
things Here grows the Sea Horse whose Teeth is an Antidote against Poison It
has these principal Cities: viz. Hochelaga and Quebeque.

Virginia has North Canada; South Florida; East Mare-del-Noo(...); West with
Terra Incognita. And it is now divided into New England, New Belgium, and
Virginia strictly so called. It is in some parts (yea most parts) Mountainous,
Woody and Barren, and full of Wild Beasts. It yields plenty of Cattle, wild
and tame Fowls. Its Commodities are Furrs, Amber, Iron, Rop^s, Tobaco,
Sturgecn, etc. The Natives are but few in number, and those very different both
in Speech and Size, to a Miracle: those whom they call Sasques Honoxi, are to
the English as Giants clad in Bears Skins; those whom they call Wig^ocomici,
are as Dwarfs; for the most part without Beards; they hide their nakedness with
a Skin, the rest of their Body they paint over in the figures of horrid
Creatures The chief Towns are `fames's, and Plymouth, and Isle of Bermoodus,
which I here omit.

Florida is bounded North-East with Virginia; East with Mare-del-Noort; South
with the Gulf of Mexico. It was first discovered by the English, America.
Anno 1497. The Soil is very fertile in Grain and Fruit, Beast wild and tame,
and so also for Fowls: It yields lofty Cedars, and Sassafras: It has Gold and
Silver Mines, and also Pearls.

The Natives are of an Olive-Colour, strong and fierce, and are clad like the
former Natives of America. The Women when their Husbands are dead cut off their
Hair, and cannot Marry till their Hair is grown out again. To it belongs these
Islands: viz. the Isles of Tortugas, Martyrs, and Lucaios: there are also
about 24 small ones more which are insignificant. The Women here are most
extremely beautiful; the Natives are Pagans. Its chief Towns are St. H^elens,
Ax Carolina, and Port-Royall.

Califormia is an Island having on the West New Spain, and New Gallicia; and so
unto those undiscovered parts which lie furthest North, to the Straits of
Anian; and it is divided into these four parts: viz. Quivira, Cibola,
Califormia, specially so called, and Nova Albion. All which Countries are
indifferent fruitful, full of Woods, and both wild and tame Beasts; plenty
both of Fish and Fowl wild and tame: They worship the Sun as their chief God:
They go naked both Men and Women in some parts, others are half way clothed;
and so very various that I cannot in this small Tract describe them. Its chief
Town is Chichilticala. And here I cannot choose but remark that in Quivira their
Beasts are of strange forms, and are to them both Meat, Drink and Clothes. For
the Hides yields them Houses; their Bones and Hair, Bodkins and Thread; their
Sinews, Cords; their Horns, Guts and Bladders, Vessels; America.
their Dung, Fire; their Calveskins, Buckets to draw and keep Water in; their
Blood, Drink; and their Flesh, Meat; and so much for Califormia.

Nova Gallicia is bounded East and South with Nova Hispania; West with the
River Buena, Guia, and the Gulf Califormia; and North with Terra Incognita. It
comprehends these Provinces: viz. Chialoa, Contiacan, Xalisco, Guadalajara,
Zacatecas, New Biscay, and Nova Mexicana. In which Provinces the Air is
indifferently temperate, yet sometimes given to Thunder, Storms, and Rain. It
is full of Mountains, yields Brass, Iron, etc. They have plenty of Fish, Beast,
Fowls, Fruit, and abundance of Honey. The Natives are wavering, crafty and
lazy, given to singing and dancing. They go not naked: they are subject to the
King of Spain. Its chief Cities are Guadalajara, and St. John's.

Nova-Hispania is bounded East with the Gulf of Mexico, and the Bay of
New-Spain; West with Nova Gallicia, and Mare-del-Zur; on the North with part of
Nova Gallicia, and part of Florida; and on the South with the South Sea. It
comprehends these Provinces: Viz. Mexicana, Mechoacan, Panuco, Trascala,
Guaxata, Chiapa and Jucutan. In all which the Air is healthful and temperate,
rich in Mines of Gold and Silver, Cassia, Coccineel, which grows on a shrub
called Tuna, yields grain, and delicate Fruit, Birds and Beasts both Wild and
Tame: their Harvest is in October and in May.

The Natives are witty and hardy, yet so ignorant that they thought the
Spanish-horse and Man America.
to have been but one Creature, and thought when the Horses Neighed they had
spoken. The Spaniards whose Cruelties will never be forgotten, did in less than
17 years kill of the Natives 6000000; here is a Tree called Meto, it bears 40
kinds of Leaves, of which they make Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Matts,
Shoes, Girdles; it yields a Juce like Syrup, which boiled becomes Honey, if
purified Sugar; the Bark roasted is a good Emplaisture for Punctures or
Contusions; and it yields a Gum Sovereign against Poison: here is also a
Burning Mountain called Propaeampeche, which sends forth two streams the one of
Red and the other of Black Pitch: the Inhabitants are Pagans.

Guatimala is bounded North with Jacuta, and the Gulf Honduras; South with
Mare-delZur; East with Castella-Aurea; and West with New Spain. The Soil and
People are as in Nova Hispania: it contains these Provinces, Viz. Chiapa,
Verapaz, Guatimala, Hondarus, Niceragna and Teragna. And Towns of most Note are
Cutrinidao and St. Michael's, the People are Pagans. And so much for Mexicana.

Peruana the Second Part of AMERICA, so called from Peru a Place of Note
therein, and it does contain these Provinces, Viz. CastellaAurea, Nova-Granada,
Peru, Chile, Paragnay, Brasile, Guyana, and Paria and its Isles. But such Isles
that fall not properly under some of these must be referred to the general
Heads of the American Islands.

Castella-del Oro, is bounded East and North with Mare-del-Noort; West with
Mare-del-Zur; and South with Granada. And it contains America.
these Provinces, Viz. Panama, Darien, NovaAndaluzia, St. Martha and
De-la-Hacha. In all which Provinces the Air is very hot and unhealthfull: the
Soil either Mountainous and Barren, or low and Miry: plenty of Beast and Fowls.
Here is said to be a Tree which if one touch he is poisoned to death: the old
Natives are now almost quite rooted out. Its chief City is Carthagena, which
Sir Francis Drake in 1585 took by Assault. This Land has abundance of Gold.

Nova-Granada is bounded North with Castella Aurea; West with Mare-del-Zur;
East with Venez^^la; and South with Terra Incognita. Its length is 390 Miles,
and as much in breadth. It does consist of these two parts, Viz. Granada,
specially so called, and Popayan, both which has a temperate Air, brave Woods,
well stored with Cattle, and Fowls both wild and tame, plenty of Emeralds and
Guacum: the People tall and strong; the Women handsome and better dressed than
their Neighbors: The chief Towns are S. Toy d'Bagota and Popayan.

Peru is bounded East with the Andes; West with Mare-del Zur; North with
Popayan; and South with Chile. It is 2100 Miles in length, and its breadth is
300 Miles: it is a Mountainous Country: And here it is to be noted that in the
Plains it never raineth; and that on the Hills it continually raineth from
September to April, and then breaks up. In the Hilly Countries the Summer
begins in April, and ends in September. In the Plains the Summer begins in
October and ends in April, So that a man may travel from Summer to Winter
both America.
in one Day; be frozen in the Morning when he sets out, and scorched with
heat before the dawning of the Day. It is not very plentiful of Corn nor
Fruits, but they have a kind of Sheep which they call Pacos as bigg as an Ass,
profitable both for fleece and burden, but in taste as pleasant as our Mutten:
So subtle that if it be overladen it will not for blows move a foot till the
burden be lessened, and it is a very hardy Creature. Here is a Fig Tree, the
North part of which looks toward the Mountains, and yields its Fruit in
Summer only, and the Part facing the Sea in Winter only. They have another
Plant, that if put into the hands of the Sick and the Patient looks merry, they
will recover; but if sad, die. It yields also Multitudes of Rarities more.
It Is chief Commodities are Gold, Silver, Tobacco, Sarsaparilla and Balsamum
d'Peru, and many other rich Drugs. The Natives are almost now rooted out of the
Country. They are fierce and Barbarous. Now it contains these Provinces: viz.
Quito, Los Quinxos, Lima, Cusco, Charcos and Colla^.

Chile is bounded North with Deserta Alacama; West with Mare del Zuz; South
with the Straits of Magellan; and East with Rio de la Plata. Its length is 1500
miles, and breadth uncertain. The Soil hereof in the Mid-land is mountainous
and unfruitful; toward the Seaside level and fertile; with products of Maize
and Wheat, plenty of Gold and Silver, Cattle and Wine. The Natives are very
tall and warlike, some of them affirmed to be eleven foot high; their Garments
of the Skins of Beasts; America.
they are of a white Complexion; their Arms Bows and Arrows. It is divided
into Chile (especially so called) and Magellanica. Here Sir Walter Rawleigh
planted two Collenies, who for want of timely Succors were either starved at
home, or eaten by the Salvages, as they ranged the Country for food.

Paraguay is bounded South with Magellanica; East with the main Atlantic;
North with Brazila; and West with Terra Incognita. It is said to be of a
fruitful Soil, well stored with Sugarcanes, Fraught with Mines of Gold,
Brass, and Iron: great plenty of Amathyses, and Monkeys, Lions and Tigers, the
People are as the other Salvages, and it contains these Provinces, viz. Rio de
la Plata, Tucaman and La Crux de Sierra, and it is chief Towns are Puenas
Agrees, and Chividad.

Brazila is bounded East with Mare del Noort; West with Terra Incognita; North
with Guiana; and South with Paraguay. Its said to be 1500 Mi'es long and 500
broad. The Country is full of Mountains, Rivers and Forests, the Air sound and
healthful; the Soil is indifferent fruitful: Its chief Commodities are Sugar
and Brazele-wood. There is a Plant called Copiba which yields Balsam, sovereign
for Poison. An Herb called Viva, which if touched will shut up and not open
till the Toucher is out of fight. A Creature which has the Head of an Ape, the
Foot of a Lion, and the rest of a Man. The Ox-Fish with Arms, Fingers and
Duggs, the rest as a Cow. So that it may be said of Brasila -- Semper aliquid
apportat novi.

The people are witty as appears by their America.
sayings to the Christians (holding up a Wedge of Gold) said they, Behold your
God oh ye Christians! on their Festival-days they go Naked, both Men and Women;
and are able Swimmers, staying under water an hour and half: the Women are
delivered without great pain: some of the Natives are all over Hairy, like
Beasts: it contains not Provinces, but these Captain-Ships: viz. Vincent, Rio
de Juneiro, Holy Ghost, Porto-Seguro, Des Ilheos, Todos los Santos, Fernambuck,
Tamaraca, Paraiba, Rio Grande, Saiara, Maragnon, and Para. Its chief Cities
are, Meranhan, Tamaracai, and Olinda, and the great River Zoyal.

Guiana is bounded East with the Atlantic; West with Mount-Peru; North with
the Flood Orenoque; and South with the Amazones. The Air here is indifferently
good: near the Sea it is plain and level, up in the Country Mountainous; here
the Trees keep their leaves all the year, with their fruit always ripe, and
growing. The Inhabitants are under no settled Government: they punish only
Murder, Theft, and Adultery; their Wives are their Slaves, and they may have as
many as they please; they are without Religion or Notion of a Deity. It does
contain these Provinces: viz. Rio de las Amazones, Wiapoce, Orenoque, and the
Isles of Guiana. Its Commodities are Sugar, and Cotton: in it are plenty of
Beast, Fish, and Fowls; they are Swarthy in Complexion, and great Idolaters;
as for Cities it has none of note.

Paria is bounded on the East with Guiana; West with the Bay of Venezuela;
North with the Atlantic Ocean; and South with Terra Incognita: America.
and contains these Provinces: Viz. Cumana, Venezuela, S. Margarita, Cutagana,
and its Isles. All which are not very fruitful; it is well stored with Pearls;
the People paint their Teeth and Bodies with Color: The Women are trained up
to ride, run, leap and swim: and also to Till the Land. In it are these most
noted Cities: Viz. St. Jago, St. Michael de Nevery, and Mahanao.

As for the Descriptions of the American Isles I must beg the favor to omit: I
shall therefore only name them having been so very large already; and they are
these: Viz. Los. Ladrones, Fernandes, the Caribes; as Granada, S. Vincent,
Barbados, Matinino, Dominica, Desrada; Guadalupe, Antego, S. Christopher,
Nieves, Sancta Crux, and some lesser Isles belonging to them: As also
Portorico, Monico Hispaniola, Cuba and Jamaica. Thus I have finished the
Description of the known Earth.

Now the Names of the Seas are these: Viz. the Ocean Sea, Narrow Sea,
Mediterranean Sea, Mare Major, Mare Pacificum, Mare Caspium, the East-Indian
Sea, Perfian Sea, Red Sea, and Mare-del-Zuz, which are all the Principal-Seas.

Thus through the Blessing of God I have given you a brief, tho'true
Description of all the known Earth and Seas, and have thus finished my
Geographical Descriptions of the Division of the Earthly Globe.

The Author on the Difficulties in the Collection of his (...), or little
Description of the great World.
Oh thou Urania! Thou that have now brought
Our Ship to Harbor sound, and richly fraught.
Tho'Aeolus his blustering Gales did send,
And foaming Billows high, the Skies did rend:
Tho'Blustring storms, and Thunder loud did roar,
And darkness Grim, oppressed our Souls all'ore;
So that we could not view the Stars, nor Sky,
Nor Sun, nor Moon, nay Earth, could not espy.
Yet by thy Art, such safety we did find,
Safely to pass both raging Seas, and Wind.
And at the last a Harbor, safe did gain:
Rejecting fears; we quite cast off our pain.
When Seas are calm, and Winds more serene be,
Then we again will put our Ship to Sea;
That when refresht we farther may descry,
And search into this Noble Treasury.
(...)

SECT. III. Of Geographical Propositions.
PROP. I. How to find the Distance of any two Cities or Places, which differ
only in Latitude.
IN this Proposition there are two Varieties which are these.

1. If both the Places lie under one and the same Meridian, and on one and the
same side the Equinoctial, either on the North or South side thereof; then
substract the lesser Latitude from the greater, and convert their difference
into Miles (by allowing 60 Miles for a Degree) so have you the distance of the
two Places propounded. 2. But if the two Places lie under one and the same
Meridian, but the one on the South side of the Equinoctial, and the other on
the North side, then add both their Latitudes together their Sum is their
Distance.
PROP. II. To find the Distance of any two Places which differ only in
Longitude.
There are also in this Proposition two Varieties.

1. The two Places may both lie under the Eqinoctial, and so have no Latitude:
and if so, substract the lesser Longitude out of the greater, and convert the
remainder into Miles; so have you the distance of any two Places so posuited.
2. But if the two Places differ only in Longitude, and lies not under the
Equinoctial, but under some other Intermediate Parallel of Latitude, between
the Equinoctial, and one of the Poles: Then to find their distance, this is the
Analogy or Proportion. As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the Latitude:

So is S. of X. of Longitude,

To S. of their distance, which being doubled, and converted into Miles, gives
the required distance.


PROP. III To find the Distance of any two Places, which differ both in
Latitude, and in Longitude.
In this Proposition three Varieties do present themselves to our View.

1. One of the Places may lie under the Equinoctial and have no Latitude, and
the other under some Parallel of Latitude between the Equinoctial and one of
the Poles. In such case observe this Analogy or Proportion. As Radius or S. of
90,

To Sc. of their X. of Longitude:

So is Sc. of their Latitude,

To Sc. of their Distance required.

2. But if both the Places proposed shall be without the Equinoctial, but on
the one side either both toward the North, or both toward the South, then
their Distance may be found, by this Analogy or Proportion. As Radius or S. 90
00',

To Sc. of their X. of Longitude:

So is To. of the greater Latitude,

To the T. of a fourth Arch, which subtracted from the Complement of the
lesser Latitude, the remainder must be the fifth Arch; Then say,

As Sc. of the fourth Arch,

To Sc. of the fifth Arch:

So is S. of the greater Latitudes,

To Sc. of the Distance of the two proposed Places.

3. The two Places propounded may be so situated, that one of them may lie on
the North, and the other on the South side the Equinoctial: the Distance of
Places so situated may be obtained, by this Analogy or Proportion. As Radius or
S. 90,

To Sc. of X. of Longitude:

So is Tc. of the greater Latitude,

To T. of a fourth Arch, which being subtracted out of the Sum of the other
Latitude, and the Radius or 90 Degrees. the remainder is a fifth Arch; Then say,

As Sc. of the fourth Arch,

To Sc. of the fifth Arch:

So is S. of the Latitude first taken,

To Sc. of the Distance required.


These are all the Varieties of the Positions of Places on the Terrestrial
Globe: For if the Distance of any two Places be required, they must fall under
one or other of these Varieties, and may be obtained by one or other of the
Proportions, mentioned in the three aforegoing Propositions.

Also if you know the Latitude and Longitude of any two fixed Stars, or their
Right Ascension and Declination, then by these Rules their Distance may be
found, which is of good use to Astronomy. It may also be applied to Circular
Sailing; of all other ways the most perfect: which is treated of in its due
Place.

CHAP. VIII. of NAVIGATION.
NAVIGATION So called from Navis a Ship, is an Art Mathematical, which shows
how by the shortest good Way, by the aptest Direction, and in the shortest
Time, to conduct a Ship from any one place unto any other place assigned: it
has been highly esteemed by the Ancients; it is the Glory, Beauty, Bullwark,
Wall and Wealth of Britain, and the Bridge that joins it to the Universe.
Navigation is commonly divided into three sorts of Sailing: viz. Plain sailing,
Mercator's sailing, and Circular sailing: Of all which three Parts I shall
treat in their Order.

SECT. I. Of Plain sailing, or sailing by the Plain Chart.
PLain Sailing, or sailing by the Plain Chart, is the most plainest way, and
the Foundation of all the Rest: and although the Ground and Projection of the
Plain Chart is erroneous, yet seeing it is more facile to the Learner, and may
serve indifferently near the Equinoctial, because there the Degrees of
Longitude, as well as the Degrees of Latitude, are Equal: Each Degree being
divided into 60 Minutes, or Milles, though they are somewhat more than English
Miles, Each Minute or Mile containing about 6000 Feet.

PROPI. The Rumb, and Distance sailed thereon being given, The Doctrine of
Rightlined Triangles, both Right, and ObliqueAngled, applied to Propositions of
Plain Sailing.
to find the Difference of Latitude, and the Departure from the Meridian.
Admit a Ship sails N. W. by N. 372' or Miles, or 124 Leagues, I demand her
Difference of Latitude and departure from the Meridian?

In the Triangle ABC, the Hypothenuse AC represents the distance sailed, or
Rumb-line, Fig. 44.
BC the departure from the Meridian, and AB the difference of Latitude.

1. To find which say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. distance sailed 372'.

So is Sc. V. A of the Course 56 15',

To Log. cr. AB 309 3/10 Minutes, which being divided by 60' gives 5. 9'. 18"
for the Difference of Latitude.

2. To find the Departure from the Meridian Fig. 44.
say,

As Radius or S 90,

To Log. Rumb-line AC 372'.

So is S. of V. of the Course A 33 45',

To Log. cr. BC 206 6/10 Minutes, the departure from the Meridian, which
divided by 60 gives 3. 26'. 36" for the difference of Longitude.

Note that by this Proposition you may keep an Account how much you have sailed
either East or West, North or South.

PROP. II. By the Rumb and Difference of Latitude given, To find the Distance,
and the Departure from the Meridian.
Admit a Ship sail N. W. by W. until her Fig. 44.
difference of Latitude be 309 3/10 Minutes, I demand her distance sailed, and
her departure from the Meridian?

1. To find the distance, say,

As Sc. of V. of the Course A 56 15',

To Log. cr. AB the X. of Lat. 309 3/10 Minutes.

So is the Radius or S. 90,

To Log. AC 372 the distance sailed.

2. For the Departure, say, Fig. 44.


As Sc. of A V. of the Course 56 15",

To Log. cr. AB. X of Lat. 309 3/10 Minutes.

So is S. of V. of the Course A 33 45',

To Log. cr. AB 206 6/10 Minutes, the Departure required.

By the help of this Proposition, when your Latitude by Observation does not
agree with your dead reckoning, (kept by the former Proposition) Then according
to this Rule, you may make your way saild agree with your Observed Latitude,
and so correct your Account or dead Reckoning.

PROP. III. By knowing the Distance of the Meridians of two Places, and their
Difference of Latitude, to find the Rumb, and Distance.
Admit A, to represent the Lizard, AB the Parallel thereof, C. St. Mary's
Islands, being one of the Azores, and CB the Meridian thereof.

In the Triangle ABC, there is given the side AB 816 Minutes, the Distance of
the Lizard, from the Meridian of St. Marys, and the side CB their difference of
Latitude 768 Minutes, I Fig. 45.
demand the Rumb: i.e. the Angle at C, and the Distance of the Lizard from St.
Marys?

1. For the Rumb or Angle at C, say,

As Log. cr. CB 768',

To radius ^^ S 90.

So is Log. cr. AB 816',

To T. of the B(...), or Angle at C 46 44', and is from the Lizard unto St.
Marys to the fourth Rumb of the Meridian, and 1 44' more, Viz. S. W. and ^ 44'.
Westerly, or from St. Marys, to the Lizard, N. E. and 1 44' Easterly: and thus
it shall be by the Plain Chart.

2. For their Distance AC, say,

As S. Rumb. or V. at C. 46 44',

To Log. cr. AB 816' Minutes.

So is Radius or S. 90,

To Log. Hypoth. AC 1120' 1/10 which is the Distance Fig. 45.
of the Lizard, unto St. Marys Istand, and such should be the distance by the
Plain Chart.

PROP. IV. Admit two Ships to set sail from one Port, one Ship sails W. S. W.
40', the other W. by N. so far until she finds the first Ship to bear from her
S. E. by E. I demand the second Ships distance from the Port, and their
Distance asunder?
In the Triangle ADE, let A represent the Port, AD the W. S. W. course, and AE
the Fig. 46.
Course W. by North.

1. To find the second Ships distance from the Port, say,

As S. of V. at E. 22 30',

To Log. cr. AD 40' Minutes.

So is S. of V. at D 123 45',

To Log. cr. AE 86 98/100 Minutes, which is the Fig. 46.
distance required.

2. To find the two Ships their distance Asunder, say,

As S. of V. at E 22 30',

To Log. cr. AD 40 Minutes.

So is S. of V. at A 33 45',

To Log. cr. DE 58 12/100 Minutes, which is the Distance required.

PROP. V. Two Ships sets sail from two Ports, which lie N. and South of each
other, the one sails from the Northermost Port 72 29'/100, and then meets she
other Ship, which came from the Southermost Port, on a N. W. Course, and had
sailed from thence 56 80'/100 I demand the Rumb on which the first ship made
her way, and also the Distance between the two Ports?
In the Triangle ADE, let A be the Southermost Fig. 47.
Port, AD the Course and way of the second Ship N. W. 56 80'/100, let E be the
Northermost Port, ED the Course and Way of the other Ship 72 29'/100, and D the
Place where they both meet.

1. To find the Rumb on which the first Ship sailed, say,

As Log. cr. DE 72 29/100 Minutes,

To S. of V. at A 45 00'.

So is Log. cr. DA 56 80/100 Minutes,

To S. of V. at E 33 45', which shows the Course of the first Ship to be S.
W. by South.

2. To find the Distance between the two Fig. 47.
Ports A and E, say,

As S. of V. at A 45 00',

To Log. cr. DE 72 29/100 Minutes,

So is S. of V. at D 101 15',

To Log. cr. EA 100', which is the required Distance.

PROP. VI. Admit a Ship coming off the Main Ocean and I had sight of a
Promontory or Cape, by which it is my desire to sail, I find it to bear from me
S. S. E. and distant by Estimation 33', or Miles: But keeping still on my
Course S. until the Evening, having sailed 36' or Miles, I would then know how
the Cape bears, and its distance from the Ship?
In the Triangle ADE, admit that at A, I do observe the Cape D, to bear from me
S. S. E. 33', and having sailed from A, to E 36' South, I desire to know its
Distance, and bearing. In the Triangle, there is therefore given, AD 33', Fig.
48.
AE. 36', and the Angle at A 22 30'.

1. To find the Angle at E, say,

As Z. crs. AE, and AD 69',

To X. crs. AD, and AE 03'.

So is T. VV unknown D and E 78 45',

To the T. of 12 20', which taken from 78 45', leaves the Angle at E 66 25', so
that the Cape D then bears from me E. N. E. and 01 05' Northerly.

2. To find the Distance of the Cape ED from the Ship, say,

As S. V. at E 66 25',

To Log. cr. AD 33'.

So is S. V. at A 22 30',

To Log. cr. ED 13 78/100 Miles distant, so that the Cape is then distant from
the Ship 13 78/100 Miles.

PROP. VII. Two Ports both lying in one Latitude, distant 64' or Miles, the
Westermost of those Ports lies opposite to an Island, more Northerly distant
therefrom 47' or Miles, which Island is also distant from the Eastermost Port,
34' or Miles, I demand the Course from the Westermost Port to that Island?
In the Triangle ADE, let A be the Westermost Port, and E, the Eastermost Port,
distant Asunder 64'; and let D be the Island, distant from A 47', and from E
34': Then is the Angle at Fig. 49'.
A required, which is the Course or Rumb, from the Westermost Port, unto the
Island: To find which, say,

As Log. cr. AE 64',

To Log. Z. crs. AD, and ED 81'.

So is Log. X. crs. AD, and ED 13',

To Log. os a certain line AO 16 454/(...).

Which added to AE 64, is 80 454/1000,

The whereof is AB, 40 227/1000

Then again say,

As Log. cr. AD 47', To Radius or S. 90.

So is Log. AB 40 227/1000,

To Sc. V. at A, 58 51', that is N. E. by E. 2 36' Easterly, which is the
Course from the Westermost Port A, unto the Island D.

SECT. II. Of sailing by the true Sea Chart, commonly called MERCATOR'S Chart.
THE true Sea Chart, commonly called MERCATOR'S Chart But is indeed the
Invention of our Learned Countryman Mr. Edw. Wright, although this Stranger
has almost got the Name and Praise thereof.
, performs the same Conclusions as the Plain Chart, and almost as speedily, but
far more exactly: Because all Places may be laid down hereon, with the same
truth as on the Globe it self: both to their Latitudes, Longitudes, Bearing and
Distance from each other.

And here it will be necessary to have a Table of Meridional Ports, which I
have extracted out of Mr. Wright's Tables, to every tenth Minute of Latitude;
accounting it in single Miles, or Minutes of the Equinoctial, and have hereunto
annexed the said Table.

A Table of Meridional Miles
The Degrees. of Lat. The Minutes of each Degree. The Difference. 0 10 20 30 40 50
The Meridional Miles. 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 10 1 60 70 80 90 100 110 10 2 120 130
140 150 160 170 10 3 180 190 200 210 220 230 10 4 240 250 260 270 280 290 10 5
300 310 320 330 340 350 10 6 360 370 380 390 400 410 10 7 421 431 441 451 461
471 10 8 481 491 501 511 521 532 10 9 542 552 562 572 582 592 10 10 603 613 623
633 643 653 10 11 664 674 684 694 704 715 10 12 725 735 745 755 766 776 10 13
786 797 807 817 827 838 10 14 848 858 869 879 889 900 10 15 910 920 931 941 951
962 10 16 972 983 993 1004 1014 1024 10 17 1035 1045 1056 1066 1077 1087 10 18
1098 1108 1119 1129 1140 1150 10 19 1161 1172 1182 1193 1203 1214 10 20 1225
1235 1246 1257 1267 1278 11 21 1289 1299 1310 1321 1332 1342 11 22 1353 1364
1375 1386 1396 1407 11 23 1418 1429 1440 1451 1462 1473 11 24 1484 1499 1505
1516 1527 1538 11 25 1549 1561 1572 1583 1594 1605 11 26 1616 1627 1638 1649
1661 1672 11 27 1683 1694 1705 1717 1728 1738 11 28 1751 1761 1773 1785 1796
1808 11 29 1819 1830 1842 1853 1865 1867 11 The Degrees. of Lat. The Minutes of
each Degree. The Difference. 0 10 20 30 40 50 The Meridional Miles. 30 1888
1899 1911 1923 1934 1946 12 31 1958 1969 1981 1993 2004 2016 12 32 2028 2040
2052 2063 2075 2087 12 33 2099 2111 2123 2135 2147 2159 12 34 2171 2183 2195
2207 2219 2231 12 35 2244 2256 2268 2281 2293 2305 12 36 2318 2330 2342 2355
2367 2380 12 37 2392 2405 2417 2430 2442 2455 12 38 2468 2481 2493 2506 2519
2532 13 39 2544 2557 2570 2583 2596 2609 13 40 2622 2635 2648 2662 2675 2668 13
41 2701 2714 2718 2741 2754 2768 13 42 2781 2795 2808 2822 2835 2849 13 43 2863
2876 2890 2904 2918 2931 14 44 2945 2959 2973 2987 3001 3015 14 45 3030 3044
3050 3072 3086 3101 14 46 3115 3130 3144 3159 3173 3188 14 47 3202 3217 3232
3247 3261 3276 15 48 3291 3306 3321 3336 3351 3366 15 49 3382 3397 3412 3428
3443 3459 15 50 3474 3490 3505 3521 3537 3553 16 51 3568 3584 3600 3616 3632
3649 16 52 3665 3681 3697 3714 3730 3747 16 53 3763 3780 3797 3814 3830 3847 17
54 3864 3881 3899 3616 3933 3950 17 55 3968 3985 4003 4020 4038 4056 18 56 4074
4092 4110 4128 4146 4164 19 57 4182 4201 4219 4238 4257 4275 19 58 4294 4313
4331 4351 4370 4390 20 59 4409 4428 4448 4468 4487 4507 20 The Degrees. of Lat. The
Minutes of each Degree. The Difference. 0 10 20 30 40 50 The Meridional Miles.
60 4527 4547 4567 4588 4608 4629 20 61 4643 4670 4691 4711 4733 4754 21 62 4775
4796 4818 4839 4861 4883 22 63 4905 4927 4949 4972 4994 5017 23 64 5039 5062
5085 5018 5132 5155 23 65 5179 5203 5226 5250 5275 5299 24 66 5324 5348 5373
5390 5423 5449 25 67 5474 5500 5520 5552 5678 5704 26 68 5631 5658 5685 5712
5739 5767 27 69 5795 5823 6021 5879 5908 5937 28 70 5966 5996 6125 6055 6085
6115 30 71 (...) 6177 6208 6239 6271 6303 31 72 6335 6368 6401 6431 6468 6501
33 73 6535 6570 6605 6640 6675 6718 35 74 6747 6783 6620 6857 6895 6933 37 75
6972 7010 7050 (...) 7130 7170 40 76 7211 7253 7295 7338 7381 7424 43 77 7469
7513 7559 7605 7651 7651 7698 46 78 7746 7795 7844 7894 7944 7996 50 79 8048
8100 8154 8209 8264 8320 55 80 8377 8435 8495 8555 8616 8678 60 81 8742 8806
8872 8939 9007 9077 68 82 9148 9221 9295 9371 9449 9523 77 83 9609 9692 9778
9865 9954 (...) 88 84 10141 10238 (...) 10441 10547 10656 105 85 10770 10887
11007 11133 (...) (...) 128 86 11539 11686 11839 11999 12168 12344 165 87 12521
12718 (...) 13150 13388 (...) (...) 88 13920 14221 14550 14914 15321 15783 386
89 16318 16950 17726 18729 20152 22623

PROP. I. To find by the Table, what Meridional parts are contained in any
Difference of Latitude.
The Use of the Table is demonstrated by the several Examples following, after
this Manner.

In this Proposition three Varieties present themselves unto our View.

1. When one Place is under the Equinoctial, the other having North, or South
Latitude, his Meridional parts corresponding, is to be esteemed for the
Meridional Difference of Latitude. 2. When both Places are toward one of the
Poles, then the Meridional parts of the lesser, taken from the Meridional parts
of the greater Latitude, the remainder is the Meridional difference required.
3. When one Place has North, and the other South Latitude, their corresponding
Meridional parts added together gives the Meridional difference of Latitude
sought: thus having sound them out they may thus be applied.
PROP. II By knowing the Latitudes, and the difference of Longitude of any two
Places, to find the Rumb, and Distance.
Admit there be a Port in the Latitude of 50 00' North, and another in the
Latitude of 13 12' North, and their Difference of Longitude is 52 57' West, I
demand the Rumb and Distance?

In the Triangle A b c, let A b represent the proper difference of Latitude, bc
the Departure, Ac the distance sailed, A the Angle of the Fig. 50.
Course, c the Complement of the Course.

In the Triangle ABC, AB is the Meridional difference of Latitude, BC the
Difference of Longitude, A the Angle of the Rumb, C the Compl. of the Angle of
the Rumb: These things being understood the work evidently appears to be the
same as in Rightangled Plain Triangles.

There is then required first the Difference of Latitude, and this falls under
the second Variety.^

1. To find the Rumb or Course say,

As Merid. X. Lat. 2676',

To Radius or S. 90.

So is X. of Longitude 3177',

To T. of the Rumb 49 53', the Course there fore is S. W. W, etc.

2. To find the Distance, Fig. 50.
^


As Sc. Course 40 07',

To proper X. of Lat. 2208'.

So is Radius or S. 90,

To the Distance 3426 Minutes as required.

PROP. III. By knowing the Latitudes, and distance of two Places, to find the
Rumb, and Difference of Longitude.
1. To find the Rumb or Course say,

As the Distance sailed,

To Radius or S. 90.

So is the X. of Latitude,

To Sc. of the Rumb required.

2. To find the Difference of Longitude say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To the X. of Latitude in Merid. Parts.

So is T. of the Rumb,

To the X. of Longitude required.

PROP. IV. By knowing the Latitudes, and Rumb of two Places, to find their
Distance, and Difference of Longitude.
1. To find the Distance say,

As Sc of the Rumb,

To the X of Latitude.

So is Radius or S. 90,

To the Distance required.

2. To find the Difference of Longitude say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To the X. of Latitude in M. Parts.

So is T. of the Rumb,

To the X. of Longitude required.

PROP. V. By knowing the Rumb, Difference of Longitude, and one Latitude, to
find the other Latitude, and the Distance.
1. To find the other Latitude say,

As T. of the Rumb,

To the X of Longitude in parts.

So is Radius or S. 90,

To the Merid. X. of Latitude required.

2. To find the Distance say,

As Sc. of the Rumb,

To the X. of Latitude.

So is Radius or S. 90,

To the required Distance,

PROP. VI. By knowing the Distance, one Latitude, and Rumb, to find the other
Latitude, and Difference of Longitude.
1. To find the Difference of Latitude say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To the Distance.

So is Sc. of the Rumb,

To the X. of Latitude required.

2. To find the Difference of Longitude say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To the Merid. X. of Latitude.

So is T. of the Rumb,

To the X. of the Longitude required.

SECT. III. Of Circular Sailing, or Sailing by the Arch of a Great Circle.
THIS is of all other the most exact way of sailing, and above all other most
perfect, showing the nearest way, and distance between any two Places: and
although it is hardly possible to keep close unto the Arch of a great Circle,
yet it is of great advantage to keep conveniently near it, especially in an
East or West Course: In the former Propositions of sailing, we used Meridians,
Parallels and Rumbs, as the Sides of every Triangle, whether by the Plain or
Mercator's Chart: but in Circular sailing the Rumbs are not used so, because
they are Helispherical-lines, and not Circles; nor the Parallels, because they
are not great Circles: Whereas the sides comprehending every Spherical Triangle
are Arches of great Circles: Therefore here we use Arches of the Meridians, of
the Equinoctial, and of other great Circles described, or so imagined to be
described, from one Place unto another, on the Spherical Superficies of the
Earth and Sea.

Therefore here arises two things observable: and,

1. If the two places lie under the Equinoctial, then is their Position East
and West, and their distance is their Difference of Longitude, converted into
Miles: or, 2. If the two Places proposed be in one and the same Meridian, then
is their Position North and South, and their Distance is their Difference of
Latitude converted into Miles.
And thus far does Circular sailing agree with the former; their difference
will evidently appear by these following Propositions.

PROP. I. Two Places, the one under the Equinoctial, the other in any Latitude
given; also their difference of Longitude given, to find.
1. Their Distance in the Arch of a great Circle. 2. The direct Position of the
first place from the second. 3. And of the second Place from the first.
Here we call the Angles which the Arch makes with the Meridians of the places
propounded, the Angles of the Direct Positions of those places one from the
other: because the Arch of a great Circle. drawn between two places is the
nearest distance; and the most direct way of the one, to the other Place. Now I
shall not here demonstrate it by Schemes, as I have done in the other two
Sections, but shall only lay down the proportions, whereby the required parts
may be found; and so leave the ingenious Seamen to practice it with Schemes at
his leisure: and,

1. To find the nearest distance from Place to place, in the Arch of a Great
Circle: Say according to the 10 Case of Rectangled Spherical Triangles.

As the Radius,

To Sc. of X. of Longitude.

So is Sc. of X. of Latitude;

To Sc. of the Distance in the Arch required.

2. For the Direct Position, say by the 11 Case thus,

As the Radius,

To S. of X. of Latitude.

So is Tc. of X. of Longitude,

To Tc. of V. of Position required.

3. For the Direct Position of the second Place from the first, say by the 11
Case thus,

As the Radius,

To S. of the X of Longitude.

So is Tc. of X. of Latitude,

To Tc. of V. of Position required.

PROP. II. Two Places proposed, the one lying under the Equinoctial, the other
in any Latitude given; with their distance in a great Circle of the same Places
being also known, to find.
1. Their Difference of Longitude. 2. The direct Position from the first to the
second Place. 3. And from the second to the first Place.
1. For their Difference of Longitude, say by Case 12,

As Sc. of the Latitude,

To Radius.

So is Sc. of their Distance in the Arch,

To Sc. of their Difference of Longitude required.

2. Now to find the Direct Position from the first place to the second, say by
the 13 Case; and thirdly, for the Direct Position from the second place to the
first, say by the 14 Case of Rectangulars.

PROP. III. Two Places lying in one Latitude given, their difference of
Longitude being also known, to find.
1. The nearest distance of those two Places. 2. The direct Position of one
Place from the other.
The Resolution of this Proposition depends on the 9 Case of Oblique Spherical
Triangles: by supposing the Oblique Triangle, to be transfigured or converted
into two Rectangulars, by a supposed Perpendicular: and then,

1. To find the nearest distance in the Arch, say by the 8 Case of Rectangulars.

As the Radius,

To Sc. of the Latitude.

So is S. of half X. of Longitude,

To S. of half the required distance, which doubled gives the distance of the
two places in the Arches, as sought.

2. For the Direct Position, say by the 9 Case.

As the Radius,

To S. of the Latitude.

So is T. of half X. of Longitude,

To Tc. of V. of Position required.

PROP. IV. Two Places lying both in one Latitude given, and the nearest
distance being also known, to find.
1. Their Difference of Longitude. 2. The direct Position of the one Place from
the other.
The Resolution of this Proposition falls under the 11 Case of Oblique
Spherical Triangles: for here you have the three sides of the Triangle given,
viz. the Arch of Distance, and the other two sides (are both equal) being the
Complements of the places Latitude: and here seeing the two sides are equal,
therefore the two Angles of Position are also equal: now there is required the
three Angles,

1. To find their Difference of Longitude, add the double of the Complement of
Latitude to the Arch of Distance; then from half this Sum, deduct the Arch of
Distance, and then proceed in all points as you see in Case the 11th. So shall
their Difference of Longitude be obtained.

2. To find their direct Position:

First, to the double Complement of Latitude, add the Arch of Distance, then
from half that agragate, deduct the Complement of Latitude, and then work as
before, so shall the direct Position be attained.

PROP. V. Two Places proposed lying in one Latitude, and the distance of those
Places in their Parallel given; to find.
1. Their Difference of Longitude, 2. Their distance in the Arch of a great
Circle, 3. The direct Position of the one from the other.
Now you must understand, that as the Semidiamiter of a Parallel, is in
proportion to the Semidiamiter of the Equinoctial: so is any number of Miles in
that Parallel, to the Minutes of Longitude answering to those Miles: fo that if
we suppose the Semidiameter of the Equinoctial to be Radius, then the
Semidiameter of any Parallel is the Sine of that Parallel's distance from the
Pole, that is the Sc. of the Latitude of that Parallel: Therefore,

1. To find the Diff. of Longitude say,

As Sc. of the Latitude,

To the Radius,

So is the Distance in that Parallel,

To the Diff. of Longitude required.

2. Now the Difference of Latitude being obtained, the nearest distance may be
found, as in the third proposition aforegoing: 3. so likewise may the Angles of
Position also.

PROP. VI. By knowing the nearest Distance of two Places, their Difference of
Longitude, and one of their Latitudes; to find the Direct Position thereof from
the other.
This Proposition falls under the first Case of Oblique Spherical Triangles,
and is thus resolved: therefore,

As S. of the Distance of the two Places,

To S. of their X. of Longitude.

So is Sc. of the Latitude of the one Place given,

To S. of the Direct Position from the other as was so required.

PROP. VII. By knowing the Latitudes of two places, and likewise their
Difference of Longitude; to find,
1. The distance in the Arch. 2. The direct Position from the first to the
second place. 3. The direct Position from the second to the first place. 4. The
Latitudes and Longitudes by which the Arch passes. 5. The Course and Distance
from Place to Place through those Latitudes and Longitudes according to
Mercator.
I shall here make use of M. Norwood's example of a Voyage from the
Summer-Islands, unto the Lizard: now because the work is various I have
therefore illustrated it with a Scheme, and shall be as brief and facile as
possible. Therefore,

In the Triangle ADE, let A be the SummerIslands, whose Latitude is 32 25', AD
the Complement Fig. 51.
thereof 57 35', let E represent the Lizard whose Latitude is 50 00', and ED
the Complement thereof 40 00', and let their Difference of Longitude, namely
the Angle ADE be 70 00', now Drepresenteth the North Pole, and AE an Arch of a
great Circle passing by these two Places: now see the operation.

1. By having the Complements of the Latitudes of the two Places, viz. AD 57
35', and ED 40 00', and their Difference of Longitude, namely the Angle EDA 70
00': you may find the nearest distance EA to be 53 24'; by Case the 9. 5. chap.
5.

2. Then having found the nearest distance in Fig. 51.
the Arch EA to be 53 24', (or 3204 Miles) the Angle of Position from the
Summer Islands to the Lizard, namely the Angle DAE, may be found by Case the 1.
5. chap. 5. to be 48 48', that is N. E. and 03 48' Easterly.

3. And also by the same Case, may the Direct Position from the Lizard, to the
Summer-Islands, namely the Angle AED befound to be 81 10', that is W. by N. and
2 25' Westerly.

4. In order to the finding the Latitudes and Longitudes by which the Arch
passes, first let fall the Perpendicular DB, so is the Oblique Fig. 51.
Triangle ADE converted into two Rectangulars, viz. ABD, and DBE: secondly, by
Case the 8. 4. chap. 5. you may find the length of the Perpendicular DB to be
39 26', whose Complement is 50 34', which is the greatest Latitude by which the
Arch ABE passes, so the greatest Obliquity Fig. 51.


BDc 48 31 BDf 38 31 BDg 28 31 BDh 18 31 BDj 08 31 of the Equinoctial from that
Circle is 50 34'. -- Thirdly, by Case the 9. 4 chap. 5. you must find the
vertical Angles, viz. ADB, and BDE, which will appear, the Angle ADB to be 58
31', and EDB to be 11 29': now these things being obtained, the Latitudes by
which the Arch passes at every tenth degree of Longitude from A, may be found
by resolving the several Right-Angled Triangles, viz. BDc, BDf, etc.
substracting 10 from ADB 58 31', there remains BDc 48 31', and so for the rest
as in the Table. Now by knowing these Angles last found, and the Perpendicular
BD before found to be 39 26', you may by Case the 3.. 4. chap. 5. find the
Latitudes of the several points A. c. f. g. h. i. B. and E. to be as in the
subsequent Table.

5. Thus having Fig. 51.


Latitude. Longitude. A. 32 25' 00 00' c. 38 51 10 00 f. 43 34 20 00 g. 46 54
30 00 h. 49 04 40 00 i. 50 15 50 00 B. 50 34 60 00 E. 50 00 70 00 found the
Latitudes and Longitudes of the Arch, and the other required parts
aforementioned, we now come to show how the Course, and the Distance from place
to place according to Mercator may be found. So to find, first the Course and
Distance Ac. now there is given the Latitude of A 32 25', and of c 38 51', and
their Difference of Longitude is 10 00', now the Proper Difference Fig. 51.
of Latitude is 6 26', or 386', and Meridional Difference of Latitude is 475'.
Now knowing these things by proposition 2. 2. chap. 8. yon may find the Course
from A to c, to be N. E. 51 38'; and the Distance Ac to be 622', and so those
Rules prosecuted will show the course and distance from c to f; from f to g;
from g to h, etc. So of the rest, which for brevity sake I shall omit, and
leave the Ingenious Seaman to Calculate at his Pleasure.

I might hereunto annex many more propositions of Circular Sailing, but because
of the smallness of this Treatise, and that those Propositions already handled,
being by the Ingenious Seaman well understood, will be sufficient to enable him
to perform any other Conclusion in Circular Sailing whatsoever, I therefore
here omit, and hasten forwards unto the other parts of this Mathematical
Treasury.

A Table of Angles, which every Rumb makethwith the Meridian.
These on this side the W. incline toward the N. end of the Meridian Angles of
Inclination with the Meridian. These on this side the E. incline to the N. end
of the Meridian. Rumbs. North Rumbs. N. by W. 11 15' N. by E. N. N. W. 22 30 N.
N. E. N. W. by N 33 45 N. E. by N. North West 45 00 North East N. W. by W. 56
15 N. E. by E. W. N. W. 67 30 E. N. E. W. by N. 78 45 E. by N. West 90 00 East
W. by S. 78 45 E. by S. W. S. W. 67 30 E. S. E. S. W. by W. 56 15 S. E. by E.
South West 45 00 South East S. W. by S. 33 45 S. E. by S. S. S. W. 22 30 S. S.
E. S. and by W. 11 15 S. and by E. Rumbs South Rumbs These on this side the W.
incline unto the S. end of the Meridian. These on this side the E. incline
toward the S. end of the Meridian. Note that if you account in quarter of
Points, add for one quarter 2 48', for one half 5 37', for three quarters 8
26', (not regarding the Seconds in Navigation.)

CHAP. IX. Of SURVEYING.
IT has been a custom among Modern Authors, that have treated on this Subject,
that before they entered on the Work it self, to give the Description of the
Instruments, used in; and chiefly appertaining to the Art of Surveying: viz.
the Circumferentor, the Theodolite, the Plain-Table, and the Semicircle:
concerning the descriptions of which Instruments I shall not here treat, but
refer you unto those Authors that have largely and amply described them. I
shall in this place only demonstrate the Use of the Semicircle in taking the
Plots of Enclosures, Champain-Plains, Woods and Mountains diverse ways Which
Instrument, and the Plain Table, I esteem as the two aptest Instruments for
Surveying of Land; i. e. the Plain Table for small Enclosures, and the
Semicircle for Champain Plains, Woods, and Mountains.
; and also in taking of Accessible, and Inaccessible Heights and Distances; and
also I shall show the use of a little Instrument called a Protractor, in the
delineating on Paper the Plot of a Field, etc. which Instrument being so
commonly known, and so generally used makes me omit the description thereof as
superfluous.

As for your Chain, I would have you, have it made of good round Wyre; to
contain in length four Poles, or Perch, to be divided into an hundred equal
parts called Links.

And here before we enter on the Work it self, it will be necessary to
understand how by the Protractor to lay down an Angle of any quantity of
degrees propounded, or to find the quantity of an Angle given.

SECT. I. Of the use of the Protractor.
PROP. I. By the Protractor, to Protract an Angle of any quantity of degrees
propounded.
AN Angle may be laid down easily according to the directions of Prop. 5.. 1.
Chapter 4. Fig. 52.
but because this is more useful in Surveying, Know that if it be required to
protract an Angle of 50 degrees. having drawn the line A B at pleasure, place the
Center of your Protractor on C, and moving it by your Protracting Pinn, until
the Meridional line thereof be directly on the line A B, then make a Mark by
the division of 50 on the limb of the Protractor as at D, and draw the line CD,
so shall the Angle DCB, be an Angle of 50 degrees.

PROP. II. By the Protractor given, to measure an Angle given.
This is performed by the line of Chords also, according to prop. 6.. 1. chap
4. and by the Protractor is found thus: Suppose DCB were an Angle whose
Quantity were desired, to find which, first the Center of the Protractor
applied Fig. 52.
unto the Angular point C, and its Meridional line lying justly with CB; you
shall perceive the Point D, to touch the limb of the Circle at 50 degrees.
Therefore I conclude the Measure of the Angle DCB, to be 50 degrees.

SECT. II. Of the Manifold Use of the Semicircle, in taking the Plots of small
Enclosures, Plains, Woods, or Mountains diverse Ways.
PROP. I. How to take the Plot of a Field, by the Semicircle at one Station
taken in any part thereof, from whence all the Angles may be seen, and
measuring from the Station unto every Angle thereof.
SUppose ABCDEF were a Field, and it is required to take the Plot thereof:
Having placed marks at all the Angles thereof, and made choice of your Station,
which let be K; at which, place your Instrument, and turning Fig. 53.
it about until the Needle hang over the Meridian Line of the Chart, there
screw it fast: Then directing your sight to A, you will find the Degree out by the
Index to be 40 15': Then measuring KA with your Chain it appears to be 5 Chains
and 20 Links, which note down in your Field-book: and so do by all the rest
until you have found all the Angles and Distances from your Station K, to each
respective Angle, which finished your work will stand thus.

Angles. D. M. C. L. A. 40 15 5 20 B. 88 00 6 10 C. 130 00 5 50 D. 200 00 7 00
E. 250 00 5 00 F. 310 00 5 20

PROP. II. How to delineate on Paper any Observation taken according to the
Doctrine of the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper draw a Line to represent the Meridian line as M, H, then
Placing the Center of your Protractor on the point K, laying the Meridian line
of the Protractor on the Meridian line M, H, then seeing the Angle at A was 40
15', make a Mark against 40 15' of the Protractor, as at A, and so do with all
the Fig. 53.
other Angles, as you find them in your Table: Then remove your Protractor, and
draw the Lines KA, KB, etc. This done lay down on each line his respective
Measure, as it appears in the Table. Lastly draw the Lines AB, BC, etc. So
have you on the Paper the exact Figure of the Field.

PROP. III. How by the Semicircle to take the Plot of a Field at one Station in
any Angle thereof, from whence you may view all the other Angles, by measuring
from the Stationary-Angle, unto all the other Angles.
Admit A, B, C, D, E, F, G, to be a Field, whose Plot is required: Place your
Semicircle at G, and turning it about until the Needle hang over the Meridian
line of the Chart, and there screw it fast: Then direct your sights to the
several Angles, viz. B, C, D, etc. in order one after the other, and so shall
eace respective Fig. 54.
Angle be found, as in the subsequent Table: Then with your Chain, measure from
your Stationary-Angle G, to all the other respective Angles, which done you
have finished, and the work stands thus.

Angles. D. M. C. L. B. 40 00 5 00 C. 88 00 6 00 D. 120 15 6 40 E. 165 00 6 30
F. 193 00 3 40 A. 348 07 4 00

PROP. IV. How to delineate any Observation taken according to the Doctrine of
the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper draw a straight line as M, N, then take a point therein as G,
to represent the Stationary-Angle, to which point apply the Center of your
Protractor, (in all respects as is Fig. 54.
before taught) then according to the Notes in the Table, prick off all the
Angles, viz. B, C, etc. according to their due quantity, then draw all the
lines, viz. GB, GC, GD, etc. and on them place their respective measure (as
appears in your Notes) lastly draw the lines AB, BC, CD, etc. So is there on
the Paper the exact Figure of the Field, as was required.

PROP. V. How by the Semicircle to take the Plot of a Field at two Stations, by
measuring from each Station to the visible Angles: the Field being so Irregular
that from no one Place thereof, all the Angles can be seen.
Admit A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, to be the Figure of a Field, whose Plot is
required: having made choice of your two Stations, viz. Q, and P, and placed
Marks in all the Angles: Then place your Semicircle at Q, and there Fig. 55.
six it with the Needle hanging over the Meridian of the Chart, represented by
R, Q, X, and direct your sights unto all the visible Angles, viz. A, B, C, D,
E, and F, and note down the Quantity of each Angle in your Field-book: Then
measure with your Chain from your Station Q, to the Angles A, B, C, D, E, and
F, and their length so found, note down in your Field-book also. Fig. 55.


This done direct your sight unto your second Station P, and note down in your
Field-book the degree of Declination, of your second-station P, from the
Meridian. Then measure the Stationary Distance PQ with your Chain, and note it
down in your Field-book also.

Then remove the Instrument unto P, your second-station, and there fix it with
the Needle hanging over the Meridian line of the Chart represented by TPB, then
direct your sights to the several visible Angles at this second Station, viz.
F, G, H, I, and K, in order one after another, and note down the Quantity of
each Angle in your Field-book: Then with your Chain measure from your Station
P, to these several Angles G, H, I, and K, (in all respects as at the first
station Q.) and their length so found note down in your Field-book likewise: So
have you finished your Observation, and your work stands thus. Fig. 55.


The Observation taken at the first Station Q.

Angles. D M C. L A 50 00 6 60 B 80 00 7 65 Fig. 55.
C 140 12 12 00 D 220 07 11 10 E 270 05 12 60 F 330 00 6 00

The Declination of the Station P, from the Meridian R Q X, is 30 00', and the
Stationary distance Q P is 9 Chains.

The Observation taken at the second Station P.

Angles. D M C L F 227 11 00 00 G 297 00 12 00 H 347 16 9 90 I 60 00 6 00 K 90
00 6 26 Fig. 55.


Note that the manner of taking the Plot of a large Champain Field, at many
Stations, is almost the same with this Proposition; for he that can do the one,
can also perform the other: therefore for brevity sake I here omit it as
superfluous.

PROP. VI. How to delineate any Observation taken according to the Doctrine of
the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper draw the Meridian-line R Q X, then place the Center of your
Protractor on Q, (representing your first Station) and its Meridional-line lay
equal to R Q X, then prick off the Angles visible at your first Station Q, viz.
A, B, C, D, E, and F, Of their due quantity, then draw Q A, Q B, etc. laying on
them their corresponding measure, noted in your Field-book. Now because your
second Station P, does decline 30 00', from the Meridian RQX, prick off 30 00',
and draw PQ, Fig. 55.
making it 9 Chains as in your Field-book appears, so does P represent your
second Station. Then in all respects as before, place your Protractor at P your
second Station, and draw the Meridian T P B parallel to R Q X, then prick off
the several Angles, viz. F, G, H, I, and K, Of their due quantity, and then
draw PF, PH, PI, etc. of their due length. Lastly draw the lines AB, BC, CD,
etc. and so shall you have on your Paper the exact Figure of the Field as
required.

PROP. VII. How by the Semicircle, to take the Plot of a Field at t(...)
Stations, which lies remote from you, when either by opposition of Enemies you
may not, or by some other Impediment you cannot come into the same.
Admit the Figure A, B, C, D, E, F, to be a Field into which by no means you
can possibly enter, and yet of necessity the Plot thereof must be had, for the
obtaining of which choose any two Stations, it mattereth not whether near at
hand or far off, so that all the Angles may be seen. Let your two Stations be H
and L, (the full length of the Field if possible) then place your Instrument at
H, and fixing it as is Fig. 56.
before showed, direct your sights to the several Angles of the Field, viz. A,
B, C, etc. orderly one after another, observing their degrees as is before
taught, noting it down in your Field-book: then take up your Instrument,
leaving a mark in its room at H, And measure with your Chain from Hunto L, your
second Station, which note down in your Field-book; Then placing your
Instrument at L, your second Station, and as is before taught, fixing it there,
make the like Observation to the several Angles, viz. A, B, C, D, etc. as at
the first Station H, and note it down in your Field-book also, And having so
done you have finished, and your Work stands thus.

Observations at the first Station H, are

The Angle from H the first Station, unto L the second Station, is 180 00', the
Fig. 56.
Stationary distance HL, is 60 Chains.

Observations at the second Station L, are

1 Angles D M A 104 00 B 88 07 C 59 00 D 48 00 E 26 00 F 21 30 2Angles D M A 16
00 B 39 00 C 50 09 D 74 00 E 100 00 F 29 15

PROP. VIII. How to delineate any Observation taken according to the Doctrine
of the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper draw a Line as HL, which make equal to 60 Chains, then placing
the Center of your Protractor on H, your first Station, prick off all the
Angles A, B, C, etc. as Fig. 56.
you find them in your Field-book, and draw HA, HB, HC, etc. at pleasure: then
remove your Protractor unto your second Station L, placing it as before, and
prick off all the Angles A, B, C, D, etc. as you find them in your Field notes;
and draw the lines LA, LB, LC, etc. at length until they intersect the former
lines, HA, HB, etc. in the Points A, B, C, etc. Fig. 56.
which Points of Intersection are the Angles of the Field. Lastly draw AB, BC,
CD, etc. So shall you have on your Paper the Figure of your Field, required.

PROP. IX. How by the Semicircle, to take the Plot of a great Champain-Plain,
Wood, or other overgrown Ground, by measuring round about the same, and making
Observation at every Angle thereof.
Admit A, B, C, D, be the figure of a Large overgrown Champain-Field; whose
Plot is required. First Place your Instrument at A, laying the Index on the
Diameter; and turn it about, until you espy the Angle at D, and there fix it
fast: and direct your sights to B, and note the Degree cut by your Index, in
your Field-book, (as before is taught) then remove your Instrument to B, and
there make the like observation, and so to C, and D, noting it down in your
Field-book, as asore. Then with your Chain, measure the Sides AB, BC, CD, and
DA, whose Fig. 57.
length note down in your Field book, and so you have finished and your work
stands thus.

Angles. D M C L DAB 100 00 12 20 ABC 117 15 10 00 BCD 71 30 19 20 CDA 71 15 12
20

PROP. X. How to delineate any Observation taken according unto the Doctrine of
the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper draw the line AB, at Pleasure, Fig. 57.
and placing the Center of your Protractor on the Point A, prick off an Angle
of 100, and draw AD, setting on it, and also on AB, their corresponding
measure, in your notes: Then on B, protract an Angle of 117 15', draw BC of its
due length: Then draw the line CD, so have you the exact figure of the Field,
on your Paper.

PROP. XI. How to take the Plot of any Field, by the help of the Chain only.
Admit the Figure A, B, C, D, E, to represent a Field whose Plot is required.
To obtain the Fig. 58.
which, first measure the sides CD, CB, and BD, and note their due length down
in your Fieldbook, and then measure the Sides CA, and BA, and then note ^
down their Length in your Fieldbook. Then measure the sides BE, and ED, for
the sides BC, and Fig. 58.
BD, were before known) which note down in your Fieldbook. So is your Field A,
B, C, D, E, reduced into three Triangles, viz. CBD, CAB, and BED, the length of
whose sides are all known, thus you have finished, and the works stands as you
see.

PROP. XII. How to delineate any Observation, taken according to the Doctrine
of the last Proposition.
Upon your Paper, draw a straight line, as CD, make it 5 Chains, 97/100, take
CB in your Compasses, and strike an Obscure Arch; then take BD, and with that
extent in D, cross the former Fig. 58.
Arch in B, and draw BC, and BD. Then take in your Compasses BE, and on B,
strike an Obscure Arch, then take DE, and also cross the former Arch in E, and
draw BE, and ED. Lastly take the line CA, and on C strike an Obscure Arch, then
take AB, and on B, intersect Fig. 58.
the former Arch in A, then draw CA, and AB, so have you on your Paper the
exact figure of the Field A, B, C, D, E, as was required.

SECT. III. Of finding the Area or superficial Content of any Field, lying in
any Regular or Irregular Form: by reducing the Irregular Fields into Regular
Forms.
HAving already showed how to take the Plot of any Field diverse ways, by the
Semicircle and Chain, and also by the Protractor how to delineate the Draught
thereof on Paper, etc. I now come to show how the Area or superficial Content
of a Field may be attained, i. e. how many Acres, Roods and Perches are therein
contained. To which end know; That a Statute Pole or Perch contains 16 Feet;
that 40 of those Perches in length, and 4 in breadth makes an Acre. So that an
Acre contains 160 Perches, and a Rood 40 Perches; according to the Statute 33,
of Edward the First.

Now the Original of the Mensuration of Land, and all other Superficies,
depends on the Mensuration of certain Geometrical Figures; as a Triangle,
Square, etc. which may be measured according to the directions of. 2. chap. 4
of Geometry: It would therefore here be superfluous to make a repetition of
things already handled: I shall therefore omit it, and come to show how any
Field lying in any Irregular Form, may be measured by converting it into
Regular Figures; for it seldom happens, but that the Plot of a Field, is
either a Trapezium Is a Quadrangle, whose sides are not Parallel, nor equal.
Euclides postulat hant fabricam'Trapezium, tanquam mensulam vocari: and sane
nominis ejus ratio Geometrica nulla est: P. Rami lib. 14 page 94.
, or a many-sided Irregular Figure: therefore I shall first show how to find
the Content of a Trapezium. Secondly, of any many sided Irregular Figure; and
thirdly, how to reduce any number of Perches into Acres, etc. and on the
contrary any number of Acres, into Roods and Perches.

PROP. I. How to find the Area or superficial Content of a Trapezium.
Trapeziums are Quadrangles of sundry forms: yet take this as a general Rule,
whereby their Content may be found. Admit it be required to find the Area or
superficial Content of the Trapezium ABCD, to find which, first by drawing the
Diagonal AD, you reduces it into two Triangles, ABD, and ADC. Then by prop.
3.. 1. of Chap. 4 let fall the two Perpendiculars on AD, from B, and C, Then by
prop 3.. 2 Chapter Fig. 59.
4. find the superficial Content of the two Trianangles ABD, and ADC, which
added together, is the Content os the Trapezium; by which Rule the Content of
the Trapezium, A, B, C, D, is found to be 630 Perches.

PROP. II. To find the Area or superficial Content of a manysided Irregular
Figure.
Admit A, B, C, D, E, F, G, to be an Irregular many-sided Figure, representing
a Field whose Content is required: now in regard the Field is Irregular,
therefore reduce it into Triangles, viz. ABC, ACG, EDG, DEGREES, and DFG, and Fig.
60.
then find the Content of all the said Triangles, by prop. 3.. 2. Chap. 4 and
add their Contents together; so shall that Sum be the Content of the said
Figure; and so do for any other.

PROP. III. How to reduce any Number of Perches into Acres, and on the
contrary, Acres into Perches.
To find how many Acres are contained in any Number of Perches given, you must
consider that 160 Perches do make a Statute Acre, therefore if you divide the
Number of Perches propounded, by 160, the Quotient is the number of Acres
contained therein; and if there be a remainder which exceed 40, then divide it
by 40, the Quotient shall be Roods, and the remainder Perches.

But on the contrary, if it were required to find how many Perches are
contained in a certain Number of Acres propounded. You must multiply the Number
of Acres, by 160: the product shall be the Perches contained therein.

It may be here expected, that I should show how to reduce customary Measure to
statute Measure; and also that I should treat of the Division and Separation of
Land. But because Mr. Rathborne, and of late Mr. Holwell, has sufficiently
explained the same, by many varieties, I shall for brevity sake omit it, and
leave you to consult those Authors.

SECT. IV. Of the Use of the Semicircle in taking Altitudes, Distances, etc.
PROP. I. How by the Semicircle to take an Accessible Altitude.
ADmit AB, be the Height of a Tower, which is required to be known. First
placing your Semicircle at D, (with the Arch downwards Fig. 61.
and the two sights fixed) place it Horizontal Which to do is no more than
thus; with a Thread and Plummet fastened at the Center of the Semicircle, so
that it has liberty to play, move the Semicircle until the Thread plays
against 90 degrees. then screw it fast, and it is Horizontal.
and screw it fast; Then move your Index, till through the sights thereof, you
espy the top of the Tower at B, and observe what degree the lower part of the
Index cutteth and that will be equal unto the Angle at D 50 degrees Then measure
the distance DA, which let be 299 Feet. Now the height of the Tower AB, is
found, according to prop. 1.. 2. Chap. 5. thus,

As Sc. V. at A 50 00',

To Log. cr. DA 299 Feet.

So is S. V. at A 50 00,

To Log. AB 356 3/10 Feet the height of the Tower AB required.

PROP. II. How by the Semicircle to take an Inaccessible Altitude, at two
Stations.
Let AB be a Tower whose height is required; having placed your Instrument at
E, as before direct your sights unto the Top of the Tower at B, and finding the
Degree cut by the Index, Fig. 61.
to be 23 43', I say it is the Quantity of the Angle at E: Now by reason of
Water, or such like Impediment, you can approach no nearer the Base of the
Tower, than D, Therefore measure ED, which is found to be 512 Feet, then at D,
make the like Observation, and the Angle at D, appears to be 50 00', whose
Complement is the Angle DBA, 40 00', and the Complement of the Angle E 23 43',
is the Angle EBA 66 17': Now if the lesser Angle at B, be taken out of the
greater, the remainder is 26 17', the Angle EBD: Now first to find the side BD,
of the Trangle EBD, say according to prop. 1.. 3. chap. 5. thus.

As S. of V. EBD, 26 17',

To Log. cr. ED 512 Feet.

So is S. of V. at E 23 43',

To Log. cr. BD 465 2/10 Feet required.

Now to find the Height of the Tower AB, say according to prop. 2.. 2. chap. 5.
thus.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. cr. DB 465 2/10 Feet found.

So is S. of V. BDA 50 00',

To Log. cr. BA 356 3/10 Feet, which is the height Fig. 61.
of the Tower required.

Note that in taking any manner of Altitude the height of your Instrument must
be added unto the height found, and that will give you the True Altitude
required.

PROP. III. How by the Semicircle to take an Inaccessible Distance at two
Stations.
Admit A, and B, be the two Stations, from either of which it is required to
find the distance unto the Church at C; placing your Instrument at B, the Index
lying on the Diameter, and direct your sights unto the Church at C, fasten your
Instrument, and turn your sights about until you see through your sights, your
second Station at A, so will you find your Index to cut Fig. 62.
30 00', which is the Quantity of the Angle ABC. Then measure the distance AB,
which is found to be 250 Yards, then with your Instrument at A, make the like
Observation as before, and you will find the Angle BAC to contain 50 00'. Now
by the third Maxim of Plain Triangles. 1. Chap. 5 you find also the Angle ACB,
to be 100 00': now to find the distance AC, and BC, you may by their opposite
proportion according to prop. 1.. 3. chap. 5. find the distance of AC, thus.

As S. of V. at C 100 00',

To Log. cr. AB 250 yards.

So is S. of V. B 30 00',

To Log. cr. AC 127 yards. Which is the distance of the Church from A.

Now to find the distance BC, say,

As S. of V. at A 100 00',

To Log. cr. AB 250 yards.

So S. is of V. at A 50 00',

To Log. cr. BC 194 4/10 yards, which is the distance of the Station B, from
the Church at C.

PROP. IV. How to find the Horizontal line of any Hill or Mountain, by the
Semicircle.
Let Figure 63 be a Mountain, whose Horizontal-line AB is required to be found:
to find which, place your Instrument at A, and having caused a Mark to be
placed on the Top of the Mountain at C; (of the just height of your Instrument)
then move your Index, until through the sights thereof you espy the Mark at C,
so will you find the Quantity of the Angle CAD, to be 50 00', and by
consequence Fig. 63
the Angle ACD to be 40 00', then measure up the Hill AC, which is 346 yards.
Now having obtained these several things, it is required to find the length of
AD part of AB; to find which say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. cr. AC 346 Feet.

So is Sc. of V. at A 50 00',

To Log. cr. AD 222 4/10 Feet.

Now seeing the Hill or Mountain descends on the other side, you must place
your Instrument at C, and direct your sights unto the Bottom at B, and the
Angle DCB will be found 50 00', and the Angle CBD 40 00'. Then measuring down
the Mountain as CB, it appears

Plate IV Page 237
4.
63.
(...).
to be 415 Feet; then have you the Angles DCB, and CBD.

To find DB, part of AB, say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To Log. cr. CB 415 Feet.

So is S. of V. BCD 50 00',

To Log. cr. DB, 318 Feet: Now AD 222 4/10 Fig. 63.
Feet added thereunto produces AB 540 4/10 Feet, which is the Horizontal line
required of the Mountain ACBD.

Note that when you come to delineate a Field wherein are Hills, you must
protract the line AB, instead of the Hypothenusal Lines AC, and CB, and 'twill
be necessary to distinguish those kind of Fields, by shadowing them off with
Hills and Dales.

SECT. V. How to find whether Water may be conveyed from a Springhead unto any
appointed Place.
THE Art of conveying of Water from a Springhead unto any appointed Place,
has a special respect unto measuring, and therefore I think it not amiss to
assert it in this place, and enroll it under the Title of Surveying.

In the performance of which we make use of a Water-level, the Construction and
making whereof is sufficiently known to those who make Mathematical
Instruments: Now if it were required to find whether Water may be conveyed in
Pipes, etc. to any Place assigned: to perform which observe these Rules.

First at some 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, or 100 yards distant from the Springhead in
a rightline toward the Place unto which your Water is to be conveyed. Place
your Water-level, being prepared of two Station Staves with moveable Vanes on
each of them, graduated also after the usual Manner: Cause your first Assistant
to set up one of them at the Springhead; Perpendicular unto the Horizon, and
your second Assistant to erect another, as far from your Water-level toward
the Place to which the Water is to be conveyed, as your Water-level is distant
from the Springhead: Now the Stationstaves in this order erected, and your
Waterlevel placed precisely Horizontal, go unto the end of the Level, and
looking through the sights, cause your first Assistant to move a Leaf of Paper,
up or down your Station staff, until through the sights you espy the very edge
thereof, and then by some known sign or sound, intimate to your Assistant that
the Paper is then in its true position, then let the first Assistant note
against what Number of Feet, Inches, and parts of an Inch the edge of the Paper
rests; which he must note down in a Paper. Then your Water-level remaining
immovable, go to the other end thereof, and looking through the sights toward
your other Station-staff, cause your second Assistant to move a Leaf of Paper
along the Staff, till you see the very edge thereof through the sights, and
then cause him by some known sign or sound, to take notice what number of Feet,
etc. are cut by the said Paper, which let him keep, as your first Assistant did.

This done let your first Assistant bring his Station-staff from the
Springhead, and cause your second Assistant to take that Staff, and carry it
forwards toward the Place, unto which the Water is to be conveyed; some 30,
40, 60, or 100 yards, and there to erect it Perpendicular as before, letting
your second Assistant's staff stand immovable, and your first Assistant to
stand by it: Then in the Midway between your two Assistants, place your
Water-level exactly Horizontal, and looking through the sights thereof, cause
your first Assistant, and after that your second, to make their several
observations in all respects as before.

In this manner you must go along from the Springhead, to the place unto which
you would have the Water conveyed, and if there be never so many several
Stations, you must in all of them observe this manner of work precisely; so
that by comparing the notes of your two Assistants together, you may easily
know whether the Water may be conveyed from the Springhead, or not, by calling
your two Assistants together, and causing them to give in their notes of
observation at each Station, which add together severally: Then if the Notes of
the second Assistant, exceed the Notes of the first Assistant, take the lesser
out of the greater, and the remainder will show you how much the appointed
Place, to which the Water is to be conveyed, is lower than the Springhead.

The first Assistant's Note.
Station. Feet. Inch. Parts. 1 15 3. 50 2 2 1. 25 3 1 6. 00 Sum 18 10. 75

The second Assistant's Note.
Station. Feet. Inch. Parts. 1 3 2. 75 2 14 0. 25 3 3 11. 00 Sum 21 2. 00

By these two Tables you may perceive that the Notes of the first Assistant
collected at his several Stations, being added together, amounts unto 18 Feet,
10 Inches, and 75/100 or of an Inch: and the Notes of your second Assistant
collected at his several Stations, amounts unto 21 Feet, 2 Inches: So that the
number of the first Assistant's Observations, being taken from the second's,
there will remain 2 Feet, 3 Inches, and 25/100 or of an Inch. And so much is
the place unto which the Water is to be brought, lower than the Springhead,
according to the slight Water-Level, and therefore the Water may easily be
conveyed thither. And here observe these Notes.

1. In your Passage between the Spring head, and the appointed Place, from
Station to Station, you must observe this order, that your first Assistant at
every Station must stand between the Springhead, and your Water-level:
otherwise great Errors will ensue.

2. That if the Notes of your first Assistant, exceed the Notes of the second
Assistant, then it is impossible to bring the Water from that Springhead unto
the appointed place, but if their Notes are equal, it may be done, if the
distance be but short.

3. That the most approved Authors concerning this particular do aver, that at
every Mile's end there ought to be allowed 4 Inches more than the
Streight-level, for the current of the Water.

4. That if there be any Mountains lying in the way betwixt the Springhead and
the Place to which the Water is to be conveyed, you must then cut a Trench by
the side of the Mountain, in which you must lay your Pipes equal with the
straight Water-level, with the former allowance: and in case there be a Valley,
you must then make a Trunk of strong wood, well under-propped with strong
pieces of Timber, well Pitched, or Leaded, as is done in diverse places between
Ware and London.

5. That when the Spring will have too violent a Current, you must then convey
your Water to the place assigned, by a Crooked or Winding line, and you also
ought to lay the Pipes, the one up, and the other down, that thereby the
Violence of the Current may be stopped.

CHAP. X. Of MEASURING, Of Board, Glass, Tiling, Paving, Timber, Stone, and
Irregular Solids, such as Geometry can give no Rule for the Measuring thereof.
SECT. I. Of the Measuring of Board, Glass, Paving, Tiling, etc.
I Have already in the fourth Chapter of this Book, and the second Section
thereof, applied Geometry to the finding out of the Superficial Content of all
Regular Superficies. I have also in the ninth Chapter, and the third Section
thereof, showed how the Superficial Content of any Irregular Superficies may be
found, by reducing them into Regular Forms: which I have explained amply in
that Section, I shall therefore here be as plain and brief as is possible.

PROP. I. To Measure a Piece of Board, Plank, Glass, etc.
In Measuring of Board, Glass, etc. Carpenters and other Mechanics measure by
the Foot, 12 Inches unto the Foot; so that a Foot of Board, or Glass, contains
144 Square Inches.

Now if a Piece of Board, Plank, or Glass, be required to be measured, let it
be either a Parallelogram, or Tapering Piece: first by the Rules aforegoing
find the Content thereof in Inches, and that Product divide by 144, the
Quotient is the Content of that Superficies in Feet.

PROP. II. To measure Tiling, Flooring, Roofing, and Partitioning-works.
In Tiling, Flooring, Roofing, and Partitioningwork, Carpenters, and other
Workmen, reckon by the Square, which is 10 Feet every way; so that a Square
contains 100 Feet: Example.

There is a Roof 14 Feet broad, what length thereof shall make a Square? Divide
100 by 14, it yields 7 1/7 Feet.

Now if you have any Number of Feet given, and the Number of Squares therein
contained are required, divide that Number by 100, the product is Squares.

PROP. III. To measure Paving, Plaistering, Wainscotting, and Painting-work.
In Paving, Plaistering, Wainscotting, and Painting-work, Mechanics reckon by
the Yard Square, so each Yard is equal unto 9 Square Feet.

By the Rules aforegoing find the Superficial Content of the Court, Alley, etc.
in Feet: which divide by 9, the Quotient is the Number of Yards in that work
contained.

SECT. II. Of the Measuring of Timber, Stone, and Irregular Solids.
IN Superficial Measure a Superficial Foot contains 144 Square Inches; but in
Solid Measure a Foot contains 1728 Cubick Inches. Now having already in the
fourth Chapter of this Book, and the third Section thereof, largely applied
Geometry unto the Measuring of all Regular Solids, I shall therefore in this
Place be as brief as possible, only I shall be somewhat larger in the
Mensuration of Irregular Solids, which is of special Moment in sundry parts of
the Mathematical Practices.

PROP. I. How to Measure any kind of Timber, or Stone, whether Three-square,
Apiece, Many-square, Round, or of any other fashion, provided it be
straight and equal all along.
To perform which first by the Rules aforegoing in Chap. 4.. 2. get the
Superficial Content at the End, and then say,

As 144, the Inches of the Superficial Content of the End of a Cubick Foot,

To a Cubick Foot containing 1000 parts;

So is the Superficial Content of the End of any piece of Timber,

To the Solid Content of one Foot length of the said piece of Timber.

According to which Mr. Phillips calculated the ensuing Table, which I have
thought fit hereunto to annex.

Case 2 Or the solid Content in Feet, etc. may be found otherwise thus.

By the Rules aforegoing find the Content of the End of the piece of Timber in
Inches, which Content multiply by the length of the said piece of Timber, or
Stone in Inches, and that Product divide by 1728, it produces the Solid
Content of that Piece of Timber, or Stone, in Feet, and parts of a Foot.

A Table showing the Solid Content of one Foot-length of any Piece of Timber,
according to the Superficial Content at the End thereof.
Feet. Parts. Feet. Parts. The Inches of the Content at the End. 1 0 007 The
Inches of the Content at the End. 200 1 398 2 0 014 300 2 083 3 0 021 400 2 778
4 0 028 500 3 472 5 0 035 600 4 167 6 0 042 700 4 861 7 0 049 800 5 556 8 0 056
900 6 250 9 0 062 1000 6 944 10 0 069 2000 13 888 20 0 139 3000 20 833 30 0 208
4000 27 778 40 0 278 5000 34 722 50 0 347 6000 41 666 60 0 417 7000 48 711 70 0
485 8000 55 555 80 0 556 9000 62 500 90 0 625 10000 69 444 100 0 694 20000 138
888

PROP. II. To measure Round Timber which is Hollow: or any other Hollow Body.
If Hollow Timber be to be measured, first measure the Stick as though it were
not Hollow, then find the Solidity of the Concavity, as though it were Massy
Timber, then substract this last found Content, out of the whole Content before
found, the remainder is the Content of that Hollow Body.

PROP. III. To Measure Tapering Timber, or Stone.
Those Tapering Bodies are either Segments of Cones, or Pyramids: now the way
to measure such bodies, is demonstrated in Prop. the 4. and 5.. 3. Chap. 4: But
now to find the Content of these Segments do thus: measure the Solidity of the
whole Cone, or Pyramid, and then find the Content of the Top part thereof cut
off, (as if it were a Cone, or Pyramid of it self) and the Content thereof,
deduct from the Content of the whole Cone, or Pyramid: so shall the remainder
be the Content of the Segment required: which reduced into Feet gives the Solid
Content of that Piece of Timber in Feet. Now to find the length of the Top part
cut off, from the Cone, or Pyramid, say,

As the Difference of the breadth of the two Ends, To the length between them:
So is the breadth of the greater End, To the whole length of the Cone, or
Pyramid. PROP. IV. How to find the Solid Content of any Solid Body, in any
strange form, such as Geometry can given: no Rule for the measuring thereof.
These strange forms are either Branches in Metal, Crowns, Cups, Bowls, Pots,
Screws, or Twisted Ballisters, Whose Surface is bounded by a Line called by
Proclus a Helicoides, but it may also be called a Helix, a Twist or Wreath, etc.
or any other Irregular-Solid, that keep not in thickness one Quantity, but are
thicker in one place, than in another, so that no man by Geometry, is possible
to measure their Solidity.

Now for the finding the Content of any such like Irregular Body in Inches or
Feet, do thus: Cause to be made a Hollow Cube, or Parallelepipedon, so that you
may measure it with an InchRule without Difficulty, and so to know the true
Content of the whole, or any part thereof at pleasure within the Concavity:
Then take some other convenient Vessel, and put pure Springwater therein; then
having filled the Vessel to a known Measure, make a Mark precisely round the
very edge of the Water, then take the solid body and put it therein, then take
out as much of the Water (as by means of the body put therein) is arisen above
the Mark, until the Water do justly touch at the Mark again: then put the
Water taken forth into the Hollow Cube, and find the solid Content thereof
(being transformed into a Cubick Body) in Feet, Inches, and parts of an Inch:
Which Content is the just solidity of the Body put into the Water. (Archimedes
by this Proposition found the deceit of the Crown of Gold which Gelo the Son of
Hiero had vowed unto his Gods: now the Workmen had mixed Silver with the Gold,
which Theft was discovered by the great skill of Archimedes) See Procl. lib. 2.
cap. 3. and Viturvius lib. 9. cap 3.
And herein you must be very curious not to spill any of the Water, or take out
of the Vessel, or put into the Hollow Cube, any more than the just quantity
arisen above the Mark, for if you do it will produce infinite Errors, and thus
may the Solidity of any Irregular Body be found.

CHAP. XI. Of GAUGING.
IN GAUGING there are two things chiefly necessary to be noted, yet both
controverted. First, that seeing all manner of Casks, made to hold Liquor in,
are for the most part the Trunk of a Sphereroid, cut off with two Circles, at
Rightangles with the Base, and therefore Irregular, Therefore they must, first
be reduced into a Regular Proportion. -- And the second thing necessary to be
noted, is to find the true quantity of an Ale, or Wine-Gallon in Cubick-Inches
or parts of a Foot, that thereby the Content of the Vessel or Cask in Gallons
may be known.

SECT. I. Of Gauging any Beer, Ale, or Wine-Cask, also any manner of Brewers
Tuns.
PROP. I. To find the Solid Content in Inches of any Cask.
I Shall follow Mr. Oughthred's method, which is, Take the Diameter of the Cask
both at Head and Bung, by which find the Area's of their Circles, which done,
then take two thirds of the Area of the Bung, and one third of the Area at the
Head, which added together, shall be the Mean Area of the Cask; which
multiplied into the length of the Vessel, it will show how many solid Inches
are contained therein.

Example: Suppose the Diameter at the Head of a Vessel be 18, and at the Bung
32, and length is 40 Inches.

Now I find the Aggregate of the two Circles to be 620, and 989, Cubick Inches:
which multiplied by 40, the length, produces 24839, 56/100 Cubick Inches, for
the whole Content of that Cask in Cubick Inches.

PROP. II. To find the Content of a Vessel in Wine, or Ale Gallons.
The Wine Gallon is established by the Consent of Artists, in these and other
Nations, to contain 231 Cubick Inches See Mr. Oughthred in his Book of the
Circles of Proportion, page the 57. and Mr. Edm. Gunter in his Book of the
Cross-staff, part 21. chap. the 4.
. Yet Dr. Wybard affirms it to be somewhat less, to wit 225, at most: The Ale
Gallon contains 282 Cubick Inches, according to the Establishment of Excise.
Herein Artists differ somewhat in their Experiments.

Now having already showed how to find the Content in Inches of any Cask, I now
come to show how to find the Content in Gallons, of any Beer, Ale, or Wine
Cask, which is thus: Divide the Number of Inches given by 231, for Wine
Measure, and 282, for Ale Measure. In the former Example I find the said Cask
to contain 107, 53 Wine Gallons, and 88, 8, etc. Gallons in Ale Measure.

PROP. III. How to Gauge or Measure Brewers Tuns, etc.
Those Tuns are most commonly Segments of Cones or Pyramid, whose Basis is
either a Square Parallelogram, Circle, or Oval; to measure which, let their
form be what it will you must do thus. By the former Rules of Measuring such
Segments or Bodies, you must find their Solid Content in Cubick Inches, (as in
prop. 3.. 2. chap. 10.) which Content divide by 282 Inches, (the Inches in one
Gallon) it shows the Content in Gallons, and dividing the Gallons by 36, (the
number of Gallons in a Barrel) it shows the Content in Barrels.

SECT. II. Of Gauging or Measuring, and the Moulding of Ships.
PROP. I. To Gauge a Ship, thereby to find how many Tuns her burden is.
IN the Gauging or Measuring of Ships, Naupegers, or Ship-Wrights, observe
these three Particular Rules: First, that if you measure the Ship within, you
shall find the Content, or the Burden the Ship will hold or take in. Secondly,
if the Ship be measured on the outside, to her light mark as she swims being
unladen, you shall have the Content of the Empty Ship. Thirdly, but if you
measure from the light mark, to her full draught of Water being laden, you
shall have the true Burden of the Ship.

Now to find the Content of the King's Royal Ships: Measure the length of the
Keel, the breadth of the Mid ship Beam, and the depth of the Hold: which three
multiply into one another, and divide their Product by 100; so shall you find
how many Tuns her Burden is.

But for Merchant's Ships, which give no allowance for Ordnance, Masts, Sails,
Cables, Anchors, etc. which are all a Burden, but no Tonnage, you must divide
the product by 95, so shall their true Burden be found.

PROP. II.
By knowing the Measure of a Ship, of one Burden, to make another Ship, of the
same Mould, which shall be double, or triple, or in any proportion, either more
or less than the said Ship.

First you shall multiply the Keel Cubically; and in like manner every Beam;
the Mid ship Beams multiply them Cubically; and also the Reaking of the Ship,
both at Stem, and StemPost, multiply them Cubically; likewise the principal
Timbers, that does mould the Ship, multiply them Cubically; and the depth of
the Hold, multiply it Cubically; and so consequently every Place, or Places,
which does lead any work, multiply them Cubically; then if it be required to
have a Ship as big again, or thrice as big; double, or triple each respective
Cubical number; then by prop. 9.. 1. chap. 1: Or by prop. 4.. 2. chap. 2. find
the Cuberoots thereunto belonging; then according unto these respective
Numbers, make your Keel, your Timbers, Beams, etc. which being done, you shall
make a Ship of the Mould and Proportion desired.

CHAP. XII. Of DIALLING.
HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA, or the Art of DIALLING, is an Art Mathematical, which
demonstrateth the precise Distinction of Times, by the Sun, Moon and Stars,
whereby the Time of the Day, or Night, may be known Which does appear to have
been in use above this 2400 Years, for King Achaz had a Dial: This Art
requires good skill in Geometry, and Astronomy: Now Cresibius that famous
Philosopher measured the Hours and Times by the orderly running of Water. Then
by Sand was the Hours measured. After that by Trochilike with Weights, and of
late with Trochilike with Springs.
. Now the Demonstrative delineation of Dials, consists chiefly in the finding
out the Hour Lines, and their true distance one from the other: which lines are
great Circles of a Sphere, which being projected on a plain Superficies, become
streight-lines; which lines do continually vary, according as the Planes on
which they are described, or projected, do lie situated in respect of the
Horizon of the Place. Now a Dial may be made on any Plain Superficies, for all
Plain Superficies are Posited either Perpendicular, Parallel, or Oblique, to
the Horizon of the Place, in which the Plane is seated.

In the delineation of all which Dials in this Chapter described, (which are
the most Eminent, and useful Dials now used) I have used this Method: First, I
have showed how to delineate them by Geometrical Projection, by Scale, and
Compass only: and secondly how they may be described by Arithmetical
Calculation, of both which I have been very plain and large.

SECT. I. Of the Delineation and Projection of sundry most useful Dials.
PROP. I. How to draw the Hour Lines on an Equinoctial Plain.
AN Equinoctial Plane, is such which lies Parallel unto the Equinoctial, and
is an Horizontal Plane, under the Pole. This is the first and plainest kind of
Dials, and is made after this manner: First describe the Circle AE, W, E, R,
for your Planes, then Cross it with the two Diameters EW, and AER. Then Fig. 64.
divide the Semicircle E, W, R, into 12 equal parts in the points,,, etc. Then
from the Center Q, and through the said points draw straight lines, which shall
be the true Hour Lines belonging unto this Equinoctial Plane. Now because these
Planes are capable of receiving all the Hour Lines from Sunrising unto the
Sunsetting, in Summer; therefore the Hourlines of 4, and 5, in the Morning;
and 7, and 8, in the Evening; must be delineated as you see done in the Figure:
These Hours may be sub-divided into half Hours, and Quarters: The Fig. 64.
Style of this Dial, must be a straight Pin, or Wyre set Perpendicular, to the
Plain, on the Center Q. and of any convenient length. This Dial may be made for
any Latitude, and is of good use for Seamen, and others.

PROP. II. How to draw the Hour Lines on a Polar Plane.
A Polar Plane is one that lies Parallel unto the Pole, and under the
Equinoctial is an Horizontal Dial: the way to make this Dial is thus. First
draw the line AB, for the Horizontal line of the Plane; and cross it at the
Middle at right angles, with the line 12, Q, 12, which is the Fig. 65.
Meridian or Hour line of 12; Then upon the line 12, Q 12, either above or
below the point Q, assume any point as S, then setting one foot of your
Compasses in S, describe the Semicircle CED, which divide into 12 Equal parts,
in the points,,, etc. Then lay a Ruler unto S, and unto the several points,,,
etc. and it will cross the line AB, in the points x, x, x, etc. Then through
those points draw (by prop. 4.. 1. chap. 4.) right lines all Parallel unto 12 Q
12, and so is your Dial finished. Then according unto the breadth of the Plane,
you may proportion Fig. 65.
your Style, Which may be either a Pin of the length of Q S, placed on Q, and
Perpendicular unto the Plane, or it may be a piece of brass or elsewhat of the
breadth of 12, to 3, or 9.
Whose height must be equal to the distance between the two Hour Lines 12, and
9, or 12, and 3, and then will the shadow of the upper edge thereof show the
Hour of the day: The height of the Style, is also found thus.

As the Tangent of the Hour-line 4 or 5,

To the Distance hereof from the Meridian.

So is the Radius,

To the Height of the Style.

Then for the other Hour-line, say,

As the Radius,

To the Height of the Style.

So is the Tangent of any other Hour-line,

To the Distance thereof from the Meridian line.

PROP. III. How to draw the Hour Lines on a Meridian Plane, which is an East,
or West Dial.
A Meridian Plane stands upright directly in the Meridian, and has two Faces,
one toward the East, and the other toward the West.

Now admit it be required to make a direct East Dial, in the Latitude of 51
32': let A, B, Fig. 66.
C, D, be a Dial-plane, on which you would describe a Direct East Dial, on the
point D, describe an obscure Arch HG, with the Radius of ^our line of Chords,
then take 38 28', the Complement of your Latitude, place it from G to L; then
draw DL quite through the Plane; Then to proportion your Style unto your Plane,
so that all the Hours may be placed thereon, from Sunrising to 11 a Clock.
Assume two Fig. 66.
points in the line LD, as K, for 11; and I for the 6 a Clock Hour lines; then
draw 6, 16, and 11, K 11, Perpendiculur to LD. This done, with the Radius of
your line of Chords on L, strike the Arch OP, and from P, to O, place 15 00';
and draw OK, to cut 6 I 6, in M, so shall IM be the height of the Style
proportioned unto this Plane; which may be a Plate of Brass, whose breadth must
be equal to the distance between the Hour Lines of 6, and 9, which must be
placed Perpendicular to the Plane, on the line 6, I 6, whose shadow of the
upper edge, shall show the Hour of the day. Now to draw the Hour Lines, with
the Radius of your line of Chords, on M strike the Arch QN, which divide into 5
equal parts in the points ^, ^, ^, etc. Then lay a Ruler from M unto each of
those points, and it will cut the line JK in the points *, *, *, etc. through
which points (by prop. 4. 1. chap. 4.) draw Parallels to 6 I 6, as the lines
77, 88, etc. which shall be the true Hour Lines of an East Plane, from 6 Fig.
66.
in the Morning, till 11 before Noon. Then for the Hour Lines of 4, and 5, you
must prick off 5 as far from 6, as 6 is from 7; and 4, as far as 6 is from 8;
and draw the Hour Lines 55, and 44, as before. Thus is your Dial completed,
and in the forming of which, you have made both an East, and a West Dial; which
is the same in all respects, only whereas the Arch H G, through which the
Equinoctial passed in the East Dial, was described on the right hand of the
Plane, in the West it must be drawn on the left hand, and the Hour Lines 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, in the Forenoon in the East Dial, must be 8, 7, 6, 5,
4, 3, 2, and 1, in the West in Fig. 67.
the Afternoon; as in the Figure plainly appears: Now you may find the
distance of the Hour Lines from the Substile, by this Analogy or Proportion.

As the Radius,

To the Height of the Style.

So is the Tangent of any Hours distance from 6,

To the distance thereof from the Substile.

PROP. IV. How to draw the Hour Lines on a direct South, and North Plane,
This Plane or Dial must stand upright, having his face or Plane, if it be a
South Dial, directly opposite unto the South; but if a North Plane, directly
opposite unto the North; now admit it be required to make a Direct South Dial,
Fig. 68.
for the Latitude of 51 32': To make which first describe the Circle ABCD, to
represent an E^ect direct South Plane, cross it with the Diameters CB, and AD,
then out of your Line of Chords take 38 28', the Complement of the Latitude,
and set it from A, unto a, and from B, unto b, Then lay a Ruler from C unto a,
and it will cut the Meridian ARD, in P, the Poles of

Plate V Page 261
Fig.
Fig. 68.
Fig.
69.
other has the North Pole of the World elevated above it, and beholds the
North part of the Meridian. The Hour Lines of 9, 10, 11, or 1, 2, and 3, is not
expressed on this Plane, because 12, represents 12, at Midnight; neither are
the other said Hours expressed, because the Sun is never above the Horizon, at
those Hours; Therefore the North Dial is capable only to Fig. 69.
receive these Hours, namely 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, in the Morning; and 4, 5, 6, 7,
and 8, at Night; as does plainly appear in the Figure: Now the distance of the
Hour Lines from the Meridian, may be found by this Analogy, or Proportion.

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the Latitude.

So is T. of the Hour from Noon,

To T. of the Hour-line from the Meridian.

PROP. V. How to draw the Hour Lines on an Horizontal Plane.
This Horizontal Plane, or Dial, is one of the best and most useful Dials in
our Oblique Hemisphere: Admit it be required to make an Horizontal Dial, for
the Latitude of 51 32': To make which, first describe the Circle AB Fig. 70.
CD, which represents your Horizontal Plane, Then cross it with the two
Diameters ARC, and BRD, Then take 51 32' out of your Line of Chords, and set it
from B, to a, and from C, to b, Then lay a Ruler from A, unto a, and it will
cut the Meridian BD, in P, the Pole of the World, Then lay a Ruler from A, unto
b, and it will cut ABD the Meridian, in the point AE, where the Equinoctial
cutteth the Meridian, then through the three points A, AE, and C, draw Fig. 70.
the Equinoctial Circle, whose Center is at H; (and found as in the former
proposition) Then divide the Semicircle ADC into 12 equal parts, in the points
^, ^, ^, etc. Then lay a Ruler to R the Center of the Plane, and on those
points, so shall the Equinoctial Circle AAeC, be by it divided into 12 unequal
parts in the points *, *, *, *, etc. Then a Ruler laid unto P the Pole of the
World, and those Points, shall cut the Semicircle CDA in those Points I, I, I,
etc. Lastly, from the Center R, and through those Points, let there be drawn
right lines, which shall be the true Hour Lines of such an Horizontal Plane,
from 6 in the Morning, until 6 at Night; but for the Hours of 4 and 5 in Fig.
70.
the Morning; and 7 and 8 in the Evening; they are delineated by producing 4
and 5 in the Evening, through the Center R, and 7 and 8 in the Morning;
extending them out, unto the other side of the Plane, so shall you have those
Hour Lines also on your Plane delineated as you see in the Figure. The Style of
this Plane may be a thin Plate of Brass, cut exactly unto the Quantity of an
Angle of 51 32', and set Perpendicular on the Meridian line, for the forming of
this Style take out of your Line of Chords 51 32', and set it from D, unto e,
and draw Re, which shall be the Axis of the Style, you may also prefix the
Halves, and Quarters of Hours, in the very same manner as the Hours themselves
were drawn.

Now to find out the distance of the Hour Lines from the Meridian, say,

As the Radius or S. 90,

To the S. of the Latitude.

So is the T. of the Hour from Noon,

To the T. of the Hour-line, from the Meridian Line.

These kinds of Dials being so frequently used Fig. 70.
with us, in this Oblique Sphere, for the help of the speedy delineating of
them, I have annexed hereunto the Table of Longomontanus, wherein the
Hour Lines, for many Latitudes, are calculated.

A Table showing the Distance of the Hourlines from the Meridian, in these
Degrees of Latitude.
An Horizontal Dial, Latitude. The Hours from the Meridian. A South Erect Dial,
Latitude. xi. i. x. ii. ix. iii viii. iv. vii v. vi. D M D M D M D M D M D M 30
7 38 16 6 26 34 40 54 61 49 90 00 60 31 7 51 16 34 27 14 41 42 62 28 90 00 59
32 8 4 17 1 27 53 42 30 63 6 90 00 58 33 8 17 17 27 28 34 43 17 63 45 90 00 57
34 8 30 17 54 29 13 44 5 64 42 90 00 56 35 8 43 18 20 29 49 44 46 64 56 90 00
55 36 8 56 18 45 30 25 45 28 65 27 90 00 54 37 9 9 19 9 31 1 46 9 65 58 90 00
53 38 9 21 19 34 31 37 46 50 66 29 90 00 52 39 9 33 19 57 32 9 47 26 66 55 90
00 51 40 9 46 20 20 32 40 48 1 67 20 90 00 50 41 9 58 20 43 33 14 48 37 67 45
90 00 49 42 10 10 21 7 33 47 49 13 68 11 90 00 48 43 10 22 21 29 34 17 49 44 68
32 90 00 47 44 10 24 21 50 34 46 50 14 68 52 90 00 46 45 10 43 22 12 35 15 50
45 69 14 90 00 45 46 10 54 22 33 35 44 51 16 69 37 90 00 44 47 11 5 22 33 36 10
51 43 69 53 90 00 43 48 11 16 23 12 36 35 52 9 70 10 90 00 42 49 11 26 23 32 37
1 52 35 70 28 90 00 41 50 11 36 23 51 37 27 53 1 70 43 90 00 40 51 11 46 24 9
37 50 53 24 70 58 90 00 39 52 11 56 24 26 38 13 53 46 71 12 90 00 38 53 12 5 24
44 38 36 54 8 71 27 90 00 37 54 12 14 25 2 38 59 54 30 71 41 90 00 36 55 12 23
25 18 39 18 54 50 71 53 90 00 35 56 12 32 25 33 39 38 55 9 72 4 90 00 34 57 12
46 25 49 39 58 55 28 72 16 90 00 33 58 12 48 26 5 40 18 55 46 72 27 90 00 32 59
13 56 26 19 40 36 56 1 72 38 90 00 31 60 13 58 26 30 40 53 56 15 72 47 90 00 30

PROP. VI. How to draw the Hour Lines, on an Erect declining Plane.
These Planes are made to set on the sides of Houses, wherein the Meridian is
always a Perpendicular, Fig. 71.
drawn on the Plane, in whose top is the Center, where the Substile, and the
Hourlines all meet.

Now before we can delineate the Hour Lines on any such Planes, two things must
be given: As the Latitude of the Place, and the Planes Declination; by having
which we must find these three things: viz. The Poles height above the Plane.
The distance of the substile from the Meridian. And the Plane's difference of
Longitude.

For the finding of which Requisites, by Geometrical Projection, we describe on
the Dial Plane, these Circles of the Sphere, viz. The Horizon, Meridian, and
Equinoctial, which being described in their true Position, on the Plane, we
proceed thus. Fig. 71.


Admit it be required to make a Direct South Dial, on an Erect, Direct South
Plane, Declining Westward 24 20', in the Latitude of 51 32'.

Now in order to find the requisites before mentioned, describe the Circle
ZHNO, and cross it with the two Diameters ZQN, and H QO: now Z is the Zenith, N
the Nadir, ZQN the Hour-line of 12, HQO the Horizon. Now seeing the Plane
declines S. W. 34 20': make Na, and Ob, each equal to 34 20: Then a Ruler laid
from Z, to a, will cut the Horizon in S, the South point of the Horizon,
through which draw the Meridian ZSN, whose Center is at Y, found as in the
fourth Proposition aforegoing: Then a Ruler laid from Z to b, will cut the
Horizon in W, the West point thereof. Now the Horizon and the Meridian being
projected on the Plane, take out of your line of Chords 51 32', which place
from H, unto c, and from N, unto d; then lay a Ruler from W, unto c, and it
cutteth the Meridian in P, the Pole of the World. Then through P and Q, Fig. 71.
draw the line PQD, which represents the Axis of the World, and the Substilar
line of the Dial, then lay a Ruler from W, to d, it cutteth the Meridian in AE,
so is W AE two points through which the Equinoctial must pass, whose Center is
found as before to be at M, (being always in the Axis of the World) so have you
on your Plane the Horizon HQO, the Meridian ZPSAe N, and the Equinoctial
LAeKWG, described on the Plane as required.

Now first to find the Poles height above the Plane, which in this Scheme is
represented by BP, Lay a Ruler from G, unto P, and it shall cut the Plane in V,
then measure the distance BV, on your line of Chords, and you Fig. 71.
will find it to contain 34 33', which is the Poles height above the Plane.

Secondly, To find the distance of the Substile from the Meridian represented
in the Scheme by the Arch ZB, or ND, which measured as before will appear to be
18 08', the distance of the Substile from the Meridian.

Thirdly, To find the Plane's Difference of Longitude, which in the Scheme is
represented by the Angle AEPK, lay a Ruler from P, unto AE, and it cutteth the
Plane in X, then measure the Arch DX, as before, and so will you find the Planes
Difference of Longitude, to be 30 00': Thus by Geometrical Projection have we
found Fig. 71.
all the three Requisites: Now to find them by Arithmetical Calculation observe
these Analogies or Proportions.

1. For the Poles height above the Plane, say,

As Radius or S. 90,

To Sc. of the Latitude 38 28'.

So is Sc. of the Declination 65 40',

To S. of the Poles height above the Plane 34 33'.

2. For the Distance of the Substile, from the Meridian, say,

As the Radius or S. 90 00',

To the S. of the Plane's Declination 24 20'.

So is Tc. of the Latitude 38 28',

To the T. of the Substilar Distance from the Meridian 18 10'.

3. For the Plane's Difference of Longitude, say,

As the Sc. of the Latitude 38 28', Fig. 71.


To the Radius or S. 90 00'.

So is S. of the Substilar Distance 18 10',

To the S. of the Difference of Longitude 30 Degrees.

Or, it may be found thus.

As the S. of the Latitude,

To the Radius.

So is the T. of the Declination,

To the T. of the Difference of Longitude required.

These things found, we come now to show how the Hour Lines may be projected.
To project which observe, First, to lay a Ruler from P the Pole of the World,
to AE the Intersection of Fig. 71.
the Equinoctial with the Meridian, and it will cut the Plane in x, where begin
to divide the Semicircle L x G, into 12 Equal parts in the Points ^, ^, ^, ^,
etc. Then lay a Ruler from Q, to every of those parts, and it shall cut the
Equinoctial; and divide it into 12 unequal parts, in the points *, *, *, *,
etc. Then a Ruler laid from P the Pole of the World unto each of these points,
it will divide the Plane into 12 unequal parts in the Points I, I, I, I, etc.
Then by a Ruler laid from the Center Q, to those points, draw right lines,
which shall be the true Hour Lines proper unto such a Declining Plane, as you
see plainly demonstrated by the Scheme.

Now the Substilar line falls in this Dial, just on the Hour-line of 2, in
the Afternoon, because the Plane declineth Westerly. The Angle of the Style is
DQR 34 33'. which may be either a Plate or Wyre, brought into such an Angle,
which must be placed Perpendicular to the Plane, and directly over the
Substilar line QUOTH 2.

Now the distance of the Hour Lines, from the Substilar line, may also be found
by this Analogy or Proportion.

As the Radius, Fig. 71.


To the S. height of the Pole above the Plane.

So is the T. of the Hour-line from the Meridian of the Plane,

To the T. of the Hour-line from the Substile.

Thus have you completed your Dial; as you see in the Scheme, and here you may
take notice that having finished a West Decliner, you have also made an East
Decliner; if you only convert the Hour Lines of the West Decliner, in such
manner as you see in Fig. 72. on the East Fig. 72.
Decliner, and complete all as you see in that Scheme.

Thus I have explained the making and delineating of the best and most useful
Dials both by Geometrical Projection, and also by Arithmetical Calculations, in
as brief and compendious a manner as possible. There are sundry other kind of
Dials, as Incliners, Decliners, and Recliners, which being not so useful, for
brevity sake, they are here omitted: As for Instrumental Dials, as Quadrants,
Rings, Cylinders, etc. Which depend on the Sun's height, I refer you to Mr.
Edm. Gunter's Book, wherein they are largely described.

As for the Beautifying and Adorning of those Dials, etc. by describing on them
the Equinoctial, Tropicks, Parallels of Declination, Parallels of the Sun's
Place, Length of Days, the Sun's Rising and Setting, Jewish, Italian, and
Babylonish Hours, Almicanthars, Azimuths, Circles of Position, the Signs Right
Ascending, Descending, Culminating, etc. I do advise you to consult Mr. Gunter,
Mr. Foster, Mr. Wells, and Mr. Holwel's Works, all which Authors have very
learnedly showed the describing of them, by several large Schemes, and Figures,
for the plainer Illustration thereof.

Now seeing the Latitude of a Place must be first known, before a Dial can be
made to it,

Plate VI P(...)
Fig. 72.
I have therefore hereunto annexed a Table of the Latitudes of all the
principal Cities, Towns, and Islands, in and about Great Britain and Ireland;
so that if you are to make a Dial, for any of those parts, you may have
recourse to this Table, and make your Dial to the Latitude of that place, which
you find to be the nearest to the Place, for which you are to make your Dial.

A Table of the Names and Latitudes of all the Principal Cities, Towns, and
Islands, in and about Great Britain and Ireland.
ENGLAND.
D. M. ARundel 51 00 Bedford 52 15 Barwick 55 54 Bristol 51 35 Buckingham 52 10
Cambridge 52 20 Canterbury 51 25 Carlisle 55 20 Chichester 50 48 Chester 53 18
Colchester 52 08 Dover 51 20 Derby 53 00 Dorchester 50 50 Durham 54 56 Exeter
50 48 D. M. Falmouth 55 22 Gloucester 51 57 Guilford 51 12 Hartford 51 54
Hereford 52 17 Huntington 52 30 Ipswich 52 20 London 51 30 Lincoln 53 20
Leicester 52 45 Lancaster 54 15 Northampton 52 24 Norwich 52 45 Nottingham 53
00 Newcastle 55 12 Oxford 51 50 Portsmouth 51 08 Plymouth 50 36 Reding 51 40 D.
M. Salsbury 51 12 Stafford 52 50 Stanford 54 44 Shrewsbury 52 50 Truero 50 30
Winchester 51 03 Worcester 52 25 Warwick 52 30 York 54 00

WALES.
D. M. ANglesey 53 28 Barmonth 52 50 Brecknock 52 01 Cardigan 52 12 Caermarthen
51 56 Carnarvan 53 16 Denbigh 53 13 Flint 53 17 Landaffe 51 35 Monmouth 51 51
Montgomery 51 56 Pembroke 51 46 Radnor 52 19 St. David 52 00

SCOTLAND.
D. M. ABerdeen 57 30 Dunblain 56 21 Dunkel 56 48 Edenbrough 56 00 Glascow 55
58 Kinsaile 57 44 Orkney 60 06 D. M. St. Andrews 56 40 Skyrassin 58 38 Sterling
56 12

IRELAND.
D. M. ANtrim 54 38 Arglas 54 10 Armagh 54 14 Carterlagh 52 41 Clare 52 34
Cork 51 55 Droghedagh 53 58 Dublin 53 55 Dundalke 53 52 Galloway 53 02 Kenney
52 30 Kildare 53 00 Kings Town 53 08 Knockfergns 54 40 Kynsale 51 41 Lymerick
52 30 Queens Town 52 52 Waterford 52 09 Wexford 52 18 Youhall 51 53

ISLANDS.
D. M. WIght 50 48 Portland 50 30 Man 54 24 Limdey 51 22 Jerzey 49 12 Garnzey
49 (...)

CHAP. XIII. Of FORTIFICATION.
THE Utility of this Mathematical Art called Fortification, or Military
Architecture, is so well known, that it needs not my commendation, and
therefore to speak any thing thereto, were but to light a Candle before the Sun.

In the handling of this part of the Mathematics, I shall be as brief as
possible, yet as plain as can be desired: In the prosecution of which, I shall
use this Method. As First, I shall give you the most principal Definitions or
Terms belonging to this Art. Secondly, I shall prescribe the most conducing
Maxims or Rules herein observed. Thirdly, I shall show how to delineate the
Ground-line of any Fortification, according to the several Proportions, used by
the best and most experienced Inginiers of Italy, France, Holland and England;
Fourthly, I shall describe the Construction of the chief and principal Outworks
now in use; and Lastly, lay down some general Maxims or Rules, by most Modern
Authors observed in Irregular Fortifications.

SECT. I. Of the Definitions of the Lines, and Angles, belonging to the
Principal Ground work of any Regular Fortification.
1. THE Exterior or outward Line, which Defin.
boundeth the Rampart, at the Foot next the Ditch, is the principal and only
Line to be regarded (...) all Regular, or Irregular Fortifications, being the
Basis on which all the other Lines, and parts of the Fortification does depend.
2. The Exterior Polygon, is the outward side of any Regular Figure, as in the
Hexagon (which Figure I shall make use of through this Tract) the side AA, is
the Exterior Polygon. Fig. 73.
3. The Interior Polygon, is the inward side of any Regular Figure, as in the
Hexagon is noted by any of the sides between P and P. 4. The Bastion or
Bulwork, is that great work of any Fort, that advances its self toward the
Campaigne, and here are six all marked with B, the lines which terminate them,
are two Gorges, two Flanks, and two Faces. Fig. 73.
5. The Demi-Gorge or Gorge-line PC, is half the Entrance into the Bastion, and
terminates the point C, whereby the Flank shall be raised. 6 The Flank is
another Out-line of the Bastion as CF, which terminateth the Curtain, and Face.
7. The Face is the utmost line of the Bastion, as FA, two lines thereof does
form the Angle of the Bastion A, or the Flanked Angle. 8. The line forming the
Flank FF, is a pricked line, made use of by the Dutch Inginiers, and others. 9.
The Capital is AP, part of the line coming Fig. 73.
from the Center, terminated at the point of the Bastion A. 10. The Curtain is
that part of the Interior Polygon CC, which lies betwixt the two Bastions B,
and B. 11. The line of Defense is AC, passing from A, the point of the Bastion,
to C the Angle of Fig. 73.
the Flank, and Curtain, and ought never to exceed 800 English Feet Because the
length of the part of a Musket does not much exceed that Measure.
. 12. The line Stringent, is the line coming from the point of the Bastion A,
and prolonged on the Face AF, to the Curtain D, which shows that DC, the part
of the Curtain, (by some called the second Flank will scour the Face. 13. The
Diameter of the Interior Polygon, is the line P, coming from the Center
thereof. 14. The shortest line from the Center unto the Curtain, is m. These
are the Definitions of the principal lines, appertaining to the Groundwork of
any Regular Fortification, the Angles follows. 15. The Angle of the Center of
the Polygon Fig. 73.
is PP 16. The Angle of the Polygon PPP, is always the Complement of the Angle
at the Center, or remainer unto 180 Degrees. 17. The Angle of the Triangle PPO
is always the one half of the Angle of the Polygon PPP. 18. The Angle of the
Bastion, or the Flanked Angle FAF, is exposed unto the Batteries of the Fig. 73.
Besiegers, and formed by the two Faces, FA, and FA, which ought never to be
less than 60, nor much above 100 Degrees. 19. The Angle of the Espaule, or
Shoulder, is formed by the Face, and Flank, as AFC. 20. The Angle of the Flank
CCF, is formed by the Curtain, and the Flank, and is most commonly a Right
Angle, but by some later Inginiers, is made Obtuse, or more than a Right Angle,
or 90 Degrees. 21. The Angle made by the two lines Sitchant, At A is called the
Angle of the Tenaile. 22. The Angle forming the Flank, is CPF, which Angle is
made use of by most of the Dutch Inginiers. Fig. 73.

SECT. II. Of General Maxims or Rules observed in Fortifications.
1. THat all the parts of the Place, be of Cannon Proof flanked, i. e. defended
from another place, which place is no farther distant than the reach of a
Musket-shoot, from the place to be Flanked or defended. Because the Defense
ought to be easy, quick, certain, and of little charge, all which qualities
the Musket has and the Cannon has not, therefore the Defense of Fortification
ought to be measured by the Port of a Musket, and not by that of a Cannon.
2. That in all the Place, there may be no part of the Wall, or outside of the
Rampire, that is not seen from the top to the bottom of the Mote, or Ditch. 3.
That the Bastions are large, and full of Earth, and not empty; the bigger they
are, they are the more to be esteemed, there being the more room to entrench,
in case of necessity: whose Gorge let be at least 35 fadoms, and their Flank at
least 18 fadoms. 4. That the Angle of the Bastion, or Flanked Angle, be not
much above 90, nor much less than 60 Degrees, for in the former it would lie
too very Obtuse, and open, at the Point; and in the latter it would be too
slender, and so easily to be battered down, by the Enemies Cannon. 5. That the
Angle of the Flank may be somewhat Obtuse; neither is there any more virtue in
a Right-angle, than in any other, for the defense of the Fort. 6. That the
length of an extended Curtain be not above 135 Fadoms, nor the single above 80
Fadoms, nor be less than 40 Fadoms, to be well defended from two Flanks. 7.
That the Rampire be so wide, that so a Parapet of Earth Cannon proof may be
erected thereon, and a Teraplane left, full wide for the Ordnance to be
recoiled. 8. That the Mote or Ditch be at least 20 Fadoms broad, and as deep as
possible. Now dry Motes in great Cities are to be preferred before others, that
are full of Water, to facilitate the Sallies, the relief, and retreat of the
Besieged; and in small Fortifications the Motes full of Water are the most
Esteemable, because in such Sallies are not necessary, and Surprises are very
much to be feared. 9. that the Parts that are most remote from the Center, be
commanded by those which are nearest to it. 10. That the Defense of a Face is
much stronger, when the Angle made by the Face, and Exterior Polygon is a great
Angle; this Maxim is so very essential, that it will try the goodness of any
Fortification whatsoever: Thus I have described the 10 chiefest Maxims,
necessary for good Fortifications.
SECT. III. Of the Construction and making of the principal Ground-line of a
Fort, according to the most Modern ways, used by the Italian, Dutch, French, or
English Inginiers.
I. Of the Italian Fortifications.
GEnnaro Maria, Mathematician to the Catholic King, wrote at Florence, his
Elements of Military Architecture entitled, Breve Trattato delle Modern
Fortificazioni. This Italian Author was a very Learned and Skillful
Mathematician, and famous in his Nation. In his said Book Printed 1665, he
makes the Interior Polygon 800, and not less than 600 Feet, his Demi-Gorge, he
makes of it, and so for the Flank of the Quadrangle. But for the Pentagon, and
all Figures above, he makes the Flanks 1/10 part of the Gorge more, and he
places his Flank at Right Angles with the Curtain.

Supposing his Interior Polygon 1000 parts, his Gorges will be 125, and in the
Quadrangle the Flanks will be 125, but of the Pentagon, and all above, 138
parts. For the Faces, he makes them to fall on the third part of the Curtain,
unless in the Square, which he allows no second Flank.

PROP. I. To fortify a Hexagon according to this Author's Proportion.
First describe the Hexagon PPP, etc, then Fig. 74.
divide the Interior Polygon PP, into 1000 equal parts, take 125 for the
Gorges, and set it from P to C. Then on C raise a Perpendicular, make it equal
to 138 parts, for your Flanks CF, then draw the Face AF, falling on the third
part of the Curtain CC, at D, and so do on every Bastion, until the work is
completed.

II. Of the French Fortifications.
Monsieur De la Mont, in his Fortifications Offensive, and Defensive, printed
1671: And Monsieur Manesson Mallet in his late work, entitled Travaux de Mars,
printed 1672, assigns these proportions for the laying down the Ground-line
of a Fort.

Both these Authors make the Interior Polygon 768 English Feet, which they
divide into 5 parts, and taking one for the Gorge 153 Feet. Both divides it
into 3 parts, and takes one for the Capital, that is 256 Feet.

Now our first Author De la Mont, makes the Fig. 74.
Flank to stand at Right-angles and takes 115 Feet for it, which is of the
Curtain, and so draws the Bastions, in all save the Quadrangle, and Pentagon,
which he makes to have no second Flank.

PROP. II. To fortify a Hexagon according to the Proportion of De la Mont.
First describe your Hexagon P, P, P, etc. Now supposing your Interior Polygon
PP, 1000 parts, the Capital 333, the Gorge 200, and the Flank 150 parts, take
out of your Triangular Scale Fig. Fig. 74.
75, (which is made for the more speedy delineation according to this
proportion of De la Mont) PA for the Capital, and prick it off from PA, on all
the Bastions. Then take PC, and prick off all the Gorges from P to C. Then take
FC and prick it off at Right Angles, from C to F. Lastly draw all the Faces AF,
AF, etc. so is your Hexagon complete, as required.

PROP. III. To fortify a Hexagon according to Manesson Mallet's Proportion.
Now our Author Monsieur Manesson Mallet, in his Works entitled Travaux de
Mars, deviates from our former Author, only in this: that as De la Mont did
place his Flanks at Right Angles, he places them at 98 Degrees with the
Curtains, and leaves no second Flank in all his Fortifications.

Therefore having described the Polygon PP, Fig. 74.
etc. divide PP into 1000 parts, prick off the Capitals PA 333, and the Gorges
PC 200, then lay off the Flanks CF, 150 parts, at an Angle of 98 degrees. with the
Curtain CC (by prop 5.. 1. chap. 4.) and draw all the Faces, AF, AF, etc.
Falling on C the point of the Flank and Curtain, so shall your Hexagon be
fortified as was required.

III. Of the Dutch Fortifications.
The Emperor Ferdinand III. has learnedly Fig. 74.
altered the Method of Fritach, Dogen, Goldman, and Faulhaberus, all which were
Dutch Inginiers, and wrote large Volumes on this Subject; in his Works
entitled Amussis Ferdinandea, published 1654; by turning their way of working
by Angles, into working by Sides.

Thus he sets down a Catholic way of delineating the Sides, or Lines of any
Fort by his 60 prop. thus, the Interior Polygon to be 66, the Capital 24, the
Gorge 15, and the Flank 12. Or in making the Interior Polygon 22, the Capital
8, the Gorge 5, and the Flank 4. Or yet making the Interior Polygon 1000, the
Capital 363, the Gorge 227, and the Flank 181, this is an Epitome of all the
Dutch Fortifications, and is general excepting for the Square, which must have
no second Flank. Fig. 74.


PROP. IV. To fortify a Hexagon according to the Emperor's Proportion.
First describe the Polygon PPP, etc. divide P P, etc. into 22 parts, take 8
for the Capitals PA, which prick off all round from P to A, take 5 for the
Gorges; which prick off all round from C to P, then take 4 for the Flank CF,
Fig. 74.
which prick off all round at Right-angles from C to F, lastly draw the Faces
AF, AF, AF, etc. So is the Hexagon completed as was required.

IV. Of the English Fortifications.
His late Majesty of Great Britain Carolus II. of ever blessed Memory, has
much facilitated the Method of Count Pagan, who in his Fortifications printed
at Paris 1645, did place the Flanks at Right-angles with the Line of Defense,
and he works by the Exterior Polygon. Now His Majesty places the Flank, at
Right-angles with the line of defense of the Interior Polygon, and works after
another manner: Count Pagan makes the proportion of the Grand Royal Fort.
Supposing the Exterior Polygon to be 1000 parts, will make the Perpendicular MT
to be 150, and Fig. 74.
the Complement of the line of Defense TC to be 185, which may serve for a
general proportion be the length what it will, only in a Square the proportions
must thus be altered in the Grand Royal Fort, the Perpendicular MT must be 162,
in the Mean R 144, and in the Petty Royal 126, the Complement of the Line of
Defense for the Grand Royal Fort is 228, and for the Mean Royal Fort 198, also
for the Petty Royal Fort 198.

PROP. V. How to fortify a Hexagon according to Count Pagan's Proportion.
To delineate this Work draw a line, about the middle whereof as at M, set off
MA, the half of the Exterior Polygon 500 parts, which makes the Exterior
Polygon 1000, then on M (by prop. 1.. 1. chap. 4.) raise the Perpendicular Fig.
74.
Mm, which make Mt, MT Equal to 150, then draw ATC, and ATC, then take 185, and
place it from T to C, and to C, and draw CC for the Curtain, then on the points
C raise Perpendiculars CF, to the line of defense CA, for the Flanks, so have
you also the Faces FA. Then on the Points A set off half the Angle of the
Figure, to wit 60 (as you see in the Table in page 38) and draw the lines OA
and O A, so shall O be the Center of the Figure, and PC the Gorge, and AP the
Capitals: then finish Fig. 74.
each Bastion at your own discretion, and the Work is finished as required.

PROP. VI. To fortify a Hexagon according to the way prescribed by His Majesty
Carolus II.
His late Majesty C. II. has much facilitated this Work, as will appear in
this following Example, by making the line of Defense, stand at Right-angles
with the Flank of the Interior Polygon, by this Table, which supposes the
Interior Fig. 74.
Polygon to be 1000. Then

Polygons 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Straitlines. Capital 398 437 367 333 312 300 291 233
Gorge-line 155 196 203 242 252 260 263 300

Now describe the Hexagon PP, etc. Then divide the Interior Poligon PP, into
1000 parts, take 367 and prick off all the Capitals PA; Then take 203 and prick
off all the Gorges from P to C. Now draw the lines of defense AC and Fig. 74.
AC, etc. Then at C, set the Flanks at Right Angles with the line of Defense
AC, so shall FC be the Flank, and FA the Faces, then finish every Bastion, and
your Hexagon is fortified as was required.

Thus have I set down the several Ways and Rules, for laying the fundamental
Groundline, from the most considerable Inginiers of Observe this for a general
Rule in Regular Fortification.
this last Age, out of all which it is most agreeable to those Authors, and to
practice, to take of the Interior Polygon for the Capital, for the Gorge, and
Flank, which leaves 6/10 for the Curtain, and let this be taken for a general
Rule, where the Flank, and Curtain, stand at Right Angles.

PROP. VII. By the Semicircle to lay down on the Ground, any of the former
Fortifications.
Having drawn the Plot of your Fort on Imperial Fig. 76.
paper, or Vellom, and if it be a Regular Fort you need not describe it but two
half Bastions from the Center, for that will be sufficient. Having such a Plate
whose length is set down on each respective line, and all proper Angles
expressed, will not only be useful for laying down the Work, but for finding
the Solidity of the Ramparts, Parapets, and the other Earth Works See Fig 76.

If it be in such a Place, that from the Center Case 1.
of the Fort, all the Angles may be seen, place your Semicircle at Z, and lay
off all the Angles of the Center, which here is 60; then mark out the
Diametrical lines, and making them their due length, as by your Plate they
appear to be, set Piquets, on all the P, P's upright with the Plane, Then take
up your Instrument and place a Piquet at Z. Then lock-spit out all the Polygons
PP. Then mark out the Gorges CP, then set out the Flanks CF, either at Right
Fig. 76.
Angles, or as otherwise required. Then lockspit out the Flanks CF, and the
Faces AF, having first set off the Capital PA, so is the Fort lined out for the
Ground-line.

But if there be Houses and Obstacles in the Case 2.
way, that from the Center all may not be seen, then must you mark out any one
side and measure it, and at each End set off the Angles of the Polygon, (which
here is 120) and draw side after side, until all be finished: Then finish the
Bastions as before, and here great care must be had, or else you will run into
infinite Errors.

But you have liberty Experimentally to alter any of the former proportions, as
you have occasion, and as will best serve the Place; as you see by the
fortifying a straight lined Figure: Fig. 77. wherein Count Fig. 77.
Pagan's or in Manesson's way it may not be allowed without some alterations.

SECT. IV. Of the Dimensions, and Measures of the Rampires, Parapets, Mote,
Coridor, or Covert-way, and its Esplanade, or Breastwork.
THE Rampire's thickness and height, must receive its Determination from the
Judgment of the Inginiers, and Purse of the Prince.

The Height TS, must not exceed 18 Feet, Fig. 78.
not be less than Ten; the thickness may be from 50, to 80 RA, in all Royal
Works, and according as Earth is to be had. The slope of the inward side of the
Rampire TR, is commonly a foot for a foot, therefore RS, the Talu, will be
equal to the Height TS, so if TS be 18, RS will be 18, if 15 then 15 feet.

The outward Slope QA, is generally proportioned a Foot for a Foot, so if the
Height OQ be 18, the Talu OA, will be 9 Feet, etc.

The Height of the Parapet ZD, must always Fig. 78.
be 6 Feet, the Exterior Height PM must be 4 Feet, the thickness of the Parapet
DQ, in light Earth must be 20 Feet, in stiff Earth 16, and in Solid Rough Clay
14 Feet; suppose it be 18 Feet, PM will be 4 Feet, MQ 2 Feet, LD 1 Foot, so
will the lower thickness LQ be 21 Feet.

The Height of the Banquet VX is 1 Foot, and thickness VL, 3 Feet.

The Lizier must be made so wide, as to support the Rampire from slipping into
the Ditch, and is taken from 3, to 10 Feet; the Mote or Ditch may be from 70,
to 130 Feet broad, that is, from E to G, and the depth IF may be 8, 10, or 12
Foot deep, the little Ditch at the bottom of the Mote represented by c q g,
must be as large and deep as the Earth and Work will give leave.

The Coridor and the Esplanade or Breast-work Fig. 78.
on it, is left about 18 Feet wide, from G to C; on which is placed a Parapet,
and Banquet, like that on the Rampire, which Parapet or Esplanade, must slope
so into the Campaigne, that a straight line drawn from Z, the Top of the
Rampire, may terminate OFd, the Slope thereof.

PROP. VIII. How to lay down the Profile of the Work, according to this Table.
Feet. The Base of the Rampart RA 70 Height TS and QO 16 Interior Talu RS 16
Exterior Talu OA 8 Base of the Parapet LQ 21 Interior Height ZD 6 Exterior
Height MP 4 Exterior Talu MQ 2 Interior Talu QUOTH 1 Breadth of the Banquet V, L 3
Height of it V, X 1 The Terra Plana TV 25 The Lizier AE 3 The Mote's breadth EG
112 Fig. 78.
The Depth of it IF 12 Breadth at its bottom FH 88 The Talus EI, or KG 12 The
Breadth of the little Ditch c g. 18 The Depth of it 5 The Coridor GC 18 The
Seat of the Esplanade 60 The Height CF 6

Now to lay down this Profile draw a line of a convenient length as RSOACGD for
the level or Ground-line, then by your Scale of 20, o^ 30, at most in an Inch,
representing Feet. Take out of it 70 for RA, 16 for R S, 8 for OA, 3 for AE,
112 for EG, 18 for GC, and 60 for CD, and mark them off on your Paper (as in
Fig. 78.) at S, O, I, K, C, raise or Fig. 78.
let fall Perpendiculars (by prop. 1, 2, or 3.. 1. chap. 4.) then take 16 for
ST, and OQ, 12 for IF and KH, and 6 for Cf, and draw RT, TQ, QA, OF, HG, cf,
fd: Then from Q set off QL 12, LV 3, QM 2, and LD 1, and raise the
Perpendiculars MP 4, DZ6, and VX 1 Then draw VX, XY, YZ, ZP, and PQ, and make
the little Ditch by its measure, so is the Profile perfected: as for the
Faus-Bray, they ar^ now out of use, therefore I omit them.

The Solid Content of those Earth-Works may easily be attained by the former
Rules which Content being got in Feet, divide that product by 324, the Quotient
shall be the Soli^ Flores contained therein, a Flore being 18 foo^ square and 1
Foot deep.

SECT. V. Of the Dimensions and Construction of Pla(...) forms, Caveleers and
Cazemats in t(...) Flanks.
1. PLatforms are Plantations where G(...) are to be placed, and are
common(...) made of Plank, and Sleepers, there neede^ for one Gun, to be but
one Platform, whi(...) must be 8 Feet broad next the Parapet, and 14 Feet wide
at the other End, and their length should be 18 Feet.

2. An Embrasure is the Port-Hole made in the Parapet, which toward the Gun
must be 4 Feet wide, and toward the Campaigne 8 Feet wide, whose height must
be proportioned unto the Wheel of the Carriage; and are 16, 18 or 20 Feet
assunder.

3. Cavaleers or Mounts are Massy pieces of Earth raised on or near the
Rampart, above the Parapet, on which Ordnance and small shot may be planted. As
to their Construction I shall follow the Method of Manesson, who places them in
the Gorge of the Bastion, and gives this Rule for it, [saith he]. Lengthen out
Fig. 79.
the line of defense to E, until it cut the Capital, the Center of your
Cavaleer shall be the middle point betwixt P and E, to wit at F, then with the
distance of 84 Feet on the Center F strike a Circle, which shall be the Base of
your Cavaleer: Now its height ought to be at least 20 Feet; and if the Work be
to be faced with Stone, or Brick it needs not not have a Talu above 3 Feet, so
that the Diameter at the top will be about 153 Feet, whereon, set a Parapet of
20 Seat, and high, and other Demensions as aforesaid in the Rampire, and there
will be a Terra-plana at the top of above 100 Feet, whereon six pieces of
Ordnance may be planted, making Embrasures and Platforms as was last directed.

4. Cazemats are made in the Corners of the Flanks, and are several Platforms
for Guns to be planted on, thereby to be hid from the Battery of the Enemy: As
to the Construction I shall follow Manesson's Directions, first as to the form,
and also to the measure: [saith he] The Caremate shall take up one half of the
Flank, and no more; The Grand Caremate D B is about 7, 8 or 9 Feet from the
Level of the Plane of the Fort, and has a passage into it from within the Fort
A, C is its Parapet of 20 or 22 Foot Seat, and in it let there be 3 or 4
Embrasures; D is the part thereof most hid from the Enemies Cannon; F is the
Magazine Fig. 79.
for this Battery; H is the second Caremate, G the Ladder, and L the Magazine,
and M the Parapet; this is to hold but one Gun; M is the third Caremate on the
level of the Bast. which let be all firm, in which let there be no void place.
The Dimensions and Construction according to the Method of this our Author are
thus [saith he] Lengthen the Line of Defense from C to G some 40 Feet, then
draw CD, parallel to Cf, (by prop. 4.. 1. chap. 4.) let CF be half of cf, so
that cF may be equal to Ff, then from the middle of the Face opposed, draw KF,
and let it cut GD, in I, then make I Fig. 79.
L, and FM equal to 6 Feet, then make MN 66 Feet, and draw NO parallel to the
Flank, which let be 24 Feet: Lastly [saith he] for the Orillon or Blind,
prolong the Face FT 36 Feet, and also FV 36 Feet, then join TV, and make that
part all solid: So is your Caremate finished: Let the height of the lower
Cazemat, be 6 Feet as before, and let all the rest be completed as you see in
the Figure.

SECT. VI. Of the Dimensions, and Constructions of those Outworks, called
Ravelins, Horn, Crownworks, etc.
THE Ravelin is a certain Work lying beyond the Mote, or Ditch, for the
covering the Curtain, Bridge, and Gate; the Angle of the Ravelin must not be
less than 60, nor much above 100 degrees. the manner of delineating it is thus.
Lengthen out the middle line of the Curtain OM unto a convenient length, Fig.
80.
then take with your Compasses the length of the Curtain CC, and setting on
Foot in F, the point of the Face and Flank, cross the middle line in q; then
laying your Ruler at q, and to the points F, draw the lines of the Ravelin q R
and qS, which shall be the Ground-lines of the Ravelin: The M^te surrounding it
must be half the breadth of the Great Mote; the Rampert may be 30 Feet thick,
and some 6, 7 or 8 Feet high, on which may stand a Parapet equal to that of the
Rampire.

Now if from the points F you raise straight lines into the Campaign, at Right
Angles to the Curtain, and from the points F set off FE, and Fig. 81.
FE 720 or 750 Feet, then may you join EE either with, A;

Single Tenaile: which is done by joining EE, and dividing it into four equal
parts, take one and place from D to N, and so draw EN and EN, so have you a
Single Tenail IENEL, which must have a Mote Rampire, and Parapet like the
Ravelin. Secondly it may if occasion require be fortified with, A;

Horn-Work: which is done by joining the points E E, and fortifying the
Exterior Polygon EE as is before taught: Or divide EE into three Fig. 83.
parts; make ME, and EN equal to MO; then draw N M, which divide so likewise at
O and P; then draw E O and E P; then at P and O raise Perpendiculars O Q and P
R, so shall M, E, Q, O, P, R, E, N, be the Horn-Work which was desired: which
must likewise have small Rampires and Parapets, as before.

For the Crown-Work: From the Center of the Fort O draw O M B of a convenient
length, then from the middle of the Ravelin set off 1000 or 800 Feet to B, then
on q, strike the Arch D B E, set off the Curtain, and DemiGorge P C C, from B
to F, and G both ways, then draw C F and C E, to terminate the points I and H
on the Counterscerp; then took Fig. 84.
part of B F or B E, and set it from B to M; and srom F to L, and from E to M;
then draw L M, and M N; then for your DemiBastions make N P and L O equal to N
E, etc. Then for the Demi-Gorges of the whole Bastion in the middle, let them
be equal to of the Interior Poligon L M or M N, viz. M Y or M X; then finish
the Bastions by drawing the lines of Defense, and raising Perpendiculars, or
making Angles of 98 at O, X, Y, and P, then the Crown work is finished as
desired. You may make Ravelins and other Works (beforementioned) before these
Curtains if occasion require. There are some other Works which are used; as
Half Moons, Bonnets, Double Tenails, Countergards, Horseshoes, Priests-Caps,
etc. which would be superfluous to speak of in this place.

5. Cittadels, are Castles or Forts of the least sort, and are the Outworks
lastly used, which are Built to bridle the Town or the Place, left the Burghers
should be rebellious, and to be the last refuge or place of retreat.
commonly of 4 or 5 Bastions, and are placed in such Order, that there may be
two Faces, and a Curtain toward the Town: the Construction whereof is after
this manner. Lengthen out the line OM, and therein find the Center of the
Citadel, the Interior Polygon of the Pentagon may be of the Curtain adjoining,
or a little more; the Center of the Square may be on P the point of the
Interior Polygon, the Center of the Hexagon may be near the outward point of
the Bastion of the Town, taken away to make the Citadel in, which may be
delineated as before: The Motes and other Works in proportion accordingly, and
the Rampires as high as those of the City or Town.

SECT. VII. Of some Maxims or Rules necessary to be known in Irregular
Fortification.
IRregular Fortifications is when any Town or Place is to be fortified, which
lies in an Irregular form; i. e. whose Sides and Angles are unequal in the
fortifying of Irregular Figures The Inginier must first form a Map of the Town
or Place, with all the Ways, Passages, Old Walls, Rivers, Pools, Enclosures,
and all other matters fit to be known in the draught, and then he is to design
what Works he finds most agreeing to the place to be Fortified.
. I shall here say very little, only I shall lay down some Precepts that are of
immediate concern in fortifying of Irregular Figures, and shall refer you to
peruse Marlois, Dogen, Fritach, Taurnier, Dilichius, etc. which will greatly
satisfy and help you: To this end know,

1. That the same Laws and Maxims for Regular Fortifications stand and be in
force for Irregular; i. e. that the line of Defense must not exceed the Port of
a Musket, nor the Angles of the Bastion be less than 60, nor much above 90,
etc.

2. That no inward Angle of the Place be less than 90, if it be so it must be
altered, and that point may be made the outward point of a Bastion.

3. That between Regular and Irregular Fortifications, there is no other
difference, but by rectifying the sides that are too short, or too long, and
altering the Angles that are too little; as for the sides, if they be above
500, and under 1000 Feet, they may be fortified by Bastions placed according to
the usual manner, at the extreme points thereof; But if the sides be between
1000 and 1700 Feet, then in the midst you may place a Plat Bastion, and at the
Extreme Points, place two Bastions, as before: But if the line be less than 500
Feet, you may lengthen it, by producing it into the Plane: As for the Angles,
they are made greater or lesser according as occasion requires. For the
Raising the Rampires, Parapets, and other Outworks, they are to be as in the
Regular, and the Out-work may be placed before the Curtains as was before
mentioned.

4. That the Capital, in any Regular or Irregular Bastion, is found by dividing
the Angle of the Polygon into two equal parts (by prop. 7.. 1. chap. 4.) and by
producing the line of Angular Division or Separation, on which the due length
of the Capital must be placed, which observe for a general Rule.

SECT. VIII. Of the Dimensions and Construction of small Forts, or Scones,
which are built for the Defense of some Pass, River, or other place.
WHEN they are made Regular, of 4, 5, or 6 Bastions, then they may be fortified
by the precedent Rules, but there are others of smaller Dimensions fit for the
same purpose: viz. Triangle with Demi-Bastions, Square with Demi-Bastions,
Parallelograms with Demi-Bastions and Tongue, Star Redoubts of four, five or six
points, and Plain Redoubts.

PROP. IX. To fortify a Triangle, with Demi-Bastions.
This Triangle may consist and be comprehended of three equal or unequal sides
in this Example: let it be an Equilaterial Triangle PPP Fig. 84.
Now divide PP into three parts, then take 1, and prick off the Capitals PA,
etc. and the Gorges make equal thereunto, as PC, PC, etc. then make the Flanks
FC to stand at Right Angles, and to be of PC or PA, then draw the Faces AF, AF,
etc. and the Work is finished as required.

PROP. X. To fortify a Square with Demi-Bastions.
The sides of the Square may be from 100 to 200 Feet, let PP be 180 Feet, which
divide into 3 parts, take one for the Gorges PC, and for Fig. 85.
the Capitals PA, and prick them off all round as you see, then take of PP, and
at Right Angles prick off the Flanks CF, then draw the Faces AF, AF, etc. and
the Figure is completed.

PROP. XI. To fortify a Parallelogram with Demi-Bastions, and Tongue.
First describe the Parallelogram, or LongSquare, PPPP, then divide PP into 6
parts (the side on which the Tongue, or Tenaile, is placed) and make MC equal
unto thereof, and also MG, and MH. Draw CG, GC, and CH, HC, Fig. 86.
then finish the Demi-Bastions as before, so shall the Work be completed as
was required. A Long Square may also be fortified as Fig. the 77.

PROP. XII. To fortify a Star Redoubt of 4, 5, or 6 Points
1. A Star Redoubt of four points may have his side from 40 to 60 Feet: First
describe the Square PPPP, then divide PP into two parts at M, take of PM, (and
by prop. 1.. 1. chapter 4.) Fig. 87.
raise Perpendiculars round at M, make MA equal to of PM, and draw all as in
the Figure. 2. A Star Redoubt of five points is thus fortified. Describe the
Pentagon PP, etc. then divide PP into halves at M, raise the Perpendiculars MA,
make MA equal to of PM, and draw the Fort Fig. 88.
in all respects as the Figure represents. 3. A Star Redoubt of six points is
thus fortified. Describe the Hexagon PPP, etc. divide PP into two equal parts
at M, then raise Perpendiculars at the M's, then make MA equal to of PM, Fig.
89.
or of PP, and draw every respective line as you see in the Figure.
PROP. XIII. To Delineate a Plain Redoubt
Plain Redoubts are called Grand Redoubts, which are used as Batteries in
Approaches, whose side may be from 60 to 80 Feet, or Petit Redoubt, Fig. 90.
which are used for a Court of Guards in the Trenches, and may be from 20 to 50
Feet, and are framed and delineated in all respects as you see in Fig 90.

The Profile's to be set on these several Works, and the Motes, are alterable
and uncertain, for they being sometimes used in Approaches; then they do
require the Breast-work at the Bottom to be 7 or 8 Foot wide, and the Interior
Height 6, and the Exterior 5 Feet, and the Mote to be either 8, 10 or 12 Feet,
sometimes 14 or 20 Feet wide at the bottom, and the height of 7, 8 or 9 Feet,
to have two, or three ascents to rise to the Parapet. There are many other
things belonging to this Art, which the limitation I am bound to, will not
permit here to be treated of.

CHAP. XIV. Of Military Orders, or the Embattelling and Encamping of Soldiers.
SECT. I. Of the Embattelling and Ordering of Soldiers.
BATTAILS are considered either in respect of the number of Men, or in respect
of the form of Ground. In the respect of the number of Men, it is either a
Square Battle, a Double Battle, a Battle of the Grand Front, or a Battle of
any proportion, of the number in Rank to the number in File. In respect of the
form of the Ground, the Battle is either a Geometrical Square of Ground, or a
long Square of Ground. For the Distance, or Order of Soldiers, martialled in
Array, is distinguished either into Open Order, which is when the Centers of
their places are 7 Feet distant assuunder, both in Rank and File, or Order;
which is when the Centers of the places are 3 Feet distant both in Rank and
File; or else 3 Feet in Rank, and 7 Feet in File.

PROP. I. To Order any number of Soldiers into a Square Battle of Men.
Admit it were required to Martial into a Square Battle 16129 Men: To do
which extract the Square Root of 16129 (by prop. 8.. 1. chap. 1.) which is 127,
therefore you are to place 127 Men in Rank, and also in File.

PROP. II. To Order any number of Soldiers into a Double Battle.
Admit 16928 Men were to be Martialled into a Double Battle, extract the Root
of half the number of Men; i. e. of 8464, whose Root is 92, therefore I say
that 92 Men must be placed in File, and 184 in Rank, to order that number of
Men propounded into a Double Battle.

Plate VII Page 302


PROP. III. To Order any number of Soldiers into a Battle of the Grand Front.
Admit 16900 Soldiers were to be Martialled into a Battle of the Grand Front,
that is Quadruple. Extract the Square Root of 4225 (that is of the Men) the
Root is 65; therefore I say 65 must be placed in File, and 260 in Rank, to form
a Battle of the Grand Front.

PROP. IV. Any number of Men, together with their distance in Rank and File,
being propounded, to Order them into a Square Battle of Ground.
Admit 2500 Soldiers were to be Martialled into a Square Battle of Ground, in
such sort that their distance in File should be 7 feet, and in Rank 3 feet, and
it is required to know how many Men must be placed in Rank and in File to draw
up 2500 Men into Square Battle of the Ground. According to prop. 1.. 1. chapter 1.
say, As -- 7 to 3, So is 2500 to 1071, etc. whose Square Root is 32, etc.
Therefore I say 32 Men are to be placed in File. Now to find how many Men are
to be placed in Rank, divide 2500 by 32, the Quotient is 78, which are the
number of Men to be placed in Rank, and 4 Men to be disposed elsewhere.

PROP. V. Any number of Soldiers propounded, to Order them in Rank and File,
according to the reason of any two Numbers given.
Admit 6400 Soldiers are to be Martialled into Array, in such Order that the
number of Men placed in File, shall bear such proportion to the number in Rank
as 7 to 13; (according to prop. 1.. 1. chap. 1.) say as 7 to 13, so is 6400 to
11885, etc. whose Square Root is 109, etc. the number of Men to be placed in
Rank, by which divide 6400, it produces, 58, etc. the number of Men to be
placed in File, and 78 Men to be employed elsewhere.

SECT. II. Of Castermetation, or Quartering and Encamping of Soldiers.
IN Quartering and Encamping of Soldiers, it is requisite, the Quartermaster
General, and all other under Quarter Masters, be skilled at Foot measure, that
so they may lay out their Quarters as directed.

The common allowance for the depth of Ground, that a Regiment of Horse or Foot
will take up, the wideness must be answerable to the Number of Men 200 Feet for
the Huts in length, and 100 for the Commanders, and Sutlers, before them; every
two Soldiers to a Hut, 8 Feet broad, and 8 Feet deep, 2 Feet Hut, from Hut, so
that there may stand 20 Huts in the 200 Feet, the Ally betwixt Hut, and Hut,
may be 8 Feet, that is 16 Feet in width, and 200 in length for 40 Men, which is
3200 Feet, and for the 100 Feet more, 1600 Feet, in all 4800 Feet, and there
must be 25 Rows of Huts, for 1000 Men; so that for a Regiment of Foot
containing 1000 Men, with Officers, and Sutlers, will take up 120000 Feet,
which is 2 Acres and 3 Roods, which because of Ways may be allowed 3 Acres of
Ground, for every Regiment, which may be 350 Feet deep, and 370 Feet wide, or
near 360 Feet square: Now if 1000 Men, Officers, Sutlers, Highways and all
take up a Square of 360 Feet, how many Feet shall the Side of a Square be
wherein 10000 Footmen, etc. may be encamped? say (by prop. 1. chap. 1.) as
1000, to 10000, so is the Square of 360, viz. 129600, to 1296000, the Square of
1138 Feet, which is very near 30 Acres of Ground.

For the Quartering of Horse, you must keep the same depth of 300 Feet for all,
and take 200 Feet for the Huts, the Horse Huts must be 10 Feet deep, and 4
wide; so that 12 Horses may stand in one Hut together, which is 48 Feet long,
and 10 wide, and 6 Feet a Street; The Huts for the Troops, will be 6, for 12
Troops; now conceive a Regiment to consist of 8 Troops, 50 to a Troop, it will
take up leaving 20 Feet Streets, and Cross-ways, very near as much Ground as a
Regiment of Foot, Ways and all must be allowed 3 Acres, near 360 Feet square,
so that 10 Regiments of Horse will take up 30 Acres: Moreover, it will be
needful and you may very well allow, as much ground as both Horse and Foot
will take, for the Train of Artillery, Victuallers, Parade Places, etc. From
these considerations the young beginner, nay even the better practiced Soldier
may receive help, and thereby be enabled to Encamp an Army if required.

CHAP. XV. Of GUNNERY.
SECT. I. Of the Names of the Principal Members of a Piece of Ordnance.
1. Defin.
ACANNON is a long round Body, either of Brass, or Iron, formed and made hollow
by Art, and proportion, to offend afar off, with a Ball of Iron, Stone, or any
Artificial Substance, charged with Gunpowder, in its charged Cilinder, which
being fired, in an instant performs its desired Effect. This Machine was
invented by This Military Engine Bombarda, Gun, Cannon, etc. So called from
Bombo, a resounding Noise, Cannone, or Cannon, from the likeness it holds with
his Canna, Bore, or Concavity; Artigleria, from Artiglio, the Talons, or Claws
of Ravenous Fowls, because its shot flying afar off tears and defaces all that
it does meet; from whence some Natures of this Machine are called Smeriglii,
long winged Hawks, Falconi, Falconets; Passa volanti, swift flying Arrows, etc.
an Englishman, and first put in practice by the Venetians against the
Genoveses at Chiezza, Anno 1376.

2. The Superficies of the Metal, is the outside round about the Piece.

3. The Body is the Substance of the whole Mass of Metal.

4. The Chase is the Concavity of the Piece, in which they put the Charge.

5. the Muzzel is the Extremity of the Chase by which you load, and unload the
Piece.

6. The Calibre is AB the Diameter of the Fig. 91.
Muzzel or Mouth.

7. The Touchhole, is that little vent, which passes from the Unequal
Superficies, to the very Chamber of the Piece, made to give fire to the Powder
within as C, that which encloseth the Extremity of the Chase about the
Touchhole is called the Breech or Coyl.

8. The Cascabel is the Pammel at the Breech or Coyl as D.

The Trunnions, are pieces of Metal fixed unto the Exterior Superficies of the
Gun on which he moves in the Carriage as E, E.

The Body of the Piece, is that which is comprehended betwixt the Center of the
Trunnions and the Cascable EG. Fig. 91.


The Vacant Cylinder, is comprehended betwixt the Cent: of the Trunnions and
the Muzzel as EB.

The Frees, or Muzzel Ring is that thick Cornish which, incompasseth the Unequal
Superficies of the Piece at I, The Base Ring is KLG, The Reinforced Ring is M,
The Trunnion Ring is N, and the Cornish Ring is O.

The Line of the Cylinder, is a direct line imagined to be described along the
Chase Parallel unto the middle of the Chase as XZ.

The Line of Metal, is a line touching both Fig. 91.
Cornishes, as MNI.

The Dispart line of the Piece, is the difference betwixt the Semidiameter of
the Muzzel, and Base Ring as the line IH.

The Vent of the Piece is the difference betwixt the Diameter of the Shot, and
the Mouth of the Piece, as e d.

The Chamber, or Charged Cylinder, is that part of the Chase toward the
Touchhole equally large, nor narrower in one place than in another, and does
contain the Powder and Ball.

SECT. II. Of the Dimension of our Usal English Cannon, and other Ordnance, etc.
IN the following Table I have set down the length and weight of our most usual
English Ordnance, the Diameters and Weight of their Bullets, the length and
breadth of their Ladles, the Weight of Powder to Charge them, etc.

The Names of the several Pieces of Ordnance. Guns length Guns weight Guns bore
Bullets diamet. Bullets weight Ladles length Ladles breadth Powder weight
Shoots Level Utmost Random Feet Inches Pounds Inches 8 parts Inches 8 parts
Pounds Ounces Inches 8 parts Inches 8 parts Pounds Ounces Paces Paces A Base. 4
6 200 1 2 1 1 0 5 4 0 2 0 0 8 60 600 A Rabinet. 5 6 300 1 4 1 3 0 8 4 1 2 4 0 2
70 700 A Falconet. 6 0 400 2 2 2 1 1 5 7 4 4 0 1 4 90 900 A Falconi 7 0 750 2 6
2 5 2 8 8 2 4 4 2 4 130 1300 Minion ordinary. 7 0 800 3 0 3 7 3 4 8 4 5 0 2 8
120 1200 Minion largest. 8 0 1000 3 2 3 0 3 12 9 0 5 0 3 4 125 1250 Saker
leaft. 8 0 1400 3 4 3 2 4 12 9 6 6 4 3 6 150 1500 Saker ordinary. 9 0 1500 3 6
3 4 6 0 10 4 6 6 4 0 160 1600 Saker old sort. 10 0 1800 4 0 3 6 7 5 11 0 7 2 5
0 163 1630 Demiculver least. 10 0 2000 4 2 4 0 9 0 12 0 8 0 6 4 174 1740
Demiculver ordinary. 11 0 2700 4 4 4 2 10 11 12 6 8 0 7 4 175 1750 Demiculver
old sort. 11 0 3000 4 6 4 4 12 11 13 4 8 4 8 8 178 1780 Culverin least. 11 0
4000 5 0 4 6 15 0 14 2 9 0 10 0 180 1800 Culverin ordinary. 12 0 4500 5 2 5 0
17 5 16 0 9 4 11 6 181 1810 Culverin largest. 12 0 4800 5 4 5 2 20 0 16 0 10 0
11 8 183 1830 Demicannon least 11 0 5400 6 2 6 0 30 0 20 0 11 4 14 0 156 1560
Demicannon ordin. 12 0 5600 6 4 6 1 32 0 22 0 12 0 17 8 162 1620 Demicannon
large 12 0 6000 6 6 6 3 36 0 22 6 12 6 18 0 180 1800 Cannon Royal 12 0 8000 8 0
7 4 58 0 24 0 14 0 32 8 185 1850

PROP. I. How to know the different Fortification of a Piece of Ordnance.
In fortifying any Piece of Ordnance there are three degrees observed, as first
Legitimate Pieces, which are those that are ordinarily fortified; secondly
Bastard Pieces, which are such whose Fortification is lessened; thirdly Double
fortified Pieces, or extraordinary Pieces.

The Fortification of any Piece of Ordnance, is accounted by the thickness of
the Metal at the Touchhole, Trunnions, and at the Muzzel, in proportion to the
Diameter of the Bore.

The Legitimate Pieces, or the ordinary fortified Cannons, have at the Touch
hole, at the Trunnions, and at the Muzzel of the thickness of the bore, in
thickness of Metal. Bastard Cannons, or lesned Cannons, have at their
Touchhole, or 12/16, and 9/16 at their Trunnions, and 7/16 at their Muzzel:
the Double fortified Cannons have full one Diameter of the Bore in thickness of
Metal at the Touchhole, and 11/16 at the Trunnions; and 7/16 at their Muzzel.
Now all double fortified Culverins, etc. are 1 at the Touchhole, 15/16 at the
Trunnions, and 9/16 at the Muzzel, and the Ordinary fortified Culverins, are
fortified every way as double fortified Cannons, and lesned Culverins as
Ordinary Cannons in all respects.

PROP. II. How to know how much Powder is fit for proof, and what for service,
for any Piece of Ordnance.
For Cannons take of the weight of their Iron Bullet of good Corn Powder for
Proof, and for service the weight of the Iron Bullet is sufficient, especially
for Iron Ordnance, which will not endure so much Powder, as Brass ones will
receive by in Weight, for Culverins allow the whole Weight of the Shoot for
Proof, and for Service. For Sakers, and Falcons, take of the Weight of the
Shoot, and for lesser Pieces the whole weight may be used in service, until
they grow hot, but then there must be some abatement made at discretion, and
take 1 of the weight of their Iron Bullet for Proof.

PROP. III. To know what Bullet is fit to be used in any Piece of Ordnance.
The Bullet must be somewhat less than the Bore of the Gun, that so it may have
vent in the discharge, some Authors affirm of an Inch less than the Bore will
serve, all Ordnance, but this vent is too much for a Falcon, etc. and too
little for a Cannon: therefore I approve them not, but commend Mr. Phillipes's
proportion In his Mathematical Manual.
to your Use, which is to divide the Bore of the Gun into 20 equal parts; and
let the Diameter of the Bullet be 19/20 thereof, according to which page 165.
proportion the precedent Table is calculated.

PROP. IV. By knowing the proportion of Metals one to another, and by knowing
the Weight of one Ball, to know what any other shall weigh.
The common received proportions for Metals are these.

Lead is to Iron as 2, to 3.

Lead is to Brass as 24, to 19.

Lead is to Stone as 4, to 1.

Iron is to Lead as 3, to 2.

Iron is to Brass as 16, to 18.

Iron is to Stone as 3, to 8.

The more exact proportion betwixt Metals are thus known. Admita Cube, or Ball
of Gold, weigh 100 l. A Cube of any of those Metals ensuing of the same
bigness, shall bear such proportion, as follows, to the said Cube of Gold.

li. pts. li. pts. Gold. 100 00 Iron. 42 10 Quicksilver. 71 43 Tinn. 38 95
Lead. 60 53 Stone. 15 80 Silver. 54 39 Water. 05 68 Brass. 47 37

It is the opinion of Dr. Wybard in his Tactometria, that a Bullet of Cast
Iron, whose Diameter is 4 Inches, does weigh 9 l. Averdupoize weight.

Now to find what any other Bullet, or Cube shall weigh; say (as in prop. 4.
chap. 1.) As the Cube of the Bullet propounded, is to his weight, so is the
Cube of another Bullet given, to his weight, and so observe still this
proportion.

SECT. III. Of the Qualification of an able Gunner, and necessary Operations
before shooting, and in shooting.
A Gunner ought to be a Man of Courage, Experience, and Vigilant; he ought to
have good skill in Arithmetic, to know the Extraction of the Roots, etc. He
ought to have skill in Geometry, to take heights, distances, etc. to know the
Divisions and Use of his Circle, Quadrant, and Quadret; to know how to level,
and to lay Platforms, and to raise Batteries. He must know the Names of all
sorts of Ordnance, their Weight, the Height of their Bore, the Height and
Weight of their Shot, the length and breadth of their Ladles, how much Powder
to use for proof, and action; The Shoots Level, and the Shoots Random; He must
know the Names of all the Members of a Piece of Ordnance, he must also know the
length, thickness and breadth of all manner of Carriages, and must know all the
parts thereof: Viz. the Cheeks or Sides, the Axtree, Spokes, Nave, Hoops,
Transomes, Bolts, Plates, Drawing-Hooks, the Clout, the Hole for the Linspin,
the Shafts, the Thill and Thill-bolt, the Fore-lock, and Fore-lockkeys,
Capsquares, the Fore-lock-pins and Chain, the Pintle and Bolt-hole, Fellows,
Nails, Fellow-bars, Stirropes, the Ruts of the Wheel, Dowledges, Beds, Coins,
Leveres, Hand screws, etc. He must also know how to make his Ladles, Spunges,
Cartridges, whether of Paper or Canvas, and to have by him Formers of all
sorts, Sheepskins undrest to make Spunges, Powder, Shot, Needles, Thread,
Paste and Starch, Marlin, Twine, Nails, Handspikes, Crows of Iron,
Granado-shells, and Materials for Composition, Fasces, Budg Barrels,
Cannon-Baskets, etc. These being general things he is to know, and at all times
to have ready by him, and he is more particularly to know these following parts
of his Art: As,

PROP. I. How to Tertiate, Quadrate, and to Dispart a Piece of Ordinance.
1. To Tertiate a Piece, is to find whether it has its due thickness at the
Trunnions, Touchhole, and Neck; if the Trunnions, and the Neck are in its due
order, and the Chase straight.

2. To Quadrate a Piece mounted, is to see whether it be directly placed, and
equally poized in the Carriage; which is known by finding in the Unequal
Superficies of the Base, and Muzzel Ring; the point which is Perpendicular,
over the Soul of the Piece which may be found by the Gunners Instrument, called
a Level; an Instrument whose use is so vulgarly known, that it needs not my
Explanation.

3. To Dispart a Piece, is to fix, or elevate on the Unequal point of the Muzzel
Ring, a Mark, as far distant from the Cylinder, or Soul of the Piece, as is the
point of the Base-Ring; to the end, that the Visail-ray which passes by these
marks, may be Parallel to the Chase, Soul, or Cylinder of the Piece. Now the
Dispart, i. e. the difference of the Semidiameters of the Cornishes, may be by
a pair of Calliper Compasses attained. Which found, place on the Top of the
Cornish-Ring, near the Muzzel, over the middle of the Inferior Cylinder.

PROP. II. To know how far any Piece of Ordnance will shoot, etc.
As to the several shootings in Artillery, Authors differ much in their
Judgments, and Opinions, but they all unanimously agree that the Ball being
shot forth flies through the Air, with a Violent, Mixed and Natural motion;
describing a Parabolical line, in whose beginning and ending are lines sensibly
straight, and in the middle carved: In the beginning the Impressed Fig. 91.
force driving forward by the Fire, the Natural gravity of the Ball does
describe a Right-line, called the Direct line, or Rangs of the Ball's Circute.

In the middle that force diminishes, and the Natural Gravity prevails, so
that it describes a curved line, called the Ball's middle Helical or Conical
Arch See Mr. Diggs in his Pantometria, page 179.
; In the End the Natural Gravity overcoming the Impressed violence, (which
becomes altogether weak and faint) describes a new right line, called the
Ball's declining line, in which the Ball tends toward the Center of the Earth,
as toward a Place natural unto all heavy bodies: See Figure the 92. These
motions are somewhat longer, according as the Piece is mounted from the level
unto the Angle of 45 degrees. which is called the Utmost Random: The Elevation of
which, is regulated by the Gunners Quadrant, the Use of which Instrument is so
generally known, and by so many Authors fully explained, that I here crave
leave to omit it: But take these for General Rules.

1. That a Shoot at Right Angle, strikes more General Rules to be observed in
the battering down of a Place, or making of Breaches.
violent and furiously than at Oblique Angles, therefore Gunners use when they
are to batter down a Tower, Wall, or Earth-work, to shoot point blank at the
Object, Tire by Tire; by discharging all the Pieces in Battery against the self
same. Object, in the same; Instant, holding it for a Maxim, that ten Cannons
discharged together, do fan more Execution than discharged one after another.
Now at Oblique Angles they shoot either Cross ways or by rebounding. 2. That
the speediest way to make a B^^a^h in a Wall, etc. Is by shooting at the Object
from two Batteries, which ruins for more speedily than by striking the Object,
with one Battery, at Right Angles, although that one Battery, has as many
Cannon as the other two has. 3. That if you were to batter a Flank, covered
with an Orillion, (which because you cannot possibly batter it right forward)
you must therefore of necessity batter it Obliquely, by way of Rebounding,
thus: Choose a fit place in the Curtain to be your Object, on which you may play
with your Battery obliquely, so that by a rebound the shoot may leap (...) the
Flanks, holding for a Maxim, in this operation, According to learned D'Chales,
on the 4th Prop. of the first Book of Euclid.
That the Angles of Incidence and Reflection are Equal. Now we come to show the
length of the Right Range, of all our Common English Ordnance, which is set
down in the precedent Table, in which the Cannon exceed not 185 Paces, etc.
Esteeming the Pace 5 English Feet, nor his utmost Random above 1850 Paces,
which Table so shows for all other Natures.


As for the Ranges, and Randoms, to the several Degrees and points of Mounture
of the Quadrant, I have hereunto annexed the Tables, calculated by the
Experiments of sundry most Eminent Artists, whose Works will perpetuate their
Worth and Name to succeding Generations.

A Table of Ranges, and Randoms, to the several Degrees of Mounture of the
Quadrent.
A TABLE OF Right Ranges or Points Blanks. Randoms or the First Graze. The
Degrees of the Pieces Mounture. 0 The Right Range in Paces of 5 Feet. 192 The
Degrees of Mounture. 0 The Paces of the Random 5 Feet a Pace. 192 1 209 1 298 2
227 2 404 3 249 3 510 4 261 4 610 5 278 5 722 6 285 6 828 7 302 7 934 8 320 8
1044 9 337 9 1129 10 354 10 1214 20 454 20 1917 30 693 30 2185 40 855 40 2289
50 1000 50 2283 60 1140 60 1792 70 1220 70 1214 80 1300 80 1000 90 1350 90

The Use of the Table of Randoms.
This Table is most agreeing to Cannons, and Culverins; and the greatest sort
of Ordnance, the Use thereof is thus.

Admit a Saker to be mounted to 3 degrees. shoots the Bullet 323 Paces, how far
will it shoot being mounted unto 7 degrees. Say (by prop. 1. chap. 1.)

As 510 the Tabular distance for 3 degrees. of Mounture, to 323, the distance found,

So is 934 the Tabular distance for 7 degrees. of Mounture, to 591 272/510, the
distance required, which the Saker according to this Experiment shall shoot at
7 degrees. of Mounture.

Mr. NIGH in his Book of Gunnery printed Anno, 1647, says he made an Experiment
by a Saker of 8 Feet long, which he loaded with three pounds of Powder, of an
exact weight, both Powder and Wad at every charge, every time ramming it down
with three equal strokes, as near as possible; but on the Bullet he put no Wad,
because the Saker was mounted; And thus he made four Shoots, each of them half
an Hour after the other, that so the Piece might be of equal temper, and
mounted his Piece to these 4 degrees of Mounture, viz. 1 degrees. 5 degrees. 7 degrees. 10
degrees. and found these Randoms.

At 1 Degrees. the Random was 225 Paces.

At 5 Degrees. the Random was 416 Paces.

At 7 Degrees. the Random was 505 Paces.

At 10 Degrees. the Random was 630 Paces.

According to which Experiment, he framed this Table of Randoms.

Degrees. Paces Degrees. Paces 0 206 6 461 1 225 7 505 2 274 8 548 3 323 9 589 4 370 10
630 5 416

Captain HEXAM in his Book of Gunnery, shows how by finding out the Random of a
Cannon, for the first Degree of Mounture, thereby to find the Random for every
Degree to 45 degrees. or utmost Random, and this is his Rule to perform it. First
find how many Paces the Cannon will shoot being laid level by the Metal, (which
by him is accounted 1 degrees.) Then divide the distance found, by 50, then
multiply the Quotient by 11, so shall the product be the greatest Digression,
or Difference betwixt Rangs, and Rang; which being divided by 44, the Quotient
gives the Number of Paces, which the Bullet will lose in the other Rangs, from
Degree, unto Degree; according to this Rule, this Table is calculated.

A Table of Randoms to 45 Degrees, accounting a Pace 2 Foot.
D. Moun Paces. Diff. D. Moun. Paces. Diff. 0 0775 225 23 4685 110 1 1000 220
24 4795 105 2 1220 215 25 4900 100 3 1435 210 26 5000 95 4 1645 205 27 5095 90
5 1850 200 28 5185 85 6 2050 195 29 5270 80 7 2245 190 30 5350 75 8 2435 185 31
5425 70 9 2620 180 32 5595 65 10 2800 175 33 5560 60 11 2975 170 34 5620 55 12
3145 165 35 5675 50 13 3310 160 36 5725 45 14 3470 155 37 5770 40 15 3625 150
38 5810 35 16 3775 145 39 5845 30 17 3920 140 40 5875 25 18 4060 135 41 5900 20
19 4595 130 42 5920 15 20 4325 125 43 5935 10 21 4450 120 44 5945 5 22 4570 115
45 5950

I have hereunto also annexed the Table calculated by Alexander Bianco, for all
sort of Ordnance, (which Table I account one of the best that was ever yet
found Extant) In his Work printed 1648.

A Table of Randoms for the first six Points of the Gunner's Quadrant.
Points. 1 2 3 4 5 6 Falconet. 375 637 795 885 892 900 Falcon. 550 935 1166
1254 1309 1320 Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080 Saker. 625 1062 1325 1125
1487 1500 Demi-culver. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725 1740 Culverin. 750 1275 1590
1710 1785 1800 Demi-cannon. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 Cannon of 7. 675 1147
1431 1489 1606 1620 Double Cannon. 750 1275 1590 1710 1785 1800

SECT. IV. Of Shooting in Mortar-Pieces.
A Mortar-Piece is a short Piece, with which they shoot Bombs, Granado-Shells,
StoneBalls, etc. not by a Right line but from a Curved, from on high; so that
it may fall where it should be desired: Now this Mortar is placed in the
Carriage, in all respects as you see in Fig. 93. in which A signifies the
Carriage, B the Mortar, Fig. 93.
C the Course the shoot flies, and D the Place on which it falls.

Bombs are great hollow Balls of Iron, or Brass, in which are put fine Sifted
Gunpowder, which by a Fuse, they proportion to them a due Fire, that so they
may break as soon as they fall amongst the Enemies. These Fuses are small Trunks
of Wood, Tinn, or Iron, filled with a prepared Composition for that purpose.
Grenades are of the same form with Bombs, only smaller, and many times are
cast by hand, and are made of Iron, Brass, Glass, or Earth.

Now in Order to the well shooting in those kind of Machines called Mortars,
it is requisite to observe these following Rules: as,

1. That before you make a shoot at any Place, you find the distance thereof
from your Mortar, which may be obtained by Prop. 3.. 4. Chap. 9. 2. That the
Bombs, or other Bodies that are to be shot, be of equal weight, otherwise the
shoots will vary 3 That the Carriage in breadth be always on a Level, and
without any descent, that so it may not leap in discharging. 4. That the Powder
with which the Mortar is loaded, be always of the same force and weight. 5.
That the Charge of the Mortar, as well in Powder as in Wadding, be always
rammed in with blows equally heavy, and of equal number. 6 That the Wadds be
always either of Wood, or Tampeons, or else of Okam, for the strongest drives
it farthest. 7. That the Fuses be newly made, in those days that they are to be
used, and that they be made of a Composition proportionable to the Range that
the shoot shall make in the Air, so that the Bomb may break in the very moment
of its fall; which Composition must be such, that though it fall in the Water,
yet not to extinguish, but the Bomb there to break. Now before we proceed any
farther, I think it necessary, to show how to compose your Ingredients for your
Fuse.
PROP. I. To make Fuses for Bombs, etc.
The Composition for Bombs must be of a slow motion, that so time enough may be
given to throw either Bombs, Grenades, Fireballs, Thundring-Barrels, etc.
They are compounded of these Ingredients, thus: Take a pound of Gunpowder,
4/16 of Sulphur 4/16 of Saltpeter, well beaten, dry, and sifted separately,
then mix it, and make up your Fuse thereof: Or take Powder of Benjamin, and
Small-Coles, all well beaten and mixed together with some Oil of Piter, and so
fill your Fuse therewith.

Now the use of Mortar-Pieces, being for the most part to shoot up at Random,
therefore the Randoms of these Pieces is very necessary to be known: Therefore
hereunto I have annexed the Tables of Randoms, calculated by the Experience of
the best of Authors, which have wrote on this Subject; most of which do agree
in their Randoms, although they are in a several dress.

Diego-Uffano-Zutphen in his Works printed 1621, has calculated these two
following Tables, the one for the 12 points of the Quadrant, the other for
every Degree, taking the one Half of each Number, and so it is reduced into our
English Paces of 5 Feet, which Tables were esteemed and made use of, both by
Captain Hexam, and Mr. Norton, and are as follows.

A Table of Randoms for Mortar-Pieces, to the 12 Points of the Gunner's
Quadrant, calculated by Diego-Uffano-Zutphen.
583 570 534 468 377 248 100 6 5 4 3 2 1 0....... 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 583 570 534
468 377 248 000

Now suppose the Mortar to be placed at, the Pricks in the middle line
represents the several Randoms, numbered with the Degrees of the Quadrant,
forward and backward, unto which the several Randoms are set; so you see that
the Mortar being levelled point blank, throws the Bomb 100 Paces, if the
Mortar be mounted one Point, it throws the Bomb 248 Paces, etc. until it is
mounted to the 6th. point, 583 Paces, which is the utmost Random: Now if the
Mortar be mounted higher to 7, 8, 9, etc. Points, the Randoms decrease again as
before they did increase: as you see in the Table.

But in those latter Randoms there lies a great mistake, as shall be made
palpably appear. For if as they are distant from the sixth Point you make them
equal to one another, then the Random of the 12 points, must be equal to the
Random of 0 point, or the Level Random, which is 100 Paces from the Mortar. Now
it is contrary to all Art and Reason, to think that if the Mortar be elevated
to the 12th. point, i. e. bolt upright, it should shoot the Bomb 100 Paces from
the Mortar; no, it cannot be; but according to all Reason the Bomb must fall
down either on, or near the Mortar, and not 100 Paces distant, as is most
erroneously conceived; the like error is in the following Table of our said
Author; but because Mr. Phillipps in his Mathematical Manual has amply
demonstrated their Errors, I therefore shall say no more to the Errors that
have been a long time generally conceived and embraced as a truth, but now are
removed.

A Table of Randoms for Mortar-Pieces, to every Degree of the Quadrant.
The Degrees of Mounture. 0 The Paces of the Random. 100 The Degrees of
Mounture. 89 The Degrees of Mounture. 23 The Paces of the Random. 480 The
Degrees of Mounture. 66 1 122 88 24 490 65 2 143 87 25 500 64 3 164 86 26 510
63 4 185 85 27 518 62 5 204 84 28 525 61 6 224 83 29 531 60 7 243 82 30 536 59
8 263 81 31 540 58 9 280 80 32 543 57 10 297 79 33 549 56 11 315 78 34 552 55
12 331 77 35 558 54 13 347 76 36 562 53 14 362 75 37 568 52 15 377 74 38 573 51
16 393 73 39 577 50 17 406 72 40 580 49 18 419 71 41 581 48 19 432 70 42 582 47
20 445 69 43 583 46 21 457 68 44 584 22 460 67 45 585

The most exact Tables of Randoms for the Mortar, that I have seen or can find
in any Ancient, or Modern Author, is this following Table, calculated by the
experience and trial of that Famous Inginier Tomaso Moretii of Brescia,
Inginier to the most serene Republique of Venice, in his Works Entitled,
Trattatu delle Artiglieria, printed 1665. Where he supposes the utmost Random,
equal to 10000, according to which proportion he framed this following Table.

A Table of the several Randoms of each Degree of the Quadrant, the greatest
Equal to 10000.
Elev. Elev. Elev. Elev. 1 349 89 23 7193 67 2 698 88 24 7431 66 3 1045 87 25
7660 65 4 1392 86 26 7880 64 5 1736 85 27 8090 63 6 2079 84 28 8290 62 7 2419
83 29 8480 61 8 2756 82 30 8660 60 9 3090 81 31 8829 59 10 3420 80 32 8988 58
11 3746 79 33 9135 57 12 4067 78 34 9272 56 13 4384 77 35 9397 55 14 4695 76 36
9511 54 15 5000 75 37 9613 53 16 5299 74 38 9703 52 17 5592 73 39 9781 51 18
5870 72 40 9848 50 19 6157 71 41 9903 49 20 6428 70 42 9945 48 21 6691 69 43
9976 47 22 6947 68 44 9994 46 45 10000 45

The Use of the Precedent Table is explained by these following Propositions.

PROP. II.
Finding that a Mortar of 300, with a Tampeon of Wood, being elevated 45, or 6
Points of the Quadrant, sends a Bomb 800 Paces, how many Paces shall the same
shoot, at the Elevation of 54?

Look at the said 54 of the Table, and you Demonstration. will find the^
proportional Number 9511, to correspond thereunto. Now you find the
proportional Number belonging to 45 is 10000, then by Prop. 1. Chap. 1. Say as
10000, to 800, so is 9511, to 760 88/100, which are the Paces, the Mortar will
send the Bomb at the Elevation of 54 Degrees.

PROP. III. Finding that a Mortar of 300, being elevated 54, sends his Bomb 760
88/100 Paces, what Degree of Elevation must that Mortar have, to shoot the Bomb
555 Paces?
This is but the Converse of the former, therefore (according to Prop. 1. Chap.
1.) say, as 760 88/160 Paces, gives the proportional part or number 9511; so
does 555 Paces, give the proportional part 6945. Which number sought among the
proportional Numbers, in the Table, you will find 68 Degrees to correspond to
that proportional Number 6945, so that the Mortar must be elevated to 68
Degrees to shoot the Bomb 555 Paces, which was required to be known. These
Rules and Precepts here delivered, I esteem necessary to be known by every
Gunner, who intends to be serviceable for his Prince and Country.

Vive, vale: Siquid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti: Si non his utere
mecum. Hora. lib. 1. Epist FINIS.
Plate VIII


A TABLE OF Logarithm Numbers, From One to Ten Thousand: Whereby the LOGARITHM
OF ANY NUMBER Under Four Hundred Thousand may be readily discovered.
LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for W. Freeman, at the Artichoke next St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet street. MDCLXXXVII.

N Log. N Log. N Log. 1 0. 000000 34 1. 531479 67 1. 826075 2 0. 301030 35 1.
544068 68 1. 832509 3 0. 477121 36 1. 556303 69 1. 838849 4 0. 602060 37 1.
568202 70 1. 845098 5 0. 698970 38 1. 579783 71 1. 851258 6 0. 778151 39 1.
591064 72 1. 857332 7 0. 845098 40 1. 602060 73 1. 863323 8 0. 903090 41 1.
612784 74 1. 869232 9 0. 954242 42 1. 623249 75 1. 875061 10 1. 000000 43 1.
633468 76 1. 880813 11 1. 041393 44 1. 643452 77 1. 886491 12 1. 079181 45 1.
653212 78 1. 892094 13 1. 113943 46 1. 662758 79 1. 897627 14 1. 146128 47 1.
672098 80 1. 903090 15 1. 176091 48 1. 681241 81 1. 908485 16 1. 204120 49 1.
690196 82 1. 913814 17 1. 230449 50 1 698970 83 1. 919078 18 1. 255272 51 1.
707570 84 1. 924279 19 1. 278753 52 1. 716003 85 1. 929419 20 1. 301030 53 1.
724276 86 1. 934498 21 1. 322219 54 1. 732394 87 1. 939519 22 1. 342422 55 1.
740362 88 1. 944482 23 1. 361728 56 1. 748188 89 1. 949390 24 1. 380211 57 1.
755875 90 1. 954242 25 1. 397940 58 1. 763428 91 1. 959041 26 1. 414973 59 1.
770852 92 1. 963788 27 1. 431364 60 1. 778151 93 1. 968483 28 1. 447158 61 1.
785330 94 1. 973128 29 1. 462398 62 1. 792391 95 1. 977723 30 1. 477121 63 1.
799340 96 1. 982271 31 1. 491361 64 1. 806180 97 1. 986772 32 1. 505150 65 1.
812913 98 1 991226 33 1. 518514 66 1 819544 99 1. 995635 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
D 100 000000 000434 000868 001301 001734 002166 002598 003029 003461 003891 432
101 004321 004751 005181 005609 006038 006466 006894 007321 007748 008174 428
102 008600 009026 009451 009876 010299 010724 011147 011570 011993 012415 424
103 012837 013259 013679 014100 014521 014940 015359 015779 016197 016616 416
104 017033 017451 017898 018284 018700 019116 019532 019947 020361 020775 416
105 021189 021603 022016 022428 022841 023252 023664 024075 024486 024896 412
106 025306 025715 026125 026533 026942 027349 027757 028164 028371 028978 408
107 029384 029789 030195 030599 031004 031408 031812 032216 032619 033021 404
108 033424 033826 034227 034628 035029 035429 035829 036229 036629 037028 400
109 037426 037825 038223 038620 039017 039414 039811 040207 040602 040998 396
110 041393 041787 042182 042576 042969 043362 043755 044148 044539 044932 393
111 045323 045714 046105 046495 046885 047275 047664 048053 048442 048830 389
112 049218 049603 049993 050379 050766 051153 051538 (...) 052309 052694 386
113 053078 053463 053846 054229 054613 054996 055378 055760 056142 056524 382
114 056905 057286 057666 058046 058426 058805 059185 059563 059942 060320 379
115 060698 061075 061452 061829 062206 062582 062958 063333 063709 064083 376
116 064458 064832 065206 065579 065953 066326 066699 067071 067443 067815 372
117 068186 068557 068928 069298 069668 070038 070407 070776 071145 071514 369
118 071882 072249 072617 072985 073352 073718 074085 074451 074816 075182 366
119 075547 075912 076276 076640 077004 077368 077731 078094 078457 078819 363
120 079181 079543 079904 080266 080626 080987 081347 081707 082067 082426 360
121 082785 083144 083503 083861 084219 084576 084934 085291 085647 086004 357
122 086359 086716 087071 087426 087781 088136 088490 088845 089198 089552 355
123 089905 090258 090610 090963 091315 091667 092018 092369 092721 093071 351
124 093422 093772 094122 094471 094820 095169 095518 095866 096215 096562 349
125 096910 097257 097604 097951 098298 098644 098989 099335 099681 100026 346
126 100371 100715 101059 101403 101747 102091 102434 102777 103119 103462 343
127 103804 104146 104487 104828 105169 105510 105851 106191 106531 106871 340
128 107209 107549 107888 108227 108565 108903 109241 109579 109916 110253 338
129 100589 100926 111263 111599 111934 112269 112605 112939 113275 113609 335 N
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 130 113943 114277 114611 114944 115278 115611 115943
116276 116608 116939 333 131 117271 117603 117934 118265 118595 118926 119256
119586 119915 120245 330 132 120574 120903 121231 121559 121888 122216 122544
122871 123198 123525 328 133 123852 124178 124504 124830 125156 125481 125806
126131 126456 126781 325 134 127105 127429 127753 128076 128399 128722 129045
129368 129689 130012 323 135 130334 130655 130977 131298 131619 131939 132259
132579 132899 133219 321 136 133539 133858 134177 134496 134814 135133 135451
135769 136086 136403 318 137 136721 137037 137354 137671 137987 138303 138618
138934 139249 139564 315 138 139879 140194 140508 140822 141136 141449 141763
142076 142389 142702 314 139 143015 143327 143639 143951 144263 144574 144885
145196 145507 145818 311 140 146128 146438 146748 147058 147367 147676 147985
148294 148603 148911 309 141 149219 149527 149835 150142 150449 150756 151063
151369 151676 151982 307 142 152288 152594 152899 153205 153509 153815 154119
154423 154728 155032 305 143 155336 155639 155943 156246 156549 156852 157154
157457 157759 158061 303 144 158362 158664 158965 159266 159567 159868 160168
160469 160769 161068 301 145 161368 161667 161967 162266 162564 162863 163161
163459 163758 164055 299 146 164353 164650 164947 165244 165541 165838 166134
166430 166726 167022 297 147 167317 167613 167908 168203 168497 168792 169086
169380 169674 169968 295 148 170262 170555 170848 171141 171434 171726 172019
172311 172603 172895 293 149 173186 173478 173769 174059 174351 174641 174932
175222 175512 175802 291 150 176091 176381 176669 176959 177248 177536 177825
178113 178401 178689 289 151 178977 179264 179552 179839 180126 180413 180699
180986 181272 181558 287 152 181844 182129 182415 182699 182985 183269 183555
183839 184123 184407 285 153 184691 184975 185259 185542 185825 186108 186391
186674 186956 187239 283 154 187521 187803 188084 188316 188647 188928 189209
189490 189771 190051 281 155 190332 190612 190892 191171 191451 191730 192009
192289 192567 192846 279 156 193125 193403 193681 193959 194237 194514 194792
195069 195346 195623 278 157 195899 196176 196453 196729 197005 197281 197556
197832 198107 198382 276 158 198657 198932 199206 199481 199755 200029 200303
200577 200850 201124 274 159 201397 201670 201943 202216 202488 202761 203033
203303 203577 203848 272 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 160 204119 204391 204663
204934 205204 205475 205746 206016 206286 206556 271 161 206826 207096 207365
207364 207904 208173 208441 208710 208978 209247 269 162 209515 209783 210051
210319 210586 210853 211121 211388 211654 211921 267 163 212187 212454 212720
212986 213252 213518 213783 214049 214314 214579 266 164 214844 215109 215373
215638 215902 216166 216429 216694 216957 217221 264 165 217484 217747 218010
218273 218536 218798 219060 219323 219585 219846 262 166 220108 220369 220631
220892 221153 221414 221675 221936 222196 222456 261 167 222716 222676 223236
223496 223755 224015 224274 224533 224791 225051 259 168 225309 225568 225827
226084 226342 226599 226858 227115 221372 227629 258 169 227887 228142 228400
228657 228913 229169 229426 229682 229938 230193 256 170 230449 230704 230959
231215 231469 231724 231979 232234 232488 232742 254 171 232996 233250 233504
233752 234011 234264 234517 234770 235023 235276 253 172 235528 235781 236033
236285 236537 236789 237041 237292 237544 237795 252 173 238046 238297 238548
238799 239049 239299 239549 239799 240049 240299 250 174 240549 240799 241048
241297 241546 241795 242044 242293 242541 242789 249 175 243038 243286 243534
243782 244029 244177 244525 244772 245019 245266 248 176 245513 245759 246006
246252 246499 246745 246991 247237 247482 247728 246 177 247973 248219 248464
248709 248954 245198 249443 249687 249932 250176 245 178 250420 250664 250908
251151 251395 251638 251881 252125 252368 252610 243 179 252853 253096 253334
253580 253822 254064 254306 254548 254789 255031 242 180 255273 255514 255755
255996 256237 256477 256718 256958 257198 257438 241 181 257679 257918 258158
258398 258637 258877 259116 250355 259594 259833 239 182 260071 260309 260548
260787 261025 261263 261501 261739 261976 262214 238 183 262451 262688 262925
263162 263399 263636 263873 264109 264346 264582 237 184 264818 265054 265289
265525 265761 265996 266232 266467 266702 266937 235 185 267172 267406 267641
267875 268109 268344 268578 268812 269046 269279 234 186 269513 269746 269979
270213 270446 270679 270912 271144 271377 271609 233 187 271842 272074 272306
272538 272769 273001 273233 273464 273696 273927 232 188 274158 274389 274619
274850 275081 275311 275542 275772 276002 276232 230 189 276462 276692 296921
277151 277379 277609 277838 278067 278296 278525 229 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D
190 278754 278982 279211 279439 276667 279895 280123 280351 280578 280806 228
191 281033 281261 281488 281714 281942 282169 282396 282622 282849 283075 227
192 283301 283527 283753 283979 284205 284431 284656 284882 285107 285332 226
193 285557 285782 286007 286232 286456 286681 286905 287129 287354 287578 225
194 287802 288026 288249 288473 288696 288919 289143 289366 289589 289812 223
195 290035 290257 290479 290702 290925 291147 291369 291591 291813 292034 222
196 292256 292478 292699 292920 293141 293362 293584 293804 294025 294246 221
197 294466 294687 294907 295127 295347 295567 295787 296007 296226 296446 220
198 296665 296884 297104 297323 297542 297761 297979 298198 298416 298635 219
199 298853 299071 299289 299507 299725 299943 200161 300378 200595 300813 218
200 301030 301247 301464 301681 301898 302114 302331 302547 302764 302979 217
201 303196 303412 303628 303844 304059 304275 304491 304706 304921 305136 216
202 305351 305566 305781 305996 306211 306425 306639 306854 307068 307282 215
203 307496 307709 307924 308137 308351 308564 308778 308991 309204 309417 213
204 309630 309843 310056 310268 310481 310693 310906 311118 311329 311542 212
205 311754 311966 312177 312389 312600 312812 313023 313234 313445 313656 211
206 313867 314078 314289 314499 314709 314920 315130 315340 315551 315760 210
207 315970 316180 316389 316599 316809 317018 317227 317436 317646 317854 209
208 318063 318272 318481 318689 318898 319106 319314 319522 319730 319938 208
209 320146 320354 320562 320769 320977 321184 321391 321598 321805 322012 207
210 322219 322426 322633 323839 323046 323252 323458 323665 323871 324077 206
211 324282 324488 324694 324899 325105 325310 325516 325721 325926 326131 205
212 326336 326541 326745 326949 327155 327359 327563 327767 327972 328176 204
213 328379 328583 328787 328991 329194 329398 329601 329805 330008 330211 203
214 330414 330617 330819 331022 331225 331427 331629 331832 332034 332236 202
215 332438 332640 332842 333044 333246 333447 333649 333859 334051 334253 202
216 334454 334655 334856 335057 335257 335458 335658 335859 336059 336259 201
217 336459 336659 336859 337059 337259 337459 337659 337859 338058 338257 200
218 338456 338656 338856 339054 339253 339453 339650 339849 340047 340246 199
219 340444 340642 340841 341039 341237 341435 341632 341830 342028 342225 198 N
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 220 342227 342620 342817 343014 343212 343409 343606
343802 343999 344196 197 221 344392 344589 344785 344981 345178 345373 345569
345766 345962 346157 196 222 346353 346549 346744 346939 347135 347330 347525
347720 347915 348110 195 223 348305 348499 348694 348889 349083 349278 349472
349659 349860 350054 194 224 350248 350442 350636 350829 351023 351216 351409
351603 351796 351989 193 225 352183 352375 352568 352761 352954 353147 353339
353532 353724 353916 193 226 354108 354301 354493 354685 354876 355068 355239
355452 345643 355834 192 227 356026 356217 356408 356599 356790 356981 357172
357363 357554 357744 191 228 357935 358125 358316 358506 358696 258886 359076
359266 359456 359646 190 229 359835 360025 360215 360404 360593 360783 360972
361161 361350 361539 189 230 361728 361917 362105 362294 362482 362671 362859
363048 363236 363424 188 231 363612 363799 363988 364176 364363 364551 364739
364926 365113 365301 188 232 365488 365675 365862 366049 366236 366423 366609
366796 366983 367169 187 233 367356 367542 367729 367915 368101 368287 368473
368659 368845 369030 186 234 369216 369401 369587 369772 369958 370143 370328
370513 370698 370882 185 235 371068 371253 371437 371622 371806 371991 372175
372359 372544 372728 184 236 372912 373096 373279 373464 373647 373831 374015
374198 374382 374565 184 237 374748 374932 375115 375298 375481 375664 375846
376029 376212 376394 183 238 376577 376159 376942 377124 377306 377488 377670
377852 378034 378216 182 239 378398 378579 378761 378943 379124 379306 379487
379668 379849 380030 181 240 380211 380392 380573 380754 380934 381115 381296
381476 381656 381837 181 241 382017 382197 382377 382557 382737 382917 383097
383277 383456 383636 180 242 383815 383995 384174 384353 384533 384712 384891
385069 385249 385428 179 243 385606 385785 385964 386142 386321 389499 386677
386856 387034 387212 178 244 387389 387568 387746 387923 388101 388279 388456
388634 388811 388989 178 245 389166 389343 389520 389698 389875 390051 390228
390405 390582 390759 177 246 390935 391112 391288 391464 391641 391817 391993
392169 392345 392521 176 247 392697 392873 393048 393224 393399 393575 393751
393926 394101 394277 176 248 394452 394627 394802 394977 395152 395326 395501
395676 395850 396025 175 249 396199 396374 396548 396722 396896 397071 397245
397419 397592 397766 174 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 250 397940 398114 398287
398461 398634 398808 398981 399154 399328 399501 173 251 399674 399847 400019
400192 400365 400538 400711 400883 401056 401228 173 252 401401 401573 401745
401917 402089 402261 402433 402605 402777 402949 172 253 403121 403292 403464
403635 403807 403978 404149 404320 404492 404663 171 254 404834 405005 405176
405346 405517 405688 405858 406029 406199 406369 171 255 406540 406710 406881
407051 407221 407391 407561 407731 407901 408070 170 256 408239 408409 408579
408749 408918 409087 409257 409426 409595 409764 169 257 409933 410102 410271
410439 410609 410777 410946 411114 411283 411451 169 258 411619 411788 411956
412124 412293 412461 412629 412796 412964 413132 168 259 413299 413467 413635
413803 413969 414137 413405 414472 414639 414806 167 260 414973 415140 415307
415474 415641 415808 415974 416141 416308 416474 167 261 416641 416807 416973
417139 417306 417472 417638 417804 417969 418135 166 262 418301 418467 418633
418798 418964 419129 419295 419460 419625 419791 165 263 419956 420121 420289
420451 420616 420781 420945 421110 421275 421439 165 264 421604 421768 421933
422097 422261 422426 422589 422754 422918 423082 164 265 423246 423409 423574
423737 423901 424065 424228 424392 424555 424718 164 266 424882 425045 425208
425371 425534 425697 425860 426023 426186 426349 163 267 426511 426674 426836
426999 427161 427324 427486 427648 427811 427973 162 268 428135 428297 428459
428621 428783 428944 429106 429268 429429 429591 162 269 429752 429914 430075
430236 430398 430559 430719 430881 431042 431203 161 270 431369 431525 431685
431846 432007 432167 432328 432488 432649 432809 161 271 432969 433129 433289
433449 433609 433769 433929 434089 434249 434409 160 272 434569 434729 434888
435048 435207 435366 435526 435685 435844 436004 159 273 436163 436322 436481
436639 436799 436957 437116 437275 437433 437592 159 274 437751 437909 438067
438226 438384 438542 438701 438859 439175 439165 158 275 439333 439491 439648
439806 439964 440122 440279 440437 440594 440752 158 276 440909 441066 441224
441381 441538 441695 441852 442009 442166 442323 157 277 442479 442637 442793
442949 443106 443263 443419 443576 443732 443889 157 278 444045 444201 444357
444513 444669 444825 444981 445137 445293 445449 156 279 445604 445759 445915
446071 446226 446382 446537 446692 446848 447003 155 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D
280 447158 447313 447468 447623 447778 447932 448088 448242 448397 448552 155
281 448706 448861 449015 449169 449324 449478 449633 449787 459941 450095 154
282 452049 450403 450557 450711 450865 451018 451172 451326 451479 451633 154
283 451786 451939 452093 452247 452399 452553 452706 452859 453012 453165 153
284 453318 453471 453624 453777 453929 454082 454235 454387 454539 454692 153
285 454845 454997 455149 455302 455454 455606 455758 455910 456062 456214 152
286 456366 456518 456669 456821 456973 457125 457276 457428 457579 457731 152
287 457889 458033 458184 458336 458487 458638 458789 458939 459091 459242 151
288 459392 459543 459694 459845 459995 460146 460296 460447 460597 460748 151
289 460898 461048 461198 461348 461499 461649 461799 461948 462098 462248 150
290 462398 462548 462647 462847 462997 463146 463296 463445 463594 463744 150
291 463893 464042 464191 464340 464489 464639 464788 464936 465085 465234 149
292 465383 465532 465680 465829 465977 466126 466274 466423 466571 466719 149
293 466868 467016 467164 467312 467460 467608 467756 467904 468052 468199 148
294 468347 468495 468643 468790 468938 969085 469233 469380 469527 469675 147
295 469822 469969 470116 470263 470410 470557 470704 470851 470998 471145 147
296 471292 471438 471585 471732 471878 472025 472171 472318 472464 472610 146
297 472756 472903 473049 473195 473341 473487 473633 473779 473925 474071 146
298 474216 474362 474508 474653 474799 474944 475089 475235 475381 475526 145
299 475671 475816 475962 476107 476252 476397 476542 476687 479832 476976 145
300 477121 477266 477411 477555 477699 477844 477989 478133 478278 478422 145
301 478566 478711 478855 478999 479143 479287 479431 479575 479719 479863 144
302 480007 480151 480294 480438 480582 480725 480869 481012 481156 481299 144
303 481443 481586 481729 481872 482016 482159 482302 482445 482588 482731 143
304 482874 483016 483159 483302 483445 483587 483729 483872 484015 484157 143
305 484299 484442 484585 484727 484869 485011 485153 485295 485437 485579 142
306 485721 485863 486005 486147 486289 486430 486572 486714 486855 486997 142
307 487138 487279 487421 487563 487704 487845 487986 488127 488269 488409 141
308 488551 488692 488333 488974 489114 489255 489396 489537 489677 489818 141
309 489958 490099 490239 490379 490520 490661 490801 490941 491081 491222 140 N
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 310 491362 491502 491642 491782 491922 492062 492201
492341 492481 492621 140 311 492760 492900 493039 493179 493319 493458 493597
493737 493876 494015 139 312 494155 494294 494433 494572 494711 494850 494989
495128 495267 495406 139 313 495544 495683 495822 495960 496099 496238 496376
496515 596653 496791 139 314 496929 497068 497206 497344 497483 497921 497759
497897 498035 498173 138 315 498311 498448 498586 498724 498862 498999 495137
499275 499412 499549 138 316 499687 499824 499962 500099 500236 500374 500510
500648 500785 500922 137 317 501059 501196 501333 501470 501607 501744 501880
502017 502154 502291 137 318 502427 502564 502700 502837 502973 503109 503246
503382 503518 503655 136 319 503791 503927 504063 504199 504335 504471 504607
504743 504878 505014 136 320 505149 505286 505421 505557 505193 505828 505964
506099 506234 506369 136 321 506505 506640 506776 506911 507046 507181 507316
507451 507586 507721 135 322 507856 507991 508126 508260 508395 508529 508664
508799 508934 509068 135 323 509203 509337 509471 509606 509740 509894 510009
510143 510277 510411 134 324 510545 510679 510813 510947 511081 511215 511349
511482 511616 511749 134 325 511883 512017 512151 512284 512418 512551 512684
512818 512951 513084 133 326 513218 513351 513485 513617 513750 513883 514016
514149 514282 514415 133 327 514548 514681 514813 514946 515079 515211 515344
515476 515609 515741 133 328 515874 516006 516139 516271 516403 516535 516668
516796 516932 517064 132 329 517196 517328 517459 517592 517724 517855 517987
518119 518251 518382 132 330 518514 518646 518777 518909 519040 519171 519303
519434 519566 519697 131 331 519828 519959 520090 520221 520353 520484 520615
520745 520876 521007 131 332 521138 521269 521399 521530 521661 521792 521922
522053 522183 522314 131 333 522454 522575 522705 522835 522966 523096 523226
523356 523486 523616 130 334 523746 523876 524006 524136 524266 524396 524526
524656 524785 424915 130 335 520545 525174 525304 525434 525563 525693 525822
525951 526081 526210 129 336 526339 526469 526598 526727 526856 526985 527114
527243 527372 527501 129 337 527629 527759 527888 528016 528145 528274 528402
528531 528659 528788 129 338 528916 529045 529174 529302 529430 525559 529687
529815 529943 530072 128 339 530199 530328 530456 530584 530712 530839 530968
531096 531223 531351 128 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 340 531479 531607 531734
531862 531989 532117 532245 532372 532499 532627 128 341 532754 532882 533009
533136 533264 533391 533518 533645 533772 533899 127 342 534026 534153 534280
534407 534534 534661 534787 534914 535041 535167 127 343 535294 535421 535547
535674 535800 535927 536053 536179 536304 536432 126 344 536558 536685 536811
536937 537063 537189 537315 537441 537567 537693 126 345 537819 537945 538071
538197 538322 538448 538574 538699 538825 538951 126 346 539076 539202 539327
539452 539578 539703 539829 539954 540079 540204 125 347 540329 540455 540579
540705 540829 540955 541079 541205 541329 541454 125 348 541579 541704 541829
541953 542078 542203 542327 542452 542576 542701 125 349 542825 542949 543074
543199 543323 543447 543571 543696 543819 543944 124 350 545008 544192 544316
544440 544564 544688 544812 544934 545059 545183 124 351 545307 545431 545555
545678 545802 545925 546049 546172 546296 546419 124 352 546543 546666 546789
546913 547036 547159 547282 547405 547529 547652 123 353 547775 547898 548021
548144 548267 548389 548512 548635 548758 548881 123 354 549003 549126 549249
549371 549494 549616 549739 549861 549984 550106 123 355 550228 550351 550473
550595 550717 550839 550962 551084 551206 551328 122 356 551449 551572 551694
551816 551938 552059 552181 552303 552425 552547 122 357 552668 552789 552911
553033 553155 553276 553398 553519 553640 553762 121 358 553883 554004 554126
554457 554368 554489 554610 554731 554852 554973 121 359 555094 555215 555336
554247 555578 555699 555819 555940 556061 556182 121 360 556303 556423 556544
556664 556785 556905 557026 557146 557267 557387 120 361 557057 557627 557748
557868 557988 558108 558228 558349 558469 558589 120 362 558709 558829 558948
559068 559188 559308 559428 559548 559667 559787 120 363 559907 560026 560146
560265 560385 560504 560624 560743 560863 560982 119 364 561101 561221 561339
561459 561578 561698 561817 561936 562055 562174 119 365 562293 562412 562531
562649 562769 562887 563006 563125 563244 563362 119 366 563481 563599 563718
563836 563955 564074 564192 564311 564429 564548 119 367 564666 564784 564903
565021 565139 565257 565376 565494 565612 565729 118 368 565848 565966 566084
566202 566319 566437 566555 566673 566791 566909 118 369 567026 567144 567262
567379 567497 567614 567732 567849 567967 568084 118 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D
370 568202 568319 568436 568554 568671 568788 568905 569023 596139 569257 117
371 569374 569491 569608 569725 569842 569959 570076 570193 570309 570426 117
372 570543 570659 570776 570893 571009 571126 571243 571359 571476 571592 117
373 571709 571825 571942 572058 572274 572291 572407 572523 572639 572755 116
374 572872 572988 573104 573219 573336 573452 573568 573684 573799 573915 116
375 574031 574147 574263 574379 574494 574609 574726 574841 574957 575072 116
376 575188 575303 575419 575534 575649 575765 575880 575996 576111 576226 115
377 576341 576457 576572 576687 576802 576917 577032 577147 577262 577377 115
378 577492 577607 577722 577836 577951 578066 578181 578295 578409 578525 115
379 578639 578754 578868 578983 579097 579212 579326 579441 579555 579669 114
380 579784 579898 580012 580126 580241 580355 580469 580583 580697 580811 114
381 580925 581039 581153 581267 581381 581495 581608 581722 581836 581949 114
382 582063 582177 582291 582404 582518 582631 582745 582858 582972 583085 114
383 583199 583312 583426 583539 583652 583765 583879 583992 584105 584218 113
384 584331 584444 584587 584670 584783 584896 585009 585122 585235 585348 113
385 585461 585574 585686 585799 585912 586024 586137 586249 586362 586475 113
386 586587 586699 586812 586925 587037 587149 587262 587374 587486 587599 112
387 587712 587823 587935 588047 588159 588272 588384 588496 588608 588719 112
388 588832 588944 589056 589167 589279 589391 589503 589615 589726 589838 112
389 589949 599061 590173 590284 590396 590507 590619 590730 590842 590953 112
390 591065 591176 591287 591399 591509 591621 591732 591843 591955 592066 111
391 592177 592288 592399 592509 592621 592732 592843 592954 593064 593175 111
392 593286 593397 593508 593618 593729 593839 593950 594061 594171 594282 111
393 594393 594503 594614 594724 594834 594945 595055 595165 595276 595386 110
394 595496 595606 595717 595827 595937 596047 596157 596267 596377 596487 110
395 596597 596707 596817 596927 597037 597146 597256 597366 597476 597586 110
396 597695 597805 597914 598024 598134 598243 598353 598462 598572 598681 110
397 598790 598899 599009 599119 599228 599337 599446 599556 599665 599774 109
398 599883 599992 600101 600210 600319 600428 600537 600646 600755 600864 109
399 690073 601082 601191 601299 601408 601517 601625 601734 601843 601951 109 N
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 400 602059 602169 602277 602386 602494 602603 602817
602819 602928 603036 108 401 603144 603253 603361 603469 603577 603686 603794
603902 604009 604118 108 402 604226 604334 604442 604550 604658 604766 604874
604982 605089 605197 108 403 605305 605413 605521 605628 605736 605844 605951
606059 606166 606274 108 404 606381 606489 606596 606704 606811 606919 607026
607133 607241 607348 107 405 607455 607562 607669 607777 607884 607991 608098
608205 608312 608419 107 406 608526 608633 608739 608847 608954 609061 609167
609274 609381 609488 107 407 609594 609701 609808 609914 610021 610128 610234
610341 610447 610555 107 408 610660 610767 610873 610979 (...) 611192 611298
611405 611511 611617 106 409 611723 611829 611936 612042 612148 612254 612359
612466 612572 612678 106 410 612784 612889 612996 613102 613207 613313 613419
613525 613630 613736 106 411 613842 613947 614053 614159 614264 614369 614475
614581 614686 614792 106 412 614897 615003 615108 615213 615319 615424 615529
615634 615739 615845 105 413 615950 616055 616160 616265 616370 616476 616581
616686 616790 616895 105 414 617000 617105 617210 617315 617419 617525 617629
617734 617839 617943 105 415 618048 618153 618257 618362 618466 616571 618676
618780 618889 618989 105 416 619093 619198 619302 619406 619511 619615 619719
619824 619928 620032 104 417 620136 620240 620344 620448 620552 620656 620760
620864 620968 621072 104 418 621176 621280 621384 621448 621592 621695 621799
621902 622007 622110 104 419 622214 622318 622421 622525 622628 622722 622835
622939 623042 623146 104 420 623249 623353 623456 623559 623663 623766 623869
623973 624076 624179 103 421 624282 624385 624488 625591 624695 624798 624901
625004 625107 625209 103 422 625312 625415 625518 625621 625724 625827 625929
626032 626135 626237 103 423 626340 626443 626546 626648 626751 626853 626956
627058 627161 627263 103 424 627366 627468 627571 627673 627775 627878 627979
628082 628185 628287 102 425 628389 628491 628593 628695 628797 628899 629002
629104 629206 629308 102 426 629409 629512 629613 629715 629817 629919 620021
630123 630224 630326 102 427 630428 630529 630631 630733 630835 630936 631038
631139 631241 631342 102 428 631444 631545 631647 631746 631849 631951 632051
632153 632255 632356 101 429 632457 632559 632659 632761 632862 632963 633064
633165 633266 633367 101 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 430 633468 633569 633670
633771 633872 633973 634075 634075 634276 634376 100 431 634477 634578 634679
634779 634880 634981 635081 635182 635283 635383 100 432 635484 635584 635685
635785 635886 635986 636087 636187 636288 636388 100 433 636488 636588 636688
636789 636889 636989 637089 637189 637289 637389 100 434 637489 637589 637689
637789 637889 637989 638089 638189 638289 638389 99 435 638489 638589 638689
638789 638888 638988 639088 639188 639287 639387 99 436 639486 639586 639686
639785 639885 639984 640084 640183 640283 640382 99 437 640481 640581 640680
640779 640879 640978 641077 641177 641276 641375 99 438 641475 641573 641672
641771 641871 641969 642069 642168 642267 642366 99 439 642465 642563 642662
642761 642860 642959 643058 643156 643255 643354 99 440 643453 643551 643650
643749 643847 643946 644044 644143 644242 644340 98 441 644439 644537 644636
644734 644833 644931 645029 645127 645226 645324 98 442 645422 645521 645619
645717 645815 645913 646011 646109 646208 646306 98 443 646404 646502 646599
646698 646796 646894 646992 647089 647187 647285 98 444 647383 647481 647579
647676 647774 647872 647969 648067 648165 648262 98 445 648360 648458 648555
648653 648750 648848 648945 649043 649140 649237 97 446 649335 649432 649529
649627 649724 649821 649919 650016 650113 650210 97 447 650308 650405 650502
650599 650696 650793 650890 650987 651084 651181 97 448 651278 651375 651472
651569 651666 651762 651859 651956 652053 652149 97 449 652246 652343 652439
652536 652633 652729 652826 652923 653019 653116 97 450 653213 653309 653405
653502 653598 653695 653791 653888 653984 654080 96 451 654177 654273 654369
654465 654562 654658 654754 654850 654946 655042 96 452 655138 655235 655331
655427 655523 655619 655715 655810 655906 656002 96 453 656098 656194 656289
656386 656482 656577 656673 656769 656864 656960 96 454 657056 657152 657247
657343 657438 657534 657629 657725 657820 657916 96 455 658011 658107 658202
658298 658393 658488 658584 658679 658774 658869 95 456 658965 659060 659155
659250 659346 659441 659536 659630 659726 659821 95 457 659916 660011 660106
660201 660296 660391 660486 660581 660676 660771 95 458 660865 660960 661055
661149 661245 661339 661434 661529 661623 661718 95 459 661813 661907 662002
662096 662191 662289 662380 662475 662569 662663 95 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 460
662758 662852 662947 663041 663135 663229 663324 663418 663512 663607 94 461
663701 663795 663889 663983 664078 664172 664266 664359 664454 664548 94 462
664642 664736 664829 664924 665018 665112 665206 665299 665393 665487 94 463
665581 665675 665769 665862 665956 666049 666143 666237 666331 666424 94 464
666518 666611 666705 666799 666892 666986 667079 667173 667266 667359 94 465
667453 667546 667639 667733 667826 667919 668013 668106 668199 668293 93 466
668386 668479 668572 668665 668759 668852 668945 669038 669131 669224 93 467
669317 669409 669503 669596 669689 669782 669875 669967 670060 670153 93 468
670246 670339 670431 670524 670617 670709 670802 670895 670988 671080 93 469
671173 671265 671358 671451 671543 671636 671728 671821 671913 672005 93 470
672098 672190 672283 672375 672467 672559 672652 672744 672836 672929 92 471
673021 673113 673205 673297 673389 673482 673574 673666 673758 673849 92 472
673942 674034 674126 674218 674309 674402 674494 674586 674677 674769 92 473
674861 674953 675045 675137 675228 675319 675412 675503 675595 675687 92 474
675778 675869 675962 676053 676145 676236 676328 676419 676511 676602 92 475
676694 676785 676876 676968 677059 677151 677242 677333 677424 677516 91 476
677607 677698 677789 677881 677972 678063 678154 678245 678335 678427 91 477
678518 678609 678700 678791 678882 678973 679064 679155 679246 679337 91 478
679428 679519 679609 679700 679791 679882 679972 680063 680154 680245 91 479
680336 680426 680517 680607 680698 680789 680879 680969 681060 681151 91 480
681241 681332 681422 681513 681603 681693 681784 681874 681964 682055 90 481
682145 682235 682326 682416 682506 682596 682686 682777 682867 682957 90 482
683047 683137 683227 683317 683407 683497 683587 683677 683767 683857 90 483
683947 684037 684127 684217 684307 684396 684486 684576 684666 684756 90 484
684845 684935 685025 685114 685204 685294 685383 685473 685563 685652 90 485
685742 685831 685921 686010 686099 682189 686279 686368 686458 686547 89 486
686636 686326 686815 686904 686994 687083 687172 687211 687351 687439 89 487
687529 687618 687707 687796 687885 687975 688054 688153 688242 688331 89 488
688419 688509 688598 688687 688776 688865 688953 689042 689131 689220 89 489
689309 689398 689486 689575 687664 689753 689841 689930 690019 690007 89 N 0 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 490 690196 690285 690373 690462 690550 690639 690728 690816
690905 690993 89 491 691081 691169 691258 691347 691435 691524 691612 691700
691789 691877 88 492 691965 692053 692142 692229 692318 692406 692494 692583
692671 692759 88 493 692847 692935 693023 693111 693199 693287 693375 693463
693551 693639 88 494 693727 693815 693903 693991 694078 694166 694254 694342
694429 694517 88 495 694605 694693 694781 694868 694956 695044 695131 695219
695307 695394 88 496 695482 695569 695657 695744 695832 695919 696007 696094
696182 696269 87 497 696356 696444 696531 696618 696706 696793 696880 696968
697055 697142 87 498 697229 697317 697404 697491 697578 697665 697752 697839
697926 698014 87 499 698101 698188 698275 698362 698449 698535 698622 698709
698706 698883 87 500 698970 699057 699144 699281 699317 699404 699491 699528
699664 699751 87 501 699838 699924 700011 700098 700184 700271 700358 700444
705031 700617 87 502 700704 700790 700877 700963 701049 701136 701222 701309
701395 701482 86 503 701568 701654 701741 701827 701913 701999 702086 702172
702258 702344 86 504 702430 702517 702603 702689 702775 702861 702947 703033
703119 703205 86 505 703291 793377 703463 703549 703635 703721 703807 703893
703979 704065 86 506 704151 704236 704322 704408 704494 704579 704665 704751
704837 704922 86 507 705008 705094 705179 705265 705350 705436 705522 705607
705693 705778 86 508 705863 705949 706035 706130 706206 706291 706376 706462
706547 706632 85 509 706718 706803 706888 706974 707059 707144 707219 707315
707399 707485 85 510 707570 707655 707740 707826 707911 707996 708081 708166
708251 708336 85 511 708421 708506 708591 708676 708761 708846 708931 709015
709100 709185 85 512 709269 709355 709439 709524 709609 709694 709789 709863
709948 710033 85 513 710117 710202 710287 710371 710456 710540 710625 710709
710794 710879 85 514 710963 711048 711132 711217 711301 711385 711469 711554
711639 711723 84 515 711807 711891 711976 712060 712144 712229 712313 712397
712481 712566 84 516 712649 712734 712818 712902 712986 713070 713154 713238
713223 713407 84 517 713491 713575 713659 713742 713826 713910 713994 714078
714162 714246 84 518 714329 714414 714497 714581 714665 714749 714833 714916
714999 715084 84 519 715167 715251 715335 715418 715501 715586 715669 715753
715836 715919 84 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 520 716003 716087 716170 716254 716337
716421 716504 716588 716671 716754 83 521 716838 716921 717004 717088 717171
717254 717338 717421 717509 717587 83 522 717671 717754 717837 717920 718003
718086 718169 718253 718336 718419 83 523 718502 718585 718668 718751 718834
718917 718999 719083 719165 719248 83 524 719331 719414 719497 719579 719663
719745 719828 719911 719994 720077 83 525 720159 720242 720325 720407 720490
720573 720655 720738 720821 720903 83 526 720986 721068 721151 721233 721316
721398 721481 721563 721646 721728 82 527 721811 721893 721975 722058 722140
722222 722305 722387 722469 722552 82 528 722634 722716 722798 722881 722963
723045 723127 723209 723291 723374 82 529 723456 723538 723619 723702 723784
723866 723948 724029 724112 724194 82 530 724276 724358 724439 724522 724604
724685 724767 724849 724931 725013 82 531 725095 725176 725258 725339 725422
725503 725585 725667 725748 725829 82 532 725912 725993 726075 726156 726238
726319 726401 726483 726564 726646 82 533 726727 726809 726890 726972 727053
727134 727216 727297 727379 727459 81 534 727541 727623 727704 727785 727866
727948 728029 728110 728191 728273 81 535 728354 728435 728516 728597 728678
728759 728841 728922 729003 729084 81 536 729165 729246 729327 729408 729489
729569 729651 729732 729813 (...) 81 537 729974 730055 730136 730117 730298
730378 730459 730540 730621 730702 81 538 730782 730863 730944 731024 731105
731186 731266 731347 731423 731508 81 539 731589 731669 731749 731830 731911
731991 732072 732152 732233 732313 81 540 732394 732474 732555 732635 732715
732796 732876 732956 733037 733117 80 541 733197 733278 733358 733438 733518
733598 733679 733759 733839 733919 80 542 733999 734079 734159 734239 734319
734399 734479 734559 734639 734719 80 543 734799 734879 734959 735039 735119
735199 735279 735359 735439 735519 80 544 735599 735679 735759 735838 735918
735998 736078 736157 736237 736317 80 545 736397 736476 736556 736635 736715
736795 736874 736954 737034 737113 80 546 737191 737272 737352 737431 737511
737590 737669 737749 737829 737908 79 547 737987 738067 738146 738225 738305
738384 738463 738543 738622 738701 79 548 738781 738859 738939 739018 739097
739177 739259 739335 739414 739493 79 549 739572 739651 739731 739809 739889
739968 740047 740126 740205 740284 79 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 550 740363 740442
740521 740599 740678 740757 740836 740915 740994 741073 79 551 741152 741230
741309 741388 741467 741546 741624 741703 741782 741860 79 552 741939 742018
742096 742175 742254 742332 742411 742489 742568 742647 79 553 742725 742802
742882 742961 743039 743118 743196 743275 743353 743431 78 554 743509 743588
743667 743745 743823 743902 743979 744058 744136 744215 78 555 744293 744371
744449 744528 744606 744684 744764 744840 744919 744997 78 556 745075 745153
745231 745309 745387 745465 745543 745621 745699 745777 78 557 745855 745933
746011 746089 746167 746245 746323 746401 746479 746556 78 558 746634 746712
746789 746868 746945 747023 747101 747179 747256 747334 78 559 747412 747489
747567 747645 747722 747800 747878 747955 748033 748110 78 560 748188 748266
748343 748421 748498 748576 748653 748731 748808 748885 77 561 748963 749040
749118 749195 749272 749349 749427 749504 749582 749659 77 562 749736 749814
749891 749968 750045 750123 750199 750277 750354 750431 77 563 750508 750586
750663 750739 750817 750894 750971 751048 751125 751202 77 564 751279 751356
751433 751510 751587 751664 751741 751818 751895 751972 77 565 752048 752125
752202 752279 752356 752433 752509 752586 752663 752739 77 566 (...) 752893
752969 753047 753123 753199 753277 753353 753429 753506 77 567 753583 753659
753736 753813 753889 753966 754042 754119 754195 754272 77 568 754348 755425
754501 754578 754654 754730 754800 754883 754959 755036 76 569 755112 755189
755265 755341 755417 755494 755569 755646 755722 755799 76 570 755875 755951
756027 756103 756179 756256 756332 756408 756484 756560 76 571 756636 756712
756788 756864 756940 757016 757092 757167 757244 757320 76 572 757396 757472
757548 757627 757699 757775 757851 757927 758003 758079 76 573 758155 758230
758306 758382 758458 758533 758609 758685 758761 758836 76 574 758912 758988
759063 759139 759214 759290 759366 759411 759517 759592 76 575 759668 759743
759819 759894 759969 760045 760121 760196 760272 760347 75 576 760422 760498
760573 760649 760723 760799 760875 760949 761025 (...) 75 577 761176 761251
761326 761402 761477 761552 761627 761702 761778 761853 75 578 761928 762003
762078 762153 762228 762303 762378 762453 762529 762604 75 579 762679 762754
762829 762904 762978 763053 763128 763203 763279 763353 75 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 D 580 763428 763503 763578 763653 763727 763802 763877 763952 764027 764101
75 581 764176 764251 764326 764400 764475 764549 764624 764699 764774 764848 75
582 764923 764998 765072 765147 765221 765296 765370 765445 765519 765594 75
583 765669 765743 765818 765892 765966 766041 766115 766189 766264 766338 74
584 766413 766487 766562 766636 766710 766785 766859 766933 767007 767082 74
585 767156 767230 767304 767379 767453 767527 767601 767675 767749 767823 74
586 767898 767972 768046 768119 768194 768268 768342 768416 768490 (...) 74 587
768638 768712 768786 768860 768934 769008 769082 769156 769229 769303 74 588
769377 769451 769525 769599 769673 769746 799820 769894 769968 770042 74 589
770115 770189 770263 770336 770410 770484 770557 770631 770705 770778 74 590
770852 770926 770999 771073 771146 771219 771293 771367 771440 771514 74 591
771587 761661 771734 771808 771881 771955 772028 772102 772175 772248 73 592
772322 772395 772468 772542 772615 772688 772762 772835 772908 772981 73 593
773055 773128 773201 773274 773348 773421 773494 773567 773640 773713 73 594
773786 773859 773933 774006 774079 774152 774225 774298 774371 774444 73 595
774517 774589 774663 774736 774809 774882 774955 775028 775100 775173 73 596
775246 775319 775392 775465 775538 775610 775683 775756 775829 775902 73 597
775974 776047 776119 776193 776265 776338 776411 776483 776556 776629 73 598
776701 776774 776846 776919 776992 777064 777137 777209 777282 777354 73 599
777427 777499 777572 777644 777717 777789 777862 777934 778006 778079 72 600
778151 778224 778296 778368 778441 778513 778585 778658 778729 778802 72 601
778874 778947 779019 779091 779163 779236 779308 779380 779452 779524 72 602
779596 779669 779741 779813 779884 779957 780029 780101 780173 780245 72 603
780317 780389 780461 780533 780805 780677 780749 780821 780893 780965 72 604
781037 781109 781181 781253 781324 781396 781468 781539 781612 781684 72 605
781755 781827 781899 781971 782042 782114 782186 782258 782329 782401 72 606
782473 782544 782616 782688 782759 782831 782902 782974 783046 783117 72 607
783189 783260 783332 783403 783475 783546 783618 783689 783761 783832 71 608
783904 783975 784046 784118 784189 784261 784332 784403 784475 784546 71 609
784617 784689 784759 784831 784902 784974 785045 785116 785187 785259 71 N 0 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 610 785329 785401 785472 785543 785615 785686 785757 785828
785899 785970 71 611 786041 786112 786183 786254 786325 786396 786467 786538
786609 786680 71 612 786751 786822 786893 786964 787035 787106 787177 787248
787319 787389 71 613 787460 787531 787602 787673 787744 787815 787885 787956
788027 788098 71 614 788164 788239 788309 788381 788451 788522 788593 788663
788734 788804 71 615 788875 788946 789016 789087 789157 789228 789299 789369
789439 789510 71 616 789581 789651 789722 789792 789863 789933 790004 790074
790144 790215 70 617 790285 790356 790426 790496 790567 790637 790707 790778
790848 790918 70 618 790988 791059 791129 791199 791269 791339 791409 791480
791550 791620 70 619 791691 791761 791831 791901 791971 792041 792111 792181
792252 792322 70 620 792392 792462 792532 792602 792672 792742 792812 792882
792952 793022 70 621 793092 793162 793231 793301 793371 793441 793511 793581
793651 793721 70 622 793791 793860 793930 793999 794069 794139 794209 794279
794349 794418 70 623 794488 794558 794627 794697 794767 794836 794906 (...)
795045 795115 70 624 795185 795254 795324 795393 795463 795532 795602 795672
795741 795810 70 625 795880 795949 796019 796088 796158 796227 796297 796366
796436 796505 69 626 796574 796644 796713 796782 796852 796921 796990 797059
797129 797198 69 627 797268 797337 797406 797475 797545 797614 797683 797752
797821 797890 69 628 797959 798029 798098 798167 798236 798305 798374 798443
798513 798582 69 629 798651 798719 798789 798858 798927 798996 799065 799134
799203 799272 69 630 799341 799409 799478 799547 799616 799685 799754 799823
799892 799961 69 631 800029 800098 800167 800236 800305 800373 800442 800511
800579 800648 69 632 800717 800786 800854 800923 800992 801061 801129 801198
801266 801335 69 633 801404 801472 801541 801609 801678 801747 801815 801884
801952 802021 69 634 802089 802158 802226 802295 802363 802432 802500 802568
802637 802705 69 635 802774 802842 802910 802979 803047 803116 803184 803252
803321 803389 68 636 803457 803525 803594 803662 803730 803798 803867 803935
804003 804071 68 637 804139 804208 804276 804344 804412 804480 804548 804616
804685 804753 68 638 804821 804889 804957 805025 805093 805161 805229 805297
805365 805433 68 639 805501 805569 805637 805705 805773 805841 805908 805976
806044 806112 68 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 640 806179 806248 806316 806384 806451
806519 806587 806655 806723 806790 68 641 806858 806926 806994 807061 807129
807197 807264 807332 807399 807467 68 642 807535 807603 807670 807738 807806
807873 807941 808008 808078 808143 68 643 808211 808279 808346 808414 808481
808549 (...) 808684 808751 808818 67 644 808886 808953 809021 809088 809156
809223 809298 809358 809425 809492 67 645 809559 809627 809694 809762 809829
809866 809964 810031 810098 (...) 67 646 810233 810299 810367 810434 810501
810569 810636 810703 810778 810837 67 647 810904 810971 811039 811106 811173
811239 811307 811374 811441 811508 67 648 811575 811642 811709 811776 811843
811909 811977 812044 812111 812178 67 649 812245 812312 812379 812445 812512
812579 812646 812713 812779 812847 67 650 812913 812980 813047 813114 813181
813247 813314 813381 813448 813514 67 651 813581 813648 813714 813781 813848
813914 813981 814048 814114 814181 67 652 814248 814314 814381 814447 814514
814581 814647 814714 814780 814847 67 653 814913 814979 815046 815113 815129
(...) 815312 815378 815445 815511 66 654 815578 815644 815711 815777 815843
815909 815978 816042 816109 816175 66 655 816241 816308 816374 816440 816506
816573 816639 816705 816771 816838 66 656 816904 816910 817036 817102 817169
817235 817301 817367 817433 817499 66 657 817565 817631 817698 817764 817829
817896 817962 818028 818094 818159 66 658 818226 818292 818358 818424 818489
818556 818622 818688 818754 818819 66 659 818885 818951 819017 819083 819149
819215 819281 819346 819412 819478 66 660 819543 819609 819676 819741 819807
819873 819939 820004 820070 820136 66 661 820201 820267 820333 820399 820464
820529 820595 820661 820727 820792 66 662 820858 820924 820989 821055 821120
821186 821251 821317 821382 (...) 66 663 821514 821509 821645 821709 821775
821841 821906 821972 822037 822103 65 664 822168 822233 822299 822364 822429
822495 822560 822626 822691 822756 65 665 822822 822887 822952 823018 823083
823148 823213 823279 823344 823409 65 666 823474 823539 823605 823669 823735
823800 823865 823930 823996 824061 65 667 824126 824191 824256 824321 824386
824451 824516 824581 824646 824711 65 668 824776 824841 824906 824971 825036
825101 825166 825231 825296 825361 65 669 825426 825491 825556 825021 825686
825751 825815 825880 825945 826009 65 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 670 826075 826139
826204 826269 826334 826399 826464 826528 826593 826658 65 671 826723 826787
826852 826917 826981 827046 827111 827175 827239 827305 65 672 827369 827434
827499 827563 827628 827692 827757 827822 827886 827951 65 673 828015 828079
828144 828209 828273 828338 828402 828467 828531 828595 64 674 828659 828724
828789 828853 828918 828982 829046 829111 829175 829239 64 675 829304 829368
829432 829497 829561 829625 829689 829754 829818 829882 64 676 829947 830011
830075 830139 830204 830268 830332 830396 830460 830525 64 677 830589 830653
830717 830781 830845 830909 830973 831037 831102 831166 64 678 831229 831294
831358 831422 831486 831549 831614 831678 831742 831806 64 679 831869 831934
831998 832062 832126 833189 832253 832317 832381 832445 64 680 832509 832573
832637 832700 832764 832828 832892 832956 833019 833083 64 681 833147 833211
833275 833338 833402 833466 833529 833593 833657 833721 64 682 833784 833848
833912 833975 834039 834103 834166 834229 834294 834357 64 683 834421 834484
834548 834611 834675 834739 834802 834866 834929 834993 64 684 835056 835119
835183 835247 835310 835373 835437 835500 835564 835627 63 685 835691 835754
835817 835881 835944 836007 836071 836134 836197 836261 63 686 836324 836387
836451 836514 836577 836641 836704 836767 836830 836894 63 687 836957 837019
837083 837146 837209 837273 837339 837399 837462 837525 63 688 837588 837652
837715 837777 837841 837904 837967 838030 838093 838156 63 689 838219 838282
838345 838408 838471 838534 838597 838660 838723 838786 63 690 838849 838912
838975 839038 839101 839164 839227 839289 839352 839415 63 691 839478 839541
839604 839667 839729 839792 839855 839918 839981 840043 63 692 840106 840169
840232 840394 840357 840419 840482 840545 840608 840671 63 693 840733 840796
840859 840921 840984 841049 841109 841172 841234 841297 63 694 841359 841423
841485 841547 841609 841672 841735 841797 841859 841922 63 695 841985 842047
842109 842172 842235 842297 842359 842432 842484 842547 62 696 842609 842672
842734 842796 842859 842921 842983 843046 843108 843170 62 697 843233 843295
843357 843419 843482 843544 843606 843669 843731 843293 62 698 843855 843918
843979 844042 844104 844166 844229 844291 844353 844415 62 699 844477 844539
844601 844664 844726 844788 844849 844912 844974 845036 62 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 D 700 845098 845160 845222 845284 845346 845408 845470 845532 845594 845656
62 701 845718 845779 845842 845904 845666 846028 846089 846151 846213 846275 62
702 846337 846399 846461 846523 846585 846646 846708 846769 846832 846894 62
703 846955 847017 847079 847141 847202 847264 847326 847388 847449 847511 62
704 847573 847634 847696 847758 847819 847881 847943 848004 848067 848128 62
705 848189 848251 848312 848374 848435 848497 848559 848620 848682 848743 62
706 848805 848866 848928 848989 849051 849112 849174 849235 849297 849358 61
707 849419 849481 849542 849604 849665 849726 849788 849849 849911 849972 61
708 850033 850095 850156 850217 850279 850339 850401 850462 850524 850585 61
709 850646 850707 850769 850829 850891 850952 851014 851075 851136 851197 61
710 851258 851319 851381 851442 851503 851564 851625 851686 851747 851809 61
711 851869 851931 851992 851053 852114 852175 852236 852297 852358 852419 61
712 852479 852541 852602 852663 852724 852785 852846 852907 852968 853029 61
713 853089 853150 853211 853272 853339 853394 853455 853516 853577 853637 61
714 853698 853759 853819 853881 853941 854002 854063 854124 854185 851245 61
715 854306 854367 854428 854488 854549 854609 854670 854731 854792 854852 61
716 853913 854974 855034 855095 855156 855216 855277 855337 855398 855459 61
717 855519 855579 855640 855701 855761 855822 855882 855943 856003 856064 61
718 856124 856185 856245 856306 856366 856427 856487 856548 856608 856668 60
719 856729 856789 856849 856910 856970 857031 857091 857152 857212 857272 60
720 857332 857393 857453 857513 857574 857634 857694 857755 857815 857875 60
721 857935 857995 858056 858116 858176 858236 858297 858357 858417 858477 60
722 858537 858597 858657 858718 858778 858838 858898 858958 859018 859078 60
723 859138 859198 859258 859318 859379 859439 859499 859559 859619 859679 60
724 859739 859799 859859 859918 859978 860038 860098 860158 860218 860278 60
725 860338 860398 860458 860518 860578 860637 860697 860757 860817 860877 60
726 860037 860996 861056 861116 861176 861236 861295 860355 861415 861475 60
727 861534 861594 861654 861714 861773 861833 861893 861952 862012 862072 60
728 862131 862191 862251 862310 862369 862429 862489 862549 862608 862668 60
729 862728 862787 862847 862906 862966 863025 863085 863144 863204 863623 60 N
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 730 863323 863382 863442 863501 863561 863620 863679
863739 863799 863858 59 731 863917 863977 864036 864096 864155 864214 864274
864333 864392 864452 59 732 864511 864570 864629 864689 864748 864808 864867
864926 864985 864045 59 733 865104 865163 865222 865282 865341 865400 865459
865519 865578 865637 59 734 865696 865755 865814 865874 865933 865992 866051
866110 866169 866228 59 735 866187 866346 866405 866465 866524 866583 866642
866701 866759 866819 59 736 866878 866937 866996 867055 867114 867173 867232
867291 867349 867409 59 737 867467 867526 867585 867644 867703 867762 867821
867879 867939 867998 59 738 868056 868115 868174 868233 868292 868350 868409
868468 868527 868586 59 739 868643 868703 868762 868821 868879 868938 868997
869056 869114 869173 59 740 869232 869290 869349 869408 869466 869525 869584
869642 869701 869759 59 741 869818 869877 869935 869994 870053 870111 870169
870228 870287 870345 59 742 870404 870462 870521 870579 870638 870696 870755
870813 870872 870930 59 743 870989 871047 871106 871164 871223 871281 871339
871398 871456 871515 58 744 871573 871631 871689 871748 871806 871865 871923
871981 871039 872098 58 745 872156 872215 872273 872331 872389 872448 872506
872564 872622 872681 58 746 872739 872797 872855 872913 872972 873029 873088
873146 873204 873262 58 747 873321 873379 873437 873495 873553 873611 873669
873727 873785 873844 58 748 873902 873959 874018 874076 874134 874192 874249
874308 874366 874424 58 749 874482 874539 874598 874656 874714 874772 874829
874888 874945 875003 58 750 875061 875119 875177 875235 875293 875351 875409
875466 875524 875582 58 751 875639 875698 875756 875813 875871 875929 875987
876045 876102 876160 58 752 876218 876276 876333 876391 876449 876507 876564
876622 876679 876737 58 753 876795 876853 876910 876968 877026 877083 877141
877199 877256 877314 58 754 877371 877429 877487 877544 877602 877659 877717
877774 877832 877889 58 755 877947 878004 878062 878119 878177 878234 878292
878349 878407 878464 57 756 878522 878579 878637 878694 878752 878808 878866
878924 878981 879039 57 757 879096 879153 879211 879268 879325 879382 879459
879497 879555 879612 57 758 879669 879726 879784 879841 879898 879955 880013
880070 880127 880185 57 759 870242 880299 880356 880413 880471 880527 880585
880642 880699 880756 57 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 760 880814 880871 880928 880985
881042 881099 881156 881213 881271 881328 57 761 881385 881442 881499 881556
881613 881669 881727 881784 881841 881898 57 762 881955 882012 882069 882126
882103 882239 882297 882354 882411 882468 57 763 882525 882581 882638 882695
882752 882809 882866 882923 882979 883037 57 764 883093 883050 883207 883264
883321 883377 883434 883491 883548 883605 57 765 883661 883718 883775 883832
883888 883945 884002 884059 884115 884172 57 766 884229 884285 884342 884399
(...) 884512 884569 884625 884682 884739 57 767 884795 884852 884909 884965
885022 885078 885135 885192 885248 885305 57 768 885361 885418 885474 885531
885587 885644 885700 885757 885813 885869 57 769 885926 885983 886039 886096
886152 886209 886265 886321 886378 886434 56 770 886491 886547 886604 886659
(...) 886773 886829 886885 886941 886998 56 771 887054 887111 887167 887223
887279 887336 887392 887449 887505 887561 56 772 887617 887674 887720 887786
887842 887898 887955 888011 888067 888123 56 773 888179 888236 888292 888348
888404 888460 888516 888573 888629 888685 56 774 888741 888797 888853 888909
888965 889021 889077 889134 889189 889246 56 775 889302 889358 889414 889469
889523 889582 889638 889694 889749 889806 56 776 889862 889918 889974 890029
890036 890141 890197 890253 890309 890365 56 777 890421 890477 890533 890589
890645 890700 890756 890812 890868 890924 56 778 890979 891035 891091 891147
891203 891259 891314 891370 891426 891482 56 779 891537 891593 891649 891705
891760 891816 891872 891928 891983 892039 56 780 892095 892150 892206 892262
892317 892373 892429 892484 892539 892595 56 781 898651 892707 892762 892818
892818 892929 892985 893040 893096 893151 56 782 893207 893262 893318 893373
893429 893484 893539 893595 893651 893706 56 783 893762 893817 893873 893928
893984 894039 894094 894149 894205 894261 55 784 894316 894371 894427 894482
894538 894593 894648 894704 894759 894814 55 785 894869 894925 894980 895036
895091 895146 895201 895257 895312 895367 55 786 895423 895478 895533 895588
895644 895699 895754 895809 895864 895919 55 787 895975 896029 896085 896140
896195 896251 896306 896361 896416 896471 55 788 896526 896581 896636 896692
896747 896802 896857 896912 896967 897022 55 789 897077 897132 897184 897242
897297 897352 897407 897462 897517 897572 55 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 790 897627
897682 897737 897792 897847 897902 897957 898012 898067 898122 55 791 898176
898231 898286 898341 898396 898451 898506 898561 898615 898670 55 792 898725
898780 898835 898889 898944 898999 899054 899109 899164 899218 55 793 899273
899328 899383 899437 899492 899547 899602 899656 899711 899766 55 794 899821
899875 899929 899985 900039 900094 900149 900203 900258 900312 55 795 900367
900422 900476 900531 900586 900640 900695 900749 900804 900859 55 796 900913
900968 901022 901077 901131 901186 901240 901295 901349 901404 55 797 901458
901513 901567 901622 901676 901731 901785 901839 (...) 901948 54 798 902003
902057 902112 902166 902221 902275 902329 902384 902438 902492 54 799 902547
902601 902655 902709 902764 902818 902873 902927 902981 903036 54 800 903089
903144 (...) 903253 903307 903361 903416 903469 903524 903578 54 801 903633
903687 903741 903795 903849 903904 903956 904012 904066 904120 54 802 904174
904229 904283 904337 904391 904445 904499 904553 904607 904661 54 803 904716
904769 904824 904878 904932 904986 905039 905094 905148 905202 54 804 905256
905310 905364 905418 905472 905526 905580 905634 905688 905742 54 805 905796
(...) 905904 905958 906012 906066 906119 906173 906227 906281 54 806 906335
906389 906443 906497 906551 906604 906658 906712 906766 906819 54 807 (...)
906927 907981 907035 907089 907143 907196 907250 907304 907358 54 808 907411
907465 907519 907573 907626 907680 907734 907787 907841 907895 54 809 907949
908002 908056 908109 908163 908217 908270 908324 908378 908431 54 810 908485
908539 908592 908646 908699 908753 908807 908860 908914 908967 54 811 909021
909074 909128 909181 909235 909289 909341 909396 909449 909503 54 812 905556
909609 909663 909716 909769 909823 909877 909930 909984 910037 53 813 910091
910144 910197 910251 910304 910358 910411 910464 910518 910571 53 814 910624
910678 910731 910784 910838 910891 910944 910998 911051 911104 53 815 911158
911211 911263 911317 911371 911424 911477 911530 911584 911637 53 816 911690
911743 911797 911849 911903 911956 912009 912063 912116 912169 53 817 912222
912275 912323 912381 912435 912488 912541 912594 912647 912700 53 818 912753
912806 912859 912913 912966 913019 913072 913125 913178 913231 53 819 913284
913337 913380 913443 913496 913549 913602 913655 913708 913761 53 N 0 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9 D 820 913814 913867 913919 913973 914026 914079 914132 914184 914237
914290 53 821 914343 914396 914449 914502 914555 914608 914660 914713 914766
914819 53 822 914872 914925 914977 915030 915083 915136 915189 915241 915294
915347 53 823 915399 915453 915505 915558 915611 915664 915716 915769 915822
915875 53 824 915927 915979 916033 916085 916138 916191 916243 916296 916349
916401 53 825 916454 916507 916559 916612 916664 916717 916769 916822 916875
916927 53 826 916980 917033 917085 917138 917190 917243 917295 917348 917400
917453 53 827 917506 917558 917611 917663 917716 917768 917820 917873 917925
917978 52 828 918030 918083 918135 918188 918240 918293 918345 918397 918449
918502 52 829 918555 918607 918659 918712 918764 918816 918869 918921 918973
919026 52 830 919078 919130 919183 919235 919287 919339 919392 919444 919496
919549 52 831 919601 919653 919706 919758 919810 919862 919914 919967 920019
920071 52 832 920123 920176 920228 920279 920332 920384 920436 920489 920541
920593 52 833 920645 920697 920749 920801 920853 920906 920958 921009 921062
921114 52 834 921166 921218 921270 921322 921374 921426 921478 921530 921582
921634 52 835 921686 921738 921790 921842 921894 921946 921998 922050 922102
922154 52 836 922206 922258 922310 922362 922414 922466 922518 922569 922622
922674 52 837 922725 922777 922829 922881 922933 922985 923037 923089 923140
923192 52 838 923244 923296 923348 923399 923451 923503 923555 923607 923658
923710 52 839 923762 923814 923865 923917 923969 924021 924072 924124 924176
924228 52 840 924279 924331 924383 924434 924486 924538 924589 924641 924693
924744 52 841 924796 924848 924899 924951 925003 925054 925106 925157 925209
925261 52 842 925312 925364 925415 925461 925518 925569 925621 925673 925725
925776 52 843 925828 925879 925931 925982 926034 926085 926137 926188 926239
926291 51 844 926342 926394 926445 926497 926548 926599 926651 926702 926754
(...) 51 845 926857 926908 926959 927011 927062 927114 927165 927216 927268
927319 51 846 927370 927422 927473 927524 927576 927627 927678 927729 927781
927832 51 847 927883 927935 927986 928037 928088 928139 928191 928242 928293
928345 51 848 928396 928447 928498 928549 928601 928652 928703 928754 928805
928857 51 849 928908 928959 929009 929061 929112 929163 929215 929266 929317
929368 51 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 850 929419 929470 929521 929572 929623 929674
929725 929776 929827 929879 51 851 929929 929981 930032 930083 930134 930185
930236 930287 930338 930389 51 852 930439 930491 930542 930592 930643 930694
930745 930796 930847 930898 51 853 930949 930999 931051 931102 931153 931204
931254 931305 931356 931407 51 854 931458 931509 931559 931610 931661 931712
931763 931814 931865 931915 51 855 931966 932017 932068 932118 932169 932220
932271 932322 932372 932423 51 856 932474 932524 932575 932626 932677 932727
932778 932829 932879 932930 51 857 932981 933031 933082 933133 933183 933234
933284 933335 933386 933437 51 858 933487 933538 933589 933639 933689 933740
933791 933841 933892 933943 51 859 933993 934044 934094 934145 934195 934246
934296 934347 934397 934448 51 860 934498 934549 934599 934649 934700 934751
934801 934852 934902 934953 50 861 935003 935056 935104 935154 935205 935255
935306 935356 935406 935457 50 862 935507 935558 935608 935658 935709 935759
935809 935859 935910 935960 50 863 936011 936061 936111 936162 936212 936262
936313 936363 (...) (...) 50 864 936514 936564 936614 936665 936715 936765
936815 636865 936916 936966 50 865 937016 937066 937117 937167 937217 937267
937317 937367 937418 937468 50 866 937518 937568 937618 937668 937718 937769
937819 937869 937919 937969 50 867 938019 938069 938119 938169 938219 938269
938319 938369 938419 938469 50 868 938519 938569 938619 938669 938719 938769
938819 938869 938919 938969 50 869 939019 939069 939119 939169 939219 939269
939319 939369 939419 939469 50 870 939519 939569 939619 939669 939719 939769
939819 939869 939918 939968 50 871 940018 940068 940118 940168 940218 940267
940317 940367 940417 940467 50 872 940516 940566 940616 940666 940716 940765
940815 940865 940915 940964 50 873 941014 941064 941114 941163 941213 941263
941313 941362 941412 941462 50 874 941511 941561 941611 941660 941710 941759
941809 946859 941909 941958 50 875 942008 942058 942107 942157 942207 942256
942306 942355 942405 942455 50 876 942504 942554 942603 942653 942702 942752
942801 942851 942901 942950 50 877 942999 943049 943099 943148 943198 943247
943297 943346 943496 943445 49 878 943495 943544 943594 943643 943692 943742
943791 943841 943890 943939 49 879 943989 944038 944088 944137 944186 944236
944285 944335 944384 944433 49 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 880 944483 944532 944581
944631 944680 944729 944779 944828 944877 944927 49 881 944976 945025 945074
945124 945873 945222 945272 945321 945370 945419 49 882 945468 945518 945567
945616 945665 945715 945764 945813 945862 945912 49 883 945961 946009 946059
946108 946157 946207 946256 946305 946354 946403 49 884 946452 946501 946551
946599 946649 946698 946747 946796 946845 946894 49 885 946943 946992 947041
947090 947139 947189 947238 947287 947336 947385 49 886 947434 947483 947532
947581 947629 947679 947728 947777 947826 947875 49 887 947924 947973 948022
948070 948119 948168 948217 948266 948315 948364 49 888 948413 948462 948511
948559 948609 948657 948706 948755 948804 948853 49 889 948902 948951 948999
949048 949097 949146 949195 949244 949292 949341 49 890 949390 949439 949488
949536 949585 949633 949683 949731 949780 949829 49 891 949878 949926 949975
950024 950073 950121 950170 950219 950267 950316 49 892 950365 950414 950462
950511 950559 950608 950657 950706 950754 950803 49 893 950851 950900 950949
950997 951046 951095 951143 951192 951240 951289 49 894 951338 951386 951435
951483 951532 951580 951629 951677 951729 951775 49 895 951823 951872 951920
951969 952017 952066 952114 952163 952210 952259 49 896 952308 952356 952405
952453 952502 952550 952399 952647 952696 952744 48 897 952792 952841 952889
952938 952986 953034 953083 953131 953179 953228 48 898 953276 953325 953373
953421 953469 953518 953566 953615 953663 953711 48 899 953759 953808 953856
953905 953953 954001 954049 954099 954146 954194 48 900 954243 954292 954339
954387 954435 954484 954532 954580 954628 954677 48 901 954725 954773 954821
954869 954918 954966 955014 955062 955110 955158 48 902 955207 955255 955303
955351 955399 955447 955495 955543 955592 955639 48 903 955688 955736 955784
955832 955880 955928 955976 956024 956075 956120 48 904 956168 956216 956265
956313 956361 956409 956457 956505 956533 956601 48 905 956649 956697 956745
956793 956840 956888 956936 956984 957032 957080 48 906 957128 957176 957224
955272 957319 957368 957416 957464 957512 957559 48 907 957607 957655 957703
957751 957799 957847 957894 957942 957900 958038 48 908 958086 958134 958181
958229 958277 958325 958373 958421 958468 958516 48 909 958564 958612 958659
958707 958755 958803 958850 958898 958946 958994 48 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 910
959041 959089 959137 959185 959231 959279 959328 959375 959423 959471 48 911
959518 959566 959614 959661 959709 959757 959804 959852 959899 959947 48 912
959995 960042 960090 960138 960185 960233 960280 960328 960376 960423 48 913
960471 960518 960566 960613 960661 960709 960756 960804 960851 960899 48 914
960946 960994 961041 961089 961136 961184 961231 961279 961326 961374 47 915
961421 961469 961516 961563 961611 961658 961706 961753 961801 961848 47 916
961895 961943 961990 962038 962085 962132 962179 962227 962275 962322 47 917
962369 962417 962464 962511 962559 962606 962653 962701 969748 962795 47 918
962842 962886 962937 962985 963032 963079 963126 963174 963221 963268 47 919
963315 963363 963410 963457 963504 963552 963599 963646 963693 963741 47 920
963788 963835 963882 963929 963977 964024 964071 964118 964165 964212 47 921
964259 964307 964354 964401 964448 964495 964542 964589 964637 964684 47 922
964731 964778 964825 964872 964919 964966 965013 965061 965108 965155 47 923
965202 965249 965296 965343 965389 965437 965484 965531 965578 965624 47 924
965672 965719 965766 965813 965859 965906 965954 966001 966048 966095 47 925
966142 966189 966239 966283 966329 966376 966423 966470 966517 966564 47 926
966611 966658 966705 966752 966799 966845 966892 966939 966986 967033 47 927
967079 967127 967173 967220 967267 967314 967361 967408 967454 967501 47 928
967548 967595 967642 967688 967735 967782 967829 967875 967922 967969 47 929
968016 968062 968109 968156 968202 968249 968296 968343 968389 968436 47 930
968483 968529 968576 968623 968669 968716 968763 968809 968856 968902 47 931
968949 968996 969043 969089 969136 969183 969229 969276 969323 969369 47 932
969416 969463 969509 969556 969602 969649 969695 969741 969789 969835 47 933
969882 969928 969975 970021 970068 970114 970161 970207 970254 970300 47 934
970347 970393 970439 970486 970533 970579 970626 970672 970719 970765 46 935
970812 970858 970904 970951 970997 971044 971090 971137 971183 971229 46 936
971286 971322 971369 971415 971461 971508 971554 971601 971647 971693 46 937
971739 971786 971832 971879 971925 971971 972018 972064 972110 972157 46 938
972203 972249 972295 972342 972388 972434 972481 972527 972573 972619 46 939
972666 972712 972758 972804 972851 972897 972943 972989 973035 973082 46 N 0 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 940 973128 973174 973220 973266 973313 973359 973405 973451
973497 973543 46 941 973589 973636 973682 973728 973774 973820 973866 973913
973959 974005 46 942 974050 974097 974143 974189 974235 974281 974327 974374
974419 974466 46 943 974512 974558 974604 974649 974695 974742 974788 974834
974819 974926 46 944 974972 975018 975064 975109 975156 975202 975248 975294
975339 975386 46 945 975432 975478 975524 975569 975616 975662 975707 975753
975799 975845 46 946 975891 975937 975983 976029 976075 976121 976167 976212
976258 976304 46 947 976349 976396 976442 976488 976533 976579 976625 976671
976717 976763 46 948 976808 976854 976899 976946 976992 977037 977083 977129
977175 977220 46 949 977266 977312 977358 977403 977449 977495 977541 977586
977632 977678 46 950 977724 977769 977815 977861 977906 977952 977998 978042
978089 978135 46 951 978181 978226 978272 978317 978363 978409 978454 978500
978546 978591 46 952 978637 978683 978728 978774 978819 978865 978911 978956
979002 979047 46 953 979093 979138 979184 979229 979275 979321 979366 979412
979457 979503 46 954 979548 979594 979639 979685 979730 979776 979821 979867
979912 979958 46 955 980003 980049 980094 980139 980185 980231 980276 980322
980367 980412 45 956 980458 980503 980549 980594 980639 980685 980730 980776
980821 980867 45 957 980912 980957 981003 981048 981093 981139 981184 981229
981275 981320 45 958 981366 981411 981456 981501 981547 981592 981637 981683
981728 981773 45 959 981819 981864 981909 981954 981999 982045 982090 982135
982181 982226 45 960 982271 982316 982362 982407 982452 982497 982543 982588
982633 982678 45 961 982723 982769 982814 982859 982904 982949 982994 983039
983085 983129 45 962 983175 983220 983265 983310 983356 983401 983446 983490
983536 983581 45 963 983626 983671 983716 983762 983807 983852 983897 983942
983987 984032 45 964 984077 984122 984167 984212 984257 984302 984347 984392
984437 984482 45 965 984527 984572 984617 984662 984707 984752 984797 984842
984887 984932 45 966 984977 985022 985067 985112 985157 985202 985247 985292
985337 985382 45 967 985426 985471 985516 985561 985606 985651 985696 985741
985786 985830 45 968 985875 985920 985965 986009 986055 986099 986144 986189
986234 986279 45 969 986324 986369 986413 986458 986504 986548 986593 986637
986682 986727 45 N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 D 970 986772 986817 986861 986906 986951
986996 987040 987085 987129 987175 45 971 987219 987264 987309 987353 987398
987443 987488 987532 987577 987622 45 972 987666 987711 987756 987800 987845
987889 987934 987979 988024 988068 45 973 988113 988157 988202 988247 988291
988336 988381 988425 988469 988514 45 974 988559 988604 988748 988693 988737
988782 988826 988871 988916 988960 45 975 989005 989049 989094 989138 989183
989227 989272 989316 989361 989405 45 976 989449 989494 989539 989584 989628
989672 989717 989761 989806 989850 44 977 989895 989939 989983 990028 990072
990117 990161 990206 980150 990294 44 978 990339 990383 990428 990472 990516
990561 990605 990649 990694 990738 44 979 990783 990827 990871 990916 990960
991004 991049 991093 991137 991182 44 980 991226 991270 991315 991359 991403
991448 991492 991536 991580 991625 44 981 991669 991713 991758 991802 991846
991890 991935 991979 992023 992067 44 982 992111 992156 992199 992244 992288
992333 992377 992421 992465 992509 44 983 992554 992598 992642 992686 992730
992774 992819 992863 992907 992951 44 984 992995 993039 993083 993127 993172
993216 993259 993304 993348 993392 44 985 993436 993480 993524 993568 993613
993657 993701 993745 993789 993833 44 986 993877 993921 993965 994009 994053
994097 994141 994185 994229 994273 44 987 994317 994361 994405 994449 994493
994537 994581 994625 994669 994713 44 988 994756 994801 994845 994889 994933
994977 995021 995065 995108 995152 44 989 995196 995240 995284 995328 995372
995416 995459 995504 995547 995591 44 990 995635 995679 995723 995764 995811
995854 995898 995942 995986 996029 44 991 996074 996117 996161 996205 996249
996293 996337 996380 996424 996468 44 992 996512 996555 996599 996643 996687
996731 996774 996818 996862 996906 44 993 996949 996993 997037 997080 997124
997168 997212 997255 997299 997343 44 994 997386 997430 997474 997517 997561
997605 997648 997692 997736 997779 44 995 997823 997867 997910 997954 997998
998041 998085 998129 998170 998216 44 996 998259 998303 998347 998390 998434
998477 998521 998564 998608 998652 44 997 998695 998739 998783 998826 998869
998913 998956 998999 999043 999087 44 998 999133 999174 999218 999261 999305
999348 999392 999435 999479 999522 44 999 999565 999609 999652 999696 999739
999783 999826 999869 999913 999957 43

A TABLE OF PROPORTIONAL PARTS, WHEREBY The Intermediate Logarithms of all
Numbers, AND The Numbers of all Logarithms from 10000 to 100000 may more
readily be found out by the foregoing Table of Logarithms.
LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for W. Freeman, at the Artichoke next St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXVII.

A TABLE OF Proportional Parts. D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 43 4 8 12 17 21 25 30 34 38
44 4 8 13 17 22 26 30 35 39 45 4 9 13 18 22 27 31 36 40 46 4 9 13 18 23 27 32
36 41 47 4 9 14 18 23 28 32 37 42 48 4 9 14 19 24 28 33 38 43 49 4 9 14 19 24
29 34 39 44 50 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 51 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 52 5 10
15 20 26 31 36 41 46 53 5 10 15 21 26 31 37 42 47 54 5 10 16 21 27 32 37 43 48
55 5 11 16 22 27 33 38 44 49 56 5 11 16 22 28 33 39 44 50 57 5 11 17 22 28 34
39 45 51 58 5 11 17 23 29 34 40 46 52 59 5 11 17 23 29 35 41 47 53 60 6 12 18
24 30 36 42 48 54 61 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 62 6 12 18 24 31 37 43 49 55 D 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 63 6 12 18 25 31 37 44 50 56 64 6 12 19 25 32 38 44 51 57 65 6
13 19 26 32 39 45 52 58 66 6 13 19 26 33 39 46 52 59 67 6 13 20 26 33 40 46 53
60 68 6 13 20 27 34 40 47 54 61 69 6 13 20 27 34 41 48 55 62 70 7 14 21 28 35
42 49 56 63 71 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 72 7 14 21 28 36 43 50 57 64 73 7 14
21 29 36 43 51 58 65 74 7 14 22 29 37 44 51 59 66 75 7 15 22 30 37 45 52 60 67
76 7 15 22 30 38 45 53 60 68 77 7 15 23 30 38 46 53 61 69 78 7 15 23 31 39 46
54 62 70 79 7 15 23 31 39 47 55 63 71 80 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 81 8 16 24
32 40 48 56 64 72 82 8 16 24 32 41 49 57 65 73 83 8 16 24 33 41 49 58 66 74 84
8 16 25 33 42 50 58 67 75 85 8 17 25 34 42 51 59 68 76 86 8 17 25 34 43 51 60
68 77 87 8 17 26 34 43 52 60 69 78 88 8 17 26 35 44 52 61 70 79 89 8 17 26 35
44 53 62 71 80 90 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 91 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 92 9
18 27 36 46 55 64 73 82 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 93 9 18 27 37 46 55 65 74 83 94 9
18 28 37 47 56 (...) 75 84 95 9 19 28 38 47 57 66 76 85 96 9 19 28 38 48 57 67
76 86 97 9 19 29 38 48 58 67 77 87 98 9 19 29 39 49 58 68 78 88 99 9 19 29 39
49 59 69 79 89 100 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 101 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
102 10 20 30 40 51 61 71 81 91 103 10 20 30 41 51 61 72 82 92 104 10 20 31 41
52 62 72 83 93 105 10 21 31 42 52 63 73 84 94 106 10 21 31 42 53 63 74 84 95
107 10 21 32 42 53 64 74 85 96 108 10 21 32 43 54 64 75 86 97 109 10 21 32 43
54 65 76 87 98 110 11 22 33 44 55 66 77 88 99 111 11 22 33 44 55 66 77 88 99
112 11 22 33 44 56 67 78 89 100 113 11 22 33 45 57 67 78 90 101 114 11 22 34 45
57 68 79 91 102 115 11 23 34 46 57 69 80 92 103 116 11 23 34 46 58 69 81 92 104
117 11 23 35 46 58 70 81 73 105 118 11 23 35 47 59 70 82 94 106 119 11 23 35 47
59 71 83 95 107 120 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 121 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108
122 12 24 36 48 61 73 85 97 109 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 123 12 24 36 48 61 73 86 98
110 124 12 24 37 49 62 74 86 99 111 125 12 25 37 50 62 75 87 100 112 126 12 25
37 50 63 75 88 100 113 127 12 25 38 50 63 76 88 101 114 128 12 25 38 51 64 76
89 102 115 129 12 25 38 51 64 77 90 103 116 130 13 26 39 52 65 78 91 104 117
131 13 26 39 52 65 78 91 104 117 132 13 26 39 52 66 79 92 105 118 133 13 26 39
53 66 79 93 106 119 134 13 26 40 53 67 80 93 107 120 135 13 27 40 54 67 81 94
108 121 136 13 27 40 54 68 81 95 108 122 137 13 27 41 54 68 82 95 109 123 (...)
13 27 41 55 69 82 96 110 124 139 13 27 41 55 69 83 97 111 125 140 14 28 42 56
70 84 98 112 126 141 14 28 42 56 70 84 99 112 126 142 14 28 42 56 71 85 99 113
127 143 14 28 42 57 71 85 100 114 128 144 14 28 43 57 72 86 100 115 129 145 14
28 43 58 72 87 101 116 130 146 14 29 43 58 73 87 102 116 131 147 14 29 44 58 73
88 102 117 132 148 14 29 44 59 74 88 103 118 133 149 14 29 44 59 74 89 104 119
134 150 15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120 135 151 15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120 135 152 15
30 45 60 76 91 106 121 136 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 153 15 30 45 60 76 91 107 122
137 154 15 30 46 61 77 92 107 123 138 155 15 31 46 62 77 93 108 124 139 156 15
31 46 62 78 93 109 124 140 157 15 31 47 62 78 94 109 125 141 158 15 31 47 63 79
94 110 126 142 159 15 31 47 63 79 95 111 127 143 160 16 32 48 64 80 96 112 128
144 161 16 32 48 64 80 96 112 128 144 162 16 32 48 64 81 97 113 129 145 163 16
32 48 65 82 98 114 130 146 164 16 32 49 66 82 98 114 131 147 165 16 33 49 66 82
99 115 132 148 166 16 33 49 66 83 99 116 132 149 167 16 33 50 66 83 100 116 133
150 168 16 33 50 67 84 100 (...) 134 151 169 17 33 50 67 84 101 118 135 152 170
17 34 51 68 85 102 119 136 153 171 17 34 51 68 85 102 119 136 153 172 17 34 51
68 86 103 120 137 154 173 17 34 51 69 86 103 121 138 155 174 17 34 52 69 87 104
121 139 156 175 17 34 52 70 87 105 122 140 157 176 17 35 52 70 88 105 123 140
158 177 17 35 53 70 88 106 123 141 159 178 17 35 53 71 89 106 124 142 160 179
17 35 53 71 89 107 125 143 161 180 18 36 54 72 90 108 126 144 162 181 18 36 54
72 90 108 126 144 162 182 18 36 54 72 91 109 127 145 163 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
183 18 36 54 73 91 109 128 146 164 184 18 36 55 73 92 110 128 147 165 185 18 37
55 74 92 111 129 148 166 186 18 37 55 74 93 111 130 148 167 187 18 37 56 74 83
112 130 149 168 188 18 37 56 75 94 112 131 150 169 189 18 37 56 75 94 113 132
151 170 190 19 38 57 76 95 114 133 152 171 191 19 38 57 76 95 114 133 152 171
192 19 38 57 76 96 115 134 153 172 193 19 38 57 77 96 115 135 154 173 194 19 38
58 77 97 116 135 155 174 195 19 39 58 78 97 117 136 156 175 196 19 39 59 78 98
117 136 156 176 197 19 39 59 78 98 118 137 157 177 198 19 39 59 79 99 118 138
158 178 199 19 39 59 79 99 119 139 159 179 200 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
201 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 202 20 40 60 80 101 121 141 161 181 203 20
40 60 81 101 121 142 162 182 204 20 40 61 81 102 122 142 163 183 205 20 41 61
82 102 123 143 164 184 206 20 41 61 82 103 123 144 164 185 207 20 41 62 82 103
124 144 165 186 208 20 41 62 83 104 124 145 166 187 209 20 41 62 83 104 125 146
167 188 210 21 42 63 84 105 126 147 168 189 211 21 42 63 84 105 126 147 168 189
212 21 42 63 84 106 127 148 169 190 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 213 21 42 63 85 106 127
149 170 191 214 21 42 64 85 107 128 149 171 192 215 21 43 64 86 107 129 150 172
193 216 21 43 64 86 108 129 151 172 194 217 21 43 65 86 108 130 151 173 195 218
21 43 65 87 109 130 152 174 196 219 21 43 65 87 109 131 153 175 197 220 22 44
66 88 110 132 154 176 198 221 22 44 66 88 110 132 154 176 198 222 22 44 66 88
111 133 155 177 199 223 22 44 66 89 111 133 156 178 200 224 22 44 67 89 112 134
156 179 201 225 22 45 67 90 112 135 157 180 202 226 22 45 67 90 113 135 158 180
203 227 22 45 68 90 113 136 158 181 204 228 22 45 68 91 114 136 159 182 205 229
22 45 68 91 114 137 160 183 206 230 23 46 69 92 115 138 161 184 207 231 23 46
69 92 115 138 161 184 207 232 23 46 69 92 116 139 162 185 208 233 23 46 69 93
116 139 163 186 209 234 23 46 70 93 117 140 163 187 210 235 23 47 70 94 117 141
164 188 211 236 23 47 70 94 118 141 165 188 212 237 23 47 71 94 118 142 165 189
213 238 23 47 71 95 119 142 166 190 214 239 23 47 71 95 119 143 167 191 215 240
24 48 72 96 120 144 168 192 216 241 24 48 72 96 120 144 168 192 216 242 24 48
72 96 121 145 169 193 217 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 243 24 48 72 97 121 145 170 194
218 244 24 48 73 97 122 146 170 195 219 245 24 49 73 98 122 147 171 196 220 246
24 49 73 98 123 147 172 196 221 247 24 49 74 98 123 148 172 197 222 248 24 49
74 99 124 148 173 198 223 249 24 49 74 99 124 149 174 199 224 250 25 50 75 100
125 150 175 200 225 251 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 252 25 50 75 100 126
151 176 201 226 253 25 50 75 101 126 151 177 202 227 254 25 50 76 101 127 152
177 203 228 255 25 50 76 102 127 153 178 204 229 256 25 51 76 102 128 153 179
204 230 257 25 51 77 102 128 154 179 205 231 258 25 51 77 103 129 154 180 206
232 259 25 51 77 103 129 155 181 207 233 260 26 52 78 104 130 156 182 208 234
261 26 52 78 104 130 156 182 208 234 262 26 52 78 104 131 156 183 209 235 263
26 52 78 105 131 157 184 210 236 264 26 52 79 105 132 158 184 211 237 265 26 53
79 106 132 159 185 212 238 266 26 53 79 106 133 159 186 212 239 267 26 53 80
106 133 160 186 213 240 268 26 53 80 107 134 160 187 214 241 269 26 53 80 107
134 161 188 215 242 270 27 54 81 108 135 162 189 216 243 271 27 54 81 108 135
162 189 216 243 272 27 54 81 108 136 163 190 217 244 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 273 27
54 81 109 136 163 191 218 245 274 27 54 82 109 137 164 191 219 246 275 27 55 82
110 137 165 192 220 247 276 27 55 82 110 138 165 193 220 248 277 27 55 83 110
138 166 193 221 249 278 27 55 83 111 139 166 194 222 250 279 27 55 83 111 139
167 195 223 251 280 28 56 84 112 140 168 196 224 252 281 28 56 84 112 140 168
196 224 252 282 28 56 84 112 141 169 197 225 253 283 28 56 84 113 141 169 198
226 254 284 28 56 85 113 142 170 198 227 255 285 28 57 85 114 142 171 199 228
256 286 28 57 85 114 143 171 200 228 257 287 28 57 86 114 143 172 200 229 258
288 28 57 86 115 144 172 201 230 259 289 28 57 86 115 144 173 202 231 260 290
29 58 87 116 145 174 203 232 261 291 29 58 87 116 145 174 203 232 261 292 29 58
87 116 146 175 204 233 262 293 29 58 87 117 146 175 205 234 263 294 29 58 88
117 147 176 205 235 264 295 29 59 88 118 147 177 206 236 265 296 29 59 88 118
148 177 207 236 266 297 29 59 88 118 148 178 207 237 267 298 29 59 89 119 149
178 208 238 268 299 29 59 89 119 149 179 209 239 269 300 30 60 90 120 150 180
210 240 270 301 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 302 30 60 90 120 151 181 211
241 271 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 303 30 60 90 121 151 181 212 242 272 304 30 60 91
121 152 182 212 243 273 305 30 61 91 122 152 183 213 244 274 306 30 61 91 122
153 183 214 244 275 307 30 61 92 122 153 184 214 245 276 308 30 61 92 123 154
184 215 246 277 309 30 61 92 123 154 185 216 247 278 310 31 62 93 124 155 186
217 248 279 311 31 62 93 124 155 186 217 248 279 312 31 62 93 124 156 187 218
249 280 313 31 62 93 125 156 187 219 250 281 314 31 62 94 125 157 183 219 251
282 315 31 63 94 126 157 189 220 252 283 316 31 63 94 126 158 189 221 252 284
317 31 63 95 126 158 190 221 253 285 318 31 63 95 127 159 190 222 254 286 319
31 63 95 127 159 191 223 255 287 320 32 64 96 128 160 192 224 256 288 321 32 64
96 128 160 192 224 256 288 322 32 64 96 128 161 193 225 257 289 323 32 64 96
129 161 193 226 258 290 324 32 64 97 129 162 194 226 259 291 325 32 65 97 130
162 195 227 260 292 326 32 65 97 130 163 195 228 260 293 327 32 65 98 130 163
196 228 261 294 328 32 65 98 131 163 196 229 262 295 329 32 65 98 131 164 197
230 263 296 330 33 66 99 132 165 198 231 264 297 331 33 66 99 132 165 198 231
264 297 332 33 66 99 132 166 199 232 265 298 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 333 33 66 99
133 166 199 233 266 299 334 33 66 100 133 167 200 233 267 300 335 33 67 100 134
167 201 234 268 301 336 33 67 100 134 168 201 235 268 302 337 33 67 101 134 168
202 235 269 303 338 33 67 101 135 169 202 236 270 304 339 33 67 101 135 169 203
237 271 305 340 34 68 102 136 170 204 238 272 306 341 34 68 102 136 170 204 238
272 306 342 34 68 102 136 171 205 239 273 307 343 34 68 102 137 171 205 240 274
308 344 34 68 103 137 172 206 240 275 309 345 34 69 103 138 172 207 241 276 310
346 34 69 103 138 173 207 242 276 311 347 34 69 104 138 173 208 242 277 312 348
34 69 104 139 174 208 243 278 313 349 34 69 104 139 174 209 244 279 314 350 35
70 105 140 175 210 245 280 315 351 35 70 105 140 175 210 245 280 315 352 35 70
105 140 176 211 246 281 316 353 35 70 105 141 176 211 247 282 317 354 35 70 106
141 177 212 247 283 318 355 35 71 106 142 177 213 248 284 319 356 35 71 106 142
178 213 249 284 320 357 35 71 107 142 178 214 249 285 321 358 35 71 107 143 179
214 250 286 322 359 35 71 107 143 179 215 251 287 323 360 36 72 108 144 180 216
252 288 324 361 36 72 108 144 180 216 252 288 324 362 36 72 108 144 181 217 253
289 325 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 363 36 72 108 145 181 217 254 290 326 364 36 72 109
145 182 218 254 291 327 365 36 73 109 146 182 219 255 292 328 366 36 73 109 146
182 219 256 292 329 367 36 73 110 146 183 220 256 293 330 368 36 73 110 147 184
220 257 294 331 369 36 73 110 147 184 221 258 295 332 370 37 74 111 148 185 222
259 296 333 371 37 74 111 148 185 222 259 296 333 372 37 74 111 148 186 223 260
297 334 373 37 74 111 149 186 223 261 298 335 374 37 74 112 149 187 224 261 299
336 375 37 75 112 150 187 225 262 300 337 376 37 75 112 150 188 225 263 300 338
377 37 75 113 150 188 226 263 301 339 378 37 75 113 151 189 226 264 302 340 379
37 75 113 151 189 227 265 303 341 380 38 76 114 152 190 228 266 304 342 381 38
76 114 152 190 228 266 304 342 382 38 76 114 152 191 229 267 305 343 383 38 76
114 153 191 229 268 306 344 384 38 76 115 153 192 230 268 307 345 385 38 77 115
154 192 231 269 308 346 386 38 77 115 154 193 231 270 308 347 387 38 77 116 154
193 232 270 309 348 388 38 77 116 155 194 232 271 310 349 389 38 77 116 155 194
233 272 311 350 390 39 78 117 156 195 233 273 312 351 391 39 78 117 156 195 233
273 312 351 392 39 78 117 156 196 234 274 313 352 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 393 39 78
117 157 196 235 275 314 353 394 39 78 118 157 197 236 275 315 354 395 39 79 118
158 197 237 276 316 355 396 39 79 118 158 198 237 277 316 356 397 39 79 119 158
198 238 277 317 357 398 39 79 119 159 199 238 278 318 358 399 39 79 119 159 199
239 279 319 359 400 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 401 40 80 120 160 200 240
280 320 360 402 40 80 120 160 201 241 281 321 361 403 40 80 120 161 201 241 282
322 362 404 40 80 121 161 202 242 282 323 363 405 40 81 121 162 202 243 283 324
364 406 40 81 121 162 203 243 284 324 365 407 40 81 122 162 203 244 284 325 366
408 40 81 122 163 204 244 285 326 367 409 40 81 122 163 204 245 286 327 368 410
41 82 123 164 205 246 287 328 369 411 41 82 123 164 205 246 287 328 369 412 41
82 123 164 206 247 288 329 370 413 41 82 123 165 206 247 289 330 371 414 41 82
124 165 207 248 289 331 372 415 41 83 124 166 207 249 290 332 373 416 41 83 124
166 208 249 291 332 374 417 41 83 125 166 208 250 291 333 375 418 41 83 125 167
209 250 292 334 376 419 41 83 125 167 209 251 293 335 377 420 42 84 126 168 210
252 294 336 378 421 42 84 126 168 210 252 294 336 378 422 42 84 126 168 211 253
295 337 379 D 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 423 42 84 126 169 211 253 296 338 380 424 42 84
127 169 212 254 296 339 381 425 42 85 127 170 212 255 297 340 382 426 42 85 127
170 213 255 298 340 383 427 42 85 128 170 213 256 298 341 384 428 42 85 128 171
214 256 299 342 385 429 42 85 128 171 214 257 300 343 386 430 43 86 129 172 215
258 301 344 387 431 43 86 129 172 215 258 301 344 387 432 43 86 129 172 216 259
302 345 388 433 43 86 129 173 216 259 303 346 389 434 43 86 130 173 217 260 304
347 390 435 43 87 130 174 217 261 304 348 391

A TABLE OF ARTIFICIAL SINES AND TANGENTS To every DEGREE and MINUTE OF THE
QUADRANT.
LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for W. Freeman, at the Artichoke next St.
Dunstan'S Church in Fleet street. MDCLXXXVII.

Degree 0. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 0. 000000 10. 000000 0. 000000
Infinita. 60 1 6. 463726 9. 999999 6. 463726 13. 536274 59 2 6. 764756 9.
999999 6. 764756 13. 235244 58 3 6. 940847 9. 999999 6. 940847 13. 059153 57 4
7. 065786 9. 999999 7. 065786 12. 934214 56 5 7. 162696 9. 999999 7. 162696 12.
837304 55 6 7. 241877 9. 999999 7. 241878 12. 758122 54 7 7. 308824 9. 999999
7. 308825 12. 691175 53 8 7. 366816 9. 999999 7. 366817 12. 633183 52 9 7.
(...) 9. 999999 7. 417970 12. 582030 51 10 7. 463726 9. 999998 7. 463727 12.
536273 50 11 7. 505118 9. 999998 7. 505120 12. 494880 49 12 7. 542906 9. 999997
7. 542909 12. 457091 48 13 7. 577668 9. 999997 7. 577272 12. 422328 47 14 7.
609853 9. 999996 7. 609857 12. 390143 46 15 7. 639816 9. 999996 7. 639826 12.
360180 45 16 7. 667844 9. 999995 7. 667849 12. 332151 44 17 7. 694173 9. 999995
7. 694179 12. 305821 43 18 7. 718977 9. 999994 7. 719003 12. 281997 42 19 7.
742477 9. 999993 7. 742484 12. 257516 41 20 7. 764754 9. 999993 7. 764761 12.
235239 40 21 7. 785943 9. 999992 7. 785951 12. 214049 39 22 7. 806146 (...)
999991 7. 806145 12. 193845 38 23 7. 825451 9. 999990 7. 825460 12. 174540 37
24 7. 843034 9. 999989 7. 843944 12. 156056 36 25 7. 861662 9. 999989 7. 861674
12. 138326 35 26 7. 878695 9. 999988 7. 878708 12. 121292 34 27 7. 895085 9.
999987 7. 895099 12. 104901 33 28 7. 910879 9. 999986 7. 910894 12. 089106 32
29 7. 926119 9. 999985 7. 926134 12. 073866 31 30 7. 940842 9. 999983 7. 940858
12. 059142 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 89. Degree 0. M Sine
Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 7. 940842 9. 999983 7. 940858 12. 059142 30 31 7.
955082 9. 999982 7. 955100 12. 044900 29 32 7. 968870 9. 999981 7. 968889 12.
031111 28 33 7. 982233 9. 999980 7. 982253 12. 017747 27 34 7. 995198 9. 999978
7. 995215 12. 004781 26 35 8. 007787 9. 999978 8. 007810 11. 992191 25 36 8.
020021 9. 999976 8. 020044 11. 979956 24 37 8. 031919 9. 999975 8. 031945 11.
968055 23 38 8. 043601 9. 999973 8. 043527 11. 956473 22 39 8. 054781 9. 999972
8. 054809 11. 945181 21 40 8. 065776 9. 999971 8. 065806 11. 934194 20 41 8.
076500 9. 999969 8. 076531 11. 923469 19 42 8. 086965 9. 999968 8. 086997 11.
913003 18 43 8. 097183 9. 999966 8. 097217 11. 902783 17 44 8. 107167 9. 999964
8. 107203 11. 892797 16 45 8. 116926 9. 999963 8. 116963 11. 883037 15 46 8.
126471 9. 999961 8. 126510 11. 873490 14 47 8. 135810 9. 999959 8. 135851 11.
864149 13 48 8. 144953 9. 999958 8. 144996 11. 855004 12 49 8. 153907 9. 999956
8. 153952 11. 846048 11 50 8. 162681 9. 999954 8. 162737 11. 837273 10 51 8.
171280 9. 999952 8. 171328 11. 828672 9 52 8. 179713 9. 999950 8. 179763 11.
820237 8 53 8. 187985 9. 999948 8. 188036 11. 811964 7 54 8. 196102 9. 999946
8. 196156 11. 803844 6 55 8. 204070 9. 999944 8. 204126 11. 795674 5 56 8.
211895 9. 999942 8. 211953 11. 788047 4 57 8. 219581 9. 999940 8. 219641 11.
780359 3 58 8. 227134 9. 999938 8. 227195 11. 772805 2 59 8. 234557 9. 999936
8. 234621 11. 765379 1 60 8. 241855 9. 999934 8. 241921 11. 758079 0 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 89. Degree 1. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
8. 241855 9. 999934 8. 241921 11. 758079 60 1 8. 249033 9. 999932 8. 249102 11.
750898 59 2 8. 256094 9. 999929 8. 256165 11. 743835 58 3 8. 263042 9. 999927
8. 263115 11. 736885 57 4 8. 269881 9. 999925 8. 269956 11. 730044 56 5 8.
276614 9. 999922 8. 276691 11. 723309 55 6 8. 283243 9. 999920 8. 283323 11.
716677 54 7 8. 289773 9. 999918 8. 289856 11. 716144 53 8 8. 296207 9. 999915
8. 296292 11. 703708 52 9 8. 302546 9. 999913 8. 302634 11. 697366 51 10 8.
308794 9. 999910 8. 308884 11. 691116 50 11 8. 314954 9. 999907 8. 315046 11.
684954 49 12 8. 321027 9. 999905 8. 321122 11. 678878 48 13 8. 327016 9. 999902
8. 327114 11. 672886 47 14 8. 332924 9. 999899 8. 333025 11. 666975 46 15 8.
338753 9. 999897 8. 338856 11. 661144 45 16 8. 344504 9. 999894 8. 344610 11.
655390 44 17 8. 350180 9. 999891 8. 350289 11. 649711 43 18 8. 355783 9. 999888
8. 355895 11. 644105 42 19 8. 361315 9. 999885 8. 361430 11. 638570 41 20 8.
366777 9. 999882 8. 366895 11. 633105 40 21 8. 372171 9. 999879 8. 372292 11.
627708 39 22 8. 377499 9. 999876 8. 377622 11. 622378 38 23 8. 387762 9. 999873
8. 382889 11. 617111 37 24 8. 387962 9. 999870 8. 388092 11. 611908 36 25 8.
393101 9. 999867 8. 393234 11. 606766 35 26 8. 398179 9. 999864 8. 398315 11.
601685 34 27 8. 403199 9. 999861 8. 403338 11. 596662 33 28 8. 408161 9. 999858
8. 408304 11. 591696 32 29 8. 413068 9. 999854 8. 413213 11. 586787 31 30 (...)
9. 999851 8. 418068 11. 581932 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 88.
Degree 1. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 8. 417919 9. 999851 8. 418068 11.
581932 30 31 8. 422717 9. 999848 8. 422869 11. 577131 29 32 8. 427462 9. 999844
8. 427618 11. 572382 28 33 8. 432156 9. 999841 8. 432315 11. 567685 27 34 8.
436800 9. 999838 8. 436962 11. 563038 26 35 8. 441394 9. 999834 8. 441560 11.
558440 25 36 8. 445941 9. 999831 8. 446110 11. 553990 24 37 8. 450440 9. 999827
8. 450613 11. 549387 23 38 8. 454893 9. 999824 8. 455070 11. 544930 22 39 8.
459301 9. 999820 8. 459481 11. 540519 21 40 8. 463665 9. 999816 8. 463849 11.
536151 20 41 8. 467985 9. 999812 8. 468172 11. 531828 19 42 8. 472263 9. 999809
8. 472454 11. 527546 18 43 8. 476498 9. 999805 8. 476693 11. 523307 17 44 8.
480693 9. 999801 8. 480892 11. 519108 16 45 8. 484848 9. 999797 8. 485050 11.
514950 15 46 8. 488963 9. 999794 8. 486170 11. 510830 14 47 8. 493040 9. 999790
8. 483250 11. 506750 13 48 8. 497078 9. 999786 8. 497293 11. 502707 12 49 8.
501080 9. 999782 8. 501298 11. 498702 11 50 8. 505045 9. 999778 8. 505267 11.
494733 10 51 8. 508974 9. 999774 8. 509200 11. 490800 9 52 8. 512867 9. 999769
8. 513098 11. 486902 8 53 8. 516726 9. 999765 8. 516961 11. 483039 7 54 8.
520551 9. 999761 8. 520790 11. 479210 6 55 8. 524343 9. 999756 8. 524586 11.
475414 5 56 8. 528102 9. 999753 8. 528349 11. 471651 4 57 8. 531828 9. 999748
8. 532080 11. 467620 3 58 8. 535523 9. 999744 8. 535779 11. 464221 2 59 8.
539186 9. 999740 8. 539447 11. 460553 1 60 8. 542819 9. 999735 8. 543084 11.
456916 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 88. Degree 2. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 8. 542819 9. 999735 8. 543084 11. 456916 60 1 8. 546422 9.
999731 8. 546691 11. 453309 59 2 8. 549995 9. 999726 8. 550268 11. 449732 58 3
8. 553558 9. 999722 8. 553817 11. 446183 57 4 8. 557054 9. 999717 8. 557336 11.
442664 56 5 8. 560540 9. 999713 8. 560827 11. 439172 55 6 8. 563999 9. 999708
8. 564291 11. 435709 54 7 8. 567431 9. 999703 8. 567727 11. 432272 53 8 8.
570836 9. 999699 8. 571137 11. 428863 52 9 8. 574214 9. 999694 8. 574520 11.
425480 51 10 8. 577566 9. 999689 8. 577877 11. 422123 50 11 8. 580892 9. 999685
8. 581208 11. 418792 49 12 8. 584193 9. 999680 8. 584514 11. 415486 48 13 8.
587469 9. 999675 8. 587795 11. 412205 47 14 8. 590721 9. 999670 8. 591051 11.
408949 46 15 8. 593948 9. 999665 8. 594283 11. 405717 45 16 8. 597152 9. 999660
8. 597492 11. 402508 44 17 8. 600332 9. 999655 8. 600677 11. 399323 43 18 8.
603488 9. 999650 8. 603838 11. 396161 42 19 8. 606622 9. 999645 8. 606978 11.
393022 41 20 8. 609734 9. 999640 8. 610094 11. 389906 40 21 8. 612823 9. 999635
8. 613189 11. 386811 39 22 8. 615891 9. 999629 8. 616262 11. 383738 38 23 8.
618937 9. 999624 8. 619313 11. 380687 37 24 8. 621967 9. 999619 8. 622343 11.
377657 36 25 8. 624965 9. 999614 8. 625352 11. 374648 35 26 8. 627948 9. 999608
8. 628340 11. 371660 34 27 8. 630911 9. 999603 8. 631308 11. 368692 33 28 8.
633854 9. 999597 8. 634456 11. 365744 32 29 8. 636776 9. 999592 8. 637184 11.
362816 31 30 8. 639679 9. 999586 8. 640093 11. 359907 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 87. Degree 2. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 8. 639679 9.
999586 8. 640093 11. 359907 30 31 8. 642563 9. 999581 8. 642982 11. 357017 29
32 8. 645428 9. 999575 8. 645853 11. 354147 28 33 8. 648274 9. 999570 8. 648704
11. 351296 27 34 8. 651102 9. 999564 8. 651538 11. 348463 26 35 8. 653911 9.
999558 8. 654352 11. 345648 25 36 8. 656702 9. 999553 8. 657149 11. 342851 24
37 8. 659475 9. 999547 8. 659928 11. 340072 23 38 8. 662230 9. 999541 8. 662689
11. 337311 22 39 8. 664968 9. 999535 8. 665433 11. 334567 21 40 8. 667689 9.
999529 8. 668160 11. 331840 20 41 8. 670393 9. 999523 8. 670869 11. 329130 19
42 8. 673080 9. 999518 8. 673563 11. 326437 18 43 8. 675751 9. 999512 8. 676239
11. 323761 17 44 8. 678405 9. 999506 8. 678899 11. 321100 16 45 8. 681043 9.
999499 8. 681544 11. 318456 15 46 8. 683665 9. 999493 8. 684172 11. 315828 14
47 8. 686272 9. 999487 8. 686784 11. 313216 13 48 8. 688892 9. 999481 8. 689381
11. 310619 12 49 8. 691438 9. 999475 8. 691963 11. 308037 11 50 8. 693998 9.
999469 8. 694529 11. 305471 10 51 8. 696543 9. 999462 8. 697081 11. 302919 9 52
8. 699073 9. 999456 8. 699617 11. 300383 8 53 8. 701589 9. 999450 8. 702139 11.
297861 7 54 8. 704090 9. 999443 8. 704646 11. 295354 6 55 8. 706576 9. 999437
8. 707130 11. 292860 5 56 8. 709049 9. 999431 8. 709618 11. 290381 4 57 8.
711507 9. 999424 8. 712083 11. 287917 3 58 8. 713952 9. 999418 8. 714534 11.
285466 2 59 8. 716383 9. 999411 8. 716972 11. 283028 1 60 8. 718800 9. 999404
8. 719396 11. 280604 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 87. Degree 3. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 8. 718800 9. 999404 8. 719396 11. 280604 60 1
8. 721204 9. 999398 8. 721806 11. 278194 59 2 8. 723595 9. 999391 8. 724254 11.
275796 58 3 8. 725972 9. 999384 8. 726588 11. 273412 57 4 8. 728336 9. 999378
8. 728959 11. 271041 56 5 8. 730688 9. 999371 8. 731317 11. 268683 55 6 8.
733027 9. 999364 8. 733663 11. 266337 54 7 8. 735354 9. 999357 8. 735996 11.
264004 53 8 8. 737667 9 999350 8. 738317 11. 261683 52 9 8. 739969 9. 999343 8.
740626 11. 259374 51 10 8. 742259 9. 999336 8. 742922 11. 257078 50 11 8.
744536 9. 999329 8. 745007 11. 254793 49 12 8. 746801 9. 999322 8 747479 11.
252521 48 13 8. 745955 9. 999315 8. 749740 11. 250240 47 14 8. 751297 9. 999308
8. 751989 11. 248011 46 15 8. 753528 9. 999301 8. 754227 11. 245773 45 16 8.
755747 9. 999294 8. 756453 11. 243542 44 17 8. 757955 9. 999286 8. 758668 11.
241332 43 18 8. 760151 9. 999279 8. 760872 11. 239128 42 19 8. 762337 9. 999272
8. 763065 11. 236935 41 20 8. 764511 9. 999265 8. 765246 11. 234754 40 21 8.
766675 9. 999257 8. 767417 11. 232583 39 22 8. 768828 9. 999250 8. 769578 11.
230422 38 23 8. 770970 9. 999242 8. 771727 11. 228273 37 24 8. 773101 9. 999235
8. 773866 11. 229134 36 25 8. 775223 9. 999227 8. 775995 11. 224005 35 26 8.
777333 9. 999220 8. 778114 11. 221886 34 27 8. 779434 9. 999212 8. 783222 11.
219778 33 28 8. 781524 9. 999204 8. 782320 11. 217680 32 29 8. 783605 9. 999197
8. 784404 11. 215592 31 30 8. 785675 9. 999189 8. 786486 11. 213514 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 86. Degree 3. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30
8. 785675 9. 999189 8. 786486 11. 213514 30 31 8. 787736 9. 999181 8. 788554
11. 211446 29 32 8. 789787 9. 999174 8. 790613 11. 209387 28 33 8. 791828 9.
999166 8. 792662 11. 207338 27 34 8. 793859 9 999158 8. 794701 11. 205299 26 35
8. 795881 9. 999150 8. 796731 11. 203269 25 36 8. 797894 9. 999142 8 798752 11
201248 24 37 8. 799897 9. 999134 8. 800763 11 199237 23 38 8. 801891 9. 999126
8. 802765 11. 197235 22 39 8 803876 9. 999118 8. 807458 11. 195242 21 40 8.
805852 9 999110 8. 806742 11. 193258 20 41 8. 807819 9. 999102 8. 808717 11.
191283 19 42 8. 809777 9. 999094 8. 812683 11. 189317 18 43 8. 811726 9 999086
8. 812641 11. 187359 17 44 8. 813667 9. 999077 8. 814589 11. 185411 16 45 8.
815598 9. 999069 8. 816529 11. 183471 15 46 8. 817522 9. 999061 8. 818461 11.
181539 14 47 8. 819436 9. 999052 8. (...) (...) 13 48 8. 821342 9. 999044 8.
822298 11. 177702 12 49 8. 823240 9. 999036 8. 824205 11. 175795 11 50 8.
825130 9. 999027 8 826103 11. 173897 10 51 8. 827011 9. 999019 8. 827992 11.
172003 9 52 8. 828884 9. 999010 8. 829874 11. 170126 8 53 8 830749 9. 999002 8.
831748 11. 168252 7 54 8. 832106 9. 998993 8. 833613 11. 166387 6 55 8. 834456
9. 998984 8. 835471 11. 164529 5 56 8. 836297 9. 998976 8. 837321 11. 162679 4
57 8. 838130 9. 998967 8. 839163 11. 160837 3 58 8. 839956 9 998958 8. 840998
11. 159002 2 59 8. 841774 9 998940 8. 842825 11. 157175 1 60 8. 843585 9.
998941 8. 844644 11. 155356 0 Cosine Sine Co tang. Tangent. M Degree 86.
Degree 4. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 8. 843584 9. 998941 8. 844644 11.
155356 60 1 8. 845387 9. 998931 8. 846455 11. 153545 59 2 8. 847183 9 998923 8.
848240 11. 151740 58 3 8. 848971 9. 998914 8. 850057 11. 149943 57 4 8. 850751
9. 998905 8. 851846 11. 148154 56 5 8. 852525 9. 998896 8. 853628 11. 146372 55
6 8. 854291 9. 998887 8. 855403 11. 144597 54 7 8. 856049 9. 998878 8. 857171
11. 142829 53 8 8. 857801 9. 998869 8. 858932 11. 141068 52 9 8. 859546 9.
998860 8. 860686 11. 139314 51 10 8. 861283 9. 998851 8. 862433 11. 137567 50
11 8. 863014 9. 998841 8. 864173 11. 135827 49 12 8. 864738 9. 998832 8. 865906
11. 134094 48 13 8. 866454 9. 998823 8. 867632 11. 132368 47 14 8 868165 9.
998813 8. 869351 11. 130649 46 15 8. 869868 9. 998804 8. 871064 11. 128936 45
16 8. 871565 9. 998795 8. 872750 11. 127230 44 17 8. 873255 9. 998785 8. 874469
11. 125531 43 18 8. 874938 9. 998776 8. 876162 11. 123838 42 19 8. 876615 9.
998766 8. 897849 11. 122151 41 20 8. 878285 9 998757 8. 879529 11. 120471 40 21
8. 879949 9. 998747 8. 881202 11. 118798 39 22 8. 881607 9. 998738 8. 882869
11. 117131 38 23 8. 883258 9. 998728 8. 884530 11. 115470 37 24 8. 884903 9.
998718 8. 886185 11. 113815 36 25 8. 886542 9. 998708 8. 887833 11. 112167 35
26 8. 888174 9. 998699 8. 889476 11. 110524 34 27 8. 889801 9. 998689 8. 891112
11. 108888 33 28 8. 891421 9. 998679 8. 892742 11. 107258 32 29 8. 893035 9.
998669 8. 894366 11. 105634 31 30 8. 894643 9. 998659 8. 845984 11. 104016 30
Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent. M Degree 85 Degree 4 M Sine Cosine Tangent
Co-tang. 30 8. 894643 9. 998659 8. 895984 11. 104016 30 31 8. 896246 9. 998649
8. 897596 11. 102404 29 32 8. 897842 9. 998639 8. 899203 11. 100797 28 33 8.
899432 9. 998629 8. 900803 11. 099197 27 34 8. 901017 9. 998619 8. 902398 11.
097602 26 35 8. 902596 9. 998609 8. 903987 11. 096013 25 36 8. 904169 9. 998599
8. 905570 11. 094430 24 37 8. 905736 9. 998589 8. 907147 11. 092853 23 38 8.
907297 9. 998577 8. 908719 11. 091281 22 39 8. 908853 9. 998568 8. 910285 11.
089715 21 40 8. 910404 9. 998558 8. 911846 11. 088154 20 41 8. 911949 9. 998548
8. 913401 11. 086599 19 42 8. 913488 9. 998537 8. 914951 11. 085049 18 43 8.
915022 9. 998527 8. 916495 11. 083505 17 44 8. 916550 9. 998516 8. 918034 11.
081966 16 45 8. 918073 9. 998506 8. 919568 11. 080432 15 46 8. 919591 9. 998495
8. 921096 11. 078904 14 47 8. 921103 9. 998485 8. 922619 11. 077381 13 48 8.
922610 9. 998474 8. 924136 11. 075864 12 49 8. 924112 9. 998464 8. 925649 11.
074351 11 50 8. 925609 9. 998453 8. 927156 11. 072844 10 51 8. 927100 9 998442
8. 928658 11. 071342 9 52 8. 928587 9. 998431 8. 930155 11. 069845 8 53 8.
930068 9. 998421 8. 931647 11. 068353 7 54 8. 931544 9. 998410 8. 933134 11.
066866 6 55 8. 933015 9. 998399 8. 934616 11. 065384 5 56 8. 934481 9. 998388
8. 936093 11. 063907 4 57 8. 935942 9. 998377 8. 937565 11. 062435 3 58 8.
937398 9. 998366 8. 939032 11. 060968 2 59 8. 938850 9. 998355 8. 940494 11.
059506 1 60 8. 940296 9. 998344 8. 941952 11. 058048 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent. M Degree 85. Degree 5. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 8. 940296 9.
998344 8. 941952 11. 058048 60 1 8. 941738 9. 998333 8. 943404 11. 056596 59 2
8. 943174 9. 998322 8. 944852 11. 055148 58 3 8. 944606 9. 998311 8. 946295 11.
053705 57 4 8. 946034 9. 998300 8. 947734 11. 052266 56 5 8. 957456 9. 998289
8. 949168 11. 050832 55 6 8. 958814 9. 998277 8. 950597 11. 049403 54 7 8.
950287 9. 998266 8. 952021 11. 047979 53 8 8. 951696 9. 998255 8. 953441 11.
046559 52 9 8. 953099 9. 998243 8. 954856 11. 045144 51 10 8. 954499 9. 998232
8. 956267 11. 043733 50 11 8. 955894 9. 998220 8. 957674 11. 042326 49 12 8.
957284 9. 998209 8. 959075 11. 040925 48 13 8. 958670 9. 998197 8. 960473 11.
039527 47 14 8. 960052 9. 998186 8. 961866 11. 038134 46 15 8. 961429 9. 998174
8. 963254 11. 036746 45 16 8. 962801 9. 998163 8. 964639 11. 035361 44 17 8.
964170 9. 998151 8 966019 11. 033981 43 18 8. 965534 9. 998139 8. 967394 11.
032606 42 19 8. 966893 9. 998128 8. 968766 11. 031234 41 20 8. 968249 9. 998106
8. 970133 11. 029867 40 21 8. 969600 9. 998104 8. 971495 11. 028505 39 22 8.
970947 9 998092 8 972855 11. 027145 38 23 8. 972289 9. 998080 8. 974209 11.
025791 37 24 8. 973626 9. 998068 8. 975560 11. 024440 36 25 8. 974962 9. 998056
8. 976906 11. 023094 35 26 8. 976293 9. 998044 8. 978248 11. 021752 34 27 8.
977619 9. 998032 8. 979586 11 020414 33 28 8 978941 9. 998020 8. 980921 11.
019079 32 29 8. 980259 9. 998008 8 982251 11. 017749 31 30 8. 981573 9. 997996
8. 983577 11. 016423 30 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent. M Degree 84. Degree 5.
M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 8. 981573 9. 997996 8. 983577 11. 016423 30
31 8. 982883 9. 997984 8. 984899 11. 015101 29 32 8. 984189 9. 997971 8. 986217
11. 013783 28 33 8. 985491 9. 997959 8 987532 11. 012468 27 34 8. 986789 9.
997947 8. 988842 11. 011158 26 35 8. 988083 9. 997935 8. 990149 11. 009851 25
36 8. 989374 9. 997922 8. 991451 11. 008549 24 37 8. 990660 9. 997910 8 992750
11. 007250 23 38 8. 991943 9 997897 8 994045 11. 005955 22 39 8. 993228 9.
997885 8. 995337 11. 004663 21 40 8. 994497 9. 997873 8. 996624 11. 003376 20
41 8. 995768 9. 997860 8 997908 11. 002092 19 42 8. 997036 9 997847 8. 999188
11. 000812 18 43 8. 998299 9. 997835 9. 000465 10. 999535 17 44 8. 999560 9.
997822 9. 001738 10. 998262 16 45 9. 000816 9. 997809 9. 003007 10. 996993 15
46 9. 002069 9. 997797 9. 004272 10. 995728 14 47 9. 003318 9. 997784 9. 005534
10. 994466 13 48 9. 004563 9. 997771 9. 006792 10. 993208 12 49 9. 005805 9.
997758 9. 008047 10. 991953 11 50 9. 007044 9. 997730 9. 009298 10. 990708 10
51 9. 008278 9. 997732 9. 010546 10. 989454 9 52 9. 009510 9. 997719 9 011790
10. 988210 8 53 9. 010737 9. 997706 9. 013031 10. 986969 7 54 9. 011962 9.
997693 9. 014268 10. 985732 6 55 9. 013182 9. 997680 9. 015502 10. 984498 5 56
9. 014399 9. 997667 9. 016732 10. 983268 4 57 9. 015613 9. 997654 9. 017959 10.
982041 3 58 9. 016824 9. 997641 9. 019183 10. 980817 2 59 9. 018031 9. 997628
9. 020403 10. 979597 1 60 9. 019235 9. 997612 9. 021620 10. 978380 0 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 84. Degree 6 M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
9. 019235 9. 997614 9. 021620 10. 978380 60 1 9. 020435 9. 997601 9. 022834 10.
977166 59 2 9. 021632 9. 997588 9. 024044 10. 975956 58 3 9. 022825 9. 997574
9. 025251 10. 974749 57 4 9. 024016 9. 997561 9. 026455 10. 973545 56 5 9.
025203 9. 997548 9. 027655 10. 972345 55 6 9. 026386 9. 997534 9. 028852 10.
971148 54 7 9. 027567 9. 997520 9. 030046 10. 969954 53 8 9. 028744 9. 997507
9. 031237 10. 968763 52 9 9. 029918 9. 997493 9. 032425 10. 967575 51 10 9.
031089 9. 997480 9. 033609 10. 966391 50 11 9. 032257 9. 997466 9. 034791 10.
965209 49 12 9. 033421 9. 997452 9. 035969 10. 964031 48 13 9. 034582 9. 997439
9. 036144 10. 962856 47 14 9. 035741 9. 997425 9. 038316 10. 961684 46 15 9.
036896 9. 997411 9. 039485 10. 960515 45 16 9. 038048 9. 997397 9. 040651 10.
959349 44 17 9. 039197 9. 997383 9. 041813 10. 958187 43 18 9. 040342 9. 997369
9. 042973 10. 957027 42 19 9. 041485 9. 997355 9. 044130 10. 955870 41 20 9.
042625 9. 997341 9. 045284 10. 954716 40 21 9. 043762 9. 997327 9. 046434 10.
953566 39 22 9. 044895 9. 997313 9. 047582 10. 952418 38 23 9. 046026 9. 997299
9. 048727 10. 951273 37 24 9. 047154 9. 997285 9. 049869 10. 950131 36 25 9.
049279 9. 997271 9. 051008 10. 948992 35 26 9. 049400 9. 997256 9. 052144 10.
947856 34 27 9. 050519 9. 997242 9. 043277 10. 946723 33 28 9. 051635 9. 997228
9. 054408 10. 945592 32 29 9. 052749 9. 997214 9. 055535 10. 944465 31 30 9.
053859 9. 997199 9. 056640 10. 943340 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
83. Degree 6. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 053859 9. 997199 9. 056640
10. 943340 30 31 9. 054966 9. 997185 9. 057781 10. 942219 29 32 9. 056071 9.
997170 9. 058900 10. 941100 28 33 9. 057172 9. 997156 9. 060016 10. 939984 27
34 9. 058271 9. 997141 9. 061130 10. 938870 26 35 9. 059367 9. 997127 9. 062240
10. 937760 25 36 9. 060460 9. 997112 9. 063348 10. 936652 24 37 9. 061551 9.
997098 9. 064453 10. 935547 23 38 9. 062638 9. 997083 9. 065556 10. 934444 22
39 9. 063723 9. 997068 9. 066655 10. 933345 21 40 9. 064806 9. 997053 9. 067752
10. 932248 20 41 9. 065885 9. 997039 9. 068847 10. 931153 19 42 9. 066962 9.
997024 9. 069938 10. 930062 18 43 9. 063036 9. 997009 9. 071027 10. 928973 17
44 9. 069107 9. 996994 9. 072113 10. 927887 16 45 9. 070176 9. 996979 9. 073197
10. 926803 15 46 9. 071242 9. 996964 9. 074278 10. 925722 14 47 9. 072306 9.
996949 9. 075356 10. 924644 13 48 9. 073366 9. 996934 9. 076432 10. 923568 12
49 9. 074424 9. 996919 9. 077505 10. 922495 11 50 9. 075480 9. 996904 9. 078576
10. 921424 10 51 9. 076533 9. 996889 9. 079644 10. 920356 9 52 9. 077583 9.
996874 9. 080710 10. 919290 8 53 9. 078631 9. 996858 9. 081773 10. 918227 7 54
9. 079676 9. 996843 9. 082833 10. 917167 6 55 9. 080719 9. 996828 9. 083891 10.
916109 5 56 9. 081759 9. 996812 9. 084947 10. 915053 4 57 9. 082797 9. 996797
9. 085999 10. 914100 3 58 9. 083832 9. 996782 9. 087050 10. 912950 2 59 9.
084864 9. 996766 9. 088098 10. 911902 1 60 9. 085894 9. 996751 9. 089144 10.
910856 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 83. Degree 7. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 085894 9. 996751 9. 089144 10. 910856 60 1 9. 086922 9.
996735 9. 090187 10. 909813 59 2 9. 087947 9. 996720 9. 091228 10. 908772 58 3
9. 088970 9. 996704 9. 092266 10. 907734 57 4 9. 089990 9. 996688 9. 093302 10.
906698 56 5 9. 091088 9. 996673 9. 094336 10. 905664 55 6 9. 092024 9. 996657
9. 095367 10. 904633 54 7 9. 093037 9. 996641 9. 096395 10. 903604 53 8 9.
094047 9. 996625 9. 097422 10. 902578 52 9 9. 095056 9. 996610 9. 098446 10.
901554 51 10 9. 096062 9. 996594 9. 099468 10. 900532 50 11 9. 097065 9. 996578
9. 100487 10. 899513 49 12 9 098066 9 996562 9 101504 10. 898496 48 13 9.
099065 9. 996546 9. 102519 10. 897481 47 14 9. 100062 9. 996530 9 103532 10.
896468 46 15 9. 101056 9. 996514 9. 104542 10. 895458 45 16 9102048 9 996498 9.
105550 10. 894450 44 17 9 103037 9. 996482 9. 106556 10. 893444 43 18 9. 104025
9 996465 9. 107559 10. 892441 42 19 9. 105010 9 996449 9. 108560 10. 891440 41
20 9. 105992 9. 996433 9. 109559 10. 890441 40 21 9. 106973 9. 996417 9. 110556
10. 889444 39 22 9. 107951 9. 996400 9. 111551 10. 888449 38 23 9. 108927 9.
996384 9. 112543 10. 887457 37 24 9. 109901 9. 996368 9. 113533 10. 886467 36
25 9. 110873 9. 996351 9. 114521 10. 885478 35 26 9. 111842 9. 996335 9. 115507
10. 884493 34 27 9. 112809 9. 996318 9. 116491 10. 883509 33 28 9. 113774 9
996302 9. 117472 10. 882528 32 29 9. 114737 9. 996235 9. 118452 10. 881548 31
30 9. 115698 9. 996269 9. 119429 10. 880571 30 Co sine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M
Degree 82. Degree 7. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 115698 9. 996269 9.
119429 10. 880571 30 31 9. 116656 9. 996252 9. 120404 10. 879596 29 32 9.
117612 9. 996235 9. 121377 10. 878623 28 33 9. 118567 9. 996218 9. 122348 10.
877652 27 34 9. 119519 9. 996202 9. 123317 10. 876683 26 35 9. 120469 9. 996185
9. 124284 10. 875716 25 36 9. 121417 9. 996168 9. 125248 10. 874751 24 37 9.
122362 9. 996151 9. 126211 10. 873789 23 38 9. 123306 9. 996134 9. 127172 10.
872828 22 39 9. 124248 9. 996117 9. 128130 10. 871870 21 40 9. 125187 9. 996100
9. 129087 10. 870913 20 41 9. 126125 9. 996083 9. 130041 10. 869959 19 42 9.
127060 9. 996066 9. 130994 10. 869006 18 43 9. 127993 9. 996049 9. 131944 10.
868056 17 44 9. 128925 9. 996032 9. 132893 10. 867107 16 45 9. 129854 9. 996015
9. 133839 10. 869161 15 46 9. 130781 9. 995998 9. 134784 10. 865216 14 47 9.
131706 9 995980 9. 135726 10. 864274 13 48 9. 132630 9. 995963 9. 136666 10.
863334 12 49 9. 133551 9 995946 9. 137605 10. 862395 11 50 9. 134470 9. 995928
9. 138542 10. 861458 10 51 9. 135387 9. 995911 9. 139476 10. 860524 9 52 9.
136303 9. 995894 9. 140409 10. 859591 8 53 9. 137216 9. 995876 9. 141340 10.
858660 7 54 9. 138127 9. 995859 9. 142269 10. 857731 6 55 9. 139037 9. 995841
9. 143196 10. 856804 5 56 9. 139944 9. 995825 9. 144121 10. 855879 4 57 9.
140850 9. 995806 9. 145044 10. 854956 3 58 9. 141754 9. 995788 9. 145965 10.
854035 2 59 9 142655 9. 995770 9. 146885 10. 853115 1 60 9. 142555 9. 995753 9.
147803 10. 852197 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 82. Degree 8. M Sine
Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 143555 9. 995753 9. 147803 10. 852197 60 1 9.
144453 9. 995735 9. 148718 10. 851282 59 2 9. 145349 9. 995717 9. 149632 10.
850368 58 3 9. 146243 9. 995699 9. 159544 10. 849456 57 4 9. 147136 9. 995681
9. 151454 10. 848546 56 5 9. 148026 9. 995664 9. 152363 10. 847637 55 6 9.
148919 9 995646 9. 153269 10. 846731 54 7 9. 149881 9. 995628 9. 154174 10.
845825 53 8 9. 150686 9. 995610 9. 155077 10. 844923 52 9 9. 151569 9. 995591
9. 155978 10. 844022 51 10 9. 152451 9. 995573 9. 156877 10. 843123 50 11 9.
153330 9. 995555 9. 157775 10. 842225 49 12 9. 154208 9. 995537 9. 158671 10.
841329 48 13 9. 155082 9. 995519 9. 159565 10. 840435 47 14 9. 155957 9. 995501
9 160457 10. 839543 46 15 9. 156830 9. 995482 9. 161347 10. 838653 45 16 9.
157700 9. 995464 9. 162236 10. 837764 44 17 9. 158569 9. 995446 9. 163123 10.
836877 43 18 9. 159436 9. 995427 9. 164008 10. 835992 42 19 9. 160301 9. 995409
9. 164892 10. 835108 41 20 9. 161164 9. 995390 9. 165773 10. 834226 40 21 9.
162025 9. 995372 9. 166654 10. 833346 39 22 9. 162885 9. 995353 9. 167532 10.
832468 38 23 9. 163743 9. 995334 9. 168409 10. 831591 37 24 9. 164600 9. 995316
9. 169284 10. 830716 36 25 9. 165454 9. 995297 9. 160157 10. 829843 35 26 9.
166307 9. 995278 9. 171029 10. 828971 34 27 9. 167158 9. 995260 9. 171899 10.
828101 33 28 9. 168008 9. 995241 9. 172767 10. 827233 32 29 9. 168856 9 995222
9 173634 10. 826366 31 30 9. 169702 9. 995203 9. 174499 10. 825501 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 81. Degree 8. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30
9. 169702 9. 995203 9. 174499 10. 825501 30 31 9. 170546 9. 995184 9. 175362
10. 824638 29 32 9. 171389 9. 995165 9. 176224 10. 823776 28 33 9. 172230 9.
995146 9. 177084 10. 822916 27 34 9. 173070 9. 995127 9. 177942 10. 822057 26
35 9. 173908 9. 995108 9. 178799 10. 821201 25 36 9. 174744 9. 995089 9. 179655
10. 820345 24 37 9. 175578 9. 995070 9. 180508 10. 819492 23 38 9. 176411 9.
995061 9. 181360 10. 818640 22 39 9. 177242 9. 995032 9. 182211 10. 817789 21
40 9. 178072 9. 995012 9. 183060 10. 816940 20 41 9. 178900 9. 994993 9. 183907
10. 816093 19 42 9. 179726 9. 994974 9. 184752 10. 815248 18 43 9. 180551 9.
994955 9. 185597 10. 814403 17 44 9. 181374 9. 994935 9. 186439 10. 813561 16
45 9. 182196 9. 994916 9. 187280 10. 812720 15 46 9. 183016 9. 994896 9. 188120
10. 811880 14 47 9. 183834 9. 994876 9. 188957 10. 811042 13 48 9. 184651 9.
994857 9. 189794 10. 810206 12 49 9. 185466 9 994838 9. 190629 10. 809371 11 50
9. 186280 9. 994818 9. 191462 10. 808538 10 51 9. 187092 9. 994798 9. 192294
10. 807706 9 52 9. 187903 9. 994779 9. 193124 10. 806876 8 53 9. 188712 9.
994759 9. 193953 10. 806047 7 54 9. 189519 9. 994739 9. 194780 10. 805220 6 55
9. 190325 9. 994719 9. 195606 10. 804394 5 56 9. 191130 9. 994699 9. 196440 10.
803569 4 57 9. 191933 9. 994680 9. 197253 10. 802747 3 58 9. 192734 9. 994660
9. 198674 10. 801926 2 59 9. 193534 9. 994640 9. 198894 10. 801106 1 60 9.
194332 9. 994620 9. 199712 10. 800287 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
81. Degree 9. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 194332 9. 994620 9. 199712
10. 800287 60 1 9. 195129 9. 994600 9. 200529 10. 799470 59 2 9. 195925 9.
994580 9. 201345 10. 798655 58 3 9. 196718 9. 994560 9. 202159 10. 797841 57 4
9. 197511 9. 994540 9. 202971 10. 797029 56 5 9. 198302 9. 994519 9. 203782 10.
796218 55 6 9. 199091 9. 994499 9. 204592 10. 795408 54 7 9. 199879 9. 994479
9. 205400 10. 794600 53 8 9. 200666 9. 994459 9. 206207 10. 793793 52 9 9.
201451 9. 994438 9. 207013 10. 792987 51 10 9. 202234 9. 994418 9. 207817 10.
792183 50 11 9. 203017 9. 994398 9. 208619 10. 791381 49 12 9 203797 9. 994377
9. 209420 10. 790580 48 13 9. 204577 9. 994357 9. 210220 10. 789780 47 14 9.
205354 9. 994336 9. 211018 10. 788982 46 15 9. 206131 9. 994316 9. 211815 10.
788185 45 16 9. 206906 9. 994195 9. 212611 10. 787385 44 17 9. 207679 9. 994174
9. 213405 10. 786595 43 18 9. 208452 9. 994154 9. 214198 10. 785802 42 19 9.
209222 9. 994133 9. 214989 10. 785011 41 20 9. 209992 9. 994112 9. 215780 10.
784220 40 21 9. 210760 9. 994191 9. 216568 10. 783432 39 22 9. 211526 9. 994171
9. 217356 10. 782644 38 23 9. 212291 9. 994150 9. 218142 10. 781858 37 24 9.
213055 9. 994129 9. 218926 10. 781070 36 25 9. 213818 9. 994108 9. 219710 10.
780294 35 26 9. 214579 9. 994087 9. 220491 10. 779508 34 27 9. 215338 9. 994066
9. 221272 10. 778728 33 28 9. 216097 9. 994044 9. 222052 10. 777948 32 29 9.
216854 9. 994024 9. 222830 10. 777170 31 30 9. 217609 9. 994003 9. 223607 10.
776393 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 80. Degree 9. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 217609 9. 994003 9. 223607 10. 716393 30 31 9. 218363 9.
993982 9. 224382 10. 775618 29 32 9. 219116 9. 993960 9. 225156 10. 774844 28
33 9. 219868 9. 993939 9. 225929 10. 774071 27 34 9. 220618 9. 993918 9. 226704
10. 773300 26 35 9. 221367 9. 993897 9 227471 10. 772529 25 36 9. 222115 9
993875 9 228240 10. 771760 24 37 9. 222861 9. 993854 9. 229007 10. 770993 23 38
9. 223606 9. 993832 9. 229774 10. 770226 22 39 9. 224349 9. 993811 9. 230539
10. 769461 21 40 9. 225092 9. 993789 9. 231302 10. 768698 20 41 9. 225833 9.
993768 9. 232065 10. 767935 19 42 9. 226573 9. 993746 9. 232826 10. 767174 18
43 9 227311 9. 993725 9. 233586 10. 766414 17 44 9. 228048 9. 993703 9. 234345
10. 765655 16 45 9 228784 9. 993681 9 235103 10. 764897 15 46 9. 239518 9.
993660 9. 235859 10. 764141 14 47 9. 230252 9. 993638 9. 236614 10. 763386 13
48 9. 230984 9. 993616 9. 237368 10. 762632 12 49 9. 231715 9. 993594 9. 238120
10. 761880 11 50 9. 232444 9. 993572 9. 238872 10. 761128 10 51 9. 233172 9.
993550 9. 239622 10. 760378 9 52 9. 233899 9. 993528 9. 240371 10. 759629 8 53
9 234625 9. 993506 9. 241118 10. 758882 7 54 9. 235349 9. 993484 9. 241865 10.
758135 6 55 9. 236073 9. 993462 9 242610 10 757390 5 56 9. 236795 9. 993440 9.
243354 10. 756646 4 57 9. 237515 9. 993418 9. 244097 10. 755903 3 58 9. 238835
9. 993396 9. 244839 10. 755161 2 59 9. 238952 9. 993374 9. 245579 10. 754421 1
60 9. 239670 9. 993351 9. 246319 10. 753681 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M
Degree 80. Degree 10. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 239670 9. 993351 9.
246319 10. 753681 60 1 9. 240386 9. 993329 9. 247057 10. 752943 59 2 9. 241101
9. 993307 9. 247794 10. 752206 58 3 9. 241814 9. 993284 9. 248530 10. 751470 57
4 9. 242526 9. 993262 9. 249264 10. 750736 56 5 9. 243237 9. 993240 9. 249998
10. 750002 55 6 9. 243947 9. 993117 9. 250730 10. 749270 54 7 9 244656 9.
993195 9. 251461 10. 748539 53 8 9. 245363 9. 993172 9. 252191 10. 747809 52 9
9. 246070 9. 993149 9. 252920 10. 747080 51 10 9. 246775 9 993127 9. 253648 10.
746352 50 11 9. 247478 9. 993104 9. 254374 10. 745626 49 12 9. 248181 9. 993011
9. 255200 10. 744900 48 13 9. 248883 9. 993059 9. 255824 10. 744176 47 14 9.
249583 9. 993036 9. 256547 10. 743453 46 15 9. 250282 9. 993013 9. 257269 10.
742731 45 16 9. 250980 9. 992990 9. 257990 10. 742010 44 17 9. 251677 9. 992967
9. 258710 10. 741290 43 18 9. 252373 9. 992944 9. 259429 10. 740571 42 19 9.
253067 9. 992921 9. 260146 10. 739854 41 20 9. 253761 9. 992898 9. 260863 10.
739137 40 21 9 254453 9. 992875 9. 261578 10. 738422 39 22 9. 255144 9. 992852
9. 262292 10. 737708 38 23 9. 255834 9. 992829 9. 263005 10. 736995 37 24 9.
256523 9. 992806 9. 263717 10. 736283 36 25 9. 257211 9. 992783 9. 264428 10.
735572 35 26 9. 257898 9. 992759 9. 265138 10. 734862 34 27 9. 258583 9. 992736
9. 265847 10. 734153 33 28 9. 259268 9. 992713 9. 266555 10. 733445 32 29 9.
259951 9 992690 9. 267261 10. 732739 31 30 9 260633 9. 992666 9. 267967 10.
732033 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 79. Degree 10. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 260633 9. 992666 9. 267967 10. 732033 30 31 9. 261314 9.
992643 9. 268671 10. 731329 29 32 9. 261994 9. 992619 9. 269375 10. 730625 28
33 9. 262673 9. 992596 9. 270778 10. 729923 27 34 9. 263351 9. 992572 9. 271479
10. 729221 26 35 9. 264027 9. 992549 9. 271479 10. 728521 25 36 9. 264703 9.
992525 9. 272178 10. 727822 24 37 9. 265378 9. 992501 9. (...) 10. 727124 23 38
9. 266051 9. 992478 9. 273573 10. 726427 22 39 9. 266723 9. 992454 9. 274269
10. 725731 21 40 9. 267395 9. 992430 9. 274964 10. 725036 20 41 9. 268065 9.
992406 9. 275658 10. 724342 19 42 9. 268734 9. 992382 9. 276351 10. 723649 18
43 9. 269402 9. 992362 9. 277043 10. 722957 17 44 9. 270069 9. 992335 9. 277734
10. 722267 16 45 9. 270735 9. 992311 9. 278424 10. 721576 15 46 9. 271400 9.
992287 9. 279113 10. 720887 14 47 9. 272063 9. 992263 9. 279801 10. 720199 13
48 9. 272726 9. 992239 9 280488 10. 719512 12 49 9. 273388 9. 992214 9. 281174
10. 718826 11 50 9. 274049 9. 992190 9. 281858 10. 718142 10 51 9. 274708 9
992166 9. 282542 10. 717458 9 52 9. 275367 9. 992142 9. 283225 10. 716775 8 53
9. 276025 9. 992118 9283907 10. 716093 7 54 9. 276681 9. 992093 9. 284588 10.
715412 6 55 9. 277337 9. 992069 9. 285268 10. 714732 5 56 9. 277991 9. 992045
9. 285946 10. 714053 4 57 9. 278685 9. 992020 9 286624 10. 713376 3 58 9.
279297 9. 991996 9. 287301 10. 712699 2 59 9 279948 9. 991971 9. 287977 10.
712023 1 60 9. 280599 9. 991947 9. 288652 10. 711348 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 79. Degree 11. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 280599 9.
991947 9. 288652 10. 711348 60 1 9. 281229 9. 991922 9. 289326 10. 710674 59 2
9. 281897 9. 991897 9. 289999 10. 710001 58 3 9. 282544 9. 991873 9. 290671 10.
709329 57 4 9. 283190 9. 991848 9. 291342 10. 708658 56 5 9. 283836 9. 991823 9
292013 10. 707987 55 6 9. 284480 9. 991799 9. 292682 10. 707318 54 7 9. 285124
9. 991774 9. 293350 10. 706650 53 8 9. 285766 9. 991749 9. 294017 10. 705983 52
9 9. 286408 9. 991724 9. 294684 10. 705316 51 10 9. 287048 9. 991699 9. 295349
10. 704651 50 11 9. 287688 9. 991674 9. 296013 10. 703987 49 12 9. 288326 9.
991649 9. 296677 10. 703323 48 13 9. 288964 9. 991624 9. 297339 10. 702661 47
14 9. 289600 9. 991599 9. 298001 10. 701999 46 15 9. 290236 9. 991574 9. 298662
10. 701338 45 16 9. 290870 9. 991549 9. 299322 10. 700678 44 17 9. 291504 9.
991524 9. 299980 10. 700020 43 18 9. 292137 9. 991498 9. 300638 10. 699362 42
19 9. 292768 9. 991473 9. 301295 10. 698705 41 20 9. 293399 9. 991448 9. 301951
10. 698049 40 21 9. 294029 9. 991422 9. 302607 10. 697393 39 22 9. 294658 9.
991397 9. 303261 10. 696739 38 23 9. 295286 9. 991372 9. 303914 10. 696086 37
24 9. 295913 9. 991346 9. 304567 10. 695433 36 25 9. 296539 9. 991321 9. 305218
10. 694782 35 26 9. 297164 9. 991295 9. 305867 10. 694131 34 27 9. 297788 9.
991270 9. 306519 10. 693481 33 28 9. 298412 9. 991244 9. 307168 10. 692832 32
29 9. 299034 9. 991218 9. 307816 10. 692184 31 30 9. 299655 9 991193 9. 308463
10. 691537 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 78. Degree 11. M Sine
Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 299655 9 991193 9. 308463 10. 691537 30 31 9.
300276 9. 991167 9. 309109 10. 690891 29 32 9. 300895 9. 991141 9. 309754 10.
690246 28 33 9. 301514 9. 991115 9. 310399 10. 689601 27 34 9. 302132 9. 991090
9. 311042 10. 688958 26 35 9. 302749 9. 991064 9. 311685 10. 688315 25 36 9.
303364 9. 991038 9. 312327 10. 687673 24 37 9. 303979 9. 991012 9. 312968 10.
687032 23 38 9. 304593 9. 990986 9. 313608 10. 686392 22 39 9. 305207 9. 990960
9. 314247 10. 685753 21 40 9. 305819 9. 990934 9. 314885 10. 685115 20 41 9.
306430 9. 990908 9. 315523 10. 684477 19 42 9. 307041 9. 990882 9 316159 10.
683841 18 43 9. 307650 9. 990855 9. 316795 10. 683205 17 44 9. 308259 9. 990829
9. 317430 10. 682570 16 45 9. 308867 9. 990803 9. 318064 10. 681936 15 46 9.
309474 9. 990777 9. 318647 10. 681303 14 47 9. 310080 9. 990750 9. 319330 10.
680670 13 48 9. 310685 9. 990724 9. 319961 10 680039 12 49 9. 311289 9. 990697
9. 320592 10. 679408 11 50 9. 311899 9. 990671 9. 321222 10. 678778 10 51 9.
312495 9. 990645 9. 321851 10. 678149 9 52 9. 313097 9. 990618 9. 322479 10.
677521 8 53 9. 313698 9. 990591 9 323106 10. 676894 7 54 9. 314297 9. 990565 9.
323733 10. 676267 6 55 9. 314897 9. 990538 9. 324358 10. 675642 5 56 9. 315495
9. 990512 9. 324983 10. 675017 4 57 9. 316092 9. 990485 9. 325607 10. 674393 3
58 9. 316689 9. 990458 9. 326231 10. 673769 2 59 9. 317284 9. 990431 9. 326853
10. 673147 1 60 9. 317879 9. 990404 9. 327475 10. 672525 0 Cosine. Sine
Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 78. Degree 12. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9.
317879 9. 990404 9. 327475 10. 672525 60 1 9. 318473 9. 990377 9. 328095 10.
671905 59 2 9. 319066 9. 990351 9. 328715 10. 671285 58 3 9. 319658 9. 990324
9. 329334 10. 670666 57 4 9. 320250 9. 990297 9. 329953 10. 670047 56 5 9.
320840 9. 990270 9. 320570 10. 669430 55 6 9. 321430 9. 990242 9. 331187 10.
668813 54 7 9. 322019 9. 990215 9. 331803 10 668197 53 8 9. 322607 9. 990188 9.
332418 10. 667582 52 9 9. 323194 9. 990161 9. 333033 10. 666967 51 10 9. 323780
9. 990134 9. 333646 10. 666354 50 11 9. 324366 9. 990107 9. 334259 10. 665741
49 12 9. 324950 9. 990079 9. 334871 10. 665129 48 13 9. 325534 9. 990052 9.
335482 10. 664518 47 14 9. 326117 9. 990025 9. 336093 10. 663907 46 15 9.
326699 9. 989997 9. 336700 10. 663298 45 16 9. 327281 9 989970 9. 337311 10.
662689 44 17 9. 327862 9. 989942 9. 337919 10. 662081 43 18 9. 328441 9. 989915
9. 338527 10. 661473 42 19 9. 329020 9. 989887 9. 339133 10. 660867 41 20 9.
329599 9. 989860 9. 339739 10. 660261 40 21 9. 330176 9. 989832 9. 340344 10.
659656 39 22 9. 330753 9. 989804 9. 340948 10. 659052 38 23 9. 331328 9. 989777
9. 341552 10. 658448 37 24 9. 331903 9. 989749 9. 342155 10. 657845 36 25 9.
332478 9 989721 9. 342757 10. 657243 35 26 9 333051 9. 989693 9. 343358 10.
656642 34 27 9. 333624 9. 989665 9. 343958 10. 656042 33 28 9. 334195 9. 989637
9. 344558 10. 655442 32 29 9. 334766 9 989609 9. 345157 10. 654843 31 30 9.
335337 9. 989581 9 345755 10. 654245 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent. M Degree
77. Degree 12. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 335337 9. 989581 9. 345755
10. 654245 30 31 9. 335906 9. 989553 9. 346353 10. 653647 29 32 9. 336475 9.
989525 9. 346949 10. 653051 28 33 9. 337043 9. 989597 9. 347545 10. 652455 27
34 9. 337610 9. 989469 9. 348141 10. 651859 26 35 9. 338176 9. 989441 9. 348735
10. 651265 25 36 9. 338742 9. 989413 9. 349329 10. 650671 24 37 9. 339306 9.
989384 9. 349922 10. 650078 23 38 9. 339870 9. 989356 9. 350514 10. 649486 22
39 9 340434 9. 989328 9. 351106 10. 648894 21 40 9. 340996 9. 989299 9. 351697
10. 648303 20 41 9. 341558 9. 989271 9. 352287 10. 647713 19 42 9. 342119 9.
989243 9. 352876 10. 647124 18 43 9. 342679 9. 989214 9. 353465 10. 646535 17
44 9. 343239 9. 989186 9. 354053 10. 645947 16 45 9. 343797 9. 989157 9. 354640
10. 645360 15 46 9. 344355 9. 989128 9. 355227 10. 644773 14 47 9. 344912 9.
989100 9 355812 10. 644187 13 48 9. 345469 9. 989071 9. 356398 10. 643602 12 49
9. 346024 9. 989042 9. 356982 10. 643018 11 50 9. 346579 9. 989014 9. 357566
10. 642434 10 51 9. 347134 9. 988985 9. 358149 10. 641851 9 52 9. 347687 9.
988956 9. 358731 10. 641269 8 53 9. 348240 9. 988927 9. 359313 10. 640687 7 54
9. 348792 9. 988898 9. 359893 10. 640107 6 55 9 349343 9. 988869 9. 360474 10.
639526 5 56 9. 349893 9. 988840 9. 361053 10. 638947 4 57 9. 350443 9. 988811
9. 361632 10. 638368 3 58 9. 350992 9. 988782 9. 362210 10. 637790 2 59 9.
351540 9. 988754 9. 362787 10. 637213 1 60 9. 352088 9. 988724 9. 363364 10.
636636 0 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent. M Degree 77. Degree 13. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 352088 9. 988724 9. 363364 10. 636636 60 1 9. 352635 9.
988695 9. 363940 10. 636060 59 2 9. 353181 9. 988666 9. 364515 10. 635485 58 3
9. 353726 9. 988636 9. 365090 10. 634910 57 4 9. 354271 9. 988607 9. 365664 10.
634336 56 5 9. 354185 9. 988578 9. 366237 10. 633763 55 6 9. 355358 9. 988548
9. 366810 10. 633190 54 7 9. 355901 9. 988519 9. 367382 10. 632618 53 8 9
356443 9. 988489 9. 367953 10. 632047 52 9 9. 356984 9. 988460 9. 368524 10.
631476 51 10 9. 357524 9. 988430 9. 369094 10. 630906 50 11 9. 358064 9. 988401
9. 369663 10. 630337 49 12 9. 358603 9. 988371 9. 370232 10. 629768 48 13 9.
359141 9. 988341 9. 370799 10. 629201 47 14 9. 359679 9. 988312 9. 371367 10.
628633 46 15 9. 350215 9 988282 9. 371933 10. 628067 45 16 9. 360752 9 988252
9. 372499 10. 627501 44 17 9. 361287 9. 988223 9. 373064 10. 626936 43 18 9.
361822 9. 988193 9 373629 10. 626371 42 19 9 362356 9. 988163 9. 374193 10.
625807 41 20 9. 362889 9. 988133 9. 374756 10. 625244 40 21 9. 363422 9. 988103
9. 375319 10. 624681 39 22 9 363954 9. 988073 9 375881 10. 624119 38 23 9.
364485 9. 988043 9. 376442 10. 623558 37 24 9. 365016 9. 988013 9 377003 10.
622997 36 25 9 365546 9. 987983 9 377563 10. 622437 35 26 9 366075 9. 987953 9.
378122 10. 621878 34 27 9. 366604 9. 987922 9. 378681 10. 621319 33 28 9 367132
9. 987892 9. 379239 10. 620761 32 29 9. 367659 9. 987862 9. 379797 10. 620203
31 30 9. 368185 9. 987832 9. 380354 10. 619646 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent
M Degree 76. Degree 13. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 368185 9. 987832
9. 380354 10. 619646 30 31 9. 368711 9. 987801 9. 380910 10. 619090 29 32 9.
369236 9. 987771 9. 381466 10. 618534 28 33 9. 369761 9. 987740 9. 382021 10.
617980 27 34 9. 370285 9. 987710 9. 382575 10. 617425 26 35 9. 370808 9. 987679
9. 383129 10. 616871 25 36 9. 371330 9. 987649 9. 383682 10. 616318 24 37 9.
371852 9. 987618 9. 384234 10. 615766 23 38 9. 372373 9. 987588 9. 384786 10.
615214 22 39 9. 372894 9. 987557 9. 385337 10. 614663 21 40 9. 373414 9. 987526
9. 385888 10. 614112 20 41 9. 373933 9. 987496 9. 386438 10. 613562 19 42 9.
374452 9. 987465 9. 386987 10. 613013 18 43 9. 374970 9. 987434 9. 387536 10.
612464 17 44 9. 375487 9. 987403 9. 388084 10. 611916 16 45 9. 376003 9. 987372
9. 388631 10. 611369 15 46 9. 376519 9. 987341 9. 389178 10. 610822 14 47 9.
377035 9. 987310 9. 389724 10. 610276 13 48 9. 377549 9. 987279 9. 390270 10.
609730 12 49 9. 378063 9. 987248 9. 390815 10. 609185 11 50 9. 378577 9. 987217
9. 391360 10. 608640 10 51 9. 379089 9. 987186 9. 391907 10. 608097 9 52 9.
379601 9. 987155 9. 392467 10. 607553 8 53 9. 380113 9. 987124 9. 392989 10.
607011 7 54 9. 380624 9. 987092 9. 393531 10. 606469 6 55 9. 381134 9. 987061 9
394074 10. 605927 5 56 9. 381643 9. 987030 9. 394614 10. 605386 4 57 9. 382152
9. 986998 9. 395154 10. 604846 3 58 9 382661 9. 986967 9. 395694 10. 604306 2
59 9. 383168 9. 986936 9. 396233 10. 603767 1 60 9. 383675 9. 986904 9. 396770
10. 603229 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 76. Degree 14 M Sine
Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 383675 9 986904 9. 396771 10. 603229 60 1 9.
384181 9. 986873 9. 397309 10. 602694 59 2 9. 384687 9. 986841 9. 397846 10.
602154 58 3 9. 385192 9. 986809 9. 398383 10. 601617 57 4 9. 385697 9 986778 9.
398919 10. 601081 56 5 9. 386201 9. 986746 9. 399455 10. 600545 55 6 9. 386704
9. 986714 9. 399990 10. 600010 54 7 9. 387207 9. 986683 9. 400524 10. 599476 53
8 9. 387709 9. 986651 9. 401058 10. 598942 52 9 9. 388210 9. 986619 9. 401591
10. 598409 51 10 9. 388711 9. 986587 9. 402124 10. 597876 50 11 9. 389211 9.
986555 9. 402656 10. 597344 49 12 9. 389711 9. 986523 9. 403187 10. 596813 48
13 9. 390210 9. 986491 9. 403718 10. 596282 47 14 9. 390708 9. 986459 9. 404249
10. 595751 46 15 9. 391206 9. 986427 9. 404778 10. 595222 45 16 9. 391703 9.
986395 9. 405306 10. 594692 44 17 9. 392199 9. 986363 9. 405836 10. 594164 43
18 9. 392695 9. 986331 9. 406364 10. 593636 42 19 9. 393190 9. 986299 9. 406892
10. 593608 41 20 9. 393685 9. 986266 9. 407419 10. 592581 40 21 9. 394179 9.
986234 9. 407945 10. 592055 39 22 9. 394673 9. 986201 9. 408471 10. 591529 38
23 9. 395166 9. 986869 9. 408996 10. 591001 37 24 9. 395654 9. 986137 9. 409521
10. 590479 36 25 9. 396150 9. 986104 9. 410045 10. 589954 35 26 9. 396641 9.
986072 9. 410569 10. 589431 34 27 9. 397131 9. 986039 9. 411097 10. 588908 33
28 9. 397621 9. 986007 9. 411615 10. 588385 32 29 9. 398111 9. 985974 9. 412137
10. 587863 31 30 9. 398600 9. 986942 9. 412658 10. 587342 30 Cosine Sine
Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 75. Degree 14. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9.
398600 9. 985942 9. 412658 10. 587342 30 31 9. 399087 9. 985909 9. 413179 10.
586821 29 32 9. 399575 9. 985876 9. 413699 10. 586301 28 33 9. 400062 9. 985843
9. 414219 10. 585781 27 34 9. 400549 9. 985811 9. 414738 10. 585262 26 35 9.
401035 9. 985778 9. 415257 10. 584742 25 36 9. 401520 9. 985745 9. 415775 10.
584225 24 37 9. 402005 9. 985712 9. 416293 10. 583707 23 38 9. 402489 9. 985679
9. 416810 10. 583190 22 39 9. 402972 9. 985646 9. 417326 10. 582674 21 40 9.
403455 9. 985613 9. 417842 10. 582157 20 41 9. 403938 9. 985580 9. 418357 10
581642 19 42 9. 404420 9. 985547 9. 418873 10. 581127 18 43 9. 404901 9. 985513
9. 419387 10 580613 17 44 9. 405382 9. 985480 9. 419901 10. 580099 16 45 9.
405862 9. 985447 9. 420415 10. 579585 15 46 9. 406341 9. 985414 9. 420927 10.
579072 14 47 9. 406820 9. 985380 9. 421440 10. 578560 13 48 9. 407299 9. 985347
9. 421951 10. 578048 12 49 9. 407776 9. 985314 9. 422463 10. 577537 11 50 9.
408254 9. 985280 9. 422973 10. 577026 10 51 9. 408731 9. 985247 9. 423484 10.
576516 9 52 9. 409207 9. 985213 9. 423993 10. 576007 8 53 9. 409682 9. 985180
9. 424503 10. 575497 7 54 9. 410157 9. 985146 9. 425011 10. 574989 6 55 9.
410632 9. 985112 9. 425518 10. 574480 5 56 9. 411106 9. 985079 9. 426027 10.
573973 4 57 9. 411579 9. 985045 9. 426534 10. 573466 3 58 9. 412052 9. 985011
9. 427041 10. 572959 2 59 9. 412524 9. 984977 9. 427547 10. 572453 1 60 9.
412996 9. 984943 9. 428052 10. 571947 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
75. Degree 15. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 412996 9. 984944 9. 428052
10. 571947 60 1 9. 413467 9. 984910 9. 428557 10. 571442 59 2 9. 413938 9.
984876 9. 429067 10. 570938 58 3 9. 414408 9. 984842 9. 429566 10. 570434 57 4
9. 414878 9. 984808 9. 430070 10. 569930 56 5 9. 415347 9. 984774 9. 430573 10.
569427 55 6 9. 415815 9. 984740 9. 431075 10. 568925 54 7 9. 416283 9. 984706
9. 431577 10. 568423 53 8 9. 416850 9 984672 9. 432079 10. 567921 52 9 9.
417217 9. 984637 9. 432580 10. 567420 51 10 9. 417684 9. 984603 9. 433080 10.
566920 50 11 9. 418149 9. 984569 9. 433580 10. 566419 49 12 9. 418615 9. 984535
9. 434080 10. 565920 48 13 9. 419079 9. 984500 9. 434579 10. 565421 47 14 9.
419544 9. 984466 9. 435078 10. 564922 46 15 9. 420007 9. 984431 9. 435576 10.
564424 45 16 9. 420470 9. 984397 9. 436073 10. 563927 44 17 9. 420933 9. 984363
9. 436570 10. 563430 43 18 9. 421395 9. 984328 9. 437067 10. 562933 42 19 9.
421856 9. 984293 9. 437563 10. 562437 41 20 9. 422317 9. 984259 9. 438059 10.
561941 40 21 9. 422778 9. 984224 9. 438554 10. 561446 39 22 9. 423238 9. 984189
9. 439548 10. 560952 38 23 9 423697 9. 984155 9. 439543 10. 560457 37 24 9.
424156 9. 984120 9. 440036 10. 559964 36 25 9. 424615 9. 984085 9. 440529 10.
559471 35 26 9. 425072 9. 984050 9. 441022 10. 558978 34 27 9 425530 9 984015
9. 441514 10. 558486 33 28 9. 425987 9. 983980 9. 442006 10. 557994 32 29 9.
426443 9. 983945 9. 442497 10. 557503 31 30 9. 426899 9. 983910 9. 442988 10.
557011 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 74. Degree 15. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 426899 9. 983910 9. 442988 10. 557011 30 31 9. 427354 9.
983875 9. 443479 10. 556521 29 32 9. 427809 9. 983840 9. 443968 10. 556031 28
33 9. 428264 9. 983805 9. 444458 10. 555542 27 34 9. 428717 9. 983770 9. 444947
10. 555035 26 35 9. 429170 9. 983735 9. 445435 10. 554565 25 36 9. 429623 9.
983699 9. 445923 10. 554077 24 37 9. 430075 9. 983664 9. 446411 10. 553589 23
38 9. 430507 9 983629 9. 446898 10. 553102 22 39 9. 430978 9. 983593 9. 447384
10. 552616 21 40 9. 431429 9. 983558 9. 447870 10. 552129 20 41 9. 431879 9.
983523 9. 448356 10. 551644 19 42 9. 432328 9. 983487 9. 448841 10. 551159 18
43 9. 432778 9. 983452 9. 449326 10. 550674 17 44 9. 433206 9. 983416 9. 449810
10. 550181 16 45 9. 433674 9. 983380 9. 450294 10. 559706 15 46 9. 434122 9.
983345 9. 450777 10. 549223 14 47 9. 434569 9. 983309 9. 451260 10. 548740 13
48 9. 435016 9. 983273 9. 451743 10. 548257 12 49 9. 435462 9. 983238 9. 452225
10. 547775 11 50 9. 435918 9. 983202 9. 452706 10. 547294 10 51 9. 436353 9.
983166 9. 453187 10. 546813 9 52 9. 436798 9. 983130 9. 453668 10. 546332 8 53
9. 437242 9. 983094 9. 454148 10. 545852 7 54 9. 437686 9. 983058 9 454629 10.
545372 6 55 9. 438129 9. 983022 9 455107 10. 544893 5 56 9. 438572 9. 982986 9.
455586 10. 544414 4 57 9. 439014 9. 982950 9. 456064 10. 543936 3 58 9. 439456
9. 982914 9. 456542 10. 543458 2 59 9. 439897 9. 982878 9. 457019 10. 542980 1
60 9. 440338 9. 982842 9. 457496 10. 542503 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M
Degree 74. Degree 16. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 440338 9. 982842 9.
457496 10. 542503 60 1 9. 440778 9. 982805 9. 457973 10. 542027 59 2 9. 441218
9. 982769 9 458449 10. 541551 58 3 9. 441658 9. 982733 9. 458925 10. 541075 57
4 9. 442096 9. 982696 9. 459400 10. 540600 56 5 9. 442535 9 982660 9. 459875
10. 540125 55 6 9. 442973 9. 982623 9. 460349 10. 539651 54 7 9. 443416 9.
982587 9 460829 10. 539177 53 8 9. 443848 9. 982550 9. 461297 10. 538703 52 9
9. 444284 9. 982514 9. 461770 10. 538230 51 10 9. 444720 9. 982477 9. 462242
10. 537758 50 11 9. 445155 9. 982441 9. 462714 10. 537285 49 12 9. 445590 9.
982404 9. 463186 10. 536814 48 13 9. 446025 9. 982367 9. 463658 10. 536342 47
14 9. 446459 9. 982330 9. 464129 10. 535871 46 15 9. 446893 9. 982294 9 464599
10. 535401 45 16 9. 447326 9. 982257 9 465069 10. 534931 44 17 9. 447759 9.
982220 9. 465539 10. 534461 43 18 9. 448191 9. 982183 9. 466008 10. 533992 42
19 9. 448623 9. 982146 9. 466476 10. 533523 41 20 9. 449054 9. 982109 9. 466945
10. 533055 40 21 9. 449485 9. 982072 9. 467413 10. 532587 39 22 9. 449915 9.
982035 9. 467880 10. 532120 38 23 9. 450345 9. 981998 9. 468347 10. 531653 37
24 9. 450775 9. 981961 9. 468814 10. 531186 36 25 9. 451203 9 981923 9. 469280
10. 530720 35 26 9. 451632 9 981886 9. 469746 10. 530254 34 27 9. 452060 9.
981849 9. 470211 10. 529789 33 28 9. 452488 9. 981812 9. 470676 10. 529324 32
29 9. 452915 9. 981774 9. 471141 10. 528859 31 30 9. 453342 9. 981737 9. 471605
10. 528395 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 73. Degree 16. M Sine
Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 453342 9. 981737 9. 471605 10. 528395 30 31 9.
453768 9. 981699 9. 472068 10. 527931 29 32 9. 454194 9. 981662 9. 472532 10.
527468 28 33 9. 454619 9. 981624 9 472995 10. 527005 27 34 9 455044 9. 981587
9. 473457 10. 526543 26 35 9. 455469 9. 981549 9. 473919 10. 526081 25 36 9.
455892 9. 981512 9. 474381 10. 525619 24 37 9. 456316 9. 981474 9 474842 10.
525158 23 38 9. 456739 9. 981436 9. 475303 10. 524695 22 39 9. 457162 9. 981398
9. 475763 10. 524237 21 40 9. 457584 9. 981361 9. 476223 10. 523777 20 41 9
458006 9. 981323 9. 476683 10. 523317 19 42 9. 458427 9 981285 9. 477142 10.
522858 18 43 9. 458848 9. 981247 9. 477601 10. 522399 17 44 9. 459268 9. 981209
9. 478059 10. 521941 16 45 9. 459684 9. 981171 9. 478517 10. 521483 15 46 9.
460108 9. 981133 9. 478975 10. 521025 14 47 9. 460527 9. 981095 9. 479432 10.
520168 13 48 9. 460946 9. 981057 9. 479886 10. 520111 12 49 9. 461364 9. 981019
9. 480345 10. 519655 11 50 9. 461782 9. 980980 9. 480801 10. 519199 10 51 9.
462199 9. 980942 9. 481257 10. 518743 9 52 9. 462616 9. 980904 9. 481712 10.
518288 8 53 9. 463032 9. 980866 9 482167 10. 517833 7 54 9. 463448 9. 980827 9.
482621 10. 517379 6 55 9 463864 9. 980789 9. 483075 10. 516925 5 56 9. 464279
9. 980750 9 483528 10. 516471 4 57 9. 464694 9. 980712 9. 483982 10. 516018 3
58 9 465108 9. 980672 9. 484434 10. 515565 2 59 9. 465522 9. 980635 9. 484887
10. 515113 1 60 9. 465935 9. 980596 9. 485339 10. 514661 0 Cosine Sine
Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 73. Degree 17. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9
465935 9. 980596 9. 485339 10. 514661 60 1 9. 466348 9. 980558 9. 485791 10.
514209 59 2 9. 466761 9. 980519 9. 486272 10. 513758 58 3 9 467173 9. 980480 9.
486693 10. 513307 57 4 9. 467585 9. 980441 9. 487143 10. 512857 56 5 9. 467996
9. 980403 9. 487593 10. 512407 55 6 9 468407 9. 980364 9. 488043 10. 511957 54
7 9. 468817 9. 980325 9. 488493 10. 511507 53 8 9. 469227 9. 980286 9 488941
10. 511059 52 9 9. 469637 9. 980247 9. 489390 10. 510610 51 10 9. 460446 9.
980208 9. 489838 10. 510162 50 11. 9 470455 9. 980169 9. 490286 10. 509714 49
12 9. 471863 9. 980130 9. 490733 10. 509267 48 13 9. 471071 9. 980091 9. 491180
10. 508820 47 14 9. 471678 9. 980052 9. 491627 10. 508373 46 15 9. 472086 9.
980012 9. 492073 10. 507928 45 16 9. 472492 9. 979973 9. 492519 10. 507481 44
17 9. 472898 9. 979934 9. 492964 10. 507035 43 18 9. 473304 9. 979894 9. 493410
10. 506590 42 19 9. 473710 9. 979855 9. 493854 10. 506145 41 20 9. 474115 9.
979816 9. 494299 10. 505701 40 21 9. 474519 9. 979776 9 494743 10. 505257 39 22
9. 474923 9. 979737 9. 495186 10. 504813 38 23 9. 475327 9. 979697 9. 495630
10. 504370 37 24 9. 475730 9. 979658 9. 496073 10. 503928 36 25 9. 476133 9.
979618 9. 496515 10. 503485 35 26 9. 476539 9. 979578 9. 496957 10. 503043 34
27 9 476938 9. 979539 9. 497399 10. 502601 33 28 9. 477340 9. 979499 9. 497840
10. 502160 32 29 9. 477741 9 979459 9. (...) 10. 501718 31 30 9. 478142 9.
979419 9. 498722 10. 501278 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 72.
Degree 17. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 478142 9. 979419 9. 498722 10.
501278 30 31 9. 478542 9. 979380 9. 499163 10. 500837 29 32 9 478942 9. 979340
9. 499602 10. 500398 28 33 9. 479342 9 979300 9. 500042 10. 499958 27 34 9.
479741 9. 979260 9. 500481 10. 499519 26 35 9. 480140 9. 979220 9. 500920 10.
499080 25 36 9. 480538 9. 979180 9. 501359 10. 498641 24 37 9. 480936 9. 979140
9. 501797 10. 498203 23 38 9. 481334 9. 979099 9. 502234 10. 497765 22 39 9.
481731 9. 979059 9. 502672 10. 497328 21 40 9. 482128 9 979019 9. 503109 10.
496891 20 41 9. 482525 9. 978980 9. 503546 10. 496454 19 42 9. 482921 9. 978939
9. 503982 10. 496018 18 43 9. 483316 9. 978898 9. 504418 10. 495582 17 44 9.
483711 9. 978858 9. 504854 10. 495146 16 45 9. 484106 9. 978817 9. 505289 10.
494711 15 46 9. 484501 9. 978777 9. 505724 10. 494216 14 47 9. 484895 9. 978736
9. 506158 10. 493841 13 48 9. 485289 9. 978696 9. 506593 10. 493407 12 49 9.
485682 9. 978655 9. 507026 10. 492973 11 50 9. 486075 9 978615 9. 507459 10.
492540 10 51 9. 486467 9. 978574 9. 507892 10. 492107 9 52 9. 486859 9. 978533
9. 508326 10. 491674 8 53 9. 487251 9. 978493 9. 508759 10. 491241 7 54 9.
487642 9. 978452 9. 509181 10. 490809 6 55 9. 488033 9. 978411 9. 509622 10
490377 5 56 9. 488424 9. 978370 9. 510044 10 489916 4 57 9. 488814 9. 978329 9.
510486 10. 489515 3 58 9. 489204 9. 978288 9. 510916 10. 489084 2 59 9. 489593
9. 978247 9. 511346 10 488654 1 60 9. 489982 9. 978206 9. 511776 10. 488225 0
Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 72. Degree 18. M Sine Cosine Tangent
Co-tang. 0 9. 489982 9. 978206 9. 511776 10. 488224 60 1 9. 490371 9. 978165 9.
512206 10. 487794 59 2 9. 490759 9. 978124 9. 512635 10. 487365 58 3 9. 491147
9. 978083 9. 513064 10. 486936 57 4 9. 491534 9. 978042 9. 513493 10. 486507 56
5 9. 491922 9. 978000 9. 513921 10. 486079 55 6 9. 492308 9. 977959 9. 514349
10. 485651 54 7 9. 492695 9. 977918 9 514777 10. 485223 53 8 9. 493080 9 977877
9. 515204 10. 484796 52 9 9. 493466 9. 977835 9. 515631 10. 484369 51 10 9.
493851 9. 977794 9. 516057 10 483942 50 11 9. 494236 9 977752 9. 516484 10.
483516 49 12 9. 494620 9. 977711 9. 516910 10. 483090 48 13 9. 495005 9. 977669
9. 517335 40. 482665 47 14 9. 495388 9. 977628 9. 517761 10. 482239 46 15 9.
495771 9. 977586 9. 518185 10. 481814 45 16 9. 496154 9. 977544 9. 518610 10.
481390 44 17 9. 496537 9. 977503 9. 519034 10. 480966 43 18 9. 496919 9. 977461
9. 519458 10. 480542 42 19 9. 497301 9. 977419 9. 519882 10. 480118 41 20 9.
497682 9. 977377 9. 520305 10. 489695 40 21 9. 498063 9. 977335 9. 520728 10.
479272 39 22 9. 498444 9 977293 9. 521151 10. 478849 38 23 9. 498824 9 977251
9. 521573 10. 478427 37 24 9. 499204 9. 977209 9. 521995 10. 478005 36 25 9.
499584 9. 977167 9. 522417 10. 477583 35 26 9. 499963 9. 977125 9. 522838 10.
477162 34 27 9. 500342 9 977083 9. 523259 10. 476741 33 28 9. 500720 9. 977041
9. 523679 10. 476320 32 29 9. 501099 9 977999 9. 524109 10. 475900 31 30 9.
501476 9. 977956 9. 524520 10. 475480 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
71. Degree 18. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 501476 9. 976956 9. 524520
10. 475480 30 31 9. 501854 9. 976914 9. 524939 10. 475060 29 32 9. 502231 9.
976872 9. 525359 10. 474641 28 33 9. 502607 9. 976830 9. 525778 10. 474222 27
34 9. 502984 9. 976787 9. 526197 10. 473803 26 35 9. 503360 9. 976745 9. 526615
10. 473385 25 36 9. 503735 9. 976702 9. 527033 10. 472967 24 37 9. 504110 9.
976660 9. 527451 10. 472549 23 38 9. 504485 9. 976617 9. 527868 10. 472132 22
39 9. 504840 9. 976574 9. 528285 10. 471715 21 40 9. 505234 9. 976532 9. 528702
10. 471298 20 41 9. 505608 9. 976489 9. 529118 10. 470881 19 42 9. 505981 9.
976446 9. 529535 10. 470465 18 43 9. 506354 9. 976404 9. 529950 10. 470049 17
44 9. 506727 9. 976361 9. 530366 10. 469634 16 45 9. 507099 9. 976318 9. 530781
10. 469219 15 46 9. 507471 9. 976275 9. 531196 10 468804 14 47 9. 507843 9.
976232 9. 531611 10. 468389 13 48 9. 508214 9. 976185 9. 532025 10. 467975 12
49 9. 508585 9. 976146 9. 532436 10. 467561 11 50 9. 508955 9. 976103 9. 532852
10. 467147 10 51 9. 509326 9. 976060 9. 533266 10. 466734 9 52 9. 509696 9.
976017 9. 533679 10. 466321 8 53 9. 510065 9. 975973 9. 534092 10. 465908 7 54
9. 510434 9. 975930 9. 534504 10. 465496 6 55 9. 510803 9. 975887 9. 534916 10.
465084 5 56 9. 511171 9. 975844 9. 535328 10. 464672 4 57 9. 511540 9. 975800
9. 535739 10. 464261 3 58 9. 511907 9. 975757 9. 536150 10. 463849 2 59 9.
512275 9. 975713 9. 536561 10. 463439 1 60 9. 512642 9. 975670 9. 536972 10.
463028 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 71. Degree 19. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 512642 9. 975670 9. 536972 10. 463028 60 1 9. 513009 9.
975626 9. 537382 10. 462618 59 2 9. 513375 9. 975583 9. 537792 10. 462208 58 3
9. 513741 9. 975539 9. 538202 10. 461798 57 4 9. 514107 9. 975496 9. 538610 10.
461389 56 5 9. 514472 9. 975452 9. 539020 10. 460980 55 6 9. 514837 9. 975408
9. 539429 10. 460571 54 7 9. 515202 9. 975364 9. 539837 10. 460163 53 8 9.
515566 9. 975321 9. 540245 10. 459755 52 9 9. 515930 9. 975277 9. 540653 10.
459347 51 10 9. 516294 9. 975233 9. 541061 10. 458939 50 11 9. 516657 9. 975189
9. 541468 10. 458532 49 12 9. 517020 9. 975145 9. 541875 10. 458125 48 13 9.
517382 9. 975101 9. 542281 10. 457719 47 14 9. 517745 9. 975057 9. 542688 10.
457312 46 15 9. 518107 9. 975013 9. 543094 10. 456906 45 16 9. 518468 9. 974969
9. 543499 10. 456501 44 17 9. 518829 9. 974925 9. 543905 10. 456095 43 18 9.
519190 9. 974880 9. 544310 10. 455690 42 19 9. 519551 9. 974836 9. 544715 10.
455285 41 20 9. 519911 9. 974792 9. 545119 10. 454881 40 21 9. 520271 9. 974747
9. 545524 10. 454476 39 22 9. 520631 9. 974703 9. 545927 10. 454072 38 23 9.
520990 9. 974659 9. 546331 10. 453669 37 24 9. 521349 9. 974614 9. 546735 10.
453265 36 25 9. 521707 9. 974570 9. 547138 10. 452862 35 26 9. 522065 9. 974525
9. 547540 10. 452459 34 27 9. 522423 9. 974480 9. 547943 10. 452057 33 28 9.
522781 9. 974436 9. 548345 10. 451655 32 29 9. 523138 9. 974391 9. 548747 10.
451253 31 30 9. 523495 9. 974346 9. 549149 10. 450851 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 70. Degree 19. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9 523495 9.
974346 9. 549149 10. 450851 30 31 9. 523851 9. 974302 9. 549550 10. 450450 29
32 9. 524208 9. 974257 9. 549951 10. 450049 28 33 9. 524564 9. 974212 9. 550352
10. 449648 27 34 9. 524920 9. 974167 9. 550752 10. 449248 26 35 9. 525275 9.
974122 9. 551152 10. 448848 25 36 9. 525630 9. 974077 9. 551552 10. 448448 24
37 9. 525984 9. 974032 9. 551952 10. 448048 23 38 9. 526339 9. 973987 9. 552351
10. 447649 22 39 9. 526693 9. 973942 9. 552750 10. 447250 21 40 9. 527046 9.
973897 9. 553149 10. 446851 20 41 9. 527400 9. 973852 9. 553548 10. 446452 19
42 9. 527753 9. 973807 9. 553946 10. 446054 18 43 9. 528105 9. 973761 9. 554344
10. 445656 17 44 9. 528458 9. 973716 9 554741 10. 445259 16 45 9. 528810 9.
973671 9. 555139 10. 444861 15 46 9. 529161 9. 973615 9. 555536 10. 444464 14
47 9. 529513 9. 973580 9. 555932 10. 444068 13 48 9. 529864 9. 973535 9. 556329
10. 443671 12 49 9. 530214 9 973489 9. 556727 10. 443275 11 50 9. 530565 9.
973443 9. 557121 10. 442879 10 51 9. 530915 9. 973398 9. 557517 10. 442483 9 52
9. 531265 9. 973352 9. 557912 10. 442088 8 53 9. 531614 9. 973307 9. 558308 10.
441693 7 54 9. 531963 9. 973261 9. 558702 10. 441298 6 55 9. 532312 9. 973215
9. 559097 10. 440903 5 56 9. 532661 9. 973169 9. 559491 10. 440509 4 57 9.
533009 9. 973123 9. 559885 10. 440115 3 58 9. 533357 9. 973078 9 560279 10.
439721 2 59 9. 533704 9. 973032 9. 560673 10. 439327 1 60 9. 534052 9. 972986
9. 561066 10. 438934 0 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 70. Degree 20. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 534052 9. 972986 9. 561066 10. 438934 60 1
9. 534399 9. 972940 9. 561459 10. 438541 59 2 9. 534746 9. 972894 9. 561851 10.
438148 58 3 9. 535091 9. 972848 9. 562244 10. 437756 57 4 9. 535437 9. 972801
9. 562636 10. 437364 56 5 9. 535782 9. 972755 9. 563028 10. 436972 55 6 9.
536129 9. 972709 9. 563419 10. 436580 54 7 9 536474 9. 972663 9. 563811 10.
436189 53 8 9. 536818 9. 972617 9. 564202 10. 435798 52 9 9. 537163 9. 972570
9. 564592 10. 435407 51 10 9. 537507 9. 972524 9. 564983 10. 435017 50 11 9.
537851 9. 972477 9. 565373 10. 434627 49 12 9. 538194 9. 972431 9. 565763 10.
434237 48 13 9. 538537 9. 972384 9 566153 10. 433847 47 14 9. 538880 9. 972338
9. 566542 10. 433457 46 15 9. 539222 9. 972291 9. 566932 10. 433068 45 16 9.
539565 9. 972245 9. 567320 10. 432679 44 17 9. 539907 9. 972198 9. 567709 10.
432291 43 18 9. 540249 9. 972151 9. 568097 10. 431902 42 19 9. 540590 9. 972105
9. 568486 10. 431514 41 20 9. 540931 9. 972058 9. 569873 10. 431126 40 21 9.
541272 9. 972011 9. 569261 10. 430739 39 22 9. 541612 9 971964 9. 569648 10.
430351 38 23 9. 541953 9. 971917 9. 570035 10. 429964 37 24 9. 542292 9. 971870
9 570422 10. 429578 36 25 9. 542632 9. 971823 9. 570809 10. 429191 35 26 9.
542971 9. 971776 9. 571195 10. 428805 34 27 9. 543310 9. 971729 9. 571581 10.
428419 33 28 9. 543649 9. 971682 9. 571967 10. 428033 32 29 9 543987 9. 971635
9. 572352 10. 427648 31 30 9. 544325 9. 971588 9. 572738 10. 427262 30 Cosine.
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 69. Degree 20. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang.
30 9. 544325 9. 971588 9. 572738 10. 427262 30 31 9. 544663 9. 971540 9. 573123
10. 426877 29 32 9. 545000 9. 971493 9. 573507 10. 426492 28 33 9. 545338 9.
971446 9. 573892 10. 426108 27 34 9. 545674 9. 971398 9. 574276 10. 425724 26
35 9. 546011 9. 971351 9. 574660 10. 425340 25 36 9. 546347 9. 971303 9. 575044
10. 424956 24 37 9. 546683 9. 971256 9. 575427 10. 424573 23 38 9. 547019 9.
971208 9. 575810 10. 424189 22 39 9. 547354 9. 971161 9. 576193 10. 423807 21
40 9. 547689 9. 971112 9. 576576 10. 423424 20 41 9. 548024 9. 971065 9. 576958
10. 423041 19 42 9. 548358 9. 971018 9. 577341 10. 422659 18 43 9. 548693 9.
970970 9. 577723 10. 422277 17 44 9. 549026 9. 970922 9. 578104 10. 421896 16
45 9. 549360 9. 970874 9. 578486 10. 421514 15 46 9. 549693 9. 970826 9. 578867
10. 421133 14 47 9. 550026 9. 970779 9. 579248 10. 420752 13 48 9. 550359 9.
970731 9. 579628 10. 420371 12 49 9. 550692 9. 970683 9. 580009 10. 419991 11
50 9. 551024 9. 970634 9. 580389 10. 419611 10 51 9. 551355 9. 970586 9. 580769
10. 419231 9 52 9. 551687 9. 970538 9. 581149 10. 418851 8 53 9. 552018 9.
970490 9 581528 10. 418472 7 54 9. 552349 9. 970442 9. 581907 10. 418092 6 55
9. 552680 9. 970394 9. 582286 10. 417713 5 56 9. 553010 9. 970345 9. 582665 10.
417335 4 57 9. 553340 9. 970297 9. 583043 10. 416956 3 58 9. 553670 9. 970249
9. 583422 10. 416578 2 59 9. 554000 9. 970200 9. 583800 10. 416200 1 60 9.
554329 9. 970152 9. 584177 10. 415823 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
69. Degree 21. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 554329 9. 970152 9. 584177
10. 415822 60 1 9. 554658 9. 970103 9. 584555 10. 415445 59 2 9. 554987 9.
970055 9. 584932 10. 415068 58 3 9. 555315 9. 970006 9. 585308 10. 414691 57 4
9. 555643 9. 969957 9 585686 10. 414314 56 5 9. 555971 9. 969909 9. 586062 10.
413938 55 6 9. 556299 9. 969860 9. 586439 10. 413561 54 7 9. 556626 9. 969811
9. 586815 10. 413185 53 8 9. 556953 9. 969762 9. 587190 10 412800 52 9 9.
557279 9. 969713 9. 587566 10. 412434 51 10 9. 557606 9. 969665 9. 587941 10.
412059 50 11 9. 557932 9. 969616 9. 588316 10. 411684 49 12 9. 558258 9. 969567
9. 588691 10. 411309 48 13 9. 558583 9. 969518 9. 589066 10. 410934 47 14 9.
558909 9. 969469 9. 589440 10. 410560 46 15 9. 559234 9. 969419 9. 589814 10.
410185 45 16 9. 559558 9. 969370 9. 590188 10. 409812 44 17 9. 559883 9. 969321
9. 590561 10. 409438 43 18 9. 560207 9. 969272 9. 590935 10. 409065 42 19 9.
560531 9. 969223 9. 591308 10. 408692 41 20 9. 560855 9. 969173 9. 591681 10.
408319 40 21 9. 561178 9. 969124 9. 592054 10. 407946 39 22 9. 561501 9. 969075
9. 592426 10. 407574 38 23 9. 561824 9. 969025 9. 592798 10. 407201 37 24 9.
562146 9. 968976 9. 593170 10. 406829 36 25 9. 562468 9. 968926 9. 593542 10.
406457 35 26 9. 562790 9. 968877 9. 593914 10. 406086 34 27 9. 563112 9. 968827
9. 594285 10. 405715 33 28 9. 563433 9. 968777 9. 594656 10. 405344 32 29 9.
563754 9. 968728 9. 595027 10. 405073 31 30 9. 564075 9. 968678 9. 595397 10.
404602 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 68. Degree 21. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 564075 9. 968678 9. 595397 10. 404602 30 31 9. 564396 9.
968628 9. 595768 10. 404232 29 32 9. 564716 9. 698578 9. 596138 10. 403862 28
33 9. 565036 9. 968528 9. 596508 10. 403492 27 34 9. 565356 9. 968478 9. 596878
10. 403122 26 35 9. 565675 6. 968428 9. 597247 10. 402753 25 36 9. 565995 9.
968378 9. 597616 10. 402384 24 37 9. 566314 9. 968328 9. 597985 10. 402015 23
38 9. 566632 9. 968278 9. 598354 10. 401646 22 39 9. 566951 9. 968228 9. 598722
10. 401277 21 40 9. 567269 9. 968178 9. 599091 10. 400909 20 41 9. 567587 9.
968128 9. 599459 10 400541 19 42 9. 567904 9. 968078 9. 599827 10. 400173 18 43
9. 568222 9. 968027 9. 600194 10. 399806 17 44 9. 568539 9. 967977 9. 600562
10. 399438 16 45 9. 568855 9. 967927 9. 600929 10. 399071 15 46 9. 569172 9.
967876 9. 601296 10. 398704 14 47 9. 569488 9. 967826 9. 601662 10. 398337 13
48 9. 569804 9 967775 9. 602029 10. 397971 12 49 9. 570120 9. 967725 9. 602395
10. 397605 11 50 9. 570435 9. 967674 9. 602761 10. 397239 10 51 9. 570751 9.
967623 9. 603127 10. 396873 9 52 9. 571065 9. 967573 9. 603493 10. 396507 8 53
9. 571380 9. 967522 9. 603858 10. 396142 7 54 9. 571695 9. 967471 9. 604223 10.
395777 6 55 9. 572009 9. 967420 9. 604588 10. 395412 5 56 9. 572322 9. 967370
9. 604953 10. 395047 4 57 9. 572636 9. 967319 9. 605317 10. 394683 3 58 9.
572949 9. 967268 9. 605681 10. 394318 2 59 9. 573263 9. 967217 9. 606046 10.
393954 1 60 9. 573575 9. 967166 9. 606409 10. 393590 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 68. Degree 22. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 573575 9.
967166 9. 606409 10. 393590 60 1 9. 573888 9. 967115 9. 606773 10. 393227 59 2
9. 574200 9. 967064 9. 607136 10. 392863 58 3 9. 574512 9. 967012 9. 607500 10.
392500 57 4 9. 574824 9. 966961 9. 607862 10. 392137 56 5 9. 575135 9. 966910
9. 608225 10. 391774 55 6 9. 575447 9. 966859 9. 608588 10. 391412 54 7 9.
575758 9. 966807 9. 608950 10. 391050 53 8 9. 576068 9. 966756 9. 609312 10.
390688 52 9 9. 576379 9. 966705 9. 609674 10. 390326 51 10 9. 576689 9. 966653
9. 600036 10. 389964 50 11 9. 576999 9. 966602 9. 610397 10. 389603 49 12 9.
577309 9. 966550 9. 610758 10. 389241 48 13 9. 577618 9. 966499 9. 611119 10.
388880 47 14 9. 577927 9 966447 9. 611480 10. 388520 46 15 9. 578236 9. 966395
9. 611841 10. 388159 45 16 9. 578545 9. 966344 9. 612201 10. 387799 44 17 9.
578853 9. 966292 9. 612561 10. 387438 43 18 9. 579161 9. 966240 9. 612921 10.
387078 42 19 9. 579469 9. 966188 9. 613281 10. 386719 41 20 9. 579777 9. 966136
9. 613641 10. 386359 40 21 9. 580084 9. 966084 9. 614000 10. 386000 39 22 9.
580392 9. 966032 9. 614359 10. 385641 38 23 9 580698 9. 965980 9. 614718 10.
385282 37 24 9. 581005 9. 965928 9 615077 10. 384923 36 25 9. (...) 9. 965876
9. 615435 10. 384565 35 26 9. 581618 9 965824 9. 615793 10. 384207 34 27 9
581923 9. 965772 9. 616151 10. 383448 33 28 9. 582229 9. 965720 9. 616509 10.
383491 32 29 9. 582534 9. 965668 9. 616867 10. 383133 31 30 9. 582840 9. 965615
9. 617224 10. 382776 30 Co sine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 67. Degree 22. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 582840 9. 965615 9. 617224 10. 382776 30 31
9. 583144 9. 965563 9. 617581 10. 382418 29 32 9. 583449 9. 965511 9. 617938
10. 382061 28 33 9. 583753 9. 965458 9. 618295 10. 381705 27 34 9. 584058 9.
965406 9. 618652 10. 381348 26 35 9. 584361 9. 965353 9. 619008 10. 380992 25
36 9. 584665 9. 965301 9. 619364 10. 380635 24 37 9. 584968 9. 965248 9. 619720
10. 380279 23 38 9. 585271 9. 965195 9. 620076 10. 379924 22 39 9. 585574 9.
965143 9. 620432 10. 379568 21 40 9. 585877 9. 965090 9. 620787 10. 379213 20
41 9. 586179 9. 965037 9. 621142 10. 378858 19 42 9. 586481 9. 964984 9. 621497
10. 378503 18 43 9. 586783 9. 964931 9. 621852 10. 378148 17 44 9. 587085 9.
964878 9. 622206 10. 377793 16 45 9. 587386 9. 964825 9. 622561 10. 377439 15
46 9. 587687 9. 964772 9. 622915 10. 377085 14 47 9. 587988 9. 964719 9. 623269
10. 376731 13 48 9. 588289 9. 964666 9. 623623 10. 376377 12 49 9. 588589 9.
964613 9. 623976 10. 376024 11 50 9. 588890 9. 964560 9. 624330 10. 375670 10
51 9. 589190 9. 964507 9. 624683 10. 375317 9 52 9. 589489 9. 964454 9. 625036
10. 374964 8 53 9. 589789 9. 964400 9. 625388 10. 374612 7 54 9. 590088 9.
964347 9. 625741 10. 374259 6 55 9. 590387 9. 964294 9. 626093 10. 373907 5 56
9. 590686 9. 964240 9. 626445 10. 373555 4 57 9. 590984 9. 964187 9. 626797 10.
373203 3 58 9. 591282 9. 964133 9. 627149 10. 372850 2 59 9. 591580 9. 964080
9. 627501 10. 372499 1 60 9. 591878 9. 964026 9. 627852 10. 372148 0 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 67. Degree 23. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
9. 591878 9. 964026 9. 627852 10. 372148 60 1 9. 592175 9. 963972 9. 628203 10.
371797 59 2 9. 592473 9. 963919 9. 628554 10. 371446 58 3 9. 592770 9. 963865
9. 628905 10. 371095 57 4 9. 593067 9. 963811 9. 629255 10. 370744 56 5 9.
593363 9. 963757 9. 629606 10. 370394 55 6 9. 593659 9 963703 9. 629956 10.
370044 54 7 9. 593955 9. 963650 9. 630306 10. 369694 53 8 9. 594251 9. 963596
9. 630655 10. 369344 52 9 9. 594547 9. 963542 9. 631005 10. 368995 51 10 9.
594842 9. 963488 9. 631354 10. 368645 50 11 9. 595137 9. 963433 9. 631704 10.
368296 49 12 9. 595432 9. 963379 9. 632053 10. 367947 48 13 9. 595727 9. 963325
9. 632401 10. 367598 47 14 9. 596021 9. 963271 9. 632750 10. 367250 46 15 9.
596315 9. 963217 9. 633098 10. 366901 45 16 9. 596610 9. 963102 9. 633447 10.
366553 44 17 9. 596903 9. 963108 9. 633795 10. 366205 43 18 9. 597196 9. 963054
9. 634143 10. 365857 42 19 9. 597490 9. 962999 9. 634490 10. 365510 41 20 9.
597783 9. 962945 9. 634838 10. 365162 40 21 9 598075 9. 962892 9. 635185 10.
364815 39 22 9 598368 9. 962836 9. 635530 10. 364468 38 23 9. 598660 9. 962781
9. 635879 10. 364121 37 24 9. 598952 9 962726 9. 636226 10. 363774 36 25 9
599244 9. 962672 9. 636571 10. 363428 35 26 9. 599536 9. 962617 9. 636918 10.
363081 34 27 9. 599827 9. 962562 9. 637205 10. 362735 33 28 9. 600118 9. 962507
9. 637610 10. 362389 32 29 9. 600409 9. 962453 9. 637956 10. 362044 31 30 9.
600700 9. 962398 9. 638302 10. 361698 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
66. Degree 23. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 600700 9. 967398 9. 638302
10. 361698 30 31 9. 600990 9. 962343 9. 638647 10. 361353 29 32 9. 601280 9.
962288 9. 638992 10. 361007 28 33 9. 601570 9. 962233 9. 639337 10. 360662 27
34 9. 601860 9 962178 9. 639682 10. 360318 26 35 9. 602149 9. 962122 9. 640027
10. 359973 25 36 9. 602439 9. 962067 9. 640371 10. 359629 24 37 9. 602728 9.
962012 9. 640716 10. 359284 23 38 9 603017 9. 961957 9. 641060 10. 358940 22 39
9. 603305 9. 961902 9. 641404 10. 358596 21 40 9. 603594 9. 961846 9. 641747
10. 358253 20 41 9. 603882 9. 961791 9. 642091 10. 357909 19 42 9. 604170 9.
961735 9. 642434 10. 357566 18 43 9. 604457 9. 961680 9. 642777 10. 357223 17
44 9. 604745 9. 961624 9. 643120 10. 356980 16 45 9. 605032 9. 961569 9. 643463
10. 356537 15 46 9. 605319 9. 961513 9. 643806 10. 356194 14 47 9. 605606 9.
961458 9. 644148 10. 355852 13 48 9. 605892 9. 961402 9. 644490 10. 355510 12
49 9. 606179 9. 961346 9. 644832 10. 355168 11 50 9. 606465 9. 961290 9. 645174
10. 354826 10 51 9. 606750 9. 961235 9. 645516 10. 354484 9 52 9. 607036 9.
961179 9. 645857 10. 354142 8 53 9. 607322 9. 961123 9. 646199 10. 353801 7 54
9. 607607 9. 961067 9. 646540 10. 353460 6 55 9. 607892 9. 961011 9. 646881 10.
353119 5 56 9. 608176 9. 960955 9. 647222 10. 352778 4 57 9. 608461 9. 960899
9. 647562 10. 352438 3 58 9. 608745 9. 960842 9. 647903 10. 352097 2 59 9.
609029 9. 960786 9. 648243 10. 351757 1 60 9. 609313 9. 960730 9. 648583 10.
351417 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 66. Degree 24. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 609313 9. 960730 9. 648583 10. 351417 60 1 9. 609597 9.
960674 9. 648923 10. 351077 59 2 9. 609880 9. 960617 9. 649263 10. 350737 58 3
9. 610163 9. 960561 9. 649602 10. 350398 57 4 9. 610446 9. 960505 9. 649942 10.
350058 56 5 9. 610729 9. 960448 9. 650281 10. 349319 55 6 9. 611012 9. 960392
9. 650620 10. 349380 54 7 9. 611294 9. 960335 9. 650959 10. 349041 53 8 9.
611576 9. 960279 9. 651297 10. 348703 52 9 9. 611858 9. 960222 9. 651636 10.
348364 51 10 9. 612140 9. 960165 9. 651974 10. 348026 50 11 9. 612421 9. 960109
9. 652312 10. 347688 49 12 9. 612702 9. 960052 9. 652650 10. 347350 48 13 9.
612983 9. 959995 9. 652988 10. 347012 47 14 9. 613264 9. 959938 9. 653326 10.
346674 46 15 9. 613545 9. 959881 9. 653663 10. 346337 45 16 9. 613825 9. 959824
9. 654000 10. 345999 44 17 9. 614105 9. 959768 9. 654337 10. 345662 43 18 9.
614385 9. 959710 9. 654674 10. 345325 42 19 9. 614665 9. 959653 9. 655011 10.
344989 41 20 9. 614944 9. 959596 9. 655348 10. 344652 40 21 9. 615223 9. 959539
9. 655684 10. 344316 39 22 9. 615502 9. 959482 9. 656020 10. 343980 38 23 9.
615781 9. 959425 9. 656356 10. 343643 37 24 9. 616060 9. 959367 9. 656692 10.
343308 36 25 9. 616338 9. 959310 9. 657028 10. 342972 35 26 9. 616616 9. 959253
9. 657363 10. 342636 34 27 9. 616894 9. 959195 9. 657699 10. 342301 33 28 9.
617172 9. 959138 9. 658034 10. 341966 32 29 9. 617450 9. 959080 9. 658369 10.
341531 31 30 9 617727 9. 959023 9. 658704 10. 341296 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 65. Degree 24. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 617727 9.
959023 9. 658704 10. 341296 30 31 9. 618004 9. 958965 9. 659039 10. 340926 29
32 9. 618281 9. 958908 9659373 10. 340627 28 33 9. 618558 9. 958850 9. 659708
10. 340292 27 34 9. 618834 9. 958792 9. 660042 10. 339958 26 35 9. 619110 9.
958734 9. 660376 10. 339624 25 36 9. 619386 9. 958677 9. 660710 10. 339290 24
37 9. 619662 9. 958619 9. 661043 10. 338957 23 38 9. 619938 9. 958561 9. 661377
10. 338623 22 39 9. 620213 9. 958503 9. 661710 10. 338290 21 40 9. 620488 9.
958445 9. 662043 10. 337956 20 41 9. 620763 9. 958387 9. 662376 10. 337623 19
42 9. 621038 9. 958329 9. 662709 10. 337291 18 43 9. 621313 9. 958271 9. 663042
10. 336958 17 44 9. 621587 9. 958212 9. 663374 10. 336625 16 45 9. 621861 9.
958154 9. 663707 10. 336293 15 46 9. 622135 9. 958096 9. 664039 10. 335961 14
47 9. 622409 9. 958038 9. 664371 10. 335629 13 48 9. 622682 9. 957979 9. 664703
10. 335297 12 49 9. 622956 9. 957921 9. 665035 10. 334965 11 50 9. 623229 9.
957862 9. 665366 10. 334634 10 51 9. 623502 9. 957804 9. 665697 10. 334302 9 52
9. 623774 9. 957745 9. 666029 10. 333971 8 53 9. 624047 9. 957687 9. 666360 10.
333640 7 54 9. 624319 9. 957628 9. 666691 10. 333309 6 55 9. 624591 9. 957570
9. 667021 10. 332979 5 56 9. 624863 9. 957511 9. 667352 10. 332648 4 57 9.
625134 9. 957452 9. 667682 10. 332318 3 58 9. 625406 9. 957393 9. 668012 10.
331987 2 59 9. 625677 9. 957334 9. 668343 10. 331657 1 60 9. 625948 9. 957276
9. 668672 10. 331327 0 Cosine Sine Co-(...). Tangent M Degree 65. Degree 25. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 625948 9. 957276 9. 668672 10. 331327 60 1
9. 626219 9. 957217 9. 669002 10. 330998 59 2 9. 626490 9. 957158 9. 669332 10.
330668 58 3 9. 626760 9 957099 9. 669661 10. 330339 57 4 9. 627030 9. 957040 9.
699990 10. 330009 56 5 9. 627300 9. 956981 9. 670320 10. 329680 55 6 9. 627570
9. 956922 9. 670649 10. 329351 54 7 9 627840 9. 956862 9. 670977 10. 329022 53
8 9. 628109 9. 956803 9. 671306 10. 328694 52 9 9. 628378 9. 956744 9. 671634
10. 328365 51 10 9. 628647 9. 956684 9. 671963 10. 328037 50 11 9. 628916 9
956625 9. 672291 10. 327709 49 12 9. 629184 9. 956565 9. 672619 10. 327381 48
13 9. 629453 9. 956208 9. 672947 10. 327053 47 14 9. 629721 9. 956446 9. 673274
10. 326725 46 15 9. 629989 9. 956387 9 673603 10. 326398 45 16 9. 630257 9.
956327 9 673929 10. 326070 44 17 9. 630524 9. 956267 9. 674256 10. 325743 43 18
9. 630792 9. 956208 9. 674584 10. 325416 42 19 9. 631059 9. 956148 9. 674910
10. 325089 41 20 9. 631326 6. 956088 9. 675237 10. 324763 40 21 9. 631592 9.
956029 9. 675564 10. 324436 39 22 9. 631859 9. 955969 9. 675890 10. 324110 38
23 9 632125 9. 955909 9. 676216 10. 323783 37 24 9. 632392 9. 955849 9. 676543
10. 323457 36 25 9. 632657 9. 955789 9. 676869 10. 323131 35 26 9. 632923 9.
955739 9. 677194 10. 322805 34 27 9. 633189 9. 955669 9. 677520 10. 322480 33
28 9 633454 9 955609 9. 677845 10. 322154 32 29 9. 633719 9. 955548 9. 678171
10. 321829 31 30 9. 633984 9. 955488 9. 678496 10. 321504 30 Cosine Sine
Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 64. Degree 25. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9.
633984 9. 955488 9. 678496 10. 321504 30 31 9. 634249 9. 955428 9. 678821 10.
321179 29 32 9. 634514 9. 955367 9. 679146 10. 320854 28 33 9. 634778 9 955307
9. 679471 10. 320529 27 34 9. 635042 9. 955246 9. 679795 10. 320205 26 35 9.
635306 9. 955186 9. 680120 10. 319880 25 36 9. 635570 9. 955125 9. 680444 10.
319556 24 37 9. 635833 9. 955065 9. 680768 10. 319232 23 38 9. 636097 9. 955004
9. 681092 10. 318908 22 39 9. 636360 9. 954944 9. 681416 10. 318584 21 40 9.
636623 9. 954883 9. 681740 10. 318260 20 41 9. 636886 9. 954823 9. 682063 10.
317937 19 42 9. 637148 9. 954762 9. 682386 10. 317613 18 43 9. 637411 9. 954701
9. 682710 10. 317290 17 44 9. 637673 9. 954640 9. 683033 10. 316967 16 45 9.
637935 9. 954579 9. 683356 10. 316644 15 46 9. 638197 9. 954518 9. 683678 10.
316321 14 47 9. 638458 9. 954457 9. 684001 10. 315999 13 48 9. 638720 9. 954396
9. 684324 10. 315676 12 49 9. 638981 9. 954335 9. 684646 10. 315354 11 50 9.
639242 9. 954274 9. 684968 10. 315032 10 51 9. 639503 9. 954213 9. 685290 10.
314710 9 52 9. 639764 9. 954152 9. 685612 10. 313388 8 53 9. 640024 9. 954090
9. 685934 10 314066 7 54 9. 640284 9. 954029 9. 686255 10. 313745 6 55 9.
640544 9. 954968 9. 686577 10. 313423 5 56 9. 640804 9. 953906 9. 686898 10.
313102 4 57 9. 641064 9. 953845 9. 687219 10 312781 3 58 9. 641323 9. 953783 9.
687540 10. 312460 2 59 9. 641583 9. 953722 9. 687861 10. (...) 1 60 9. 641842
9. 953660 9. 688182 10 311818 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 64.
Degree 26. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 641842 9. 953660 9. 688182 10.
311818 60 1 9. 642101 9. 953598 9. 688502 10. 311498 59 2 9. 642360 9. 953537
9. 688823 10. 311177 58 3 9. 642618 9. 953475 9. 689143 10. 310857 57 4 9.
642876 9. 953413 9. 689463 10. 310537 56 5 9. 643135 9. 953351 9. 689783 10.
310237 55 6 9. 643393 9. 953290 9. 690103 10. 309897 54 7 9. 643650 9. 953228
9. 690423 10. 309577 53 8 9. 643908 9. 953166 9. 690742 10. 309258 52 9 9.
644165 9. 953104 9. 691063 10. 308938 51 10 9. 644423 9. 953042 9. 691381 10.
308619 50 11 9. 644680 9. 952980 9. 691700 10. 308300 49 12 9. 644936 9. 952917
9. 692019 10. 307981 48 13 9. 645193 9. 952855 9. 692338 10. 307662 47 14 9.
645449 9. 952793 9. 692656 10. 307343 46 15 9. 645706 9. 952731 9. 692975 10.
307025 45 16 9. 645962 9. 952668 9. 693293 10. 306706 44 17 9. 646218 9. 952606
9. 693612 10. 306388 43 18 9. 646473 9. 952544 9. 693930 10. 306070 42 19 9.
646729 9. 952481 9. 694248 10. 305752 41 20 9. 646984 9. 952419 9. 694566 10.
305434 40 21 9. 647239 9. 952356 9. 694883 10. 305117 39 22 9. 647494 9. 952294
9. 695201 10. 304799 38 23 9. 647749 9. 952231 9. 695518 10. 304482 37 24 9.
648004 9. 952168 9. 695835 10. 304164 36 25 9. 648258 9. 952105 9. 696153 10.
303847 35 26 9. 648512 9. 952043 9 696470 10. 303530 34 27 9. 648766 9. 951980
9. 696786 10. 303213 33 28 9. 648020 9. 951917 9. 697103 10. 302897 32 29 9.
649274 9. 951854 9. 697420 10. 302580 31 30 9. 649527 9. 051791 9. 697738 10.
302264 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 63. Degree 26. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 649527 9. 951791 9. 697738 10. 302264 30 31 9. 649781 9.
951728 9. 698052 10. 301947 29 32 9. 650034 9. 951665 9. 698369 10. 301631 28
33 9. 650287 9. 951602 9. 698685 10. 301315 27 34 9. 650519 9. 951539 9. 699001
10. 300999 26 35 9. 650798 9. 951476 9. 699316 10 300684 25 36 9. 651044 9.
951412 9 699632 10. 300368 24 37 9. 651296 9. 951349 9. 699947 10. 300052 23 38
9. 651648 9. 951286 9. 700263 10. 299737 22 39 9. 651800 9. 951222 9. 700578
10. 299422 21 40 9. 652052 9. 951159 9. 700893 10. 299107 20 41 9. 652303 9.
951095 9. 701208 10. 298792 19 42 9. 652555 9. 951032 9. 701522 10. 298477 18
43 9. 652806 9. 950968 9. 701837 10. 298163 17 44 9. 653057 9. 950905 9. 702152
10. 297848 16 45 9. (...) 9. 950841 9. 702466 10. 297534 15 46 9. 653558 9.
950777 9. 702780 10. 297219 14 47 9. 653808 9. 950714 9. 703095 10. 296905 13
48 9. 654059 9. 950650 9. 703409 10. 296591 12 49 9. 654309 9. 950586 9. 703722
10. 296277 11 50 9. 654558 9. 950522 9. 704036 10. 295964 10 51 9. 654808 9.
950458 9. 704350 10. 295656 9 52 9. 655057 9. 950394 9. 704663 10. 295337 8 53
9. 655307 9. 950330 9. 704976 10. 295023 7 54 9. 655556 9. 950266 9. 705290 10.
294710 6 55 9. 655805 9. 950202 9. 705603 10. 294397 5 56 9. 656053 9. 950138
9. 705915 10. 294084 4 57 9. 656302 9. 950074 9. 706228 10. 293771 3 58 9.
656550 9. 950009 9. 706541 10. 293459 2 59 9. 656799 9. 949945 9. 706853 10.
293146 1 9. 656347 9. (...) 9. 707166 10. 292834 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 63. Degree 27. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 657047 9.
949880 9. 707166 10. 292834 60 1 9. 657295 9. 949816 9. 707478 10. 292523 59 2
9. 657542 9. 949752 9. 707790 10. 292210 58 3 9. 657790 9. 949687 9. 708102 10.
291897 57 4 9. 658037 9. 949623 9. 708414 10. 291586 56 5 9. 658284 9. 949598
9. 708726 10. 291274 55 6 9. 658531 9. 949494 9. 709037 10. 290962 54 7 9.
658777 9. 949429 9. 709349 10. 290651 53 8 9. 659024 9. 949364 9. 709660 10.
290340 52 9 9. 659271 9. 949300 9. 709971 10. 290029 51 10 9. 659517 9. 949235
9. 710282 10. 289718 50 11 9. 659763 9. 949170 9. 710593 10. 289407 49 12 9.
660009 9. 949105 9. 710904 10. 289096 48 13 9. 660255 9. 949040 9. 711214 10.
288785 47 14 9. 660500 9. 948976 9. 711525 10. 288475 46 15 9. 660746 9. 948910
9. 711836 10. 288164 45 16 9. 660991 9. 948845 9. 712146 10. 287854 44 17 9.
661036 9. 948760 9. 712456 10. 287544 43 18 9. 661481 9. 948715 9. 712766 10.
287234 42 19 9. 661726 9. 948650 9. 713076 10. 286924 41 20 9. 661970 9. 948584
9. 713386 10. 286614 40 21 9. 662214 9. 948519 9. 713695 10. 286305 39 22 9.
662459 9. 948453 9. 714005 10. 285995 38 23 9. 662702 9. 948388 9. 714314 10.
285686 37 24 9. 662947 9. 948323 9. 714624 10. 285376 36 25 9. 663190 9. 948257
9. 714933 10. 285067 35 26 9. 663433 9. 948191 9. 715241 10. 284758 34 27 9.
663677 9. 948126 9. 715550 10. 284449 33 28 9. 663920 9. 948060 9. 715859 10.
284140 32 29 9. 664163 9. 947995 9. 716168 10. 283832 31 30 9. 664406 9. 947929
9. 716477 10. 283523 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 62. Degree 27. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 664406 9. 947929 9. 716477 10. 283523 30 31
9. 664648 9. 947863 9. 716785 10. 283215 29 32 9. 664891 9. 947797 9. 717093
10. 282907 28 33 9. 665133 9. 947731 9. 717401 10. 282598 27 34 9. 665375 9.
947665 9. 717709 10. 282290 26 35 9. 665617 9. 947599 9. 718017 10. 281983 25
36 9. 665858 9. 947533 9. 718325 10. 281675 24 37 9. 666100 9. 947467 9. 718633
10. 281367 23 38 9. 666341 9. 947401 9. 718940 10. 281060 22 39 9. 666583 9.
947335 9. 719248 10. 280752 21 40 9. 666824 9. 947269 9. 719555 10. 280445 20
41 9. 667065 9. 947203 9. 719862 10. 280138 19 42 9. 667305 9. 947136 9. 720169
10. 279831 18 43 9. 667546 9. 947070 9. 720476 10. 279524 17 44 9. 667786 9.
947004 9. 720783 10. 279217 16 45 9. 668026 9. 946937 9. 721089 10. 278911 15
46 9. 668266 9. 946871 9. 721395 10. 278604 14 47 9. 668506 9. 946804 9. 721702
10. 278298 13 48 9. 668746 9. 946738 9. 722008 10. 277991 12 49 9. 668986 9.
946671 9. 722315 10. 277685 11 50 9. 669225 9. 946604 9. 722621 10. 277379 10
51 9. 669464 9. 946537 9. 722927 10. 277073 9 52 9. 669703 9. 946471 9. 723232
10. 276768 8 53 9. 669942 9. 946404 9. 723538 10. 276462 7 54 9. 670181 9.
946337 9. 723843 10. 276156 6 55 9. 670419 9. 946270 9. 724149 10. 275851 5 56
9. 670657 9. 946203 9. 724454 10. 275546 4 57 9. 670896 9. 946136 9. 724759 10.
275240 3 58 9. 671134 9. 946069 9. 725065 10. 274935 2 59 9. 671372 9. 946002
9. 725369 10. 274630 1 60 9. 671609 9. 945935 9. 725674 10. 274326 0 Cosine.
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 62. Degree 28. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
9. 671609 9. 945935 9. 725674 10. 274326 60 1 9. 671847 9. 945868 9. 725979 10.
274021 59 2 9. 672084 9. 945800 9. 726284 10. 273816 58 3 9. 672321 9. 945733
9. 726588 10. 273412 57 4 9. 672558 9. 945666 9. 726892 10. 273107 56 5 9.
672795 9. 945598 9. 727197 10. 272803 55 6 9. 673032 9. 945531 9. 727501 10.
272499 54 7 9. 673268 9. 945463 9. 727805 10. 272195 53 8 9. 673505 9. 945396
9. 728109 10. 271891 52 9 9. 673741 9. 945328 9. 728412 10. 271587 51 10 9.
673977 9. 945261 9. 728716 10. 271284 50 11 9. 674213 9. 945193 9. 729020 10.
270980 49 12 9. 674448 9. 945125 9. 729323 10. 270677 48 13 9. 674684 9. 945058
9. 729626 10. 270374 47 14 9. 674919 9. 944990 9. 729929 10. 270070 46 15 9.
675154 9. 944922 9. 730232 10. 269767 45 16 9. 675389 9. 944854 9. 730535 10.
269464 44 17 9. 675623 9. 944786 9. 730838 10. 269162 43 18 9. 675859 9. 944718
9. 731141 10. 268859 42 19 9. 676094 9. 944650 9. 731443 10. 268559 41 20 9.
676328 9. 944582 9. 731746 10. 268254 40 21 9. 676562 9. 944514 9. 732048 10.
267952 39 22 9. 676796 9. 944446 9. 732351 10. 267649 38 23 9. 677030 9. 944377
9. 732653 10. 267347 37 24 9. 677264 9. 944309 9. 732955 10. 267045 36 25 9.
677497 9. 944241 9. 733257 10. 266743 35 26 9. 677731 9. 944172 9. 733558 10.
266441 34 27 9. 677964 9. 944104 9. 733860 10. 266140 33 28 9. 678197 9. 944016
9. 734162 10. 265838 32 29 9. 678430 9. 943967 9. 734463 10. 265537 31 30 9.
678663 9. 943898 9. 734764 10. 265236 30 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent M
Degree 61. Degree 28. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 678663 9. 943898
9734764 10. 265236 30 31 9. 678895 9. 943830 9. 735666 10. 264934 29 32 9.
679128 9. 943761 9. 735362 10. 264633 (...) 33 9. 670360 9. 943692 9. 735668
10. 264332 27 34 9. 679592 9. 943624 9. 735968 10. 264031 26 35 9. 679824 9.
943555 9. 736269 10. 263731 25 36 9. 680056 9. 943486 9. 736570 10. 263430 24
37 9. 680288 9. 943417 9. 736870 10. 263130 23 38 9. 680519 9. 943348 9. 737171
10. 262829 22 39 9. 680750 9. 943279 9. 737471 10. 262529 21 40 9. 680982 9.
943210 9. 737771 10. 262229 20 41 9. 681213 9. 943141 9. 738071 10. 261929 19
42 9. 681443 9. 943072 9. 738371 10. 261629 18 43 9. 681674 9. 943003 9. 738671
10. 261329 17 44 9. 681904 9. 942933 9. 738971 10. 261029 16 45 9. 682135 9.
942864 9. 739271 10. 260729 15 46 9. 682365 9. 942795 9. 739570 10. 260430 14
47 9. 682595 9. 942725 9. 739870 10. 260130 13 48 9. 682825 9. 942656 9. 740169
10. 259831 12 49 9. 683055 9. 942587 9. 740468 10. 259532 11 50 9. 683284 9.
942517 9. 740767 10. 259233 10 51 9. 683514 9. 942448 9. 741066 10. 258934 9 52
9. 683743 9. 942378 9. 741365 10. 258635 8 53 9. 683972 9. 942308 9. 741664 10.
258336 7 54 9. 684201 9. 942239 9. 741962 10. 258038 6 55 9. 684430 9. 942169
9. 742261 10. 257739 5 56 9. 684658 9. 942099 9. 742559 10. 257441 4 57 9
684887 9. 942029 9. 742858 10. 257142 3 58 9. 685115 9. 941059 9. 743156 10.
256844 2 59 9. 685343 9. 941889 9 743454 10. 256546 1 60 9. 685571 9. 941819 9.
743751 10. 256248 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 61. Degree 29. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 685571 9. 941819 9743752 10. 256248 60 1 9.
685799 9. 941749 9. 744050 10. 255950 59 2 9. 686027 9. 941679 9. 744348 10.
255652 58 3 9. 686254 9. 941609 9. 744645 10. 255355 57 4 9. 686482 9. 941539
9. 744943 10. 255057 56 5 9. 686709 9. 941468 9. 745240 10. 254760 55 6 9.
686936 9. 941398 9. 745538 10. 254462 54 7 9. 687163 9. 941328 9. 745835 10.
254165 53 8 9. 687389 9. 941257 9. 746132 10. 253868 52 9 9. 687616 9. 941187
9. 746429 10. 253571 51 10 9. 687842 9. 941116 9. 746726 10. 253274 50 11 9.
688069 9. 941046 9. 747023 10. 252977 49 12 9. 688295 9. 940975 9. 747319 10.
252680 48 13 9. 688523 9. 940905 9. 747616 10. 252384 47 14 9. 688747 9. 940834
9. 747912 10. 252087 46 15 9. 688972 9. 940763 9. 748209 10. 251791 45 16 9.
689198 9. 940693 9. 748505 10. 251495 44 17 9. 689421 9. 940622 9. 748801 10.
251199 43 18 9. 689648 7. 940551 9. 749097 10. 250902 42 19 9. 689873 9. 940480
9. 749393 10. 250607 41 20 9. 690098 9. 940409 9 749689 10. 250311 40 21 9.
690323 9. 940338 9. 749985 10. 250015 39 22 9. 690548 9. 940267 9. 750281 10.
249719 38 23 9. 690772 9. 940196 9. 750576 10. 249424 37 24 9. 690996 9. 940125
9. 750872 10. 249128 36 25 9. 691220 9. 940053 9. 751167 10. 248833 35 26 9.
691444 9. 939982 9. 751462 10. 248538 34 27 9. 691668 9. 939911 9. 751757 10.
248243 33 28 9. 691892 9. 939840 9. 752052 10. 247948 32 29 9. 692115 9. 939768
9. 752347 10. 247653 31 30 9. 692339 9. 939697 9. 752642 10. 247358 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 60. Degree 29. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang.
30 9. 692339 9. 939697 9. 752642 10. 247358 30 31 9. 692562 9. 939625 9. 752937
10. 247063 29 32 9. 692785 9 939554 9. 753231 10. 246769 28 33 9. 693008 9.
939482 9. 753526 10. 246474 27 34 9. 693231 9. 939410 9. 753820 10. 246180 26
35 9. 693453 9. 939339 9. 754115 10. 245885 25 36 9. 693676 9. 939267 9. 754409
10. 245591 24 37 9. 693898 9. 939195 9. 754703 10. 245297 23 38 9. 694120 9.
939123 9. 754997 10. 245003 22 39 9. 694342 9. 939051 9. 755291 10. 244709 21
40 9. 694564 9. 938980 9. 755584 10. 244415 20 41 9. 694786 9. 938908 9. 755878
10. 244122 19 42 9. 695007 9. 938835 9. 756172 10. 243828 18 43 9. 695229 9.
938763 9 756465 10. 243535 17 44 9. 695450 9. 938691 9. 756759 10. 243241 16 45
9. 695671 9. 938619 9. 757052 10. 242948 15 46 9. 695892 9. 938547 9. 757345
10. 242655 14 47 9. 696113 9. 938475 9. 757638 10. 242362 13 48 9. 696334 9
938402 9. 757931 10. 242069 12 49 9. 696554 9. 938330 9. 758224 10. 241776 11
50 9. 696774 9. 938257 9. 758517 10. 241483 10 51 9. 696995 9. 938185 9. 758810
10. 241190 9 52 9. 697215 9. 938112 9. 759102 10. 240898 8 53 9. 697435 9.
938040 9. 759395 10. 240605 7 54 9. 697654 9. 937967 9. 759687 10. 240313 6 55
9. 697874 9. 937895 9. 759979 10. 240021 5 56 9. 698093 9. 937822 9. 760271 10.
239728 4 57 9. 698313 9. 937749 9. 760564 10. 239436 3 58 9. 698532 9. 937676
9. 760856 10. 239144 2 59 9. 698751 9. 937603 9. 761147 10. 238852 1 60 9.
698970 9. 937531 9. 761439 10. 238561 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
60. Degree 30. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 698970 9. 937531 9. 761439
10. 238561 60 1 9. 699189 9. 937458 9. 761731 10. 238269 59 2 9. 699407 9.
937385 9. 762023 10. 237977 58 3 9. 699626 9. 937312 9. 762314 10. 237686 57 4
9. 699844 9. 937238 9. 762606 10. 237394 56 5 9. 700062 9. 937165 9 762897 10.
237103 55 6 7. 700280 9 937092 9. 763188 10. 236812 54 7 9. 700498 9. 937019 9.
763479 10. 236521 53 8 9. 700716 9. 936945 9. 763770 10. 236230 52 9 9. 700933
9. 936872 9. 764061 10. 235939 51 10 9. 701151 9. 936799 9. 764352 10. 235648
50 11 9. 701568 9. 936725 9. 764643 10. 235357 49 12 9. 701585 9. 936652 9.
764933 10. 235067 48 13 9. 701802 9. 936578 9. 765224 10. 234776 47 14 9.
702019 9. 936505 9. 765514 10. 234486 46 15 9. 702236 9. 936431 9. 765805 10.
234195 45 16 9. 702452 9. 936357 9. 766095 10. 233905 44 17 9. 702669 9. 936284
9. 766385 10. 233615 43 18 9. 702885 9. 936210 9. 766675 10. 233325 42 19 9.
703101 9. 936136 9. 766965 10. 233035 41 20 9. 703317 9. 936062 9. 767255 10.
232745 40 21 9. 703533 9. 935988 9. 767545 10. 232455 39 22 9. 703748 9. 935914
9. 767834 10. 232166 38 23 9. 703964 9. 935840 9. 768124 10. 231876 37 24 9.
704179 9. 935766 9. 768413 10. 231587 36 25 9. 704395 9. 935692 9. 768703 10.
231297 35 26 9. 704610 9. 935618 9. 768992 10. 231008 34 27 9. 704820 9. 935543
9. 769281 10. 230719 33 28 9. 705040 9. 935469 9. 769570 10. 230430 32 29 9.
705254 9. 935395 9. 769859 10. 230141 31 30 9. 705469 9 935320 9. 770148 10.
229852 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 59. Degree 30. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 705469 9. 935320 9. 770148 10. 229852 30 31 9. 705683 9.
935246 9. 770437 10. 229563 29 32 9. 705897 9. 935171 9. 770726 10. 229274 28
33 9. 706112 9. 935097 9. 771015 10. 228985 27 34 9. 706327 9. 935022 9. 771303
10. 228696 26 35 9. 706539 9. 934948 9. 771592 10. 228408 25 36 9. 706753 9.
934873 9. 771880 10. 228120 24 37 9. 706967 9. 934798 9. 772168 10. 227832 23
38 9. 707180 9. 934723 9. 772456 10. 227543 22 39 9. 707393 9. 934649 9. 772745
10. 227255 21 40 9. 707606 9. 934574 9. 773033 10. 226967 20 41 9. 707819 9.
934499 9. 773321 10. 226679 19 42 9. 708032 9. 934424 9. 773608 10. 226391 18
43 9. 708245 9. 934349 9. 773896 10. 226104 17 44 9. 708457 9. 934274 9. 774184
10. 225816 16 45 9. 708670 9. 934199 9. 774471 10. 225529 15 46 9. 708882 9.
934123 9. 774759 10. 225241 14 47 9. 709094 9. 934048 9. 775046 10. 224954 13
48 9. 709306 9. 933973 9. 775333 10. 224666 12 49 9. 709518 9. 933897 9. 775621
10. 224379 11 50 9. 709730 9. 933822 9. 775908 10. 224092 10 51 9. 709941 9.
933747 9. 776195 10. 223805 9 52 9. 710153 9. 933671 9. 776482 10. 223518 8 53
9. 710364 9. 933596 9. 776768 10. 223232 7 54 9. 710575 9. 933520 9. 777055 10.
222945 6 55 9. 710786 9. 933444 9. 777342 10. 222658 5 56 9. 710997 9. 933369
9. 777628 10. 222372 4 57 9. 711208 9. 933293 9. 777915 10. 222085 3 58 9.
711418 9. 933217 9. 778201 10. 221799 2 59 9. 711629 9. 933141 9. 778487 10.
221513 1 60 9. 711839 9. 933066 9. 778774 10. 221226 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 59. Degree 31. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 711839 9.
933066 9. 778774 10. 221226 60 1 9. 712049 9. 932990 9. 779060 10. 220940 59 2
9. 712259 9. 932914 9. 779346 10. 220654 58 3 9. 712469 9. 932838 9. 779632 10.
220368 57 4 9. 712679 9. 932761 9. 779918 10. 220082 56 5 9. 712889 9. 932685
9. 780203 10. 219796 55 6 9. 713098 9. 932609 9. 780489 10. 219511 54 7 9.
713308 9. 932533 9. 780775 10. 219225 53 8 9. 713517 9. 932457 9. 781060 10.
218940 52 9 9. 713726 9. 932380 9. 781346 10. 218654 51 10 9. 713935 9. 932304
9. 781631 10. 218369 50 11 9. 714144 9. 932227 9. 781916 10. 218084 49 12 9.
714352 9. 932151 9. 782202 10. 217799 48 13 9. 714561 9. 932074 9. 782480 10.
217514 47 14 9. 714769 9. 931998 9. 782771 10. 217229 46 15 9. 714977 9. 931921
9. 783056 10. 216944 45 16 9. 715186 9. 931845 9. 783341 10. 216659 44 17 9.
715394 9. 931768 9. 783626 10. 216374 43 18 9. 715601 9. 931691 9. 783910 10.
216090 42 19 9. 715809 9. 931614 9. 784195 10. 215805 41 20 9. 716017 9. 931537
9. 784479 10. 215520 40 21 9. 716224 9. 931460 9. 784764 10. 215236 39 22 9.
716431 9. 931383 9. 785048 10. 214952 38 23 9. 716639 9. 931306 9. 785332 10.
214668 37 24 9. 716846 9. 931229 9. 785616 10. 214384 36 25 9. 717053 9. 931152
9. 785900 10. 214099 35 26 9. 717259 9. 931075 9. 786184 10. 213816 34 27 9.
717466 9. 930998 9. 786468 10. 213532 33 28 9. 717672 9. 930920 9. 786752 10.
213248 32 29 9. 717879 9. 930843 9. 787036 10. 212964 31 30 9. 718085 9. 930766
9. 787319 10. 212681 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 58. Degree 31. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 718085 9. 930766 9. 787319 10. 212681 30 31
9. 718291 9. 930688 9. 787603 10. 212397 29 32 9. 718497 9. 930611 9. 787886
10. 212114 28 33 9. 718703 9. 930533 9. 788170 10. 211830 27 34 9. 718909 9.
930456 9. 788453 10. 211547 26 35 9. 719114 9. 930378 9. 788736 10. 211264 25
36 9. 719320 9. 930300 9. 789019 10. 210981 24 37 9. 719525 9. 930223 9. 789302
10. 210698 23 38 9. 719730 9. 930145 9. 789585 10. 210415 22 39 9. 719935 9.
930067 9. 789868 10. 210132 21 40 9. 720140 9. 929989 9. 790151 10. 209849 20
41 9. 720345 9. 929911 9. 790433 10. 209566 19 42 9. 720549 9. 929833 9. 790716
10. 209284 18 43 9. 720754 9. 929755 9. 790999 10. 209001 17 44 9. 720958 9.
929677 9. 790281 10. 208719 16 45 9. 721162 9. 929599 9. 791563 10. 208436 15
46 9. 721366 9. 929521 9. 791846 10. 208154 14 47 9. 721570 9. 929442 9. 792128
10. 207872 13 48 9. 721774 9. 929364 9. 792410 10. 207590 12 49 9. 721978 9.
929286 9. 792692 10. 207308 11 50 9. 722181 9. 929207 9. 792974 10. 207024 10
51 9. 722385 9. 929129 9. 793256 10. 206744 9 52 9. 722588 9. 929050 9. 793538
10. 206462 8 53 9. 722791 9. 928972 9. 793819 10. 206180 7 54 9. 722994 9.
928893 9. 794101 10. 205899 6 55 9. 723197 9. 928814 9. 794383 10. 205617 5 56
9. 723400 9. 928736 9. 794664 10. 205336 4 57 9. 723603 9. 928657 9. 794945 10.
205054 3 58 9. 723805 9. 928578 9. 795227 10. 204773 2 59 9. 724007 9. 928499
9. 795508 10. 204492 1 60 9. 724210 9. 928420 9. 795789 10. 204211 0 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 58. Degree 32. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
9. 724210 9. 928420 9. 795789 10. 204211 60 1 9. 724412 9. 928341 9. 796070 10.
203930 59 2 9. 724614 9. 928262 9. 796351 10. 203649 58 3 9. 724816 9. 928183
9. 796632 10. 203368 57 4 9. 725017 9. 928104 9. 796913 10. 203087 56 5 9.
725219 9. 928025 9. 797194 10. 202806 55 6 9. 725420 9. 927946 9. 797474 10.
202522 54 7 9. 725622 9. 921867 9. 797755 10. 202245 53 8 9. 725823 9. 927787
9. 798036 10. 201964 52 9 9. 726024 9. 927708 9. 798316 10. 201684 51 10 9.
726225 9. 927628 9. 798596 10. 201404 50 11 9. 726426 9. 927549 9. 798877 10.
201123 49 12 9. 726626 9. 927469 9. 799157 10. 200843 48 13 9. 726827 9. 927390
9. 799437 10. 200563 47 14 9. 727027 9. 927310 9. 799717 10. 200283 46 15 9.
727228 9. 927231 9. 799997 10. 200003 45 16 9. 727428 9. 927151 9. 800277 10.
199723 44 17 9. 727628 9. 927071 9. 800557 10. 199443 43 18 9. 727828 9. 926991
9. 800836 10. 199163 42 19 9. 728027 9. 926911 9. 801116 10. 198884 41 20 9.
728227 9. 926831 9. 801396 10. 198604 40 21 9. 728427 9. 926751 9. 801675 10.
198325 39 22 9. 728626 9. 926641 9. 801955 10. 198045 38 23 9. 728825 9. 926591
9. 802234 10. 197766 37 24 9. 729024 9. 926511 9. 802513 10. 197487 36 25 9.
729223 9. 926431 9. 802792 10. 197207 35 26 9. 729422 9. 926351 9. 803072 10.
196928 34 27 9. 729621 9. 926270 9. 803351 10. 196649 33 28 9. 729820 9. 926190
9. 803630 10. 196370 32 29 9. 730018 9. 926110 9. 803908 10. 196091 31 30 9.
730216 9. 926029 9. 804187 10. 195813 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
57. Degree 32. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 730216 9. 926029 9. 804187
10. 195813 30 31 9. 730415 9. 925949 9. 804466 10. 195534 29 32 9. 730613 9.
925868 9. 804745 10. 195255 28 33 9. 730811 9. 925787 9. 805023 10. 194977 27
34 9. 731009 9. 925707 9. 805302 10. 194698 26 35 9. 731206 9. 9. 25626 9.
805580 10. 194420 25 36 9. 731404 9. 925545 9. 805859 10. 194141 24 37 9.
731601 9. 925464 9. 806137 10. 193863 23 38 9. 731799 9. 925384 9. 806415 10.
193585 22 39 9. 731996 9. 925303 9. 806693 10. 193309 21 40 9. 732193 9. 925222
9. 806971 10. 193028 20 41 9. 732390 9. 925141 9. 807249 10. 192751 19 42 9.
732587 9. 925060 9. 807527 10. 192433 18 43 9. 732784 9. 924978 9. 807805 10.
192195 17 44 9. 732980 9. 924897 9. 808083 10. 191917 16 45 9. 733177 9. 924816
9. 808361 10. 191639 15 46 9. 733373 9. 924735 9. 808638 10. 191362 14 47 9.
733569 9. 924653 9. 808916 10. 191084 13 48 9. 733765 9. 924572 9. 809193 10.
190807 12 49 9. 733961 9. 924491 9. 809471 10. 190529 11 50 9. 734157 9. 924409
9. 809748 10. 190252 10 51 9. 734353 9. 924328 9. 810025 10. 189975 9 52 9.
734548 9. 924246 9. 810302 10. 189697 8 53 9. 734744 9. 924164 9. 810580 10.
189420 7 54 9. 734939 9. 924083 9. 810857 10. 189143 6 55 9. 735134 9. 924001
9. 811134 10. 188866 5 56 9. 735330 9. 923919 9. 811410 10. 188589 4 57 9.
735525 9. 923837 9. 811687 10. 188313 3 58 9. 735719 9. 923755 9. 811964 10.
188036 2 59 9. 735914 9. 923673 9. 812241 10. 187759 1 60 9. 736109 9. 923591
9. 812517 10. 187483 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 57. Degree 33. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 736109 9. 923591 9. 812517 10. 187483 60 1
9. 736309 9. 923509 9. 812794 10. 187206 59 2 9. 736497 9. 923427 9. 813070 10.
186930 58 3 9. 736692 9. 923345 9. 813347 10. 186653 57 4 9. 736886 9. 923263
9. 813623 10. 186377 56 5 9. 737080 9. 923180 9. 813899 10. 186101 55 6 9.
737274 9. 923098 9. 814175 10. 185824 54 7 9. 737467 9. 923016 9. 814452 10.
185548 53 8 9. 737661 9. 922933 9. 814728 10. 185272 52 9 9. 737854 9. 922851
9. 815004 10. 184996 51 10 9. 738048 9. 922768 9 815279 10. 184720 50 11 9.
738241 9. 922686 9. 815555 10. 184445 49 12 9. 738434 9. 922603 9. 815831 10.
184169 48 13 9. 738627 9. 922520 9. 816107 10. 183893 47 14 9. 738820 9. 922438
9. 816382 10. 183617 46 15 9. 739013 9. 922355 9. 816658 10. 183342 45 16 9.
739205 9. 922272 9. 816933 10. 183066 44 17 9. 739398 9. 922189 9. 817209 10.
182791 43 18 9. 739590 9. 922106 9. 817484 10. 182516 42 19 9. 739783 9. 922023
9. 817759 10. 182240 41 20 9. 739975 9. 921940 9. 818035 10. 181965 40 21 9.
740167 9. 921857 9 818310 10. 181690 39 22 9. 740359 9. 921774 9. 818585 10.
181415 38 23 9. 740550 9. 921691 9. 818860 10. 181140 37 24 9. 740742 9. 921607
9. 819135 10. 180865 36 25 9. 740934 9. 921524 9. 819410 10. 180590 35 26 9.
741125 9. 921441 9. 819684 10. 180315 34 27 9. 741316 9. 921357 9. 819959 10.
180041 33 28 9. 741507 9. 921274 9. 820234 10. 179766 32 29 9. 741698 9. 921190
9. 820508 10. 179492 31 30 9. 741889 9. 921107 9. 820783 10. 179217 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 56. Degree 33. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang.
30 9. 741889 9. 921107 9. 820783 10. 179217 30 31 9. 742080 9. 921023 9. 821057
10. 178943 29 32 9. 742271 9. 920939 9. 821332 10. 178668 28 33 9. 742461 9.
920855 9. 821606 10. 178394 27 34 9. 742652 9. 920772 9. 821880 10. 178120 26
35 9. 742842 9. 920688 9. 822154 10. 177846 25 36 9. 743032 9. 920604 9. 822429
10. 177571 24 37 9. 743223 9. 920520 9. 822703 10. 177297 23 38 9. 743412 9.
920436 9. 822977 10. 177023 22 39 9. 743602 9. 920352 9. 823250 10. 176739 21
40 9. 743792 9. 920268 9. 823524 10. 176476 20 41 9. 743982 9. 920184 9. 823798
10. 176202 19 42 9. 744171 9. 920099 9. 824072 10. 175928 18 43 9. 744361 9.
920015 9. 824345 10. 175655 17 44 9. 744550 9. 919931 9. 824619 10. 175381 16
45 9. 744739 9. 919846 9. 824892 10. 175108 15 46 9. 744928 9. 919762 9. 825166
10. 174834 14 47 9. 745117 9. 919677 9. 825439 10. 174560 13 48 9. 745306 9.
919593 9. 825713 10. 174287 12 49 9. 745494 9. 919508 9. 825986 10. 174014 11
50 9. 745683 9. 919424 9. 826259 10. 173741 10 51 9. 745871 9. 919339 9. 826532
10. 173468 9 52 9. 746059 9. 919254 9. 826805 10. 173195 8 53 9. 746248 9.
919169 9. 827078 10. 172922 7 54 9. 746436 9. 919084 9. 827351 10. 172649 6 55
9. 746624 9. 918999 9. 827624 10. 172376 5 56 9. 746811 9. 918915 9. 827897 10.
172103 4 57 9. 746999 9. 918830 9. 828170 10. 171830 3 58 9. 747187 9. 918744
9. 828442 10. 171558 2 59 9. 747374 9. 918659 9. 828715 10. 171285 1 60 9.
747562 9. 918574 9. 828987 10. 171012 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
56. Degree 34 M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 747562 9. 918574 9. 828987
10. 171012 60 1 9. 747749 9. 918489 9. 829260 10. 170740 59 2 9. 747936 9.
918404 9. 829532 10. 170468 58 3 9. 748123 9. 918318 9. 829805 10. 170195 57 4
9. 748310 9. 918233 9. 830077 10. 169923 56 5 9. 748497 9. 918147 9. 830349 10.
169651 55 6 9. 748683 9. 918062 9. 830621 10. 169379 54 7 9. 748870 9. 917976
9. 830891 10. 166106 53 8 9. 749056 9. 917891 9. 831165 10. 168834 52 9 9.
749242 9. 917805 9. 831437 10. 168563 51 10 9. 749429 9. 917719 9. 831709 10.
168291 50 11 9. 749615 9. 917634 9. 831981 10. 168019 49 12 9. 749801 9. 917548
9. 832253 10. 167747 48 13 9. 749986 9. 917462 9. 832525 10. 167475 47 14 9.
750172 9. 917376 9. 832796 10. 167204 46 15 9. 750358 9. 917290 9. 833068 10.
166932 45 16 9. 750543 9. 917204 9. 833339 10. 166660 44 17 9. 750729 9. 917118
9. 833621 10. 166389 43 18 9. 750914 9. 917032 9. 833882 10. 166118 42 19 9.
751099 9. 916945 9. 834154 10. 165846 41 20 9. 751284 9. 916819 9. 834425 10.
165575 40 21 9. 751469 9. 916773 9. 834696 10. 165304 39 22 9. 751654 9. 916686
9. 834967 10. 165033 38 23 9. 751838 9. 916600 9. 835238 10. 164762 37 24 9.
752023 9. 916514 9. 835509 10. 164491 36 25 9. 752207 9. 916427 9. 835780 10.
164220 35 26 9. 752392 9. 916340 9. 836051 10. 163949 34 27 9. 752576 9. 916254
9. 836322 10. 163678 33 28 9. 752760 9. 916167 9. 836593 10. 163407 32 29 9.
752944 9. 916080 9. 836864 10. 163136 31 30 9. 753128 9. 915994 9. 837134 10.
162866 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 55. Degree 34. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 753128 9. 915994 9. 837134 10. 162866 30 31 9. 753312 9.
915907 9. 837405 10. 162595 29 32 9. 753495 9. 915820 9. 837675 10. 162325 28
33 9. 753679 9. 915733 9. 837946 10. 162054 27 34 9. 753862 9. 915646 9. 838216
10. 161784 26 35 9. 754046 9. 915559 9. 838487 10. 161513 25 36 9. 754229 9.
915472 9. 838757 10. 161243 24 37 9. 754412 9. 915385 9. 839027 10. 160973 23
38 9. 754595 9. 915297 9. 839297 10. 160702 22 39 9. 754778 9. 915210 9. 839568
10. 160432 21 40 9. 754960 9. 915123 9. 839838 10. 160162 20 41 9. 755143 9.
915035 9. 840108 10. 159892 19 42 9. 755325 9. 914948 9. 840378 10. 159622 18
43 9. 755508 9. 914860 9. 840647 10. 159352 17 44 9. 755690 9. 914773 9. 840917
10. 159083 16 45 9. 755872 9. 914685 9. 841187 10. 158813 15 46 9. 756054 9.
914597 9. 841457 10. 158543 14 47 9. 756236 9. 914510 9. 841726 10. 158273 13
48 9. 756418 9. 914422 9. 841996 10. 158004 12 49 9. 756600 9. 914334 9. 842206
10. 157734 11 50 9. 756781 9. 914146 9. 842505 10. 157465 10 51 9. 756963 9.
914158 9. 842804 10. 157195 9 52 9. 757144 9. 914070 9. 843074 10. 156926 8 53
9. 757316 9. 913982 9. 843343 10. 156657 7 54 9. 757507 9. 913894 9. 843612 10.
156387 6 55 9. 757688 9. 913806 9. 843882 10. 156118 5 56 9. 757869 9. 913718
9. 844151 10. 155849 4 57 9. 758049 9. 913630 9. 844420 10. 155580 3 58 9.
758230 9. 913541 9. 844689 10. 155311 2 59 9. 758411 9. 913453 9. 844958 10.
155041 1 60 9. 758591 9. 913361 9. 845227 10. 154773 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 55. Degree 35. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 758591 9.
913364 9. 845227 10. 154774 60 1 9. 758772 9. 913276 9. 845496 10. 154504 59 2
9. 758952 9. 913187 9. 845764 10. 154235 58 3 9. 759132 9. 913099 9. 846033 10.
153967 57 4 9. 759312 9. 913010 9. 846302 10. 153698 56 5 9. 759492 9. 912921
9. 846570 10. 153429 55 6 9. 759672 9. 912833 9. 846839 10. 153161 54 7 9.
759851 9. 912744 9. 847107 10. 152892 53 8 9. 760031 9. 912655 9. 847376 10.
152624 52 9 9. 760210 9. 912566 9. 847644 10. 152356 51 10 9. 760390 9. 912477
9. 847913 10. 152087 50 11 9. 760569 9. 912388 9. 848181 10. 151819 49 12 9.
760748 9. 912299 9. 848449 10. 151551 48 13 9. 760927 9. 912210 9. 848717 10.
151283 47 14 9. 761106 9. 912121 9. 848985 10. 151015 46 15 9. 761285 9. 912031
9. 849254 10. 150746 45 16 9. 761464 9. 911942 9. 849522 10. 150478 44 17 9.
761642 9. 911853 9. 849789 10. 150214 43 18 9. 761821 9. 911763 9. 850057 10.
149943 42 19 9. 761999 9. 911674 9. 850325 10. 149675 41 20 9. 762177 9. 911584
9. 850593 10. 149407 40 21 9. 762356 9. 911495 9. 850861 10. 149139 39 22 9.
762534 9. 911405 9. 851128 10. 148872 38 23 9. 762712 9. 911315 9. 851396 10.
148604 37 24 9. 762889 9. 911226 9. 851664 10. 148336 36 25 9. 763067 9. 911136
9. 851931 10. 148069 35 26 9. 763245 9. 911046 9. 852199 10. 147801 34 27 9.
763422 9. 910956 9. 852466 10. 147534 33 28 9. 763599 9. 910866 9. 852731 10.
147267 32 29 9. 763777 9. 910776 9. 853001 10. 146999 31 30 9. 763954 9. 910686
9. 853268 10. 146732 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 54 Degree 35. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 763954 9. 910686 9. 853208 10. 146732 30 31
9. 764131 9. 910596 9. 853532 10. 146465 29 32 9. 764308 9. 910506 9. 853802
10. 146198 28 33 9. 764485 9. 910415 9. 854069 10. 145930 27 34 9. 764662 9.
910325 9. 854336 10. 145664 26 35 9. 764838 9. 910235 9. 854603 10. 145397 25
36 9. 765015 9. 910144 9. 854870 10. 145130 24 37 9. 765191 9. 910054 9. 855137
10. 144863 23 38 9. 765367 9. 909963 9. 855404 10. 144596 22 39 9. 765544 9.
909873 9. 855671 10. 144329 21 40 9. 765720 9. 909782 9. 855937 10. 144063 20
41 9. 765896 9. 909691 9. 856204 10. 143796 19 42 9. 766071 9. 909601 9. 856471
10. 143529 18 43 9. 766247 9. 909510 9. 856737 10. 143263 17 44 9. 766423 9.
909419 9. 857004 10. 142996 16 45 9. 766598 9. 909328 9. 857270 10. 142730 15
46 9. 766774 9. 909237 9. 857537 10. 142463 14 47 9. 766949 9. 909146 9. 857803
10. 142197 13 48 9. 767124 9. 909055 9. 858069 10. 141931 12 49 9. 767299 9.
908964 9. 858336 10. 141664 11 50 9. 767474 9. 908873 9. 858602 10. 141398 10
51 9. 767649 9. 908781 9. 858868 10. 141132 9 52 9. 767824 9. 908690 9. 859134
10. 140866 8 53 9. 767997 9. 908599 9859400 10. 140600 7 54 9. 768173 9. 908507
9. 859666 10. 140334 6 55 9. 768348 9. 908416 9. 859932 10. 140068 5 56 9.
768522 9. 908324 9. 860198 10. 139802 4 57 9. 768696 9. 908233 9. 860464 10.
139536 3 58 9. 768871 9. 908141 9860730 10. 139270 2 59 9. 769045 9. 908049 9.
860995 10. 139005 1 60 9. 769219 9. 907958 9. 861261 10. 138739 0 Cosine Sine
Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 54. Degree 36. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9.
769219 9. 907958 9. 861261 10. 138739 60 1 9. 769392 9. 907866 9. 861527 10.
138473 59 2 9. 769566 9. 907774 9. 861792 10. 138208 58 3 9. 769740 9. 907682
9. 862058 10. 137942 57 4 9. 769913 9. 907590 9. 862323 10. 137677 56 5 9.
770087 9. 907498 9. 862589 10. 137411 55 6 9. 770260 9. 907406 9. 862854 10.
137146 54 7 9. 770433 9. 907314 9. 863119 10. 136880 53 8 9. 770606 9. 907221
9. 863385 10. 136615 52 9 9. 770779 9. 907129 9. 863650 10. 136350 51 10 9.
770952 9. 907037 9. 863915 10. 136085 50 11 9. 771125 9. 906945 9. 864180 10.
135820 49 12 9. 771298 9. 906852 9. 864445 10. 135554 48 13 9. 771470 9. 906760
9. 864710 10. 135289 47 14 9. 771643 9. 906667 9. 864975 10. 135024 46 15 9.
771815 9. 906574 9. 865240 10. 134759 45 16 9. 771987 9. 906482 9. 865505 10.
134495 44 17 9. 772159 9. 906389 9. 865770 10. 134230 43 18 9. 772331 9. 906296
9. 866035 10. 133965 42 19 9. 772503 9. 906203 9. 866300 10. 133700 41 20 9.
772675 9. 906111 9. 866564 10. 133436 40 21 9. 772847 9. 906018 9. 866829 10.
133171 39 22 9. 773018 9. 905925 9. 867094 10. 132906 38 23 9. 773190 9. 905832
9. 867358 10. 132642 37 24 9. 773361 9. 905738 9. 867623 10. 132377 36 25 9.
773533 9. 905645 9. 867887 10. 132113 35 26 9. 773704 9. 905552 9. 868152 10.
131848 34 27 9. 773875 9. 905459 9. 868416 10. 131584 33 28 9. 774046 9. 905365
9. 868680 10. 131320 32 29 9. 774217 9. 905272 9. 868945 10. 131055 31 30 9.
774388 9. 905179 9. 869209 10. 130791 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
53. Degree 36. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 774388 9. 905179 9. 869209
10. 130791 30 31 9. 774558 9. 905085 9. 864773 10. 130527 29 32 9. 774729 9.
904992 9. 867337 10. 130263 28 33 9. 774899 9. 904898 9. 870001 10. 129999 27
34 9. 775070 9. 904804 9. 870265 10. 129735 26 35 9. 775240 9. 904711 9. 870529
10. 129471 25 36 9. 775410 9. 904617 9. 870793 10. 129207 24 37 9. 775580 9.
904523 9. 871057 10. 128943 23 38 9. 775750 9. 904429 9. 871321 10. 128679 22
39 9. 775920 9. 904335 9. 871585 10. 128415 21 40 9. 776090 9. 904241 9. 871849
10. 128151 20 41 9. 776259 9. 904147 9. 872112 10. 127888 19 42 9. 776429 9.
904053 9. 872376 10. 127624 18 43 9. 776598 9. 903959 9. 872640 10. 127360 17
44 9. 776768 9. 903864 9. 872903 10. 127097 16 45 9. 776937 9. 903770 9. 873167
10. 126833 15 46 9. 777106 9. 903676 9. 873430 10. 126570 14 47 9. 777275 9.
903581 9. 873694 10. 126306 13 48 9. 777444 9. 903486 9. 873957 10. 126043 12
49 9. 777613 9. 903392 9. 874220 10. 125780 11 50 9. 777781 9. 903298 9. 874484
10. 125516 10 51 9. 777950 9. 903203 9. 874747 10. 125253 9 52 9. 778119 9.
903108 9. 875010 10. 124990 8 53 9. 778287 9. 903013 9. 875273 10. 124727 7 54
9. 778455 9. 902919 9. 875536 10. 124464 6 55 9. 778623 9. 902824 9. 875799 10.
124201 5 56 9. 778792 9. 902729 9. 876063 10. 123937 4 57 9. 778960 9. 902634
9. 876326 10. 123674 3 58 9. 779129 9. 902539 9. 876589 10. 123411 2 59 9.
779295 9. 902444 9. 876851 10. 123149 1 60 9. 779463 9. 902349 9. 877114 10.
122886 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 53. Degree 37. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9 779463 9. 902349 9. 877114 10. 122885 60 1 9. 779631 9.
902253 9. 877377 10. 122623 59 2 9. 779798 9. 902158 9. 877640 10. 122360 58 3
9. 779965 9. 902063 9. 877903 10. 122097 57 4 9. 780133 9. 901967 9. 878165 10.
121834 56 5 9. 780300 9. 901872 9. 878428 10. 121572 55 6 9. 780467 9. 901776
9. 878691 10. 121309 54 7 9. 780634 9. 901681 9. 878953 10. 121047 53 8 9.
780801 9. 901585 9. 879216 10. 120784 52 9 9. 780968 9. 901488 9. 879478 10.
120522 51 10 9. 781134 9. 901391 9. 879741 10. 120259 50 11 9. 781301 9. 901298
9. 880003 10. 119997 49 12 9. 781467 9. 901202 9. 880265 10. 119734 48 13 9.
781634 9. 901106 9. 880528 10. 119472 47 14 9. 781800 9. 901010 9. 880790 10.
119210 46 15 9. 781966 9. 900914 9. 881052 10. 118948 45 16 9. 782132 9. 900828
9. 881314 10. 118686 44 17 9. 782298 9. 900722 9. 881576 10. 118424 43 18 9.
782464 9. 900626 9. 881839 10. 118161 42 19 9. 782690 9. 900529 9. 882101 10.
117899 41 20 9. 782796 9. 900433 9. 882363 10. 117637 40 21 9. 782961 9. 900337
9. 882625 10. 117375 39 22 9. 783127 9. 900240 9. 882886 10. 117114 38 23 9.
783292 9. 900144 9. 883148 10. 116852 37 24 9. 783457 9. 900047 9. 883410 10.
116590 36 25 9. 783623 9. 899951 9. 883672 10. 116328 35 26 9. 783788 9. 899854
9. 883934 10. 116066 34 27 9. 783953 9. 899757 9. 884195 10. 115805 33 28 9.
784118 9. 899660 9. 884457 10. 115543 32 29 9. 784282 9. 899563 9. 884719 10.
115281 31 30 9. 784447 9. 899467 9. 884980 10. 115020 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 52. Degree 37. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 784447 9.
899467 9. 884980 10. 115025 30 31 9. 784616 9. 899370 9. 885242 10. 114758 29
32 9. 784776 9. 899273 9. 885503 10. 114497 28 33 9. 784941 9. 899175 9. 885765
10. 114235 27 34 9. 785105 9. 899078 9. 886026 10. 113974 26 35 9. 785269 9.
898981 9. 886288 10. 113712 25 36 9. 785433 9. 898884 9. 886549 10. 113451 24
37 9. 785591 9. 898787 9. 886810 10. 113190 23 38 9. 785761 9. 898689 9. 887072
10. 112928 22 39 9. 785925 9. 898592 9. 887333 10. 112667 21 40 9. 786088 9.
898494 9. 887594 10. 112406 20 41 9. 786252 9. 898397 9. 887855 10. 112145 19
42 9. 786416 9. 898299 9. 888116 10. 111884 18 43 9. 786579 9. 898201 9. 888377
10. 111623 17 44 9. 786742 9. 898104 9. 888638 10. 111362 16 45 9. 786909 9.
898006 9. 888899 10. 111101 15 46 9. 787069 9. 897908 9. 889160 10. 110840 14
47 9. 787232 9. 897810 9. 889421 10. 110579 13 48 9. 787395 9. 897112 9. 889682
10. 110318 12 49 9. 787557 9. 897614 9. 889943 10. 110057 11 50 9. 787720 9.
897516 9. 890204 10. 109796 10 51 9. 787883 9. 897418 9. 890465 10. 109535 9 52
9. 788045 9. 897320 9. 890725 10. 109275 8 53 9. 788208 9. 897222 9. 890986 10.
109014 7 54 9. 788370 9. 897123 9. 891248 10. 108753 6 55 9. 788532 9. 897025
9. 891507 10. 108493 5 56 9. 788694 9. 896926 9. 891768 10. 108232 4 57 9.
788856 9. 896828 9. 892028 10. 107972 3 58 9. 789018 9. 896729 9. 892289 10.
107711 2 59 9. 789180 9. 896631 9. 892549 10. 107451 1 60 9. 789342 9. 896532
9. 892810 10. 107190 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 52. Degree 38. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 789342 9. 896532 9. 892810 10. 107190 60 1
9. 789504 9. 896433 9. 893070 10. 106930 59 2 9. 789665 9. 896335 (...) 10.
106669 58 3 9. 789827 9. 896236 9. 893591 10. 106409 57 4 9. 789988 9. 896137
9. 893851 10. 106149 56 5 9. 790149 9. 896038 9. 894111 10. 105889 55 6 9.
790310 9. 895939 9. 894371 10. 105628 54 7 9. 790471 9. 895840 9. 894632 10.
105368 53 8 9. 790632 9. 895741 9. 894892 10. 105108 52 9 9. 790793 9. 895641
9. 895152 10. 104844 51 10 9. 790954 9. 895542 9. 895412 10. 104588 50 11 9.
791115 9. 895443 9. 895672 10. 104328 49 12 9. 791275 9. 895343 9. 895932 10.
104068 48 13 9. 791436 9. 895244 9. 896192 10. 103808 47 14 9. 791596 9. 895144
9. 896452 10. 103548 46 15 9. 791756 9. 895045 9. 896712 10. 103288 45 16 9.
791917 9. 894945 9. 896971 10. 103028 44 17 9. 792077 9. 894846 9. 897231 10.
102769 43 18 9. 792237 9. 894746 9. 897491 10. 102509 42 19 9. 792397 9. 894646
9. 897751 10. 102249 41 20 9. 792557 9. 894546 9. 898010 10. 101990 40 21 9.
792716 9. 894446 9. 898270 10. 101730 39 22 9. 792876 9. 894346 9. 898530 10.
101470 38 23 9. 793035 9. 894246 9. 898789 10. 101211 37 24 9. 793195 9. 894146
9. 899049 10. 100951 36 25 9. 793354 9. 894046 9 899308 10. 100692 35 26 9.
793513 9. 893946 9. 899568 10. 100432 34 27 9. 793673 9. 893845 9. 899827 10.
100173 33 28 9. 793832 9. 893745 9. 900086 10. 099913 32 29 9. 793991 9. 893645
9. 900346 10. 099654 31 30 9. 794149 9. 893544 9. 900605 10. 099395 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 51. Degree 38. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang.
30 9. 794149 9. 893544 9. 900605 10. 099395 30 31 9. 794308 9. 893444 9. 900864
10. 099135 29 32 9. 794467 9. 893343 9. 901124 10. 098876 28 33 9. 794626 9.
893243 9. 901383 10. 098617 27 34 9. 794784 9. 893142 9. 901642 10. 098358 26
35 9. 794942 9. 893041 9. 901901 10. 098099 25 36 9. 795101 9. 892940 9. 902160
10. 097839 24 37 9. 795259 9. 892839 9. 902419 10. 097580 23 38 9. 795417 9.
892738 9. 902678 10. 097321 22 39 9. 795575 9. 892637 9. 902937 10. 097062 21
40 9. 795733 9. 892536 9. 903196 10. 096803 20 41 9. 795891 9. 892435 9. 903455
10. 096544 19 42 9. 796049 9. 892334 9. 903714 10. 096285 18 43 9. 796206 9.
892233 9. 903973 10. 096027 17 44 9. 796364 9. 892132 9. 904232 10. 095768 16
45 9. 796521 9. 892030 9. 904491 10. 095509 15 46 9. 796678 9. 891929 9. 904750
10. 095250 14 47 9. 796836 9. 891827 9. 905008 10. 094991 13 48 9. 796993 9.
891726 9. 905267 10. 094733 12 49 9. 797150 9. 891624 9. 905526 10. 094474 11
50 9. 797307 9. 891522 9. 905784 10. 094215 10 51 9. 797464 9. 891421 9. 906043
10. 093957 9 52 9. 797621 9. 891319 9. 906302 10. 093698 8 53 9. 797777 9.
891217 9. 906560 10. 093440 7 54 9. 797934 9. 891115 9. 906819 10. 093181 6 55
9. 798091 9. 891013 9. 907077 10. 092923 5 56 9. 798247 9. 890911 9. 907336 10.
092664 4 57 9. 798403 9. 890809 9. 907594 10. 092406 3 58 9. 798560 9. 890707
9. 907852 10. 092147 2 59 9. 798716 9. 890605 9. 908111 10. 091889 1 60 9.
798872 9. 890503 9. 908369 10. 091631 0 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree
51. Degree 39. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 798872 9. 890503 9. 908369
10. 091631 60 1 9. 799028 9. 890400 9. 908627 10. 091373 59 2 9. 799184 9
890298 9. 908886 10. 091114 58 3 9. 799339 9. 890195 9. 909144 10. 090856 57 4
9. 799495 9. 890093 9. 909402 10. 090598 56 5 9. 799651 9. 889990 9. 909660 10.
090340 55 6 9. 799806 9. 889888 9. 909918 10. 090081 54 7 9. 799961 9. 889785
9. 910176 10. 089823 53 8 9. 800117 9. 889682 9. 910435 10. 089565 52 9 9.
800272 9. 889579 9. 910693 10. 089307 51 10 9. 800427 9. 889476 9. 910951 10.
089049 50 11 9. 800582 9. 889374 9. 911209 10. 088791 49 12 9. 800737 9. 889271
9. 911467 10. 088533 48 13 9. 800892 9. 889167 9. 911724 10. 088275 47 14 9.
801047 9. 889064 9. 911982 10. 088017 46 15 9. 801201 9. 888961 9. 912240 10.
087760 45 16 9. 801356 9. 888858 9. 912498 10. 087502 44 17 9. 801510 9. 888755
9. 912756 10. 087244 43 18 9. 801665 9. 888651 9. 913014 10. 086986 42 19 9.
801819 9. 888548 9. 913271 10 086729 41 20 9. 801973 9. 888444 9. 913529 10.
086471 40 21 9. 802127 9. 888341 9. 913787 10. 086213 39 22 9. 802282 9. 888237
9. 914044 10. 085956 38 23 9. 802435 9. 888133 9 914302 10. 085698 37 24 9.
802589 9. 888030 9. 914560 (...) 36 25 9. 802743 9. 887926 9. 914817 10. 085183
35 26 9. 802897 9. 887822 9. 915075 10. 084925 34 27 9. 803050 9. 887718 9.
915332 10. 084668 33 28 9. 803204 9. 887614 9. 915590 10. 084410 32 29 9.
803357 9. 887510 9. 915847 10. 084153 31 30 9. 803510 9. 887406 9. 916104 10.
083895 30 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 50. Degree 39. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 803510 9. 887406 9. 916104 10. 083895 30 31 9. 803664 9.
887302 9. 916362 10. 083638 29 32 9. 803817 9. 887198 9. 916619 10. 083381 28
33 9. 803970 9. 887093 9. 916876 10. 083123 27 34 9. 804123 9. 887989 9. 917134
10. 082866 26 35 9. 804276 9. 886884 9. 917391 10. 082609 25 36 9. 804428 9.
886780 9. 917648 10. 082352 24 37 9. 804581 9. 886675 9. 917905 10. 082094 23
38 9. 804734 9. 886571 9. 918162 10. 081837 22 39 9. 804886 9. 886466 9. 918420
10. 081580 21 40 9. 805038 9. 886361 9. 918677 10. 081323 20 41 9. 805191 9.
886257 9. 918934 10. 081066 19 42 9. 805343 9. 886152 9. 919191 10. 080809 18
43 9. 805495 9. 886047 9. 919448 10. 080552 17 44 9. 805647 9. 885942 9. 919705
10. 080295 16 45 9. 805799 9. 885837 9. 919962 10. 080038 15 46 9. 805951 9.
885732 9. 920219 10. 079781 14 47 (...) 9. 885627 9. 920476 10. 079524 13 48 9.
806254 9. 885521 9. 920733 10. 079267 12 49 9. 806406 9. 885416 9. 920990 10.
079010 11 50 9. 806557 9. 885311 9. 921247 10. 078753 10 51 9. 806709 9. 885205
9. 921503 10. 078496 9 52 9. 806860 9. 885100 9. 921760 10. 078240 8 53 9.
807011 9. 884994 9. 922017 10. 077983 7 54 9. 807162 9. 884889 9. 922274 10.
077726 6 55 9. 807314 9. 884783 9. 922530 10. 077469 5 56 9. 807464 9. 884677
9. 922787 10. 077213 4 57 9. 807615 9. 884572 9. 923044 10. 076956 3 58 9.
807766 9. 884466 9. 923300 10. 076699 2 59 9. 807917 9. 884360 9. 923557 10.
076443 1 60 9. 808067 9. 884254 9. 923813 10. 076186 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang
Tangent M Degree 50 Degree 40. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 808067 9.
884254 9. 923813 10. 076180 60 1 9. 808218 9. 884148 9. 924070 10. 075930 59 2
9. 808368 9. 884042 9. 924327 10. 075673 58 3 9. 808519 9. 883936 9. 924583 10.
075417 57 4 9. 808669 9. 883829 9. 924839 10. 075160 56 5 9. 808819 9. 883723
9. 925096 10. 074904 55 6 9. 808969 9. 883617 9. 925352 10. 074647 54 7 9.
809119 9. 883510 9. 925609 10. 074391 53 8 9. 809269 9. 883404 9. 925865 10.
074135 52 9 9. 809419 9. 883297 9. 926121 10. 073878 51 10 9. 809569 9. 883191
9. 926378 10. 073622 50 11 9. 809718 9. 883084 9. 926634 10. 073366 49 12 9.
809868 9. 882977 9. 926890 10. 073110 48 13 9. 810017 9. 882871 9. 927147 10.
072853 47 14 9. 810166 9. 882764 9. 927403 10. 072597 46 15 9. 810316 9. 882657
9. 927659 10. 072341 45 16 9. 810465 9. 882550 9. 927915 10. 072085 44 17 9.
810614 9. 882443 9. 928171 10. 071829 43 18 9. 810763 9. 882336 9. 928427 10.
071573 42 19 9. 810912 9. 882228 9. 928683 10. 071317 41 20 9. 810061 9. 882121
9. 928940 10. 071060 40 21 9. 811210 9. 882014 9. 929196 10. 070804 39 22 9.
811358 9. 881907 9. 929452 10. 070548 38 23 9. 811506 9. 881799 9. 929708 10.
070292 37 24 9. 811655 9. 881692 9. 929964 10. 070036 36 25 9. 811804 9. 881584
9. 930219 10. 069781 35 26 9. 811952 9. 881477 9. 930475 10. 069525 34 27 9.
812100 9. 881369 9. 930731 10. 069269 33 28 9. 812248 9. 881261 9. 930987 10.
069013 32 29 9. 812396 9. 881153 9. 931243 10. 068757 31 30 9. 812544 9. 881045
9. 931499 10. 068501 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 55. Degree 40. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 812544 9. 881045 9. 931499 10. 068501 30 31
9. 812692 9. 880937 9. 931755 10. 068245 29 32 9. 812840 9. 880829 9. 932010
10. 067989 28 33 9. 812988 9. 880721 9. 932266 10. 067734 27 34 9. 813135 9.
880613 9. 932522 10. 067478 26 35 9. 813283 9. 880505 9. 932778 10. 067222 25
36 9. 813430 9. 880397 9. 933033 10. 066967 24 37 9. 813578 9. 880289 9. 933289
10. 066711 23 38 9. 813725 9. 880180 9. 933545 10. 066455 22 39 9. 813872 9.
880072 9. 933800 10. 066200 21 40 9. 814019 9. 879963 9. 934056 10. 065944 20
41 9. 814166 9. 879855 9. 934311 10. 065688 19 42 9. 814313 9. 879746 9. 934567
10. 065433 18 43 9. 814460 9. 879637 9. 934822 10. 065177 17 44 9. 814607 9.
879529 9. 935078 10. 064922 16 45 9. 814753 9. 879420 9. 935333 10. 064666 15
46 9. 814900 9. 879311 9. 935589 10. 064411 14 47 9. 815046 9. 879202 9. 935844
10. 064156 13 48 9. 815193 9. 879093 9. 936100 10. 063900 12 49 9. 815339 9.
878984 9. 936355 10. 063645 11 50 9. 815485 9. 878875 9. 936610 10. 063389 10
51 9. 815631 9. 878766 9. 936866 10. 063134 9 52 9. 815777 9. 878656 9. 937121
10. 062879 8 53 9. 815923 9. 878547 9. 937376 10. 062623 7 54 9. 816069 9.
878438 9. 937632 10. 062368 6 55 9. 816215 9. 878328 9. 937887 10. 062113 5 56
9. 816361 9. 878219 9. 938142 10. 061858 4 57 9. 816506 9. 878109 9. 938397 10.
061602 3 58 9. 816652 9. 877999 9. 938653 10. 061347 2 59 9. 816797 9. 877890
9. 938908 10. 061092 1 60 9. 816943 9. 877780 9. 939163 10. 060837 0 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 49. Degree 41. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0
9. 816943 9. 877780 9. 939163 10. 060837 60 1 9. 817088 9. 877670 9. 939418 10.
060582 59 2 9. 817233 9. 877560 9. 939673 10. 060327 58 3 9. 817378 9. 877450
(...) 10. 060072 57 4 9. 817523 9. 877340 9. 940183 10. 059816 56 5 9. 817668
9. 877230 9. 940438 10. 059562 55 6 9. 817813 9. 877120 9. 940693 10. 059307 54
7 9. 817958 9. 877009 9. 940948 10. 059052 53 8 9. 818103 9. 876899 9. 941203
10. 058797 52 9 9. 818247 9. 876789 9. 941458 10. 058542 51 10 9. 818392 9.
876678 9 941713 10. 058287 50 11 9. 818536 9. 876568 9. 941968 10. 058032 49 12
9. 818681 9. 876457 9. 942223 10. 057777 48 13 9. 818825 9. 876347 9. 942478
10. 057522 47 14 9. 818969 9. 876236 9. 942733 10. 057267 46 15 9. 818113 9.
876125 9. 942988 10. 057012 45 16 9. 819257 9. 876014 9. 943243 10. 056757 44
17 9. 819401 9. 875904 9. 943498 10. 056502 43 18 9. 819545 9. 875793 9. 943752
10. 056248 42 19 9. 819689 9. 875682 9. 944007 10. 055993 41 20 9. 819832 9.
875571 9. 944262 10. 055728 40 21 9. 819976 9. 875459 9. 944517 10. 055483 39
22 9. 820119 9. 875348 9. 944771 10. 055229 38 23 9. 820263 9. 875237 9. 945026
10. 054974 37 24 9. 820406 9. 875125 9. 945281 10. 054719 36 25 9. 820549 9.
875014 9. 945535 10. 054464 35 26 9. 820693 9. 874903 9. 945790 10. 054210 34
27 9. 820836 9. 874791 9. 946045 10. 053955 33 28 9. 820979 9. 874679 9. 946299
10. 053701 32 29 9. 821122 9. 874568 9. 946554 10. 053446 31 30 9. 821264 9.
874456 9. 946808 10. 053192 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 48.
Degree 41. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 821264 9. 874456 9. 946808 10.
053192 30 31 9. 821407 9. 874344 9 947063 10. 052937 29 32 9. 821550 9. 874232
9. 947317 10. 052682 28 33 9. 821692 9. 874120 9. 947572 10. 052128 27 34 9.
821835 9 874008 9. 947826 10. 052173 26 35 9. 821977 9. 873896 9. 948081 10.
051919 25 36 9. 822120 9. 873784 9. 948335 10. 051664 24 37 9. 822262 9. 873672
9. 948590 10. 051410 23 38 9 822404 9 873560 9. 948844 10. 051156 22 39 9.
822546 9. 873447 9. 949099 10. 050901 21 40 9. 822688 9. 873335 9. 949353 10.
050647 20 41 9. 822830 9 873223 9. 949607 10. 050393 19 42 9. 822972 9. 873110
9 949862 10. (...) 18 43 9. 823114 9. 872998 9. 950116 10. 049884 17 44 9.
823255 9. 872885 9 950370 10. 049630 16 45 9. 823397 9. 872772 9. 950625 10
049375 15 46 9. 823538 9. 872659 9. 950879 10. 049121 14 47 9. 823680 9. 872546
9. 951133 10. 048867 13 48 9. 823821 9. 872434 9. 951388 10. 048612 12 49 9.
823962 9. 872321 9. 951642 10. 048358 11 50 9. 824104 9. 872208 9. 951896 10.
048104 10 51 9. 824245 9. 872094 9. 952150 10. 047850 9 52 9. 824386 9. 871981
9. 952404 10. 047575 8 53 9. 824527 9. 871868 9. 952659 10. 047341 7 54 9.
824667 9. 871755 9. 952913 10. 047087 6 55 9. 824808 9. 871641 9. 953167 10.
046833 5 56 9. 824949 9. 871528 9. 953421 10. 046579 4 57 9. 825090 9. 871414
9. 953675 10. 046325 3 58 9. 825230 9. 871301 9. 953929 10. 046071 2 59 9.
825370 9. 871187 9. 954183 10. 045817 1 60 9. 825511 9. 871073 9. 954437 10.
045563 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 48. Degree 42. M Sine Cosine
Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 825511 9. 871073 9. 954437 10. 045562 60 1 9. 825651 9.
870960 9. 954691 10. 045308 59 2 9. 825791 9. 870846 9. 954945 10. 045054 58 3
9. 825931 9. 870732 9. 955199 10. 044800 57 4 9. 826071 9. 870618 9. 955453 10.
044546 56 5 9. 826211 9. 870504 9. 955707 10. 044292 55 6 9. 826351 9. 870390
9. 955961 10. 043038 54 7 9. 826491 9 870275 9. 956215 10. 043784 53 8 9.
826631 9. 870161 9. 956469 10. 043531 52 9 9. 826770 9. 870047 9. 956723 10.
043276 51 10 9. 826910 9. 869933 9. 956977 10. 043023 50 11 9. 827049 9. 869818
9. 957231 10. 042769 49 12 9. 827189 9. 869704 9. 957485 10. 042515 48 13 9.
827328 9. 869589 9. 957739 10. 042261 47 14 9. 827467 9. 869474 9. 957993 10.
042007 46 15 9. 827606 9. 869360 9. 958246 10. 041753 45 16 9. 827745 9. 869245
9 958500 10. 041500 44 17 9. 827884 9. 869130 9. 958754 10. 041246 43 18 9.
828023 9. 869015 9. 959008 10. 040992 42 19 9. 828162 9. 868900 9. 959262 10.
040738 41 20 9. 828301 9. 868785 9. 959515 10. 040485 40 21 9. 828439 9. 868670
9. 959769 10. 040231 39 22 9. 828578 9. 868555 9. 960023 10. 039977 38 23 9.
828716 9. 868439 9. 960277 10. 039723 37 24 9. 828855 9. 868324 9. 960530 10.
039469 36 25 9. 828993 9. 868209 9. 960784 10. 039216 35 26 9. 829131 9. 868093
9. 961038 10. 038962 34 27 9. 829269 9. 867978 9. 961291 10. 038608 33 28 9.
829407 9. 867862 9. 961545 10. 038451 32 29 9. 829545 9. 867747 9. 961799 10.
038201 31 30 9. 829683 9. 867631 9. 962052 10. 037947 30 Cosine Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 47. Degree 42. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 829683 9.
867631 9. 962052 10. 037947 30 31 9. 829821 9. 867515 9. 962306 10. 037694 29
32 9. 829959 9. 867399 9. 962560 10. 037440 28 33 9. 830096 9. 867283 9. 962813
10. 037187 27 34 9. 830234 9. 867167 9. 963067 10. 036933 26 35 9. 830372 9.
867051 9. 963320 10. 036680 25 36 9 830509 9. 866935 9. 963574 10. 036426 24 37
9. 830646 9. 866819 9. 963827 10. 036173 23 38 7. 830784 9. 866703 9. 964081
10. 035919 22 39 9. 830921 9. 866586 9. 964335 10. 035665 21 40 9. 831058 9.
866470 9. 964588 10. 035412 20 41 9. 831195 9. 866353 9. 964842 10. 035158 19
42 9. 831332 9. 866237 9. 965095 10. 034905 18 43 9. 831469 9. 866120 9. 965348
10. 034652 17 44 9. 831606 9. 866004 9. 965602 10. 034398 16 45 9. 831742 9.
865887 9. 965855 10. 034144 15 46 9. 831879 9. 865770 9. 966109 10. 033891 14
47 9. 832015 9. 865653 9 966362 10. 033638 13 48 9. 832152 9. 865536 9. 966616
10. 033384 12 49 9. 832288 9. 865419 9. 966869 10. 033131 11 50 9. 832425 9.
865302 9. 967122 10. 032878 10 51 9. 832561 9. 865185 9. 967376 10. 032624 9 52
9. 832697 9. 865068 9. 967629 10. 032371 8 53 9. 832833 9. 864950 9. 967883 10.
032117 7 54 9. 832969 9. 864833 9. 968136 10. 031864 6 55 9. 833105 9. 864716
9. 968389 10. 031611 5 56 9. 833241 9. 864598 9. 968643 10. 031357 4 57 9.
833376 9. 864480 9. 968896 10. 031104 3 58 9. 833512 9. 864363 9. 969149 10.
030851 2 59 9. 833648 9. 864245 9 969403 10. 030597 1 60 9. 833783 9. 864127 9.
969656 10. 030344 0 Cosine. Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 47. Degree 43. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 833783 9. 864127 9. 969656 10. 030344 60 1
9. 833919 9. 864010 9. 969909 10. 030091 59 2 9. 834054 9. 863892 9. 970162 10.
029838 58 3 9. 834189 9. 863774 9. 970416 10. 029584 57 4 9. 834324 9. 863656 9
970669 10. 029331 56 5 9. 834460 9. 863537 9. 970922 10. 029078 55 6 9 834595 9
863419 9.971175 10. 028827 54 7 9. 834730 9. 863301 9. 971428 10. 028571 53 8
9. 834865 9. 863183 9. 971682 10. 028318 52 9 9. 834999 9. 863064 9. 971935 10.
028065 51 10 9. 835134 9. 862946 9. 972188 10. 027812 50 11 9. 835269 9. 862827
9. 972441 10. 027559 49 12 9. 835503 9. 862709 9. 972694 10. 027306 48 13 9.
835538 9. 862590 9. 972948 10. 027052 47 14 9. 835672 9. 862471 9. 973201 10.
026799 46 15 9. 835806 9. 862353 9. 973454 10. 026546 45 16 9. 835941 9. 862234
9. 973707 10. 026293 44 17 9. 836075 9. 862115 9. 973960 10. 026040 43 18 9.
836209 9. 861996 9. 974213 10. 025787 42 19 9. 836343 9. 861877 9. 974466 10.
025533 41 20 9. 836477 9. 861757 9. 974719 10. 025280 40 21 9. 836611 9. 861638
9 974973 10. 025027 39 22 9. 836745 9 861519 9 975229 10. 024774 38 23 9.
836878 9 861399 9 975479 10. 024521 37 24 9. 837012 9. 861280 9. 975732 10.
024268 36 25 9. 837146 9. 861161 9. 975985 10. 024015 35 26 9. 837279 9. 861041
9. 976238 10. 023762 34 27 9. 837412 9. 860921 9. 976491 10. 023509 33 28 9
837546 9. 860802 9. 976744 10. 023256 32 29 9. 837679 9. 860682 9. 976997 10.
023003 31 30 9 837812 9. 860562 9. 977250 10 022750 30 Cosine. Sine Co-tang.
Tangent M Degree 46. Degree 43. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 30 9. 837812 9.
860562 9. 977250 10. 022750 30 31 9. 837945 9. 860442 9. 977503 10. 022497 29
32 9. 838078 9. 860322 9. 977756 10. 022244 28 33 9. 838211 9. 860202 9. 978009
10. 021991 27 34 9. 838344 9. 860082 9. 978262 10. 021738 26 35 9. 838477 9.
859962 9. 978515 10. 021485 25 36 9. 838009 9. 859842 9. 978768 10. 021232 24
37 9. 838742 9. 859721 9. 979021 10. 020979 23 38 9. 838875 9. 859601 9. 979274
10. 020726 22 39 9. 839007 9. 859480 9. 979527 10. 020473 21 40 9. 839140 9.
859360 9. 979780 10. 020220 20 41 9. 839272 9. 859239 9. 980033 10. 019967 19
42 9. 839484 9. 859118 9. 980285 10. 019714 18 43 9. 839536 9. 858998 9. 980538
10. 019461 17 44 9. 839668 9. 858877 9. 980791 10. 019209 16 45 9. 839800 9.
858756 9. 981044 10. 018956 15 46 9. 839932 9. 858639 9. 981297 10. 018703 14
47 9. 840064 9. 858514 9. 981550 10. 018450 13 48 9. 840196 9. 858398 9. 981803
10. 018197 12 49 9. 840428 9. 858272 9 982056 10. 017944 11 50 9. 840459 9.
858150 9. 982309 10 017691 10 51 9. 840591 9. 858029 9. 982562 10. 017438 9 52
9. 840722 9. 857908 9. 982814 10. 017185 8 53 9. 840854 9. 857786 9 983067 10.
016933 7 54 9. 840985 9. 857665 9. 983320 10. 016683 6 55 9. 841116 9. 857543
9. 983573 10. 016427 5 56 9. 841247 9. 857421 9. 983826 10. 016174 4 57 9.
841378 9. 857300 9. 984079 10. 015921 3 58 9. 841509 9. 857178 9. 984331 10.
015668 2 59 9. 841640 9. 857056 9. 984584 10. 015416 1 60 9. 841771 9. 856934
9. 984837 10. 015163 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 46. Degree 44. M
Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang. 0 9. 841771 9. 856934 9. 984837 10. 015162 60 1
9. 841902 9. 856812 9. 985090 10. 014910 59 2 9. 842033 9. 856690 9. 985343 10.
014657 58 3 9. 842163 9. 856568 9. 985596 10. 014404 57 4 9. 842294 9. 856445
9. 985848 10. 014151 56 5 9. 842424 9. 856323 9. 986101 10. 013899 55 6 9.
842555 9 856201 9. 986354 10. 013646 54 7 9. 842685 9. 856078 9. 986607 10.
013393 53 8 9. 842815 9. 855956 9. 986859 10. 013140 52 9 9. 842945 9. 855833
9. 987112 10. 012888 51 10 9. 843076 9. 855710 9. 987365 10. 012635 50 11 9.
843206 9. 855588 9. 987618 10. 012382 49 12 9. 843336 9. 855465 9. 987871 10.
012129 48 13 9. 843465 9. 855342 9. 988123 10. 011877 47 14 9. 843595 9. 855219
9. 988376 10. 011624 46 15 9. 843725 9. 855096 9. 988629 10. 011371 45 16 9.
843855 9. 854973 9. 988882 10. 011118 44 17 9. 843934 9. 854850 9. (...) 10.
010866 43 18 9. 844114 9. 854727 9. 989387 10. 010613 42 19 9. 844243 9. 854603
9. 989640 10. 010360 41 20 9. 844372 9. 854480 9. 989893 10. 010107 40 21 9.
844502 9. 854356 9. 990145 10. 009855 39 22 9. 844631 9. 854233 9. 990398 10.
009602 38 23 9 844760 9 854109 9. 990651 10. 009349 37 24 9. 844889 9. 853986
9. 990903 10. 009096 36 25 9. 845018 9. 853862 9. 991156 10. 008844 35 26 9.
845147 9. 853738 9. 991409 10. 008591 34 27 9. 845276 9. 853614 9. 991662 10.
008338 33 28 9. 845404 9. 853490 9. 991914 10. 008086 32 29 9. 845533 9. 853366
9. 992167 10. 007833 31 30 9. 845662 9 853242 9. 992420 10. 007580 30 Cosine
Sine Co-tang. Tangent M Degree 45. Degree 44. M Sine Cosine Tangent Co-tang.
30 9. 845662 9. 853242 9. 992420 10. 007580 30 31 9. 845790 9. 853118 9. 992672
10. 007328 29 32 9. 845919 9. 852994 9. 992925 10. 007075 28 33 9. 846047 9.
852869 9. 993178 10. 006822 27 34 9. 846175 9. 852745 9. 993430 10. 006569 26
35 9. 846304 9. 852620 9. 993683 10. 006317 25 36 9. 846432 9. 852496 9. 993936
10. 006064 24 37 9. 846560 9. 852371 9. 994189 10. 005811 23 38 9. 846688 9.
852246 9. 994441 10. 005559 22 39 9. 846816 9. 852122 9. 994694 10. 005306 21
40 9. 846944 9. 851997 9. 994947 10. 005053 20 41 9. 847071 9. 851872 9. 995199
10. 004801 19 42 9. 847199 9. 851747 9. 995452 10. 004548 18 43 9. 847327 9.
851622 9. 995701 10. 004295 17 44 9. 847454 9. 851497 9. 995957 10. 004043 16
45 9. 847582 9. 851372 9. 996210 10. 003790 15 46 9. 847709 9. 851246 9. 996463
10. 003537 14 47 9. 847836 9. 851121 9. 996715 10. 003285 13 48 9. 847964 9.
850996 9. 996968 10. 003032 12 49 9. 848091 9. 850870 9. 997220 10. 002779 11
50 9. 848218 9. 850745 9. 997473 10. 002527 10 51 9. 848345 9. 850619 9. 997726
10. 002274 9 52 9. 848472 9. 850493 9. 997979 10. 002021 8 53 9. 848599 9.
850367 9. 998231 10. 001769 7 54 9. 848726 9. 850242 9. 998484 10. 001516 6 55
9. 848852 9. 850116 9. 998737 10. 001263 5 56 9. 848979 9. 849990 9. 998989 10.
001011 4 57 9. 849106 9. 849864 9. 999242 10. 001758 3 58 9. 849232 9. 849737
9. 999495 10. 000505 2 59 9. 849359 9. 849611 9. 999747 10. 000253 1 60 9.
849485 9. 849485 10. 000000 10. 000000 0 Cosine Sine Co-tang Tangent M Degree
45.

FINIS.
Some Books sold by W. Freeman at the Artichoke next St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street.
REports in the Court of King's Bench from the 12th. to the 30th. Year of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles II. in 3 Vol. Taken by J. Keble
of Grey's-Inn, Esquire; with new and useful Tables to all the 3 Vol.

Sheppard's President of Presidents. 8o.

Zenophon's History of the Affairs of Greece, inseven Books, being a
Continuation of the Peloponnesian War, from the time where Thucydides ends, to
the Battle at Mantinea; to which is prefixed an Abstract of Thucydides, and a
brief Account of the Land and Naval Forces of the ancient Greeks. Translated
from the Greek by John Newman.

The Institution and Life of Cyrus the Great, written by the famous Philosopher
and General, Zenophon of Athens. Translated by F. Digby and J. Norris.

Holy Devotions with Directions to Pray: Also a Brief Exposition on the Lord's
Prayer, Creed, Ten Commandments, seven Penitential Psalms, and the seven Psalms
of Thanksgiving, by the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews late
Bishop of Winchester.

Daily Exercise for a Christian, or a Manual of Private Devotions, as well for
every day in the Week, as upon Particular Occasions, by J. Bridal, Senior, Esquire
late of the Rolls.

A New Years Gift composed of Prayers and Meditations with Devotions for
several Occasions; the whole six parts complete.

A Catalogue of Books.
The Old Religion: A Treatise wherein is laid down the true State of the
Difference betwixt the Reformed and Roman Church. Serving for the Vindication
of Our Innocence, for the settling of Wavering Minds, for a Preservation against
Popish Insinuations. By the Reverend Father in God Jos. Hall late Lord Bishop
of Excester, and afterward of Norwich.

The Manners of the Israelites in 3 parts. 1. Of the Patriarchs. 2. Of the
Israelites, after their coming out of Egypt, until the Captivity of Babylon.
3. Of the Jews, after their Return from the Captivity, until the Preaching of
the Gospel, in 12o.

The Means to preserve Peace in Marriage; being an ingenious Treatise written
(Originally in French) by the Author of the Rules of Civility.

The Penitent Pardoned, or a Discourse of the Nature of Sin and Efficacy of
Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son, by Dr. Goodman.

An infallible way to Contentment in the midst of Public and Personal
Calamities, together with the Christians Courage and Encouragement against evil
Tidings and the fear of Death.

Argalus and Parthenia, by F. Quarles.

Nanis History of Venice, Fol.

History of the Government of Venice, 8o.

Policy of the Venetians, 12o.

The Mistaken Beauty, a Comedy.

The Duchess of Malphey.

The Empress of Morocco, a Farce.

The Court of the Gentiles in 4 parts complete, by Theophilus Gale.


