A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER Knight, Lord
Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON, AT GROCERS-HALL, February the 12th. 1687/8.

By Nathanael Tailor.

Published by his Lordships Command.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril at the Three Legs in the Poultry. 1688.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN SHORTER Knight, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
HAD I been at liberty to have followed my own Inclinations, the ensuing
Discourse had been thrown by, and lain neglected in my own Study only. But
having received your Commands for the Publishing as well as the Preaching of
it, I here present it to your Lordship; being resolved there shall be no
defects in my Obedience, how many soever there may be in my Sermon. But it is
not the design of this Dedication to make Apologies, or which is another common
place usually insisted on, write a Panegyric. They are generally Hypocrites
that blow Trumpets before other Men, as well as they that of old did it before
themselves. If you take care that your Works shall praise you, and your own
Conscience approve and commend you; this will afford you a solid Satisfaction,
when the good Words of Men only will no more comfort, than the Breath wherewith
they utter them, will nourish you. And that your Lordship and your Honorable
Brethren, may manage your Selves and all your Affairs in that Station wherein
Providence has set you, so as to secure this to your selves; prevent the
Reproaches of Conscience, and live down those of malicious Men; that this great
City and Religion may flourish under your prudent and just Administration, is
and shall be the Daily Prayer of

MY LORD, Your most Obedient and Faithful Servant Nathanael Tailor.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, etc.
LUKE X. 21. In that Hour Jesus rejoyted in Spirit, and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise
and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight.


HE that shall seriously consider the many express Prophecies concerning the
Messiah; the great and incredible Diligence wherewith every Iota and Tittle of
them was preserved; and the general Expectation among all forts of men in
Judaea of his Coming and Kingdom, about our Savior's Time; would be apt to
think, that our Lord would have been as joyfully welcomed and entertained by
them, as the first Approaches of the Sun are by those that have been buried in
Darkness for many Months together in the remoter parts of the Earth: And that
as he was ushered into the World with the Hallelujahs of Angels, so he would
have been received with the Hosannas of the Wisest of Men. But he that is in
the least acquainted with the History of our Savior, as recorded by all the
Four Evangelists, will easily see, Joh. 1.11.
that tho he came to his Own, yet his Own received him not; and that tho when
he went out of the World, the Dead indeed arose, as if they would present him
with their Sepulchers; yet as for the Living, while he was in the World, they
would not afford him a Place wherein to lay his Head. He had indeed approved
himself to be a Teacher sent from God; for never did any Man speak the Words,
or do the Things which he had done: and yet the Generality reject him, and
especially the Sons of Wisdom and of Learning did most furiously oppose him. He
opened the Eyes of the Blind, yet the Pharisees would not see the truth of his
Doctrine. He cured the Dumb, but this was his Reward from the Scribes, he
himself was spoken against. He unstopped the Ears of the Deaf, but yet the
Rulers would not hear him: He removed the Diseases of their Bodies with greater
ease than the Errors and Prejudices of their Minds. The Spiritual Wickednesses
in those high places were the only Evil Ones that would not be subject to him.
Ephesians. 6.12.
Nay, as if those raging Devils which he had cast out of others, had entered
into them, they blaspheme and revile him; and their Doctors sat in the Chair
of Scorners as well as in the seat of Moses. Whilst they that followed him were
few in number, mean and ignorant, despicable as well for their understanding,
as for their quality. Both of which things were very popular prejudices, and
mightily improved against him to discourage men from owning and submitting to
him. But yet our Blessed Lord was so far from being dejected and troubled in
mind at this, that on the contrary, as the Evangelist tells us in the words I
have now read, In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, etc. wherein we have
these five things:

1. The inward motion of Christ's Soul, and the external effect or expression
of it, He rejoiced in spirit; and such a passion must have some vent, makes him
break silence, and with an audible voice give thanks.

2. The time when this happened, In that hour; which calls us to cast our eye
back on the foregoing Verses. From ver. 3, to 11. From v. 12, to 16.
and those that rejected it. Then he upbraids and threatens the Cities of
Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum for their impenitence under all those means
of Grace which they enjoyed. And immediately upon this St. Mat. 11.25, 26.
Matthew brings in our Savior uttering the same words with those in my Text.
But St. Luke, that gives us an account of our Savior's using these expressions
at a different time from what St. Matthew speaks of, inserts an account of the
return of the Seventy Disciples, and their being puffed up with the success of
their Ministry, because not only, Devils themselves were subject to them.

Our Savior hereupon corrects that carnal joy, and turns this wandering stream
into its right channel, and directs them to rejoice in that which was a solid
reason and foundation of joy, viz. because their Names were written in Heaven.
in that hour he rejoiced in spirit, for that revelation of Divine Mysteries
that God had made unto them, which he denied unto others.

3. The subject matter or reason of Christ's joy and thanksgiving, Thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes.

These things] i.e. the knowledge of thy self and me, (which he mentions in the
next Verse) and those Mysteries of thy Kingdom which I have declared,

Thou have [hid] from some, [revealed] to others. By considering the latter of
these words we shall the better understand the former of them. Thou have
revealed them] He does not speak of an external revelation; for that was not
the peculiar privilege of some few only, Christ having preached them publicly
and plainly in the ears of all the people; but of an internal revelation,
enabling them in a spiritual and practical manner to apprehend those Divine
Truths that were outwardly proposed to them. And consequently by the hiding
these things from others, we must understand the denying them that special
Grace which might open their minds to see the glory of Divine Mysteries, and
their hearts to feel the transforming power of them; leaving them to their own
obstinate wilful ignorance, to the lusts of their own hearts, and the power of
Satan to blind and harden them.

Thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent.] Men of great Parts,
worldly Wisdom, humane Learning, such as the Scribes and Pharisees were. And
revealed them to Babes. The word properly signifies those that are young in
years; but being opposed to the Wise and Prudent, must be understood of those
that are, as young Children use to be, weak in understanding; as Christ's
Disciples were.

4. The notion under which Christ directs his thanksgiving to his Father for
this thing; that of Lord of Heaven and Earth; which is a title very suitable to
the matter insisted on, and denotes his absolute Dominion, and his infinite
Power. q. d. It was not for want of ability, or of right, that thou have not
done otherwise. Thou did act like one who had all power in thy hand, in
thus revealing these thy Mysteries unto Babes; and by the same Almighty Power
could have shined into the hearts of the Wise and Prudent, who are thy
Creatures also. But thou art at liberty to choose or pass by according as seems
good in thy own eyes.

5. Christ's approbation of, and acquiescence in this dispensation, on this
account, because it was the gracious pleasure of God. Even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight.

From the words thus opened, many Doctrines might be raised; but I shall take
notice of one only.

Doct. The saving revelation of divine things is usually bestowed on mean and
inferior persons, and denied nied to the wise and prudent that enjoy the same
outward means with them.

In the handling this Doctrine I shall I. Explain and confirm this Truth. II.
Show upon what account this was matter of joy and thanksgiving unto Christ.
III. Apply all.


I. I shall explain and confirm this Truth. And here

1. As to a notional Knowledge, Divine things are so far from being hid from
the Wise and Prudent, that they are more fully understood by them than any of
these weaker ones. Daily experience shows us, there are many of the Disputers
of this World that have a more exact scheme of Divine Truths in their heads,
than thousands of holy Souls. They have such an understanding of Divine
Matters, as they have of Humane Arts and Sciences: Can talk acurately and
learnedly about them to the reviving the hearts of some, and stopping the
mouths of others. Tho indeed the great things of God and Christ, the Precepts,
Promises, and Threatenings of the Word, have not that sound in their ears, nor
that holy influence on their hearts and lives as they have on many inferior
persons. They do not see them with life and affection, they do not taste the
sweetness, nor feel the power of them; they have not the relish and savor of
them on their spirits. They do not receive them with respect and veneration;
with that love, delight and holy obedience, as those of weaker capacities do.
All the knowledge that is in them, is but like those Lamps that have been
discovered in some Tombs; still there are dead bones, stench and rottenness
within, and there the Carcass lies dead and unactive in the very same place and
posture, notwithstanding all that light that surrounds it.

2. Wisdom and Prudence do not in themselves obstruct the saving revelation of
Divine Things, nor does the want of them qualify any for the receiving it.
Humane Wisdom and Learning are the Gifts of God, and the proper ornaments of
our rational Faculties; like a crown of flame to a burning Taper. And therefore
so far are such excellent qualifications from hindering any in their own nature
from an hearty embracing Christianity, that if we consider how plainly the
Doctrines of the Gospel are revealed; how undeniably they are proved to be from
Heaven; how excellently suited to the distressed state of an Apostate World;
with what exquisite Wisdom the whole is contrived to the admiration of all the
glorious Angels; how reasonable its commands are, how glorious its promises,
how terrible its threatenings; it is a very amazing thing that men of parts and
abilities to weigh and consider things, and discern their own Interest, should
not readily entertain them. These noble things are not obstructions to it in
themselves; but those lusts, and that pride that too generally accompany them,
like rust cleaving unto silver and gold.

Nor does the want of these qualify any man for saving Knowledge. Nay, on the
contrary, it renders men naturally more unapt and incapable, as well as more
unworthy of it. As the Woman of Samaria said to our Savior, the Well is deep;
John 4.11.
and the shorter the line is, so much the more unlikely it is in it self to
reach to the bottom for the drawing up of living Waters. If any have the
advantage, it should be men of quick parts: for such generally take a thing
presently, as spirits immediately catch fire; whereas things do not enter so
easily, nor pierce so deeply into those that are naturally dull and slow of
understanding. If the Iron be blunt, much pains must be taken in whetting the
edge, Eccl. 10.10.
or more strength put forth in the using it.

3. The saving knowledge of Divine things is not denied to all that are wise
and prudent, nor given to all inferior Persons. Some renowned for wisdom and
learning, have been of Christ's Retinue. Some curiously carved Pieces have been
in our Father's House that have exceedingly graced and adorned it. Sacred
Records inform us of Joseph of Arimathaea, a rich man, and an honorable
Counselor; Acts 13.7.
of Nicodemus a Master in Israel; of Sergius Paulus a prudent man; of a
profoundly learned Paul; an eloquent Apollos; and in the succeeding Ages there
have been some others of a great name, that have known the truth as it is in
Jesus. Ephesians. 4.21.
Some that have had the advantage of the higher ground, have breathed in a
clear Air, and been refreshed with the beams of the Sun; while more
inconsiderable Persons, like them that dwell in low and marish Grounds, have
been wrapped up in fogs and thick darkness. The very dust of the Earth, being
raised by the Prince of the Air, flew in Christ's face; the common people, I
mean among the Jews, who cried out Crucify him, which they would no more have
done than their Rulers, had they known the Lord of Glory. 1 Cor. 2.8.


4. The saving knowledge of Divine things is most usually given to inferior
persons; and most commonly denied to those that are wise and prudent. The
Temple at Jerusalem was made of the richest and most costly Materials; the
spiritual Temple generally of the meanest, only here and there a few precious
and polished Stones that set off the whole Building. And the truth of this will
appear, if you consider,

1. How matters stood about the time of our Savior's appearing, and while he
continued in the World.

Learning and Policy were then at the highest. But yet the wise Philosophers
were lost in the fog; 1 Cor. 1.21.
and by wisdom the World knew not God. Like the blinded Sodomites, they were
groping after the door of Knowledge and Eternal Life, when the Day Star was just
rising, but were not able to find it. If we leave them, and pass into the
dwellings of the Children of Israel, who were now the Goshen of the World, as
they had been once of Egypt, we shall find them encompast with palpable
darkness. The most understanding men want an eye to see. One would have
thought, that as the light of the morning strikes first on the tops of the High
Mountains, so the dawning of the day of Christ should have been first perceived
by the High Priests. That the Sanhedrin should have had the most early notice
of the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, as they used to have of the Phasis
of the New Moon. But on the contrary, the first tidings of an approaching
Messiah were given to Zechariah, an ordinary Priest of the course of Abias; to
Elizabeth his Wife, to the Babe in her Womb, to Joseph the Carpenter, and Mary
a despised Virgin, of a Royal Family, but run to decay, and sunk like a dry
root under ground. True indeed, three Wise men of the East were informed of
Christ's Nativity by a new Star; Mat. 2.1, 2.
but a more considerable number of poor Shepherds had it from a higher hand;
Luke 2.8.
one of the noble Order of Angels, those Morning Stars, was their Preacher. a
great multitude of the Heavenly Host, who in their hearing sung a Psalm of
Praise at the close of the Angelical Sermon. The Wisemen understood the matter
but darkly and confusedly, somewhat in the general, which left them under much
perplexity and uncertainty, and caused them to resort to Jerusalem to make a
farther enquiry. But the poor Shepherds are told all very plainly, both as to
the Nature and Office of Christ; that he was a Savior, Lord: And as to the
particular circumstances of Time and Place, this day, and in the City of David.
It was several days to be sure; nay, whatever Baronius says to the contrary,
for the credit of the Roman Calender, Lightfoot's Works, Vol. 1. p. 432.
a learned Man on good ground thinks, above a year before the Wise men could
obtain a sight of Christ. But the Shepherds find him the very next morning,

When our Savior was brought into the Temple, the learned Scribes and
Pharisees knew him no more than Subjects do their Prince when under a disguise.
Only two aged persons, Simeon (who in all probability was not the famous Man of
that name, the Son of Hillel and Father of Gamaliel, Anna the Prophetess of the
Tribe of Asher, that was always mean, and much more so since the Captivity;
persons remarkable for nothing so much as their extraordinary Piety, by which
the Holy Ghost describes them, discern who he is; the one opening his Arms to
receive him, and both of them their Mouths to praise God for him. Afterward
Christ was removed from Bethlehem, as tho that were a place too near the great
Doctors in Jerusalem, and Nazareth an obscure corner of the Country was the
place of his usual residence. Lazarus, Martha, Mary, persons of no
extraordinary quality, were his intimate Friends. Not Princes or Rabbis, but a
Publican and Fishermen were chosen his Disciples. The learned Men indeed were
sometimes his Hearers; but they revile, oppose, undervalue, endeavor to
ensnare and murder him, while the Poor only receive the Gospel. Mat. 11.5.
He blesses little Children, and they are the persons that sing Hosannas to
him. John 4.
He instructs a poor Woman of Samaria in the Mysteries of Salvation in a long
and excellent Discourse, tho she seemed to deny him a draught of water. But as
for King Herod, Luke 23.8.
who had long desired to see him, and if gratified, might have preserved his
Life, he could not get a word from Christ, tho he hoped for a Miracle. There
was not a greater darkness on the face of the Earth, in the time of Christ's
Passion, than there was upon the Understandings of Pilate, the Chief Priests
and Elders. Christ communicates a saving light and knowledge of himself to a
poor condemned Thief that hung by him on the Cross, and opens his Eyes that
were ready to be closed by Death, while those of the Rulers that were almost as
near him, Luke 24.16.
were holden that they could not know him.

2. Things ran in the same channel in the Apostles days, and the succeeding
Age. At Athens, the eye of the World, when Paul preached Jesus and the
Resurrection, he was reviled as a Babbler, disputed against by two Sects of
Philosophers; Acts 17.
dragged before the great Judicatory at Mar's Hill: And tho the Judges there
were remarkable for their For tho their number was not certain, yet it could
not be small, because nine of their Archontes that had ruled well for one year,
were annually chosen into that Society. It must therefore be a great mistake of
those that say they were no more than 9, or 31, or 51. Diogenes Laertius tells
us that there were 281 of them that condemned Socrates, besides those that
acquitted him; who, as Plato in his Apology affirms, were as many, wanting
three only. And Diog. Laertius informs us, that no less than 80 of those that
gave sentence in favor of him, afterward changed their minds; so that at
least, there were no less than 361. that voted against him. Vide Meursi
Areopag. p. 32.
number and quality, being the most famous men in all Greece for Wisdom and
Morality, yet we find but one of them, viz. Dionysius converted to the
Christian Faith. Acts 16.14.
The heart of Lydia that sold purple, was opened, while Felix's that wore it
was only terrified. And tho both he, and King Agrippa, and Bernice, and Festus
heard Paul reasoning about Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come,
yet he that went farthest among them was but almost persuaded to be a
Christian. Acts 26.28.
And what the success of his Labors generally was, he himself tells us; not
many wise men after the flesh were called. 1 Cor. 1.26.


3. The great things of the Gospel, and the sacred Records of Christianity, are
not suited to the Genius of these wise and prudent ones, nor penned so as to
gratify their vanity. So far are the Apostles, like some Modern Missionaries
in the remoter parts of the world, from drawing a veil upon those Articles of
the Christian Doctrine that seem most naked, and where it lies most open and
exposed to shame and reproach, that that part of it, a Crucified Savior, they
mainly insist on in their Sermons and Writings, and magnify as the highest
instance of Divine Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice and Goodness, and require
all men heartily to own it as such. Coloss. 2.15.
They openly triumph in the Cross of Christ, as he did upon it; a thing which
the wise men of this world have scorned in all ages as the greatest weakness
and folly. The Truths, as well as the Laws of Christianity tend to promote
Holiness, and are not accommodated to the evil inclinations of Mankind, as a
Garment shaped so as to humor the body of a crooked person. The Sacred Penmen
are peculiarly severe against those sins that men are most in love withal. They
blow on all humane wisdom and learning, that they may blast the glory of it;
and the whole of our Religion is so contrived, as to suffer men to glory in
nothing but this, Jer. 9.24.
that they know the Lord. Had the Holy Scriptures been penned in an exact
method according to the rules of humane art; had they been adorned with all the
beauties of style and expression; had they transmitted to us the secret
intrigues of Princes, the Politic Maxims of States, or a more accurate History
of the flourishing Empires of the world, than all the Profane Authors have
done: Had Paul, when he came down from the Third Heavens, discoursed of the
Hierarchy of Angels, and their several Orders; had his Language been as high as
his rapture, these men would have read and studied him with a mighty relish.
But here is not Cicero's Rhetoric for an Austin, nor sublime Metaphysical
subtilties for a profound Bradwardine. The Mantles which these Elijahs dropped
and left behind them when they went to Heaven, are not so finely wrought, nor
so curiously embroidered as they would have had them, nor of such a fashion as
pleases them. The main scope of them is nakedly to relate matters of fact
concerning an obscure Person, one Jesus, who was dead, but they affirm to be
alive; propose many surprising and stupendous Mysteries, and lay down very
strict and severe rules that concern all alike. They don't run out into high
useless speculations, nor stand on Mathematical Certainty, but press all on the
naked authority of God, which these men think below them to bow and submit
themselves unto. And all this in such a manner, that tho it is plain enough to
men that are virtuous and humble, that they are from God; yet not so plain as
to hinder vain, proud, Atheistical and captious men from starting many
Objections against them, and stumbling at them. And therefore all Ages have had
but too much reason to complain as they did of old, that unlearned men rise up
and take Heaven by violence, while great Scholars sink down into Hell, live in
spiritual darkness, and pass into that which is eternal.

II. Well, but tho this be true as to matter of fact, is not this a mighty
reproach and scandal to Christ and Religion? Had it not been more for his
honor and interest to have had the wise and prudent ones on his side? Or
however, seeing it has pleased God to take a contrary course, had it not been
enough patiently to have born this, to have considered it with calmness and
submission? Would it not have been more suitable to his tenderness, and mighty
concern for the welfare of Mankind, to have turned his eyes toward these men
with all the expressions of sorrow, rather than to have lifted them up toward
Heaven with all the signs of delight? What reason is here for joy and
thanksgiving, considering either the thing it self, hiding from men the things
that belong to their eternal peace; or the person spoken of? What! the blessed
Jesus, the great Lover and Savior of men! One would have thought he should
rather have lifted up his voice, and have wept upon this occasion, and as he
did on the death of Lazarus, have groaned rather than rejoiced in spirit.

And here Saint Chrysostom's answer will not help us out, viz. that this joy
and thanksgiving of Christ does not refer to the former, the hiding these
things from the wise and prudent; but to the latter Clause only, the revealing
of them unto babes. And so he parallels it with that place of the Apostle, God
be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, Romans 6.17.
but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered to
you. Where St. Paul cannot be supposed to thank God but for the latter only; q.
d. Tho you were once the slaves of sin, yet now I praise my God that you are
become the Lord's Freemen.

But there is a mighty difference between these two Scriptures. For the Apostle
does not in that place ascribe their being the servants of sin unto God as the
Author of it, as our Savior in my Text does the hiding of these things from
the wise and prudent, Thou have hid them. Moral evils come not from God, Isa.
29.14.
but penal and judicial ones of this nature are frequently ascribed to him as
his mavelous acts. Isa. 6.10.
That tremendous Prophetical threatening of his making the heart of a rebellious
people fat, and shutting their eyes lest they should see, etc. is repeated no
less than six times in the New Testament. God as a Sovereign and a Righteous
Judge denies or withdraws his Grace when a people have a long time sinned
against the light with a high hand, leaves them to themselves, and delivers
them up to the will of Satan, who blinds their eyes, and hardens their hearts.

The true answer therefore is this, That tho the blinding of any men considered
nakedly in it self, and as they are rational Creatures made after the Image of
God, and capable of eternal happiness, is matter of great sorrow; yet Christ
being a true Man, and filled with quick and lively affections to God and his
Glory, does rejoice and give thanks for the hiding these things from the wise
and prudent, as well as for revealing them to men of weaker capacities, as such
a dispensation in both the branches of it tends to the displaying and
glorifying the Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power and Sovereignty of his Father:
For all these are magnified herein. And,

1. Christ rejoices and gives thanks because such a dispensation makes
exceedingly for the honor of his Wisdom and Goodness: See this in four things.

1. This tends to destroy pride, and advance the honor of his free Grace in
the eyes of all whom he teaches and saves. And it is highly reasonable that this
should be done, considering the first rise of our misery, as well as the
greatness of it. You shall be like Gods, was the prevailing temptation that
ruined man. It was requisite that he who had totally undone himself by
aspiring, and bold attempts to exalt himself, should be greatly debased and
humbled, and God alone be honored in the very way of his recovery. That that
evil Humor that had caused his Sickness should be purged out, and a contrary
quality infused into him in order to the restoring of his Health. It Is
agreeable to the Eternal Reason of things, that so vile a Criminal should be
brought on his knees, laid in the dust, in the lowest posture imaginable, in
order to the receiving so high an act of Grace. That such extremely miserable
Wretches, and yet such haughty, swelling and lofty Creatures too, should have
those proud looks of theirs taken down, that first brought them into, and still
accompanied them in that most deplorable state. Now this God has most
effectually provided for by such a dispensation as we are now treating of: And
if the Apostle may be believed, it was his great design therein. 1 Cor. 1.25,
31.
He has not called many wise men after the flesh, but has chosen the foolish
and the weak things of the World, that no flesh might glory in his presence;
but that whosoever glories, should glory in the Lord alone. Had God taken a
contrary method, boasting had not been excluded. For natural and acquired
Parts, when alone, are exceeding apt to puff up. Much more would men be prone
to be exalted in their own eyes, if special Grace also, like a Crown of Gold,
were commonly put upon these men's Heads. And on the other hand, even those that
have renewing Grace only, and little or nothing besides to recommend them, yet
are apt to swell: which is so evident, that the Men of the World take notice of
it, there being no sin which they are more ready to reproach the Generation of
the Righteous withal, than spiritual pride, except it be hypocrisy. And in
truth this Worm is apt to breed even in this Mannah that comes down from
Heaven, not from the nature of the Grace it self, but from the corruption of
those Vessels wherein it is put: How much more were saving-knowledg given to men
of refined parts, would they be prone to be lifted up, and not ascribe all with
that lowliness of mind that becomes them to the free grace of God alone.
Instead of admiring him, they would be applauding themselves. They and others
too would be tempted to ascribe all to their own excellency and deserts. It
would be thought that a spiritual understanding of divine things was not the
effect of God's teaching, but of the strength of their own wit and labor. That
this choice Plant, like the Fruits of the Field in the beginning of the World,
did spring out of the ground, and did thrive and flourish, Genesis 2.5, 6.
not by the rain falling down from Heaven, but by virtue of that mist that went
up from the Earth it self. But now God clearly confutes any such vain
imaginations, and openly proclaims that none of these excellencies were motives
to him. Seeing he passes by the great ones of the World, who, by reason of
their noble qualifications, appear beautiful in our eyes, as Eliab did in
Samuel's, 1 John 2.20.
and will not pour out the Unction of the Holy One that teaches all things, on
their heads and hearts (as the Prophet would not the anointing Oil on Eliab)
but generally on the meanest of all the people, he stains the glory of man, and
plainly declares, to the silencing and humbling of all Flesh, the absolute
freeness of the unsearchable riches of the glory of his own Grace.

2. By such a dispensation God pours contempt and scorn on that wisdom for
which his Enemies so much despise him, and magnify themselves. Men of great
abilities are apt to have the same extravagant fancy concerning themselves, as
that blind Man whose Eyes were half-open'd, Mark 8.24.
had of other men, that they walk like Trees, far above the ordinary height and
stature of Mankind. And they look down with scorn on the ways of Christ, and
upon his Followers as a rabble of fools and mad men. But what a mortification
may it well be to these men now, and will it certainly be at the last day, to
see those very Persons, whom they thus despise, crowned with eternal glory, to
which their own so much admired wisdom was so far from advancing them, that it
rather helped, like bags of gold about a drowning man, to plunge them the
deeper into Hell! The flames of that infernal Pit shall at once manifest their
folly, and punish it; and the darkness thereof shall not be their only
covering; for this very thing shall spread an eternal shame and confusion upon
their Souls. Mal. 1.7.
Like those of old they count the Table of the Lord contemptible, and the meat,
and those that sit and eat thereof. Mal. 2.9.
Therefore will the Lord also make them contemptible and base before all his
people in the general assembly of his firstborn. How will they then be forced
to say, We fools thought their life madness, but now it appears that ours was
so; and surely these are the only wise and understanding people.

3. The Wisdom of God is seen herein, in bringing such weak Persons safely to
Heaven, and carrying on his interest in the World by them. It Is certainly an
argument of great wisdom so to order matters, as by little contemptible things
to overcome strong ones. Now God suffers Satan to have almost all the
advantages that he could desire. He is a very subtle Spirit; and generally all
the policy of Earth, as well as of Hell, is on his side for the strengthening of
his Party. And how unequal a match are the poor weak Followers of Christ to
cope and grapple with such Enemies whose policy is so much superior to theirs?
How unlikely is it to an eye of sense and reason that these men should in
spite of all, bear up Christ's name, propagate his interest, drive on his
great Counsels in the World, send others to Heaven, and at last safely reach it
themselves? It is one great argument that our Religion is of God, that it was
propagated by such feeble Instruments, against such mighty Enemies as the
Philosophers and Princes of this World; and the sweet savor of the knowledge of
a crucified Jesus was diffused everywhere, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15.
not like the Spices of Arabia upon the wings of the Wind, but against a
furious one that arose from every corner of the Earth. The skill of a Commander
is very much discovered in securing the retreat of a few feeble and raw men,
during a long march, quite through the Enemies Country, while a powerful and
well-disciplin'd Army, under the conduct of a Politic General, hovers about
them, watching all advantages to defeat them; but it is much more for his honor
if he brings them off with victory. When by the mouths of babes and sucklings
God not only stills the enemy and the avenger, Psalm 8.2.
but conquers him too; he perfects the praises of his own Power and Wisdom.

4. The Wisdom and Goodness of God is shown herein, because hereby he prevents
the meanest of his Creatures being discouraged from seeking after
saving-knowledge. Whatever the proud Sinners that are at ease in Sion, may
imagine, yet to a poor convinced Soul that has a lively view of the Divine
Majesty and Greatness, it seems almost incredible that ever the King of Kings
should stoop so much below himself, 1 Samuel 24.14.
as to cast a favorable eye on such a Flea, such a dead Dog as he: who is
sensible, not only that he has been the greatest of Sinners, but is one of the
meanest of Men; and whos^ ^bilities are so small, or rather none, that he can
signify no more to the advancing his Interest, than the very dust of the
balance to the turning of the Scales. Ps. 50.21.
We naturally think God is altogether such a one as our selves; that we must
have some good qualities to recommend us to his favor, as well as to that of
men. None of us will trade to barren Countries; and we fancy there can be no
commerce between us and Heaven, unless there be some excellency of our own
native growth to invite and encourage it. But now by this Dispensation God
shows on the contrary, how much he values the precious Souls of the lowest of
his Creatures. That he does not do by the Treasures of his Wisdom and Knowledge
as Princes do by those of their Earthly Substance, lock them up from vulgar
eyes; but is ready to open his arms and his heart to those that humbly sit at
his feet, and are willing to learn of him, how mean soever their state and
condition may be. So much for the Wisdom of God.

II. Christ rejoices and gives thanks, because the hiding these things from the
wise and prudent is an act of high justice in God. And that upon these three
following accounts.

1. Such men do despise and reject the Mysteries of the Gospel. Tho there are
many things in Nature which they cannot understand, and dare not deny; yet they
are exceeding nice and tender about Mysteries in matters of Religion. It Is
below men of their refined parts and piercing intellectuals, to assent to any
thing which they cannot grasp; it is for Children to swallow Physic which they
do not understand. They are subtle to evade the force of the strongest
Arguments, start many plausible Objections against the plainest truths, which
weaker heads never dream of; smart and witty to represent them as contemptible
and ridiculous. The barren Sands cannot send up so many vapors to keep off the
light of the Sun, as the richer and fatter Soil does. These are the Men that
above all others have many high and proud thoughts, and vain imaginations,
exalting themselves in their Souls against the knowledge of the Gospel, and
will not be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.


2. With the greatest scorn they refuse the grand condition of the
Gospel Covenant. To rely on Christ alone for Salvation, when they have so many
rare things of their own to depend on: to stand begging at another's door, and
with deep humility and brokenness of heart to sue for pardon and salvation
merely from the Mercy of God, and the Merits of a Redeemer, it is such a
mortification as their high Spirits can by no means endure to think or hear of.
Like foolish Children, they have the advantage of the ground, and therefore
think themselves taller, their heads touch the Clouds, and are nearer Heaven
than others. To lie at the foot of a Crucified Savior, they judge a posture
more suitable for those vile ones of the Earth that are not raised up out of
the dust; but as for them, they will never be brought to it, till like Paul,
they are struck down to the ground. And even then too generally, when they are
convinced of their sins, and pained at the heart about them, they choose any
other way to the Father; and if they find themselves under a necessity of
returning to God, they will rather do it in their own names, than his: And this
is the spring of all that Theism that begins to spread so much among these men
in our days. To look on all they have done, or can do, as dross and dung; to
lay aside their own wisdom and prudence, for which they are so highly valued
both by themselves and others; to be justified by the Righteousness of another;
Phil. 3.3.
to rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh; to be ruled and
saved by him alone, it is not a thing suitable to the greatness of their minds.
They would fain be doing somewhat that should distinguish them from the dregs
of the people, and recommend them to the Divine favor and acceptance. They are
not more desirous that their own Wills should be their Lord's, than that the
Works of their own hands should be their Savior's. They bear up themselves on
empty Bladders, filled with nothing but wind, and despise that Ark of God's
building, wherein alone they can avoid sinking in the storms of Divine Wrath
and vengeance: and tho glorified Saints in Heaven above, Rev. 4.10.
cast their Crowns at Christ's feet, yet these haughty Sinners here below
scornfully refuse to do it.

3. They desperately hate the great duties of holiness. That first and
fundamental thing which is required as preparatory to our learning of Christ,
the renouncing our own Understandings, Mat. 18.3.
and becoming as little Children; the mortifying of our beloved Lusts,
crucifying the Flesh with all its affections, purifying the Heart, loving our
Enemies, denying our selves, taking up the Cross, and suffering the loss of all
things, even their darling Reputation; These are hard sayings, against which
their hearts exceedingly rise within them, as a man's blood would do at the
sight of one that would murder his dearest Friend. And when at any time any
serious thoughts are flasht into their minds, they run through their Souls like
lightning through the Air, which never warms it, and quickly vanishes. They
close their eyes, turn away their faces; it is the language of their hearts and
lives, Depart from us, Job 21.14.
we desire not the knowledge of these ways. They love and cherish darkness
rather than light, John 3.19.
because their deeds are evil. Righteous therefore art thou, O Lord, just and
true are thy Judgments, O thou God of all Grace, when thou suffer the God of
this World to blind the minds of these men, 2 Cor. 4.4.
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ may not shine into their
hearts.

3. Christ rejoices in, and gives thanks for such a Dispensation, because the
power of God is magnified herein. He shows himself to be the mighty Lord of
Heaven and Earth, in revealing these things unto Babes. In making the simple
wise unto salvation, elevating their weak Understandings to a saving
apprehension of those matters, which the wisest and most learned of themselves
are not capable of attaining unto; He shows the power of his own grace to be
far above the force of Nature when raised to its highest pitch and glory. When
he makes things that are not, do more than things that are; enables them that
have not Logic enough to perceive the force of an argument in other matters, 1
Cor. 2.4.
yet understand the demonstration of the Spirit, cannot know because it is
spiritually discerned; those that cannot search into the vulgar Subjects of
Philosophy, much less into the abstruser parts of it, see into the profound
depths of the Divine Wisdom; those whose discourses on all other Arguments are
weak and trifling, yet can speak of God, Christ, Heaven, and the great things
of the Gospel in such an admirable manner, that the best Scholars may not only
be astonished at them as the Rulers were when they perceived Peter and John were
ignorant and unlearned men; Acts 4.13.
but be instructed by them too, as Priscilla, the Wife of a poor Tent-maker,
Acts 18.3, 26.
expounded the way of the Lord more perfecty to an Eloquent Apollos. Those that
are not able to dive into the cunning Intriegues of Statesmen, shall pierce
into the infinitely deeper Counsels of God's Will: Those that cannot manage the
Affairs of this life with common discretion, but are easily over-reached by
their Neighbors in every business, yet are not ignorant of Satan's devices,
nor entangled by the cunning craftiness of them that lie in wait to deceive
them to their eternal ruin: Those that are dull and heavy in other matters,
Is. 11.3. Is. 35.8.
yet are of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and tho fools, yet
they err not in the way of holiness, in which the unclean, tho never so
knowing, cannot pass: He that does these things, declares himself to be a God
that works wonders.

Behold, God exalts himself by his Power; Job. 36.22.
who teaches like him, that makes dull Scholars understand in writing, by his
Hand upon them, 1 Chronicles. 28.19.
how to perform those Duties and excel in those Graces, which the greatest Men
of this World cannot so much as know what to make of, much less can they
imitate? To be humble in Prosperity, to live by Faith in Adversity; James 1.9,
10.
for a Brother of high Degree to rejoice when he is brought low, as much as
other Men when they are raised up; to love the most bitter Enemies, and hate
the dearest Friends and Relations; Hab. 3.17.
when there is no fruit in their Vines, yet to sit cheerfully under their
Shadow, rejoicing in the Lord, and joying in the God of their Salvation; to set
their Affections on things above, while they are here below; have their
Conversation in Heaven, while they dwell on Earth; to be killed all the day
long, Coloss. 3.3.
and yet believe their Life is hid with Christ in God, where their Enemies
Swords cannot reach them; to be diligent in their Callings, and yet careful for
nothing; to bear Burdens, and yet cast them all upon God; carefully to preserve
their Lives, and yet hate them too, and desire Death, longing to depart and be
with Christ; to be meek under Reproach and Injury; when smitten on the one
Cheek to turn, not to requite the Affront, but offer the other also to the same
Indignity: In a word, to live by the Spirit, walk by the Strength, do the Will
and design the Glory, not of themselves, but of another whom they never saw,
yet they love, 1 Pet. 1.8.
in whom tho now they see him not, yet they believe, and rejoice, and that
sometimes with joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

These are things which God by his teaching enables many simple Men to do;
things that the Wise and Prudent cannot so much as understand, but gaze and
wonder at them as if they were not only Mysteries and Riddles, but
Impossibilities and Contradictions; when they hear us mention them, we are
Barbarians to them, and speak a Language which they know not. He that does all
this, teaches with a wonderful Authority and a mighty Power.

4. Christ rejoices and gives thanks, because in such a Dispensation the
Sovereignty of God is declared. This is an Attribute that Men do not much care
to hear of, as if it were like those Flourishes and Pictures that we see in
Maps, placed there to fill up some void room, but of no real use. And it is very
remarkable, that for preaching this very Doctrine of the Sovereignty of God in
the free distribution of his special Favors, without any regard to human Worth
or Excellency; Christ himself was in danger of being murdered. Luke 4.25.
For when he discoursed to the Men of Nazareth about one only Widow and she of
Sarepta, fed by Elijah; and one Naaman, and he a Syrian too, cured by him;
there being many Widows and Lepers, and they in Israel also, who were passed
by, tho they might (one would have thought) have pretended a better Title to
such a Favor, than these uncircumcised Gentiles; the Men of the place were
filled with Indignation against a Preacher of such Doctrine, v. 29.
and endeavored to cast him down headlong from the brow of the Hill. But vain
Men may think as they please; this is one Letter of Gods Name which he himself
did not leave out when he proclaimed it, and caused his Glory and Goodness to
pass before Moses; Exodus 33.19.
I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. Christ himself, in my Text,
rises up as high as this Wellhead, and acquiesces in this even so Father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight. And hither must we resort for Satisfaction; and
here must we rest at last. If a Reason be asked of any Person, absolutely
considered, Why is God savingly made known unto him? It does not savor of
Evangelical Humility nor a Gospel Spirit, to say, Because he was more worthy,
or (as some mince the matter) because he was less unworthy: Romans 9.16.
The Scripture answer is, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows Mercy; Titus 3.5.
according to his mere Mercy and Grace, and not for any Works of Righteousness
which he has done. If the Question be asked of any one absolutely considered,
Why are not Gospel Truths savingly made known to him? It Is a Truth that will
stop his Mouth; and his own Conscience will attest it, by sinning against
natural Light and common Grace, he has deserved it, and there is no
unrighteousness in God. But now take them comparatively, and if you ask, Why
does God reveal Divine Mysteries to two or three wise Men only in an Age, and
not to the rest? Acts 26.24.
Why to Paul the Scholar, whom tho (as Festus imagined) much Learning had not
made mad, yet Rage against the Gospel made him exceedingly so; and not to
Gamaliel the Master, a moderate and sober Man that gave very gentle Counsel in
favor of the first Preachers of Christianity, and was in great Reputation
among all the People? Or if you ask, Acts 5.34.
Why should God pass by the generality of wise Men, pitch his Love upon, and
give his saving Grace unto inferior Persons for the most part? What, could he
not have torn off the Veil from the Heart of the one as well as of the other?
Was not the refidue of the Spirit with him? Yes surely, Mal. 2.15.
for he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and has all Power and all Hearts in his
Hands. He could have made the Dews of his saving Grace, as Universal as the
Drops of the Morning. He could have made his Ministers have blown the Gospel
Trumpet with such a Breath, made it give so loud a sound, that like the last
Trump at the Mouth of an Angel, it should have awakened all that are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, and made them to revive. Why therefore has he not done
it? If you answer, he shows his Power, Wisdom and Justice, in leaving them
under spiritual Darkness; it may be replied, these very Attributes of Wisdom
and Power, besides that of his infinite Goodness he might have glorified the
other way; and his Justice had a large Field to display it self in the
punishment of Apostate Angels. Why therefore has he not done it? You must
Center in this at last, because his Grace is free; he is debtor to no Man; he
does with his own what seems good in his own Eyes; he fashions the same Lump
of filthy and untemper'd Clay into what Vessels he pleases. And who art thou,
Romans 9.20, 21.
O Man! that dare to dispute or reply against thy Maker? Be still, O proud
Dust! and know that he is God, and a great King over all the Earth. Bowels of
Mercy made the Motion at first; the Eye of Wisdom directed the Management of
the whole; the right Hand of Power was there to assist; Justice did not open
its Mouth to contradict; and Sovereignty (as it became that Attribute,) sat
upon a glorious high Throne, far above all the Heavens, and from all Eternity
selected the particular Persons, whom according to the Counsel of its own Will,
it resolved should be infallibly brought to Salvation through the knowledge and
belief of the Truth,

III. In the last place I shall briefly apply all.

1. By way of Information in six Things.

1. Hence learn, it is no great wonder there are so many Follies, Weaknesses and
Miscarriages, among the sincere followers of Christ. They are a plain, simple,
illiterate sort of People, for the most part, that mind the Power of Religion,
and but few of the prudent Ones of this World among them. And therefore, tho
they are wise as to the main, in as much as they avoid the greatest Dangers,
and secure their biggest Interest; yet it cannot be expected they should manage
themselves and all their Affairs, according to the exact Rules of human Policy,
which they generally want; and it is not strange, if in many single instances of
a lower nature, they frequently mistake their Way, and take many a false Step.
A Mariner may have so much skill in Sea Affairs, as to be able to steer his
Ship through the main Ocean, and make a good Voyage even to the Indies, escaping
the great Rocks and mighty Sands; and yet not know the way into a particular
Port, so well as an ordinary Pilot of the place, but be apt (through mistake) to
run his Vessel a-ground, where it may receive great Damage, and be very
difficultly brought off again.

2. See one reason, why the ablest Ministers are seldom so successful in their
Work as those that are more meanly furnished. Like Canon mounted too high, they
shoot over the Heads of inferior Persons, whom generally God has ordained to
eternal Life; and so they beat the Air, but batter down no strong Holds; and
are qualified to deal with the wise and more rational part of Mankind, among
whom God has not much People, nor Christ many Sheep. The most Sovereign
Remedies prepared according to Art, shall have no Success, John 9.6.
when Clay and Spittle (if Christ will but use it) shall restore Sight to those
blind Creatures, on whom he has resolved the Works of God shall be made
manifest. v. 3.


3. See the Vanity of that Objection against serious Religion, drawn from the
meanness of those that sincerely embrace it, when the far greatest part of the
famous Men are on the other side. This is an old Engine of the Devils, John
7.48.
Have any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believed on him? The weakness of this
Argument appears from what has been said: And indeed, if it be of any force
against a sincere embracing of Christ's ways, it will hold good against the
practice of common Morality. For it is very evident, that multitudes of the wise
and prudent Ones of this World, are wholly eaten up with their Lusts, as the
choicest Trees are devoured by Caterpillars.

4. See the reason, why weak Christians more steadfastly adhere to Christ, his
Ways and Truths, in times of danger, than the wise and prudent. This saving
Revelation of Divine Things, fixes and establishes their Hearts, and keeps them
faster in the Faith than others can be held by mere dry Reason and naked
Arguments; so, that tho they are none of the great Scholars of the World, nor
able to answer the specious Arguments of subtle Heretics, Mat. 24.24.
yet it is not possible that all the craft and policy of Hell should finally
deceive them. For they that are thus taught of God, have a spiritual Sense and
Judgment to discern between Good and Evil; they inwardly know, 1 John 2.20, 21,
27.
and have a Witness within themselves of the truth of what this Unction has
taught them. And therefore, as all Creatures, Plants as well as Animals, have a
natural instinct whereby they draw to them what is proper for their
Preservation and Nourishment, but avoid what is destructive to them: So these
Persons to whom God has spiritually revealed his Truths, have a supernatural
Instinct whereby they turn aside from pernicious Errors, and unmovably retain
the great Things of the Gospel with a mighty relish and savor. They cannot be
beaten out of that Truth which has been so plainly discovered; they know these
things to be great Realities, that have made such a deep Impression on their
Hearts; and tho they cannot learnedly dispute, they can courageously die for
them rather than deny them. They will not be disputed out of them, no more than
a Man will be persuaded that Honey is not sweet, which his Senses tell him is
so; tho some Sophistical Arguments may be propounded against it, which he has
not skill enough to answer. This Divine Knowledge, like polished Armor, adorns
them in the sight of God, and defends them from the fiery Darts of wicked Men.

5. See what the faithful Ministers of Christ must expect, and not be
discouraged at it. They are the poor only, that for the most part will receive
Us and our Message: And it is no very great Service that we do our Master or his
Interest, by bringing in such as these. But yet, tho they are the poor, the
maimed, the halt, the blind, (such as we can pick up in the Streets and Lanes,
Luke 14.21.
or gather up by the Highways or Hedges,) he refuses not them for his Table,
nor will he be angry with us, unless it be, because his House is not filled
with them. v. 23.
For our comfort, if we are but faithful in our Work, we shall be a sweet
savor to God in those that are saved, tho they are but inferior Persons; and
in those that perish too, tho they are the great and honorable Ones of the
Earth.

6. Hence I infer, we should not idolize the greatest, nor contemn the meanest.
This is what the Apostle reproves; and to take Men off from it, he propounds
this Question to their serious consideration, Hearken, my beloved Brethren,
James 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? It Is great Folly not to
prefer a rough Diamond before a counterfeit Stone, tho curiously cut and set to
the greatest advantage. We should not judge according to outward Appearance;
for those that seem but little in our Eyes, may be, and frequently are, of
mighty value; as the Stars that look like small Sparks in the Skies only, are
in truth, very great and glorious Bodies.

2. Use. Exhort. To those from whom these things are hid; and those to whom
they are revealed.

1. To those from whom these things are hid; chiefly the Wise and Prudent, tho
not excluding Persons of a lower Station.

1. Be not proud of nor satisfied with any Wisdom or Knowledge, while the great
things of God are not savingly understood by you. Some that have drunk as
largely at those Fountains as any of you, have solemnly professed, they have
found more sweetness and satisfaction of Soul, in one drop of a Spiritual
Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, than in a whole Ocean of other Learning. They
have looked on the deepest insight into all other things, to be, in comparison
of this, but as congealed Drops of Water that may look bright and pleasing, but
it is to Children and Fools; but this, this alone has been the Pearl of great
Price in their account. All human Wisdom and Knowledge, tho useful and valuable
in its due Place and Order, yet is but like an Eye of Crystal in the Head of a
blind Man, which may hide his Deformity from the observation of his Neighbors,
but cannot direct him one step in the way wherein he ought to go. The Devils
have as much and more of this than the best of us, and yet are the most
miserable of all Gods Creatures. Why will you highly value your selves on the
account of that, which leaves you in as bad a Condition as those wretched
Apostate Spirits, and in a worse State than the most ignorant Man that has a
spiritual Understanding of heavenly Things? If you have no more than this, you
shall perish at last for lack of Knowledge. For at the last Day, it shall fare
with those curious Wits that are ignorant of God and Christ, as with carved
Statues about a House that is set on Fire; down they drop into the Flames, and
are consumed, there being none at hand to pluck them out.

2. Seriously meditate on the deplorable State of those from whom these things
are hid. It Is a sad thing when God hides common Wisdom and Prudence from Men,
as to the Affairs of this Life. When God infatuates, it is a sign he intends to
destroy. When Hamans Face was covered with a Cloth, he was near his Execution.
When God throws a Veil over the Face of Men's Minds, and hides from them the
things that belong to their Peace, they are on the very Borders of ruin. It Is
sad to be given up to judicial Blindness as to any Objects; but to be so as to
Divine Mysteries, so as to see no Glory nor Beauty in them, is the worst of
all. If our Gospel be hid, 2 Cor. 4.3.
it is hid from them that are lost; they are lost Men indeed, and undone
Creatures, unless infinite Mercy speedily give them an Heart to perceive, to
whom such a Blindness has happened.

3. If you are wise and prudent, be provoked unto a godly Jealousy, by those
that are comparatively a foolish People; be not out-stript in matters of the
greatest Moment, by those that in other things are so much below you.

If you are inferior Persons, let not your meanness discourage you; seeing of
such as you is the Kingdom of Heaven. Princes on their Coronation days use to
scatter rich Medals among the common People; so does Christ these Gifts of his.
Do not you lose them for want of striving for them.

4. Renounce all your Wisdom and Learning which you really have, or fancy you
are possessed of. 1 Cor. 3.1^.
If any Man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a Fool
that he may be wise.

II. To those to whom these things are revealed.

1. Be humble. Flesh and Blood has not revealed these things to you. Had not
the Dew of Heaven fallen upon you, you had still been dry Trees and withered
Branches. Out of free rich undeserved Grace, to you it is given of God to know
these Mysteries; to others it is not given; Mat. 13.11.
be not proud and lofty as tho you did not know your selves.

2. Rejoice and give thanks. If you are wise and prudent, adore that Sovereign
Grace that stepped out of it is usual Rode to meet with thee; what art thou better
than others that sat as high as thou do, that God should single thee out to
anoint thee with this Oil above thy Fellows, and thine Equals, whom he
generally overlooks? If you are meaner Persons; what are you that so rich a
Treasure should be put into such an earthen Vessel? Stones should not hold
their peace, but cry out aloud with the voice of Joy and Praise, Luke 19.40.
when they are turned into Children of Abraham. Holy Men in all Ages have
admired and adored this distinguishing Grace. Judas says to him, (not
Iscariot) Lord, John 14.22.
how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us and not to the World! The
Holy Ghost takes care that we should not mistake the Person that was thus
affected with these special Discoveries. It was a Judas, but not Iscariot; not
that vile Traitor, not that Son of Perdition: No, it was another kind of
Person, a better Man than he, tho one of the same Name. Such Men know not the
sweetness of that Wine they never tasted of; and therefore admire not the
goodness of the Master of the Feast, in the distribution of it. Christ rejoiced
and gave thanks, for the Revelation of these things to others; and will not you
do it for the discovery of them to your selves? Had you the Tongue of Angels or
Power over Devils, you would not have so great cause of Rejoicing and singing
Praises as you now have, because Gods Law is written on your Hearts and your
Names in Heaven.

3. Envy not the excellent Gifts of others that are strangers to the grace of
God in truth. For you have the better part. Tho the surface of the Field appear
mean and barren, yet the rich Mines contained in the Bowels of it, render it
exceeding more valuable than another Soil, that is Fat and Flourishing.

4. Endeavor to grow and improve in. this saving Knowledge. Your Minds are not
yet opened so wide as they may be, to receive the highest sight and sense of
these things; no more than a Flower is full-blown in one day, but insensibly
cleaves its Hood, and gradually opens it self to our view. Spiritual
Understanding, like the natural One, should come on by little and little; and
the Sons of God, like the Children of Men, be daily growing up in Wisdom and
Stature.

5. Long for Heaven, where your Knowledge shall be completed. It Is with us
here below, as with a Man that walks in a cloudy Night, that makes a hard shift
to perceive first one Star, and by and by two or three more; but still there is
a vast number of them which he cannot discern. Something we know, and gradually
make some few fresh Discoveries; but how great a Portion is hid from us?
Whereas in Heaven, all that Ignorance shall be removed, that now hangs about us
like the Relics of a broken Cloud on the top of a Mountain: All that Dust
shall be blown out of our Eyes, that at present obstructs our Sight. The Sacred
Volumes have many glorious things written in them, which we cannot yet discern,
because they are according to the ancient Form of Books, rolled up; which, tho
God be gradually unfolding, yet it is in Heaven only that they shall be fully
stretched out, and lie all plain and open before us. There shall not be a
greater and more glorious Change of the dull Matter of these vile Bodies, than
in our dark Souls when we reach Heaven; both shall shine clear as the Light at
Noonday. Our Notions here are broken, confused and imperfect, like the rude
Images in the Fancies of them that dream; Ps. 73.20.
which we our selves shall despise upon our awakning in that Morning, Ps. 17.15.
when we shall behold Gods Face, and be satisfied with the Vision of him as
well as with our likeness to him.

6. Follow the Example of Christ in an humble Adoration of the good Pleasure of
God, as to those things which may seem very strange to you. I might press this
as to his Laws, Ordinances and Providence. When you meet with many hard
Chapters in the Book of Nature, Scripture and Providence, which you are not
able to read and understand; don't cavil and wrangle; lay your Hands on your
Mouths; or if you do open them, say no more than thus, with the greatest
lowliness of Mind Even so Father, for so it pleases thee. Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

Lastly, Lay out your selves to the utmost, for the advancing of Gods Honor
and Interest. This is the Duty of all Men; and in a peculiar manner, of
Christian Magistrates that have been taught of God. And the fewer of the great
Ones of this World, are on Christ's side; so much the more zealous and active
should those few be. You cannot indeed, give of your Oil unto the foolish
Virgins; yet you may reflect the Light of it in good Works, shining before Men,
and induce them to glorify your heavenly Father. And if you do not do this, it
had been better for you, you had still continued under the Bushel, remained in
your former Obscurity, Luke 11.33.
than to be thus advanced on a high Hill. It Is a serious Question that will
e're long be put to all of you, by one that has Authority to ask it, and will
have an Answer; seeing I have done so much for you more than for others, what
have you done for me more than others? And I hope, you will betimes bethink
your selves what Reply to make, and labor to be ready furnished with a very
good one. If you behave your selves like wise and faithful Magistrates, the
Power you have now in your Hands, and the Grace of God ruling in your Hearts
and Lives, while you rule over Men; will exceedingly recommend Religion to
others, and set it off with great Advantage. Divine Wisdom and Knowledge in an
Assembly of Men in Authority, are like flaming Tapers in a Branch of burnished
Gold, whose glittering and sparkling Substance returns Light as well as
receives it; sheds a Glory on the Room where it hangs, and at once draws and
dazzles the Eyes of all both far and near. I have said ye are Gods; Ps. 82.6.
but be not like the useless Idols of the Heathens, that are empty and hollow
within, that only fill up the void Places where they stand; and tho worshipped
by the People, have neither Eyes to see and discern between Good and Evil, nor
Hands to work Righteousness. Tho you are a sort of inferior Deities, v. 7.
yet remember you must die like Men; so live therefore in your present
Stations, as the Children of the most High, that you may not die in a civil or
a natural Sense, as a Fool dies. Encourage Religion; punish and suppress that
Profanation of Gods Name and Sabbaths, that Debauchery and Immorality which to
this day walks too open and barefaced in the midst of us. Steadily own the
Truths of God wherein you have been instructed. Plead his Cause in your Places;
maintain, promote, encourage his Interest; not that of any single Party among
us. This is the Duty of Magistrates as well as Divines. Romans 13.4.
For you also are the Ministers of God. In our Saviors glorious
Transfiguration on the Mount, not only Elias the Prophet, but Moses also, the
Ruler of the People, appeared and waited on him. Christ and his Interest will
never be lifted up on high, nor shine in their Luster and Glory in the World,
till both these are with him. If you resolve to be so, you must expect
Reproaches, and despise them. Let all the Revilings which Men pour out against
you, be to you as Snow to the Ground, Ps. 147.16.
that comes down upon the Earth like Wool, soft and easy, making no noise nor
disturbance where it falls. Whatever a few Fools may say against you, this will
be your Wisdom and Honor in the sight of the whole Nation, and redound to your
eternal Advantage. For if you do these things, then you, to whom it is given to
know the Mysteries of his Kingdom, to you also shall it be given to behold the
Glory, and enjoy the Rewards of it. When not only yours and all other Civil
Power shall be at an end; but the Mediatorial Kingdom of God-Redeemer too shall
cease, and the Father be all in all; you shall be advanced to Thrones of Glory
near his right Hand, where there are Rivers of Joy for you to drink of, and
Pleasures that flow for evermore.

FINIS.

