THE Character of Cruelty IN THE Workers of Iniquity: AND Cure of Contention
Among The People of God. Held forth in TWO SERMONS. Preached in the Day of
Public HUMILIATION Upon occasion of the late sad Persecution in PIEDMONT.

By Faithful Teate, Minister of the Gospel of Peace.

Psalm. 74 20 The dark places of the earth are full of the Habitations of
Cruelty. LONDON Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill.
1656.

To His Highness OLIVER Lord Protector OF The Commonwealth OF England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
My Lord,
REst in the Flesh is not ordinary with Gods People, (whose Rest remains,
Heb. 4.9.) but rather trouble on every side; without fightings, 2 Cor. 7.5.
within Fears, with manifold perils by strangers and Heathen, by Friends and
Countrymen; 2 Cor. 11.26.
what through the wickedness of the wicked, what through the Remainder of the
Root of bitterness in, and among, themselves.

Where Satan's seat is, (as to persecution) Sinners Eat up Saints: where the
Gospel runs (as to Liberty of profession) Saints are too prone to eat up
each other. The former is the Hurt of our Brethren abroad, where the sword
bereaveth; Lam. 1.20.
and Papists, being high, persecute poor Professors; The later is our own Hurt
at home, where there is as death; for God has lifted his Peoples Horn on high,
but alas! they have pushed at one another.

In respect of the former, each Party of Professors amongst us are troubled,
and ready to say (as David) The men, that have done it, 2 Samuel 12*5.
deserve to dye; but I fear in Respect of the later, some Nathan may come and
tell one and other of Us, verse 7.
you, and you are the Men. Now both are the Subject of this discourse, and are,
and shall be, to me, for a Lamentation.

Enemies alas! know not; nay, friends consider not, How tender in themselves,
Joh. 21.15.
and tendered by their Savior, Isa. 40.11.
are the Lambs of the Lamb, the little ones of Christ: who will not endure that
One of them perish, Matthew. 18.14.
no nor that one of them be offended, verse 6.
no nor so much as that one of them be despised: who, verse 10.
if he hear an Ishmael but scoff, Genesis 21.9.
writes down persecution, Gal. 4.29. And if he see a Paul and a Barnabas but
contend, he calls it a Paroxysm, Act. 15.39. (...)
And how can it choose but be painful to the Head, when there is a paroxysme
in the Body?

But if Contention be a Paroxysme, it is high time to Endeavor a cure, i^e.
(for our own, yea for Christ's sake) to ensue peace with each other, if it may
be to the lenghtning out of our tranquillity; for certainly the Lord,
otherwise, will speedily Judge between Cattle and Cattle, because of our
thrusting with side and shoulder, and pushing all the Diseased with horns, till
we have scattered them abroad, Ezekiel. 34.21.22.

Toward which endeavor though I (being least among the thousands of Judah) am
least able to contribute: Let these two mites be accepted, though others, of
Ability, might cast in much more abundantly.

For though mine unskilfulnesse, and the ordinary Lot of the friendly
Interposer among violent Contenders (Moses himself not exempted therefrom)
might deter me from offering my poor thoughts toward the Cure of so
Epidemicall a Distemper; Exodus 2.13.
yet remembering the Dumb Child, in the story, that could not but speak, when
they went about to kill his Father; or rather the words of the Psalmist, That
out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings God has ordained strength, Psa. 8.2.
for the stilling of the ENEMY, and the AVENGER; I am bold (though but a Child
that cannot speak, yet) as I am able, to cry out to Persecutors abroad, O kill
not the Saints! and to Saints at home, O kill not one another! being hopeful
that the Treatise will prove it self to be Truth; and TRUTH is of Age, let it
speak for it self.

For peruseall whereof if your Highness be pleased but to allow any few
vacant Minutes, I humbly hope that my boldness in troubling your hands
therewith, shall be pardonable unto me; since the Lord, to whom the Glory
belongs, has put it into your Highnesses Heart to express so natural a care
for the state of the Brethren abroad, that are Persecuted; and so solicitous a
desire to redintegrate the Brethren at home, that are Divided. And has put
moreover so singular advantages into your Highnesses Hand of becoming a further
Restorer of wast places to dwell in to the former, and Repairer of the Breaches
among the later.

Your renowned endeavors in the one, the world knows, are not wanting; mine
humble prayer to God is that the difficulty of the thing, or Morosotie of any
Persons may never be a Remora to the later; Surely a Lion in the way of any
duty incumbent on your Highness (before whom God has stopped the mouths of
so many) would be less plea for you, than for ordinary Persons.

What though the Divisions of our Reuben be dangerous? the Wound great, or at
least contused and greatly rancoured? Is there no Balm in Gilead? Jer. 8.22.
is there no Physician there? why then may not the health of the Daughter of
our people be recovered? Isa. 53.5 10.
Is not the blood of a wounded and bruised Christ effectual to stanch the
bleeding, Col. 1.2^
1 John 1.7.
and cleanse the festring sore of Sion? Even the Blaspheming Beast can boast of
his deadly wound that was healed, Rev. 13.3. Therefore let not Sion say, as
Jer. 15.18.
my wound is incurable.

Oh! how great a disparagement would it reflect upon Christ, to account the
Distance betwixt dissenting Saints to be like the unpassable Gulf betwixt
Abraham and Dives, either for greatness or for fixedness? Luke 16.26.
as if the Destroyer were a better artist in the healing of the hurts of his
Party, than the Savior who has also promised to his Party; Jer. 32.39.
that they shall have one heart, and one way: And shall serve him with one
shoulder: Zeph. 3.9. Zac. 14 9.
And that he will be One, and his name one.

If any say we will stay then, till he come and perform what himself has
spoken; it is a known principle, that he that has made Promises, makes the
means of their accomplishment: Who though he be ever faithful to his
Covenant, yet is not therefore bound to gratify our unfaithfullnesse to our
duty. If any reply; however, it is enough for us to pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem; But endeavourlesse Prayers weigh as light in Gods balance, as
Prayerlesse endeavors.

Now since the God of all Peace and blessings has blessed the considerers of
the poor, Psalm. 41.1. Mat. 5.5, 7, 9.
and with them the meek, and the Peacemakers; My Prayer is that all his people
in general, and your Highness in special, may be ever found giving all heed
to this pure Religion, and Undefiled: till the Lord shall give strength to his
(poor, Jam. 1.26, 27. Psa. 29.11.
weak) people (abroad) and bless his people (at home) with Peace: So Prays

Your Highness most humble Servant, Faithful Teate.

TO THE SONS OF VIOLENCE.
Ye Men of Belial;
THe God of Peace has sent me this day to proclaim war against you, for
waging war with his People; who will shortly bruise you (with Satan, your
Leader) under his feet, except you speedily humble your selves under his Mighty
hand.

Fury is not in him, who would set up Briers and Thorns in battle against
him? Isa. 27.4, 5.
He would go through them, and burn them together: or let them take hold of
his strength, that he might make Peace with him for them, and he shall make
Peace.

The Lord is a man of War: The Lamb is a Lion: who ever hardened himself against
God and prospered? Your Fathers, where are they? and the Persecutors, do they
live for ever? Verily nay; The Lord has sworn that he will have war with
Amalek continually: Exodus 17.16. Psalm. 55.23.
and that bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days.

Agree therefore with your Adversary quickly, whilst you are in the way. Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish; for he comes, Psalm. 9^.13.
for he comes to judge the Earth; Slight not the Alarm, though it be but a
Child that blows the Trumpet.

THE CHARACTER OF CRUELTY In the workers of Iniquity.
PSALM. 14.4 Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my
people as they eat Bread?


THis day of Humiliation is as the day of Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 1.3.
a day of trouble and of Rebuke; and Blasphemy. His practice therefore may be
our president; who

1. Draws up a bill of Complaint against the Adversaries of Gods People, (or
rather takes it as drawn put to his hand) and spreads it before the Lord. verse.
14.


2. Prefers a Bill of Petition in behalf of the People of God, verse. 19.
Now therefore, O Lord our God! save, etc.

Thus with a Bill in each hand up he marches unto the house of the Lord
(knowing that the way to prevail against the Esaus of the world, is to prevail
as did Israel, verse. 14, 15. etc.
with God first.)

Go you therefore this day, and do likewise. Spread before the Lord the sad
Tidings that are come from the persecuted Valleys, The Lilies whereof are among
(Cruel) Thorns; And say, with Hezekiah, Now therefore, O Lord our God, save,
etc.

This Psalm or Maschil Psalm. 53.1. i. e. Psa. ^
Psalm of Instruction for its singular use, penned twice over by David, may be
your directory in this your Duty. Consisting,

1 Of Complaint against the fool; the abominable workers, verse. 1. The men void
of understanding verse. 2. The filthy transgressors, and evil Doers, verse 3.
Unto which our Text is added, to show how sinners fill up the measure of their
sins all way, adding iniquity to iniquity; even drunkenness (with the blood of
Saints) unto their thirst (after other sins) for as the Anthropophagi, the
Man-eaters, are the most abominable with men, so are these Hagiophagi, these
savage Saint-Eaters, in the Eyes of the Lord. Wherefore,

2. The Psalmist turns his bill of Complaint into a Bill of Supplication, in
the last verse (being none other than the very Petition, which I am persuaded,
you are on purpose Assembled to prefer before the Lord this day viz.) Oh!
that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion.

Our Text is part of the former part of the Psalm, viz. the Indictment, which
(according to form) is preferred in the Kings Name, The crimes are alleged to
be against the Honor and Dignity of God himself, in the first verse. For proof
of the Accusation, Application is made to the judge of the Bench, as an
Eyewitness of the matter of fact. verse. 2, 3. The Lord looked down from the
heaven to see, etc.

Now in this fourth verse (which is our Text) seeing the Judge is himself
invoked, and cannot but attest the crimes, he rises up as Ahashuerus upon
Esters complaint that she and her people were sold to destruction; Esth. 7.4.
says the King, who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart
to do so? As if he should say, is there any man so imprudent, any so impudent,
as to presume in his heart to do so? so says God here,

Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they
eat bread?

Do they understand themselves no better? Have they no more wit then so? Have
they banished all prudence from them? Does nothing but furious rage dwell with
them? Has cruel passion thus put out the eye of their reason, and that they
might be the more tyrannous toward others, have they thus begun their Tyranny
upon their own souls? surely they would never behave themselves so strangely,
Deuteronomy. 32.27.
were there any understanding or Counsel in them.

Have they no knowledge of ME, or of MINE, that they dare presume in their
hearts to do as they do? Have they nothing to eat as bread, but the Apple of
mine eye? No people to make a prey of but my people? mine by Choice, by
Calling, by Covenant, by Purchase, by Self-Resignation on their part, and
gracious obsignation on my part, my called, faithful, chosen, ransomed
sanctified, sealed Servants? Have they none other to make bold withal? but
these they must be biting, and not only biting but eating, and not only
eating but eating up; and have they no knowledge, how dearly they must pay for
these stolen morsells of this sweet breed? Ah! if they knew the people of God,
and who it is that says unto them, Touch not mine anointed, Psa. 105.15.
for who so touches them, touches the apple of mine eye, Zech. 2 8.
they would sooner choose to feed on their own flesh, then on this bread; but
now hereby I know they have no knowledge.

This wisdom none of the Princes of the world knew for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. or cut off Messiah the
Prince (as it is expressed Dan. 9.26.) nor have eaten up his people, as it is in
the Text.

Where then is the wise, where is the scribe, 1 Cor. 1.20.
where is the learned of this world, since all the workers of iniquity have no
knowledge? where is the Ahitophel? and where are the crafty Counselors, Psa.
83.3.
where are the persecutors that say of the Saints, come let us deal wisely with
them (as Exo. 1.10)? Surely if we plough with the Lords heifer, we shall soon
find out this Riddle. The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, 1
Cor. 3.19.
and however wise they may be to do evil, yet have all the workers of iniquity
no knowledge, who eat up Gods People like bread.

The instruction is.

That Folly, and Fury, and the extremity of both, is notoriously manifest in
that spirit of malignity, that works in all the people of the World, against
the people of God.

In which Character of their Cruelty.

Observe. 1 Their Unity, 2 Folly, 3 Fury.

First,

THe point implies, that all the workers of Iniquity have one and the same
spirit of Malignity against the people of God, lusts are diverse, (...). 3.3.
yet in this they all agree; and Herod and Pilate are, by this means,
reconciled. Luke 23.12.


Our Savior says to his Disciples, Joh. 15.19. You have I chosen out of the
World, and the WORLD hates you. Ecclesia Malignantium is as wide as the World,
The Countries, 1 John 5.19.
the Nations, the Sects, the Factions, the Heathen, the People, the Kings, Psa.
2.1, 2
the Rulers, Turks, Jews, Pagans, Papists, Profane Protestants and empty
Professors; though they all differ, yet are all agreed in this Catholic
Article of Iniquity.

This Malignitie is that Point in which every Line from each part of the
Circumference of the round World (however they cross each other) can quietly
concenter.

And though some can dissemble their stomach before folk, and in appearance,
bridle their appetite from this Bread; yet can such privily whet their tongue,
secretly to devour the Saints of God; Psalm. 23.2, 3, 4.
They that are not with Christ: are against Christ: and the best of them is as
a Bryer, Mat. 12.^.
and the most upright of them as a thornhedge. Mic. 7.4.

Yea though some carnal ones are so civil and seemingly fair manner'd, and
such strangers to their own hearts, as that they would cast by this truth with
disdain, as did Hazael: if you should charge it upon them. Do you take us to
be Dogs that we should do such a thing? what? 2 Kin. 8.13.
eat up Gods people like bread? we hope better things of our selves than so;
yet was there, at that very time, in that very person that malignant humor
that fed this (...), this Dogs disease (for it is no better, therefore says
David, Dogs have compassed me, Psa. 22.16. and del^ver my soul from the power
of the Dog. verse 20.) Neither is there a worker of Iniquity amongst them all,
let the Lord but take off the Collar, Chain, and Muzzle that he has upon
them, and let them loose to an opportunity and temptation of such a nature; but
would run about the City, and make a noise like a Dog (and leap at a morsel of
this bread) Psa. 59.2.6. these words were spoken by the Psalmist of Saul, who
was once amongst the Prophets; 1 Samuel 10.11.
and then thought (it is like) as well of himself as another man, but is now
among the Persecutors, yea the fore-Dog of the company.

Thus you see that all the workers of Iniquity are of the self-same Doeg-like
dog-like disposition toward the Saints and (as we say, in actu primo) do all
eat up the People of God?

But and if you demand why it should be so, I answer you, ask a reason of that
which is unreasonable. Even the same reason that the Sodomites had to grudge at
Lots sojourning among them, or to wish him out of Sodom; the same have the
wicked to malign the Saints, and to wish them out of the World; which vexed
Lots no sooner go but ruin comes; and were they all but once out of this
Sodom, you would soon see that its judgment would not linger.

It is for the Wheats sake that the Tares are spared, Matthew. 13.29. for the
Saints sake that the wicked are respited, and yet can these wicked find in
their hearts to make bread of Gods Wheat, and these must be the men that
fareworst in in the world, for whose sakes the world fares so much the better.
As the Lord of hosts lives (says Elisha to wicked Jehoram King of Israel)
surely were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosaphat, the King of Judah,
I would not look toward thee. 2 Kin. 3.14.

Yet is there an enmity betwixt seed and seed. An Antipathy betwixt that of the
Serpent, the Generation of vipers, Mar. 12.11. Ps. 75.15.
and the Generation of Gods Children, and we say, Antipathies are rather known
in their effects, than causes.

Yet possibly some Tertullus will take upon him to play the Orator, and to
render a reason (such as it is) of the wickeds rage against the Saints. Do you
think that Cain the Elder Brother, and better man (for so they estimate
goodness by greatness) had not reason to be wroth, when his junior and
inferior is preferred before him? and had not Esau cause enough to eat up
Jacob, when the Elder was appointed a servant to the Younger? would it not
inrage any man in the world, that a company of Precisians should pretend to be
the only Reformed, and Gods only favorites, as if they were wiser than our
Leaders, and better than our Rulers? Joh. 7.4^
That a company of Apron-men and Plough-men should talk of judging the world?
of binding Kings in chains and Nobles in links of Iron; and go about to make us
believe that the good that we enjoy, is for their sakes: and that evil is
kept out by their standing in the gap (and a few more Puritans like
themselves)? These are the Pestilent fellows and movers of sedition in all
places, Act. 24.5.
who yet call themselves Light, Mar ^4. Ps. 7
and us darkness: themselves Children, and us Dogs: themselves the Wheat, and
us the Tares: which if they be, why then should men be blamed for eating them
up like Bread?

Such is the cause and such are the reasons, why the Ishmaels of the world, the
Sons of the bondwoman, do persecute those that are born of the free.

But how causeless is this cause? and how unreasonable are these reasons? The
truth is, there is a difference betwixt one and other. But who has made them
to differ? 1 Cor. 4.7
It is not righteous Abel that prefers himself, but the righteous God that
prefers Abel before Cain. So that if the Saints be precious and honorable, it
is (not in their own eyes, in the which they are vile, Job 40.4. but) in the
sight of the Lord, Isa. 43.4. since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable. Who notwithstanding the difference that he makes betwixt them
and others, yet makes no difference betwixt the terms of their acceptance: If
thou do well (says God to Cain) shall not thou be accepted? Genesis 4.7.

Neither is it in the hearts of any of the People of God; to engrosse their
privileges and spiritual blessings; but on the contrary, their hearts desire
is, that all the Nation of which they are, should be saved, Romans 1.10.
and that their very persecutors might not be almost, but altogether such as
themselves are, excepting their bonds (if so be that they be in bonds) Act.
26.29. The injuries they suffer from them, they are far from wishing them;
but the mercies they receive from God, those they altogether apprecate unto
them. Yea, it is the truth in Christ and no lie, their Conscience also bearing
them witness in the Holy Ghost, that they have great heaviness and continual
sorrow in their heart, that their Brethren according to the flesh are not such
as themselves are (as to grace and Privileges) Romans 9.1, 2, 3.

And yet for all this, if any man will live godly in Christ Jesus, he must
suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Integrity is his guilt; Innocence his Crime;
and this the Offense that he commits in that he exercises himself to have a
Conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward all men, Act. 24 16.

So then because the willing Child receives the Fathers gift, which the
stubborn rejects with disdain, though tendered to him upon equal terms, yea
though the other stand by and entreat him to accept what he has accepted, that
he also may be accepted even as he is accepted, because the Rebellious
resolves to be yet a Sinner, therefore the innocent must be a Sufferer. 2
These. 3.2.
(...). O! how unreasonable are wicked men?

But though all this be without Reason, yet is it not without Use; for

1 We may all see our natural faces in this glass; wherefore the Apostle
applies the Character of the wicked in this Psalm unto all that are in the
state of Nature, Romans 3.9, 10, 11. by Nature we are All workers of Iniquity,
and so in as proximate a disposition as any others, the Lord leaving us to our
selves, to eat up the people of God like bread; such were some, yea all of you,
and were sometimes alienated in your minds and enemies by wicked works, Col.
1.21.

And herein oh! how has God commended his love to us, in that whilst we were
such sinners, Romans 5.8. verse. 10.
yea such Enemies, Christ died for us; that he should give his natural body
to be bread, for Paul that spoke it, and for many other Persecutors, who did
eat up his body mystical as men eat bread; Joh. 6.35. 1 Cor. 1 i. 22, 24.
That the eating of the flesh, and driking of the blood of a crucified Christ,
might be the cure of the eating of the flesh, Jo. 6, 54.
and drinking of the blood of Persecuted Christians, that as the latter was
their great sin, the former might be their great Salvation.

And hereby let us be the rather induced to pray (as Christ wills us, Matthew.
5.44.) for our Persecutors, if among them there may be any chosen Vessel (as
was Saul) and the more hopefully to bless those that despitefully use us; if
possibly among such there may be any belonging to the election of grace.

2 Admire that the Lord of Sabbath should yet leave us a seed, Romans 9.29. of
that thin crop of his Principal Wheat, which all the ravinous Fowls of the
Air, and greedy Dogs of the Earth, even all the workers of Iniquity, have ever
conspired to devour, who eat up Gods People like bread.

3 Are you to suffer from the workers of Iniquity? see then that you never
suffer as the workers of Iniquity. Happy are you when you suffer wrongfully for
Christ's name sake, and are reproached, for then the Spirit of God, and of glory
rests on you. 1 Pet. 4.14. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, etc as
a busy-body in other men's matters, verse 15. or as defiling the flesh, or as
despising Dominion, or as speaking evil of Dignities, Jude verse 8. And the
rather, because it is the guise of Persecutors (as they do in Piedmont at this
day) to put the Saints into Bear-skins when they mind to bait them. In regard
of whom we have the more need to make David's Prayer, Psa 5.8. Lead me O Lord
in thy Righteousness; because of mine enemies, because of mine observers make
thy way straight before my face.

THe second point in this Character of their cruelty is their Ignorance and
Folly. They all have no knowledge; for though Junius render this Interrogation
by a positive assertion, (it cannot be but that they should be conscious,
etc. because of the following verse. viz. There were they in great fear, etc.)
yet I rather choose (with others) to paraphrase this Interrogative by a
Negative, have they no knowledge? i. e. they have no knowledge; who may be said
to be void of Science, though galled in conscience? and are expressly charged
to be without understanding, (unplacable, unmercifull) Romans 1.30. and yet
knowing the judgment of God, verse 32. Which sense, as it is evidently
consentaneous to other Scriptures (for, says Christ, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. Luke 23.34. And Paul says, had they known, they
would not have crucified, etc. (as is aforesaid) which the Lord therefore calls
a kicking against the Pricks, Act. 9.5.
which thing no knowing man would be drawn to do) so is it not in the least
incongruous to the genuine Analysis of this Psalm; for whereas an Inquest is
made in the second verse, First, Whether there were any that did understand? or
Secondly, Seek God? so is there an evident Return made, in the Negative, in
this fourth verse, First, That they have no knowledge (which appears by their
eating up of Gods People like bread.) Secondly, That they call not upon the
Lord.

And indeed well may the Interrogative be resolved by a Negative; for first,
They know not themselves; nor secondly, Those they persecute; thirdly, They
know no cause for what they do; and yet fourthly, They know no bounds, or
measure in the doing of it.

First, When the wicked which are but Gods sword and his hand, Psa. 17.13 14.
have permission from God to take the sword into their own hands; They either
know not, or act as if they knew not themselves to be men, Psa 9.19. Exodus 5.2.
or the Lord to be God; their heart is lifted up like the heart of Tyrus, and
they say they are God, (though they must dye like men, Psa. 82.7.
and fall like one of the Princes) yea though they be men and not God, yet
they set their heart as the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.2. They say also how does
God know, and is there knowledge in the most High? Psalm. 73.11. Ah! there is no
knowledge in them, or else they would never ask such a question.

They are Gods Rod, but know it not, Isa. 10.5. neither does their heart think
so, verse. 7. wherefore they shake themselves against him that lifted them up,
as if they were not (combustible) Wood. verse. 15. Ah! little do they know what
God will do with his Rod, verse. 17. when he has done with his Children, and
performed, as it is said, verse. 12. his whole work upon Mount Sion, and on
Jerusalem, or what he will do with his wash-pot, Psalm. 60.8. when he has
scoured his household Vessels; Therefore they say their tongues (and their
hands, and their swords) are their own, who is Lord over them? Psalm. 12.4.
(...) this, he that sits in the heavens laugheth, the Lord has them in
derision, Psa. 2.4. Yea, when they least think of it, even then will he speak
to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, ver. 5. even so put
them in fear, O Lord! that they may know. themselves to be but men, Selah,
Psa. 9.20.

Secondly; How ignorant are persecuters of the worth of those they persecute?
The precious Sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers? Lam. 4.2. And made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things? 1 Cor. 4.13. (...), i. e. as men meet for nothing
but to be cast out from among men, and as things good for nothing but to be
swept away. Away with him, away with him, crucify him, said they of the Son
of God: to whom Pilate answers more truly and wisely than he was aware of,
shall I crucify your King? Joh. 19.15. Thus, away with him; say they of holy
Paul, Act. 21.36. yea, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
fit that he should live, Acts 22.22. Thus they account them unworthy of the
world, of whom the Lord (that bought them, and therefore surely he best knows
the worth of them) pronounces that the world is not worthy, Heb. 11.38.

Thirdly, The workers of iniquity know no reason for their persecuting of the
Saints: For lo, they wait for their souls, the mighty are gathered together
against them, but not for their Transgression, nor for their sin: They run
and prepare themselves without their fault, Psa. 59.3, 4. They hate them
without a cause, Psalm. 35.19. Chase them without cause, Lam 3.59. Persecute
them without cause, Psa. 119.161. deal perversely with them without cause, Psa.
119.78. Lurk privily, Pro. 1.11. and lay nets, and dig pits for them without
cause, Ps. 35.7. And though one would wonder that there should be any such
monsters among men, or any such Brutes among Reasonable Creatures, yet they
that do thus are more in number than the hairs of a man's head, Psa. 69.4. Yea,
thus was it done in the green tree, Joh. 15.25. and therefore less wonder if
it be so in the dry.

Fourthly, As their wrath is groundless, their rage is boundless. They know
no more measure in it than reason for it. They cannot breath without
threatenings, and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, Act. 9.1. they
punish them often, and are exceeding mad against them, Act. 16 10, 11. They are
mad beyond measure. Therefore Paul confesses of himself whilst he was a
Saul, that beyond measure he persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it, Gal.
1.13. He never knew when he had done enough. And this leads to

THe third particular in the Character of their cruelty, viz. Their fury; They
eat up the people of the Lord, as they eat bread.

1 Bread is that one thing without which man is not, nay cannot be satisfied
long, though he have every other thing. Let a man have what varieties sea and
Land can afford, yet he must have bread.

So these wicked, let them have whatsoever they are capable of, as their
portion, yet must they have Saints to eat up, or they are not, nay cannot long
be satisfied. In the fulness of their sufficiency (as to other things) they
will be in straits (for this bread).

So Cain, unto whom God had given (as to civil respects) much more than to
Abel, Gen 4. The birthright, chiefer trade, the greater strength in
probalitie, etc. Yet all this cannot keep his countenance from falling, verse.
6. still he is unsatisfied, still he wants bread, he must see an end of poor
Abel.

So Saul, in comparison of whom David was but as a flea, or a partridge on the
Mountains, 1 Samuel 26.20. Saul was King, the land was his, all was his, yea
David himself his servant: What ails him that he cannot make a meal without
sucking the blood of this flea, or picking the bones of this partridge? Oh! he
wanted bread, he would fain see an end of poor David.

So Haman could boast what a feast was before him well suiting his sweet tooth
and ambitious appetite: the Kings favor, promotion above all his Princes, the
Queens invitation once and again to the banquets, from which all, but himself
and the King, were excluded, yet the poor man cannot pick a living out of all
this plenty, for want of this Bread, but pines away with an All this availes
me nothing so long as I see Mordecai the Jew (the Servant of God) sitting at
the gate, Esth. 5.11, 12, 13.

So was it also with Herodias, her Daughter had stolen the King from himself,
and half of the Kingdom, in promise, from the King; yet can she not be
contented without the head of poor John (who had no promotion but a prison) the
which head she sends her Daughter with as great an eagerness a begging for, as
some poor body would send a Child to a door a begging for a piece of bread,
Mark. 6.22, 23, 24.

2 Bread is that one thing for which men will part with any thing rather than
want it; They will sell their Estates, their Cattle, their land to buy bread,
as the Egyptians to Joseph; yea themselves into the Bargain; Buy us and our
Land for bread, Genesis 47.19. yea take any pains and endure any travel, Genesis
42.2, 3.
rather than perish for want of bread.

So the workers of Iniquity will take any pains, will return at the evening,
make a noise like a Dog, and go round about the City, and wander up and down
(for the ruin of Saints) and grudge if they be not satisfied, Psalm. 59.2, 6,
14, 15. They will hunt their steps that they cannot go in the streets, and
pursue them upon the Mountains, and lay wait for them in the Wilderness. Lam.
4.18, 19. As Monteil, La Trinity, Truchet, and other truculent Persecutors did
by these poor Angrongnians Predecessors.

Yea they will waste their estates, lavish any expense for their Ruin; it is
their bread, and they must have bread whatever it cost them; therefore says
Esther to the King, we are sold, etc. Esther 7.4. Haman, it seems, had been
bargaining for this Bread, and had come to a price, Let it be written (said
he to the King) that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand
Talents, Esther 3.9. A round rate I Will promise you, it should seem his stomach
was sharp set.

So surely Herodias was hugely hunger-bit, that she could so readily reburse
the grant of the half of the Kingdom, for the purchase of one single Saints
head in a Charger.

Therefore says the Apostle, All the day long we are killed for thy sake, and
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8.36. Behold the Butcherie of
the workers of Iniquity! See what flesh it is that is dressed in their
slaughter-houses all the day long, and sold in their shambles!

Thus have I read of some Persecutors that have sold their Lands, and beggered
themselves, to promote Persecution; but why speak I of so low a rate? The
Scripture says, They sell themselves to work this Iniquity, 1 Kings 21.19, 20.

3 It is not the reaping, the threshing, the grinding, the putting the
bread-corn into the Oven, that satiates the hungry, but he must eat the bread,
and eat it up.

So the workers of iniquity are not contented with the cutting down of the
Saints from their stations, enjoyments, hereditaments, lawful possessions, by
Rapines, Robberies, Proscriptions, exilements; nor with the threshing, and
grinding, of them (as it is called Isa. 3.15. What mean you, says God, that you
beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor?) by cruel exactions,
and intolerable oppressions; nor yet with casting them into Prison (with
Micaiah) which I may well compare to an Oven, in regard of the scorching
thirst, and burning hunger (as it is called Deuteronomy. 32.24.) that they are
constrained there to endure, 1 King. 22 27.
but when all this is done, they must see an end of them, they must eat them,
and eat them up like bread* Come, say they, and let us cut them off from being
a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance, Psalm. 83.4.

Therefore says Esther, we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, and
to be slain, and to perish, Esther 7.4. The expressions are multiplied; to
show that nothing but their ruin, yea utter ruin, could satiate Hamans greedy
appetite; Therefore says David, be merciful, O God, for man would swallow
me up, Psalm. 56.1.

4 When the Hungry has obtained his desired bread, with what eagerness and
complacencie does he feed upon it?

So when this bread stands before the wicked, when the Saints are within their
ravenous reach, Oh! how greedily do these Dogs fall aboard? David complains
that the Abjects did tear him, and ceased not, Psalm. 35.15. that they gnashed
on him with their teeth, ver. 16. that they rejoiced over him, (as the
hunger-bit person over his prey) ver. 19. that they opened their mouth wide
against him, and said aha! aha! our eye has seen it (we have got our bread) v.
21. Therefore he prays, v. 25. Let them not say in their hearts, ah! so we
would have it; Let them not say, we have swallowed him up. Thus they rejoice,
Rev. 11.10. over the slain Carkases of the two witnesses and (in token that
they have now got what they longed for) they send gifts one to another.

Lastly, Eaten Bread (the Proverb says) is soon forgotten; Men have daily
Appetites for daily bread, wherewith if you seem to satiate them to day, they
will yet cry for more on the morrow.

So the workers of iniquity, when they have expressed all the wrath they can at
once, yet is there a remainder, yet is there more behind, Psa. 76.10. The
remainder of wrath thou shall restrain. Thus when the Dragon, Rev. 12. had
spent whole floods of wrath upon the woman (that is, the Church of Christ)
which floods the earth drank up, v. 5. yet is he still wroth, ver. 17. and
goes to make war with the remnant of her seed (that is to say) in the
remainder of his wrath. David's expression is most pat to this purpose, Psalm.
56.2. My enemies would daily swallow me up.

AND oh! how too too Applicable is all that has been spoken to this Lamentable
occasion?

The treacherous Irish that were lately against the French, how easily could
they join with the French in the acting this bloody tragedy and monstrous
Massacre? The Popes Congregation, the French Kings Soldiers, the Spaniards
Runne-awayes, and the Dukes Vassals, oh! how one were all these in this thing?
how whole-footed, was the Cloven-footed Devil in this design?

And secondly, Whether these workers of iniquity had any knowledge either of
themselves, or of the worth of those precious souls that are now among others
under the Altar, or of any good grounds for what they did, or bounds in the
doing of it, let but the most impartial Relation be read; and the Readers
judge.

And Lastly, how truly may we spread this complaint before the Lord this day;
That they have eaten, yea eaten up, the people of the Lord like bread?

And this 1 When they had a full table as to other things. Theirs were the
Riches, the honors, the principalities, the powers, civil and military: the
Saints were mean, and few, and underlings, far from contending for
superiority, if under others they might but load peaceable and quiet lives in
all godliness and honesty. And yet how unsatisfied were those Persecutors
without this bread?

2 How dearly have they paid, and are like to pay for this bread? Their Name
stincks among Neighbour-Nations; their Honor (had they any) is sold and gone.
Their Revenue which arose from these painful subjects, which (according to
Historians Relations of their almost incredible improvement of some of their
sterile and Mountainous parts) was not inconsiderable; Together with the ready
service which these faithful Subjects have unanimously tendered (as Histories
tells us) to their Prince upon all occasions; These are sold for this bread.

Yea the lives of diverse Persecutors are already gone, for the lives of the
persecuted, and more must go when the Lord makes Inquisition for blood.

Yea themselves are sold, and their souls made over to him who has taught them
their falsitie, and their fury, that by Deceit they might attain no small part
of this sweet bread, Prove. 20.17. with the which, whilst he feeds them, he
makes sure of his Interest in them; They are of their Father that old Murderer
and Liar, Joh. 8.44. and by doing his lusts, they acknowledge his Lordship.

3 The cutting down of the Reformed out of their Ancient and rightful
Possessions; their being sub tribula, the flail of rigorous oppression; The
casting of diverse into the Oven, into Prison, was not yet enough for these
greedy Dogs, till the bread came to the eating, that they might see an end of
it.

And 4 With what eagerness and delight did they fall upon this prey; rending
and tearing each one for a belly-full; and then, like wantons, playing with
their bread when they had filled their Bellies; making havoc of the Saints (as
it is said, Acts 8.3.) toying, and striking each other with the lacerated
Members of the Members of Christ, tasting of their brains in sport, and in
scorn crying out, unsavory meat!

5 And thus hungry were they grown, notwithstanding all the bread of this sort
that has been formerly eaten, not only in France, in Paris, Rhoan, Rochel,
etc. and in Province, in Merindol and Cabriers, but more especially even in
Piedmont (1655. and onward) in Angrongne, Lucern, St. Martin, Perouse, etc. Yea
thus hungry were these Rebels of Ireland grown, since the other day, that they
glutted themselves with so many score thousands of poor Protestants, by them
and others, butchered in bleeding Ireland; unto which bread God will give the
surviving Murderers blood to drink.

And now let me take up An EXPOSTULATION (In the words of the Text)

With all the workers of Iniquity, concerning the People of God.

1 Have you no knowledge of the high Price and value that God sets upon his
People? Dare you eat them up as bread, whom he makes up as Jewels? Mal. 3.17.
which thing if you know not, read, Isa. 43.3, 4. For I am the Lord thy God
(says the Lord to his People) the Holy one of Israel thy Savior, I gave Egypt
for thy Ransom, Ethiopia and Sebah for thee, since thou wast precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore will I give
men for thee, and People for thy life.

2 Have you no knowledge of the near Relation, that God stands in, to his
People? They are his Flock, Luke 12.32. his Household, Ephesians. 2.19. his
Children, Isa. 63.8. yea his Spouse, Cant. 5.1. For their Maker is their
Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name, Isa. 54.5. And will you offer force to
his Queen before his face?

Know you not moreover that his Interest in his People makes him a sufferer
with his People? so that in all their afflictions he is afflicted; when you
persecute them, you persecute him, when you drive them through a Red Sea, he
goes with them, and when into a fiery furnace, thither he comes to them, and
will bless those that bless them, and curse those that curse them? then read
Isa. 63.9. Act. 9.4. Exodus 14. Isa. 43.2. Dan. 3.25. Genesis 12.3.

Who puts it therefore into the hearts of his Children, at a distance from his
sufferers, yet to suffer with them, and to remember their bonds as bound with
them, and their afflictions as being themselves also in the same body, Heb.
13.2. And therefore he that is the head of the body, and the father of these
dispositions in his people, will much more Sympathize with his people.

3 Have you no knowledge of the Care that the Lord has of them? though he care
little for you, yet he cares for them: though he care not for Egypt, he cares
for Canaan, and the eyes of the Lord are always upon it, from the beginning to
the end of the year, Deuteronomy. 11.12.

Think you that their pitiful, faithful father will not mind them, who bids
them to be careful for nothing, but in all things to make known their
Requests unto him with supplications, Phil. 4.6. yea, that bids them cast all
their care upon him, assuring them that he cares for them? 1 Pet. 5.7.

He that ever cared for them, and bare them all the days of old, Isai. 63.9.
cares not he for them still? He that numbreth their Hairs, Matthew. 10.30.
cares not he for their heads? He that cares for their food, cares not he for
their body? and that cares for their Raiment, cares not he for their Life?
Mat. 6.2^.26. Psa. 56.8. Heb. 2.16
He that bottles their tears, cares not he for their blood? He that took
their nature that he might suffer in their nature, cares not he for their
sufferings? he that was bound for them, cares not he for their Bonds? and
that laid down his l fe to save theirs, cares not he for their Death? ( Joh.
15.13. with Psa. 116.15.)

Surely they have no knowledge that are ignorant of all this: That think while
God winketh and keeps silence, that he takes no care, but is altogether
such a one as themselves, who care not ('it is true) what becomes of the Saints;
Yet will he reprove them, when they say; Let God deliver, if he will have
them; they shall soon find that the Lord takes part with his People, and shall
never have cause any more to say, Psa. 118.7.
their Lord cares not that they perish.

Lastly; Have all of you no knowledge what the end of these things shall be?
Know you not that God will break the teeth of the ungodly (that they shall be
no more able to eat up this bread) and smite his enemies on their Cheek bone,
Psalm. 3.7. and persecute these Persecutors from under heaven? Lam. 3.16.

Know you not moreover, that the slain Witnesses must arise and stand upon
their feet, Rev. 1^.11. and judge their Judges, and torment their Tormentors?
Then shall the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two edged sword
in their hands, to execute (upon their executioners) the judgment written,
this honor have all Gods Saints, Psa. 149.6, 9.

But and if the workers of iniquity be willingly ignorant of this day, and of
these things, of which even Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied saying, 2
Pet. 3.5.
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14.15. Yet let me tell these
tidings to the People of God, concerning the Giants, the Sons of Anak, in
whose sight we appear as Grashopers, and they make nothing to eat us like
bread; Rebel not O Saints! against the Lord, neither fear ye this People, for
THEY ARE BREAD FOR US, Numb. 14.19.

Thus when the Lord brings back the captivity of his People, they shall be
as men that dream, Psa. 126.1. As Satan and his Instruments have done, shall it
be done unto Them. The broken heads of Leviathan shall be meat, Psalm. 74.14.
and his members shall be bread for the People of God. Then shall God say to
his Saints concerning Babylon, Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double
to her, double, according to her works, Rev. 18.6.

Therefore let your Faith in these promises, add wings to your Prayers, and
second your Complaints with solicitous Supplications. How long, O Lord holy and
true! will thou not be avenged? Rev. 6.10. Return O Lord! for thy servants
sake, the Tribes of thine inheritance, Isa. 63.17.

IS it then the Lot of the People of God to be thus eaten up, like bread, of
the workers of Iniquity?

1 Then let not the Papists say to the REFORMED, where is now your God? Satan's
Usurpation cannot stand in Gods right. The workers of Iniquity should they cut
off Gods People from being a People, Yet can they not from being his People.
They may cut off their lives from the Land of the Living, but never separate
their souls from the Living God, nor from his love, Romans 8.35, 38, 39. still
God is theirs, and they are his People, and so he accounts them, and so he
calls them, when eaten up like Bread.

2 Nor let Profane Protestants say, that the reformed suffer for their
factions; or that these poor Waldenses were sinners more than others; I tell
you nay, but except you Repent, ye shall much more perish, Luke 13.3.

These were a pure and a pious People, that never, that I read of, bowed the
knee to the Romish Baal, no not in the times when our Fathers and other Nations
were wondering after the Beast.

These were of that humble, and poor, and painful People, who going into a
Wilderness to worship, are recorded to have taught the Rocks and Wilderness to
yield food for them and their Children, when we have abounded in Pride, in
Idleness, and fulness of Bread.

These were that constant and faithful People who loved not their lives to the
death, neither counted them dear unto themselves, that they might finish their
course with joy, and testify to the Gospel of the Grace of God. But and if
judgment begin at the house of God, what then shall be the end of those that
obey not the Gospel of God? 1 Pet. 4.17.

3 Nor, lastly Let Sion say, The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten
me (as Isa. 49.14.) because he has given me to be eaten up like bread of
mine Adversaries, and of them that hated me; for though he suffer them to
make bread of your huskie, brannie, bodily part, yet will gather your precious
souls as Wheat into his Garner, Mat. 3.12. yea and your very Bodies shall
return, and come safely in, in their season. Thy dead men shall live (says
Christ to Sion) together with my dead body shall they arise, Isa. 26.19.
comfort you the Comfortless in Sion with these words.

FINIS.
THE Cure of Contention Among The People of God: wherein is manifested; That
there is too great a pronenesse in Gods own People to eat each other. As also
Whence this proceeds. The evil of it. When this is done. The Cure of it.


Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

Peace be within thy walls. For my Brethren and Companions sakes, I will now
say, peace be within thee.

LONDON Printed for George Sawbridge, 1655.

TO THE SONS OF PEACE.
Ye Lambs among Wolves;
THe King of Salem, Heb. 7. Isa. 9.
and Prince of Peace ( who is himself no striver, Matthew. 12 19) has sent me
this day to you with this charge, avoid contentions and strivings, Tit. 3.9.
for the Servants of the Lord must not strive, 2 Timothy 2.14, 24.

Wherefore let him henceforth hear of your Affairs, that you stand fast in one
Spirit, with one mind striving together (i. e. not against one another, but
with combined forces) for the faith of the Gospel, so need you in nothing to
be terrified by your Adversaries, Phil. 1.27, 28.

Make haste therefore and turn your swords and spears, the carnal weapons of
your warfare one with another, Isa. 2.4.
into pruning hooks and Plough-shares, into pruning hooks to cut off the
superfluity of naughtiness, Jam. 1.21.
and Plow-shares to extirpate the Root of bitterness in your selves. Heb.
12.15.


Whatever ye therefore forget, forget not the great Commandment, yea the end
of the Commandment, which is Charity, 2 Timothy 1.5.

Whether you be for new Notions, this is the new Commandment that ye love
one another, Joh. 13.34. or for old ways, the same is the old Commandment,
which was from the beginning, 1 John 2.7. and 2 John 5.6.

Therefore above the having of your will, or your way, or your lust, or your
lucre, Above all things have servent Charity among your selves, for Charity
shall cover a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. For the fruit of Righteousness is
sown in Peace, of them that make Peace, Jam. 3.18.

Now seeing your Lord proclaims unto you a Cessation from strife, and sounds a
Retreat from Contention, flight not your Generals word of command, though it
be but a Child that blows the Trumpet.

THE CURE OF CONTENTION Among the People of God.
FUrthermore;

Is it the property of the workers of iniquity to eat up Gods people like bread?

Why then should Saints take the wickeds work out of their hands? or bite? or
eat up one another?

Oh! let not such a thing be told of them in Gath! or published in Askelon!

But can there be need of such a Caution to those who are taught of God to
love one another? 1 These. 4.9. yea to dwell in love, as they would dwell in
God, 1 John 4.16. who have heard this message from the beginning, Chap. 3.11.
even ever since they were born of God, or knew God, chap. 4.7?

It should seem there is.

GALAT. 5.15. Si vero exeditis, etc.

If you bite and eat up one another, (as Beza, observing the force of the
Compound (...), renders it) take heed that you be not consumed one of another.

This he spoke who once felt in himself this dangerous paroxisme (as Luke the
Physician calls the biting sharp contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act.
15.39.) Yea this he spoke to other Saints, as having such remainder of
iniquity in their hearts, as (if not carefully watched over) will soon show
what need they have of such a caution; And for this well may there be further
thoughts of heart, Judge. 5.15, 16.
further searchings of heart this day.

I shall therefore enquire whence this Eating up of Saints by Saints is? What
the evil of it? When it is done? And How it may be remedied?

First

THen, From whence come wars and fightings among you? (even, you Saints) come
they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Jam. 4.1. In
which Members there is yet a Law, that warreth against the law of your minds,
Romans 7.23. And by that Law you are pressed (I hope it is against your minds) to
fight one against another.

A dead dog cannot bite; were Lust thoroughly killed in thee, it could not snap
at thy Brother that passes by thee: would Saints fight with sin more, they
would then quarrel with each other less: would they spare lust less, they
would soon spare one another more; but what wonder that the unmortified
remainder of the Old Man in thee, should show its teeth against thy Brother,
bearing the Image of God upon him, which thou find irreconcilable to thy
self, so far forth as thou art the Friend of God.

But there are two Dogs-teeth, more especially, with which the Saints do bite,
and eat up one another.

The one is Covetousness, the other Pride.

1 Covetousness, or the love of money, this is the root of all (but especially
of this) Evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. which some while they coveted after, have peirced
themselves thorough (yea and others also) with many sorrows.

From that Love springs this Variance, that one is ready to pull out his
Brothers throat, for the Morsells sake that is going down in it. Therefore to
the mention of the Iniquity of his Peoples Covetousness; the Lord adds the
mention of their hearts frowardness, Isa. 57.17. What a cursed Dog is Worldly
avarice, that snaps at God and man, and none can be quiet for it? The Covetous
Saint (if so be that both may be possibly predicated of the same subject, and
if not, we shall find but a few Saints now a days) is like a male-contented
Child that flies in the very face of Father and Brother, when it should receive
its own portion with thanksgiving, and give the Father (one would think) leave
to carve at his own table.

But why should Travalers so contend by the way, who shall carry the most
Luggage? which Moses let fall, when he came of years, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26,
reckning that he had a good riddance of it.

Sirs, If you be Christians indeed, there is Christ enough, there is grace
enough, there is Heaven enough for you all, and surely he that would have two
Worlds, is too Covetous; Yea, there is Earth enough for you all to rest quietly
in, when you dye, and therefore why not as well to live quietly in, whilst you
live?

The second lust is Pride, which is so primely, that Solomon speaks as if it
were only influentiall upon the forementioned Evil, Prove. 13.10. Only by
Pride comes Contention; and again Romans 12.16, 17. Be not wise in your own
eyes, recompense to no man evil. O! it were better for one and other, if each
of us were not so good as we are, and so wise as we are, I mean in our own
eyes.

The Saints actings are now a days as if the proud Proverb of the World, viz.
The lie deserves a stab, were become a Canon in some Catholic Council, a
prime Rule for Saints to walk by; no sooner can we be crossed, and our private
fancies contradicted, but (as if we had a dispensation from Christ to
avengeour selves) we are ready to retaliate bitterness, with bitterness, and
reviling, with reviling.

Yea and so proudly fond are we of the Births of our own brains, that whoever
slights the discoveries (perhaps of some New-nothing) that we make, we are
presently prone to commit such Person to the Law De comburendis Haereticis,
being Parties, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners, and all within our selves.

And finally, which is the Pride of our Pride, lest conscience should fall foul
upon us, for falling foul one upon another; and contend with us, for being so
contentious; our Pride can yet help us with a supersedeas to the suit against
us; the manner is, to lay the Brat at Gods door, as if he must needs foster
our conceptions, and maintain our sayings; and by this means how often comes
that to be called a Zeal from God, and for God; which the fire of that day, 1
Cor. 3.13. will manifest to be a Zeal from self, and for self? And this though
so great, yet is so ordinary an Evil, that whosoever justifies himself wholly
from this Pride, I conclude him the Prouder for so doing.

But besides these causes within, there are some without, of the Saints eating
up each other; As

1 Satan, that Apolyon, Rev. 9.10. or Devourer; who because he cannot, as he
would, immediately eat up dissenting Saints, therefore sets them a work by
dissentions to bite and eat up one another; for this is that prime principle
that he taught Machiavill his dear Disciple, Divide and Impera, divide and
devour them. which maxim he closely follows; 1 By founding, 2 By fomenting, 1
Dividing Principles, 2 Dividing Terms and Titles, 3 Dividing Interests.

Whereas Unity is as essential, to all that is truly Evangelicall, as is
Verity; for as God is a God of truth, so is he One, and his name one; and
the, refore whatsoever is more comes of evil. The Saints so far forth as they
are Godly, they are One; and so far forth as there is envying strife, Division,
they are carnal, and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. i. e. as other men, and are so
far fit for Satan's Design.

Whom since he cannot hinder from being one in the Main; yet has he the
trick to make them contest for the Method, whilst they all mind the same
thing. That if there be not a real difference, yet there may seem so to be;
that so he may really divide, where they seemingly differ; or at least,
greatly divide, where they little differ; and consequently, both really and
greatly devour, where they divide.

Who though he sometimes extenuate the breaches between God and Man, making
great sins, small; and small sins, none; yet knows how to aggravate the
breaches betwixt Man and Man, and Saint and Saint, that the least may be
great, yea that nothing may appear something.

Thus having founded, his next business is to foment these divisions betwixt
the People of God, and having parted them asunder, to keep them asunder: and
having made the wound to keep it open; For this purpose he will tell the one
that the other loves not his company, because he likes not his opinion; and
will say to the other, let him come to thee, if he have a mind to be friends
with thee. Thus if both be somewhat willing to accord, perhaps the proud
nicity of an who shall speak first? may prevail to keep them from speaking each
to other; till such time as something be spoken of each other, which the Birds
of the air (belonging to the Prince of the power of the air) will so carry,
and miscarry, to each other, that thereby the old wound may take new Air, and
burn, and throb and swell afresh, and so the latter end thereof be worse than
the beginning.

Ah! Satan sufficiently knows, what a conducement to the distancing of
affections is the distancing of Godly persons: And how easily he can keep them
from agreeing together, if he can but keep them from speaking, especially from
praying together. And therefore he will have one to look proudly upon himself
as a John, as the only champion for the truth, and to look censoriously upon
his dissenting Brother as a Cerinthus, that may by no means be admitted into
the same Bath.

Secondly, For this end he wants not his Ministers and false Apostles, 2 Cor.
11.15. who may still gall and chafe the sore, that would almost heal alone, if
but let alone. Neither are we to think that these are only to be found among
those whom we least affect, but some of these there are in every fort of
dissenting Saints. These he will have to be great pretenders to the light of
Truth, and fire of zeal above others. And wherefore think you serves this their
light and fire, but to set the Church on a Light fire? and then can they come
and look on, and warm their hands, and more --

These are the Zibahs of the several parties, which get by their trade, you
may see by their following it. And it is sad that Gods David's, his own dear
people, should be the Receivers of these Thieves: And yet more sad that such
false suggestions should produce such true variance, as that David should not
qu te clear himself of the grudge, when Mephibosheth quite clears himself of
the guilt. Yet such Artists are these Zibahs in the trade of false accusing,
and such bunglers are we Christians in the Trade of forgiving, 1 Samuel 16.3.
and 19.29.

These are the Madmen that make a sport of casting fire brands, Pro. 26.18.19.
and there are that make a sport of returning the like; as if they strove who
should rail for God most, or lie for God fastest.

Whence it comes to pass that the most precious among men, cannot possibly be
Congregationall, but must presently be Schismatic, nor Presbyterian, but
presently Antichristian; yea hence it is that a man cannot follow Peace with
all men, no not with all good men, or put in a bill for an accommodation; but
before he thinks of it, he becomes an Heteroclitall Erastian, and is almost
Amathematized, on several hands, by some less charitable Zelots, for a
Neutralizing Merozite.

I speak not in the least, to the quenching any genuine zeal in the People of
God (the Lord increase it a thousand fold!) But me thinks when a fiery Zeal
stands in competition with fervent charity, it is as when preternaturall heat
labors the extinction of the Natural.

Yea peradventure it will, upon close trial, be found, that some that spend
their zeal the most prodigally upon the circumstance and form, spare the least
for the substance and power of Godliness.

Secondly,

WHerefore, O Saints! before these conspirators any more draw you in to bite
and devour one another, Consider.

1 What Injury you offer to God, your Father and their Father whom you devour?
Ephesians. 4.6. there is one God, and Father of All. His is the house which you set
on fire, Ephesians. 2.22. his the Servants whom you smite, Matthew. 24.49. and his
are the Children which you destroy, Psalm. 73.15. In this case the Lord may
complain as did Israel of old, Genesis 42.36. me have ye bereaved of my Children;
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and will ye take away Benjamin? all these
things are against me. So may God say, Persecutors have destroyed my People
abroad, and will you destroy one another at home? Joseph and Simeon are gone,
and will you take away my surviving Benjamin? All these things are against me.

2 What injury you offer to God the Son, who paid the same price for thy
dissencing Brother that he paid for thee? Destroy not him for whom Christ
dyed, Romans 14.15. Sirs, you pretend to be followers of the Lamb; see that you
follow him in his Lamb-like disposition.

3 What Injury to God the Spirit? That Dove is grieved when you grieve one
another, Ephesians. 4.30, 31, 32. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby you are
sealed unto the Day of Redemption; i. e. let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away, with all malice: And be
ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you.

4 What Injury to your Profession? The Gospel, that is professed by you, came
to you with acclamations of Peace on Earth, Good Will toward men, And says
unto you. Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath,
Gal. 6.10. Do good unto all men, but especially to those that are of the
household of Faith, Yea, Romans 12.14. bless them that persecute you, bless and
curse not, yea, verse 20. If thine Enemy hunger, give him meat (not eat him
up.) How then should there be license for you in the Gospel, to harm one
another? or to make a prey one of another?

5 What Injury to your Party, too little, alas! and too weak already (I speak
as to men) and the weaker for being divided, Mat. 12.25. For having mentioned
before the wrong that is hereby offered to your Heavenly Father, how shall I
forget Jerusalem which is above, and should be free from these Injuries, for
she is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26? whose tender heart can not choose but
bleed when her own Children put each other into blood. O! why said Rebekah,
should I be deprived of you both in one day? Genesis 27.45. If Envy kill one Son,
Judgment the other; Rebekah, loses both, who is the Mother of both. Ah!
Jerusalem can have no greater grief than to see of her Children warring one
against another. And how say you that you love her, Psa. 122.6
if you thus grieve her? and how hope you to prosper if you do not love her?
observe how the Spirit aggravateth the wickedness of the wickeds slandring and
evill-speaking from such relation, Psalm. 50 20. Thou sit and speak
against thy Brother, and slandrest thine own Mothers Son. Is he a Dissenter,
but yet thy Brother? Take heed of speaking slandrously against him. The Saints
look for Tribulation in the World, and Persecution from the World; but O how
insupportable, is an Injury from a Saint, to a Saint? Had it been an Enemy,
says David, I could have born it; but it was my Familiar with whom I have
taken sweet Counsel, going to the House of God with him, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.
(as it is in the Psalm.) It is little trouble to a Saint to hear that Way
called Heresy by the profane and Ignorant World, wherein he worships the God
of his Fathers; but to be called Schismatic by a Saint, or stigmatized for an
Heretic by his own Mothers Son, or for an Hypocrite, as Job by his friends;
(without the support of an Almighty Arm) who can bear it? How sad and grievous
a thing is it that out of those that are sent out as Lambs among Wolves, Luke
10.3. grievous Wolves should arise not sparing the flock? Act. 20.29, 30.
Christ and Believers, and Believers among themselves are all of a piece; and
therefore by no means should fall in pieces. He that eats up his Brother, eats
up the flesh of his own Arm, whereas, No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church, for we are Members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.29, 30.

6 What Injury to those that suffer? Art thou strong? then ought thou to
bear the Infirmities of the weak; and not to please thy self, but thy Neighbor
for his good, unto Edification, Romans 15.1, 2. Are others weak? they are to be
received, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. or are they over-taken
in a fault? they are to be restored by thee, being Spiritual, in the Spirit
of Meekness, Gal. 6.1. wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the
feeble knees, and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame
be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed Heb. 12.12, 13. Have
thou knowledge, wherein thy Brother is Ignorant? then show out of a good
conversation thy works with meekness of Wisdom, Ja. 3. 13. But if you have
bitter Envying, and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
truth, ver. 14. For the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God, Iam.
1.20.

Seventhly, what injury to the very Workers of Iniquity whose bloody hands are
by you strengthened? for as in some cases we are said to Tempt the Tempter to
temptus; so may we, in this case, be too truly said to tempt the Destroyers
to destroy us; Who perhaps would have little courage to set upon Us, but that
they find Us setting upon one another. For whom might there be any plea in the
great day, I am verily persuaded, it would be this; Lord! thou chargest Us
with the blood of thy Disciples; but thou did tell Us that we should hereby
know men to be thy Disciples, by their loving one another, Joh. 13.35. And
thou know that we found these out of this thy Livery, and how then should
we know them to be thine? Their secret shibboleths, we knew not, but should
have guessed them to be thine, had we found the mark thou gave us to know
them by, upon them.

Well, one thing I am assured of, that though this Plea will not justify them,
it will justify God in making them Scorpions to you, whilst you are Scourges
to each other.

Cast it seriously with your selves, O ye Saints! How can you imagine that the
workers of Iniquity should take it to be so heinous a sin to Eat you up,
when they find you Eating up one another? You are, or should be, the Light of
the World, Mat. 5.14. but may not they that walk in this, by you, walk in
Darkness? the Saints should walk so by Rule, that their walking should be to
others as a Rule; but they, alas! by breaking their own Cords what occasion do
they give to others, to Cast these cords quite away from them?

O! how fair and how fortified is Jerusalem, that City compact together? Psa.
122.3. They that dwell in Unity dwell in safety. Houses are first broken and
then robbed: Armies are first routed and then ruined: Dinahs straggling* was
Sochem: Temptation, Genesis 34, 1, 2. The Solitary Traveller is soonest set upon;
And if any thing be our Destruction it will be our Division.

We say Occasion makes a Theif, and why not a murderer? Oh! Our othermen
sins in this respect* Oh! how formidable might we be to our enemies were
we more gentle to our friends? Oh! how fair would the Moon be (I mean the
Church Militant) if it were but clear as the Sun (the Church triumphant) from
these spots? Yea, how terrible would unarmed Saints be even as an Army with
banners had they but a banner amongst them like the Banner over th m, Cant.
6.10.
Cant. 4.2.
viz. Love. And were it so, how great Evils might they prevent the enemies in
Doing, and themselves in Suffering?

Therefore

Finally, Consider what injury you do your selves, in being so injurious? If
you fall out, you do not only provoke the Enemies as I said to fall in, but
also you provoke God to let them in. Which if he do not, he must needs fall
in himself among you, and buffet you for buffeting one another. Has not God
spoke in flaming fire often enough of late against the flaming Contentions of
his People? And may not I truly say, that for this cause many are sick, and
many sleep?

Yea for this cause (as some Master would make his quarrelling Scholars whip
one another) does the Lord make you scourges each to other, who would otherwise
be the greatest delights and meetest helps each to other upon the face of the
earth. In this sense he that takes the sword shall perish by the sword and they
that bite and devour one another, shall be devoured one of another, and he
that slayes a man shall do it (as Lamech said) to his own wounding. Genesis 4.234
Therefore grudge not one against another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned:
behold the Judge stands before the door, Jam. 5.9.

And think moreover with your selves, O Saints! what small cause you have to
deal unkindly each by other, whether you consider your present or future state.

1 At present, you are Strangers, and in a strange Land. Your Enemies are many,
and you are few, they are strong, and you (as to Numbers, and humane accounts)
are weak your enemies, as you have heard, want nothing but opportunity (not
appetite) to eat you up, why then should you eat up one another?

2 And if you can see but a very little before you, and make your future
Estate, by faith, present; you must all live together hereafter, and why not
love together here? You all pretend for the same Country, and why should you
fall out by the way? (see Genesis 45.24.) and if some of you go the furthest way
about, the more is their trouble, the more are they to be pitied, that do so.
Brethren, I am persuaded, were there any Room for sorrow after our entrance
into the Joy of the Lord, It would be a principal grief to us there, to think
how we have grieved each other here.

Thirdly

BUt how may the People of God be guilty of biting, and eating up one another?

I answer.

First, As Principalls, secondly, As Accessaries

1 As Principalls, And that either.

1 More grossly; When one Saint stands in another light, or in the Way of his
lust, then for the stronger to eat up the weaker, this is very sad, yet very
possible, if the Lord leave the best of men unto themselves; and thus did David
eat up Uriah, 2 Samuel 12.9. or

2 More inwardly, secretly, and most usually by Debates, envyings, wraths,
strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, 2 Cor. 12.20. which are
too great Violations of the Royal Law of Love for the Sons of Peace, to
commit, or the God of Peace to permit in his Household, and do evidently tend in
their degree, to their eating up of one another; for, whosoever hates his
Brother is a Murderer, 1 John 3.15.

2 As Accessaries, either

1 By our giving occasion to others, to make a prey of those Saints whom we
least affect, and by preparing them as Morsells for the Teeth of the ungodly by
mincing their Reputations by our sinful Rachas and disdainful interjections:
Mat. 5.22.
Tush! such an one is a Presbyterian, or such a one an Independent, what do you
talk of him?

But if thou slight him that art a Brother, what wonder though a Doeg smite
him? But if he suffer through thine occasion, any persecution, from an
Ishmael; know that thou, the Accessory, art in danger of the Council, Mat.
5.22. Oh! how Patient is the Father of Us froward Children? else who is there
of us, but had been haled before this Council, for this cause, before this day?

2 By taking up a (groundless) reproach against thy brother (when it lies in
the way) Psalm. 15.3. or by suffering any dog to eat up his turtle, when thou
may deliver it.

The same Commandment that forbids thee to kill, enjoins thee to preserve: And
that, which prohibits the bearing of false-witnesse, commands thy true
witnessing in behalf of thy Brother.

Not that I would have you to justify the wicked, or to plead for any that
pretends to be Godly, in that which is evidently ungodly, for in so doing you
expose the whole Generation of the just, to be eaten up of the unjust.

4 See these Puritans will hold one with another in fraud, overreaching, etc.
If one of us, whom they call the world, had done so -- but now they can make
light of the matter, it is the man's infirmity, and the man's honest at heart for
all this.

For as there is nothing that more hardens the wicked than the shameful
miscariages of Professors, so is there nothing that more confirms them in such
their obduration, then when such miscariages are justified or at least (which
is too too usual) extenuated by other Professors.

Is he called a Brother 1 Cor. 5.11. that incorrigibly drives a trade of sin
(for I speak chiefly to that case) excuse him not, least thou seem like unto
him excuse him not, least thou accuse thy self, and give occasion to others to
accuse the whole brotherhood as like unto him.

Nor would I have you in all cases, to condemn your own Innocence, by your
silence; for certain it is, that he that ought to vindicate his Brother, may
vindicate himself from evident injuries, and false Aspersions, especially when
the Gospel is reproached in his Reproaches; and the Name of God is blasphemed,
in the sufferings of his Name.

But it is so hard for us to be competent Judges when we are Parties, and
when we strive, to strive lawfully, that ordinarily it is best for us not to
strive at all, and then we are surest not to strive amiss.

Fourthly,

ANd now finally, to direct you; supposing your Judgments deeply convicted of
the sinfullnesse of the sin of eating up one another, your hearts humbled, and
your souls imbitred in the sense of it --

That you that are the Children of God should be so far complexioned like those
whose Father is the Murderer, the Destroyer, the accuser of the Brethren.

That you that are the Ransomed of Christ Jesus should yet be yoaked in Satan's
Plough with the workers of Iniquity.

That you that are the sealed of the Spirit, should be thus far carnal, and
your very wisdom, which you pretend comes from above; be, as James calls it
earthly, Cha. 3.15.
sensual, yea, and devilish.

That you that profess the Gospel should be scandal to the Gospel, and be a
shame to that which you count a glory to you.

That you that are of the little little flock, should be Dogs to the flock;
and you that are of Gods household, firebrarnds to his house.

That you that should be Healers, are Biters; and you that should be repairers
of Breaches, are Devourers.

That you that should be the Light of the World, walk your selves in
Darkness, 1 John 2 ii
as John says, every man does that hates his Brother.

That you should prepare stripes for your own backs by laying stripes on your
fellow servants.

That you who travail in one way, and to one Rest, should bite and eat up one
another by the way, because you go not every one in one Path.

That you should take up, or lay down groundless and sinful Reproaches
against each other.

That you should secretly grudge at each others good, or seek each others harm,
or lay stumbling blocks before each other, that each that falls might be a
step to other to rise by.

In a word.

That you should hatch the Viperous brood of the Old Serpent, and distance your
selves at his word of command, and make much of his Ministers, for setting you
together by the ears, and help the Divider to make such deep furrows on each
others backs, which he could never do, except he ploughed with each others
Heifer,

Perferring your private Phant'sie, Lust, or Lucre before the public Peace
and weal of the Church of Christ.

And especially that, in doing all or any of this, any of you should think that
he has done God good service:

Oh! What cause of sorrow? shame? blushing? yea bleeding before the Lord is
here? Oh! how might Rivers of tears run down our faces, to wash away the
blood that runs down the faces of our brethren; where we have set the print
of our Teeth and Nails?

Let us this day call in our Troops of Passions that we have sent abroad to
burn and kill our Brethren; O we want them to curb the Mutineers in our own
bowels, were they themselves but well disciplined. Let me tell thee there is
none in the world that thou have cause to look so discontentedly on, or to deal
so unkindly with as thine own heart: There is none that has done, none that
can do thee so much injury, there is none that so much deserves thine Ire.

This heart is that old enemy of thine, that froward piece of flesh called the
Old Man; which has so often not only bred variance between thee and thy
Brother, but distances or strangenesses betwixt thee and thy God; and not only
provoked thy Christian friend to wrath; but even thy Christ unto sore
displeasure.

This heart is that grand enemy of thine that has ever grudged at thy greatest
good, and has done more to the hindering of thee from and in the enjoying God
thy chief good, than all the world beside. Injuries from Enemies, unkindnesses
from Friends, yea even temptations and assaults and bufferings from Satan
himself, have often driven thee the sooner and the nearer to God; but thine
evil, evil heart of unbelief is that which has made thee to depart from the
living God

Heb. 3.12.
This heart is that secret and close enemy of thine that can follow thee where
thy quarrelling friend comes not at thee, into thy Closet and secret Chamber
and there disturb and interrupt thee, which being an enemy unto thee, and yet
within thee, O! how great is the mischief that it is able to do thee?

This heart is that continual adversary of thine, that dogs thee from duty to
duty, from day to day, breeding thy disquiet in all places, and at all times,
when thou might retire from an injurious world, and froward friend, how hard
a thing is it to reced e from an injurious and froward heart?

And were we but once angry, as we should be, with our own hearts for sin;
we should better know how to be Angry with our Brother, and yet not sin,
Ephe. 4.26. and having first pulled the beam out of our own eyes, should see
the more clearly to pluck the Mote out of our Brothers eye, Mat. 7.5.

If therefore thy wrath has been thy weapon wherewith thou have wounded thy
Brother; the right salving of thy weapon may (in this case) be some cure to his
wound: this is the allowable weapon-salving; If thy Passions were healed,
others would not be so soon harmed by them; or if harmed, sooner healed.

Art thou then Irascible? be well advised before thou spare any of thine anger
to thy Brother, be sure thou serve well thine own turn first; Be angry with
thy self, and be wroth with thy Sin; Yea particularly be angry with thine
anger for gadding abroad like Dinah, when had it been a good Houswife, it would
have found work enough at home.

Have thou been a Troubler of other Saints? be thou troubled this day; or a
sadner of others? be thou sad. Has self in thee taken revenge on thy Brother?
take thou then revenge on thy self this day; Or have had Indignation against
other the People of God? have Indignation therefore against thy self. Mortify
the lusts that have murdered thy Brother; Thine eye that has looked enviously
or scornfully on him, though thy right eye, pluck out; Mark. 9.43, 45, 47.
The hand that has smitten him, though thy right hand, cut off; And the foot
that has been swift to shed his blood, though thy right foot, cut off also,
and cast it from thee, Matthew. 5.29, 30.
for it is profitable for thee that these should perish, and not that thou
should be cast into Hell; And if thou have been angry with thy Brother
without a cause? say not any more that thou do well to be angry.

1 But the more special prescriptions for the cure of the Saints contentions
are these three.

1 Labor to get much of the Spirit of Christ into thine heart. Let the same
Spirit that descended on him (like a Dove Mat. 3.16.) dwell in thee. This is the
prime Direction which the Apostle adds to that very caution which we have been
treating of, Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk in the Spirit and you shall not
fulfill the lust of the flesh; What lust? i. e. the lust (mentioned in the
preceding verse) of biting and devouring one another.

There are that attribute their fellnesse (as themselves call it) to the
Spirit; But to what Spirit it belongs, ipsi viderint; for the fruit of Gods
Spirit is love, Joy, Peace, long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith.
Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no law, Gal. 5.22, 2.

Whereas Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, and such like are the manifest lusts of the flesh, verses
19, 20, 21.

Especially labor to be rich in those two special graces of the Spirit, which
I mention in opposition to Covetousness and Pride, the forementioned inward
and Principal causes of our bitings of one another.

1 In the contempt of the World. Oh! this were an healing grace indeed; were
we more violent in taking Heaven, we should be less violent in raking Earth.
Did we, as we should, contemn the World; we should not, as we do, contend
for the World.

Meethinks I might tell you of one Salve that would heal most of your sores,
would you go to the price of it. You all pretend to be Abraham's Children; but
will you make use of your Fathers receipt? it is an excellent good one, yea too
good for you to hear of, unless you will make use of it.

You know Abraham was every way a better man than Lot; yet seeks to Lot for
peace (when it had been manners for Lot to have sought to his Uncle Abraham)
Genesis 13.8. Yea prays for peace: yea bids so fair for it, that I am persuaded,
there are few Lots, that you deal with, so froward, but you might buy your
peace at Abraham's price, ver. 9. Is not the whole land before thee? If thou will take the right hand, I will go to the left, if thou will go to the left I
will take the right, only let there be no strife between me and thee, for we
are brethren.

As one, with whom I have sometime travailed, who used to ask whom he met on
the Road, will you not out of the way? If the Answer were, No; his reply used
to be, Then I will.

2 In the Contempt of self. The Apostle joins these two together, Romans 12.16,
17. Be not wise in your own eyes, Recompense to no man evil for evil. And
mind not high things but condescend to men of low estate.

Therefore that nothing be done through strife, in lowliness of mind let each
esteem other better then themselves, Phil. 2.3

Shall the taller brother (that so counts himself) put his shorter brother upon
the Rack because he is not of his own size? what proud Tyrants are we that
must suite the length of every Lodger to our own bed? what froward Children
that fling away, and will agree in nothing, because we cannot agree in every
thing.

I remember the Lord ushers in the mention of an Endeavor to keep the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. verse. 2.
with the forbearing of one another in Love. As if all Attempts about the
former were in vain without resolvednesse in the later.

And who are we that we should pretend to be the only Men of Gods Counsel?
or that the secret of the Lord is with us only? or that we should chide or
smite our dissenting Brethren as Zedekiah did Micaiah, with an which way went
the Spirit of God from us to speak unto you? 2 Chronicles. 18.23.


Think thou that the Lord has revealed more in one point to thee, than to
another; and why not as well more to another in some other point than to thee?
why should thou then desire that every one should yield unto thee in every
thing?

Nay who is there of you that in every thing would be bound to his own
Apprehensions and Opinions some years ago?

Nay, who that is any whit sensible of his own Ignorance (which who is not, is
of all men the most Ignorant, and therefore least fit to be followed) that
dares say that he has got away all the Truth from the Dissenters; that they,
or any of them are wholly wrong, and he and his Apprehensions wholly right?
does he not rather say, so judge I, at present, and so I do; but if you show
me a clearer light, or more excellent way, that I shall, by the grace of God,
follow.

Blessed be the Lord in things most needful, we have Faith; and certain
(though not full) knowledge; which if any, though an Angel from Heaven would
have from us, Gal. 1.8.
we may strive, and strive lawfully, Jer. 9.3.
showing our valor for the Truth; and contend, and contend earnestly; Jud. v.
3.
and rebuke, Tit. 1.13.
and rebuke ((...)) cuttingly; But oh! how woefully do we confound Matters of
Opinion with things of faith? and contend for tithing, etc. whilst we (almost)
let the weightier things, of the Gospel, go?

Christians, I would not have you prostitute your Principles to any under
Heaven, being first sure that they are Principles of the Doctrines of Christ,
wherein I warn you again that you be first sure; yet may you, in Humility,
prostrate your selves; And where you cannot prefer their way (whom you know to
be godly) prefer their persons and where you cannot conquer by clearness of
light, be sure you overcome your Antagonist by fervencie of Love; showing that
Divine Prowess which the World calls Cowardice, viz. Better is the slow to
anger, than the Mighty, Pro. 16.32.
and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City.

They say that London Bridge is built upon wool-sacks, and surely if there be
any passablenesse from the one side to the other of dissenting Saints, the
basis of such Bridge must be laid in that Lenity that James calls the meekness
of wisdom, Chap. 3.13.

Secondly, That there may be no Schism in the body of Christ, let the Members
have the same Care One for Another, 1 Cor. 12.25. And look not every man on his
own things, but every man on the things of others, Phil. 2.4. Let each burn
when other is offended, 2 Cor. 11.29. Let each promote and rejoice in others
Good. 1 Cor 12.26. so shall you keep extinct those sparks of jealousy that are
usually the first kindlers of the flames of Contention.

Lastly; In opposition to Satan's Dividing Design, Study, O Saints! Uniting
Principles. Yea let the necessity of Unity be one of the prime Principles you
study.

Indeed the Pleasantness and beauty of this Concord is most worthy your study,
which the Psalmist calls Others (whilst himself breaks out into the admiration
of it) to behold Psa. 133.1. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity. The Hebrew has an Emphasis even together.

But, to the Psalmists Quam bonum? Quam jucundum? Let me add Quam
necessarium? Christians, Contemplate the necessity of Unity, that may force you
thereunto, if its beauty do not Ravish you.

Its Necessity in respect of your Calling which is unto Peace, 1 Cor. 7.15. And
of Gods Command, Be at Peace amongst your selves, 1 These. 5.13. In respect of
your expectation of the accomplishment of many most sweet promises (such as
that Isai. 11.13. and 66.12.) And its natural Connection to the promises even
of love and Peace from God himself, 2 Cor. 11.13. Be of one mind, live in
Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Its necessity as a
Token to others that you are Citizens of SALEM and his Disciples Joh. 13.35.
who has said, all thy children shall be TAUGHT of God, and great shall be
the PEACE of thy Children, Isay. 54.15. Its Necessity as a Conviction unto
others, that the Gospel is a Gospel not of Discord, but of PEACE, Ephesians. 6.15.
and that God is the Author not of Confusion, but of PEACE in all the Churches
of the Saints 1 Cor. 14.33. and finally, Its necessity as an Evidence to your
selves, that the PEACE of God rules in your hearts and that, notwithstanding
your Imperfections, you can yet find that you have, put on Charity which is the
bond of perfection, Col. 3.14, 15. and seeing that you love one another not in
word but in truth and in deed, may hereby know that you are of the truth and
assure your hearts before God, 1 Jo. 3.18.19. But If a man say, I love God, and
hates his brother; he is a Liar, for he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20.

It is not of absolute necessity, however eager you may be for one or other;
It is not, I say, indispensably necessary to your going to Heaven, that you be
Presbyterians, Congregational, etc. But your living in love is necessary; If
any shall conclude that another, that is none of his party, is therefore none
of Christ's Body; If that man himself make a shift to get to Heaven, and there
meet the other; I dare say it will not there go against his conscience to call
him Brother. Whosoever then is right or wrong in point of Judgment; sure I am
that every one is wrong that is not right in point of Love; for Love that
works no ill to its Neighbor, is the fullfilling of the Law, Romans 13.11.

You must therefore be of one heart, where you cannot be of one mind, which
that you may be, know;

That it is not possible for Saints to differ in so great things as wherein
they agree, yea wherein they must needs agree, or cannot be Saints. In
Fundamentalls they agree; in Circumstantialls they differ; It may be they
differ in Paul or Cephas, but they agree in Christ.

Their Body is One, their Spirit One, their Hope One, their Lord One, their
Faith One, their Baptism (at least that of the Spirit, and with fire) One,
their God and Father, One; who is above them, and through them all, and in them
all, Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6.

And now in final opposition to Satan's Dividing Design, be sure you add to
the study of uniting Principles, your utmost Endeavors after union.

O! Let not your practices in this contradict your prayers; I persuade my self
there is no man, that knows what prayer means, but prays to this effect, that
God would send forth an healing Spirit; but where is the Magistrate, the
Minister, the Christian that is an Healer indeed? Seek Peace and ensue it,
says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.11. joining both these together, which we, it
seems, are too prone to put asunder. Do we then seek Peace by our Prayers? let
us ensue it by endeavor. Do we beg the coming of the Kingdom of Christ? let
us approve our selves to be not faint well-wishers thereunto, but industrious
in the promotion thereof, as much as in us lies, of the increase of the Peace
of which, Isa. 9.7.
there shall be no end.

Christians, you see that you agree together in the most, and the greatest, and
best things, And therefore get together, and pray together, and communicate
together in what you may, if you cannot in all things.

And be sure you do not differ wherein you agree; or fall out for Words, where
in things you accord; or for Will, whereas you agree in Judgment.

But if any man (that is honest) be indeed otherwise minded (then thou art,
wherein thou art right) God shall reveal even this unto him, Phil. 3.15.
Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the some Rule,
let us mind the same thing, verse 16.

Oh! What a Nurse to Union is Christian Communion? Satan is more aware of this
than we; hence it is that he so earnestly endeavors that we should forsake
the Assembling of our selves together, and that the manner of some is, as he
would have it, Heb. 10.25.

It may be by that time differing Saints have gone a mile together, they may
go two. And though two cannot well walk together except they be reconciled,
yet except they come together, how should they be reconciled? And Oh! how
sweetly have I seen and felt Saints of differing apprehensions, as to some
things in Discipline, when One in Duty, inter-mingle their very souls, whilst
they have inter-mingled their Prayers? And what wonder? since there is but one
prayer-making spirit in them all.

Variance is an hindrance, as Peter observes, unto joint Prayer; 1 Pet. 3.7.
And why may not joint-prayer be as well an healer of variance? I verily think
it is scarce possible for two that are truly gracious, though in opinion
various, to set themselves to pray together, but they must needs love together,
which love will last when the prayer is ended. If Saints that complain most of
one another, and strave most when they are asunder, would but complain together
to the Lord of themselves, and strive together in Prayer; Romans 15.30.
these latter and better Complainings and strivings would be of far more
force to put out the other, then the Sun is of, to put out the fire.

But alas! Instead of taking this course, have we not rather been watching for
one another haltings, while God has been waiting for all our healings? God
has spared us, but we have not spared one another. God has had patience with
us, but we have not been patient toward each other: and has taken us at the
best, when we have been taking one another at the worst.

But is it not enough, and too much, that the World envies us, and the Wicked
vex us? Oh! when shall it once be, that the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and
the adversaries of Judah be cut off, Isa. 11.13.
that Ephraim shall no more envy Judah, nor Judah any more vex Ephraim.

That this Day may come,

Come Lord Jesus; yea, come quickly.

FINIS.
Reader, The Principal errat's that occur are these.
ERRATA.

PAge 2. Line 7. for put r. up, p. 77. fo paroxisme r. paroxysm.

Some few mis-pointings there are, that may favorably be passed over, as not
much hindering the sense.

There is extant by the same Author,
A Scripture-Map of the Wilderness of Sin, and way to Canaan, or the Sinners
way to the Saints Rest, largely discovering the lost estate of sinners. And the
necessity of Leaning upon Christ alone as a Savior.

Being the brief sum of 64 Lecture-Sermons preached at Sudbury in Suffolk,
upon Cant. 8.5.


