THE Tears of ROME: Or the Despair of the POPE For the Ill Success of the PLOT.
In a DIALOGUE between the Pope, the Devil, the Jesuit Ignatius, and the
Cardinal Barbarin.
The Pope. REally Master Devil, I don't know what Name I must give you at this
time; for whereas formerly you were the strong upholder of our Reign, now it
seems that you are the destroyer of it. You made me hope that I should recover
my dear England, if I would but send one of those Light Thunders, that they
call Excommunication, but they prove but brutish, and did as an Arrow sent
against a Marble-Wall; and so unless you take better Measures, I am afraid I
shall be bound to leave your Worship, for to go unto those naked Churches of
the Presbyterians, wherein they do serve God only, without any mention of yours.


The Devil. Nay, my dear Colleague and Brother, don't run so fast, and believe
that I have more than one way to be as good as my word: Hac non Successit, alia
tentandum est via. But I remember I must thank ye for those sweet
Burnt-Sacrifices of your Children lately Canonized at Tyburn: No Rost-Beef was
ever of better taste, and my Nostrils have been Corked by me for to keep the
Smell of it. Now as for the business, I Will tell thee what I think, you must
send our Dear Sister Discordia for to set them all by the Ears; and do but say
you have got the best of the Noblemen, then it will be an easy thing to undo
them all, when you have deprived them of the best Pillars of their Religion and
Kingdom. This is indeed the best Advice I can give you; and for that, send some
of your Jesuits, make them turn their Religion, if you will, and become of
those Proselytes that go to Church, for to get a supply from it; and to accuse
and speak the most rashly of all those Heretics of the best Men of the Land,
that will be the way indeed.


The Jesuit Ignatius. Most Dear and Dreadful Sovereign, of all the Basest
Deeds that ever were, pray pardon me, if I tell your half-Divinity, and whole
Unworthiness, that I cannot abide any longer Master Devil his talk, that does
never nothing but at my Charges; yes I Will tell it, even if it should cost me
some stripes obove what is due to me; you never made any step to the worldly
and dark Empire, but what was signed with the Blood of my Children. It Is true,
you flatter me with the name of Martyr's Father and Patriarch; but let me tell
you, that all that smoke of honor is no fire for to make the Pot boil; and
unless you provide to it, I Will send no more Missionaries, I mean Emissaries:
And if you have a mind to Conquer England, you shall go your self to try,
Whether London's Fire is not hotter than your Phanatical Purgatory's Flames.


The Cardinal Barberini. Most high and mighty Devil, and you the second King of
Darkness, I must confess to you, I am much moved with the Jesuit's Reasons; and
my sense therein is, that we have lost much in the Fathers Whitebread,
Harcourt, and the rest; for they were well bred in any kind of Lie, Mental
Restrictions, and high Murderers, ready to do any kind of Mischief: wherefore
I conclude that they must have the darkest room of Hell, and be carried on the
Nero's, Domitian's, Caligula's Banks. And that if there be any other Order of
mischievous Monsters, they ought to be set in, but with this grand Prerogative,
to be given to no others, of everlasting Enemies of Mankind, Murderers of
Kings, the Popes only Preservers, Pillars of Hell, and Minions of the Devil.
And as for the living, they ought to enjoy all the Privileges they can wish;
such as are, to Burn, Violate, Poison and undo Princes whomsoever, Houses,
Churches, Maids and Women, or any one of what State, Province and Kingdom they
be, that ever displeased them any way, and under whatever Justice, or Reason,
or Pretense of it.


The Devil. Though that was never used since my Reign, yet in consideration of
London burnt, of the great Massacre of Ireland, of the great Feast of St.
Bartholomew, of the Murder of the two Henry's of France, and of the never to
be forgotten Whitebread and Harcourt, I will part with my Authority, and
release unto them the Power I have of doing any mischief; and I declare
publicly, that I do resign my Devilship unto the Jesuits, give them power to
Hurt, Kill, undo whatever they please upon Earth, Sea, Air and Hell; and I do
engage my Honor, in the word of an honest Devil, that I will never recall this
Privilege.


The Pope. As for me, I leave to their honest direction the use of my Keys, and
even of the Sword; and do approve all whatever Mischiefs they have done, or
ever shall do, and declare for Heretics and Rebellious, all those that will
oppose 'em, or any way disturb 'em from their honest practices; declaring, that
they have never done any thing, or never shall do, but for my half Godheads
Service, Honor and profit of our Church, The Whore of Babylon. And as for the
Holy League against England, I do declare it was by my Order, Consent, and at
my Request, that the blessed Martyrs, Knighted at Tyburne upon a wooden Horse,
went into England, like as Judith or Jael, for to kill that Holofernes or
Sisera, Charles, whom they call, as indeed he is in spite of my teeth, King
and Lawful Monarch of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith. Which Title indeed was given him by my Predecessors, though it was
after his Parliament had bestowed it on him, for good Reasons, a good while
before. And I do farther promise in a Popes word, that I Will cause the Memory of
these Martyrs to be honored throughout all Christendom, with a double Feast
in Pontificalibus, as of Virgins and Martyrs; and at the High-Mass it shall be
sung, instead of Glory be in Heaven to God, Glory, Honor, and Money be given
to the Jesuits, and upon Earth, Poverty and Misery to the Men of good will,
with an everlasting Excommunication of all those Heretics that will any way
defend themselves from their Robbery; for it was agreed, Clave non errante.


Ignatius. I do return my hearty thanks unto your Holiness for this great
favor, and I do bind my self, and mine for ever, to pursue, as they have begun
to do, any good Deed for you; that is, in plain English, to Kill, Murder, and
the like, of those five Labors of our Hercules, James Clement Henry the
Third's Murderer, Father Burgoin and Ravilliac the Extirpator of our Enemy
Henry, they call the great, Grandfather of this Charles of England King; and
that I swear upon the most Holy, after you, Sacrament, and the Holy Ashes of my
dear Children Whitebread and Harcourt; and so I pray your Devilship to help me.


FINIS.

