A Brief Enquiry Whether they who ASSERT, And they who DENY, THE Divinity OF
OUR LORD Jesus Christ, May have Communion together at the Lords Table.

By JOSEPH TAILOR.

Therefore thus says the Lord, if thou return, then will I bring thee again,
and thou shall stand before me: And if thou take forth the precious from the
vile, thou shall be as my Mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not thou
to them, Jer. 15.19. London, Printed in the Year, School.

To the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved Brethren,
HOW displeasing is it to him, who walks in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1. to see his Churches, either corrupted, or divided, to
find his Body either defiled, or torn. Christ is the Head, and we are the
Members of his Body, and as the Purity of the Head, calls for the greatest
Purity in the Body, so the Oneness of the Body, requires the strictest Union
among the Members; 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one Bread, and one Body,
for we are all Partakers of that one Bread. Such cannot be Members of the Body
who do not hold the Head: Col. 2.19. From which all the Body by Joints and
Bands, having Nourishment ministered and knit together increases with the
increase of God. And such cease to be Members who make a Schism in the Body, it
behooves the Churches of Christ, therefore to take great heed to avoid both
these Evils.

The desire of Unity with all that call upon the Name of the Lord in Truth, put
me on the serious Consideration (among other Things) whether Persons who
believe, or disbelieve the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to have
Communion together as Members of the same Body, and here you have the result of
my Thoughts, with the Reasons, wherefore I believe they ought not.

I have no personal Prejudice against any, it is only the Glory of God, the
Honor of Jesus Christ, and the Purity of the Churches that has engaged me in
this Work, and I cannot conceive how any who believes Jesus Christ to be God
of the same Essence with his Father, can account the denial of his Deity a
small Thing: Is it a small Thing to take Christ from his Throne, his Crown from
his Head, and his Royal Scepter out of his Hand? To deny him that Nature
without which you believe he could not be a Savior; nor the Object of Faith
and Trust which gave all the value to his Sufferings, that made the Offering up
of his Humane Nature, Ephesians. 5.2. An Offering and a Sacrifice to God, of a sweet
smelling Savor: Whereby his Justice was satisfied, and his Law answered; if he
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, what robbery will he account it in
such who make him no more than a Man. And is it a sign of Love to Christ, to
hold the most intimate Communion with such who having stripped Him of His Royal
Ornaments, put a Crown of Thorns on his Head, a gorgeous Robe on his Body, a
Reed in his Hand, and then Salute him with Hail King of the Jews: For what is
it less to give him all the Titles and Characters of God, and yet deny Him his
Nature. It is no Argument to say they do it ignorantly, for so did the Jews
when they crucified Christ, 1 Cor. 2.8. For if they had known, they would not
have Crucified the Lord of Glory. And therefore, though we are to Pity and Pray
for them, yet we are not to embrance and receive them into our Communion.

On the other Hand, there is nothing more desirable in the Churches of Christ
than Peace and Unity, it is a Blessing to be prayed for and labored after
Night and Day, Psalm 133.1. How good and how pleasant, is it for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity. For sweetness, v. 2. It is like the precious Ointment
upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aarons Beard, that went down
to the Skirts of his Garments. For Profit, v 3. It is as the Dew of Hermon, and
as the Dew that descended on the Mountains of Zion; and there the Lord commands
his Blessing, even Life for evermore.

There he will be graciously present, there he will dwell, and there he will
dispense the choicest of his Favors: But this Unity that is so good, and so
pleasant is among Brethren among such who believe in, exalt, and glorify, the
same God the Father, the same Lord Jesus Christ, and the same Holy Spirit.

Peace and Truth must be joined together: For that is not the Peace of God,
which is purchased with the loss of Truth, we are obliged to take as much Care
that we have Union only with the faithful: As to preserve among them the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. I hope I can truly say, I write
only for Truth, and shall be so far from being displeased at the disproof of my
Arguments, as thankfully to acknowledge my mistake, and be one of the first as
shall give them, I now write against, the right Hand of Fellowship: But in the
mean Time, for the Reasons herein mentioned, I must entreat they who believe
their Savior is God by Nature, to be concerned for his Glory, to be consistent
with their own Principles, and not have Communion with such that profess the
contrary, and use all due means to recover such who are seduced, by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6. Let the Exhortation of our Lord be diligently hearkened to. Have Salt in
your selves, and Peace one with another, Mark 9.50. And of the Apostle,
Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; for you are
one Body, and have one Spirit, and are called in one Hope of your Calling; you
have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. The great design of
Satan is to divide you, which he endeavors to effect by sowing Seeds of
Discord about lesser Matters, and stirring up such who cause Divisions and
Offenses contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, Romans 16.17. who are to be marked,
there is nothing can weaken our Hands more than Discord, nor strengthen them
more than Unity; hereby is the Father gloryfied, the Son honored, the Gospel
spread, and the Churches Edified.

There are many Things about which the dear Children of God do differ in their
Judgments, and will do whilst they are on this side the Grave, for we know but
in part, they have not the same degrees of Light; and therefore are not of the
same mind in all Things; but their differences are only about such Things which
they may believe, or disbelieve and yet hold the Head, they agree in the great
and necessary Doctrines of Salvation, in the Foundation Principles of the
Christian Religion, and Things of lesser moment I humbly conceive should make
no difference among the Churches of Christ, nor cause them to withdraw their
Affections, or Communion from each other; for says the Apostle (respecting
these things) Phil. 3.15, 16. If any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you, nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same Thing. The strong must bear the Infirmities
of the weak, the Consciences of none are to be imposed upon, either to Practice
what they do not, or to omit what they do believe to be their Duty, and where
their differences are about such Things which are not essential, there ought to
be Christian Charity and tenderness toward one another, in Order to this
Unity; therefore the Apostle exhorts to lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love, Ephesians. 4.2. But this Christian
Charity must not be abused, and the Line stretched to reach those who profess
such Principles, which root up the Foundations thereof. But whilst we are
separating from these let us unite together in entire Affection, and close
Communion among our selves not suffering the lesser Points, about which we may
have different Apprehensions to break the bond of our Union, that so we may as
one Man set our Hearts, our Hands, and Shoulders, to the Work of God amongst
us, which is the earnest Desire and Prayer of

Yours in Christ Jesus J. T.

A Brief Enquiry into the Nature of that Article of the Christian Faith, Viz.
That Jesus Christ was Truly GOD from Eternity, and in Time Assumed Humane
Nature, and so is both GOD and MAN in One Person.
THe Enemies to this Truth are many and various, and their great Endeavors are
to Proselyte; but when that cannot be done, they labor to keep the Orthodox in
Church Communion with themselves, by representing this Doctrine as a thing
indifferent, That it is not a Principle of such Consequence, for which to leave
Communion; but what may be believed or disbeliev'd without danger: That it is a
Mysterious Point, and the knowledge of such Mysteries can neither be necessary
to Salvation or Church Communion.

The Design of this Discourse therefore is to represent the Nature of this
Principle, and put it in its true Light. Wherein I shall offer to show that it
is a Principle of such a Nature, that they who assert, and they who deny,
believe and dis-believe it, ought not to have Communion together, which
evidently appears from the Reasons following.

1. It is a Principle of that Consequence, That either they who believe it, or
they that disbelieve it must be Idolaters; and they must esteem each other
either guilty of Blasphemy or Idolatry. We all know there is an infinite
distance between Creator and Creature; between God and the highest Creature
whatsoever. Idolatry is to give Divine Honor and Worship to a Creature only;
it is not Idolatry only to give Divine Adoration to a mean Creature, but any
Creature: They who Adore the Stars, are not less Idolaters than they who Adore
Wood and Stone; they who adore the Angles are not less Idolaters than they who
adore the Stars: Because that Idolatry consists not in rendering Divine Honor
to a mean Creature, but simply in rendering it to a Creature; for, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, Matt. 4.10 Deuteronomy. 6.13
and him only shall thou serve. Now if Christ be not God, such as give him
Divine Honor can be no less than Idolaters; because they give Divine Honor to
a Creature only, and they who believe he is not God, and yet worship him, are
guilty of Formal Idolatry, because they give Divine Honor to one whom they
believe to be a Creature only.

And, as they who deny this Principle, cannot but esteem such Idolaters that
worship him, as the most high God that is not so: So they who assert it, cannot
but account it Blasphemy in them, to make him that is God from Eternity no more
then a Creature, to rob Christ of his Deity, and all that Worship that is due
to him as God, they that love the Lord Jesus cannot bear this, and how can the
others if they have any Religion, bear to see the Glory due to God given to a
Creature only. It is a Principle therefore of great Importance. For Idolatry is
a crime that violates the express Law of God, Matt. 4.10
and is Opposite to the two great ends of Religion. viz. The Glory of God, and
our own Salvation.

1. The glory of God: Because it is a taking away of his Glory and giving it to
another, contrary to Isa. 42.8.

2. To the Salvation of Men: for the Spirit of God expressly declares, That
Idolaters shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9.

If Jesus Christ be of the same Essence with his Father, then he ought to be
adored in the same manner with him, and they cannot without impiety refuse to
acknowledge him as such. If he is not, we cannot without Idolatry confound him
with the most High God. So that the actions are inevitably either Idolatry, or
gross Impiety. It being then such a Principle that either we are Idolaters, or
not Idolaters, and they Blasphemers or not Blasphemers, according to the
Falsity or Truth of it. Persons of both Opinions ought not to have Communion
together.

Secondly, It is a principle of that Consequence as they who deny it, deny the
Person of the Son of God, and thereupon deny the true Christ, and bring another
in his stead: so that they believe in different Objects. This is evident, for
if the Person of Christ consists of the Divine and Humane Nature, and this is
the whole of his Person, then they who deny both Natures in Christ: as is
manifestly the Opinion of some, or those that deny his Godhead only, as the
Socinians, they necessarily deny the Person of Christ.

Who is the Person, for both believe in him, that was born of the Virgin Mary,
that suffered under Pontius Pilate, was dead and buried, etc. But what is the
Person, and therefore it is alleged they do not deny the Person of Christ, and
bring another in his Stead.

Who he is, for he believes it is he that made Heaven and Earth, etc. but what
he is, but notwithstanding, it is most evident, that he which denies those
Perfections which are Essential to the Godhead must deny God: as to instance,
without holiness he cannot be God, it is Essential to his Nature, therefore he
that denies he is Holy, denies he is God: in like manner we assert, The
Divine Nature is Essential to the Person of Christ, without that he cannot be
the Immanuel, the Mediator between God and Man; he could not make Satisfaction
to Divine Justice, nor answer the Demands of the Law, nor Work out Salvation
for us: It is evident therefore, that as he who denies the Nature of God
denies God: So he that denies the Natures of Christ denies his Person, yea
it is better, as the Reverend Mr. Charnock on the Attributes, page 496.
Charnock says, to deny there is a God, than to deny his Perfections: as
Plutarch had rather it should be said, there never was such a Man as Plutarch,
than it should be said he was a vile Man, or a base Fellow; So it is worse to
deny what is Essential to Christ, than to deny there ever was such an one; it
it better to say there never was any Christ, any Messiah, than to deny he was
God; for, as it will be seen in the sequel, this is but to make him an Impostor
and a Deceiver. The Socinians assert, That Christ was that Man whom God
anointed; certainly therefore they would account such who should deny he was a
Man anointed by God, to Deny Christ; and yet they might at the same time
answer, We disagree not about the Person of Christ; for we both believe its He
that was born of the Virgin Mary, etc. From whence it is plain, there is
nothing in the Objection, but they who deny the Natures of Christ, deny his
Person, and hereby the true Object of the Christian Faith is removed, viz.
Immanuel, or God-Man, in one Person. This Object we are to believe in, for
Eternal Life and Salvation; but he that denies He is God-Man removes that
Object; and he which asserts He is of another Nature, brings in another Object
in his Room: For Faith depends not upon an empty Name, but has respect to the
Nature of the Person believed in.

There can be no Act without an Object, the Object of our Faith is not the bare
Name, but the Nature of the Person believed in: No Man can be said to believe
in God, that knows nothing of his Nature, Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, viz. The Nature of God
signified by his Name. In like manner, No Man can be said to believe in Christ
that denies his Nature. From whence it is evident, That they who deny, and they
who assert this Principle, do not believe in the same Person. The Christ of God
is Immanuel, God-man. The Eutychians, the Arians, the Socinians, Christ is not
God-Man. Therefore the Christ they worship is not the Christ of God. And can
they walk together that disagree about the Object of their Faith? Can any have
Communion with them who deny the true Christ, and bring another in his Room?
Hereupon

Thirdly, It is a Principle of that Importance, That a Man cannot be said to be
a true Believer in Jesus Christ that denies it; For if there can be no Act of
Faith without the true Object of Faith, and this is Jesus Christ the Son of
God, or the Immanuel God with us, then they who believe the contrary, wanting
the Object of Faith viz. The true Christ, they have no Faith in him, and so are
yet Unbelievers, and therefore should remember that Text, John 3.18. He that
believes on him, is not condemned: But he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. By the Name of God in Scripture his essential Perfections are signified,
Exodus 34.5, 6. and if we thus understand the Name of Christ in the Text, they
are yet unbelievers, that believe not his Divine Nature, and the Perfections
thereof, or which is all one, that Record which God has given of him, which
is, 1 John 5.10.
that as he has given Eternal Life so that Eternal life is in his Son; or as
mentioned v. 20. That he is True God and Eternal Life. And a like Argument they
have against us, and therefore it is very plain there can be no Communion
together for we must not have Communion with Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6.14.

Fourthly, Hereupon likewise, it is a Principle of such a Nature as they who
deny it, deny the Lord that hought them, as the False Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1. By
denying the Lord here, it cannot be supposed, the Apostle means a direct
denying of Jesus Christ to be the Messiah: Because,

First, They should be teachers among them, which they could not be, if they
openly denied Christ.

Secondly, They should do it privily, and this would be an open denial.

Thirdly, They did it by those damnable Heresies which they privily brought in;
they should bring in such Heresies that should deny the Lord that bought them,
and what Heresy can there be that more plainly denies the Lord, than that
which denies what he is: He that denies I am of the nature of Man, certainly
denies me who am a Man; and so, he that denies Christ is of the Nature of God,
certainly denies that Lord who is God.

If the Person of Christ consists of the Divine and Humane Nature then he which
denies the Natures denies the Person; for if that Name belongs to a Person of
such Natures, then take away the Natures, and you leave only an empty Name, a
Name of nothing, it is in vain therefore to say, that both own Jesus Christ.
They who deny the Natures of Christ, deny his Person, and they who deny his
Person deny the Lord that bought them, and therefore are Incommunicable.

Sixthly, This Principle is that Rock upon which Christ has built his Church.
Peter makes his Confession of Christ, Matthew. 16.15, 19, 17, 18.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; And our Lord says, upon this Rock
will I build my Church; Whosoever therefore denies this Principle, cannot be
founded on that Rock which the Church of Christ is built upon; and
consequently, can be no Member of it.

That Christ is the Son of the living God.

Answer, It is impossible: For if we don't understand the same thing by it, we
have not the same Faith, whilst one asserts by the Son of God, is meant his
Divine Nature, and the other, that by it, is meant Humane Nature only: Both
cannot believe the Truth contained in this Proposition, and each Party must
suppose the other to deny that Rock upon which Christ has built his Church,
and therefore cannot be Members thereof.

Seventhly, It is a Principle of such Consequence that the Christian Religion
stands or falls with it. As there is but one God, so there can be but one true
Religion. Now There are three Religions in the World, each of which plead to be
the true Religion, viz. The Mohammedan, the Jewish, and the Christian. I shall
therefore, following Monsieur Abbadie in his French Treatise of the Divinity
of our Lord Jesus Christ show,

First, That if Jesus Christ is not true God, of the same Essence with his
Father, That the Mohammedan Religion is preferable to the Christian, and Mahomet
was a greater Prophet than Christ.

Secondly, That if Jesus Christ is not true God, of the same Essence with his
Father, He was an Impostor and deceiver. The Jews did justly in sentencing of
him to Death for Blasphemy; They do well in maintaining the sentence of their
Sanhedrim, in rejecting of the Preaching of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ. That Christian Religion is Idolatry and Superstition; and the Messiah
is not yet come.

First, If Jesus Christ is not true God etc. the Mohammedan Religion is
preferable to the Christian, and Mahomet was a greater Prophet than Jesus
Christ And the Reason is this, because the Christian Religion brings in
Idolatry, and the Mohammedan abolishes it.

For if Jesus Christ be a Creature only (as he must be if he be not of the
Essence of God) then that Religion that teaches Divine Adoration ought to be
given to him (as is plain this does) brings in Idolatry, and they who deny his
Deity cannot but believe we are Idolaters. Whereas the Mohammedan Religion
denies a Trinity, denies Christ to be God, teaches he ought not to be
worshipped; Now if these things are true, the Mohammedan Religion is the best,
for that Exalts God in the Throne, and puts Jesus Christ in his due place viz.
in the rank of Creatures only; whereas the Christian Religion does the direct
contrary, as will be proved in the following Discourse.





If Mahomet has rid the World of Christian Idolatry (for so is the worship of
Jesus Christ if he is not God) we ask by what Spirit he did this great Work; by
the Spirit of God, or by the Spirit of the devil? if it be by the Spirit of God
then how is he an Imposter? And how can it be supposed so great a thing should
be done by the Spirit of the Devil? It is a Rule Christ gives in his Gospel to
know Teachers by their Fruits, Matt. 7.16
and if Christ be not God how can we then but have a great Opinion of Mahomet,
and own him for a great Prophet of God? For he has taught men not to confound
the Sovereign Being with a Creature, and has delivered many Nations for many
Ages from this Idolatry, and what is greater and more Holy than such a Design?
What can bespeak a Man more inspired of God, than to undertake and be so
successful in such a Work; to disperse the darkness of this profound
Superstition from so great a part of the Universe. Surely (if this were true,
as they must acknowledge) he was a very great Prophet and all that he taught
ought to be owned as Divine. Yea, hence it will appear that he is a greater
Prophet than all the Prophets under the Law; yea, that he is preferable to
Jesus Christ. The Prophets under the Law they spoke only to the People of
Israel; But Mahomet has spoken to the most Considerable part of the Universe;
they succeeded one another because they could not live long enough to instruct
the People in different Ages; he needed no Companion, nor any Successor to
banish Idolatry; the Ancient Prophets worked many Miracles to ruin Idolatry:
But Mahomet has ruined it without a Miracle; yea if that Principle is true
that Jesus Christ was no more than a Man, Mahomet is preferable to Christ
himself, which will appear if you consider either his Doctrine or the Success
of his Ministry, If you consider the latter, Jesus Christ has spread his
Doctrine in the Universe, but it has had no other effect than to pull down one
piece of superstition and to set up another in its place; to pull down Pagan
Idolatry, and to set up Christian Idolatry: for the same Gospel as forbade them
to worship Pagan Idols, taught them to worship Jesus Christ: But Mahomet has
established his Religion upon firm Foundations, and has taken far wiser
Methods, that Idolatry should not return after it was once destroyed. And if we
consider his Doctrine (if Christ is not God) we shall find that Jesus Christ
has a vast disadvantage to Mahomet, the Doctrine of Mahomet has a natural
Character which is opposed to Idolatry, and it is not so of Jesus Christ, if
you consider his Language spoken by himself or his Apostles. We shall compare
the Language of Christ and of Mahomet together, and it will plainly appear
(upon this Supposition) that Mahomet was much wiser and better than Jesus
Christ. Christ tells us by himself and servants, That he was before John
Baptist, that he was before Abraham, before the making of the World, that he is
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the Last: That he
was in the beginning with God, that he was God in the beginning, That all
things were made by him and without him nothing was made that was made; That he
in the beginning laid the foundations of the Earth and the Heavens are the work
of his Hands. And that none might doubt of the sense in which these Expressions
are used, he, and his Disciples, which were inspired by his Spirit, did apply
to him such Scriptures of the Prophets which are only applicable to the most
High God. 1 Kings 8.39.
The Prophet says, God only knows the hearts of the Sons of Men. Jesus Christ
attributes this glorious Title to himself, that he might beget to himself the
Fear and Adoration of Men. Rev. 2.23.
And all the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the reins and
hearts, and I will give unto every one of you according to your works. It is
said in the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.
According to the Exposition of Christ, Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Heb. 1.6.
And the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, That when God brought
his Son into the World he said, Let all the Angels of God worship him. etc. Now
compare the Language of Mahomet with this, and it will readily appear, if
Christ is not God, Mahomet had greater Truth, Wisdom, and Charity to the Souls
of Men, and had greater Care of and Zeal for the Glory of God than Jesus
Christ, who when he speaks either by himself or his Disciples, makes himself
One with the most High God, both speaking of himself (as has been instanced)
such things as can agree to none but the Supreme Being, and applying such
Scriptures as can agree to none else. Mahomet does not thus; he declares almost
in every Page of his Alcoran, That there is no other but the Eternal Father,
which is God; he says of himself, he is a Prophet, a Man inspired by God, but
he would not pass for God; he acknowledges Jesus Christ was sent from God: But
he would not have him have the Name of God, nor of the Son of God; his Words
are not so obscure, nor equivocal. He says plainly, That they are Unbelievers
and Infidels who say that the Son of Mary is God; he says the Christians are
Infidels, making Three Gods when there is but One, and he would that Men should
call upon the Creator of Heaven and Earth, which made the Light, and the
Darkness. Now I say, if Christ was not God, Mahomet spoke more truly and
plainly than Christ. He had more Wisdom, and took more Care, not to entangle
the Souls of Men; he was more zealous of the Glory of God, and would not
Attribute to himself the Names and Nature of GOD as Christ did. These are such
Consequences as our hearts abhor, as full of Blasphemy; but they are such as we
must be constrained to receive for Truth, if Jesus Christ is not of the same
Essence with his Father.

2. If Christ is not true God, of the same Essence with his Father, then he was
an Imposter, his Disciples Deceivers, the Jewish Sanhedrim did justly in
sentencing him to Death for Blasphemy, the Jews do well in maintaining that
Sentence; in rejecting the Preaching of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ.
That Christian Religion is a Cheat, it is Superstition and Idolatry, and the
Messiah is not yet come. And certainly if this be proved true, all will allow
with me, that this Principle is of such a consequence that they who assert, and
they who deny it, ought not to have Communion together.

In order to the Proof of what is asserted, I take it for granted, That none
will deny, the Jewish Sanhedrim (being a Council, of Gods own appointing, to
judge in Capital Matters relating to their own Tranquillity, either in Church or
State, to the Preservation of their Religion and Laws.) But that they had a
right to judge, to condemn, and to put to Death for Blasphemy. The only thing
therefore to prove is. That if Jesus Christ was not God, then he was a
Blasphemer, and they had reason to condemn him for Blasphemy; which appears in
what follows. It is Blasphemy for a mere Creature to call himself by those
Names that are proper only to the Divine Being, with the Names, to ascribe to
himself the Nature of God. And those Perfections which distinguish him from all
Creatures, to assert that he is equal with God, that he ought to have Divine
Homage and Adoration given him; And Lastly to ascribe those Scriptures of the
Old Testament to himself, which are spoken of none but the most High God. I
think none will vindicate such a Person from being a Blasphemer, and his
Disciples, who attribute these things to him, to be Idolaters. It remains then
only to prove, That he did these things, which is evident from the Writings of
his Disciples; before the proof of which I will only remark, that what his
Disciples asserted of him must be looked upon as asserted by himself, because
that they spoke as they were Inspired by his Spirit; it was one and the
same-Spirit that dwelt in both.

First, That the Name of God is given him, is beyond all Contradiction. John
20.28.

The great God, Tit. 2.13. Where the Learned note, that the Greek Article put
before the Great God, and which agrees to Savior also, is in the original a
certain Mark that these two Terms are understood of the same Person, and that
it is Jesus Christ who is called the Savior and great God both together. The
True God, Romans 9.5.
1 John 5.20. Yea, God above all Blessed for ever. The Mighty, Most Mighty,
Psalm. 45.3. Heb. 1.8. Yea Almighty is ascribed to him, Rev. 1.8.

Secondly, That the Incommunicable Names of God (viz. Such as can belong to
none but the Supreme Being) are ascribed to him is evident.

Jehovah is a Name only belonging to the most High God. Psalm. 83.18. Pray read
these Scriptures.
Thou whose name alone is Jehovah and this is attributed to Christ, if you
compare Isa. 6.1. with John 12.41, and Psalm. 102.25. with Heb. 1.10. Where
note, that Lord in these Texts, is Jehovah in the Original.

I am that I am, is an incommunicable Name of God, Exodus 3.14.
this Jesus Christ attributes to himself, John S. 58. He says not, before
Abraham was, I was, but before Abraham was I am. Which would not be sense if he
did not signify he was the [I am] before Abraham, and the significancy of that
Name, viz. Eternity and Immutability he claims to Himself, Rev. 1.8. From
whence it is evident he is of the same Essence, etc. Or he was a Blasphemer;
because no mere Creature can, without Blasphemy, ascribe these Names of the
most High God to himself.

2. With the Name, the Nature of God and the most distinguishing Characters
thereof, he claims to himself.

It is the highest Blasphemy for a mere Creature to claim Eternity: For nothing
can be Eternal but God. There can be but One Being, that never was made: But
Jesus Christ claims this incommunicable Perfection of the Godhead to himself,
and that in such Terms as the Father expresses his own Eternity. Isa. 43.6.
Thus says the Lord the King of Israel, I am the first and the last, and
besides me there is no God; and thus says Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.8. Chap. 2.8.
ver. 18.
I am the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, and which
was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Omnisciency is an incommunicable Property of the Divine Being, 1 Kings 8.39.
For thou, even thou, only know the Hearts of all the Children of Men: And
the same Jesus Christ says of himself, I am he which searches the Reins and
Hearts, Rev. 2.23. John 21.17.
And his Disciples ascribe this to him, Thou know all things; which must be
Blasphemy if he was not God.

Omnipresence belongs only to God, And yet this Christ claims to himself, Math
18.20. and Chap. 28.19. And asserts he was in Heaven, whilst he was on Earth,
John 3.13. which cannot be said of any Creature without manifest Impiety.

Omnipotency is an Attribute belonging only to the Supreme Being, and this is
spoken of Christ, John 5.19, 21. Phil. 3.21.

Immortality is so ascribed to Christ, as it is proper only to the Eternal God,
1 Timothy 6.16. who only has immortality dwelling in that light which no man can
approach unto. This can be only said of the Supreme Being. Jesus Christ is of
the same Essence therefore, or He is a Blasphemer: for it is He of whom this is
spoken, as plainly appears by the preceding Verse.

Immutability is an Attribute belonging only to God, it can only be said of
God, Jam. 1.17
In him is no variableness neither shadow of turning. And was he not God of the
same essence with the Father, what Blasphemy would it be to say, Heb. 13.8
Chap. 1.10.11.12.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. And Thou Lord, in the
beginning, have laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the Work
of thy Hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they shall wax old as
does a Garment, and as a Vesture shall thou fold them together but thou art the
same and thy Years shall not fail

Of what mere Creature can it be said, He is Eternal Life, without Blasphemy
yet of Jesus Christ is it said, This is the True God, 1 John 5.20.
and Eternal Life.

From all which nothing is more evident, that he is either True God, of the
same Essence with his Father, or he was a Blasphemer, and his Disciples
Idolaters: For either a mere Creature may assume all this without Blasphemy, or
else these things are not so; and certainly, we may as well deny the Light at
Noonday, as the clearness of this Evidence.

2. To strengthen this, Those works which are peculiar to the Deity, that none
did, or could do, but the Most High God, his Disciples ascribe to him and
positively assert he did them; which cannot be without Blasphemy, if he did
them not. It is God only Created the World; this was the distinguishing
Character of God in the Old Testament, that He made Heaven and Earth, And this
is beyond all contradiction ascribed to Jesus Christ, John 1.1, 2, 3.14. Col.
1.16. Heb. 1 10.
That all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made. That in the beginning he laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the works of his Hands.

It is the Almighty God only that Sustains this mighty Universe; all things are
upheld in being by the Word of his Power, and yet of Jesus Christ these words
are spoken Upholding all things by the word of his power: Heb. 1.3.
I ask what can be said greater of God than this, and what can be greater
Blasphemy, if he was a Creature only?

Yea, he assumes to himself the power of forgiving sins; Mat. 9.6.
of Quickening whom he will, of bestowing eternal life.

The Peculiar Character of SAVIOVR, Isa. 43.11. Chap. 41.21.
whereby the God of Israel is distinguished from all other Gods, he eminently
claims, I am the Lord and besides me there is no Savior. This is spoken on
purpose to beat men off from trusting in any other, as a Savior, but the God
of Israel; and this is ascribed to Christ in the most eminent manner. The
savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10 John 4.42. Romans
the Savior of the World, who is to be believed in and trusted in as such.

Fourthly, That you may be assured all this was spoken properly of him, the
Evangelists acquaint us he made himself equal with God, John 5.18. He said also
God was his Father, making himself equal with God. John 10.30. I and my Father
are one, whereupon the Jews took up Stones to stone him for Blaphemy, because
he being a Man made himself God. ver. 33. And least any should think it was
only the Jews mistake, the Apostle Paul assures us, That Jesus Christ thought
it no robbery to be equal with him. For he says without any manner of
hesitation, Phil. 2.6. that he was in the form of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God.

In Isa. 40.25. the Lord makes a challenge, to whom then will you liken me or
shall I be equal, says the Holy one. Heaven and Earth and all the Creatures in
it cannot be Compared with him, v. 17.18.
they are nothing, less than nothing and Vanity, But the Apostle Paul likens,
compares, and equals Jesus Christ to him, and lets us know, Jesus Christ
himself thought it no Robery to be equal to the most High God; who being in the
Form of God thought it no robery to be equal with God. It is the more to be
remark't, because it is the Apostle Paul that thus speaks, who above all the
Apostles exalts God, and debases the Creature. 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen Vessels, to the end that the excellency of
the Power may be of God, and not of us. Who very well knew, that Jesus Christ
was accused, of Blasphemy, and was Condemned, and Crucified for making himself
equal with God. Who also knew the Prophet Isaiah had asserted there was none to
be likened or compared with Him, and yet with the greatest assurance asserts,
He was in the Form of God, and was equal to him. Jesus Christ therefore is of
the same Essence with the Father, or he was the greatest of Blasphemers.

5. To put the Matter out of doubt, that all this was spoken in a true and
proper Sense, he requires Divine Adoration, and his Disciples assert, it is due
to him, and Divine Adoration cannot be given to the highest Creature without
Idolatry; it is most certain they which adore God, adore none but under that
Idea: But they gave Adoration to Jesus Christ. The Evangelists tell us, That at
his Birth he was adored; first by the Shepherds of Bethlehem, and then by the
Wise Men; and the Author to the Hebrews expressly tells us, Heb. 1.6.
That when he was brought into the World; God said, let all the Angels of God
Worship him. He required, John 5.23.
that Men should Honor the Son, as they honored the Father. That as they
believed in God, Chap. 14.1.
they should believe in him, and can there be Faith in Christ without Paying
Divine Homage to him? Romans 15.2.
In him shall the Gentiles trust. And a Curse is pronounced against trusting in
a Creature. Jer. 17.
Both outward and inward Worship is required to be given Him.

1. He requires we should Dedicate our selves to him, and therefore must be
Baptized in his Name; Matthew. 18.19.
whereby we are Devoted to Him.

2. Divine Invocation is given to him by his Disciples, Acts 7.59. 1 Cor. 1.2.

2. Divine Praises are offered up to him, Rev. 5.9. Chap. 7.9, 10. Chap. 11.15,
17.

4. He received Worship from the Leper, Mat. 6.2.

From his Disciples, Mat. 28.17. When they saw him they Worshipped him.

From the Mariners, Matthew. 14.33. This the Angel would not receive from John,
because he was a Creature only, but charges him to Worship God, Rev. 22.8, 9.
From whence one of these Three Things will follow, that either

1. The Angel was mistaken, his Charge to John needless, and his Direction to
Worship God Alone, in Vain. Or,

2. That Jesus Christ was God by Nature, and so Divine Worship belonged to him
(which is certainly the Truth.) Or,

2. He was an Impostor, and was guilty of Blasphemy in receiving that Worship
and Honor as belonged to God only.



Jesus Christ required that Honor as is due to God alone: For He required
Divine Adoration in Thought, in Word, and Deed.

1. In Thought, He Attributes to himself the Names and Nature of God, his
Eternity, Almighty Power, Immutability, etc. And for what End can this be, but
that we might think him to be the most High God.

2. In Word, For to what end does he take to himself the Names and Titles of
the most High God, but that we might call him by those Names, and speak of him
as he that made all Things, etc.

2. In Deed: And this appears, because he requires to be honored and loved
above all, that we should love him above all our Relations, Father, Mother,
Wife, and Children, etc. That we should give him not the Sacrifice of Oxen, of
Calves of a Year Old, etc. But of our Blood, he requires us to loose our Lives
for the Honor of his Name, to Sacrifice our selves, and all we have for his
Sake; whoever does this, must own him to be very God, because these are Duties
that are owing Only to the most High.

Objected, That he did declare to the World, that the Father is greater than
he, and therefore what has been said, ^s not to be understood in a proper and
litteral Sense, but in a figurative only.



Should a Minister of State take to himself the peculiar Titles of the King,
take the Name of Sovereign, stamp his Image on the Coin, ascribe to himself the
peculiar Glories of the Prince, and receive Homage, as such, would it excuse
him to say he still acknowledged the King to be greater than he.

Suppose Moses, when he came down from the Mount, with the Glory on his Face,
had called himself by the Names of God, Attributed to himself his Nature, and
required the People to give him Adoration. I ask, whether the People of Israel
ought not to have accounted him a Seducer, and rejected him as such, in as much
as he taught them it was a Law written with the Finger of God, Exodus 20. Thou
shall have no other Gods before me. In like manner the Jews were obliged to
reject Jesus Christ (if he were not of the Essence of his Father) when he
called himself by the Names of God, attributed to himself his Nature, and
required the People to give him Adoration, in as much as he taught them, Matthew.
4.10. Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him Only shall thou serve. It is
no excuse, to say these Things are spoken Hyperbolically and Figuratively, for
such Hyperbolies, and such Figures would be Impious and Wicked, and open a wide
door for Blasphemy, for why might not Peter or Paul ascribe these Things to
themselves, and what hinders any from attributing to themselves the Names, the
Natures, the Offices, and Works of Jesus Christ, if they may excuse themselves
after this Manner.

6. That these Things were spoken properly of Jesus Christ is beyond all
scruple Confirmed, in that those Scriptures of the Old Testament that are
applicable to none but the most High God, are ascribed to Him. Here I might
give you a large Catalogue, but it shall suffice to give some Instances,

The first is, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. In the Year that King Vzziah died, I saw also
Jehovah sitting upon a Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filled the
Temple. Ver. 2. Above it stood the Seraphims, etc. Ver. 3. And one cried unto
another, and said Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is
full of his Glory. Jehovah, the King, the Lord of Hosts, and Holy, Holy, Holy,
are peculiar Characters of the most High God, and none can without Blasphemy,
ascribe these to a mere Creature. But John the Evangelist applies these to
Jesus Christ, John 12.39, 40, 41. These Things said Isaiah, when he saw his
Glory and spoke of him. And the Things that are here mentioned, ver. 39, 40.
Isaiah says, when he had that Vision, ver. 9, 10.

Psalm 68.17, 18, 19. The Chariots of God are Twenty Thousand, even Thousands
of Angels: The Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the Holy Place, Ver. 18. Thou
have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity Captive: Thou have received
Gifts for Men; yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among
them, Ver. 19. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with his Benefits,
even the God of our Salvation, Selah. These are Characters belonging only to
the most High God. But this Text is expressly applied to Jesus Christ by the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.6, 9. Wherefore He says, when he ascended up on high, he
led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts to Men. Now He that ascended was He that
descended first into the lower Parts of the Earth, which was Jesus Christ.

Isa. 40. v. 3. The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the
way of the Lord, make straight in the Desert a high way for our God. Ver. 4.
Every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low;
and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain. Ver. 5. And
the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed, etc. Ver. 9. Say unto the Cities of
Judah, behold your God. Ver. 10. Behold the Lord will come with strong Hand,
and his Arm shall rule for him; behold his Reward is with him, and his Work
before him. Ver. 11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather
the Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with Young. Ver. 12. Who has measured the Waters in the hollow
of his Hand, and meeted out Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of
the Earth in a measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a
Balance, etc. These are without any difficulty the Characters of the most High
God, and the Evangelist plainly applies these to Christ, in making John Baptist
to be this Voice, John 1.23.
and Christ to be this Lord, of whom plainly all these are spoken, Luke 3.4, 5,
6. As it is written in the Book of the Words of Isaias the Prophet saying, the
Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
Paths straight, etc.

Isa. 35.4, 5, 6. Say to them that are of a fearful Heart, be strong, fear not,
behold your God will come with Vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will
come and save you, Ver. 5. Then the Eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the
Ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped. Ver. 6. Then shall the Lame Man leap as an
Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb sing: For in the Wilderness shall Waters break
out, and Streams in the Desert. Read Matthew. 15.4, 5. and you will see that
Christ makes a visible Application of this Scripture in the Answer, he gives to
the Disciples of John Baptist. Hereupon he declares himself to be the God of
Israel, the God of Vengeance, and Recompense, and the God of their Salvation.
All which are Titles given by this Scripture to the most High.

Isa. 8.13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread. Ver. 14. And he shall be for a Sanctuary, but for a
Stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of offense to hoth the Houses of Israel, for
a gin, and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. This Scripture that is
applicable to none but to the most High God, is applied to Christ, Luke 2.34.
Romans 9.33. and 1 Pet. 2.8. Hereupon His Disciples declares him to be the Lord
of Hosts himself, who is to be our fear and dread whom we are to sanctify, as
such, in our Hearts.

Have not I the Lord, and there is no God else beside me, a just God and a
Savior, there is none beside me, Ver. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all
the ends of the Earth, for I am God, and there is none else. Ver. 23. I have
sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness, and shall
not return, that unto me every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear. This
Scripture that contains so many distinguishing Characters of the most High God
is applied to Christ, Romans 14.9, 10, 11. For to this end Christ both died and
rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead, and of the Living.
Ver. 10. -- For we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Ver. 11.
For it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and
every Tongue shall confess to God. It is likewise applied to him, Phil. 2.10,
11. From whence it is evident, Jesus Christ is the Lord, and there is no God
else beside him, a just God and Savior, and none beside him. That all the ends
of the Earth are to look to him and be saved, for he is God and there is none
else. That he is the Object of his own Oath, that He swears by himself, because
he cannot swear by a greater.

Psalm 102.25. Of Old have thou laid the Foundation of the Earth: And the
Heavens are the Work of thy Hands. Ver. 26. They shall perish, but thou shall
endure, yea all of them shall wax old like a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed, Ver. 27. But thou art the same, and thy
Years shall have no end. Notwithstanding this Text is so peculiar to the
Supreme Being, distinguishing him from all that is not God; the Author to the
Hebrews, as has been Instanced, expressly ascribes it to Christ, Heb. 1.10. And
thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundations of the Earth, etc. Now I
say, it is very strange and surprising, that the Disciples of Christ (unless
they were the worst of Men) should make such Applications to Jesus Christ, if
he is not of the same Essence with the Father. And further, we cannot imagine
they would ascribe the peculiar Glories of the Divine Nature to him, if we
consider,

1. That the Light of Nature sufficiently taught them, that they ought not to
make Applications of those Things to a Creature, which belongs to the Creator,
exclusive of all Creatures.

2. If you respect them as taught in the Schools of the Prophets, this cannot
be imagined: Because there is nothing can equal the Circumspection of the
Prophets in this respect; it will necessarily follow therefore, if Jesus Christ
is not God of the same Essence with his Father, he was a Blasphemer, and the
Jewish Sanhedrim did very justly to Sentence him to Death for it. And to
corroborate what has been said, consider if he was not God by Nature, what
Reason the Jews had thus to proceed against him.

1. The very first Precept in their Decalogue (which they had continually
before their Eyes) was, Thou shall have no other Gods before me; Exodus 20.3
this they taught their Children, their Servants, and all under their Care.

2. They well knew it was Idolatry to give Divine Worship to a Creature only,
and Blasphemy for a mere Creature to take to himself the Glory due to God;
their Prophets well instructed them in that Doctrine, that God would not give
his Glory to another.

2. They well knew, that the blessed God had given himself Names on purpose to
distinguish Him from all Creatures whatsoever, as Jehovah, etc. The which Names
they had in mighty Reverence.

4. They knew that it was Blasphemy for a mere Creature to assume his Names,
Nature, Works, and Worship, and that it was Idolatry to attribute these to such
an one.

5. The Prophets were very diligent to prevent Idolatry, which was the Sin this
People was exceedingly addicted to? and therefore warned them against the least
appearance thereof, and this they did for the Glory of the God of Israel, that
none might be acknowledged for the true God besides; and for the Salvation of
Men, because Idolaters were not to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

6. Jesus Christ did say, He and His Father were one, John 10.30. That
therefore they who had seen him had seen the Father. John 14.9.
That he was in the Father and the Father in him. Thereby he did make himself
equal with God, John 5.18. which is plain, in that his Disciples that were
inspired with his Spirit, assert the same Thing of him, as has been evidenced;
for this the Jews accused him; him; for this they condemned him, and that with
the greatest Reason, if He where not true God of the same Essence with the
Father, and so equal with him.

These are the Things that the Jews allege in their Defense, for crucifying of
Jesus Christ; and we demand how any Man, or any Company of Men whatsoever, that
deny the Divinity of our Lord, can take off the force of them; it was according
to their own Law which God had given them, and according to his own Exposition
of it, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Matthew. 4.10. And it was for that which we must allow Blasphemy in another Case;
for suppose any Person among the Christians should attribute to himself, the
Names, and Natures, the Works, and Offices of Jesus Christ, If he should say he
was the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, that he is the great
Prophet and High Priest of the New Testament, a Priest for ever after the Order
of Melchizedeck, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, Immanel, God with us, Jesus a Savior, Christ the
Anointed, the Eternal Word, the Savior of the World, the Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the Ending, etc. That he is the only begotten Son of God, that
there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby Men can be saved but his,
that he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and no Man comes unto the Father
but by him. Would not such an one be justly esteemed among Christians as an
Impious and Blasphemous Person. In like manner, for Jesus Christ to attribute
to Himself the Names, the Nature, the Works, and Worship of the most High God;
and at the same time was not so, he could not be esteemed amongst the Jews
then, nor can with any just Reason be esteemed by any since, to be otherwise,
than a notorious Blasphemer, and from hence it would follow, his Disciples were
deceivers, that the Jewish Sanhedrim did well in sentencing Christ to Death,
that the Jews do well in maintaining that Sentence, and in rejecting the
Preaching of his Disciples, that Christian Religion is Superstition and
Idolatry, and the Messiah is not yet come. For what is Idolatry, but to give
the essential Glory of God to a Creature only; if Herod was guilty of Idolatry,
for permitting the People to say it is the Voice of God, and not of a Man, if
though those that offered one Grain of Incense to an Idol, were guilty of this
Crime, and they who swore by the Head of the Emperor were not Innocent, though
at the same Time they did not imagine the Emperor to be God, what a piece of
Idolatry and Superstition must that Systeme be, that gives the incommunicable
Glory of God to a Man only, and requires Divine Adoration to be rendered to
him? yea, if Christ is not God of the same Essence of his Father it represents
him, as an Actour on a Stage, that takes the Name, the Apparel, and Acts the
Part of a Prince, when at the same time he is one of the meanest Subjects, for
it represents Christ as God, God over all blessed for ever, the Almighty,
All-seeing, Eternal, Immutable. The True God, and Eternal Life, as he that laid
the Foundations of the Earth, etc. When in Deed and in Truth he was but a mere
Creature, and in reality had none of these Excellencies in him, there is a
necessity therefore to give up the Truth of the Christian Religion, and turn
either Mahometans, or Jews if this Principle is not true, That Jesus Christ is
true God, of the same Essence with the Father. From whence it is evident, that
this is a Principle of such a Nature, that the Christian Religion stands or
falls with it, and therefore they who assert, and they who deny it cannot have
Christian Communion together.

8. They which assert, and they which deny this Principle, ought not to have
Communion together at the Lords Table, because one or the other must be
ignorant of what it represents, and signifies, they would have different Ideas
represented by the same Elements. To the one it would represent Jesus Christ,
giving himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling
Savor, the Humane Nature offered up, and by Reason of its Union with the
Divine making Satisfaction, to Divine Justice, answering the demands of the
Law, and obtaining Salvation for us.

Whilst it represents to the Secinians nothing else but a mere Man Suffering as
an Example of Patience and Submission to the Will of God. It sets forth to the
one the Infinite and amazing Love of God in giving his Son, his only begotten
Son, that lay in his Bosom, and was his delight from Eternity to become a
Sacrifice for Sinners, to bear their Griefs, Isa. 53.4, 5.
and carry their Sorrows, to be wounded for their Transgressions, and bruised
for their Iniquities, to give him up to Death, even that shameful, painful, and
accursed Death of the Cross. And it sets forth the amazing Love of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9.
or as the Apostle speaks the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was Rich, for their sakes he became Poor, that through his Poverty they might
be made Rich. Phil. 2.6.
That he that was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal
with him made himself of no Reputation, etc. But it represents no such thing to
the other; no more Love, than to make a glorious Man, and set him to be an
Example of Holiness, Patience, and Humility both in his Life, and Death; and
ought they to have Communion together at the Lords Table, that are not agreed
what the Ordinance represents and signifies? can they be said to discern the
Lords Body, that discern it not to be a Sacrifice offered up to God for our
Sins? Heb. 13.10
This is an Altar, of which they have no right to Eat.

9. They ought not to have Communion together, because they must esteem each
other, either Unbelievers or Heretics, and neither are communicable, I have
already shown, that if Christ be God, etc. then those that never believed it
cannot be said to be Believers in Christ, inasmuch as they cannot be said to
Believe that Thing, who deny what is Essential to it, and they denying what is
essential to the Person of Christ, cannot be said to believe in that Person,
and as for those that have believed it, and departed from this Faith, they
cannot but be looked upon to be Heretics, for there is nothing Heresy if this
be not Heresy, which Roots up the very Foundations, and denies the Lord that
bought them, which overthrows the Christian Faith, and turns it out of the
World.

Tit. 2.10, 11.
that what they hold is Heresy, they are not Heretics.

Ver. 10. A Man that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition
reject, for it were absurd for him to give an Injunction, as a Rule of
Discipline in the Church that was impossible to followed.

2. Therefore a Man is condemned of himself, that renounceth the great Truths
he has owned; he that once professed Jesus Christ to be the Messiah the Son,
and sent of God, was devoted to him by Baptism, and acknowledged the Doctrines
revealed by him, and since has apostatized therefrom is condemned of himself,
his own Actions show him to be self-condemned, for there is no better rule than
to judge of the Tree by its Fruit, and Actions speak more than Words.

The Foundation Principles of Christianity carry very great Evidence with them,
they recommend themselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God, we have
the greatest Reason therefore to judge those self-condemned, condemned in their
own Consciences, who have departed from the Faith, Ver. 11. Knowing he that is
such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself, it follows hence,
they are not communicable, because an Heretic after the first and second
Admonition reject.

10. They who maintain a Separation, because of Principles of far lesser
Moment, must acknowledge that they who assert, and they who deny this, ought
not to have Communion together; and if we look upon professed Christians of all
Persuasions, we shall find they do so.

The Idolatry of the Church of Rome, for which the Protestants separate from
them, is not so gross as this, for this is directly and formally giving Divine
Adoration to a Creature only, especially in those that deny his Deity, and yet
give him Divine Worship.

The Reasons for which the Presbyterians and Independants separate from the
Church of England are very Trifles in Comparison of this.

Most baptized Churches maintain a Separation from those that are unbaptized,
and many will allow Communion with none that are not in the Profession and
Practice of those six Principles, Heb. 6.1, 2. But what is Baptism, or Laying
on of Hands, to this Principle; can any urge that they are of that Consequence,
that they who assert, or they who deny them must be either Blasphemers or
Idolaters? That they deny the true Christ, and bring in another in his stead,
that they deny the Lord that bought them, that Christianity it self stands or
falls with it. If then a Separation between the Baptists and Pedo-baptists is
warrantable, that they which are rightly Baptized, and those which are not,
ought not to have Communion together; much more ought not they, that assert and
deny, that Believe and Disbelieve this great Principle.

Obj. There are but few who are capable to understand this great Mystery, and
therefore it cannot be a Principle of such Consequence.

Jesus Christ is God, Eternal, Almighty, etc. That be is Man of the Seed of the
Woman, of the Seed of David according to the Flesh, and did partake of our
Flesh and Blood. So that he was both God and Man this is plain. But how these
two Natures did unite, or after what manner this Union was made, as it is past
our Capacity to reach it, so this is our Comfort, we are not obliged to
understand it. True Faith believes the Thing, notwithstanding Reason cannot
Fathom the manner of them; and this Answers all the clamours made in this Case,
for generally those Christians that are not concerned in these Controversies,
believe this Truth with the greatest stedfastness; they read in Scripture, that
Jesus Christ is the true God and Eternal Life, that he is God over all Blessed
for ever, that he made the World and all Things in it: And they read that he
was Man like unto us in all Things, Sin only excepted, and they believe these
Things firmly and truly, because God has said them, and ask not with a
carping mind how can these Things be, they adore it as a Mystery, but humbly
believe it as an undoubted Truth.



Gal. 1.8, 9. Though we or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto
you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

2. We are to distinguish between the Seducers that cunningly lie in wait to
deceive, and those who through Ignorance, Simplicity, or flexibleness of Spirit
are seduced by them, to the first we are not to give Place no not for an hour,
Gal. 2.5. Mat. 7.15.
beware of false Prophets, the Elders of Churches are peculiarly charged to
keep these out of the Flock, Acts 20.28, 29, 30, 31. The Apostle Treats these
with the greatest Severity, Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of
the Concision, Phil. 3.2. Whose Mouths must be stopped, Tit. 1.11. Because
their Words will eat as does a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17.

2. To those that are seduced by them, we are to carry it with the greatest
Love and Tenderness in Order to regain them, so the Apostle Treats the seduced
Galatians, Gal. 4.19.
My little Children, of whom I Travel in Birth again: He mixeth Entreaties with
his sharp Rebukes. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
Thus we should in meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, that they
may be recovered out of the Snare of the Devil.

2. If after all means used, they persist in their Heresies they are to be
rejected, for a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, Tit. 2.10, 11.
after the first and second Admonition reject, and this fully answers the
Objection; for let their Lives and Conversations be never so exact, let them be
Men of never so great Study, Labor, Sufferings and Self-denial, yet they are
to be rejected by the Church; which shows, that notwithstanding this, they are
not good Christians, and therefore their Piety but seeming and not real,
because good Christians are not to be rejected from the Communion of the Church
as Heretics.

And as for their being willing to know the Truth, we find by Experience, that
after they have once espoused and broached their Heresies, they set themselves
with all cunning subtlety and obstinacy to oppose the Truth, and maintain their
Errors; shutting their Eyes against all the Evidence that the Truth carries
with it, and using all ways whatsoever to evade the force thereof, whereby
whatsoever they may say, it is plain to every Observer; that they are not
willing to know any Thing to be Truth, that is contrary to their professed
Principles; hence then it is so far from Christian Charity, that it is against
the express Rule and Law of Christ Jesus, the Head and Lord of Christians to
have Communion with them.

FINIS.

