A DISCOVRSE touching Choice of RELIGION.

By Sr. RICHARD TEMPEST Baronet.

Antiquam exquirite matrem, Virgil.

Judge ye what I say, Acts Apostles.

To the Lady TEMPEST.
Madam,
IT is my Duty to give you an account of spending my Hours, whose virtuous
directions has still enjoined me the employment of them in the best things:
and there can be no endeavor comparable to the Inquest after Truth. Happy are
Men's early embraces of that most worthy mistres of Man's soul; when the Son of
their Judgment rises free from those Clouds and Mists, which otherwise by
long ascending, time, and endeavor, they would be but hardly able to expel. I
must acknowledge my weaknesses, and errors, knowing it is the Victory of
Christianity, to conquer the Pride of a Man's own understanding, and whose
vigor is showed in our lowest submissions. The World is like that Nymph, which
still destroyed those, to whom she most seemed fair; And Men in the short
course of life, heap up to themselves a sort of Opinions and Passions, and
make them the faithless guides of their lives, of which though they highly
esteem, yet do they but dwell under those barren Hills which are never
without Clouds and Showers discending thence: And who would for the love of
that, which in a moment perishes, refuse to profess that, which will bestow on
him Eternity; and in a confusion of all humane things, will render him a
felicity solid and durable? I shall show you what Port my Thoughts have arrived
at, to escape the storms of Error, and from thence to despise the several
Winds of Doctrine with which Men are much tossed, but never Sail; and through
the diversity of Opinions, half of them Pray for those Winds, whereby the rest
are Drowned. The name of Rome, but once Named, some Men's minds become
surcharged with the apprehensions of Superstition, Conspiracy; and what evils
throng not into their conquered Imagination? whereas they being got out of the
Magic Circle of parties, (where their minds are Conjured with the Devil of
Faction) they find that to be the place, which did commend to the whole World,
The Faith of the Romans. And where Christian Profession has with infinite
sufferings and persecutions triumphed over the Armed Power of its Adversaries,
and four hundred Heresies that have sprung up before Luther; such high
displeasures Men have entertained against those Names which they looking
directly on with the Eye of Reason, would perceive engraven the well-drawne
Lines of Truth; they by going on one side, looking with the Eye of Passion,
draw the same Figures and Lines, by a deceit of the Eye, to bear an unhandsome
proportion. We intertaine Christian Profession, and the Sacred Word of God (the
Records of it) delivered over to us upon a Divine infallible testimony, which
is that of the holy Catholic Church, to which he has promised his holy
spirit to the Worlds end. Wherefore if Men would enlarge their thoughts, and
take a free and open view of all the parts of the Fabric of Christianity, and
shall consider of that power which he has left to his Church, of his
injunctions to hear his Church, of his promises to assist his Church; The
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; to remain as a Light upon a Hill:
How great comfort must it needs raise in the Hearts of Christians, to find
this made good, in a constant un-interrupted succession of Bishops from Saint
Peter? Let God be true, and every man a liar. The Church of Rome locally, is
but a particular Church; but let them not offer affront to the Divine
goodness, through abuse of Wit, or Logical trifle (of a Universal
particular) for the Church of Rome has ever defended the Catholic cause; and
antiquity has ascribed unto it a more powerful principality, calling Her, The
Mother of Churches; though the Holy Catholic church is ever the same; like
the Ocean, which as it beats upon several Countries with its Waves, begets
several Names; being now called the French Sea, then the Spanish. Those Madam
who are possessed with prejudice against the Sea of Rome, have all different
ways of maintaining their opposition; neither will they agree to the judgment
of any one Tribunal; the same Arguments have not the same effects with its
different enemies; but like Wards in a Key, they are to be fitted to the
diversity of parties, and capacities, to unlocke their judgments, fast bound
with error: It being truly said, That not the perfection of Reason, but the
proportion does prevail. Some retain still something in the bottom of the
Box, and will not let it see the Light by conference, lest it fly away;
accounting it the surest tenure of Truth, to stick with obstinacy in the
quicksands of error, and esteem it their best title to it, to refuse to
dispute it. Another Measures Truth by the temper of indifferency, and esteems
it to be the safest way to be freed from Error, to be willing to capitulate. A
third frames his own principles, and by Reasons and deductions drawn thence,
makes all their Discourse agree well enough with it self; As Astronomers, some
of them making the Earth to move: some the Heavens; and by both Doctrines,
according to their principles laid down, make up their Phainomena, and
appearances; but tell them of Antiquity, Fathers, and the Councels, they will
answer you with that Merchant, that hung out for his Sign, Books set on fire;
so that if any desired to have been Trusted, or to have come in his Books; He
answered them, That they were burned: so if you would get any belief from
them, from Libraries and Books, their Zeal has already Burnt them. Another
sort are wittily placed, betwixt a Puritan and a Priest; If the Priest urge
Councels and Fathers, they turn to the Puritan, and steal the Bible out of
his pocket, to confute him with: And if the Puritan urge the Bible, then he
turns to the Priest, and borrowes of him the Decrees and Councels, to defend
himself with. Children, says Aristotle, call every one Mother; but coming to
the use of Reason, they then acknowledge only their true Mother. Thus do Men
bear their spiritual Allegiance, dressed up in several garbes and forms, and
apply to themselves the benefits of that stupendous Mystery of our Redemption,
by the several Conduits and Channels of their own Fancies: but God is both
the Way, the Means, and the End; He has made complete the designations of his
Grace, and Men will be found to be more in love with the Means, then the End,
and to empty all their Zeales and Devotions into some new Mode in Religion, or
particular Opinion, whereby they are differenced from others: They hold such a
course, that do make them seem to be desirous to take our Savior by the Hand,
over the back of his Church; whereas he has said of his Ambassadors, which
were to continue to the Worlds End; Who hears not you, hears not me. But
Madam, its more agreeable to you, and more contentfull, to cast the Lines of
ones Thoughts into the smooth and pleasant waters of Devotion, which wash the
beautiful Walls of Sion, rather then into the boisterous Sea of Controversy,
for which my Bark is too little; and I ever returning thence Sea-sicke: but
only induced Madam to give your self, and some other of my worthy Friends
satisfaction: In the performance of which, I shall little value the Censure of
those who suffer themselves to be carried away with that easy fault of
Fault-finding; And do beseech your Ladyship to give me your Blessing:

Your Ladyships most humble, and most obedient Son, R. T.

The Contents.
CAP. I.
COnsideration of Religion, under the Notion of Reformations.

Wherein is discourst, of several of their Tempers and Opinions, and
perticularly of the Church of England.

CAP. II.
Page 29. against Melatair.
An Answer to the particulars of that grand Objection, repeated in the Words of
Doctor Bramhal.

If you seek to obtrude upon us the Roman Church, with its Adherents, for the
Catholic Church, excluding three parts of four of the Christian World, from
the Communion of Christ; Or, the Opinions thereof for Articles, and
Fundamentals of Catholic Faith: neither our Reason, nor our Religion, nor our
Charity will suffer us to listen to you.

1. Wherein is related the Opinion of Antiquity: Of the necessity of keeping
communion with the Church of Rome.

2. How Protestants agree, and how they exclude one another.

3. The Catholic Church excludes none, but whom their own errors exclude.

4. Of the use of Reason, in the Election of Religion.

CAP. III.
A View of some of the chief Doctrines, pretended to be the cause of their
departure.

1. Transubstantiation. 2. Praying to Saints. 3. Use of Images. 4. Praying for
the Dead, and Purgatory. 5. Confession and Satisfaction. 6. Of Fre-will.
CAP. IV.
The falling away from the Church (under the Notion of Reformation) the cause
of troubles of State: and from the same grounds they build their opinions on,
arises the grounds of the disturbance of Governments.

1. Wherein is declared the ill and unfortunate ends of those, who in several
Ages and Kingdoms, opposed the jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome.

2. True Religion, no Enemy to Governments.

CAP. V.
An Invitation of Wits to the Study of Arts, and to leave opposing the Church;
(wherein,)

1. Of the excellency of the Fruits of Piety.

2. That they proceed only from true Religion.

CAP. I. Consideration of Religion, under the Notion of Reformations.
THe esteem and value men put on the finding of what is Truth, makes all men
so plausibly vent their particular Opinions, under the Notion of Reformation;
so that by the gate and entrance of that word, men's understandings are
delivered into an inextricable labyrinth of error; and no sooner men withdraw
their wary steps from one deluding path, but they are insensibly conveyed into
another, and do but still by the variety of falsehoods, tend to the Center of
those Maeanders: nor is there any way to get out of those toils, till by a
neglect of all those artificial fences, that each party enclose their opinions
with, despising the Laws of their mazes; men redeem themselves into the
liberty of a dis-interested judgment, which neither the name of Calvin, or any
particular opinion, or national alterations has shut up with prejudice. There
are sufficient Alarums to hearken to that precept, of trying all things: and as
it is said by one of the Fathers, the Church shall never be free from two sorts
of persecution; outward affliction, to try men's affections to God: and errors
in faith, to try their right knowing him: but I perceived men subject and tide
to any party, or to men of particular opinions, rise to no further
acknowledgements, then of such Tenants and Articles, which those men are
Patrons of, who cry up the Champions of them, and are wholly frozen in charity
toward those, who using the freedom of their reasons, make a retreat from
their precipices. Grotius, the glory of his Country, and Learning, eminent
through a universal knowledge, and who drew his experience of the state of
Christendom, at the Fountain head of great affairs, employed all his Junior
endeavors for reconciling Protestants, and bringing them under one band of
government; yet in the later deliveries of his judgment, acknowledges that an
impossibility, and that there was a necessity to return to Catholic
obedience, or to communion with the Church of Rome, as a Rock against which
hitherto, all Heresies had beat themselves into froath. He made me with more
equal eye look upon the ingenuous retractions of Doctor Vain, and Doctor
Cressey, against whom notwithstanding I had an edge for deserting that, which
as I thought, should have centred all judgments and devotions; but after
finding them fetch from deep search of antiquity, their resolutions of
returning to that Church (from which the ill accidents and obliquity of late
times had misled men) with reluctance I found their testimonies true, and my
most rebelling understanding, their reasons most imperiously brought to
capitulate; finding, that though men profess to become ready captives of
Truth, yet they are unwilling to think, but that they are in its fetters
already; wherefore I obtained of my self, to discharge all pre-ingaged
affections, all byas of Faction, and interest; resolving to pay that Homage to
my Creator, which I should find he required of me; knowing, that when he
commands a Sacrifice, nature must sleep, affections be silent. I found this
likewise a great deal more plausible to my self, than easy with
faithfulness to put in practice. I perceived that a constant and steady
Judgment was required to enter upon the quarrellings of Polemick Discourses,
where were used so much subtilty in arguing, partial proceeding, ingenious
diversion (where wits were imployd for conquest, aided with the advantages of
Language and Science) not for to be rewarded with the triumph of Truth, but to
bear the Laurel, for having conquered men with words, though not satisfied
them with reason. Wherefore I considered the difference, between what may be
said, and what should be thought: and therefore to discharge that duty which a
man owes his own reason, for the utmost examination and scrutiny of Truth, I
considered the Foundations and Authorities upon which several parties at the
same time did challenge men's devotions. 1. The Presbyterians, who
acknowledging, and ingeniously professing to be more convinced by, then tide to
the Fathers, or Antiquity; equal their own Interpretations and Preachings to
the dignity and verity of the Text, extolling and crying up their imaginary
discipline; to the means of setting up of which, they sacrifice all Moral,
Civil, Ecclesiastical obligations, counting it want of Zeal in Gods service,
to be true in any relation, when for the promotion of the Covenant, it is
expedient to be failing in them; this is their invention, to which they ascribe
an Apotheosis; they dress it up, and adorn it with Scripture Phrase, making
the two Attributes of Gods, Mercy and Justice, (all the threats and promises of
either) but to damn and crown men's forwardness or slownesse in this cause, in
titling to Divinity this their delusion; with such heats do they embrace, what
was never heard of in Gods Church this fourteen hundred years; and this do
they extol to be the height of Reformation. 2. All other sects and sorts that
descent from them, who will not be subject to this spiritual bondage, have
their bucklers of defense out of Scripture too (the measure and judge whereof
is their own interpretation) they allege, That when two or three are gathered
together, God is in the midst of them: whereas the Fathers say in their
Expositions, That when two or three of the Church are gathered together for
devotion sake, God is in the midst of them; not that the gathering of two or
three together does make a Church; thus in the Son of Gods Word, does swarms
of gnats and flies play, not capable of being governed: And though both these
Reformations be contrary to each other, yet both oppose a third Reformation,
established by Parliamentary Laws, which retained a solemnity of Form and
Ceremony, and from its first angry leaving only, to acknowledge the Authority
of the Roman Bishop, fell by degrees to leave off one thing after another. And
as it served them, to be able to bandy against the Church of Rome, complide
with those other reformists (as they call themselves) who in no other thing
agreed with them, but in disagreeing from it. Its own proper temper stood not
upon terms irreconcilable, but pretended the cause of new Doctrines received
in the Church of Rome, to be that which forced their departure: the most
ingenious and ingenuous, owned this Model, whose parts I highly esteem, whose
persons I honor, having had establishment of civil authority, decency of
Ceremony, and Form of Liturgy. I endeavored to observe in the Writings of the
chief upholders of it, their freer and less compeld judgment concerning the
Church of Rome, such as fell from them in the intervals of their calentures,
and heats of contradiction. I found the Bishop of Canterbury against M. Fisher
acknowledging, that if they were another Church from the Church of Rome, he
would soon return to it. Hooker denies to damn them, who have been the authors
of their salvation. Others part stakes betwixt Truth and Faction, saying, The
Church of Rome has the truth in it, as Silver lying hid among Rubbage. I have
heard a Learned Bishop yet living, confess, All the difference was only in
words and terms. Thus do they date their Religion a new, from some
accidental thing, bringing in new Epochaes and accounts from changes and
alterations, (which they term Reformatition) whereas the firm principle of
the Church, was ever a pleading an uninterrupted succession, of Pastors and
Doctrine from the Apostles time to this: Saint Cyprian saying in his Epistles,
He has not Ecclesiastical Ordination, who keeps not Ecclesiastical union; but
they have cut this Scepter (which whilst whole, every one did bow to) into
contemptible little coin, which are several parties, bearring different
impressions, which are only current with those, whose particular mark and
character is set upon it.

CAP. II.
A View of the whole Question betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Episcopal
party, by answering the perticulars of that grand Objection, which I repeat in
the words of Doctor Bramhal.

Page 29. against Molatair.
If you seek to obtrude upon us the Roman Church, with its adherents, for the
Catholic Church, excluding three parts of four of the Christian World, from
the communion of Christ:

OR,

The Opinions thereof for Artikles and Fundamentals of Catholic Faith;
neither our Reason, nor our Religion, nor our Charity, will suffer us to listen
to you.

Thus do they Patronize their opposition to the Church of Rome, under the
challenged protection of Religion, Reason, and Charity; and with as great
applause as the naming of these things can afford, they celebrate the triumph
of error. They be few words, I confess; but such as govern and constitute all
the actings and reasonings of man, by their light, and influence. But to Write
over the Door where the Plague is, all the Medicinable names in Physic, will
not preserve men from Infection: only the greater danger is, that men more
easily under the title of good things, are deceived into places of mortality:
And because this Objection seemingly is framed up, and upheld by all those
things, that are worthy of man. I will leave pecking at stones in the field,
and will impartially view the inward strength and force of this building. They
find fault that any should obtrude upon them, the Roman Church, with its
adherents, for the Catholic Church, excluding three parts of four, of the
Christian World, from the communion of Christ. Who is it that would obtrude the
Roman Church, with its adherents upon you? is it only in this age urged by a
Faction? Who is an enemy to your most necessary Reformation, and for ambition
and profit sake, will not apply themselves to the innocence and purity of Gods
true Religion? Is it obtruded only by those, whom you have justly offended,
warranted thereto by the Laws of God, and the Church? Is it by those only, who
by their erroneous tenants makes justifiable your departure from them, and
bandying against them? to return to them again, were, to forfit your zeal in
Gods cause, to betray your Reason, Religion, and Charity; but if on the
contrary it prove only a perverse proceeding to maintain a Scisme; if it be
only your calumny, and ill dealing with your Mother, from whose lap,
peevishly, and without reason you have withdrawn your selves; if it be you
only who take scandal at the Church, which can be none to you, though they may
be to it, Tunc alta ruunt subductis t^cta columnis; then have you Passion for
Zeal, Opinion for Faith, and confusion for the effects. St. Iraeneus, who
lived in the second age, in his Book against Heresies, reckons up a succession
of the Bishops of Rome, from St. Peter, to the Pope then present, and
pronounces it necessary for all Churches, to hold communion with those that
adhere to the Church of Rome; Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem
principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est omnes qui sunt
undique fideles, in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique, conservata est ea,
quae sit ab Apostolis traditio; fundamentis igitur Ecclesiam Apostoli, Lino
Episcopatum, etc. then were they plain and positive, in the declaring the duty
of all, to desert all particular Churches, which did not adhere and hold
communion with the Sea of Rome. Tertullian of the same Age, De prescriptione
Hereticorum, si autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam, unde and nobis auctoritas
praesto est. St. Ambrose of the fourth Age or century of the Church, How happy
is that Church, upon which the Apostles have poured out all Doctrine with their
bloods. Saint Jerome of the same time, upon the first Epistle to Timothy, The
Church which is the house of God, notes upon it thus; Of which Damasus (then
Pope) is at this day ruler: And again, Prima adversus Ruffinum, fidem suam
quam vocat; camque qua Romana pollet Ecclesia; Si Romana respondent, ergo
Catholici sumus. St Augustine of the fifth Age, lib. 11. cap. 2. contra
Fauns^um, Vides in hac re quid Ecclesiae Catholicae vale^t authoritas quae ab
ipsis fundatissimis se^ibus Apostolorum usque ad hodiernum diem, succedentium
sibi met Episcoporum serie, populorum consensione firmata. St. Jerome of most
austere life, a profound Scholar, and general Linguist, lived unmarried, a
Monk, a Priest, said Mass. St. Augustine was Bishop of Hippo, confessedly a
Priest, and offered up the body and blood of Christ in Sacrifice, for the
living and the dead. Saint Basil, a Monk, Priest, unmarried; did not they all
live and dye in the communion of the Church of Rome, and did detest Scisme? I
remember one told me at Venice, pleasantly discoursing of the difference which
that Republique had with the Pope; We would have become (says he) any thing to
have been ad oppisitum with the Pope, Lutherans or Calvenists, but that we were
satisfied with the truth of all opinions of the Church; from our own Records
which have been in violated and kept entire, and delivered then with as great
vigor, as now observed, for about a thousand years; which time that City has
stood, never taken, or plunderd, nor burnt; the two great winding sheets of
humane things. Will not the Laws and constitutions of all ancient governments
declare and demonstrate the same, even of those places which have revolted from
them? must all men in so many grave Councels, resorting from all parts of the
Christian world, relating one to another, what in the several places whence
they came, has been held, and so from time to time an universal establishment
of such things as have been found to be the general Traditions and Doctrines
of the Church: and yet must all these be thought to have walked in a vain
shadow? Rocks, Cities, Woods, must be thought to move, while their eyes
dwelling too much upon the current of the times, breeds this deception, that
they are thought to move from the little Boats, when it is the Ship boats
departing from them. Thus it is evident, who thrusts the Church of Rome upon
them, and what has thrust them from the Church of Rome? When parties are once
engaged, though testimonies be as loud as Thunder, yet the ball must be kept
up; poor pretenses must undergo the opinion of inevitable necessities; all
sticks seen in that Water, must be crooked: Non persuadebis, etiamsi
persuaseris: They say, It must not be obtruded upon them as Catholic, it
excluding three parts of four, of the Christian World. All Christians in all
Ages have pronounced that Artikle, I believe the holy Catholic Church; if
men's says should not vary, the object must never fail; and in all Ages down
from our blessed Saviors time, they have most steadfastly pronounced this
Artikle in the bosom of the Church of Rome; which taken locally, is but a
Parish Church; but in respect of retaining with others that same Doctrine which
the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul delivered them, whether by writing, or by
word of mouth; in that sense, it is called Catholic; and so, Orbis in Vrbe
est. When Heresies sprung, as there must be Heresies, they had recourse still
to what was delivered by way of Doctrines to them, whereby they did repel all
false and erroneous opinions, as constantly maintain their own Doctrine. When
diverse parts of Scripture were called in question, it was the Churches
Authority did pronounce them Divine: now the Church was to be deceived in its
Sentence, or not: If it was then infallible, why not now? and in the
interpretation and exposition, as well as the Letter, when Scripture is not
Scripture, but rightly Expounded. As touching an externe and adventitious
condition of the Church, it suffers sometime dilatation and enlargement; other
time, persecution and contraction, yet still ever the same. The Arc, that was
the type of the Church, was sometimes on the Waves, sometime in the
Wilderness, traveling: again, in the Temple in peace and glory. When the
Arrian Heresy had so catchingly surprised the World, no doubt but the
Catholic Church did exclude them; and because it will not now let every
stinking puddle of Opinion, and every infectious current of Faction run into
its Sea; or that like the Sea, it will not let any dead or corrupt thing lie in
its bowels; therefore forsooth, it must not be obtruded upon any as Catholic,
it excluding three parts of four of the Christian World.

If it should have so much good nature, to admit all, its Doctrine would not be
Catholic, that is, what was professed at all times; the holy Catholic Church
is but one. Episcopacy is but one, says Saint Cyprian, as Streams from the
same Fountain, Branches from the same Root; here is nothing but that fidelity,
which a Spouse owes to her Betrothed, no intertainment of Foreign loves, or
unlawful mixtures. Those that are called, Reformists, exclude not one another;
when they would appear a great body of opponents of the Roman Church, they
exclude them not from opposing the same Authority, though in manner, and in
their own opinions they oppose and exclude one another; like that Image, part
whereof was Clay, part Iron, that by cleaving together resembled a body, though
never incorporated. Harmony of Confessions. B. Hall of the Churches of Holland
and France.
They are enemies of a good Catholic malice, whilst they would unite all the
different Forms of Scisme, wherein every ones Fancy was their guide, and of
these would make an angry union, to gratify their humor of opposing their
Mother Church: and if one should lend a severe aspect into their own
Commonwealths, and Interests, he shall seem to retreave the ancient Chaos, each
Sect so differing from other, and every one dissenting from what themselves
were at first: When they shak'd hands with the Church of Rome, every one
departing a several way, according to the concernments and ends of their
Leaders, or the Genius and nature of the People, or the accidents and affairs
of those times, which steared their furies, and indignations. The Lutherans
hold the Calvenists for the Phaetons of Europe, and in a late Sinod have
condemned them guilty of all the Wars and disasters in these late times.
Calvin allows of Episcopacy, yet his followers make it ground enough of an
immortal quarrel, to have them extirpated. In every Country, that ill Seed
that Calvin sowed, came up of a different fashion; as he well perceived, who
described their several humors of Genevizing, Anglizing, Scotizing. What Wars
are raised in the mutual opposition of each others Doctrine, every one of them
having some particular Opinion wherein they magnify themselves, being their
Eurika; and sets it as it were in the Van, for an Ensign of the Faction, under
which they do so peevishly militate? A Satyr would be the best style, to
describe the animosities, they prosecute each others Opinion with, and no less
would it become all those angry fits, that they express in their several
wanderings and errors: they throw a Sea of gall and bitterness after those, who
upon mature examination, relinquish those Mazes, they lead their followers in.
What should one speak of the fruitful Independency, big with all sorts of
Opinions, Brownists, Anabaptists, Arminian, Zwinglian, Aecolampadian, and all
these the English Church Protestant, Episcopal banishes and excludes from
them. The bosom of the Catholic Church is spread wide, to intertaine all,
whom with earnest Prayers and endevors, it invites and desires, zealous of
their salvation, which only in an ordinary way, is to be had there. The
ancient Heretics, Arrians, Nestorians, Vtichians, whose relics yet possess
some place in the World, are excluded likewise by themselves, who make this
objection; and besides their own Reformation, has been a varied unconstant
one; that except they would (fall in love with this Word Reformation) I know not
well what can be understood by it. H. 8. first only threw out the Pope, but
retained the seven Sacraments: after, by degrees, they were taken away, and new
Doctrines brought in, with relaxations of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and
sometime it has been wholly submitted to the Presbyterian humor, in
confusedly going to their Churches; and so generally using their Directory:
whereas, according to their own opinions, without Bishops no Ordination can
be; Quo teneam nodo?

They complain, That the opinion of the Church of Rome, are obtruded upon
them, for Artikles and Fundamentals in Faith. Does not all the Wilderness of
their opinions, their opiniotive Idolatries, each one avouching their Doctrine,
with, Thus says the Lord? Does not all their Anarchies and irregularities,
flow in upon them, by letting those ancient bulworks go into neglect, which
stood betwixt a Sea of error and themselves? that is, in stead of standing upon
the old ways, to view and discover truth from: they have only disdainefully
trampled upon them; and in stead of asking the Fathers, to see what they held
and thought; they will make bold to think the Fathers mistaken, if they find
themselves contradicted by them; and hold, and think of them, as not worth
asking. Thus do they discountenance Tradition, and the establishments of the
Church. The Apostle says, When he should come, he would order things: Now,
says the Father, what has been universally observed, was ordered by him. St.
Augustine de Bap. contra Donatist, That which the Universal Church holds, and
is not Instituted by Councels, but always retained, its probably believed, not
to be delivered, but by Apostolical authority. Their error that oppose the
authority of the Church, and the prerogative of the Apostolical Seat, flows
from this wretched pudled Fountain; that is, Reducing Reformation to the
Scripture it self, interpreted by men's particular judgments. The holy and
sacred letters, are the blessed records of our salvation, Celestial Messages,
Angels of peace, winged with love, which hover over men's souls, with
celestial protections, comforts, and graces: they are the glass, wherein is
beheld the beauty of holiness, the splendour of the Eternal Father, the Image
of his Son. Yet as S. Austine says, The words of the Scripture, are to be so
understood, as the world has believed, which it self foretold should believe:
they were writ upon several occasions to particular Churches, which faithfully
kept, what was committed unto them, whether by writing, or by word of mouth;
the Scripture confessing, That if all had been writ, the world would not have
contained the Books: and every where they enjoyne the harkening to the Church,
which who should not hear, are excluded from Christian communion, by their
holy censure. The Church was then established, when diverse of these sacred
letters were directed to them; and by them, and what other rules were delivered
and taught them: they governed, taught, administered, corrected, and absolved;
so that they were like the Testimony in the Arc: the Church of God, had the
custody and interpretation of them; so that who should Sacrilegiously steal
the testimony out of the Ark, and run away with Scripture, and impaile
Congregations about with new goverments, and cry, The Word of the Lord, and
quarrel at the other orders and Traditions of the Church, he would be judged
by all, to have ravished the spheres of government, to have disordered the
Divine dispensation of his goodness toward us: Neither can they pretend any
right over those Laws, who are condemned by those Laws Waters out of their own
channels, beget strange and foreign tastes; and this is the grand and unhaypy
sophistry of this age; a been conjunctis, ad male divisa. Scripture divided
from the Church, seems to countenance every party in their fancies, making it
like a Looking-glass, wherein they do but see their own Image, not Gods; and
by an inward delusion, view the reflections of their own wits, flattering
their understandings, whilst by a foreprepared conceit, they find some
countenance, to their own inward thoughts: Whereas Scriptures, the Oracles of
God, are truth; not the Pen, or the Press, being writ because they were true;
not true, because they were writ.

They say, neither their Religion, Reason, nor Charity will permit them to
acknowledge the Church of Rome for their Mother. I shall now view the use of
Reason, in the election of Religion, and see if it well directed, does hinder
them. When that which flows from well established authority, shall be called in
question, or disputed through the violence and disorder of Factions, the
upholders of Government and Justice, have recourse to the Origens and
Fountains of Justice; showing how all their Acts and Decrees, received their
obligatory nature, from the agreement they had with those rules of Reason, and
those several Laws which constituted them to be good and just: so that they
who before found only the effects of peace, by a due obedience to them, now
search into the reasons and causes, why they were of such power, to produce
such effects: And those who before pleasantly lived in the building,
laboriously now seeks the Foundation. The mysteries of Religion being above
reason, were confirmed with mirakles, which are above nature: but whether this,
or that Religion, be the same with that which was so confirmed, must be
examined according to all those rules, which though divinely given, must now by
reason be examined, whether they be conformable to them, or not. The protitipe
was from Heaven, the original supernatural; but for to prove the continuance
of it, we must compare, and examine it according to all that has been
delivered concerning the same formerly. And its no small difficulty to chase
truth through its several channels: The Laws of Gods Church, challenge our
obedience; the opposing whereof is Scisme, because we are kept in one entire
body, by the observation of them: the neglect whereof cuts us off from that
communion. Civil Governments and Policies have their Acts and Statutes, the
opposing whereof makes men guilty of sedition and faction; because there is a
solution of continuity made, and a dividing of them into parts, which threatens
destruction of the whole; the preservation whereof, is the end of all good
Governments. The Laws of Reason, distinguish Vice and Virtue. What way is there
to distinguish Ecclesiastical obedience, from Scismaticall combinations? but
to prove the universality of the Church, its constant succession, with the
exercise of its jurisdiction: and that those, who have separated themselves
from it, bears a later date, begun from some accidental change in Government;
the Pride of their Leaders, or the ignorance and heaped up errors of the
people. What differences, Vice, and Virtue? not a local distinction, of being
placed in the midst of Vice; but, as such actions observe the dictates of right
Reason, which assigns them their end, their degrees of heats and motion. Who
views not the establishment of ancient Commonwealths in their first and
Primitive Laws, their Records, Acts of State, and a constant exercise of a
Supreme Authority? When men with the arms of reason encounter the desert
souls of Atheists, do they not prove the Impression of a Deity engraven on
the souls of all, though they err in paying their Homage? Do they not bring
reasons from several Sciences, for the demonstration of a natura naturans, or
first mover, or Supreme Governor? Those who prove the truth of Christian
Religion against Turks and Jews, do they not plead the innocence and
simplycity of those men, that first Preached Christ crucified; that they could
have no end, but the hope of an Immortal Glory to bear them out in all their
sufferings; they delivered a Doctrine to the world, an enemy to carnal
pleasures, and the ambition of the world; and with disarmed innocence to
prevail over the furious malice of their Persecutors, must needs prove an
omnipotent power that aided them: and having brought them to the
acknowledgement, that God is the Author of our Faith, then they find a
necessity, to receive the speaker, for a full demonstration of the truth of all
that is spoke: Then do they all to heavenly rules give place
Which passions kill, and reason does deface
The Church is builded upon the Divine promises, That the gates of Hell should
not prevail against it: and we see, that neither Tyrants, whose angers are
Massacres; nor an Angel of Light-seeming falsehood, has prevailed against his
Church; neither the courses, nor discourses of men's Pens and Wits, have been
prevalent against it; In hanc manca ru^s fortuna. It has continued in the
Succession of two hundred and sixty Popes; and according to the Sibils
Prophecy, The Fishers hook has subdued the Roman Empire, and conquered the
World, verified in St. Peter's Successors. Thus Reason may have its
satisfactions, and has a latitude of discussing, and being active in those
things which are its proper sphere, which are arguments of credibility: the
light of nature will conduct us a great way in our duties, which we may carry
in our hands, till they be obscured with the clearer lights of grace. A Star
conducted the Wise Men to the Son of Righteousness: and though illuminations
from Heaven, sometime beat down the fiercest Saul to the ground, that is at
once to make them humble, and to know his will: and though sometimes by his
omnipotent grace, he, as it were, casts his servants at once in a mould; as
Saint Paul was called Apostolus fusilis; yet reason otherwhile, (which is Gods
Law too) must be summoned up to our aid, whilst by degrees we recover our
falling steps, and unwinde our selves out of error: Hos quaesitum munus in
usus; Is there any way to weane men's minds, nursed in the embraces of error, but
the employment and use of their reason? To discover what their opinions owe to
their cradle, what to a rational examination: men bear an affection to
opinions, as to the places where they were borne, though it be the rude rugged
mountains of the Swisses. The soul with difficulty parts with its first
imbibitions, and with pain climes the rising Hill of Truth. Many are the innate
delusions of men's souls: occult adhesions, and secret fastnesses, which are
not cassierd till their judgments are informed from what source they spring,
till by the thread of reason, they unwinde themselves out of that Labyrinth,
nature, or their first course delivered them into: Men's judgments suffer from
society, and example retorts upon our understanding. Custom and Affection, are
mediums which represent things different from their true proportions: nothing
can infranchise men's minds, or set them free from those enchanting embraces,
but the Power and Sovereignty of Reason: Stultus non accipit, verba prudentiae,
Nisi ea dixeris, quae sunt in cord ejus.
Now, as Reason compels them to return to the Church, so will the tenants of
their own Religion, if great soule-killing opinions be not found to make the
Gulf, and the mega kasma. Some perticulars whereof in the next Chapter I shall
examine, and then I hope their Charity is such to themselves and others, that
they will be as good as their words. Thus in a short Map, I have let you see,
That the Church of Rome, with its adherents, does necessarily challenge their
Union with, and obedience to, by the Voice of Antiquity, which has still kept
its ancient deposited Doctrines, written and unwritten, whose bosom is ever
open to receive all, but whom their own Scisme and Error excludes; and that
both their Reason, Religion, and Charity command a return.

CAP. III. A View of the particular Doctrines, pretended to be the cause of
their not returning.
THe just exceptions against any opinion, is either want of Truth, or want of
Piety: but they being convertibilia, I shall show, That as these Doctrines
excepted against are true, so likewise they have the Impressions of God
engraven on them; though there be two pretenses of exception that they make.
First, Objecting to general Councels, new creation of Truths, when they do no
more then declare what are so. Nextly, From the words they make use of to
condemn Error and Heresy. They would have it, that the Councels make new
Artikles, when as they pretend to signify no other thing by those words, then
that which is certainly known to be the Ancient, and Orthodox Doctrine. The
Reformed Religion (so called) thus stands in opposition, and is a
contradictory, and a negative one, and is an angry and verbal contention,
oppositions of Science falsely so called. There has not wanted those in the
Church of Rome, that have exactly tried the depths of all those studies,
whether in the knowledge of Languages, for knowing the Text in the Original,
or of History, or Schoole-reasoning, wherein any opponents can pretend to
contest with them in. Convect Land. 1562. Art 16.
If they will appeal to Scripture, as sometimes they do, how many Catholic
Champions have faithfully studied the literal sense, the mystical, the
Historical part, the Parabolicall, the Figurative expressions, the Natural,
the Originals of the Old and New Testaments, the Hebrew and the Greek, with
the Ancient Greek and Latin Glosses. If Hystory may prevail, Eusebius shall
bring testimony, Palladius, Sezemen Socrates, Ruffin shall be witnesses. Saint Bede, St. Jerome shall tell what was the practices in the first times of
Christianity. If the pious Decrees of those Popes (which themselves believe to
be Saints in Heaven) shall be heard, Catholic Doctors have viewed all their
Decrees, both before the Council of Nice, and after. If conquest, by the Arts
of Disputation, be pretended to, they have enterd into the nicest differences,
and have been cutters of a Commin Seed: and are thoroughly acquainted with all
the most retired advantages of Wit and Learning. There have been many and great
challenges to the four first General Councels, Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
and Calcedon; but many Catholics have not only read from the first of Nice,
to the last of Trent, but also all other approved Provincial Councels. If the
Fathers, Doctors, and men famous in all Ages, be consulted with, they will
appear to be all of the same holy Catholic Church; St. Basil, St.
Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Gregory Nessen, St. Gregory the great,
Iraeneus, Cyprian, Fulgentius, Pamphilus the Martyr, Palladius, Theodoret,
Ruffinus, Lactantius, Vincentius, Lyrenensis, Dionisius the Areopagite,
Scholar to Saint Paul. St. Ignatius, St. Polycarpus, St. Clement, St.
Augustine, Hierome, St. Ambrose, Papias Scholar of St. John the Evangelist,
etc. Who will not then put their foot into the same Bark, with so excellent
company, to sail to happiness in? but remain in the Cock-Boars of their own
private opinions, to be tossed with every wave of Doctrine, and to suffer
Shipwreck? The Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, are preserved by the Roman Church
(defendors of the Catholic cause. Its Doctrines whether writ, or delivered by
mouth, Historians deliver the same to be with, what Popes have maintained,
Decrees confirmed, Expositions cleared, Councels declared, Schools taught, and
Fathers delivered. And their practice is demonstrated by all Ancient Laws of
England, Imperial, National of Foreign Countries, and former times: by
confession of Enemies, Mahumetans, Jews, Pagans, and all those Scismatickes,
who confess Antiquity is not for them. I shall for those opinions, that are
pretended to be cause of their departure, and the hinderance of their not
returning again to the Church of Rome, give you a taste of the Fathers in
several Centuries: and withal show what fruits of piety, charity, and comfort
they have contained in them.

Of the Eucharist Altars, and Sacrifice.
The word Transubstantiation, must not be endured; they say it is but a late
word, The verity of its Doctrine.
since the Council of Laterane only used; hence they impute novelty to the
Artikles of the Church: they acknowledge the Church has a power given it, to
decide controversies, and the truth of the real presence being called in
question, with subtle interpretation of words, the Church must use some words
of art to oppose them, and secure the truth against their nimble turning of the
sense of words; so that to quarrel at the word, is indeed to quarrel at the
exercise of the Churches power; modern rebellions against the Tenants of holy
Church, forces it to use some words, to hinder the evasions of its enemies,
which they profess to signify no more by, then what was taught, by This is my
body. The word Trinity was not used, till Councels found it necessary to oppose
certain Heresies of those times, by framing that word. But what a sinister
laying hold of all occasions is there, by those who once undertake to defend a
party? Ingenuity is fled, passion is the Pilot, whilst they are tossed upon those
faithles Seas of error. Transelementation is as hard a word, and M. Mountague
allows that. The Greeks use a word to of the same signification, yet no
offense taken at it. Hear the Fathers several expressions, as well as late
Councels. St. Ambrose in the fourth Age after Christ, by the benediction,
nature it self is changed; the change is not made by Faith alone, but really,
says St. Chrysostom. Not every bread, but that which receives the
benediction, is made the body of Christ. Saint Augustine in the fifth Age. In
answer to Melatei^
The Bishop of Derry does ingenuously confess, That Antiquity has used the
expressions of seeing Christ, touching Christ in the Sacrament, of fastening our
teeth in his flesh, etc. What satisfaction can prevail with a moderate
ingenuity, which one shall not meet with in later Schoolmen and Councels?
Clypeus Tridentinus says, Believe Transubstantiation, but the manner of
Transubstantiating, you need not. School terms oblidge not, whether by
adduction, or assumption, or any other words of Art, they may argue, but not
disturb the Faith of the Church. How Christ is present in the Sacrament, can
neither be perceived by sense, nor imagination. St. Thomas of Aquin. Jeremias
Patriarcha in Greece, says, By the power of the omnipotent spirit, the bread
is changed into the very body of Christ, wine into the very blood. The Council
of Trent declares, that in this Sacrament, Jesus Christ, true God, and true
Man, is truly, really, and substantially contained under the species of those
sensible things, yet nor according to a natural manner of existing, but
Sacramentally.

He was the Word that spoke it,
And what that word did make it,
I do believe, and take it.
All the Ancients use constantly without flashes of Rhetoric, or translation
of words, the word sacrifice, and not only to note, giving of thanks, but
propitiation: oblation and offering likewise are used by the Fathers of the
Council of Nice: Dialog. 4.58.
This sacrifice singularly saves the soul from Eternal destruction, which
does repair unto us by mystery, the death of the only begotten; who although,
rising from the dead, dies not, and death shall have no further power over him;
notwithstanding in himself immortally and incorruptibly living, is again
sacrificed for us in the mystery of this holy oblation. Fathers in all Ages
have spoke and held this. Cardinal Perron calls it a sacrifice applicative of a
sacrifice. Thus do the enemies of Catholic Doctrines and words, by their
opposition of them, make that, which should be the band of Unity, the flag of
dissension. And for the name of Altars, St. Ambrose says, He is upon the
Altar, who suffered for all those under the Altar (the bodies of Martyrs) who
are Redeemed by his Passion. St. Augustine says, the sacrifice it self is the
body of Christ, which is not offered to the Martyrs, because they themselves
are that also. The piety and fruits is brings.
The word Transubstantiaon truly understood, affords us the comfort of
asserting the truth of Gods promises: For the several modes and manners which
those out of the Church fancy to themselves, touching the presence of Christ,
if there were words of Art to express, how detractive would they be found,
from the verity, certainty, and reality of that comfort which our Savior
intended us in the blessed Sacraments? But Catholics do adore the Lord
Jesus, here truly present; only him do they adore, who although, till the
world be dissolved, after a natural manner, he is above; yet here with us, is
the truth of the Lord, That as often as we receive, we eat his Flesh, and
drink his Blood, without which, there is no life in us; by which Union, how
do our souls receive a torrent of joys and graces, which flow from a
Celestial source, into all the faculties and powers of our mind, sanctifying
them to him, who is our head, being incorporated into him?

Invocation of Saints.
Whilst we live in the earthly Tabernacles of our Bodies, we are subject to the
sumes of flesh and blood, to the Impressions of diverse affections, and the
clouds of the world; whence we are put to execute a warfare, and act a vigilent
part against the depths of Satan; and to that end, we desire one another
Prayers; And shall theirs be less effectual, whose blessed souls are
unbodied, out of a possibility of falling, and enjoying the blessed presence of
God, inflaming with charity and good will toward us? They rejoice at our
conversions; they understand our conditions: holy Church has ever practiced to
make them friends in the Court of Heaven: To obtain their requests of their
King and ours, the effects of Christ's mediation and merits, may be more
hopefully purchased by Angelical Petitions, then man's disturbed and cold
devotions. Chrysostom. Hom: de Martyr: Egyp.
Let us ask the Fathers, and they will tell us, By the Prayers of the Martyrs,
we may after our departure hence, see and embrace them, says saint Chrysostom.
And elsewhere, Mary prays for us, stronger then Deborah, more powerful then
Jael. De Cog. nit: verae vitae.
St. Augustine says, When you call upon the saints in Prayer, it behooves you
thus to think of them, as placed in the glory of the Eternal beauty, most
glorious lights, far out-shining the Son, who have fully all that is good
in the Vision of God, and who forcibly assist all that call upon them. St.
Hierom to Heliodore, After death (says he) you shall pray for me, who have
incited you, that you might overcome. In the Liturgy of Basil, Now Martyrs
earnestly pray, that God may grant us remission of our sins. De vidu^.
Saint Ambrose says, The Angels are to be called upon in our behalf, who are
assigned to us for our defense. And again, let us not be ashamed to have them
the Intercessors of our infirmity: of the Intercession of the blessed Virgin;
Doctor Don says prettily, Her Womb was a strange Heaven, for there God
clothed himself, and grew; our zealous thanks we pour, as her deeds were our
helps, so are her Prayers; nor can she sue in vain, who has such titles unto
you. The piety and fruits of (...)
Whilst men make themselves such strangers to the Inhabitants above, they break
the communion of saints: if men's joys were all above, if men did thirst after
those glorious fruitions, they would accept of all the helps that might lead
them to it. In invocating, and worshipping the saints, we worship him, whose
saints they are: Says a Father, in often contemplating their crowns, and
begging their patronage, how are our hearts inflamed through their helps? it
erects our thoughts on high, and gives us courage in our journey below, to have
seen all the dangers of it conquered, by those who as they were our example, so
now are our Patrons. (...).
It inlarges and mends our prospect, when we view those Celestial Inhabitants
shining all as stars of several magnitudes; one glorious in the ruddy beams of
Martyrdom; another shining with the snow white purity of Chastity; others, now
the higher, by having been low in their own esteem: they provoke us, by
viewing their glories, to the care of acquiring their virtues; neither let any
pretend, and say, God has commanded us to call on him, therefore its needless
to go to any other; for he has told us, He hears not every one that cries,
Lord, Lord, but him who does the will of his Father; and his will is, that we
should be obedient, and hearken to his Church, and not in stead of observing
its commands, revile it, and rent, and tear it by contempt of its Doctrines.

Confession, Absolution, Satisfaction.
This is, and ever has been, so universally, generally delivered, Preached,
urged, practiced in the Catholic Church, that none can deny it, but those
whose stiffe-neckednes will not give the^ leave to look back into any
Antiquity, or Fathers; these words are plainly, frequently made use of, to
express this part of the Discipline of the Church, which the Fathers called,
The vigor of the Gospel; as if without it, all men's manners and courses toward
Heaven, would languish. Sermons of Confessions.
Bishop Andrews, from the Text, Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted;
acknowledges a particular personal Confession to be meant, by reason, he says,
it is expressed, whose Sins, not what Sins soever. Epist. 55.
Let us hear Saint Cyprian express himself against those that opposed it, It
is indevoured (says he) that sins may not be redeemed, by satisfactions and
just lamentations, that men's wounds may not be washed away with tears; true
peace is taken away, by the lie of a false one; and the healthful bosom of a
Mother (a stepmother interceding) is shut up; weeping and mourning should be
heard from a sinner, and the face of those who have fallen. August. Hom. 5.
Let him come to the Priests, those by whom the Keys are disposed of in the
Church; and let him, from those who are set over those holy rites, receive the
measure of his satisfaction. Tertullian de poenitentia, Confessio
satisfactionis consilium. It is objected, that its an all-daring presumption,
to pretend to be able to satisfy in the most pure eyes of Almighty God, and so
plausibly run on in an ill applide humility; when a man does, what another
demand is, its said, he has satisfied his desires: nay, if the Creditor do
for some reasons, forgive the Debt; he is said to be satisfied: and its spoken
by reason of the Evangelicall compact, when God by promising, makes himself a
debtor, says the Father; and we doing what is required, that is, bringing
forth fruits worthy of Penance, and performing such expressions of sorrow, and
those penitential injunctions as the Church will be satisfied in, for the
demonstrating our hearty repentance, it is called satisfaction: but whom the
expressions of the Council of Trent will not satisfy, touching it, he is sick
of siding and parties, nor is any desire of peace with the Church prevalent
with him.

Sessio. 14 cap. 8.
Its agreeable to the divine clemency, lest sins be pardoned us, without any
satisfaction, occasion being taken, that we lightlier esteeming of sins, fall
into more grievous ones, injurious, and contumelious to the holy spirit of God,
treasuring up wrath for us against the day of wrath; for without doubt these
satisfactory punishments, do greatly recall us from sin, and, as it were, with
a certain bridle restrain us, and make penitents more cautious for the
future; they cure likewise the relics of sin; they take likewise away ill
habits got by vicious living, but contrary acts of virtues: nor at any time is
there a surer way in Gods Church to remove punishments, then that men frequent
these works with true grief of mind: and it draws to this, that whilst we by
satisfying suffer for our sins, we are made conformable to Christ Jesus, who
satisfied for our sins, enjoying also the most certain earnest; that if we
suffer together with him, we shall likewise be glorified together with him.
Neither is this our satisfaction such, which we pay for our sins, that it is
not made by Christ Jesus: for we who of our selves, as of our selves, can do
nothing; yet he cooperating, who strengthens us, we can do all things: so man
has not whence he may glory, but all our glorying is in Christ, in whom we
live, and merit; in whom we satisfy, doing worthy fruits of penance, which
have their force from him, and are offered from him to the Father, and by him
are accepted of the Father.

It was ever held in the Church of God the ordinary means of the forgiveness
of sins, and is so far from being a cause to drive men from the Catholic
Church, that to enjoy the benefit of it, they should come with humble minds,
and tears in their eyes, to beg the comfort of this only approved sure way
for their pardon. St. Augustine, in his Enchirid. says, God has given liberty
to none to sin, though by his pitying of us, he blot out our sins, if sitting
satisfaction be not neglected.

How wholesome must it be for our minds, Fruits and Piety.
to discharge themselves, to air our minds by confession, to have the state of
our souls judged of, (all men being partial censurers of themselves) and
thence fitting Physic prescribed, after his inspection of our inward
complexion? what comforts are conveyed into our breasts, in liew of all vicious
affections or acts we part with thence in Confessions? our pardon is confirmed
in Heaven, as it is granted here on Earth. How many thick and foggy
selfe-delusions, false opinions, desperate fears, ill grounded doubts, do all
vanish from that soul, that has dispersed those clouds by clearenesse of
Confession? What recruits of graces, spiritual satisfactions, healthful
directions are acquired? here is exercised an act of that most acceptable
humility, in throwing your self down at the Feet of Gods Ambassador, in
detestation of your self; exercising your Faith likewise, in believing that,
Whose Sins they remit, they are remitted, this being the second table after
shipwreck.

Purgatory, and Praying for the Dead.
It is the general confession of those, who call themselves the Reformed, that
Prayer for the Dead was anciently used; some few testimonies of which I Will show
you. St. Augustine in his Book pro Mortuis, writes, That if no where it should
be read in the Old Testament, yet the authority of the Universal Church is not
small; which is so clear in the custom of this, where in the Prayers which
the Priests pour out to their Lord God at the Altar, a recommending of the
dead has place also. And the same Father, ad Laurentium in the Enchiridion,
There is a certain manner of living (says he) not so good that it does not
require these things after death; nor yet so ill, that these things may not
profit him after death. Aerias was condemned of the whole Church, for
condemning this. One may perceive by the constant practice of the Church, how
these Texts in Scripture are to be understood, of being neither pardoned in
this World, nor in the World to come: And that other place, concerning those,
who build hay and stuble upon the Foundation; they shall be saved, yet as by
Fire. Martyrdom, says Clemens Alexandrinus, is a purgation of sins with
glory. And St. Augustine says, That the recital of the names of Martyrs at
the Altar, is more that they may pray for us, then that we may pray for them.
For the pains in Purgatory; one cannot conceive how there should be a
Purgatory, without suffering pain. Hear what Boethius says a thousand years
since, But I pray (says he) remain there no punishments after this life? yes,
great certainly (says he:) for some (says he) I take to be exercised with
bitter punishments, Liber 4.
others with element purgations.

The fruits and piety.
To a Skoffer, there shall never want matter; but as he says, Cave sed fiat ne
Jocus iste Focus: When St. Paul mentions trial by fire, its blown away with a
hundred light Interpretations: an Atheistical spirit would quarrel with that
expression, of the damned gnashing their teeth; which, they say, is an effect
rather of cold, then of fire. But as a Father says, Heresy is not from the
Scripture, but from the sense of Scripture, which the Church, by the providence
of God, safely preserves.

It must raise no small comforts in the minds of those, who have parted with
what were their joy here, to be able by devout Prayers to recommend them to a
more advanced state of Joy. It does enlarge the subject of our charity, whilst
death it self does but quicken our devotion for our Friends, parting with
them, as men not without hope. It sweetens our passage hence, being not out of
the pertaking of the benefit of Prayers, Alms, and the good Works of those we
leave behind, the Communion of Saints: and for the effects that the opinions of
postumous and after suffering must have upon the minds of men, it must needs
tend to the making the soul disgust these inferior appetites and affections,
which breathe upon the soul an earthy vapor and foulness, which it must be
cleansed from, with penal purgation, before it can be admitted into those
purer joys, to see God, which only is granted to them that are clean of
heart. The perverting, and disordering the dispensation and application of Gods
grace, who (though Gods merits be all-sufficient, and our Redemption complete,
and the Divine Promises large) yet think, that notwithstanding, all their life
time, their judgments have been abused with the too great esteem of the empty
delights and glories of the world, their wills following the impulse of carnal
pleasures, nor any Celestial spark ever kindling their affections; yet by a
swimming fancy in the head, that Christ has dyed for them; think, they shall
presently jumpe into Paradise; It is a merry conceit: so was it of that Fool,
That thought, that all the ships that came into the Harbor, were his own. If
we suffer together with him, we shall likewise be glorified with him, was held
to be the surest earnest of Everlasting Joy.

Of Free Will.
He who has made you without your self, will not save you without your self,
says a Father. God is the way, means, and end; all is from him, and to him:
but how much more noble thought have they of the Deity, who conceive him to
deal with man as endowed with free operations, then with us, as with stocks
and stones, that are merely patient? It is the mere grace of God that gives
good works their force and value; yet no such necessity, that any thing is
done, whether man will or no: Apolig. Epist.
For who could either praise, or discommend that, who can imagine such actions
to be rewarded, or punished? or that soul to be immortal, and perform
Religion, which should want free and reasonable actions, the arguments and
pledges of immortality: but we are to admire the wisdom of Gods Church, which
agrees the aeternall prescience of God, with the temporal cooperation of
man; that it leaves the first infallible, and yet proves the temporal action,
appetite and delight, or consent to any thing to be voluntary, free, and in the
power of man, to be effected or omitted, rewarded and punished.

Of the use and Veneration of Pictures and Images.
Upon this is waged a perpetual war; Hic illius arma, hic currus fuit. The
Reformists generally take it for Idolatry, and what ever is spoken against
Idolatry in Scripture, they press and urge upon the use of Pictures. But
before they tax our Mother with so odious a crime: they might please to
consider the nature of the objection, and how far the extent of it is: and
withal, they might consult the opinion of ancient devout Fathers (who would
rather have lost a thousand lives, then have committed Idolatry) touching it;
and withal, they might have considered the use of them, before they should be
frighted from their Mothers bosom (a place of protection) into wanderings and
errors, where are laid the snares of the enemy. Church story informs us, That
the ancient Christians would fall down before the Statues of the Emperors,
which was then the manner and posture used to do reverence; as sometime to be
bare before the Cloth of State, does signify the like; though they would
rather dye, then salute so the Images of the false gods. But for the like
postures to be forbid to be used to the Pictures of Saints, or of our blessed
Savior, none can show a prohibition; for those outward signs of honor
signified by gesture, are indeed common toward God, Grotius.
Angels, and Men; no particular one being set a part, or commanded to be
peculiarly used, to signify only Divine Worship: when we frame a thought of
that good Shepherd in our minds, if we would deliver it in writing, why might
we not write it in Hyreogliphies, as well as Letters, which are not so ancient,
no other thing is so worthy, as the mind of Man? but if the Image of our
Savior Crucified be there drawn and viewed by the understanding; why may not
our corporal Eye, behold it drawn on Paper, or other material, since they do
but serve to recall and revive those former Ideas in the mind, which other
objects might distract, or steal away? And by several Persons the several
Attributes of God may be signified; as a King for Royalty, etc. St. Augustine
says, in the Visitation of the sick, There is added upon the Cross the Image
of a Man; humbly embrace this, and weekly venerate it. The honor done to the
Image, is referred to whose Image it is, says Basil and Chrysostom. I know
these things are proposed in vain, to those who will admit of no other
Tribunal, then their own breasts, who exercise an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
power over the Consciences of their followers, whom an imaginary exposition of
some dark prophecy of Antichrist does unhinge their minds and judgments,
from off, what they ought to turn on, which is obedience to the Church, whose
sacred Authority ought to bind in the luxuriant and forward imaginations of
men's own brains: But I have only instanced in these few perticulars, without
using any illaqueation of Arguments, or finnesse of discourse. Thus are all the
Churches Doctrines, Practices, and Ceremonies, advancements and means to
Salvation and Piety, the establishment of its regiment on Earth, of Pope,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcists,
Lectors: where the mystery of our Redemption is so esteemed, and remembered,
that no Holy day, no part of Divine Service is celebrated, but represents to us
one benefit or another: no Ceremony in the holy Sacrifice, no action of the
Priest, no Ornament or Attire he wears, no Benediction he gives, no Sign of
the Cross he makes, but has its religious signification, and Preaches to us,
and speaks nothing but Christ Crucified: therefore, though the great work of
our redemption may be thought not to be hindered, by opposing things of an
inferior nature; yet it is no small matter, the opposing the Authority of the
Church, tending to the dissolving that power, Richworths dialogue
by which the greatest things are maintained. Commonwealths punish with death
a small stealth; because its an offense against the nature of Government.
Heretofore men proved Doctrines to be true, from the authority of holy Church;
and now they would annull her authority from her Tenants; and from her
Articles, would throw dirt in her Face, as if she had lost her being, for being
the faithful Keeper of what was committed to her, and had forfeited her
breasts, the Scriptures, for feeding us with their milk.

CAP. IIII. The falling away from the Church (under the Notion of Reformation)
the cause of troubles of State; and from the same grounds, they build their
opinions on, arises the grounds of the disturbance of Governments.
THe Church being Divinely Founded, as it has survived all the malices and
practices of the greatest Tyrants, its enemies; so have those, who breaking of
that Ecclesiastical league which kept them in the limits of the practice, and
belief of the same things, mist of that enlargement and lastingnesse of
commands, which they expected, by altering the sight and mark, they took their
aim by; they have straide the most, from what they chiefly took their aim at:
whilst they sought a particular prosperity, separated from the peace of the
Church; against which, the musterd, forces of men's malice, and Hells fury,
became ever weak and impotent.

The blood of the first Bishops of Rome, was the fruitful compost of the
Church; their Ashes were Generative: all the furious conflagrations, sackings,
and spoylings of the City of Rome by the Goths, Huns, Visegoths, Halaricus,
were like stormy winds, whose Gole and end was only to dye and expire; while
Rome triumphed over their spoils, in the continuance of that never failing
Church: I will not name Attila, nor Limprandus; the one retiring from Rome by
Saint Leos means: the other by Pope Zacharies, strangely and miraculously.
Those barbarous Saracens, whose rage was glutted with the conquest of the
Eastern Emperor, the glory of whose arms and conquest of Candy increased; who
made Africa feel the effects of the advancement of their Armies, and struck
terror into a great part of Europe and Asia; who deflowred fair Italy, and set
fire to the Suburbs of Rome. And yet against Gregory the fourth, the Sea of
their incursions, found its bounds, that its waves should go no further. The
Duke of Burbon (says Fox) died censured, being slain in the assault of Rome,
whose Faith has still prevailed, in spite of German Scismes, or the powerful
oppositions of Dalmatia, Slavonia, Bulgaria; or the entertainment of Luthers
dissoluteness in Dania, Suevia; or Calvin's subtilities in Zelandia, Franciae,
Genevah, and all other blindnesses and powers of the rest of the world. Julian
dyed with a, Vicis^i Galileae, thou have overcome o Galilean, meaning our
Savior. The Arrian Emperors opposed, and were confounded. The Jacobines,
Armenians, and Grecians, are under the Tyranny of the Turkish Empire, whilst
they deny obedience to the Church of Rome. How many Pagans Emperors before
Constantine opposed it, and almost all dyed miserably. Four hundred Heretics
before Luther, Bernard Lutzen. catalog. Haeret.
whose malice was all dashed into froath upon this Rock? How many of the Kings
of Scotland, England, Portugal, France. Emperors have been miserable, deposed,
slain, who have contended with this Sea in its jurisdiction. Bid, lib. 3: 4:
5. hist.
Like success had those Saxon Kings, who opposed the Faith of that Sea: some
whereof submitted, and became religious men; and those that were Apostates,
miserably put to death. The British Kings, disobeyed Rome in the observation of
Easter, and manner of shaving of the Crowns of Priests: a leaven thousand of
their Munks, who defended this opposition, were wrapped up in the sad catastophre
of being slain by the Pagans sword; their Country mastred, and awed by their
hired soldiers; and of Kings over them, were made subjects to them. Upon the
stage of every Kingdom, these parts have been acted, and have concluded in
direful Tragedies; from whose every parcel and passage in our conquerors
life, Edwards, Henry's, Richards, the observation of men might store themselves
with most stupendous examples of their sufferings, in, and from their contests
with the Roman Sea; the revolt, defection, and falling away from which, I shall
show to be pregnant with the unheard of mutations, distractions, wars, and
tumults, which threatens such fatal trepidations and concussions in the bowels
of all modern States: and as effects which are included in their causes, so
all these evils to be shut up and vertually contained, in the principal, upon
which their departure from Rome is made: propositions, which seemingly
blausible, yet the higher they get into esteem and reputation, so much the
more powerfully, do they shower down upon their followers, desolation and
destruction: one may behold them at first like little Aerie, soft and tender
strings exhaled and ascending, drawn with the more powerful aspect of the Son:
yet, with you shall ere long, find descending upon you in hard, condensed,
thunder stone, with wild flaming expansions, breaking forth of the womb of
that cloud that bred it; or like the wooden horse, peaceably at first let in,
yet straight filling the Town with bands of Armed men. A way certainly (as
Solomon says) which seeming right in a Man's own eyes; yet the end thereof is
death. I will first take a view of some of their particular opinions, and see
what a dangerous influence they have upon Governments: Calvin teaches, That the
Laws of the Magistrate do not bind the Conscience. Luther Preaches, That it
is the nature of the Gospel to raise wars and seditions among Christians, etc.
that there is no hope of remedy, till all humane Laws be taken away: and (then
that which is the Foundation and ground of all, Reformation so called) that all
things are to be settled, ordered, changed, according to their agreeing, or
disagreeing with Scripture, the interpretation whereof must be the particular
judgments of private Men. This rule is equally strong for all sides; too
stiff to recant, or yield to others judgments: and this same rule must
patronize as many opinions and sects, as the various fancies of men busied in
Scripture can invent or suggest: thus naturally flows from this rule of
Reformation, not only diversity of opinions, various judgments, and opposite
Doctrines; but strong and numerous parties, that cry up such a man for their
Apostle, or embrace such an opinion for their Faith: several bodies of
considerable strength, whose obligations are the defense of such opinions. New
and several interests, whereby every one studies their own preservations and
upholdings, though never so contrary to each other, or destructive to the
Government where they live: so that those who in a contemplative way, and
abstracted consideraon did but lately talk of the purity of the Gospel, of
light and truth; find themselves by and by, plunged in all practices,
turbulent, seditious, unjust, oppressive: A wrong principle in the
understanding, does not only multiply notionall absurdities, but begets and
produces sinister actions: these numbers of men, of several persuasions and
Doctrines, comes to be variously planted and spread, in several Countries and
Governments; whether brought in by way of Traffic, negotiating one with
another, or that such men being banished their own Countries, they sow their
ill seed in others Provinces; or whether the errors be native, and sprung up
there; or that, as infection, they catch and spread, by way of example and
imitation; yet thus the world becomes to be blended, and the subjects in all
sorts of Governments, get a new Primum mobile to their Allegiance and duty; and
instead of intending the good of the community where they live, they are busied
in the advancing of that body, which for conformity, and holding the same
Tenants with them, they become concerned in: so that if in one Government, a
sort of them be oppressed for their seditious practices; presently in all others,
those of the same opinion are alarumed: so that Governors straight find their
Laws silent, distractions multiplying; and none secured of their own subjects,
who do either profusely throw away on their confederates, that treasure and
money (which should be the support of their own Country) or if those opinions
have taken hold of active and generous spirits, which endeavor still to make
others of the same opinion with them, presently they expect Foreign aid and
help, to change their proper policies and Governors. Then through the innate
reverence that all people bear to the opinion of Divinity; believing that the
spirit moves upon the Face of their Preachers watery discourses, they become
powerful, like the winds, to make the people as the Sea, swell and become
unpeaceable, whilst each bandies against other, and all against the State: thus
are all the veins of Christendom filled with these unwholesome and noxious
humors, whilst Ambition and Heresy often shake hands together; for Ambition
seeks but under any pretense to procure the affections and services of men, and
to apply them to their own uses: and now so great bodies of men, wanting but
countenance, and great persons to be their head, and encourage them; these two
seek their mutual ends in this conjunction: no discontented or ambitious great
one, but has a prepared way to awe, or be revenged on his Prince, or State:
and Kings, and Governors themselves, are at last forced to hang their Crowns
and Diadems upon the maintenance and upholding on one party or other, who
becomes strong or weak, as that party ebbes or flows; all the rest esteeming
themselves but persecuted by their power, and would at last prove like the Ivy,
which first dissolves the Wall, and then seems to uphold it. Thus did
Reformation, (so called) Jehu like, drive its warlike Chariots through
Germany; Mars so long a time, seeming to have set up his standard there; whilst
replenished with these unwholesome humors, the German Diets became not so
wholesome, as before: and no less suddenly has those sparks taken hold,
and flowne over the French Stables, whilst Genevah, the Lady of the Lake,
challenges the Prerogative of the Apostolical Seat, and dictates Laws to its
Brethren. From Calvin's Institutions, the Switzers cantonize their Religion, as
well as Country: and not meanly have these seeds grown up under the shade of
Orange Tree: The Dane with graver pace, recedes from their former
Ecclesiastical league; and now all breaking up and disbanding, the face of
Europe which was seen one and entire in the Sea of Rome, is now by these
numberless Fractions, but parcels and pieces, representing several Faces, the
sacred anchor of Religion being moved, True religion not contrary, nor
prejudicial to Governments.
all the ships of States and Goverments, come to be tossed and troubled; Religion
being like the Sun, which whilst it keeps its own proper and heavenly
course, gives light and influence to all; but when the pretense of it serves
earthly ends, it causes a conflagration, and is a Phaeton to set the world on
fire.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
True Religion must be such, that it carry no destruction to Commonwealths,
though it last for ever, as the worship of Christ was instituted to do. There
are vices of men, and there are vices of times; but disobedience to
Governments, or Doctrines of disloyalty are detested by the Catholic
Religion, and the Canons and Decrees of the Church. I will recite the words of
an English Jesuit, This Priesthood which is now rejected, is the same which was
given to St. Peter, and the Apostles; the same which St. Augustine, and his
Associates had, that converted England; the same which has been honored of all
Kings since; the same Sacrament, unchangeable; the same power of order, the
same jurisdiction: there is not any point of civil regiment in that Sacrament,
being wholly spiritual and supernatural; nothing concerning a temporal
Commonwealth; no renouncing or denial of any authority in England; no
conspiracy to Prince, no authority communicated, but to offer Sacrifice, to
Pray, to Preach, minister Sacraments. The Grecians, the Germans, and other
people, having their Doctrine diverse to the Church of Rome, have their
seminaries in the same City, and their Priests maintained by the same Popes;
yet the Princes of those Nations, for the greater part being Infidels, Turks,
condemn not their Priests for Traitors, but admit the exercise of their
Function, as agreeable to the Commonwealth: and as it were a great absurdity
to say, that the Pope in relieving the Catholic Students of Palestine,
Grecia, Armenia, and such Nations, should do it in hope to be temporal Lords
of those Countries, but only for love to true Religion; so is it improbable he
should have any such intent in England, as unprobable as the other to be under
his temporal regiment: no Article we defend, Prayer to the Saints, Prayer for
the Dead, restitution for wrongs and injuries to those that live, obedience to
Governors, the validity of their Laws, the force of good works; the number,
grace and reverence of the Sacraments, penance, and punishment for sin, both
in life and after; teaching duty to God, honor to Magistrates, equallity to
all, injury and oppression to none: the chiefest points of true regiment,
cannot be offensive to a well ordered policy.

CAP. V. An Invitation of Wits, to the study of Arts, and to leave opposing the
Church; with the excellency of the fruits of Piety, which only can proceed
from true Religion.
IT is observed by the most Ingenious Lord Virulam, That in Divinity there was
nothing to be added by the wit of Man: and in stead of finding wantings and
desideratars, complained here of too much luxuruancy of Men's brains; for God
has so surely founded his Church on one side, and the Devil has so busily in
the night sown Tares on the other, that there is no employment here for the
restless agitation of Men's heads. It was truly observed by another, That Men
must either resolve their Religion into Reason, or Authority: if into Reason,
then they must believe no more then they can prove by Reason. If into
Authority, It was apparent where it had continued this sixteen hundred years;
but the measure of truth is many times the maintaining Men's cause; but not
truth the guide of their cause: they transfer and send the beams of their
wit, to gild the clouds of their error. How unhappy are the triumphs of those
endeavors, which strive to make falsehood appear more like truth, then truth it
self? As the English Poet, describing truth by Vna, which is still one, and
the same: and falsehood by Duessa, which is doubleness: complains, Though Una
was as fair, as fair might be,
Yet false Duessa, seemed as fair as she.
When the edge of wit is turned aside to maintain an error; how are men
uncharitable to Texts of Scripture? how do they pretend to a Genealogy, by
thredding all the oppositions that ever was in any Age against the Church, on
the line of their Discourse? for their service, such and such Ages must have
the plagues of Egypt brought upon them, gross darkness. The Fathers must
pretend to no more knowledge then that which has now the approbation of men's
more refined brains: and the lately found out rules of (Reformation so called)
must overruled the witness of Antiquity, the Authority of Councels, the
constitutions of the Church. When Ireneus, and St. Hierom, etc. do magnify
the Apostolical Seat, they must be held but flashes of Rhetoric, dashes with
their Pen; they make use of hard niceties, elaborate thinness, weak finesse,
where Sillogismes must seem to uphold the Church: whereas that which is
comprehended within the rules of reasoning, will fly no higher then reason can
carry it. Thus do they strive to place in the Clouds that Article of I believe
the holy Catholic Church; Divine words being such, that they require a Simple
believer, but argue a disputer impious; because in Divinity we respect not what
is spoke, but who speaks: How do the holy virtues of Charity and Humility give
place to Ambitious heats, and contentions, and trials of wit, where men more
strive to get the conquest in words, then to become the happy subjects of
truth? Is there no new discoveries to be made in the intellectual Globe? nor
means to be found out with the arms of an active reason, to enlarge man's
dominion over nature? Does not the Ethics invite a further disquisition
touching the Culture and Georgies of the mind, and to find out Methods of
attaining virtue, as well as handsomely to describe it? Does not the Physickes
upbraide you with the few linkes that yet men have been able to take up of
natures chain, whereas only three accidental discoveries of Guns, Printing,
and the Loadstone, have altered the face of Christendom, in its Wars, Studies,
and Expeditions? Are the Arts of reasoning themselves, so exact and fit for
these scrutanies, that they need not the help of reason it self to make them
more expressive and directive: whereas Hooker says, There might be a way of
reasoning found out, wherewith men's judgments inured, they would go as far
beyond the greatest Doctor now, as the Learnedest Doctor now does a Child: But
I find it Writ, That there must be Heresies: Therefore doubts, scruples, and
questions may breed the same disturbance in men's minds, as the prosperity of
the wicked did to David: as soon as he entered into the Temple of God, he found
an end of them: where now with pleasure, we shall retire from this noise
without, and walk into the Gardens of our Heavenly Spouse; where we will view
the excellent Fruits of Piety, that he himself has Sowed and Planted there;
and which can only proceed from true Religion. The Antidotes of humane
Learning, are many times the Aerie Bladders of men's Pride, though the Methods of
Logic, object to men their confused blindness; the Art of Rhetoric, their
rudeness; the gravity of the Ethics, their passionate weakness: yet are they
pleased many times, from them rather to plume themselves with some Feathers of
ostentation, then endeavor the real advancement of their natures, by
conforming it to duty and truth. True Religion stablishes men in their duties,
and constitutes the virtues of men from the most worthy end of their Makers
praise: virtue being else but a gathering together of colors, seen through the
glass of Men's diversified humors.

There is no virtue, but Religion: Wise, Valiant, Sober, Just, are Names which
none want, which want not vice covering discretion.

Without this directive power, designing all things their Offices, War is but
an angry fit, and violence taught to undergo a rule. Courts, and Tribunals,
but injustice, wearing the Gown, and putting on the Formalities of Law: all
men's services, and most obsequious performances, are but well ordered Craft,
and methodicall subtility: the conversations of Men, but a Stage, where Vizards
are worn with applause: Chastity, the malignity of the complexion, and
humility but Phlegm. Religion fills men's minds with magnanimity, whilst the
judgment is incited to censure worldly things, vain and transitory, whereby
the understanding takes off a true copy of the world; and the cozenages of men's
souls are prevented, all the inconstancies which the Scene of humane affairs
represents, do but yield a grateful prospect to the soul, beholding it self
placed obove the alterable nature of humane things; leaving to admire what is
inferior, to the dignity of its own immortal nature; finding that of all the
Nymphs men court, be it honor, wealth, power, (by a most true Metamorphosis)
they catch but an armefull of dust: for the greatness of men's minds, proceeds
from the little esteem they have of all such things, as are under the power,
and uncertain stroke of Fortune, (that is, of things that by the Laws imposed
on them have to change and corruption) for although men's minds may seem to be
too much buried and deprest, with the contemplation of the dissolution of
things, and in viewing how low all humane hopes do lie: yet are they thereby
truly raised, and elevated; which except men's minds had buried them, that is,
have pursued things to their Tombs and Ashes; they would have buried men's
minds, by setting a greater value and rate on things, then their fluid,
altering nature would bear. Thus are we called on by Religion, from these
delusions from loving the world, or the things in the world: How does it
provide for our contents, lifting up the soul, not to any fruitless rocky
swellings, but to an active towering height, transplanting men's souls, making
them take root in Heaven, and to flourish downward in a constant practice of
virtue toward men, till the cold blasts of Death breathe on them; when as then
those Celestial Spirits repair to their Mother root, to flourish for
Eternity? It makes our passions the instruments of virtue, by giving them its
directions in their motions, hindering their excursions and fallings out, upon
the many false shows and pretenses of things. How Heroical are the commands
of Religion? making men the Champions of their neighbors Fame, the deliverers
of the oppressed, and every where to erect the monuments of their Charity; and
this upon their Masters command, with the contempt of the Aerie rewards of the
World, but set on fire with an Heavenly flame, which men's breaths neither
kindle, nor extinguish: It makes its followers use the aids and comforts of
this their exile with security, in order to sublimer purchases: it makes them
steddily follow through all states and conditions, their Masters designments,
desiring only to live in the world in order to his service that made it. It
will approach that breast with its Celestial purities, which erects a Stage
for vainglorious thoughts to action; or sets up a Shop for gain, through
covetousness; or shambles, for Envy to act its Massacres on; or a Tavern for
excess and pleasure. How many devout orders, as it were the Regiments of the
Church, that sight these Battles, and exercise this holy warfarre? and how many
have all of them afforded, either stout Champions of the truth against
Haeresie; or have stored the Church with able and devout Governors; or who have
aided men's devotions, and have kindled men's minds with the love of God, with
their seraphicall devotions? Jesuits.
The orders of Gods Church never grows barren, but are always teeming with
the excellencies of transcendent gifts. How many sublime and generous spirits,
by frequent making sacrifice of themselves into Foreign parts, makes the
hearts of Savages Trophyes of Christ Crucified, and fill the Letterd World with
the admired productions of Wit and Learning? Here the fire of Devotion is laid
upon the true Altar, which never goes out no hour in the Day or Night, where
in some Church or Convent there are not some actually in the Church, offering
up their cheerful Hyms of Praise, or mournful throbs of Soule-washing Tears,
or their souls dilated with the flames of burning charity, pour forth their
intercessions. They profestly tread under feet the brags of worldly glory: they
contemn the dotage of the world, who honor one another in vanity, and set a
price upon that, which is but the Ensign of their lost and fallen condition.
Here that Hydropick distemper of covetousness is conquered, by sending a
divorce to all propriety: Here, by a generous Flight on the wings of Fastings
and Prayer, their souls soar above the smoke and steames of Flesh and Blood,
and breathe in those Upper and purer Regions of Celestial conversation, their
spirits with disdain, descend to moderate repasts, all the inferior actions
of their life are but rational distinctions, no interruptions from their
Prayers, they being so refined and sublimed up to spiritual objects, that
their conversation, and all the motions and affections of their heart, do but
become one continued Prayer: Here they follow that council of leaving all, and
following him: they view what the building of Christianity will cost; and as
the Apostle says, Resist unto blood, proving what the holy and acceptable will
of God is. The Church likewise instructs its Children, and brings them up in
the exercise of an active devotion, as well as contemplative, fitted to the
employments of all sorts of persons and conditions, making it speak in every
ones proper and natural Language; the wisdom of Gods spirit descending upon
men (as it were) in such cloven Tongues. Piety and goodness is the end of the
Commandment, the will of God being our sanctification, which appears to
triumph in the practice and doctrine of the only true Catholic Church, of
Divine and Infallible authority: to the manifestation and demonstration of
which, its agreeable with the Divine goodness to establish the same (which is
the only director and care of our way to Heaven) with effectual Sacraments,
with a successive Priesthood; the verity whereof might be showed as a light
upon a Hill, by its universality of place and time: Decrees of Councels,
Writings of Fathers, and all Antiquity. Virtue has its proper object, and all
actions, not steared by that compass of obedience, which truth it self has
enjoined us, though otherwise plausible, are wound up upon the bottom of
error, and turn upon the Poles of erroneous and selfish Principles: as the
clearest Rivers (which though they delight and profit in their passage) yet
emptying themselves into a Sea of error, there lose their name; and the best
metal is rung out of tune: notwithstanding all those who with hearty and
faithful desires seek to know how to serve God, with a will rather to lose a
thousand worlds, then not profess what they should know was Gods command. God
is at the end of such men's desires, as he gave them a beginning; and though
such be actually in a by channel and way, yet by those. Heavenly inspirations
and spiritual gusts, they are Sailing out of them into the great Canal.

FINIS.

