RIHGT THOUGHTS The Righteous Man's EVIDENCE: A DISCOURSE,

Proving Our state (Godward) to be as Our Thoughts are.

Directing how to try them, and Our Selves by them.

Propounding Schemes of Right Thoughts.

With Motives and Rules for keeping Thoughts Right.

In Two Parts.

By FAITHFUL TEAT.

For as a man THINKS in his Heart, So is He, PROVE. XXIII.VII. Let the
Unrighteous Man forsake his Thoughts, ISAIAH LV.VII. Does not He that Pondereth
the HEART, Consider? PROVE. XXIV.XII. London, Printed for George Sawbridge,
dwelling on Clerkenwell Green, 1669.

The Preface.
Little Book,
I Am very sensible that thine Entertainment in the World is likely to be the
same with His, on whose Errand Thou art sent, who is said to have endured,
Hebr. 12.1.
(...), the contradiction of Sinners against Himself. For to tell men of making
Conscience of THOUGHTS, for Setting and Keeping them RIGHT, when the most do
even hate to be reclaimed from the most Outward Enormities in Words and
Actions, Psalm. 50.17. Genesis 27.9. compared with Gal. 4.28, 29
is likely but to tickle the Spleen of too many Ishmaels to an Impious
scurrility, and profane Derision.

But ( whether they will hear, Ezekiel. 2.4, 5.
or whether they will forbear) Go Thou and tell the wicked WITS that thou do
meet with, Dan. 5.3.
That whilst they are Quaffing Themselves into a drunken merriment in the
Vessels of the Temple, Verse 25. Verse 27. Verse 26.
(making sport of things Spiritual) there is a tremendous MEAN TEKEL upon the
Wall, Their wit is weighed in the Balances (of the Sanctuary) and found
wanting; Their Days are numbered, and themselves shortly, to give up the Ghost,
and a sad account therewith to God that gave them their active Phansies for
better use.

And here I could tell thy Reader, that I have been lately an Eyewitness of
some (taken for Wits of prime magnitude in the Orb of Profaneness) who upon
their Deathbeds, could allow no rest to themselves, or those about them,
without procuring the Visits and Prayers of such as themselves had by a mimical
way of Praying, and Theatrical mock-Preaching, been wont to expose to Derision
among their Companions; Unhappy Partners in their profane LIFE, and again
unhappy in that they were not Spectators of their penitent DEATHS!

Exodus 10.16. Chap. 8.8, 28. and 9.27. Hebr. 11.26.
When Gods Plagues are upon Egypt, Oh then call for Moses and Aaron in have, O
Pray, pray, pray s^r us; Yet this Moses is the man, that at other times, must
bear the Reproach of Christ in Egypt, as the Apostle (to the Hebrews)
testifies. For though the Hearts of the Sons of men are fully set in them to
do Evil, and Madness is in their Hearts whilst they Live (as Ecclesiastes
observes) yet, Eccles. 9 3. Job 28.22. compared with Verse 28.
says the Holy Ghost, Destruction, and DEATH say, We have heard the Fame of
Wisdom with our Ears, that is, of the true fear of the Lord, as the Text
expounds it self. Now Mr. W^^ler quoted by Mr. R. B^yl.
It Is not that which first we Love.
But what Dying We approve.


2 Cor. 5.11.
Go thou therefore, and tell the World that thine Author, knowing the Terror of
the Lord, (and in the many years leisure he has had for Thinking, finding no
more Noble Theme than Thoughts) has sent thee forth to persuade Men, to be so
far from daring to adventure. Their Souls in naked and open Profaneness, as not
to rest under the fairest Fig Leaves of superficials, or the best of OUTSIDES
whatsoever; but to consider seriously, That there is a Sanctify the LORD GOD
in your HEART; 1 Pet. 3.15. Eccles. 10.12. Hebr. 4.22. (...).
and a Curse not the KING, no not in thy Thought; That the word of God is quick
and powerful, a (critical) discerner of the Thoughts of the Heart.

And therefore thou can be unfit for the Hands of none, for that all have
HEARTS. Discourses of other sorts may more particularly concern some one sort
of Readers, Prove. 27.2^.
and some another, but that Counsel of Solomon's, Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy FLOCKS, concerns every one, if that of Holy Herbert be true, My
Soul's a Shepherd too, a Flock it seeds, Herbert in Temple.

Of THOUGHTS, and Words, and Deeds.


Let all sorts therefore be diligent to know the state of their Thoughts.

As for the Poor in this World, they have the more need to be rich in (that
which our Savior calls the good treasure of the Heart, that is, Mat. 12.33.
(amongst other things) good THOUGHTS; and as for the Greatest, go thou and
tell them, that as the Bereans were the More Noble for wearing the precious
Pearl of Gods Word at their Ear; So, Thoughts regulated by that Word, Acts
17.10.11.
are the best Jewel that can sparkle upon the most Honorable Breasts, Mal.
3.16. Verse 17.
to make them orient in his Eye, who has said of those only, who so THINK
upon his Name, They shall be Mine, in that day when I make up my JEWELS.

1 King 8.38.
But if the sick of the Plague of the Heart (which Scripture speaks of as the
worst of Plagues and) whose Cure thou designest, will not receive thee, because
the Divine patience does as yet suffer them to walk abroad free from Outward
and bodily Maladies; Then go thou, and visit my old Neighbors in Doleful
Colchester, and other such sad places, where the Plague in their Houses,
hindering their freedom of converse with others, does the more oblige, and may
perhaps the more dispose them to turn in to Themselves, Psalm 4.5.
to stand in aw, and not to sin, but to commune with their Own HEARTS; And the
God of all Grace go along with thee, and succeed thee, for the effectual
Turning of many Hearts from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHap. 1. Of Self-discovery: its Nature and necessity.

Chap. 2. Dams this Principle, That Thoughts are Free; The less so in Gods Eye,
because free from Man's. Evil Thoughts sin to us, Abomination to God; Damned in
the old World, Exclude from Salvation, like Devils, and worse.

Chap. 3. Thoughts the Souls Pulse. In Churlishness, Liberality, Envy,
Goodness, Impatience, Patience, Uncleanness, Chastity, Covetousness, Pride,
Humility, Purity. Judge we Our selves by what we would others (if we could).

Chap. 4. God chiefly eyeth men's Thoughts, they have Feet, Tongues and Hands.
Thought-Adultery, Profaneness, Presumption, etc. Evil and Good Characterized
from their Thoughts: known to God afar off. Our Possessions, Companions, etc.
1. God made us for Thinking. Gods Good will toward us, and Ours to Him set out
by Thoughts, so Our Ill will by not thinking of Him, etc. 2. Grace first stirs
in Thoughts. 3. Thoughts can reach further then our Deeds can, and God requires
our utmost. 4. Thoughts are the Hearts firstborn, Gods part Man's Heart a
Fountain, Mint-house, God-eyes our hearts first setting out. 5. God judges (as
Man cannot) most by what is in-most. 6. Conscience (Gods Deputy) judges us by
our Thoughts.

Chap. 5. Right Thoughts how to be known, not thoughts of, but in our selves.
Conscience the Lords Candle to search.

Trial 1. By their Original, not from Nature, but Grace. The occasion and
season of Gods first working them. A Scheme of a Converts first thoughts, agree
with natural motions in 1. Facility, 2. Frequency, 3. Perpetuity.

Trial 2. By their Radication, when good thoughts are deepest. Rule explained,
Reason of the Rule, Instances in good and bad, Godly (at lowest) excel
Hypocrites at best. Bodily temperament how considerable in this trial.

Trial 3. Right thoughts operative in a Right Conversation. Thoughts without
Works vain and dead. Right application of this Rule.

Trial 4. Right Thoughts are Regular, Here 1. Think there is a Rule for
Thoughts. 2. Have Right Thoughts of the Rule.

RIGHT THOUGHTS The Righteous Man's EVIDENCE: A Discourse upon Proverbs 12.5.
The Thoughts of the Righteous are Right. The I. Part.
CHAP. I. Shows how Self Discovery is to be had and made: bewails
Self-Ignorance; Persuades to Self-studying and Self-acquaintance.
Sect. I.
COgito, ergo sum, Thinking the Evidence of Being.
is a prime Conclusion with the modern and ingenious Philosopher. Thinking is
the surest proof of Being. For since Operation does certainly suppose Essence,
Man does most certainly conclude his Being from that Operation that he is most
certain of. I cannot so surely conclude I am, because I walk, or talk, or eat,
or drink, or see, or hear; for I may be deceived as to these Operations; senses
are not seldom deluded; Fantasy obtrudes falsity; A man dreams and thinks he
eats (says the Prophet) and awakes and his soul is empty: Isa. 29.8.
Man is not so sure he eats when he thinks he eats, as he certainly knows he
thinks, when he thinks he thinks; and if he be sure he thinks, he is sure he
Is, for Thinking is an Operation and flows from Being. Right-thoughts of a
right-Spirit Acts 8.21. Psalm. 51.10 Prove. 23.7


And as naked Thinking is the surest argument of mere Being, so is
well-thinking (if our Text be true) an Evidence of Well-being, Right Thoughts
(as this Scripture calls them) of a Right Heart and a Right Spirit (as other
Scriptures call it,) for (says the Holy Ghost) As a man Thinks in his heart,
So is He.

Sect. II.
Self-sight how to be had. 1 Cor. 2.11 Ephesians. 5.13
NOw this Self-sight or Self-discerning, as it is only to be had and made in the
Looking-glass of thine one Thoughts, so only by the Eye of thine own soul, for
what man knows (says the Apostle) the things of a man, save the Spirit of man
that is in him? Yet must that Light, that makes manifest, be held rightly to
thee, even the Word of God which is quick and powerful and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart: Hebr. 4.12. 2 Cor. 2.10
so also must that Spirit, that searches all things, give thee visive power,
and help thee in the search, (as David says, Ps. 193.23
Search me, O God, and know mine heart, try me, and know my thoughts.) For
this is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation (says the Apostle) not only in
the knowledge of God, Ephesians. 1.17 and 18
but also for our selves; that the eyes of our understandings being enlightened,
we may know not only what is the hope of his calling, but also what is his
working in us. Wherefore, Reader, though the Author know not what thy spiritual
state is, yet for the loves sake he bears thy soul which he knows to be
inestimably precious, most earnestly desirous he is to meet and help those
self-discovering Thoughts of thine, by these few Thoughts of His, here
presented to thy view, and to thy value no farther than they carry the Evidence
of that Word which shall judge thee at the last day; Jo. 12.48.
Praying that as thou read, 1 Jo. 2.20.
thou may receive an unction from the Holy One, that knowing all things,
thou may not be ignorant of thy self.

Sect. III.
TH Scripture says, Eccles. 2.14. Pro. 17.24.
The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fools eyes are in the end of the
earth. How many How do ^ou's do many make (for which they will one day make a
sad account) without bestowing one poor hour in a Month or year in a
profitable How do You upon their own souls, which if thou thy self neglectest,
though I might say (with the Prophet) Who shall pity thee? Jerem. 15.5
who shall bemoan thee? Who shall go aside to ask thee, How thou do? yet (me
thinks) it greatly pitties me for the multitude of Our Wandering Jews (miscalled
Christians) that gad like Dinah, Genesis 34.12.
or rather flee from themselves, and the presence of the Lord like Cain, whose
feet abide not in the house, their own heart, Pr. v. 7.12. Psalm. 78.33
nay scarcely their own home; but their days are consumed in vanity (as the
Psalmist speaks) betwixt making and showing themselves fine and brave. But Oh,
have not such heard, Jude 13
have they not known that for wandering Stars (though they glitter like them for
a season) there is yet reserved a blackness of darkness for ever; surely the
Lord will say to such as now depart from themselves depart from me; to such as
know not themselves, Mat. 7.23
I know you not.

O how diligent is the Tradesman in his Counting House? Pro. 27.13.
and the Countryman in knowing the state of his Flocks? How anxious are
Thousands about Titles, Evidences, Bills, Bonds, in matters of dirty Mammon,
yet prodigiously careless as to what Scripture calls precious; Faith, (2 Pet.
1.1.) Promises, (2 Pet. 1.4.) Souls, (Psalm 49.8.) Christ, (1 Peter 2.7.) Never
so much as asking themselves, or others, for any Evidences for Heaven, or what
they might do to be saved? like those that prepare a table for a Troop, but
forget Gods Holy Mountain; Isaia. 65.11 Luke 10, 41, 43
Our thoughts are with Martha, cumbred about many things, But O when shall we
make choice of Mary's part? What looking amongst others of the natural face in
a glass? Mean while Gods glass thrown by; James 1.23
the Souls complexion never enquired after; Its state not searched into, even
though the most offensive excrements of nature are diligently examined for the
discovery of the vile bodies condition, Phil. 3.21
when threatened with the least hazarding distemper; and the Soul, the Soul of
man drudging at all this. Cant. 1.6.
Ah poor Soul who made thee the Keeper of all these Vineyards, wh le thine own
is unkept? What spending of time amongst others, Acts 17.21
Athenian like, in hearing and telling some new thing? who, mean while are
never acquainted with the Old Man, Ephesians. 4.22
who has so long dwelt in their own bosoms. What looking (like the Mother of
Sisera) out of their windows (and like that cursed woman the wife of Ahab) yet
not in at their hearts? Judge. 5.28 hearts looking out, not looking in. 2 Kings
9.2 Isaiah 48.4 John 21.11 Jerem. 8.6
There, are open Casements; here, are brazen shuts, and Iron sinews to keep all
close, even from their own eyes: What busy inquiries by unconcerned Idlers
after Alien and Foreign things, like his in the Gospel, And what m^st this Man
do? yet I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him,
saying, what have I done? or how shall I do? Intelligencers from abroad are
gladly received, those in men's own breasts are checked and choked. What will
become of such and such Interests? what will times come to? what will become of
Trade? such and the like are frequent Inquiries, What will be the issue of this
man's Contest, and the other man's Law suit, Nay of this Cock-Fighting, or that
Horse-race, of this Game at Cards, or that Cast at Dice? But where shall I meet
the Man or Woman that seriously, that seasonably cries out, but what will
become of my own Soul, my immortal Soul to all eternity? What will you do in
the end? Jer. 5.35.
this is a Query of Gods putting to us, and methinks (amid all other our
Inquisitiveness and Curiosity) we should not neglect to put this to Our selves.

Alas! how deplorable and lamentable a thing it is that Man that would be wise,
should be so vain? Job 11.12
he ^reedily drinks in the knowledge of all about him, yet is willingly
ignorant of himself. If man do but meet a Ghost (if his mettle will serve him)
he presently cries ou^, In the name of God what art thou? yet carries a Spirit
about him every day, whereunto he never moves that Question. Miserable man
that thou art! Is thy Conscience such a Fiend to thee, and thi^e own Soul such
a ghastly Ghost, that thou dare not stay to talk with it? Put thy self to it:
Temptation will put thee to it, Affliction will put thee to it: Death and
Judgment will put thee to it, and ask thee plainly what thou art? Ask thy self
beforehand, that thou may know what to answer them that ask thee.

Sect. IV.
SUrely that Ancient, Apostolic, Self-knowledge necessary. 2 Cor. 13.5
may pass for a Catholic challenge (...); Know you not your own selves? you
know your conditions and outward concernments, do you not know your spiritual
state? you know your Herds, do you not know your Hearts? you count your Coin,
take you no account of your Consci nces? you try your Gold, do you not prove
your Faith? nay more, you are acquainted abroad, and know others, know you not
your own selves? Must that needs be true of you, that is said of the Witch in
the Fable, that she wore eyes when she went abroad, and still laid them by when
she came at home? you take upon you to judge one another, to know the hearts,
and foreknow the ends and future states of others, and know you not your own
selves? surely God may say to that his Officer (though a bribed one) that
self-discerning power and faculty, that he placed in man's breast, as sometimes
he did in another case, Isa. 42.19, 20
who is blind as my servant, or deaf a my Messenger, that I sent? seeing many
things, but tho^ observed not the one thing that more concerns thee than all
other things. But God knows thee, though thou know not thy self; and will tell
thee what thou art (as Ahijah did Jeroborams wife) whether thou make or take
thy self to be another; 1 Kin. 14.6
And that bribed Officer will (one day) do his office, and will make thee, too
late, to know thy self, when thou will not know what to do with thy self. Luke
16.24
Thy tormented tongue will then tell thee, what this little Treatise would fain
acquaint thee with in a better season, and more to thy profit, yea and those
very thoughts of thine that thou will by no means put thy self upon the trouble
now to reflect upon, will turn upon thee, and fly in thy face, and gnaw at
thine heart as so many never dying worms and roundly tell thee then, what they
might have told thee before, even before thou had come into that place of
torment. Those thoughts that are now thy pulse, thou may try thy self by
them, will then be thy pain, thou will torture thy self with them. Son
remember, Verse 25.
said Abraham to Dives, Oh thy Memory will then be thy misery, and thy thoughts
thy tormen^. Those thoughts of thine that might now make a Jury, whilst, if
thou be cast, thou have time before thee to sue out thy pardon, if thou
empannel them not for this better service, they will then turn thy
Executioners, when there will remain neither help in thy self, nor hope in God,
Pr. 5.11.12 Jer. 2.5 Psalm. 50.21. Think now what thy eternal thoughts will be
if thou miscarry.
for thee. O then thou will think of thy Soul, thy Sin, thy misery, means
neglected, mercies abused.

Reader, pause here, and think of what is past, before thou proceed (a whet's
no let.) Thou can not endure to spend a little time now in the unpleasing
work of self-Reflection, whilst self-reflection might do thee good; And can
thine heart endure to spend an Eternity in the same work to a worse end, save
that Eternity can never be spent? My heart is enlarged to thee, O Reader,
fearing thine may be straightned toward thy self, yet do but promise me that
thou will well weigh this one word, what the work of thy thoughts will be to
all Eternity; (if thou should miscarry) I say to Eternity; And I will leave
the porch of my discourse (built larger for thy sake then was intended) and so
lead thee to its principal parts.

CHAP. II. Damneth this licentious principle that Thoughts are free.
Sect. I.
ANd now that we might make a right Judgment of our selves by our thoughts,
Thought's Free a damned Principle
it will be necessary that we first Judge aright of our Thoughts; and therefore
we must come in the first place to damn that hell-born Principle, to the place
from whence it came, That Thoughts are Free: for hardly can I think a more
evident token of a Reprobate mind (as the Apostle calls it) then for a man to
think of his thoughts as some will say of their words, Romans 1.28
Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4
But I may say to all those that promise liberty to their thoughts as the
Apostle speaks in another case, 2 Pet. 2.19
Whilst they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
Corruption, for as we shall find, the first stirrings of grace are in thou
hts, it is as true that the first motions of Corruption are there also; James 1,
15
for Lust concerves (says the Scripture) and then brings forth sin. Thou^ht is
the Cockat^ice, Isai 59.49
Egg (as the Prophet calls it) that Breaks forth into a Viper. And thus are
they miserably requited by their own thoughts being themselves enslaved by
them, to whom they proclaim a liberty.

Thoughts not right, except we think aright of our thoughts in point.
In this discourse we shall soon see that thoughts are the test by which God
will try us and we should try our selves; Now as Thoughts are reckoned amongst
the highest acts of the mind, so Reflexive thoughts are ranked in the highest
order of Thoughts, and hence it will clearly follow, that thoughts are not
right in specification, that as to this Principle are not so in reduplication,
that is to say, That God will approve the thoughts of no man that thinks He is
unaccountable to God for his thoughts, for if the thought, of the Righteous be
right (as our Text speaks) it follows that he that thinks not in this very
point aright of his thoughts, is unrighteous. Isaiah 55.7
And now let the unrighteous forsake his thoughts, even these unrighteous
thoughts of his thoughts, for as Scripture mentions a judging of unrighteo^s
thoughts, James 2.4 Evil thoughts are sin to us Pro. 24.9 Pro. 6.18 Abomination
to God
so this surely is an unrighteous judging of Thoughts, for any man to think
that his thoughts are Free. No, no, but the very thought of foolishness is sin.
A heart that devises wicked imaginations, is one of the seven things that the
Lord hates, and it is placed by the wise man (as the Sun in the midst of the
Plan^ts) as that, from which all the rest do derive, what they have. Evil
thoughts are iniquity to Those that harbor them. Isaia. 53.2
They conceive mischief, their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity (says the
Prophet;) And as they are iniquity to themselves, so the thoughts of the wicked
are an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 15.26 Condemnation of the old world Genesis
6.5 Verse 8
as Solomon says. This was the Grand wickedness and great Condemnation of the
old World. God saw that the wickedness of man was Great, for the imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, and therefore it repented
God that he made man, and it grieved him at his heart.

The evil thoughts of our hearts grieve God to his heart; and surely man has
great reason to repent of that, that made God to repent that he made man.

It Is a sad Complaint that God makes by his Prophet, I am broken, says God,
with their whorish heart, Break Gods Heart. Ezekiel. 6.9. Jer. 4.18. Jer. 4.14.
Prove. 30.32.
(as the Fountain of their whorish practices.) Be not deceived, Iniquity is
bitter, when it reaches to the heart, and so must our sorrow for thought-sin
be, if we ever be saved. If thou have thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy
mouth, nay upon thine heart. Wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved, Exclude from Salvation.
how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? If a man may think himself to
Hell by vain thoughts, what shall we think of evil thoughts? for even vain
thoughts lodged and allowed, are plagued and punished by such vile thoughts often
times as are abhorrent to nature, as it is said of the old Romans, Romans 21.2^.
they became vain in their imaginations, and God gave them up to vile
affections.

Sect. II.
FOr the Truth is, God knows thoughts.
that which most likely induces Men to think that their thoughts are free,
(viz.) that they seem, and in some sort are so in respect of Men, does render
them the less so in the sight of God, who understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts, 1 Cor. 28.9.
more infallibly then Men do words and actions. I know their works and their
thoughts (says God in Isaiah). We may know Men's works, Isa. 66.18.
but we know not what the thoughts were, that put them upon those works,
whether for the glory of God, or to be seen of men; But God knows both.

What though man's eye cannot see, or his Law bind, And eyeth them the rather,
because less liable to outward inducements.
or outward weights and plumbets force the thoughts of men (when threatenings or
rewards may make men act against their minds, or speak what they do not think,
yet all the world cannot make a man think what he does not think; God that is
himself an Independent Agent, does the rather judge of the conformity of the
minds of men to his own, by those Acts that have least dependency upon outward
Inducements, or Inforcements.

A man may seem to do many Acts for God, and speak many words for God, and yet
only make man his debtour, they do it (says Christ) to be seen of men, Mat.
6.5.
and verily they have their reward; But he that lays out his thoughts upon
God, and for God, he trusts God without a witness, and the Righteous God will
place what we thus lend to his own Account, and will pay us again in our own
Coin, but with infinite Interest; Psalm. 40.5.
Holy David had many thoughts for God, and says David, Many, O Lord my God,
are thy thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee, If I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered,
so that whilst the outward Actions, if they be no more then bare outward
Actions, can look for no more then an outward Reward; there is upon good
thoughts, which are a spiritual exercise, an Intail of spiritual blessings in
heavenly places, Romans 8.6.
for to be spiritually minded is life and peace. Here is Use upon Use, for what
thou lendest to the Lord; Life and Peace, Salvation and Assurance, for what can
be more an uncontrollable Evidence that the man is Spiritual then that the mind
is so, 1 P^t. 3.4.
which Scripture calls, the hidden man of the heart.

From carnal fear.
A Cudgel may make a Dog to let go a Bone out of his mouth, when it does not go
out of his mind; Laws of the Land, and shame of People (as we say) may keep a
man from committing Adultery in the outward Act, but all the world cannot keep
him from committing Adultery in his heart. But the fear of God in a Joseph's
heart could make him afraid to look upon a woman to lust after her, Genesis ^9.10.
to lie by her, says the Text, or to he with her; he dreaded all exterior
incentives to adulterous thoughts; and so also in a Jobs, Job 31.1.
why then (says he) should I think upon a Maid?

And again, Carnal self-love, Self-Love.
if thou be a Preacher, may raise thy tongue to the high praises of Christ, and
fill thy Pulpit with Hosannahs in the highest to the son of David, but it is
only love to Christ that can make thee take him to bed and board with thee, to
lay him all night between thy breasts, to remember his love more than Wine,
Cant. 1.4, 13.
and that not so much for that thou art to Preach upon it the Lord's Day, as
that thou art to Live upon it all the week, as St. Paul says, to me to live is
Christ; Phil. 1.21.
for it is one thing to prove our parts to men, and another thing to approve our
hearts to God: neither are we so much to desire to evidence to others a Proof
of Christ speaking in us (as the Apostle speaks) as to find a proof of Christ
living in our selves, least while we preach to others, 1 Cor. 13.3.
Chap. 9.22.
We our selves prove (...), that is, unapproved.

So then for a man to think that his Thoughts are Free, that is, that he is
unaccountable to God for his thoughts (according to which God especially
judges men) is to admit a contradiction, not only to all Scripture, but to all
Right Reason.

Sect. III.
Evil; thoughts like Devils.
LEt me freely tell thee, O Reader, (whosoever thou art) whose thoughts are not
right, thine heart is but an hell, and thy thoughts are but so many Devils, and
worse then Devils to thee, for First,

In their Original.
As Angels (the most Excellent of Gods Creatures) became odious Devils, by
departing from God, so that our Thoughts (that in their own nature, are the
Offspring of the noble and most excellent Mind of man) should become Iniquity
to us, Isa. 59.7. Prove. 15.26. Hebr. 3.12.
and an abomination to God. This is from our evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God.

Nature, spiritual wickedness. Ephesians. 6.12. Luke 22.3. Ezekiel. 18.10. Mat. 23.27.
In high places.
And as Devils for their nature, are called spiritual wickednesses, can enter
into men ('it is said, Satan entered into Judas,) and fill their hearts (as in
Ananias his case) why has Satan filled thy heart? so also Evil thoughts are
said to come into men's, minds, and fill their hearts; Inwardly they are full of
rottenness (says Christ.) And as Devils for their pride and power are called,
spiritual wickednesses in high places, so also evil thoughts are said to be
those high things that exalt themselves against God, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and against Christ, (Casting down Imaginations, and every high thing, etc. and
bringing into captivity every thought of the heart, etc.

Number, Legions. Mark 5.9. Luke 8.30. Mat. 17.34.
And as Devils for their number made the possessed man cry out, My name is
Legion, for we are many; so may Evil thoughts say, for these are called the
abundance of the heart, Like the swarms of Flies in Egypt, as if they were of
Beelzebubs Army, who, by the Etymology of his name, is Lord of the Flies, and
by the account of the Pharasees, Prince of the Devils.

And as Devils for their agility, Agility.
made answer to God (when he demanded, Satan, whence come thou?) From going
in the Earth to and fro, Job 1.7.
and from walking up and down in it; Just so may evil Thoughts say; for the
wandering of the desire is by the Thoughts; they go where we cannot, Israelites
in the Wilderness, Eccles. 6.9. Acts 7.39.
yet in heart went back to Egypt.

And as Devils for their Vigilance, Vigilance. 1 Pet. 1.8. Psalm. 104.20, 21.
are said to walk about as roaring Lions, which are stirring when we are
sleeping, (as the Psalmist observes) Therefore says the Apostle, be vigilant,
so the worldlings thoughts are at work while himself is asleep, for as his
days are sorrow, so his heart takes not rest in the Night, Eccles. 2.23.
Chap. 5.8.
for a dream comes through the multitude of business; And oh how often cause
have we to be troubled, when we awake, for the Thoughts of our sleep, Daniel
4.1.
as Nebuchadnezzar was with his Thoughts in his sleep?

And Devils for disturbing in good Duties, Disturbing in Good. Mat. 13.4. 1 Samuel 1.13.
are called the Fowls of the Air, that steal away the word; such are evil
thoughts, and so do they; As when Hannah was a Praying, Elie's thoughts were
running upon that, that was neither charitable nor true, (viz.) that she was
drunk. And when Simon should have been minding what Christ was a saying, his
Thoughts were wandering, He said within himself, Luke 3.37.
if this man were a Prophet, he would have known who and what manner of Woman
this is that touches him, for she is a sinner. Vain thoughts can dog us when
and where vain company cannot come at us, even in our closest places and
performances.

And as Devils are signalized for disturbing us in what is good, so for
tempting to evil, Tempting to evil. Math. 4.3. James 1.14.
(therefore Satan is called (...), The Tempter,) so every man is tempted (says
the Apostle) when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed; so that Evil
Thoughts are our Tempters as much as He, and we should belie the Devil should
we say otherwise: for they have made ready their heart like an Oven, Hose^ 7.6.
says the Prophet; What though Satan bring the Fuel, yet men put it into the
Oven, and stir it about by their own Thoughts, in their own hearts, so that if
He, like a cunning Baker, seem to sleep all night, (as it is there expressed)
yet he knows that they will tend it, and so look to it, that in the morning it
shall burn like a flaming fire.

And then accusing.
And as Devils, when they have been Tempters, will be sure to be Accusers, (so
that, as many men are called by such a name, Alias, such a name, so Satan is
called Tempter, Rev. 12.10.
alias the Accuser) so also are Evil Thoughts, Their thoughts mean while
accusing, etc. as the Apostle speaks. Romans 15.2.


And tormenting. Mat. 18.34. Luke 16.25.
And as Devils are Tormenters as well as Tempters and Accusers, so also the
Thoughts of the damned shall be a principal part of their torment, Son,
remember, etc. says Abraham to Dives, that is, bethink thy self, etc.

And thus have we seen that Evil Thoughts are as bad as Devils; Yea worse then
Devils to us.
yea that they are worse then so, we shall now make appear in a few lines, and
so conclude this head. And that.

In themselves.
First in themselves, (in some respect) Let me tell thee, O Reader, that thy
thoughts may be guilty of such a sin, as Satan himself is not, nay cannot be
guilty of; Psalm 14.1.
For says the Psalmist, The Fool has said in his heart, that there is no God;
whereas the Apostle says expressly, James 2.10.
that the Devils believe and tremble. And Oh that we could tell how to bewail
it sufficiently, that there should be more Atheism in one heart upon Earth,
nay in one thought, than in all the Devils of Hell. We pity others when
possessed with Evil Spirits, how much more should we lament bitterly over our
own selves when possessed with Evil thoughts, in some sort worse then the worst
of spirits.

II. As to those whose thoughts they are, And to us.
For these are the Heifers wherewith Satan Ploweth, whose Temptations could
only di^turb^, not destroy us, If our Thoughts did not take them in (as the
Trojans in the Story, the deceiptful Horse,) and make them ours; so that our
Destruction is of our selves (as the Prophet speaks, Hose^ 13.9.
) for if Satan cannot know our Thoughts (without us) much less can He force
them; But as Christ says in one place, You are of your Father the Devil, John
8.44. Jerem. 7.44. Chap. 9.14. Chap. 11.8. and 13.10.
and his Lusts will ye do, so the Prophet says in many places, that in and
after the imaginations of their own hearts they do and will walk; So that as
Christ says, the Devil is the Father, the Apostle makes man's heart to be the
Mother, which receives the Temptation; and Thought the Womb that Conceives and
Hatcheth it, when he says, James 1.15.
Lust when it has conceived, brought forth sin, whereas were there a Cordial
crying out, as by the forced Damosel in the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.24, 25. Romans 7.24.
or the Apostle in the Gospel, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me?
God would lay the sin upon Satan, and not upon the Soul disturbed by, and
afflicted with it.

Now then since Evil Thoughts are as so many Devils, and worse then Devils to
us, let us dread them as we do the Devil; resist them as we ought to do Him,
and Pray against them as we would against Him, and when they break into our
hearts (which are such unruly and untamed Evils,) let us serve them as the
People of a Country Village would a ravenous Wolf, or cruel Bear, that should
break into th^^r Town, all the Town would be after them, either to kill them
in, or to force them out of it.

Prove. 23.26.
And since the hear is the thing that God Principally requires, and that out of
it are the Issues of Life, Let us keep the heart with all keeping; Prove. 4.23.
Mal. 3.16, 17.
and be choice of our Thoughts as of Gods Crown-Jewels.

Phil. 4.8.
And now finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are p^^e, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, Think of these things.

CHAP. III. Shows the Thoughts of man to be the Souls Pulse, and that they
evidently discover his Inward Estate.
Sect. I.
YOu see then where this wisdom is to be found, Thoughts the Souls pulse.
and where is the place of self-understanding. Reader, Thou art before the
Lord, do thou unfeignedly desire to know thy self truly? then say not in
thine heart, who shall ascend, or who shall descend to tell thee, whether of
the two, Heaven or Hell shall be thy place and portion; As the words are nigh
thee, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
even in thy mouth; so the Thoughts are nigh thee, even in thy mind; for what
Christ says of thy words, I may say of thy Thoughts, Mat. 12.37. Verse 34.
By thy words (says the text) and by thy thoughts (says the reason of the
text) Thou shall be justified, and thou shall be condemned. For out of the
abundance of the heart does the mouth speak; If then thy Thoughts be Right,
Thou art Right. The thoughts of the Righteous are Right. All the Righteous have
Right Thoughts; and All, whose Thoughts are Right, are Righteous.

It Is a Laudable fairness in our Law, Thoughts our Neighborhood.
that it puts All Trials for Life and Death, upon God and the country; that
is, the Neighborhood. This little Book allows thee the Birthright of thy
Native Law in thy greatest trial, more Important then for Life and Death. It Is
for Salvation or Damnation. Trial by them fair.
Thy Thoughts are thy Neighborhood, they walk and talk with thee, they know
thy lying down, and thy rising up; Put thy Soul trial upon God and them, and
God send thee a good deliverance.

Sect. II.
Instances of churlishness. 1 Samuel 25, 26. Isaiah 32.5. Isaiah 32.5. Isaiah
31.8. Liberality.
A Nabal-like Heart may seem sometimes to put forth a liberal hand, and make a
Feast like a Prince, yet shall not a Churl be the more called liberal, The
liberal man devises liberal things. He only is the liberal man that has
the liberal mind, whose thoughts are free in a better sense, then the old
saying has it; It Is not the drawing of the Purse to the Poor though that must
be too where there is a Purse, but the drawing out the Soul to the Hungry that
is true Charity, Isaiah 58.10. Mark 12.21.
Two mites bestowed with one truly Generous and Liberal thought, is a righter
Almesgiving then the giving of the two Hemispheres of the whole world, would be
without it.

Sect. III.
Envy. Prove. 26.25. Psalm. 55.21.
THe Envious may carry smooth, and speak fair, yet never a whit the more to be
trusted if there be seven abominations in the heart, The Oil of smooth words
may float at top, whilst Waters of strife are at bottom, war in his heart: His
words kind, his thoughts Cruel; now He is what his thoughts are. It Is not said
as a man speaks with his tongue, but as a man thinks in his heart so is He.
Nay such are Evil whose thoughts are so, though God turn the fruit of their
heart to good, to those to whom they intend evil, Gen 50.20.
as in Joseph's case, ( Ye thought Evil against me, says He, But God turned it
to good), and to His own Glory, Isaiah 10.7.
to whom they intend dishonor; as in the Assyrians (howbeit He means not so,
neither does He think so, Goodness.
) He was what his thoughts were: on the other hand, Joseph was a good Brother
to them, that had been otherwise to him, though his carriage were course, and
his speaking rough, for He thought them good, and meant them well. And thus God
himself, Isai^h. ^0.3.
when He shows his People hard things, and (it may be) incurs their hard
thoughts, yet then he approves himself to be a merciful Father, and a tender
Friend by his gracious thoughts and tender purposes, I know the thoughts that
think toward you, Jer. 29.11.
thoughts of peace; And as He thinks in His Heart so is he, (though they think
hardly of him) his thoughts are of Peace, and He is the God of Peace. Romans
15.33.


Sect. IV.
THe Impatient are not always Clamorous, Impatience.
but sometimes like froward Children that declare their doggedness by not
speaking at all, Job 36.19. Prove. 23.39.
as well as by speaking doggedly. It Is said of the Hypocrites in Heart, they
cry not when God binds them, He strikes them, yet they will not be thought
sick, and beats them, yet they seem not to feel, they have not grieved, Jerem.
5.^.
they make their face, harder then a Rock, yet are never the more quiet; never
the more patient; for, mean while, Habak. 2.4.
their minds fret, their thoughts boil within them, their Hearts are lifted up,
therefore they are not upright. Their thoughts are froward, and so are they,
for as a man thinks in his Heart so is he. Prove. 19.3.
The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his Heart fretteth against the
Lord. He frets in Heart and thought, though not in word. Patience.


On the other hand, you have heard of the Patience of upright Job, yet how
often did His Impatience (like some Men's sickness) break out at his lips, when
the distemper had made no mortal seizure upon his heart; for search but his
Heart and his History to the bottom, and you shall find it full freight with
thoughts of Penitence, of Patience, of Piety, of Humility, full of
God-exalting, self-abasing thoughts, thoughts of calmness and sweetness toward
God, and only of bitterness and Indignation against sinful self. Job 40.4. and
42, 2, 3, 6.
Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? and again, I know that no thought
can be withheld from thee: who is be that hides Council without knowledge:
I have uttered that I understood not, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes.

Sect. V.
Uncleanness. Prove. 30.20. Prove. 7.14. Verse 18.
Solomon's strange woman keeps a stir about wiping of her mouth, whilst she
never regards the cleansing of her thoughts; She can talk of Pe ce-Offe ings,
and of Her paying her Vows in the day, and think the same moment, of pleasing
her bruit^sh Lust all the night, Come let us take our fill of loves till the
morning. Her thoughts were unclean, and so was she. Whatever men's garbes and
pretensions are, how demure soever their deportments, Romans 13.14. and 8.5.
Chastity. Job 31.1,
how mortified soever their appearances, they whose profoundest thoughts, are
how to make provision for the Lusts of the Flesh, are fleshly, and they that do
mind the things of the Flesh are after the Flesh: On the contrary, Chaste Job
will not only make a Covenant with his Eyes, but will not allow himself so much
as to think upon a Maid. His thoughts were Chaste and clean, and so was He.

Sect. VI.
Covetousness.
THe Covetous walk not always in open and naked view for every one to see,
perhaps not for themselves; but often wear a Cloak (as the Apostle calls it) a
Cloak of zeal, and seeming sanctity, as Iehu, 1 These. 2.5. John 12.10.
and others. Their thoughts boil, but the fervor of their spirit is, for the
serving of themselves, not the Lord Jesus Christ; Judas talks of the Poo, but
he think^ of the Purse, 2 Pet. 2.1.
and of his Prey; yet he carried it so plausibly, that the Eleven suspected
themselves more than Him. Men's Hearts may be exercised with covetous practices,
Jer. 23.31. Jer. 22.17.
whilst their hands seem not so, They come and sit before the Lord as his
People, but their hearts run after their covetousness; nay, their hearts are
not but for their covetousness, as the Prophet smartly expresses it. They may
talk of better things, but their thoughts are for no other, their tongues may
run of heavenly things, but their thoughts still run after their e^vetousness.
Their thoughts are for to morrow, Mat. 6.31. Psalm. 49.11.
what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and wherewith they shall be
clothed. Their Inward thoughts are, that their Houses and Inheritances are to
them and their Heirs for ever. Such are the thoughts that they drown their
Souls in, and bury themselves in alive, working like Moles underground, Phil.
3.19.
and if they sometimes app ar above ground, they are not in their Element, till
rooting in the earth again, Mat. 10.17.
they mind earthly things, The young man in the Gospel, His tongue ran of
Heaven, What must I do that I may inherit Eternal life? but his thoughts ran
after Earth, if I go with this Christ, I must forgo my Estate, if I cleave to
Him, I must leave that: Deuteronomy. 15.7.
He went away sorrowful, for he had large Possessions. But says God to his
People, Beware there be not in thy wicked heart a thought, etc. which he there
cautions in this case of Covetousness. A Covetous thought reigning in the
heart, Allowed, Loved, Liked, Maintained, customarily entertained there, is the
Evidence of a wicked heart, of a bad man, for as a man thinks in his Heart,
so is He.

Sect. VII.
THe Proud person may be tried by his Thoughts, Pride.
be he never so much in the disguise of his voluntary humility. Isaiah 58.53.
His thoughts do swell and rise high, whilst He cringeth low; like those in
Isaiah, who hung down their heads like Bulrushes, yet their Hearts were lifted
up in proud thoughts against God, as if He were in their Debts for their formal
devotions; wherefore have we fasted, say they, Luke 18.11.
and thou take no notice? The Pharisee was the worse for his good thoughts of
himself; God I thank thee, that I am not as other men; Yea, and thousands in
the world have cause enough to think ill of themselves, if they had no more
then their thinking too well of themselves: God will punish the fruit of men's
stout hearts; Isaiah. 10.18. compared with the 12.
now the fruit of the stout heart is in the same place, explained to be the
proud Thought. The Psalmist complains, the wi^ked through the pride of their
countenances will not seek after God, Psalm. 18.4. Ezekiel. 28.16.
God is not in all their thoughts. He fetches proof of their wicked pride from
their Godless thoughts. The proud Prince of Tyrus did set his heart as the
heart of God, in high thoughts of Himself, as the Sequel there shows. Humility.
But the best Men on the contrary are least and lowest in their own thoughts.
Thus Abraham, Genesis 18 27. and 23.10. Psalm. 22.6. Psalm. 73.22. Prove. 30.2.
Isaiah 6.5. 1 Cor 15.9. Col. 3.12. Mat. 11.29.
but dust and ashes; Jacob, less than the least of Gods mercies; David, a worm
and no man. Asaph, a beast before thee. Agar, more brutish then man. Isaiah, a
man of unclean lips. Paul, the very least of the Apostles, but the chiefest of
Sinners. Put on humbleness of mind, says the Apostle. The Humble man is humble
in mind, and lowly in heart and thought as Christ was, for as a man thinks in
his heart so is He.

Sect. VIII.
Purity. Matthew. 5.3.
BLessed are the pure in heart, says our Savior, they shall see God. Are thy
thoughts holy? then thou art happy. In a good man's heart there is a good
treasure, Mat. 12.35. Psalm. 139.17. and 10.4 Prove. 10.20.
and the Psalmist tells you what it is, How precious are thy thoughts, O God,
unto me? But for the wicked, God is not in all his thoughts, therefore the
heart of the wicked is little worth, and he, whose Heart is little worth, is
wicked.

Sect. IX.
To draw this head toward a conclusion, let me persuade thee, O man, but to
judge of thy self, which thou can, by the same way, that thou would judge
thy Neighbor if thou could. If another thoughts lay as fair to thine eye, as
his words do sound to thine ears, thou would try his thoughts toward thee,
before thou would too much trust his words, for the wise man observes, these
too may be very wide each from other, Eat and drink says he to thee, and yet
his heart is not with thee. But God has purposely locked up thy Neighbors
thoughts from thee, Prove. 23.7.
to correct thy curiosity and over eager propension to Censoriousness abroad,
and has said, Judge not that ye be not Judged, Math. 7.1. 1 Cor. 11.32.
but has made thee Tur^-k^y to thy own, because its best for the to turn often
in at thine own door, for if we wo^^^ judge our selves we should not be judged.
Man's Law does what it can in the trial of those that are under Inquest, for
discovery not only nor chiefly of the Act, but the Men's ^^a, the Intent and
thought of the Heart in the Act, whether a Traiterors, Malicious, Felo^ious
Intent, and of M^lice forethought or no? When smooth-tongued Simon Magus came
with Honey in his mouth, and his well-tuned tongue had a fair freedom to make a
plausible profession, he was received and Baptized, Acts 8.12. Verse 22.
but as soon as the Apostle Peter came to discern his thought ( Repent and pray
God, says he, if perhaps this thought of thine may be forgiven thee) he
presently perceives that his heart was not right, and that his state was
naught, for he says not, I perceive that the ^a^^ of bitterness is in thee
only, but that thou art in it and in the bond of Iniquity. Verse 23.


Sect. X.
IN one word, as the Pulse so the Thoughts derive immedia e^y from the heart,
both as to Temper and Distemper, the one in a Physi^al, the other in a moral
notion and respect, and were thou but as careful and S^i^fu to observe thy
flowing thoughts, as thy Physician is to examine thy gliding pulse, thy Thou^hs
would ^s^^ste^ deceive thee, then thy Pulse him, and thou need not be so
much at a loss as the most are for the knowledge of thy spiritual and
everlasting state, having so fair as Index to Eternity so near at hand,
Commune then with thine own heart upon thy b d, and be still. Psalm 4.4.
It Is Scripture Council, and it will never hurt thee to take it. Thy thoughts
may talk with thee when none else will, when none else can, when there is none
but God, and thou, and they together. Thy faculty will be true to thee, if thou
be so to it, thy Thought will not flatter thee if thou do not daub with them;
but and if thou do, God will not. And so I pass to the next.

CHAP. IV. Proves that the Judgment that God passes upon Men is by their
Thoughts.
Sect. I.
Would thou then, O Man, Try thy self by the same M asures that God will try
thee, and judge of the state, as He judges of thee, who judges not according
to the appra a^^^, but judges righteous judgment; Let me try thy thoughts and
thee together again. For the Lord search th the h^a t and t^y^th the reins,
Jer. 17.10. and 11.20. Psalm. 16.7.
those reins the Psamist speaks of, My rein^s jest uct me in the night season,
His solemn thoughts and setious self-reflections. Those are they that God
tried, and thee by them. Psalm. 139.1.2.
O Lord thou have searched me and known me, thou understandest my thoughts afar
of; As Christ said to Nathaniel, John 1.48.
I may say to others in other cases, before that Philip called th^e, I saw th^e
when thou wast under the Fig Tree, so before others called thee to the
Ale-Bench, or into the ^hore-ho^se, he saw thee, he knew the pr^p^^sions of thy
Thoughts, the motions in thy mind, the tendency of thine heart, He
understa^deth the thoughts afa^ off, and by these He dooms, sentenceth, and
judges thee, though (to speak strictly) God judges of us or knows us by pure
and simple intuition^ abstractly as well from thought as from words and
actions, that is, He needs no more any thought or thing, then he does any man,
to testify of man, for He knows, John 2.25.
as what is in man, so what man is, by a more perfect way then discursive
inference, or argumentation. He knows all things in their prin^iples before
they operate, For known unto the Lord are all his works f^o^ the beginning.
Acts 15.18:


Sect. II.
THoughts have feet, they have a tendency, be they good or evil. Thoughts have
feet. Prove. 21.5. can go. Ephesians. 4.17. Jer. 7.24. Tongues. Math. 3.9. Lam. 3 60.
The thoughts of the diligent tend to plenteousness, the Lord takes notice of
the tendency of thy thoughts, and counts thee go^e the same way that they go.
The Gentiles are said to walk not only after but in the vanity of their mind.
And the wicked Jews not only after but in the imaginations of their evil
Hearts. Thoughts can speak as well as go, Think not to say within your selves,
etc. and God hears them, ( thou have heard all their imaginations against me,
says the Church) when the voice is not hard Hannah prayed in her heart, and
her lipes moved, Can pray, 1 Samuel 1.13. Verse 14.
But her voice was not heard. Old Eli that measured her by the bare moving of
her lipes, misjudged her; but God had an eye to the Motion of her Heart,
Thoughts can Curse too, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. And curse,
Eccl. 10.20, 19 Prove. 23 33. And lie, Acts 5.3, 4.
The Heart of the wicked is said to utter perverse things. The Holy Ghost heard
An^^^as thoughts tell the he before Peter and the rest heard his tongue do so,
Why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost; thou have not
lied unto men but unto God. Thoughts have Ha^^s too as well as Tongues and Feet
in Gods account. And hands.
The heart of the vile person is said to work Iniquity, Isa. 22.6. can work.
and to pra^tice hypo^risy. Therefore says God of the false witness, thou
shall do to him, as he thought to do to his Brother. David thought to build God
at House, and thus God reckons, Deuteronomy. 19.19: 1 Kings 2.26.
thou did well in that it was in thine heart. When Esau thought to slay his
Brother if his Father were but once dead, (Esau said in his heart, Genesis 27.41.
the days of mourning for my Father are at hand, then will I slay my Brother
Jacob); God Books it down, though he never did it. How are the things of Esau
searched out, Obadiah 6.
how are his hid things sought up? and so shall all men's be, 1 Chro. 28.9.
for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts.

Sect. III.
Thought, Adultery. Mat. 5.28. Profaneness, Psalm. 50.21.
IF a man looking on a woman do but send after her an Impure thought, God
writes down Adultery committed already, if he look, says Christ, to Lust after
her. If thou do but think profanely, he notes it, thou thoughtest I was
altogether such an one as thy self, But I will reprove thee; I say, he observes
it, and accordingly judges thee. If presumptuously, he dooms it, and thee for
it. Presumption, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
If a man hearing the words of this curse, bless himself in his heart (that is,
in his own thoughts) saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the
Imagination of mine heart: the Lord will not spare him, etc. If thy thought be
vain and foolish, Vanity.
wicked and worldly, God will pronounce thee such as he finds that. The grounds
of a certain rich man brought forth plenteously, Luke 12.16, 17, 19, 20.
and he thought within himself what shall I do, etc. I will say to my Soul,
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry; But God said unto him, thou fool, etc. If thy thoughts be
Viperous and Venomous, Venom.
blasphemous and malicious against the Lord and His Christ. He will damn thee
for such as he finds them. Mat. 12.25. compared with verse 34. Psalm. 2.4, 5.
Jesus knew their thoughts, and said, O Generation of Vipers, etc. Why do the
Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? they take Council against
the Lord, and against his Anointed, etc. The Lord shall speak to them in his
wrath, etc. The Consult, He condemns, they Think, and He Speaks; that is to
say, speaks in judgment.

Sect. IV.
THis was the Condemnation of the old world, as we have seen, Evil men
characterized by their thoughts. Genesis 6.5.
Gods proof of man's wickedness was from the Thoughts of his heart, and the
punishment thereof was proportioned thereunto, an over flowing scourge upon
them for that superfluity of naughtiness that was in them. Yet were there many
amongst these that because of their profession were called the sons of God.
Genesis 6.2.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men, etc. It Is not what our professions
are, or what our Names are, but what our thoughts are that the Lord looks at,
and accounts of us by. It Is said of our Lord Jesus that though many believed on
his Name, when they saw the Miracles which he did, Joh. 2.23, 24, 25.
yet did not Jesus commit himself to them, because he knew all men, and needed
not that any man should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. The Text
says, he judges of Man, by what was In Man: Our words proceed out of us, our
professions are on us, but our thoughts are in us; and these are they that the
Lord Christ looks at, Luke 2.3, 35.
and was himself set (amongst other ends) for the manifestation of, That the
thoughts of many hearts might be revealed.

Sect. V.
ON the other hand, So the Godly.
those blessed Souls whom the Lord Crowns with so high a testimony, and so
Honorable a Character of being his, Mal. 3.16, 17
whom he will spare, his Jewels which he will make up, for whom a Book of
Remembrance was written before him, they are briefly thus described, such as
feared the Lord, and that Thought upon his Name. 'Twas not the Name of God upon
them, but the Name of God in them, 'twas not the bare speaking of his Name,
though (no doubt) they did that too, (for they speak often one to another,) but
their thinking upon his Name, that God Characterizeth them from; whereas be the
wicked grossly such, Psalm. 9.17. Job 8.13.
or Hypocrites, they are stigmatized for such as forget God.

Sect. VI.
THere are two things that God is said to know afar off. God is said to know
thoughts afar off, Psalm. 13.8, 6. and 139.2. Ezekiel. 38.10.
The Pride of man, and the Thoughts of man. He has it seems a severe eye upon
each of these. I know their Imaginations which they go about (says God of
Israel) even now before I have brought them into the Land which I swear, and of
Gog, thus says the Lord, it shall also come to pass, that at the same time
shall things come into thy mind, and thou shall think an evil thought. God
minds our thoughts before they come into our minds; and knows what we are about
to think, before we think it; Then needs must he know what we think, when we
think; and what to think of us too whilst we are a thinking, before we speak or
act. Psalm. 94.11.
The Lord knows the thoughts of man that they are vanity, says the Psalmist,
the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain, says the
Apostle. 2 Cor. 3.20.
The variation in the version speaks thus much, Amongst all the vain Children
of men, there is not one wise enough to hide his thoughts from being known to
God, and himself by them. The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the
Lord. He cannot keep the noisome stench of them from the Almighties nostrils;
Prove. 15.26. Yet abhors evil thoughts though at a distance. Prove. 11.20.
nor can God endure them without declaring his abhorrence of them. Who smells
them at a distance (afar off) and abhors them, so they that are of a froward
heart are an abomination to the Lord, If thy thoughts be froward, though thy
words (through thy subtle or hypocritical restraint of them) be not so; as
appears by the Antithesis, but such as are upright in their way are his
delight. You see then how God reckons men by their Thoughts.

Sect. VII.
WE value men according to their Possessions, and God according to their
Thoughts: We value men by their possessions, Our thoughts are so.
A man of mean parts, of low acquirements, of mean Possessions, we reckon a
mean person: A man of high Improvements, of large Acquisitions, of great
Possessions, we reckon a Great Man, a substantial person; now Men's thoughts a^e
their Possessions; and it is observable that one word in the Hebrew expresses
both, therefore when the Text in Job reads, Job 17.11.
My purposes are broken off, even the Thoughts of my heart; The Margin
(according to the Hebrew) reads the possessions of my heart. Luke 21.19.
It Is by patient thoughts that we possess our Souls, under Affliction: By Chaste
and pure thoughts that every one should possess his vessel in Sanctification
and Honor, It Is by believing thoughts, 1 These. 4.4.
we possess the Lord Jesus, put him on, dwell in him, Romans 13.14. Col. 2.6. Job
7.3, 4.
walk in him having received him. On the other part; when Jobs thoughts were
restless and unquiet, tossing and tumbling from morning to evening, from
evening to morning, from week to week, from month to month, then it is said,
God made him possess months of vanity, When God presented all his youth-sins
(as so many frightful Ghosts) fresh to his Thoughts, then it is said, Job 23.26.
God made him to possess the iniquities of his youth. So when the Heart is
full of good Thoughts, God calls that the good treasure; if of evil Thoughts,
the evil treasure of the heart; Math. 12 35.
and we value Men to be, as their treasures and possessions are.

Sect. VIII.
WE Judge men by their constant Companions. We judge men by their companions.

Our thoughts are so.


Noscitur ex socio qui non dignoscitur ex se. Now our thoughts are our eonstant
Company, They are ever with us at Bed and Board. Company draws out answers from
us (sometimes, when we have no great mind to speak,) so do our Thoughts.
Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer said Zophar. Job 2.2. 1 Kings 12.8.
These are as Rehoboams Councillors, that were brought up with him from his
youth; so the Imaginations of man's heart are said to be; Genesis 9.21. Jer. 4.14.
These are our Inmates and Intimates (be they good or evil, Divine or vain).
They lodg^ with us, nay within us; these are guests that never part with us,
till we bid adue to our selves. It Is not till that very day, Psalm. 146.4.
that our thoughts perish: no nor then neither in some sense, but they go with
us into another World, and there God will judge them, and us by them. Prove.
13.20.
He that walks with the wise (the word, Men, is not in the Hebrew) shall be
wise. He that walks with God, who gives wisdom, and he that walks with the word
of God which is able to make a man wise to Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.
He that has that dwelling richly in him, and dwells upon it by wise and holy
Thoughts and Meditations (as the Psalmist says, I have more understanding then
all my teachers, Psalm. 119.9. Good thoughts good company. Prove. 6.21, 22.
for thy testimonies are my meditation) as well as he that converseth with wise
and holy persons, shall be wise. If thou bind them continually upon thine
heart, when thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep
thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, that is, wisdom shall.
Under God thou can not have better Company then good thoughts; God cannot be
had without Theirs.
nay, thou can not have His without theirs. Thou may have his Company when
thou can not have good men's; but thou can not have His, except thou have
good thoughts. But the companion of fools (says another Proverb) shall be
destroyed; Prove. 24.9.
of foolish sinners without us, of foolish thoughts within us, (for even the
thought of foolishness is sin.) If we choose either for our Companions,
especially the later, they will undo us, and bring us under that doom of
Destruction. This made holy, David choice of his Company, Psalm. 26.4.
but curious of his Thoughts* I have not sat^ with vain persons, says he, but
I hate vain thoughts, when his Company was bad his thoughts were good; Even
while the wicked was before him, ^sal. 39.1.
his heart was hot within him, while he was musing, the Fire burned: his
Thoughts inflame his affections with godly Zeal; and this Holy Fire, as by an
Anteperistasis, burnt so much the hotter for the Frost of cursed Contrariety
that was about it. When the careful Magistrates or Officers of a City break
into a suspected house in the Night time, the great question is, what Company
have you here? so when God breaks in upon our dark hearts, the Inquiry is, what
Thoughts have you here? Gods inquiry in man's heart, What thoughts have you
here? Luke 24.38. James 2 4.
why do Thoughts arise in your Minds? Are ye not become Judges of evil thoughts?

Sect. IX.
FIrst, God made Man to think of his Maker, Remember thy Creator, God made man
to think of his maker, Eccles. 12 1. We value things as they suit their ends.
there is Man's end and duty sumd up in short. God gave man a mind higher then
other Animals, that he might mind high^r then they; a mind above other things,
that he might mind things above; An Heathen could say, Os ho nini sublime
dedit, Cael^mque tu^ri jussit. We chiefly estimate things as they suite their
Ch if end, as Fuel by its burning, a Knife by its Edge, an Horse by his good
heels, etc. Otherwise though they look well, if they do not ^urn well, or cut
well, or go well, we like them not: So God will have none of thy ( Naphthali
like) goodly words without Godly thoughts. Genesis 49 21.
We do not reckon Parrats or Mag pies men; because they are taught to talk; We
know they have not Thoughts like Men, though they have words like Men; And is
it possible that for a little professions sake, God should have good thoughts
of thee, whose thoughts are not good? Let me tell thee once for all, He thinks
better of thy Ox or Ass that in its kind minds thee its Owner, then of thee
who mindest not Him whom thou call thy Lord and Maker, (and so perhaps often
swearest by him, when thou do not once think of Him.) It Is a dismal Charge
and Challenge that, Isaiah 1.5.
But my people do not consider; They call themselves Mine, but they MIND not
Mo; Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19.
Of the Rock that begat thee, thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that
formed thee, And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his Sons and his Daughters. Alas, how little do Names, Titles,
Privileges, Professions stand for in Gods Account, where God Himself is not
minded? Jud. 16.15.
As she said, How say thou that thou love me, seeing thy heart is not with
me? how is it that thou pretendest to God, seeing thy mind is not with him,
Psalm. 10.4.
God is not in all thy thoughts?

Gods good will to us set out by his thoughts, Psalm 115.12. Psalm 111.5. Neh.
5.19. and 13.22. Luke 23.4. Psalm 4^.9. Cant. 1.4. Psalm 44.17, 18, 20, 21.
Isaiah 64.5. So ours to God.
As Gods good will toward men in Scripture is called his being mindful, his
remembering, his thinking upon them. He is ever mindful of his Covenant. Think
upon me, O my God: Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom! So ours
also to Godward. We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God! We will
remember thy love more then Wine. ^f we have forgotten thy Name, shall not God
search this out? All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee; our
heart is not turned back. Therefore it is said, thou meet st them that remember
thee. A good God will be sure to be even with them: They remember him, and he
minds them. He is in their thoughts, and they are in his. But on the other
hand, Think not, O man, to be regarded by him that is forgotten by thee; or
that God should have any good thoughts of thee, who never harbourest any good
thoughts in thee, And our evil will, by our not thinking of him. Psalm 9.17.
and 50, 22.
or that God should mind thy good, who never mindst God nor good? No, no, if
God think upon thee, it will be to destroy thee, for not remembering him that
made thee. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, And all the Nations that
forget God; Now consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in
pieces while there is none to deliver you. Even such are the paths of all that
forget God, and the Hypocrites hope shall perish. Job 8.13.
In vain is hope in God harbored where thoughts of God cannot be.

Sect. X.
Secondly,

GOd looks especially to man's thoughts, Because if there be any Grace, Grace
first stirs in thoughts. 1 John 3.9. 1 Peter 2.2. (...).
which is called the seed of God in Man, it first stirs there. The newborn
babe (as the Apostles expression is,) it first breaths in Prayer, but it first
stirs in thought, and its stirring (as in Nature) is before its breathing. Nay
even that privation, which according to the Old Philosophy) is as it were a
kind of principle of this Spiritual Generation, begins there. This is called a
Casting down Imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and a bringing of every thought of the heart into captivity to the obedience
of Christ. Grace, I say, Psalm. 119.59.
first stirs in the Thought. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
test moneys. Luke 15.17, 20. Deuteronomy. 30.1. 1 King. 8.46, 47, 48, 49, 50.
The Prodigal came to himself before he came to his Father. First, thought of
his Fathers house, and then turned his feet thither-ward: Solomon in his Prayer
(a Type of Jesus Christ our Lord in his Intercession) speaks thus, If they sin
against thee, etc. Yet if they shall be think themselves, etc. and so return to
thee, etc. Then bear thou their Prayer, etc. and forgive thy People, etc.
First, they bethink themselves, and then return. Thus the Accomplishment of the
new Covenant in the work of Grace is called the putting of Gods Laws into men's
minds, and the writing them in or upon their hearts. Hebr. 8.10. (...). 1 Cor.
10.5. 1 Pet. 1.23. Hebr. 4.12.
The Greek word signifies, I will give them into their Thoughts, and write them
upon their hearts. Thoughts are the Gate and Inlet to all the affections.
Grace first knocks at this door. Therefore also the word of Grace, which is the
great Engine for the foresaid Privation, and the very Seed of Regeneration is
called (...) a strict and curious observer of the thoughts and intentions of
the Heart. And if Gods Word be such, sure God is so.

Sect. XI.
THirdly, God principally requires the heart, and therefore especially looks at
the Thoughts. Thoughts to the Heart are as motion to the Watch, Therefore
especially looks to the thoughts. Prove. 23.28. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Psalm. 119.41.
Sailing to the Ship; and it is those that render these valuable. My Son give me
thy heart. We must give God our Hand too, and our all, but out heart in All,
and above All. Thus set your Hearts unto all the words, etc. for is it not a
vain thing for you, because it is your life. We must lift up our Hands too to
Gods Commandments (says David) but especially our Hearts and Thoughts, and
therefore he adds, and I will meditate in thy Statutes. Thoughts can reach
farther than deeds can, and God requires our most. Psalm 137.1, 5, 6. Romans
7.24, 25.
Our Thoughts can reach farther, than our Deeds can, and God requires and looks
for our utmost. The poor Captivated Soldier when he cannot get to his party,
he can think of his party. As the Captives in Babylon could think of Sion, nay,
could not but think of it: the Apostle captivated to the Law of sin by the Law
in his Members, did yet with his MIND serve the Law of God. And God minds
carefully how your minds stand, which way they serve, to the World or Heaven,
Sin or Holiness, Christ or Belial.

Sect. XII.
Thoughts the Hearts primary productions. Exodus 13.1. First born Gods part. Job
5.7.
Fourthly,

THoughts are the primary productions of the Mind, and Heart, therefore God
principally eyes these. Of old times, the first born were under Gods especial
eye. The Hebrews call sparks, the Sons of the burning coal, as you may see by
comparing that Text in Job with the Margin. The Thoughts are the sparklings of
man's Mind, the very Issue of it, if it be enkindled with Heavenly Fire, Mat. 3
11.
that inward Baptism, what numberless numbers of these Divine sparks are there
daily flying upward; if with Fire of Hell (as the Apostle James speaks of the
Tongue, James 3.6.
) thy very thoughts, as it were, stink of Brimstone, and look like Hell in Gods
eye; they are earthly, Ver. 14.15, 16.
sensual, and Devilish, there is confusion, and every evil work. Thoughts, I
say, are the proper Issue, nay the first born of the heart, Mat. 15.19.
for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries,
Fornications, Thefts, Blasphemies; Mark, First Evil thoughts, and then all the
rest. Evil Thoughts are the File-leaders, these stand in principal view. Evil
Thoughts are the hearts first begotten, which no sooner are they born, but the
heart incestuously begets on them again, Murders, Adulteries, Thefts,
Blasphemies, what not? Thoughts you see lie next to the heart; and if we would
judge of a Fountain, we judge of it by the waters that flow next and
immediately from the spring head; going farther, Fountain to be judged by what
flows most Immediately from it.
they may come to be altered from their natural taste or look. The waters of a
salt spring by being distreined and percolated through the fresh earth may
loose their brackishness. So that which is hatred in heart, and every Brine in
the Thoughts may seem sweet in the mouth through the intermediation of the
dissembling tongue of him, whose hatred is covered by deceit: he that hates
dissembleth with his lipes, makes his voice gracious, Prove. 16.24. Verse 26.
so the Hebrew, Hail Master! may be in the mouth while Blood and Treason are in
the thoughts, and the very Devil and All in the Heart. Contrariwise, the waters
of a pure and wholesome Fountain may receive some other kind of tincture from
the Channel they pass through, and thus too often Holy thoughts springing from
an Heavenly heart, may seem lost as it were in the crowd of wordly occasions,
temptations and perturbations. Thus Isaac went to MEDITATE in the Field in the
evening tide, Genesis 24.63.
and behold the Camels. It Is not said he went out to meet the Camels, and some
good thought dropped in, (as a good Thought may now and then fall in a wicked
man's way, as the Angel in Balaams) But he went out to meditate, and the Camels
fell in. Rebeckah, Verse 65. God eyes ^he hearts first setting our. Jerem. 2.2.
she thought (as she said) he came to meet her; but the Lord says, he went out
to meet God. God will take notice whether our hearts set rightly out with him,
though after in the journey we may for some season loose our way. Thus, says
the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine
Espousals, when thou ^entest after me, Psalm 110.7.
etc. Christ has a dew of youth in a gracious heart, as well as Holy Church,
and this Divine and early dew of precious thoughts is fairest when freshest,
Coin fairest out of the Mint-house.
as from the Womb of the morning. Gods Coin is brightest when it first comes
out of the Mint-house of man's heart (for such is man's Mind, a Mint-house for
thoughts) when it passes farther, it comes to be discolored, to contract
blackness, especially by lying for some time in the Earth, and so sometimes to
grow suspicable to others, perhaps hardly discernable to our selves, without
much rubbing, etc. Repentance and Reformation; yet if it were right for metal
and stamp at its first setting out, when we our selves dare hardly trust it,
yet God (that knows its Original) will own it. It is said of King Asa, 2 Chro.
15.17.
that his heart was perfect all his days, perfect with the Lord, yet the poor
man took many a wrong and wretched step, 1 King. 15.14.
for a man of a right heart; yea how was Gods stamp sometimes, as it were,
worn off? little left of his Image or Superscription to be seen: for besides
that the high places were not remo^ed, which was a blot upon his Government; In
the business of Baasha, 2 Chronicles. 16. Verse 8.19.
He relied on the King of Syria, and relied not on the Lord his God; And when
he (that had eminent experience of God in the business of the Ethiopians and
Lubims) had done thus foolishly, and Hanani the Seer had reproved him
faithfully, Verse 10.
he was wroth, yea in a rage with him, and put him in Prison. and oppressed
some of the people at the same time; nay, in the very evening of his days, and
toward his very E^^t, it is said, that in his Disease he sought not to the
Lord, Verse 13.^
but to the Physicians; yet there was something found at bottom notwithstanding
all this. Contrariwise, 2 Chr^. 25.2.
Amazia did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but (says God) not
with a perfect heart. Like some counte^se pieces now abroad, that being ^ased
or plated over with Silver, are observed to have fewer cracks and flaws in the
Edges, perhaps than the Kings own Coin, and yet they are but Copper-hearted.

The gracious soul is the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 6.8.
who as she is attended with a number of Holy and Royal affections as so many
Queens, so also with pure thoughts, as with Virgin without number; And our
Heavenly Solomon eyes them most that wait next and immediately, as it were,
upon his Queens person; now our thoughts, as you have heard, they he next to
our hearts.

Sect. XIII.
Fifthly,

IT cannot but be granted, that God judges as man cannot, We look at each
others outsides, God judges as man cannot, therefore by the thoughts. Luke
6.45. Prove. 26.23. 1 Samuel 16.7.
and oftentimes are not deceived, for ordinarily the abundance of the heart
will break out either some ti^e or other, by the tongues clinking what the
heart thinks, (as the Proverb has it,) or some way or other, so that the wary
observer may come to discern the Potsheard, notwithstanding the covering of
Silver dross: often times, I say, but not always, That Is Gods, Prerogative; so:
the Lord sees not as man sees, How then? for man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. We hear men's words, He sees
their thoughts; we weigh their Actions and Appearances, Prove. 24.12. Chap. 16.2.
the Lord ponders their hearts, and weighs their spirits (as the wise man
speaks.)

In the Levitical Law the Swan was pronounced unclean, a Bird whose Feathers
are excceeding white, Lev. 11.18. God judges most by what is in most. 2. Cor.
11.14. Man. 23.27. Verse 28. Verse 25.
but her Skin black. God judges most by what is In-most. God can easily
discern the trans-formed Devil, under the Angel of Light; the rottenness
within, through the whited Tomb, and painted Sepulcher. We unto you
Hypocrites, says Christ, for ye make clean the outside of the Cup and of the
Platter, but within they are f^ll of Extortion and Excess; Even so ye also
appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. Oh what horrid Spectacles were the most of men, even of many that
desire to make a fair show in the flesh, Gal. 6.12.
as the Apostle speaks, if their Insides were but turned outside; But alas!
They are all outside to him that is All eye.

Sect. XIV.
Conscience Gods Deputy judges by our Thoughts, Rom 2 13. Verse 16.
LAstly, That God sentenceth and Dooms us by our Thoughts, is hereby evident, in
that Conscience, that is, Gods Vicegerent in man's breast, does so, which show
the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience bearing witness,
and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or excusing one another: it
follows, In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel; God, and Christ, and the Gospel, they will judge men by
their Consciences; and their Consciences they will judge them by their Thoughts
in the great day; Judge we therefore our selves now, as then we must be judged.

CHAP. V. Disc verse what those Right Thoughts are, that are the Righteous man's
Evidence: and how to be known.
Sect. I.
Psalm. 64.6. Jer. 17.9.
BUt alas! may some one say, Is not Man's heart a great deep, and desperately
wicked, and deceiptful above all things? I am afraid of Judging my self by my
Thoughts of my self, least I should Mis-judge of my self, finding my self so
apt to think amiss; does not the Apostle speak of some that measuring
themselves by themselves are not wise. 2 Cor. 10.12. Prove. 16 2. and 21. 2.
There is so much Pride, Partiality, and Self-love, that almost every way of
man will seem clean and right in his own eye, if his own Thoughts may but be
his Judges.

Why all this is true; Solution. Not what Thoughts we have of our selves, but
in our selves. Gal. 6.3, 4.
yet all that has been said before true also, We never said that every man's
Case is, as his thoughts are of himself, but yet by his thoughts that are In
himself, he may come to discover his own state. For if a man Think himself to
be something, (says the Apostle) when he is nothing, he deceives himself. But
yet let every man prove his own works, and then he shall have rejoicing In
himself alone, and not in another. This he speaks in respect of Sincerity, not
of Righteousness, or Justification in the sight of God, for of the later, he
says, we rejoy^e only in Jesus, and have no other Confidence; Philip 3.3. 2
Cor. 2.12.
But as to the former, this is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. 1 John 5.10.
so also he that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself.

Nay in as much as the Apostle condemns him for a self deceiver, who is in some
respect the worst kind of deceiver (as Self-murder is the worst kind of
Murder), that thinks himself to be something when he is nothing; even this
makes it evident, that his high thoughts of himself were evidences against
himself, had he but rightly considered them.

Sect. II.
WHereas Reader, on the other hand, Self suspicion a better sign than hi h
thoughts of our selves.
if thou be but honest in what thou pretendest, and not Hypocritically
humble-tongued, as many men are, when thou complainest of thy self, and
declarest thy jealous thoughts that thou have of thine own heart; Here is
something like a token for good; For even right jealousy falls much in with
that Carefulness, Indignation, 1 Cor. 7.1.
Fear, etc. that were approved signs of godly sincerity. But and if it be thus
with thee, right gladly will thou go along with me in the following
particulars, and say as David, O Lord, thou have searched me, Psalm 139.1, 2,
23.
and known me, and thou understandest my thoughts afar off; and yet again,
search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts; Search me, O
search me, thou blessed word of God, that can not lie; Thou Messenger of
Christ that dare not flatter me, O try me and know my Thoughts. Thou will
receive Gods spies with peace, Hebr. 11.31. Lend Gods Servants the Lor^^
Candle. Prove. 20.27. Conscience to search thee by.
as Rahab did) yea wilt willingly lend me the Candle of thine own Conscience to
hold to thee, whilst we are together searching the secrets of thy own soul; for
the spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of
the belly. And the reason why so many Hearers and Readers of the most searching
Books and Sermons, are yet ignorant of, or mistaken in themselves, is because
they deny the Lords servants the Lords Candle to do his work by.

I. Trial of Right Thoughts.
Sect. I.
First,

1. Trial of thoughts is b^ their origin^^^ Good thought^ grow not in an evil
heart. Luke 24.38.
THen let us begin with thy Thoughts in their Original, and so judge the
streams, as near as we (...) to the Fountain head. Would thou approve thy
thoughts to be right Thoughts, such as indeed are the Righ co^s man's Evidence,
let me ask thee plainly how th^^ cam^st to thy Thoughts? have they their Rise
in thy self? (why do Thoughts arise in your hearts?) then know they are but
Carnal at best, for all that is born of the flesh is flesh. John 3.6.
The heart I know is a Vine that is always bea^ing, a Fountain that is ever
springing up: Isaiah 10.12. Mat. 15.19.
and Thoughts are called the Fruit of the heart, as we saw before, and (as it
were) the streams of the Heart, they proceed from it, says Christ; but, says
he, Mat. 7 18. James 3.22.
a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor a Fountain wel^, says the
Apostle James, salt water and fresh. Now every natural heart is a corrupt tree,
a Vine of Sodom, and therefore its Crowds of thoughts naturally are but the
Clusters of Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 32.32. Is^ah 57.20.
a troubled Spring of Sea rather, that cannot (...), but is ever casting up
mire and dirt. Amongst all the Unbelievers in the world, there is not one pure
mind, therefore not one pure thought; Titus 1.15. Job 14.4.
for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? It Is a vain and ignorant
boasting that I have observed in some, that have thanked God that they were
never troubled with evil thoughts in all their days: say thou so? then I
dare tell thee that thou never yet wast owner of one good one, such as God will
own and accept for such: That they think no body any hurt, who never truly
thought themselves or others any good: surely there are none greater strangers
to good thoughts, than such as brag most of their good meanings, nay, that can
tell you they hope to be saved by them, And how came they by them? why, they
thank God, they have had them ever since they can remember, God forbid else.
They have as good hearts to God, and think as well of Jesus Christ as the best
of them, though they cannot speak so well. Yet do but ask these of the New
birth, and you are unto them as a Barbarian, and speak as it were in an unknown
tongue, (as our Savior to Nicodemus,) and shall only receive a frump or a
frown for your freedom; Jam. 3.3, 4^
what do you think they stand in need to be Catechized? if you do, they thank
you, they do not think so meanly of themselves, and this is one of their good
thoughts.

Sect. II.
BUt let me plead with thee, O Man, No sufficiency in our selves for one right
thought.
thou that find good Thoughts, as free as the Rode, and as Common and easy
as the high way: Art thou greater than the ^postle Paul, he says expressly,
that we are not sufficient of our selves to Think any thing of Our selves.
Therefore we must be taken off of Our selves before we can possibly Think one
Right Thought. But our sufficiency (says the Text) is of God. As we cannot
think at all Physically, nor exert one motion of the Mind in Thought, but by a
sufficiency of God, working by Nature: so much less can we think Morally, 2
Cor. 3.5. Amongst all Unbelievers not one pure thought. Titus 1.15.
Thoughts good in a spiritual notion, in the account of God, but by his own
sufficiency working by Grace. To the unbelieving, (says the same Apostle,)
there is nothing pure, but even their very Mind is defiled; And if their Mind
drop its uncleanness and defilement upon all about it, surely much more upon
the thoughts, that lie next unto it. Some men think their thoughts are
certainly good, Reason why their thoughts trouble them not.
because they never trouble them. They do not complain of blasphemous thoughts,
and horrid injections, as many do; And alas! the only Reason why the thoughts,
the Treasures of their H arts, their goods are in peace, is because the strong
Man Armed keeps the Palace, Luke 11.21.
the Devil is Lord and Master there. But if ever that stronger one than he, the
Lord Jesus Christ, Verse 22. 2 Cor. 10.5.
(by the weapons of that warfare that are spiritual and mighty through God,)
had come and prevailed upon thee, it is strange if all would have continued so
quiet in thee; thou would likely have seen troubles, and heard amazing
noises in thy own Soul, for there would have been the pulling down of strong
holds, and this would have awakened thee sure to purpose, and raised Commotions
in thy Thoughts: for the very First motions of Grace, as I said before, and
stirs, would have appeared there. The casting down of some, the bringing in
others into captivity to the obedience of Christ, Luke 2.24.
who is set as for the rising and falling of many in Israel, so in the soul;
the thoughts that thou were best acquainted and pleased with, must have come
tumbling down; and the thoughts, whose faces thou never saw before, would
have risen up in their room, own thoughts must have been unthoughts, Old
thoughes amongst other things, must have past away, 2 Cor. 5.17. Isaiah 55.7.
and all things must have become new. Let the unrighteous forsake his thoughts,
His Thoughts, that is, Thoughts growing in corrupt natures Garden, for
Regeneration is especially called, a Renewing in the spirit of the Mind. Ephesians.
4.23
Search the Scriptures and if things be not thus, then blame me, and think as
well as ever thou thou did of thy self, and as ill as ever thou can of the
Author, for giving thy calm and quiet thoughts any needless trouble; But alas
Reader! be not deceived, Gal. 6.7, 8.
God is not mocked; but if a man think himself to be something when he is
nothing, he deceives himself. Let me tell thee, thy thinking well of thy own
thoughts, will no more make them good, than thy thinking thy self such, will
make God to think thee so. And yet, believe it, I beseech thee, O Reader, that
my end and design in all this is not to disturb, but to direct thee. The
Apostle delighted not in making the Corinthians sorry, but that they sorrowed
after a godly sort, 2 Cor. 7.9.
It is no pleasure to me, to think that thy thoughts are wrong, but desirous I
am to set them right, and to help thee how to judge rightly of them, and of thy
self by them.

Sect. II.
SEeing then, Reader, Seeing grace first stirs in thoughts.
that we are now at the very root of the matter, and have told thee once again,
that the grace of God first stirs in the Thoughts. Give me leave to lay before
thee a plain Scheme and Map of such Thoughts as Divine Grace does usually work
in true Penitents, of such Right Thoughts, as it does first give in to those
whom it will accept, and own as Righteous persons. And herein, that I may the
more distinctly proceed, I shall premise something, (First,) Concerning the
Season and Occasion, Premised two things, occasion and method of Gods working
them.

Gods usual season to bring sinners to right thoughts (such as for mad men to
right minds.)


and the Method, (Secondly,) Of Gods working such Thoughts as these in the
Heart and Mind of Man. In all which, if thou will go along with me, I trust
thou will find both Scripture Evidence and Christian Experience to bear thee
Company.

Sect. IV.
FOr the Season that God takes to bring Sinners to Right Thoughts, it is such as
the Physician takes, to bring mad men to Right Minds, (for even this great and
Inward Change in Scripture is called (...), Acts 3.31. Repentance a coming to
Right minds.
a coming to our Right minds, so the word signifies) when they have them under
Chains, and in the dark. If they be held in Cords of Affliction, and bound in
Fetters; THEN he shows them their work, etc. He opens their Ear to
Discipline, etc. For God speaks once, Job 36.8. Verse 9.10. Job 33.14, 15.
Verse 19. Verse 16.
yea twice, yet man perceives it not; But in a vision of the Night, (when he
is chastened with pain upon his bed, as it there follows, etc.) then he opens
the Ears of men, and seals their instruction, In the day of Adversity, says
God, Consider, when the Patriarchs were reduced to a sore strait, then they are
brought to think seriously of their Sin against their Brother Joseph; And 'twas
he that brought them into it, for that very end; so does our heavenly Joseph,
Jesus Christ, Eccles. 7.14. Genesis 41.21.
often do for the very same purpose; he sends troubles often times on the
outward, for the reducing of the inner man; and straitens the Garrison, that he
may take it in. 1 King. 8.47. Luke 15.17.
The Israelites by their Captivity must be taught to Bethink themselves, and so
the Prodigal by his Famine. Or however, when the mighty God takes the weapons
of the spiritual warfare into his own hand, Hosea 6.5.
and hews men by his Prophets, and stays them by the words of his mouth, and
his Judgments are as the light that came upon Saul (in his full ca^^ar) and
struck him to the ground, Act. 9.3.
and a ^oice from Heaven with it, that strikes him to the heart; Soul, soul,
Verse 6.
what do thou mean by this hardening thy Heart against Heaven, and setting
thy self against God? Are thy heels harder than his pricks? can thou dwell
with ever^asting burnings? Verse 4.5.
The Commandment comes, Sin revives, the false conceited Righteous person is
struck dead ( I dyed, says Paul) knows not what to think; Romans 7.9.
w^o art thou Lord? nor what to do, Lord what would thou have me to do?
such, I say, is the season and occasion that God takes for reducing sinners to
Right Thoughts. Act. 9.5.


I know indeed that Grace is a Sovereign agent, Grace not to be limited. Acts
16.15. Sometimes slips the lock of the heart with little noise.
and works as it will: sometimes It slips the Lock of the hear, as Lydia's,
with little noise, and so makes ^oom for Right Thoughts there, It may possibly
steal into the heart, if I may say so, like Joseph's cup into Benjamins sack,
And he, that has it, wonders when, or how, It first came thither. All women
that do well too, have not the same troubles and pains in Childbearing, that
the most have; And so it is also in the new birth. And if thou be one that
can say indeed, that there is a Change in thee from what thou wast by Nature,
one thing thou know that whereas thou wast born blind, now thou se^st, John
9.25.
(as the man in the Gospel,) The grace of God has brought t^ee to thy right
sight, a Right mind, Right Thoughts; Can thou say I was born blind, but God
has brought me to Right sight, mind, and thoughts with less: do Bless God for
the thing, Repine not at the manner. Genesis 44.13.
but by what Sickness, Sermon, Affliction, Conviction, it began with thee, thou
can not say; which is the case of some (especially some such that have been
all their lives, much under the power of the restraining Grace of God, and of a
strict and holy education), let me exhort thee rather to magnify that Grace
that has appeared to thee, and (taught thee to deny ungodliness, etc. then to
repine because thou do not know, or by what means and gradations, the work of
God has grown up in thy heart, or to deny what God has done for thy Soul. But
yet withal, this I must add, that as it is observed that the coming of the Cup
into the Sack, in an unknown way, left them in the more trouble and
perturbations afterward, though it came from a friendly hand; And those women
that have less fore-pains, then others, have many times greater After-pains,
(as they call them). So they that have less signal Spiritual troubles preceding
their conversion, and have known least of the terrors of the Lord, are by so
much the more full of Anxiety many times, almost all their days, 2 Cor. 5.11.
full of doubtful thoughts whether they were ever savingly wrought upon,
because not wrought upon as such and such; Haunted, many times with Hideous
thoughts, and Temptations to Atheism, Blasphemy, etc. which make them even
weary of life, and afraid of death, and yet may be very precious in the sight
of God, and dear to Jesus Christ.

Sect. V.
ANd as Gods usual Season is the time of trouble, of spiritual trouble, to
bring men to Right Thoughts: Psalm. 77.2.3. Verse 16.
To remember God, to Consider the days of old, to commune with their own
hearts, to make diligent search into their own spirits, to take notice of their
Infirmities, Verse 10. Verse 11.
to Remember the years of the right hand of the most High; to Remember the
works of the Lord, and to meditate of his doings, etc. (All which is
Right-Thought-work, and which the Psalmist was set upon in the day of his
Trouble. Psalm. 77.2. Gods ordinary method to bring to right thoughts by setting
home some particular sin.
) So the Method that God ordinarily uses, Is, to bring to their thoughts some
one particular Sin, and to present it to their Souls view in all its ugly shape
and monstrous deformity, with its heightening circumstances, and hellish
horror, that, (like the tail of a Pr^digious Comet), it draws after it; now as
Ghosts are most terrible and confounding when they appear in the Dark, so is
Sin when it stares a man in the face in his time of trouble. Thus the
Patriarchs were struck with the appaling thought of their savage cruelty to
their innocent Brother when themselves were in Distress; Genesis 42.21.
no doubt, they had other Sins to trouble them, but this first flew in their
face. Saul, with the thought of his furious persecuting of Jesus. Thus some for
telling a known Lie, Acts 9.4.
others for some Theft, or known Fraud, others for profaning the Lord's Day,
others for some profane Oath, others for Disobedience to Parents, And some,
though few, like Mary Magdalene, for the foul sin that brings a wound and a
dishonor, and a rep^oach that is hardly wiped away. Prove. 6.33.
So that as men ordinarily single out some one special Sin to set their heart
upon, though they entertain and practice all the rest, Romans 7.8. with 24.
so God singles out some special Sin to fix their thoughts upon, and thereby to
bring them in due time to sight and sense of the whole Body of Death; nay
sometimes when men (by a blameless appearance, and moral conversation) have got
the good thoughts of other men, and their own much more, Heb. 3.1. Luke 18.6.
God sometimes suffers civil men to fall into some foul act to discover t^ them
the plague of the heart 1 Kings 8 38. Sometimes thoughts are in an uproar,
troubled, and distinct cares not known. Acts 19.32. Verse 40. Yet God sometimes
out of this Chaos draws a new Creation. As in Genesis. Reduces thoughts to
proper places and things to order. Rev. 3.20. Prove. 18.14. Acts 2.57. Prove.
38.4.
trusting (as Christ speaks) in themselves, that they are righteous, God
suffers them to fall into some gross act of Sin, perhaps Drunkenness, perhaps
making a mock at Godliness to please vile company, perhaps Perjury, or some
other palpable act of wickedness, that by such a rising in the flesh, he may
bring them to know, and to bethink themselves of the Plague of the heart that
Scripture speaks of.

Indeed I have sometimes observed, some persons troubled with a strange unusual
throng and crowd of Thoughts, Sermons trou^led them, and Sins troubled them,
but their Thoughts were like that confused concourse in the Acts, of which no
distinct account could be given, and the Assembly knew not why they were come
together. And as such a crowd of thoughts have been thus in an uproar for some
space of time, and they knew not distinctly why, so a little time has brought
it to they know not what, nothing for good has come of it. And yet sometimes
the All-wise and powerful grace of God, even out of such a Chaos of confusion,
is pleased to draw a New Creation, reducing things to their proper places, and
thoughts to their right order.

Sect. VI.
BUt generally, when Grace first knocks at the door of the heart, and finds the
Sinner in distress, wounded in Spirit that he cannot bear it, pricked at the
very heart, (the pressing sense of Sin lies upon him, and goes over him as a
burden too heavy for him;) It brings him to speak within himself; Or, (which
is all one) to think thus, The Scheme of a Converts first thought. Lament. 3.1.
or to this effect;

I am the man that have seen Affliction by the Rod of his anger, and now I
stand here a miserable Malefactor before the Lord, who perfectly knows all my
secrets, and infinitely hates all my Sins: My Conscience hales me to his Bar,
for my sin has found me out, Number. 32.23. Genesis 42.21. Prove. 28.13. Job 9.4.
And I am verily guilty concerning this thing: should I then either hide my
sin, or harden my self against God? who ever did either of these, and
prospered? This then is my proper station, though my feet be hurt with setters,
and the Iron enters into my very Soul, though the Chain of Gods Indignation be
heavy upon me, Micah 7.9.
yet I must bear it, because (it is my own Chain) I have sinned against him.
Excuse my sin. Alas, I cannot; I knew my Masters will, Luke 12.57. Romans 7.12.
Malac. 1.6.
and knew it to be Holy, just, and Good, and did it not; I called him Lord, yet
feared him not; I knew he forbad the thing I did, yet I did it; I knew he
looked on me, and yet I did it; I knew he would call me to an account for it,
and yet I did it. Accuse my Master, Alas, I dare not; No, no, Jam. 1.13, 14.
He tempted me not, but I was drawn away of my own lust and enticed; my own
lust, I may call it so, as much as I may call my Heart my own; an Heart so
vile, but yet my own; such a Fountain of Poison, such a Cage of every unclean
and hateful Bird; an Heart, nay an Hell; yea and worse to me then all the
Devils there; I should belly them, as bad as they be, should I say otherwise; an
heart so desperately wicked, Jorem. 17.9.
that if all the men of the world had told me that I had such a heart, or
should have done such a thing, 2 King. 8.13.
I should with disdain have replied (with Hazael) am I a Dog? or a Devil? that
I should do such a thing; Nay, when Gods own word told me, till this cursed Sin
told it me, I could not have thought that I carried such a heart about me. Is
this the Heart I so long trusted? that I so often excused? that I so much
applauded? Is this the honest, the good heart? the heart full of good meanings?
the heart that thought no harm? O mystery of Iniquity! O Hell of Hypocrisy! and
unsearchable depth of deceit! Well, deep as thou art, God has now searched
out thy deep things, O my soul! and now my Sin is ever before me, Psalm 51.3.
Genesis 4.7. Job 14.5.
and my punishment is following hard after me, Sin lies at my door; My fatal
moment is set, that I cannot pass it; and yet secret, that I cannot know it,
Mat. 24.42. Mat. 13.35. Heb. 9.27.
whether in the evening, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing; only this I know,
that after death (come it when it will) comes Judgment; Judgment unavoidable,
before a Judge impartial and unexorable; The Crime naked; The Prisoner
speechless; Heb. 4.13. Mat. 22.12.
The Sentence speedy; The Execution certain; The Torment intolerable, yet must
be born; without any ease, yet without all end; Mat. 18.13.
through millions of millions of Ages; nay without help, or hope of help to all
Eternity; And this not a Fantasy, but a greater reality, then what I see with
my outward eyes; nor a foreign concernment, but thy own case, O my own Soul.

Sect. VII.
UNder such doleful thoughts as these, the pensive Sinners Life (for some part
of it more or less, even as it pleases God) is spent with Grief; Psalm 31.10.
as David's, yea sometimes whole years with sighing, so that his very strength
fails because of his Iniquity, and his very bones are consumed. But then the
working thoughts do not thus leave the spiritual mourner, But in such like sort
as this they do proceed.

Alas then! what shall I do? Shall I think of giving my overwhelmed Spirit, my
aching Heart some present ease by breaking away from Gods Bar? But whither, O
whither shall I go? shall I fly out again to my cursed courses, and riotous
Company? Oh these have been my Bane already, and methinks I still see upon the
wall, over against the place where I too lately sat amongst them, Daniel 5 5.
the Fingers of a man's hand writing and drawing up a bloody Indictment against
me, Iam. 3.19. Prove. 7.23.
I remember the Wormwood and the Gall, the Dart, that then and there struck
through my Liver, and the wound that has been festring ever since because of
my foolishness. Psalm. 38 5.
Shall I turn me then to the harmless creatures, and beg of them some relief?
Alas! my Sins have engraven vanity there, with a pen of Iron, Eccles. 2.11.
yea Vexation of Spirit, with the very point of a Diamond. Shall they ease my
Servitude and cruel Bondage, who have wearyed them with mine Iniquities, Isaiah
43.24.
and made them serve with my Sins, and God in them? shall they help my
groaning, who have made them all groan under the bondage of my corruption? Romans
8.21. and 2^. Job 7.13, 14. Psalm. 102.4.
No, no, If I say my bed shall comfort me, or my Couch ease my complaint, then
am I sca ed with Visions, and terrified through Dreams. Sometimes I forget,
sometimes I fear to eat my Bread, least the Morsel should prove a Messenger of
Death to me, and hasten me away to the place from whence I shall not return.
Sometimes God holds my eyes waking that I cannot sleep; Psalm 77.4.
and sometimes I dare not, least I should awake no more, till Fire and
Brimstone are about mine ears. In vain then do I think of running away from
God, for whither shall I fly from his presence? Psalm. 139.7.
Shall I think then of fleeing to him, and of b^wing the knee before him? Alas,
He is a consuming Fire, and the Mountains smoke, Heb. 12.29. Isaiah 63.3. 1
King. 20.31.
and the Hills flow down at his presence. Yet have I heard that the God of
Israel is a merciful God, I will put a Rope upon my head, and make my
Supplication to my Judge. But Alas! wherewithal shall I come before him, Job
9.15. Mich. 6.6, 7.
and bow my knee to the most High? Shall I think of Pilgrimages or Penances, of
coming before him with burnt Offerings? to give him, If I had them, thousands
of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? or my first born for my
transgression, or the fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul? Will he take any
Bullock out of my House, Psalm. 9.50. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Prove. 6.35. Exodus 34.5.
or He-Goats out of my Fold? No, no, He is a Jealous God, and Iealously regards
not any Ransom, or many Gifts; He will by no means clear him that is guilty,
and I dare not plead Not Guilty, though I die for it. Shall I think then of
stretching out my hand in the way of some Legal Righteousness and self-wrought
Reformation, to take hold of the Tree of L fe, now that I have eaten of the
forbidden Tree? Alas! Genesis 3.22. and 24.
behold Cherubims with a Flaming Sword, blocking up the way of the Covenant of
Works, so that by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Alas! Gal.
2.16.
my Sights for Sin are an Impure vapor; and my Tears for Sin, need washing! my
Righteousness are filthy rags, Isaiah 64 6.
and like the cloths of a removed Woman; If I should justify my self, my own
mouth would condemn me, Job 9.20.
and prove me perverse; And I have too long already added this sin of perverss
R bellion to my other wretchedness, that I have gone about to establish my own
Righteousness, Romans 10.3.
and have not submitted to the Righteousness of God.

But yet, O thou pure God, have not thou said that there is Forgiveness with
thee, Psalm. 130.4. Jer. 8.22. John 4.29.
that thou may be feared? Is there no Balm in thy Gilead? is there no
Physician there? But this very day there was a Messenger of thine with me, of a
truth he was none but thine, for he told all that was in my heart, is not this
the Interpreter? the one of a thousand? Job 33.23.
He told me withal from thy own mouth, that though I could not, yet thou have
found a Ransom, and given a Name, Job 33.24. Acts 4.12. Mat. 9.13. and 18, 11.
though but One under Heaven whereby men might be saved; Who came not to call
the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance; to seek and to save that which was
lost; That help was laid upon him, Psalm. 89.19. Hebr. 7.25.
and that he it mighty, even able to save to the utmost. That therefore there
was hope in Israel concerning my soul, a possibility, nay a probability, nay a
Certainty that if I would agree quickly, even while I am in the way, Mat. 5.25.
Job 22.25.
acquaint now my self with God, I should be at peace: That thou art not only
Reconcilable, but in Christ reconciling the world to thy self; 2 Cor 5.15.
V^rse 20.
And therefore as though thou were beseeching me by Him (thine Ambassador) He
did pray me in Christ's stead, that I would be reconciled to God; And O my Soul
was moved within me at that word; shall the Judge, though I (as it were)
petition? and not I, the Offender entertain the motion? 1 Kings 20 23. Lam.
3.29.
nay catch at the words (as Benhadads Servants,) and put my mouth in the dust
if there may be hope.

But then withal he told me, That Christ must be Lord as well as Jesus; Zach.
6.13. Romans 3.27. Mat. 13.45. and 46. and 19.21. chap. 19.24. Hebr. 3.15. and
10.30. Luke 17.32.
a Priest indeed, but a Priest upon his Throne; That Faith was not
Libertinisme, but a Law; That all must be sold, and not a farthing would be
abated, if I would buy the Pearl of great price: That there was a dear self to
be denied; A da ly Cross to be taken up, A crucified leader to be followed, a
severe example to be imitated; No time to be delayed before I began, ( to day
if I would hear his Voice, etc.) nor looking back (with Lots Wife) to be
endured, after I had once begun. Wherefore he charged me in thy Name, before I
went farther, to sit down, Luke 19.28.
and consider the Cost.

But O the consternation that this new Thought breeds in my perplexed Spirit! I
had almost said in my heart, 1 Samuel 15.32.
like Agag, the bitterness of death is over; Alas! my Sea-sick Soul would fain
have been at shore any way, though she ventured a drowning for it; But now I
see there is no remedy, but I must out again into the tempestuous Ocean. But O
the unexpressible torment of a divided distracted mind! Alas the contrary
struglings in my poor soul, Genesis 25.22.
as if there were two Nations there! One throng of Thoughts breaks in
Impetuously, Isaiah 57.10. Luke 19.21.
did not we tell thee from the very first, silly soul, that there is no hope in
God for thee? we knew that he was an austere Lord, whatever others might tell
thee, that his sayings are hard, so that none could bear them; And should
thou set out, thou could never hold out, and so thy last end would be worse
than thy beginning; John 6.60. 2 Pet. 2.20.21. Jerem. 2.25. Isa. 22.23.
And now thou may find our words true; Come, come, there is no hope, no: but
we will throw up all, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we must die: did not
we tell that these Micajahs though, at first, they might seem to sooth thee in
some flattering hopes, yet would never prophecy good concerning thee?

But let not thy heart say so, says a contrary thought, And so flies (with
indignation) in the face of the former; And behold a Troop comes after it,
which when it has forced them to give some ground, This new Troop seizes upon
mine heart, and speaks thus to it.

Sect. VIII.
UNngrateful sinner! Romans 5.8.
is this thy kindness to thy Friend (that herein commends his love to thee in
that whilst thou wort an enemy he dyed for thee) that thou art still listening
to the cursed Offspring of that old and evil heart of unbelief that ever was,
Heb. 3.12.
and ever will be, for departing from the living God? who, had he had a mind to
destroy thee, might have done it, and never have shown thee such things as
these. Judge. 13.23. Phil. ^.7. Isaiah 30.18.
He took upon himself the form of a servant; And he still waits, that he may
be gracious; He stretched forth his arms, to open thee a way to his Bosom love,
upon the Cross; and he stretc^eth out his hands again to thee, Isaiah 65.2. Mat
26.26. Rev. 3.20.
in the Preaching of the word. It has been said, Ask, and have; it is now,
Take, and have; Take, eat, this is my body broken for thee: Salvation knocks,
it is but thy opening and the work is done.

A work indeed, says the drooping soul; which before it be done, I am like for
all this to be undone; it is but taking! but opening? a sad BUT, God knows, for
me who am weak, and cannot: Vile, and dare not. Alas what have Dogs to do with
Childrens Bread? should I presume, thinking to believe, and Blaspheme, thinking
to pray; Mat. 15.26.
call Christ my Savior, Rev. 2.9.
and God my Father, and be rejected of both, O whither should I make my shame
to go? No, no, had I an Hand fit to receive such a Guest, gladly would I go
through Fire and Water to open the door to Jesus, and take him with ten
thousand welcomes into my Soul.

And is it such Presumption, says a thought on the other hand, and such pride
to be dutiful and obedient (for this is Gods Commandment that thou believe on
Jesus Christ) what pride, 1 John 4.13.
what presumption then is it to be undutifull and disobedient? He that
believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. And will thou needs be damned,
that thou may have the credit of being modest, and going mannerly to Hell?
Thou say, Luke 5.8. Mat. 9.12.
depart from me, for I am a sinful man! Why, he is the Physician, what should
he do with thee, if thou were not sick? Chap. 8.8.
Thou art not worthy Grace should come under thy Roof; neither would it be
Grace if thou were worthy, for if it were of works, (says the Apostle) it were
no more grace. But whilst thou speak thy Fears and dismal dread of
presumption, Romans 11.6.
did thou never hear of such a Sin as despair? presumption indeed, were it
so, might undo thee; but bold and blasphemous despair, (which thou think
modest and humble) la^ours to undo Jesus Christ, Other sins make work for
Christ, who came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; Math
9.13. Chap. 13.58. and 17.20.
but black desperation shuts him out of work, as it is said, he d^id not many
works there, (that is, in his own Country) because of their unbelief. And do
thou thus requite the Lord? foolish sinner, and unwise! as to spill the Wine of
his precious blood, in thy proud humility and Impudent Modesty (like water upon
upon the ground,) and that for no other reason than this, Isaiah 55.1. Job
15.11.
that he offers it to thee that have no Money, nor price: Must the consolations
of God needs be small with thee, that thy modesty may be great? Thou have no
money, but have thou mind? thou have no desert, but have thou no desire? Christ
has a healing hem in his garments for thee, be thy Issue never so foul, Mat
9.20. and 14.36. Mat. 5.25. Verse 17. Zach. 9.1^. Mar. 9.27.
so shameful, so inveterate. If thy desires be creeping toward him, while that
Issue of thine continues Running; Break then, O prisoner of hope, through the
throng of all thy contradicting Thoughts, and steal (...) ^he least one blessed
touch, till thou find virtue going one of him. Come, Come, Chap. 9.30.
The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come, and let him that hears say
Come, And let him that is athi^st come, and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of Life freely. Rev. 22.17. Heb. 12.27.
Now see that thou refuse not him that speaks from Heaven.

But alas thinks my Soul, after all this, I sadly fear, that if Christ would
indeed accept me, I should never be able to accept Christ; I find now it is a
hard thing to be a Christian; Acts 26.38. Numb. 13 28, 31, 33.
I thought I had been almost persuaded; but O the sons of Anak! The walled
Towns in the way! the Cross! the Yoke! not a Lust, not a Thought, not a Word,
not a Look, in all the remainder of my life, but by Law? Alas! who can bea^ it?
I dread to begin to draw, least I should draw back, and better then I had never
known the way of truth; Heb 10.38. Isaiah 38.14.
I know thy Soul has no pleasure in such; O Lord, I am now oppressed,
undertake for one! I would believe, my God, but cannot, help thou my unbelief!
I would take thy yoke upon me, Mark 9.24.
but I dare not; for I have been a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, But turn
thou me and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18.
and thou shall be the Lord my God: I see, O Lord, I must have my yoke, which
way soever I turn my self; Sins and Satan's I have too long born; And should I
die under thine, I cannot bear the thought of going back to theirs: For I am
sure to die under theirs. I am indeed in a great straight; 2 Samuel 24.14.
let me now fall into the hand of the Lord, for with the Lord there are
mercies, but as for Satan and Sin, the mercies of these are cruel. Prove. 12.10.


Sect. IX.
CAst out then the Shete Anchor of thy hope, O thou afflicted, Isaiah 54.11.
tossed with tempest, and not comforted; and cast it O my soul, as near as thou
can, into that within the Vail; Heb. 11.19.
If thou venture not on Jesus Christ, thou perishest: And if thou do, thou
can but perish; 2 King. 7 4.
If he save thee alive, thou shall live, And if he kill thee, thou can but
die; There has been high and heinous, and (in their own eyes) the very chief
of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Cor. 6.11.
washed, ^ustified, sanctified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of God, yea that has been set forth even for a PATTERN to all that
should afterward believe of him, 1 Timothy 1.16. Isaiah 26.12.
who not only ORDAINS peace for us, but also works all our Works in us;
Wherefore O thou blessed Jesus, with fear and with trembling, I cast and ^oul
my self upon thee, Hester 4.16.
And if I perish, I will perish at those feet that were therefore p^^^ced, that
whilst I put my fingers into the print of the Nails, John 20.27.
the weak hand of my Faith may have the better hold.

Sect. X.
LO here the Restless Mind of Man touched with the Lodestone of Divine Grace,
tremblingly wavering, Numb. 24.17.
seeking rest but finding none, till the thoughts fix upon the Star out of
Jacob, the Lord Jesus Christ! Lo, here the Heavenly conduct of Divine light
(newly arisen in the mind of man) bringing his Thoughts from a far Country,
Matthew 2. Verse 5.
and never leaving them till it leave them in the very place where the Holy
Child lies, The sweet bosom of the Fathers love. Lo, here the Celestial Call,
Isaiah 41.2.
raising up the Righteous man from the East his Native Country, or (if you
will) natural condition). Acts 11.23. Heb. 11.15.
And bringing him to Gods foot, with full purpose, and fixed Thought of Heart,
(should opportunity of returning into the old Country, The old state, The
other Gods on the other side of the Flood) serve never so fair, yet) never by
the Grace of God, to return unto them more; cleaving to Christ for fear of
leaving of him, or being left by him, Leaning on its beloved, that it may not
be lost any more in the old Wilderness, Cant. 8.5.
the perplexing maze of its old unbelieving thoughts; fastening it self upon
him, that it may by no means be shaken off by him, with such mental speakings
as these.

Entreat me not to leave thee, Ruth. 2.14.
or to return from following after thee; neither say thou to me, let me go; Ah
my Jesus, I will let all go, rather then let thee go; for I should let
infinitely more than the Worlds All go, in letting thee go, I should loose my
self in loosing thee, and be cast away, Luke 9.25.
and that too in the very sight of Harbor. No, mo, my heart is fixed, O
Christ, my heart is fixed; whither thou go I will go; be it to thy Crown, or
to thy Cross: and where thou lodgest I will lodge; Ruth 2.16, 17.
be it a Paradise or a Prison: Thy people shall be my people, (though the world
hate them.) And thy God shall be my God, (notwithstanding all the ungodliness
that is in the world, and the world of ungodliness that is in my heart,) where
thou dyest I will die, Romans 6.4. Verse 6.
and there will I be buried; thy death shall mortify my members that are upon
earth; My Lusts shall thy Cross kill, and thy Grave bury; Nay, God forbid that
death should part, Col. 3.3.
but more closely, yea unseperably, eternally unite thee and me, And so shall I
ever be with the Lord.

And thus have you seen the returning Shulamite; Cant. 6.16.
and what will you see in the Shulamite, but as it were the company of two
Armies? On the one hand the struglings of unbelief, on the other, the work of
Faith with power till at length the house of Dav d grows stronger and stronger,
2 These 1.1. Isaiah 23.33. Genesis 32.25, 28. Isaiah 40.1, 2.
and the house of Saul grows weaker and weaker: Old thoughts pass away, and new
prevail, the lame divides the spoil, the halting Jacob becomes a Prince with
God, the mourner is comforted, the warfare accomplished, the sin pardoned, the
bruised Reed lifts up its hanging head, Chapter 42.3.
the smoking slax breaks out into a flame; In one word, ^n the multitude of
the thoughts within, Psalm 94.19.
Gods comforts they delight the Soul.

And thus the soul falling into a place where, all this while, Acts 27.41.
Psalm 143.10.
two contrary Seas have met, runs at length a ground on the and of uprightness:
where the sore-part, the Thought that presses forward toward the Lord Jesus
Christ, sticks fast and remains unremoveable, while the hinder part is broken
with the violence of waves, O blessed H^art-breaking, O blessed storm, that
drives the tumbling Thoughts upon this shore! Psalm 107.30.
well may thou be glad because thou art quiet, for God has brought thee to
thy desired Haven.

1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.7.
O sweet serenity, Joy unspeakable, peace passing all understanding, that now
keeps the heart and mind! yea the heart, by the MIND; flowing down like the
precious Oyntme^t from the head of Aaron to the skirts of his garment, Luke
2.29, 36.
perfuming and embalming, by the thoughts of the mind, all the inferior powers
of the Soul and affections of the heart; That the former can now present unto
the later, even a deaths head without horror, nay with amiableness in its
Aspect, whilst the Soul can think with Simeon, Psalm 133 2.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation. So that hardly could the Convert now be kept from impatient desiring
to be disso ved and to be with Christ, but that he THINKS withal of something
to be done for Christ before ^e die, Psalm. 51.13. Luke 22.3^. 2 C^r 1 Phil.
1.23.
of teaching transgressors Gods ways that sinners may be ^^verted; of
strengthening Brethren: of comforting others with the same consolations, and so
be hasteneth to be doing, that he may also hasten to be dying.

Sect. XI.
BUt Alas! These Thoughts cannot always hold without interruption. This brood
of Travailers dig up Wells as they go, Psalm. 84.5. Genesis 2.5.
and the Philistines follow after as fast as they can, to stop them up with
earth and stones: worldliness and earthliness, deadness and dullness return and
repossesses the Mind and Thoughts of the eager Convert, and threaten to undo
whatever Grace has been a doing. So that the confident young Christian (who
thought that if he had but once gotten the Red Sea on his back, his Saviors
blood betwixt him and his soul oppressors, there would be but a few days
direct and easy journey, through the Wilderness of the World, to the Land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
) falling amongst many fiery Serpents, violent and virulent temptations and
lusts (not thought of at his first setting out) and being bitten by them, he
proceeds as more heavily so more humbly; And his After-thoughts are such as
these.

Now woe is me that I should ever put my hand unto Gods Plough, Luke 9.62.
and thus look back O why was I not contented to have dwelt on the other side
of Jordan, Nay, to have stayed by the Fleshpots of Egypt, Joshua 7 7. Exodus
16.3.
rather than to die in this Wilderness? It had been better sure for me not to
have known the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.2. Gal. 4 15.
then after I have known it, thus to turn from the holy Comman^ment. Where is
then the blessedness that I spoke of? The Scripture says indeed, Job 17.9.
Gal. 3.3, 4.
that the Righteous shall hold on in his way; But alas! I have begun in the
spirit, And after all must I foolishly end in the flesh? Have I suffered so
many things in vain, if so be that it be yet in vain? Have I sustained such
corrections, and received such convictions, and brought forth such Purposes and
Resolutions with so great Pain and Difficu^ty, and to so little purpose? Hos.
10.12. Isaiah 28.14.
I cannot deny that the fallow ground of my heart has been indeed broken up,
and Gods Plo^^^^s have plowed all day to sow, and 'twas good seed at the S^^ers
did sow, when they sowed the Wo^d; Mark 4.14.
But alas I now find, to my Woe, that it was not sown in a good and honest
heart, for no sooner was the blade spring up, Luke 8.15. Mat. 13.16, 21. Luke
8.14. Mark 4.19.
but early temptation made it ^ither away, so that it brought no fruit to
^erfection; the cares of the World, the decoiptfulness of Riches, and the lusts
of other things, these coming in have choked the word, and it ^^th become
unprofitable, Job 4.6.
And is this thy confidence, O my soul, the uprightness of thy ways; and thy
hope? O think then that the word will prove true to thee, though thou have not
been so to it, for it told thee that the back-slider in heart should be filled
with his own ways, and I am sure thou have found it so. Prove. 14.14. Heb. 6.7.
Thou art the ground that have drunk in the rain that came often upon it, and
have brought forth Thorns, and what can now be thy doom, but to be rejected of
God, to be nigh unto cursing, and thine end, but to be burned? Thou art the
House out of which the unclean Spirit went, Math. 12.33, 44, 45.
and into which He returned, taking others with him, which though he found
empty, swept, garnished, yet leaves the last state worse than the first. Thou
have wearyed thy self with lies, Ezekiel. 24.12, 13.
and thy great scum went not forth of thee, what remains but that thy scum
shall be in the fire? In thy filthiness is lewdness, because God has purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, therefore how can thou hope to be purged from
thy filthyness any more, till he have caused his Fury to rest upon thee? 2
Peter. 2.20.
for if after Men have escaped the pollutions of the World, through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the later end is worse with them than the beginning. Thou
art that girdle marred by lying in the Babilonish waters of worldly Lusts, Jer.
13.7, 11.
and now profitable for nothing, who did sometime seem to cleave so closely
to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man. Jer.
6.28, 29, 30.
Ah! grievous Revolter! Reprobate sinner! the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
consumed in the Fire, the Founder has melted thee in vain, for the wicked are
not plucked away, thy wicked pride, and worldliness, and wantonness, etc. and
now what can thou think O my Soul, but that the Lord has rejected thee?
Jerem. 2.5.
But what Iniquity have thou found in thy God, that thou art gone far from Him,
and that thou have walked after vanity and art become vain? Micha 6.3.
Ah my Soul! What has he done unto thee? or wherein has he wearyed thee?
testify against him. No, no, I am sure thou can not, thou dare not reprove
him, Jerem. 2.19.
But thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall
reprove thee, know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter,
that thou ha^t forsaken the Lord thy God, and therefore surely his fear is not
in thee. What fruit ha^t thou then of this foul Apostasy whereof thou have so
great reason to be now ashamed? Thou did run well, Romans 6.21. Gal. 5.7.
Jerem. 2.11, 12, 13.
who did hinder thee? Has a Nation changed their Gods, whi h yet are no Gods,
but thou have changed thy glory for that which does not profit; Be astonyed at
this, and be horribly afraid, yea, be very desolate O my heart, For thou have
committed two Evils, Thou have forsaken the Fountain of living waters, and
hewed thee broken Cisterns that can hold no water. O profane Heart, Heb.
12.16, 17.
that for a morsel of meat have sold thy Birthright! How sain would thou
now inherit the blessing, could thou but find a place for repentance, Ezekiel.
37.11. Lam. 3.18. Job 19.10. chap. 8.13.
though thou should seek it never so carefully with tears? But alas for thy
part, thine hope is cut off, thine hope has God removed like a tree; and
indeed what else can be expected, but that the Hypocrites hope should pe ish? O
false heart, and flattering hope! Exodus 14.13.
must I be thus deceived by you both which I so much trusted? I said (with
Moses) of my strong corruptions, when I thought I saw them drowned in the Red
Sea of my Saviors Blood, I shall see them again no more for ever, and (with
David in his prosperity,) I shall never be moved; Psalm 30.6. Luke 10.15.
and must I now, like Capernaum, after I have been thus lifted up to Heaven, be
thrown down to Hell? and so everlastingly separated from the blessed presence
of the dear Jesus; whom I fondly thought I had loved better then my life, but
now find I did love him less than my laziness, and my lusts; and indeed I am
convinced that if any man loves any thing more than Christ, He is not worthy of
him. Mat. 10 37.


But, ah my dear and blessed Jesus, must thou and I thus part? part Eternally?
Oh no! not for a World, no not for a World of Worlds. Why then, Psalm. 88 14.
O Lord, castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? Yea
rather, O Lord, why have thou made me to err from thy ways, Psalm. 63.14. Job
10.1.
and hardened my heart from thy fear? yet will I leave my complaint upon my
self, and I will speak in the bitterness of my soul; I know indeed that God
cannot be tempted with evil, J^m. 1.13, 14.
neither tempts he any man: But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust and enticed. Therefore, Psalm. 42.6, 7.
O my God, my Soul is cast down within me, and deep calls unto deep at the
noise of thy water spouts; Verse 4.
thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. When I remember these things, I
power out my soul in me; For I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to
the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise; I call also to remembrance
my song in the night, Psalm. 77.6.
and commune with mine own heart, and my spirit makes diligent search; Job
16.12.
I was at ease, but God has brok^n me asunder; He has also taken me by the
neck, and shaken me in pieces and set me up for his mark. Job 29.3, 4, 5.
Oh that I were as in months past, as in the da^es when God preserved me, when
his Candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness, when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, and when the Almighty
was yet with me. Psalm. 42.3.
But now alas my tears are my meat day and night while my returning Corruptions
and prevailing Lusts say to me continually where is thy God? As with a Sword in
my bones do they reproach me, Verse 9.
while they say daily to me where is thy God? But w^ll the Lord cast off for
ever? will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does
his Promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? has ^e in
anger shut up his tender mercies? 2 Samuel 23.5.
Surely this is my infirmity; but I will remember the ^ears of the right hand
of the most High. Although my heart be not so with God, yet has he made with
me a Covenant, an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; I will
therefore say unto God, Psalm. 42.8, 9.
my rock why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the Enemy? Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the
daytime, and in the night his song shall be with mo, Verse 11.
and my Prayer unto the God of my Life. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God for I shall yet Praise him,
who is the health of my Countenance, and my God. O Lord though mine iniquities
testify against me, do thou for thy Name sake, for my backslidings are many,
Jerem. 14.7. Verse 20. and 21. Psalm. 42.2. Psalm 63.2.
I have sinned against thee: But I acknowledge O Lord my wickedness, Do not abl
or me, for thy names sake, Remember, break not thy Covenant with me. For truly
my Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, to see his Power and his Glory,
so as I have seen him in the Sanctuary.

Be watchful therefore, O mine heart, Rev. 3.2.
and strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to die, for here is yet a
Pillar of Fire before thee, Neh. 9.12, 19. Jer. 3.24.
the token of a Divine presence with thee. Has not God said, Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your backsliding? Behold I come unto
thee for thou art the Lord my God.

But surely if God will allow me to set my hope on high, He will yet have me to
keep mine Heart low, for though he be still saying, H^sea 14.4. Jerem. 3.14.
I will heal thy backsliding, and love thee freely, and again, Turn O
backsliding Child for I am married unto thee; yet he still feeds me like the
Israelites in the Wilderness, as it were, from hand to mouth; The water of his
Rock, not my Cistern, must supply me, and I be undone if it do not follow me; 1
Cor. 10.4.
I must fetch my food by daily Faith, my Manna out of the Heaven of his
Promises, not by Plowing, for it is in the earth of my s^lf-Righteo^sness, and
legal performances; and my Medicine too (for all venomous bitings by all sorts
of fiery temptations) from him only, who for that end was lifted up upon the
Cross, Joh^ 3.14.
and still is on the pole of the Gospel, and still must be in the THOUGHTS of
my heart, as my only strength, my health, my life, my All; And if at any time
he allow me but a touch or taste of the hoped for Clusters, Numb. 13.23.
it is to feed not my high, but my diligent Thoughts; Phil. 3.12, 13.
and to mind me that I have not already attained, either am already perfect,
but that I press forward, forgetting the things that are behind, toward the
mark for the price of the high Calling of God which is in Christ Jesus. What
shall I then say to these things? The Lord has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it, Isaiah 38.15.
I will go (with him though I go but) softly all my years, even in the
bitterness of my Soul.

So then the Thoughts of the Righteous pick up encouragement, Numb. 14.9.
as the Good Spies, from their very difficulties, They are Bread for us; I will
go with this man, says Rebeckah; I will go with this Jesus, says the fixed
Thought of heart; Though I go sadly, yet I will go, I will go though but softly
in my souls bitterness all my years; Isaiah 38.16.
But yet O Lord, by these things men live, And in all these is the life of my
spirit, so will thou recover me, and make me to live (so says the gracious
Heart.) And thus is the soul fed with Manna, aad led about many years, it may
be, in the Wilderness of Anxiety; Deuteronomy. 8.2.
And all this to humble, to prove, to know what is in the heart, and to do it
good in the later end.

The end of the draught or scheme of Thoughts. 1. Wrought in conversion.
And thus have I given you as briefly as I could, though more largely then I
thought, a Scheme or draught, of such Thoughts in man as do ordinarily flow
from the Grace of God, as I have received from that sure Word, that is a
discerner of the Thoughts, and a discoverer as well as a discerner, and as I
have known, and perhaps felt in some small experience, And the Holy Ghost,
Prove. 27.19.
that knows all hearts, says expressly, As in water, face answers to face, so
the heart of man to man.

Regenerate man's thoughts flowing from a new nature agree with other natural
motions in three things.
Sect. XII.
NOw because as I have said, The Regenerate man's thoughts are sparks from a new
Fire, fruits of a new heart, stirrings of a new Nature, Therefore it must needs
be, that they partake with all natural motions in these Three points.

I. Facility. Natural Acts and Motions, 1. Facility, Good thoughts delightful,
if from a right principle. Prove. 2.10.
If Nature be not oppressed (as sometimes the New nature seems to be) are
facile, yea pleasing and delightful, as to eat, to drink, to sleep, etc. So are
right Thoughts to a Righteous person. When wisdom enters into thy heart, and
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, etc. A naughty heart is like a vicious
stomach, those very thoughts that are as an honey Comb, Prove. 27.7.
or as pleasant bread to others, do make it turn, as it were, at the very sight
of them; Go thy way Paul, for this time, I have no stomach to think of
Righteousness or Judgment to come; No, no, Acts 14.25.
Felix his Thoughts were another way, suitable to his Corruption; He thought
(says the Text) there was no money coming, Verse 26.
and 'twas the thought of money that made Music in his Mind; But says David
of his God, not of his Mammon, My meditation of HIM shall be SWEET, Psalm. 124
34.
I will be glad in the Lord. When the Miser receives his Mammon, Oh how it
glads him? nay he loves the Thought of it, when he cannot come at it; Nay, he
can Think with delight of the Bills or Bonds, he can lay them in his bosom,
that do but Name it, Money is his God, and Worldliness his Nature: So does a
gracious heart with sweetness entertain the Thought of his God, nay hide his
word in his very Heart; Psalm. 119.11.
It goes down with him with delight, as his food when he is most hungry; Thy
words were found, and I did eat them, Jer. 15.16.
and they were to me the joy and rejoicing of mine Heart. The Bar drinks in
words, but it is the heart that eats them, by setting the Thoughts to chew upon
them. And as it is with a man that is in health, if he want his set meals, so
is it with a good Heart, kept in good order, without many gripes, and secret
gnawings, it cannot want its set MEDITATIONS, And surely it would be better
with most Christians then it is, were they but careful with Isaac, to set a
part some little time of the day for Meditation, who are so little able to say
with David, O how love I thy Law! Psalm. ^19.67.
It is my MEDITATION all the day. And this leads me to the

Sect. XIII.
Frequency David's thoughts good all the day. Psalm. 119 97. How to be understood.
II. ANd that is Frequency. A good pulse strikes many a good stroke in a day,
and so does a good heart, as you may see in David, when he was in a good state
of soul health; you cannot think that he thought of nothing but Gods Law in the
whole day, when he says, It was his Meditation all the day; his Crown was
lined with Cares, And his Head with Thoughts as other men's: But he would allow
no Thought in the day contrary to the Law; He would order all his Thoughts in
conformity and subordination thereto; And his Thoughts thereof were better
pleasing to him then all other Thoughts, He was in his Element when in such
Meditations; and reckoned so much of the day lost, as wherein he was hurryed by
Temptations, to any contrary cogitations: If a Bird fall into the water, it is
not her Element, she neither uses nor delights to be there; If a Mole get
above ground, he is not where he would be, or is wont to be. Trial what
Thoughts thy Element. Psalm 77.5.
Ask thine heart seriously what Element it is that thy thoughts most use, and
with most ease; (My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness when I
think upon thee, when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate upon thee,
etc.) And thereby discern whether it be a Bird of Paradise, or a mere Mole, for
to be carrnally minded is death, but to be Spiritually minded is life and
peace. Romans 8.6.
A bad man may have a Thought of God now and then, and a Thought for God (or
the most are very much mistaken.) But a David can say of his divine Thoughts,
how great is the sum of them? Gods Thoughts of him, and his Thoughts of God,
and the reflection of his Thoughts upon Gods Thoughts, Psalm 137.17.
for,

Sect. XIV.
III. 3. Perpetuity.
THere is Perpetuity as well as Facility and Frequency in Natural acts and
motions. The pulse beats not only all the day, but all a man's days: so do good
thoughts in a Godly mind. What a blessed frame was holy David in when he could
never awake, but he found his pulse beating Heavenward? when I awake I am
still with thee. Psam 139.18. Psalm 1.12.
The blessed man's delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he
meditate day and night. O happy He whose Thoughts are holy day and night, that
is, continually.

I know Grace is liable to its languishings, Grace may languish, soul pulse
intermit, as the natural. But good Thoughts never quite die.
as well as Nature, and the souls pulse to its Intermissions, as the bodies is,
whereof more hereafter; only the Pulse of Nature may cease totally, nay it
must, because Nature it self must expire; But Grace is a Caelestial, an
Heaven-born principle, an Immortal Fire, which can never be extinguished, but
burns brightest when Nature goes out, Psalm. 146.4.
as in Jacob and Joseph when they lay a dying: so good thoughts do usually most
flourish in that very day when other Thoughts perish, Heb. 11.21, 22.
the day of Death, and after Death especially. And thus much for the first
Trial of Thoughts, whether Right or no, from their Original:

II. Trial.
Sect. I.
Secondly, THoughts are to be known to be right by their ROOT, as Plants are,
2. Trial. Thoughts are to be known or no by their root.
especially in Winter-season: now this is as it were the Winter-state of Grace.

We have seen in the first Trial, that Right Thoughts are to be discerned by
their Soil, They grown not in the Wild, or common Field of corrupt Nature, but
in the Garden of Grace; so now, in the second Trial, by the occult and inward
manner of their growth, which I call their Radication. This I say then, If good
thoughts be our deep thoughts.
if good Thoughts be thy DEEP Thoughts, if (as we say) the best be at bottom,
thy thoughts are then Right, and thou art Righteous: for as the deep thoughts
of Worldlings are worldly thoughts, and the deep Thoughts of wicked men are
wicked thoughts, so the deep thoughts of good men are good Thoughts. It Is a
notable observation of the Holy Ghosts concerning worldly men, That their
INWARD THOUGHT is, Psalm. 49.11.
that their Houses shall continue for ever, etc. Why? is there any Thought that
is not an Inward Thought? No; But the meaning is, that though they have some
floating Thoughts of their mortality, and the vanity and transitoriness of all
worldly things, swiming, as it were, on the top; yet they do not suffer such
Thoughts to sink into their Hearts, or to go to the bottom, But the Thoughts
that lodge there are such as His who is said, by our Savior, to have thought
within himself, Luke 12.17. Verse 19.
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, Take thine ease, eat, drink
and be merry. Note the phrase, he thought within himself; There are other kind
of thoughts that sometimes knock at the door of the worldings Heart, Nay
sometimes look in at his windows, as Paul's Sermon began to press in upon Felix
his Heart, Acts 24.25.
and to set him a Trembling, but there are other Thoughts within, which if they
cannot keep good Thoughts quite out, they will keep them off from making any
due or deep impression upon the Heart. Now these Thoughts that nestle
themselves, as it were, at the very Heart-roots, to keep others out from
reaching thither, these deep thoughts are they which the Scriptures call the
inward thoughts, Psalm 64.6.
according to that of the Psalmist, the inward thoughts of every one of them,
and the heart is deep. And so if thy inward Thoughts and deep Thoughts be good
thoughts, Romans 2.19.
it is a good sign. Thus He is a Jew, that is one inwardly. When God has put
wisdom in the inward parts, as it is in Jeremiah; Jer 21.33. Psalm. 5 9. Luke
11.39. Jerem. 9.8.
as it is said of the wicked, that their inward part is very wickedness, and
that their inward part is full of Ravening and wickedness: even when he
speaks peaceably with his mouth, yet in Heart he lays his wait.

Now the Reason of this Rule is this, Reason of the Rule.
because as corruption (like the Worm at Jona's Gourd) loves to lie at the Root
to wither all; so Grace (to work out Corruption) loves to lie at the very
Hearts root, as it were; and the work of Grace being to fix the Heart aright,
(as David says, My Heart is fixed O God, my Heart is fixed) like a wise Master
Builder, Psalm. 108.1.
Grace goes to the bottom, and looks especially to that; the Foundation being
that that fixes all the building. The Latins do very elegantly express
height and depth by the same word, thus, altas radices agere, Good thoughts
build high, therefore must be b^^tomed low. Acts 16.30.
is to take deep Root, and yet we call it the Altitude of a Star: He that will
build high, must dig his Foundation deep and low; Now Grace, where it comes,
never aims lower then the Raising of the Thoughts as high as Heaven, Sirs, what
must I do to be saved (says the ^ayler.) A Converts first Thoughts are for no
less than SALVATION; and therefore Grace lays them in the very depth of the
heart, Thus Gracious Thoughts are called the good Treasure, not of the Head
(for a Toad, they say, may have a Pearl there.) A wicked man may have excellent
notions and speculations like Balaam, Numb. 24.34.
whose Heart is full of Poison.) But the good treasure of the Heart.

Our Savior, comparing Gods Word to Seed, Math. 13.4. Verse 5.
Man's Heart to Soil, Thoughts and purposes to a springing up of that Seed in
the Soil, expressly says of the stony ground in opposition to the good ground,
(that is, Luke 8.14.
the good and honest heart as himself explains it) that therefore it was that
all came to nothing, Man. 13.56.
because there was no depth of earth for the Seed, and they that sprung up had
no root, and therefore they withered away.

Mat. 25.1.
And in the Parable of the Virgins, where he designedly puts the difference
between the sound Believer and the Hypocrite, He denies not the foolish to have
Lamps and Lights, and Oil in their Lamps, to keep them burning for a season;
but denies them to have any Oil in their Vessels, as the Wise had. The Lamps
were the Outside and shallow appearances of splendid Notions and Professions,
but the Vessels are the very inwards and depths of the Heart* and therefore its
said, Prove. 13.9.
The light of the righteous rejoices, but the Lamp of the wicked shall be put
out. The Light of the Righteous (which may be understood of their good
Conversation, according to that, Let your light so shine before men, that th y
may see your good works) has a Vessel within full of Oil, to keep it burning
perpetually, and therefore it rejoices, but the Lamp of the wicked has not
so, and therefore time shall put it out.

And when he represents the Grace that he gives, by a Well of Water in a man
springing up to everlasting life; John 4.14. Good thoughts a wellspring.
This Phrase is most accurately to be attended to our present purposes; We are
not in judging of a man so much to consider what may be put into a man, or what
may for some time float at top, nay flow from a man, but what the SPRINGINGS UP
are that are IN A MAN. And so the Apostle James also puts the Trial upon what
the FOUNTAIN yields, James 3.11. Verse 14.
whether it be sweet water, or bitter, salt water or fresh; which expression he
does enough explain, when he says, Verse 12.
If you have bitter envying, or strife in your hearts, glory not and lie not
against the truth; Mark that, IN YOUR HEARTS, that is, when these bitter waters
are the springings up of the inward Fountain, glory not, and lie not: sweet
words and pleasing professions, shows and appearances will be no good Testimony
for you when these BITTER springings up within you bear witness against you.

In Nature, there are Springs or Wells of diverse sorts, the diligent
observation of which will much clear the scope of these Texts of Scripture, and
the thing in hand; I shall only instance in such as I have seen. There is the
salt spring at Nantwich, where the springings up are naturally salt; Now let
never so much fresh water be poured into it, though it may for the present
abate its saltness, and make its present waters the less brinish, yet that
which springs up will in some time work out all the fresh water, and will
continue (as before) perfectly salt. Again, there is the generous and famous
Spring, called the HOLY WELL, in Wales, that is perpetually boiling up with an
admirable activity, so that if never so much salt water should be poured into
it, though all the waters (for the present) would taste salt or brackish, yet
give it time, and it would certainly work out all that Heterogeneous mixture,
and retain its sweetness, and (as I may say) its Native excellency and purity.

This then is a grand Rule for the trial of Right Thoughts, if thy good
thoughts be such as continually springing up, do work out evil thoughts which
sometimes do seem to defile and deprave thee, it is a good Scripture-Evidence
both of thy thoughts and state: for this is that which the Apostle calls a
clearing of our selves, which he says expressly, that Godly sorrow works
where it works Repentance to salvation; 1 Cor. 7.10, 11.
this self same thing, says be, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, Behold
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, etc. Now
this Godly sorrow ha^h its spring in the Thoughts, as the Evangelist says of
Peter, when he thought thereon he wept. Mark 14.7.
As the Jews in their Captivity, wept when they remember Zion; so Peter, in his
spiritual Captivity, Ps l. 137.1.
wept when he remembered Sin. But a little before, the stoods of the ungodly had
overwhelmed the good man, and the waters of bitterness had come into his soul;
And had we but tasted of his spirit, by what came from him in the High Priests
Hall, we should have been apt to have concluded him in the gall of bitterness,
when with swearing and cursing he denied that ever he knew Jesus: and all this
issuing from the Thoughts and apprehensions of his imaginary danger, that his
sorry sinful slavish fear suggested to him in case He had held fast the
profession of his Faith without wavering; these were the Thoughts that were
uppermost, and so nearest his tongues end, to influence that under this
surprise of Temptation; and little doubt but at that very time his deep and
bottom Thoughts were full of real kindness to his Lord and Master, which
shortly after (by their springing up) discover themselves; For these Thoughts
work him to Godly sorrow (as the Text affirms) and godly sorrow to a clearing
of himself of that which had now so sadly stained the Glory of his Profession,
so that we read after of his dying for Christ, but never more word of his
denying him.

Sect. II.
Instances of good thoughts deepest. Genesis 25.25.
AS this therefore is the grand trouble of many gracious Persons, that they find
many strong and boisterous and evil Thoughts, like rugged Esau, that present
themselves first to view, and seem to be strongest and most impetuous, yet this
may be a comfort, if they can find good Thoughts, like another Jacob, taking
those other thoughts, as it were, by the heel, Verse 26.
and continually laboring to supplant them; for instance,

If you look on David (a Gracious man, and one of a very tender spirit) as He
first appears under Nabals provocation, David. 1 Samuel 25.21, 22.
you find all the waters, as it were, turned into blood, and nothing meditated
but Cruelty and Revenge; But when David's deep and bottom Thoughts are set on
work, How quickly do they work out all that Cruelty? The waters return to their
proper nature and right color; and now all becomes goodness, meekness,
gentleness. And David said to Abigail, Verse 32.33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this day to me; and blessed
be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to
shed blood, and from avenging my self with my own hand. So that whereas there
was a Root of bitterness springing up, which would have brought trouble enough
upon himself and others, there is also a deeper root of sweetness supplanting
the former, and yielding the peaceable fruit of righteousness. And, by the way,
the Reader may remark that they whose Thoughts are right and good, Note well.
are very apt to Think well of those that set them right, (as any prudent
serious Travailer that has been out of his way will be) O blessed Sermon,
Sickness, Person, Providence, will such a one say, that has been an occasion
or means to set me clear of such a Temptation, or from such or such wicked,
proud, or passionate or unclean, or worldly Thoughts that have so disturbed and
distempered me.

Take another instance in good King Hezekiah, Hezekiah.
whom when God had raised up, the Text says, presently his Heart was lifted
up, 2 Chro. 32.25.
so that there was wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem; His heart
swells with proud and haughty thoughts; Notwithstanding, says the next Verse,
Verse 24.
Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, so that the wrath of the
Lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah. Here was Humility at the
bottom, His lowly Thoughts were his lowest Thoughts, and his deepest Thoughts,
which did wear and work out the former.

Thus holy Asaph, Asaph. Psalm. 73.16, 17.
what dark and discontentful Thoughts had he concerning the prosperity of the
wicked in this world, and the equitableness of divine providence therein? When
I thought to know this, Verse 21.
says he, it was too painful for me; But when he comes into the Sanctuary,
Verse 23.
and applies himself to the due use and help of Holy means and Ordinances, how
plenteously do better thoughts then the former spring up, and work out the
former? and how does his Heart presently flow not only with truly penitent
Thoughts, like Peter's for his former distemper, Thus, says he, Verse 24.
my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins; but also with sweet
serenity and Celestial satisfaction; for you instantly find him in the mount
of contemplation, which becomes to him a Mount of Transfiguration, when he thus
says, Verse 23.24.
Nevertheless I am still with thee; thou shall guide me with thy Council, and
afterward receive me to glory: Verse 26.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none in Earth that I desire
besides thee. And thus you see in gracious Hearts, that gracious Thoughts are
still the bottom thoughts.

Instances of evil thoughts deepest Pilate.
On the contrary, How many are there that have many good thoughts, as to the
matter of them, floating at top, but there is still some Evil, wicked thoughts
at the Bottom, to worm and work them out? Thus Pilate had many thoughts that
were good in themselves, He thought Jesus was a just person, and he thought it
just in Himself to acquit and justify the innocent, and he had many thoughts
and contrivances how to set him at liberty; but then the bottom thoughts of
all, were base thoughts, and his Root thoughts were rotten thoughts, for he
thought it better for him to displease God than the Multitude, and to offend
his Conscience rather than Caesar; for this was the hinge upon which the whole
matter turned, John 19.12, 13, 17.
the Jews cried out, saying, if thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's
friend; When Pilate therefore heard that saying, He brought out Jesus, etc. and
delivered him to them to be Crucified.

Agrippa.
Thus Agrippa, no doubt, had many good Thoughts and motions in his mind, when he
cries out to St. Paul, Acts 26.28. Many followers of Christ.
Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. And many of Christ's followers
thought, no question, to have continued longer with him, at their first coming
to him, and are therefore called his Disciples, from that time (says the Text)
Many of his Disciples went back, John 6.66.
and walked no more with him. And so that rich young man that came running to
him with so much eagerness, Young man, Math. 10.17.
and kneeled before him with so much Devotion, thought (without all
peradventure) that Christ was a most excellent person, and that it was a most
desirable thing to be saved; But then his ultimate Thoughts were, that if He
could not have Heaven and Earth too, it was best to venture the first, and to
hold to that which he had in his Hand, and these thoughts carried him, (as the
like Thoughts do thousands) away from Christ. And therefore the Antithesis to
the Text is remarkable, The thoughts of the Righteous are right, but the
Counsels of the wicked (that is, their Deep, Deliberate, Bottom thoughts) are
deceit. Saints at worst of a more excellent Spirit then Hypocrites at best.
Daniel 6.3.


So then by this Rule we may discern what an Excellent Spirit there is, as
'twas said of Daniel, in the meanest Saint, take him at his very worst and
lowest, that is not to be found in the most flourishing Hypocrite in the world
when he is arrayed in all his Glory. A gracious heart, (like a faithful
Soldier) be it never so oppressed and trodden down by its Enemy, yet its
bottom thoughts are still working at a Holy Revenge (as the Apostle says yet
what Revenge? 1 Cor. 7.11.
) contriving how it may cast off its Enemy, and having cast it off, to cut it
off; for it is to every upright person in the World that the Holy Ghost applies
that of the Prophet, thine heart shall MEDITATE TERROR; Isaiah 33.18.
Thou shall be thinking how to kill this corruption, and how to Conquer that
Lust, How to mortify this uncleanness, that inordinate affection, this Evil
Concupisence, that Covetousness, how to be revenged of these uncircumcised
Philistines for thy two eyes, Jud. 16.28.
for all that light of Holy Joy and Peace, they have deprived thee of. Whereas
on the other hand the best Hypocrite, even whilst he seems to hold out the
Garrison with greatest Gallantry and Resolution for God and Christ, yet even
then his secret thoughts, his inward, deep, and bottom thoughts are trucking
with the Enemy, to betray and yield up all, when He spyeth His season, and
pleasing advantage; Thus Esau resolves to carry it most demurely during His
Fathers life, but his Deep thoughts are all along, Genesis 27 41.
(Esau said in his heart says the Text) the days of mourning for my Father
are at hand, then will I stay my Brother. And Oh! How many are there that can
palliate a foul and rotten heart, with the fairest pretenses and appearances,
whilst Godly Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, Guardians, Governors, continue
with them, that all the while have a months mind, as we say, to the license
that other debauched or vain persons take, and secretly please themselves with
the thoughts thereof, which they purpose to themselves, when the Awe of such,
as at present hinder them, shall be removed and taken away? A kin to these are
those, who (though they will not sell Wheat on the Sabbath day, Amos 8.5.
yet) are still thinking when will the Sabbath be over? So then the test of our
Spirits is our Deep thoughts.

And thus also we have a reason of a Following Rule in this, for it cannot but
be supposed that Right thoughts must needs be (not idle or unactive but)
operative and abounding in fruit that are so happy in their Root, Isaiah 37.32.
they take root downward, and therefore will bear fruit upward.

Sect. III.
Thoughts are to be considered with special respect to the Temperament of the
body. Hebr. 4.12.
NOw a grand Reason why I have desired to speak so fully and distinctly to this,
is this, which I desire most heedfully may be observed. The THOUGHTS of men
(whereof the word of God is (as has been said) the great discerner, and to the
touch whereof we have been bringing them in these trials) I say, THOUGHTS of
men's minds, which, in the manner of Exerting and putting forth their
operations, do much depend upon the various Temperaments of those bodies
wherein those operations are put forth, are to be considered with a special
respect thereunto; for most certain it is, that neither Grace nor Corruption,
Temperaments may help to more stability of thoughts in some then in others.
neither Sincerity nor Hypocrisy find all men's minds, be they good or bad, to
work alike, but according as their diverse workings are influenced by the
diversity of bodily constitutions; Now some temperatures (being naturally more
heavy, lumpish, and melancholic, more easily dispose their minds to greater
measures of Resolution, stability and fixation of thoughts, when once the
Thoughts are set, be the minds or matters good or bad; In worldly, nay wicked
things some are of one mind, and who can turn them? truly none, but God
Omnipotent; who, if God come once to set their Hearts aright, have a marvailous
advantage in point of consistency, and as to the stability of their good
thoughts even from their Natural temper; whereas some others in Constitution
sanguine, and more symbolizing with the Air, their minds seem commonly
volatile, and so their thoughts more fluid, and less fixed, be the habit of
their Minds, Difference of natural constitution may appear, as in conversion.
or Objects of their Thoughts, good or evil: Now this difference of Natural
constitution, occasions many mistakes in the spiritual judging of Men's Estates.
A man may be very serious, yet not Religious, though John Baptist was naturally
('it is probable) very austere, John came (says Christ) neither eating nor
drinking: Mar. 11.28.
and another man may be very pleasant, and yet not vain; and it would seem our
Saviors Natural bodily temper was differing from the Baptists, and disposed
him to a complaisant conversation, Verse 29.
The Son of Man came eating and drinking (for even in that sense his delights
were with the Sons of Men) Rejoicing in the habitable parts of the Earth: The
Hebrew word signifies sporting, Prove. 8.5.
and so the Margin reads it, and yet he was the pattern of all Perfection. And
as in Conversation, So in thoughts.
so in thoughts, the Natural temper may (if not attended) occasion dangerous
mistakes in judging the spiritual state. Take an instance in two, whom I take
to be Eminent Saints, King Solomon, and the Apostle Paul, Instance in King
Solomon and St. Paul.
concerning the later none doubt, nor dare I of the former, (who was Gods
Iedidiah, from whom God, says he, will never take his mercy. A Penman of Holy
Writ, and so numbered by the Apostle among the Holy men of God, a grand Type of
Christ, and one of those Prophets of whom Christ says expressly, that all the
Prophets are in the Kingdom of God, Luke 15.2^
) yet I suppose a vast difference in the Natural temper of these two excellent
men: Paul, no doubt, was of great natural resolution, Acts 26.9^
and fixation, I verily thought (says he of himself before his Conversion)
that I ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus, Verse 10, 11.
which thing also I did in every Synagogue. He never alters his mind (as we
say,) never changes his thoughts, never turns, nor ever would, had not God
overturned him; but then when God called him by his Grace, and set the Watch
right, Oh! this Natural temper of His was an Excellent Balance, and kept the
motion admirably: What do you mean (says he) to weep and break mine heart?
Acts 21.17.
I am ready not only to be bound, but to Die for the Name of Jesus; And when
he would not be persuaded (say they) we ceased, etc. You see He was fixed
before Conversion, and fixed after; for Grace rather uses then alters
Nature, though it cures its corruption, But now Solomon, He was naturally (I
question not) of a more Airy Constitution, and so of a more doubtful mind (as
our Saviors Phrase is which He borrowes from the Aerie Meteors, (...). Luke
12.30.
which are now here, and now there, and you can hardly find them fixed any
where,) and so His thoughts more fluid and volatile, flying up and down from
one thing to a contrary thing, from Wisdom, Eccles. 2.2.
to Wine, to Women, to Madness, to Folly, yea from one thing to a thousand
things, Even from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop upon the Wall; and being
naturally (like Reuben) unstable (as water) his Wives turned away his heart, 1
Kings 11.4.
and the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from
the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice; and yet there was a
well of Water after all this, springing up in Him to Everlasting Life; for you
may see what was in the bottom of his heart (what his deepest thoughts were) by
what you find in the bottom of his Book of Penitence and Recantation; Let us
hear (says He) the CONCLUSION of the matter, FEAR GOD, Eccles. 12.15.
and keep his Commandments, etc. Now All is well (We say) that ends well.

Sect. IV.
THis then (to shut up this scrutiny) is that which we are most accurately to
observe amongst all that variety not only of Temptations, Conclusion of the
Rule.
but of Tempers, and consequently of Thoughts, Purposes, and Resolutions, Psalm.
94.14. Several instances of good thoughts at bottom, working out evil thoughts.
Isaiah 8.13.
if (as David says in another respect In the multitude of our thoughts within
us, We can find Divine and gracious Thoughts to be deepest in our Soul. As to
add to the instance forementioned, when our slight Thoughts of God, and slavish
fear of Man, and thoughts of sinful security as to our selves, are wrought out
by our sanctifying the Lord God in our hearts, and making him our FEAR, as the
Prophet speaks,

When ones high thoughts of himself, who is ready to say in his heart, Deuteronomy.
8.17.
My power and the might of my hand has ^otten me this wealth, are removed by
remembrance of the Lord God, Verse 18.
and that it is he that gives power to get wealth.

When our self-justifying, self-exalting thoughts are taken down and let fall
(as Job's plumes were) by his thoughts of his black feet, behold I am vile, Job
40.4.
what shall I answer thee? etc.

When over-eager thoughts of the world are worn out by thinking on what He
says, who has charged us to take no thought for to morrow; Luke 12.22. Matthew.
6.34. Prove. 11.4.
and over-valuing thoughts of the World, by thinking that the world was not
Crucified for Us, cannot deliver, or profit in the day of wrath, that laboring
for the World, is but laboring for the Wind; Eccles. 5.16.
whereof the more a man g^asps (for the most part) the greater are the gripes,
that their end is Destruction that mind earthly things; but especially by
Thinking that the Lord has said, Love not the World, nor the things of the
World; for if any man love the World, 1 John 2.15
the love of the Father is not in him.

When Flesh-pleasing thoughts are supplanted by thinking that to be carnally
minded is death; Romans 8.^. James 5.5.
that living in pleasures upon the Earth, and being wanton, is but the
nourishing of the heart as in the day of slaughter; that a St. Paul himself
must (...), 1 Cor. 9.27.
beat down his body, and bring it in subjection, least he himself should be
cast away, Phil. 3.8.
or when thoughts of the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ come to make a
man think other things to be but dogs meat, or dung, that he may win Christ;
when the thoughts of the Rivers of pleasures, that are at Gods Right hand for
evermore, do challenge the Heart, Jerm. 2.18.
What have thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihoi? Heb.
11.25.
what have thou to do with the puddle pleasures of Sin, that are but for a
season?

When our wandering thoughts take Heaven for their home.
In a word, when the wandering Thoughts (like weary Travailers,) take Heaven for
their Home, and though they fetch too many a compass, yet still they ultimately
are making thitherward: when they (like so many busy Bees have been flying
about all day perhaps, yet never rest till they have housed themselves in God,
as an Hive of sweetness, and there find satisfactory Repast, and sweet Repose,
Thou may well say, Psalm. 116.7.
Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, and that the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee, for this was it that the Church comforted her self in the thoughts of,
that the desire of her soul was to the remembrance of Gods Name, Isaiah 26.8,
9. Verse 13.
with her Soul she desired him in the night; even when other Lords had dominion
over her, etc. for though Temptations (which are called) the fiery Darts of
Satan may sometimes make thee black, Ephesians. 6.16. Cant. 1.7.
like the Spouse in the Canticles, and real mixtures of darkness may be found
in thee, in respect of which thou may fitly be compared to smoke, yet if thy
Thoughts, like h^rs, be like Pillars of smoke, Cant. 3.6.
still winding and working upward. Thou art black indeed, but yet beautiful in
Christ's account. As in the Levitical Law the creeping things going upon all
four, ^ev. 11.20, 21.
were unclean, yet, if they had legs above their feet to leap withal, as the
Locust, or Grasshopper, they were clean in the Laws account.

III. Trial.
Sect. I.
Thirdly,

COme we then to the Third Trial of Thoughts, ( viz, 3. Trial, Right thoughts
have influence upon ordering the conversation aright. Psalm 50.23. 1 John 8.9.
Ephesians. 2.2. Acts 5.3.
Right Thoughts have a natural Energy and influence unto the ordering of the
Conversation aright, as the Scripture speaks: Now the reason of this Rule is
this, The Grace of God which (as we have seen) first stirs in Thoughts, is
called in the Scripture the seed of God, and therefore it is not possible that
it should prove abortive: for if the evil Spirit works effectually in the
Children of Disobedience, by working first upon their Thoughts ( why has Satan
filled thine heart? etc, Satan's work begins there. Isaiah 1.15.
) And if Lust when it has conceived in the Thought, brings forth sin in the
life, which is an Anomy or Transgression of the Law; True Grace when it
conceives in the Thought, must accordingly bring forth Newness in the Life,
Romans 6. Gal. 6.16. Hebr. 8.8.
(as Scripture speaks) which is a conformity to the Rule of the new Creature,
the Law and the Terms of the new Covenant, which first says, I will put my
spirit within them, and then they shall keep my judgments and do them, Ezekiel.
36.27.
which is to be understood of Evangelical Obedience. First Grace works in us,
and then it sets us a working; for after that it pleased God, who called me by
his Grace, to reveal his Son in me, immediately, says Paul, Gal. 1.15, 16.
Acts 9.6.
I conferred not with Flesh and Blood, etc. With whom then? why* Lord what
would thou have me to do? His thoughts were working in the verse before, and
they see him a work in the verse following.

The works of God, which we call Providence, are All pursuant to the thoughts
of God, Ephesians. 1.11. Jer. 23.20.
which Scripture calls his Purpose. Thus God is said to perform all the
thoughts and intents of his heart. Now Grace is called a partaking of the
Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and therefore cannot spend it self in bare thinking. In Nature the motions of
the hands and feet, without the command or express dictate of the Tongue, do
readily pursue the thoughts and motions of the mind, and therefore it is said,
Prove. 16.9.
that a man's heart devises his way; A man thinks to go such a way, and goes
it; He thinks to do such a thing, and does it. And it is so in corrupt Nature,
Isaiah 65.2.
they walk in a way that is not good, after their own hearts; And it is as
truly so in Grace. I thought on my ways, Psalm. 119.59. Right thoughts are
rectifying thoughts. 1 John 3.7. Isaiah 59.4. Micah 2.
says David, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Right Thoughts indeed
may we well call them, when they are Rectifying thoughts, when they make us to
do Right; as, the Apostle says, He that does Righteousness, is Righteous. It Is
said of the Wicked, They conceive Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity. And can
We think it proper to Grace only to prove abortive? Woe to them, says God,
that devise Iniquity, and work evil upon their Beds; when the morning is light
they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand. This is the Case
and Character of the wicked, Psalm 39.7.
He first devises mischief upon his Bed, and then sets himself in a way that
is not good; And thus the Sincere Convert, Rev. 2.2.
what good he thinks to do, when God holds him down on the Bed of sorrows (as
Scripture phrase is) and in the Night of affliction, he will not therefore
forbear doing, because God lifts up the light of his Countenance upon him, so
far as it is in the power of his hand; Psalm. 66.11, 12, 13.
but will rather say with David, with a little variation, thou laidst
affliction upon our Loins, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place, I
will pay thee my Vows, which my Heart has purposed, and my mouth spoken when I
was in trouble. Purpose often outgoes power.
It Is true indeed, that in both cases the purpose of the Heart does oftentimes
outgo the power of the hand; A wicked man thinks to do more mischief then he
can possibly compass; Genesis 27.42. 2 Samuel 18.25.
Thus, Esau purposed to kill Jacob, and Saul thought to make David fall by the
Philistines: It is said, Sanballat and Geshem thought to do Nehemiah mischief,
Neh. 6.2.
yet they could not do it: So a Child of God perhaps purposes greater
exactness, and more close walking with God. (in a sicknes^, under a Sermon, or
a Sacrament) then he can possibly attain unto afterward, by reason of renewing
of Temptation, and remaining corruption, and then (it may be) he is ready to
cry out, Oh my thoughts were never right, my purposes were never sincere, for
if they had, I had never fallen so short in performance; I thought in such a
straight, if ever God brought me out of it, I should never forget my self, and
God, and it, as (to my shame and confusion of face I may speak it) I have since
done; I thought under such a trouble of mind if God would ever speak pardon to
my sin, and peace to my soul, Job 15.11. Ephesians. 4.30.
the Consolations of God should never more be small with me, I would never
neglect my Evidences for Heaven, never grieve the Comforter, as I (like a
wretch) have since done; Psalm 85.8.
I would never return to folly, never indulge corruption, never dally with
Temptation any more; I thought I should never have been so slight in holy
Duties, in Closet or Family, never have past a day without some soul-repast by
sweet and solemn meditations, never have restrained Prayer from the Almighty;
Job 15.4.
I thought I should never have spent so many Lords-dayes so carelessly, heard
Sermons so unprofitably, read Gods Word so unattentively, as I have since done;
I thought also I should have taught Transgressors Gods way, Psalm. 51.13.
and that Sinners should have been converted unto him; Hebr. 5.25.
that I should have expressed more Zeal for the Glory of God, more compassion
on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way: more Courage in reproving
Sin in others, and care in being exemplary unto others in my own Conversation:
But alas! How may I complain; as Job, Job 17.11.
that my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart: that I went
out (like Naomi) full of purposes, Ruth 1.21.
but Returned empty of performances; I thought to have gone forth victorious
like Sampson, Judges 16.17. and 20. Mark 14.29
but found my strength upon trial, but like another man's; I thought like Peter,
that though all should have been offended in Christ, yet should not I; But,
alas, I have found slender temptations too hard for me, as the Damosel was for
him; Verse 66.
and truly now the thing that I feared is come upon me, I thought this Trial
would find me out, that my thoughts and purposes were never right, for they
have never reached their intended performance.

Sect. II.
Right application of the Rule. Isaiah 42.3. Job 13.25.
BUt for the right application of this Rule, and that the bruised Reed may not
be broken, or the leaf that is driven to and fro, you must know that the right
ordered Conversation before mentioned, as the genuine issue of Right Thoughts,
is not to be estimated by Legal, but by Evangelical measures; and so the
Thoughts themselves, not so much by the successfulness of attainment, as by the
sincerity of endeavor, for (what the Apostle says in another case, is true
here) if there be first a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
it is accepted according to what a man has, not according to what he has
not; Now where this willing mind is, there will be reality of endeavor to do
what it can, though it cannot do what it would, as the Apostle Paul says, Romans
7.18.
The good that I would do that I cannot; and again, not that I have already
attained, either were already perfect, Phil. 3.12.
but one thing I do, I press forward, etc. there will, and there must be a
pressing forward. Grace is a Warfare rather, then a Triumph, and a Plowing,
rather then a Reaping, Phil 21.5.
and therefore the Holy Ghost to right Thoughts adds diligence, and to that a
tending to plenteousness; if plenty do not presently attend them, yet they
intend it, Good purposes how seconded with Evangelical disobedi^^^.
and tend toward it; We say, He that will shoot high, must aim at a Star,
though he cannot hit it. He therefore that purposes Holiness, as God is Holy,
whose careful and real endeavors in all holy means and ways are pursuant to
his purposes; whose daily short comings are his daily burden and bitterness,
who (unfeignedly bewailing them) humbly rowls his Penitent Soul upon the
perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ (which was the case and practice of the
Apostle in the place before quoted) is a complete man in Christ, Phil. 4.9.
and a Conversation thus ordered is a Scripture Evidence that the Thoughts are
Right, and that the man is Righteous.

But then on the other hand, Psalm. 146.4. Thoughts without works dead thoughts.
James 2.17.
what the Scripture speaks of the day of Death, is sitly applicable to a state
of spiritual Death, That all a man's Thoughts perish; for as Faith without Works
is a dead Faith, so Thoughts without works may be said to be dead thoughts; Nay
these are sometimes the Evidence of one whom the Scripture calls twice dead,
Jade 12. Twice dead, how meant.
plucked up by the roots, that is once dead as to his Natural sinful condition;
and then again dead in regard of the motions and stirrings of thoughts and
purposes which seemed to show some spiritual life, and yet after all come to
nothing. Therefore, says Solomon, 1 Kings 8.47, 48.
if they bethink themselves and return, etc. For a man to bethink himself, and
not to return is to add an high aggravation to his former Impenitency; it is sin
enough to crucify the Son of God afresh, and not to bethink ones self what one
is a doing; but to consider Jesus, and yet to trample his Blood under feet, (As
They said, Come this is the Heir, Mat. 21.38.
let us kill him) this leaves no room for that very Prayer of Christ, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do; For a man to bethink himself of
Heaven, as Esau of the Birthright, and yet to despise it, Genesis 25.32.
or to bethink himself of Hell, and yet to rush into it as the Horse into the
Battle: This is as it were to deal cruelly with Christ in cold Blood, to bid
defyance to the God of Heaven upon Advice and set Council, which too many do
upon inadvertency, and non-consideration; or at least, like the vile Gadarenes,
when Christ comes into our Thoughts, as he came into their Coasts, for our
Swines sake, our filthy Lusts sake, to bese^ch him to depart out of our
Country; Luke 8.3^.
nay, with the wicked Jews, when conviction puts it upon our Thoughts (as
Pilate did upon theirs, shall I crucify your King?) shall I Crucify the Lord
Jesus, by continued Impenitency, and unbelief? When Barabbas and Jesus lie both
before our Thoughts, deliberately to deny the Holy One, Acts 3.14.
and to choose a Murderer. And Oh! how sad will it be to perish without Christ,
under so many Thoughts of Christ? or to go to Hell with so many Thoughts and
fruitless purposes of going to Heaven.

Sect. III.
Folly of trusting to idle thoughts, and purposes. Mat. 25.11, 12
YEt alas, how many are there that have many confident Thoughts of Heaven,
because they have now and then a few cold, unactive, unoperative thoughts for
Heaven; and carry these confident Thoughts with them to their very Graves, as
the foolish Virgins, that roundly knock at Christ's door with a Lord, Lord, Open
unto us, but the Answer is, I know you not. Foolish Ones, may I well say; for
as in ease where prudence might foresee the Evil of Event, or Consequence, to a
thought or purpose, we say, Stultum est dicere non putaram, it is a foolish
thing to say, I never thought that this would have come of it, or else I would
never have engaged in it, so in all cases where we have the Highest assurances
from Religion and Reason that the understanding of a man is capable of, 1 Cor.
15.58.
that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, stultum est dicere putaram,
it is a foolish thing to say, I thought to have repented, and I thought to have
believed, and to stick there, and go no farther, What does it profit my
Brethren, says the Apostle, If a man say he have faith, James 2.14.
and has not works, can faith save him? So I may say, if a man say he have
Thoughts, and has not works, can Thoughts save him? If a man think over night
to be so far onwards of his journey by such an hour in the morning, and sleep
out the time he should go it in, can Thoughts carry him? If a Prince command
his Servant in the morning (on pain of Death) to do such a thing, of most high
importance to his Crown and Dignity, and that must be done that day or not at
all, and promise him withal a munificent Reward in case of performance;
suppose this servant goes forth of his Princes Presence, full of many busy
Thoughts, and present purposes of going about the business; but by the way
falls into evil Company, or into some other business, trivial and vain in
respect of his Great Masters, but more pleasing to the wicked and sloathful
Servant; but returns at night, Mat. 25.26.
and (with Confidence shall I say, or Impudence?) sues for his reward; shall
the Princes bounty reward this man's vain purpose? or his just severity punish
his inexcusable neglect of performance? Reader, what think thou? Even so
says God, Verse 30.
Cast ye he unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be ^eeping
and gnashing of teeth; He says not the Servant that never purposed, but the
Servant that never did what he should have done, and so never profited. And on
the other hand, it is not said, well thought, or well meant, or well purposed,
or well intended, but WELL DONE thou good and faithful Servant, Verse 21.
thus David describing the Blessed man, says not only that He meditates in the
Law day and night, but also brings forth his fruit in his season: But, says
he, Psalm. 1.2, 3.4.
the ungodly is not so.

Sect. IV.
THis then is a sure Rule. Thoughts no ways right, when ways alw y grievous.
Psalm 10 5. Isaiah 32.8.
His Thoughts are no ways Right and Good, whose ways are always grievous, as
the Scripture speaks. There is no such thing as GOOD MEANINGS, (a Delusion that
damns thousands) where there is no GOOD LIFE (as before explained) The libe^al
says the Prophet, devises liberal things, and by the liberal thin^s he shall
stand. It Is well when THOUGHTS and THINGS go together; otherwise the very
Thoughts of GOOD, or of doing GOOD, or of becoming GOOD, are not GOOD, because
they are vain, and Scripture reckons all VAIN THOUGHTS to be wickedness of
heart, and such a One as the continuance whereof excludes from Salvation;
Jerem. 4.14.
Wash thine Heart from wickedness, that Thou may be saved, how long shall
vain thoughts lodge within thee? Thoughts not only vain, when set upon vain
objects, but upon the best objects in vain.

How purposes may be said to be to no purpose.


Now, Thoughts are VAIN, not only when set upon vain Objects, but if they be
placed upon the best objects in vain, or to no purpose, as our Phrase is, when
a thing does not reach its real or practical end, we say such a thing is to no
purpose: and so purposes themselves may be said to be to no purpose. They say
in Philosophy, Frustra fit potentia quae nunquam producitur in Actum, that
power is vain that is never produced into Act; so may I say in Divinity, Those
Thoughts are vain that are never produced into Exercise or Operation, as the
Drunkard, who often thinks of amendment, but still turns like a Dog to his
vomit, 2 Pet. 2.24.
or the unclean Whoremonger, or Harlot in the Proverbs, that after her Vows and
her Peace Offerings, Prove. 7.14.
returns with the Swine that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, or as
those in Malachy, Man. 2.15.
of whom the Holy Ghost thus complains, and against whom he thus witnesses,
And this have ye DONE AGAIN, Covering the Altar of the Lord with Tears, with
weeping and with crying out, insomuch that he regards not the offering any
more, or receives it with good will at your hands. Not that we are therefore
not to purpose, much less to purpose against purposing that which is good, but
to take care to fulfill our purposes; for if they perish that go so far as this
Text mentions, what shall be the end of those that come so far short of them,
that come short of Heaven?

And so we come to.

The IV. and Last Trial.
Would thou (Lastly) know whether thy Thoughts be Right, 4. Trial of Right
thoughts by the Rule.
Remember that RIGHT is a Relative word, and refers to proportion and Rule. As
in THINGS so in THOUGHTS; Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque, nequit consistere RECTUM.


THOUGHTS have their Measures, SHORT, or OVERLONG, cannot be RIGHT, but both
extremely WRONG.

Thy Thoughts are Right if Regular, and conformed to Right measures: And here
are two things (...) be presupposed to thy Right judging of thy Thoughts.

First, that thou think there is a Rule for Thoughts; Two things prerequired a
Rule for Right thoughts.
Secondly, that thou have Right Thoughts of the Rule.

Sect. I.
AS to the First, 2. Right thoughts of the Rule.
It was a sore spiritual Plague and Judgment, A black Vail upon the heart, upon
the Jewish Rabbines and Expounders of the Law, that they did not extend Its
Rule to the Thoughts, but taught for Doctrine, what we have in the Proverb,
that Thoughts were FREE, (even in that sense) Man's Thoughts from Gods Laws;
Some of them are observed to have given that cursed gloss upon that Text, If I
regard Iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.18. Rabbi Kimchim loc.
God will not ^^ar; God will not hear; that is, say they, If it go no further
then my Thoughts, God will not mind, he will take no notice thereof, nor call
to any account for it. And this made them think so well of themselves, because
they thought no worse of their thoughts. Blessed Paul, Acts 22.3. Paul brought
up at Gamaliels feet, Ignorant of thoughts. Romans 7.7. Verse 9.

Till the Commandment came to him Christ's own teaching.

Christ's exposition of the Law spiritual teaching thoughts, Matthew. 5.3. Verse
8. Verse 22, 28. Chap. 6.25, 28, 31.

Last Commandment. Romans 7.7.

Against evil Thoughts. Rom 7.14. 1 Cor. 4.6.

Gods writing is Rule for man's thinking. Reasonable sense, Romans 12.1. what,
Chap. 7.21.


though brought up at the feet of Gamaliel a Doctor of Law, yet was alive once,
without the Law, and gives this as the Reason, He did not by all their
Doctrine, know LUST; He knew not that thought-sins were such sins until the
Commandment came in another manner, and by another kind of teaching then ever
he had from them. For this was our Saviors great business, in that
Incomparable Sermon upon the Mount, to vindicate the Spirituality of the Law,
from their carnal and corrupt Dotages; they put the great stress of the Rule
upon the outward man, He puts it upon the Heart also, Poverty in spirit, he
begins with that: He lays the breach of the Sixth and Seventh Commandments in
heart and thought as well as outward Act, He condemns carking cares, Anxiety of
Thoughts. It Is strange indeed they should be so blinded, seeing the very last
of Gods Ten Words, goes down to the very bottom of the mind and thought, Thou
shall not COVET, so that when the scales were but fallen from the Apostles
eyes, He could easily-see, in the light of that Law, that THOUGHT was Sin; He
knew LUST to be SIN then: He knows now that the Law is Spiritual, Yea, and thus
he Schools others (...), That ye might learn not to think above what is
written. Gods written WORD is the measure of man's Right THOUGHTS, yet even some
Heathens had some glimmerings of this, Deuteronomy est animus, therefore mente
colendus, God it a Spirit, and requires mental worship and conformity to his
will: And this is indeed (...), our reasonable Service, when the Internal
(...), THOUGHT and mind serve the Law of God.

Sect. I.
Secondly,

AS a man must have a right Rule for his Thoughts, Right thoughts of the Rule.
James 4.11. 1 Cor. 2.14.
so he must have Right Thoughts of the Rule. The Apostle speaks of some that
Judge the Law, Take we heed that we do not misjudge it. Therefore it is
necessary that we look on the Spiritual Law with a Spiritual eye. To carnal
Thoughts, the Right ways of the Lord seem crooked and unequal, Gods right
Rule, why seems crooked to men.
not that the Law is so, but because the medium is such through which it is
looked upon; as if a man put part of a strait staff into the water, it appears
crooked, because of the inequality of the medium. All Gods Rule to David. Psalm.
119.228. All right.
But now a right heart has right thoughts of the Rule, I esteem all thy
Precepts, concerning all things, to be right. So we Read it, but the Text is, I
esteem all thy Precepts to be all right, every one, and every way, Right. It Is
true, There may be some kind of approving the things that are excellent, Romans
2.18. Some approve some excellent things. As Herod, Mark 6.20.
And yet the Heart not be Right; But if there be not an approving of excellent
things, the Heart cannot be Right; A bad Heart may think good of many good
ways, as Herod, but a good heart thinks good of every good way, as David. Then
shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. Psalm.
119.6. But David all Gods Laws. Universal respect, fair evidence. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Men may have a fair respect to many of Gods Laws, yet have hard Thoughts of
some. But an universal respect is a fair Evidence of Sincerity. For ALL
SCRIPTURE is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, etc.

THE Second Part.
Contents of the II. Part.
AN Introduction of particular Instances of Thoughts suited to their several
Subjects according to Scripture Rule.. 1. In thinking of Scripture it self. 2.
Of Our Selves. 3. Of others. 4. Of Creature Comforts. 5. Of Ordinances. 6. Of
Sin. 7. Of Holiness. 8. Of Afflictions. 9. Of Temptations. 10. Of Persecutions.
11. Of the present Condition of Life. 12. Of the present Time of Life. 13. Of
Death. 14. Of Judgment. 15. Of Eternity. 16. Of Angels, Evil, Good. 17. Above
all in Thinking of GOD.

To have High Thoughts and Sweet Thoughts, but in all points Regular and
Scriptural.

Of his Being, Highness, Holiness, Unshangeableness, Unity, (yet Trinity in
Unity,) Eternity, Omnipresence, Omniscience, Omnipotence, Invisibility,
Terribleness and just Severity, Truth and Verity, Loveliness and Goodness, not
only in his sparing Mercies and means of Grace, but even in His Judgments and
Destruction of the ungodly: in the First Covenant, especially in the New;
Covenant of Grace richest Theme for thoughts. CHRIST the Obje^t of Gods Eternal
thoughts, and of all good men's of Old, and of Angels, though Men otherwise
concerned in Him than They. Immanuel God with us, makes All in God Ours,
Justice, Holiness, Highness, etc. Gods Love in Christ's Incarnation, Suffering.
The Necessity and Excellent Virtue of Christ's Death. Right thoughts of Christ's
righteousness Imputed. High thoughts of Christ, sweet thoughts of Christ, Holy
thoughts of Christ as tho great Enemy of Sin, though Friend of Sinners, right
thoughts of God the Holy Ghost. High thoughts of God the Spirit, in his
Essence, Subsistence, and Operations, Sweet thoughts of him, and our high
Obligations to Him; the finishing work in man's Salvation the Spirits, Holy
Ghost, the great Promise of the New Testament as Christ of the Old. Fruits of
the Spirit sweet.

Thoughts For God must be Scriptural as well as Of God.

Conclusion.

Exhorting to Self-reflection by and upon Our thoughts.

Giving Motives and Rules for keeping thoughts RIGHT.

THE Second Part.
WHICH Contains an Induction of particular Instances of Thoughts suited to
their several Subjects, according to Scripture-Rule; and concludes with an
Exhortation to self-Reflection, and Motives and Rules for keeping Thoughts
Right.

NOw then supposing a Man have a right Rule for his thoughts, and right
thoughts of the Rule: The great inquiry for the trial of thoughts is; whether
they be suited to their several Subjects according to that Rule.

Right thoughts of Scripture. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, Tertul. cont.
Hermog. See B. Tayler's Dissuasive from Popery. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. John 5.39.
As for Example.

Sect. I.
IN thinking of SCRIPTURE, that it is (...), All divinely inspired, and a
sufficient Rule in all things pertaining to God and our Souls, Able to make the
man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, able to make wise
to Salvation, and therefore to be searched by every one that desires to be
Saved; Search the Scriptures (says our Savior) for in them ye think to have
Eternal Life, and they are They that testify of Me. Now to think otherwise of
Scripture then we are taught by it, is to think strangely of it, which is a
thing the great God takes strangely at their hands that do it, (a dishonor
done to our Spiritual MAGNA CHARTA, the great Charrer of our Salvation.) I have
WRITTEN to Him (says God) the GREAT THINGS of my Law, Hosea 8.12.
but they counted them as a strange thing. Great things, indeed must we needs
think them, being sent from the Great God, Exodus 8.19. John 11.74.
confirmed by Great Works and Miracles, Many in Number, Mighty in Nature,
uncontrolable and infallible in their Evidence, witnessed by Friends, confessed
by Enemies, admired by All, in succession of Ages attending the Holy Penmen,
and the Doctrine thereof.

And yet alas ^how strangely have these things of HOLY WRIT been thought of
(even as the Holy men themselves) as Troublers of States, Acts 24.5.
and Movers of Sedition throughout all the World, and as Ringleaders of all
Sects and Schisms. And therefore it is the wisdom and the piety of Popery to
take away this dangerous Key of Knowledge from the Common People, Luke 11.52.
and to persuade that ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, (they mean sure
their own Devotion,) but God calls Ignorance the Mother of Destruction, when he
says, Hosea 4.6.
My People are destroyed for lack of knowledge.

But thanks be to God, We have not so learned Christ, Scriptures must be
searched by All. Psalm. 119.7. Magistrates. Deuteronomy. 17.1^. Psalm. 119.24. Ministers.
as to dare to think that Book unfit for the study and reading of the meanest,
which God has ordained for making wise the simple, that cries to the simple,
turn in hither, and declaredly puts it self (as I may say) into the Hands of
all sorts and sizes, conditions, ages, and sexes, The Prince must read in it
all the days of his Life, and think it his safety to take the Testimonies
thereof to be the Men of his Council. And the Officers in Gods House must be
ready Scribes in the Law of God, (as was said of Ezrah,) Yea, Ezra 7.6. People.
Romans 10.8.
this is the Comfort of all the People of God, to have this Word nigh them,
even in their mouths, and in their Hearts, for says the Apostle to Community
of the People, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, that they through patience and
comfort of the SCRIPTURES might have hope; Romans 15.4. Deuteronomy. 3.6. Old.
Yea, this is their wisdom (says Moses) in the sight of all Nations. Here none
may think themselves too old to learn, for David by this study came to
understand more then the Ancients; Psalm. 11.10. Young. Psalm. 119.9. Women.
Children. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Nor too young neither, for wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by
taking beed thereto according to thy Word. Yea, and Women and Children are
commended in Scripture, for their study and knowledge of it; Thus Timothy is
commended for this, that from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures,
continue in the things that thou have learned and been assured of (says S.
Paul) knowing of whom thou have learned them, Chap. 1.5.
( viz. of Lois his Grandmother, Acts 16.1.
and his Mother Eunice, which was a Jewess, and believed, but his Father was a
Greek.

And the truth is, for any one to think that the Scripture is not to be read by
any but those that understand it perfectly, is to think that it is to be read
by none, till there will be no more need of Reading it, for here the Ablest and
most knowing do know but in part, 2 Cor. 13.9.
and do Prophesy but in part; And therefore it is that We have this sure word
of Prophesy, 2 Peter 1.19.
whereunto (we are to think that) We do well to take heed as unto a light
shining in a dark place, until the day of Glory dawn, and the Day Star arise in
our Hearts, the Interpretation and Explication of which word of Prophecy we are
taught, Verse 20. True meaning how to be sought. 1 Cor. 2.15.
in the next Verses, not to seek as some do) from our own private Phansies, but
by comparing the New Testament, with the Prophecies of the Old, Scripture with
Scripture, Spiritual things with Spiritual, and in all our study and reading
most humbly to implore, and believingly to wait for the guidance of that Spirit
that indicted and gave it forth, for as was the Genesis, 1 Peter 1.20.
so must be the Analysis, for it came not in old time by the will of Man,
therefore may, by no means, be expounded by man's will, but Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And therefore the Bereans are
highly commended in that they received the Word preached with all readiness of
mind, Acts 17.11.
and searched the Scriptures whether those things were so.

He therefore that thinks rightly of SCRIPTURE, esteems it his Darling, to be
laid in his Bosom, to be bid in his Heart (as the Psalmist speaks) the
incorruptible seed, Psalm. 119.11.
whereby he was born again from the miserable state of Corrupt Nature; 1 Pet.
1.23.
for the Law of the Lord, and the Testimonies of the Lord are they that convert
the soul, and make wise the simple; Psalm. 1.7.
the sincere milk, whereby he was nourished as soon as new born, and his strong
meat when he is grown up to be a strong man, for man lives not by Bread only,
Heb. 5.13, 14. Math. 4.4. Jer. 15.16. Job 23.12.
but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. Therefore when he
finds these words, he eats them, as Jeremy; Yea esteems them, as Job, more then
his necessary food; And as his food when he is well, so his Physic when he is
sick, he holds fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
(...), of healing words, so the Greek; for God sends his Word and heals, and
delivers from destructions; his Antidote against Infection, Psalm. 17.4.
for concerning the works of men (says David) by the word of thy lips I have
kept me from the paths of the Destroyer; his weapon, when he warreth, for the
Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17.
and this was it that our Savior foiled Satan with, and kept him off at the
points end of, Mat. 4.4, 7, 10, 11.
It is WRITTEN (says Christ) thus and thus, then the Devil leaves Him; his
light when he walks or works by day and his Lamp or Lantern to his feet by
night, his best friends Will and Testament, confirmed by the Death of the
Testator; Heb. 9.16. Psalm, 119.111.
He takes Gods Testimonies as an Heritage for ever, and thinks it less
pernicious to the World to have the Sun plucked out of the Firmament, then the
Bible taken away from the sight of the Sons of Men.

Sect. II.
(...) our selves. Romans 12.3. Low thoughts of our selves. 2 Cor. 11.11. With
high thoughts of the Grace of God in and toward us.
IN thinking of OUR SELVES, for no man to think of Himself more highly then he
ought to think, but to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith: not boasting beyond his measure, nor yet denying the grace of
God that is given to him. The great Apostle speaks thus of himself, in Nothing
am I behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, though I be nothing. He has
high thoughts of the Grace of God, yet low thoughts of Himself; Not I, but the
Grace of God with me.

1 Cor. 15.10. Self performances. Luke 17.10.
And as we must think thus of what we are at the best, so also of the best that
we can do; We are taught to say, and therefore to think, that when we have done
all, we are unprofitable servants.

Carnal self to be denied. Mat. 16.24. In its wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.10. and 2.14.
Prove. 3.5. Will. Gal. 5.17. 1 Pet. 2.11. Righteousnesses, Isaiah 64 6. Romans
3.20. Job 10.20. and ver. 31. Strength. Romans 5.6.
And if we must think thus of our Regenerate self, what can we think of Carnal
self, but that it is to be denied, (if any man will be my Disciple, let him
deny himself) denied in its Wisdom, which is Foolishness for the Natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them; and
therefore we must not think of leaning to our own understandings: in its Will,
which is wickedness, and perverse Rebellion, for the Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and these lustings war against the Soul; in its Righteousnesses, which
are Rottenness and filthy rags, for no Flesh can be justified in the sight of
God, and if we should say we are Righteous, our own lips would prove us
perverse, and our own cloths would abhor us; And finally in its strength, which
is weakness, for whilst we were ungodly (says the Apostle) at that time we
were without strength, and we have already seen, if we will think rightly of
our selves, we must think that we are not sufficient, as of our selves, so much
as to think one good thought. And therefore we are to think in all this,
Eccles. 7.29. Romans 3.12. Verse 23.
How is the Gold become Dross? Man that was made upright, Oh how is He come
short of the Glory of God, and altogether become unprofitable! His Destruction
is of Himself, but his help of the mere Mercy, and Free Grace of God, Hosea
13.9. Romans 9.16.
for it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows Mercy.

But yet we are to think of our selves, Job 10.3, 8.
as to our Natural Beings, that we are the works of Gods hands, though thus
defiled and defaced by our sins; that Our Bodies are yet capable, by Grace, 1
Cor. 6.19.
to be made Temples of the Holy Ghost, and therefore that we are to possess
these our Vessels in Honor and Sanctification; 1 These. 4.4.
And that our Souls are more worth then as many Worlds, for what shall a man
give in exchange for his Soul! Mat. 16.26.
That in neither are we our own. But in both bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.19,
20. Self-love the standard of Love to others. Lev. 19.18.
and therefore that we are to glorify God both in our Bodies and in our Souls,
for both are Gods.

For certain it is, there is a SELF that is to be tendered, as well as a Self
that is to be denied; nay the Love that we owe to It is made, both by Moses and
Christ, the Rule or Standard of our loving our Neighbor, which is called the
second great Commandment like unto the first, which is (Love God, Mat. 22.93.
) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy SELF; First GOD, and then our SELF, and
then our Neighbor as our Self; For the Rule has a natural priority to the
thing Ruled; And therefore we are to THINK thus of our selves, 1 Cor. 6.18.
that for a man to sin against HIS OWN Body, (as the Apostle speaks) or to
wrong HIS OWN Soul (as it is in the Proverbs) being against that LOVE which
Scripture makes the Standard of our loving one another, Prove. 8.36. Sinning
against our selves, greater then to sin against others.
is by so much greater then our sinning against, or wronging others; for
Charity may and must begin at home, though it must not end there. And therefore
as we have already intimated, that self deceit is the worst deceit, and
self-Murder the worst kind of Murder, so I might add that in this (as in some
other Respects, as is largely observed by Mr. Capel in his choice and rare
Treatise of Temptations) SELF Pollution is a more heinous kind of pollution,
then many perhaps are aware of, and so in other cases.

And therefore we are to THINK All those SELF-Tormentings used by IDOLATERS of
an elder Date (as was the manner of the Priests of Baal to cut themselves, 1
King. 18.28.
till the blood gushed upon them) or by others of a later Edition, yea and All
those SELF- Neglectings so much magnified by a new Sect of Self-^ustitiaries
sprung up lately amongst us, whose Religion lies so much in Touch not, 1 Cor.
2.21, 22. Verse 20. Verse 23.
taste not, handle not, etc. after the Doctrines and Commandments of Men; as
the Apostle concludes them to be unscriptural, when he calls them Worldly
Rudiments, though he confesses them to have a show of wisdom in Will Worship,
(...).
and humility and NEGLECTING the Body, (or not sparing the Body) not in any
Honor to the satisfying of the Flesh; so are we, I say (by the same
Apostolical Authority) to think them UNNATURAL, Ephesians. 5.28, 29.
for he expressly says, He that loves his Wife loves HIMSELF, for no man ever
yet hated his OWN Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the
Church. So that we are to think these things so far from justifying us in the
sight of God, as that he condemns them, and will condemn all that trust unto
them.

Sect. III.
Right thoughts of others. 1 Cor. 4.1.
IN Thinking of OTHERS, some are short in estimating some men, Let a man
therefore (says the Apostle) so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ,
Not under what was written. 1 Cor 3.5. Nor above. Chapter 4.6. Others better
then our selves. Philip. 2.3. Acts 12.21. ^ude 8. ^ccles. 19 20.
and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Some think too highly of some,
(therefore says he again,) Who then is Paul, or who is Apollos, but Ministers
by whom ye believed? and this was spoken, That they might learn in them not to
think of Men above what was written, and not be puffed up for one against
another. On both hands there are great Evils; We may think others better then
our selves, but none better then the word declares. It Is a great sin to cry up
the Greatest, as the people did Herod, And on the other hand, to despise
DOMINION; or to Curse the KING in our very THOUGHT.

Sect. IV.
IN Thinking of CREATED COMFORTS, Of created comforts. 1 Timothy 4.4. All good.
Genesis 32.10. Our selves unworthy of the least, yet the greatest not enough.
Psalm. 4 6. Without Christ. Phil. 3.7, 8. Happiness not having, but in having
sanctified. 1 Timothy 4.4. Job 31.25, 27.
as the Apostle Paul, every Creature of God is good, etc. and of our selves in
respect of them, as Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies; yet
not to think them the chief good, or the best of them good enough for the
precious soul to sit down with. Many will say, who will show us any good? But
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance, etc. Yea doubtless, and I
account all things but loss, and do count them but (...), Dogs meat, not Man's
meat.) All things of all sorts, civil advantages, Church privileges, etc. as
nothing for the Soul without Christ) that I may win Christ. These, I say, were
his thoughts of the highest humane seize, of Outward Church Privileges,
of Creature Enjoyments in the World; And so not to think Him happy that has
them, but that has a sanctified title to them and sanctified use of them, If
they be sanctified by the Word and Prayer. If I rejoiced because my Wealth was
great, and because my Hand had gotten much, and my Hand has been secretly
enticed, or my Mouth kissed my hand; He did not think himself to be the better
or the happier, for being the wealthier; 'twas the gain of the heart, Heavenly
treasure true. Job 23.12.
not the Gettings of the Hand that Job estimated to be true treasure. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my appointed portion, so the Margin,
then my necessary Food, so the Text. No doubt he accounted that good too, but
not the chief good, Psalm. 49.8.
not a suffici^nt good for his Soul, for the Redemption of the Soul is
precious, It cease for ever. And (Alas! Whole world not worth a Soul, Mat.
16.26.
thinks a Man that knows the worth of a Soul,) what is a man profited, if he
gain the whole world, and loose his own Soul?

Sect. V.
Right thoughts of Ordinances, what Mat. 23.19.
IN thinking of ORDINANCES, as the good ways of God, to be gone in, not rested
in: He thinks not so greatly of the Gift, as of the Altar sanctifying the Gift;
of his attendances upon them, as they are performances of his own, but as
appointments of God, for the Communication of Himself to the Soul. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, Good ways to be gone, not rested in. Psalm. 27.4.
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the
days of my life, to see the beauty of the Lord, etc. not the beauty of the
House (though that was very beautiful) and to inquire in his Temple; not only
the way to his Temple, but to the sight and fruition of him in his Temple.

Sect. VI.
Right thoughts of sin, what. Greatest evil. Job 32.21. Isaiah 33.24.
IN thinking of SIN, as the only contrary to the Supreme good: Therefore Jobs
Friends would have fastened it on him, as a Brand of in-sincerity, that he had
chosen Sin rather then Affliction. The inhabitants shall not say I am sick, for
the people that dwell there shall be forgiven their Iniquity. They shall think
all well, when sin is done away. Sin, in a good man's Thoughts, is the very Gall
of bitterness, the very core of all troubles, the very sting of Death it self,
1 Cor. 15.56. Heart-sin worst. Heb. 12.15. 1 King. 8.38. Jer. 17.9. Romans 7.23.
^^rom. 9.5. Hiba^. 2.5.
and the very Hell of Hell. And as he thinks Sin the worst of Evils, so
Heart-sin the worst of sins, that Root of bitterness, that Plague of the heart,
that desperately wicked thing, that cannot cease to Sin, that Law in the
Members that wearies them to commit Iniquity, yet it self is unweariable, and
unsatiable as Death and Hell, (and therefore called the Body of death) which
never says it is enough. It Is this evil that makes good men cry out of
themselves as of the chief of Sinners! Romans 7.24.
For whatsoever they know of others, as to other Evils, they know more of this
by themselves then by all the World. It Is this Evil that makes many a man
thought humble by others, cry O my pride! counted mortified by others,
Spiritual wickedness.
cry O my potent passion! my strong corruption! my unruly Lusts! how many a man
is there of unblemisht life, that is weary at heart of his own Heart, yea of
his very Life, because of the evil of his Heart: his spiritual pride,
filthiness of Spirit, Earthly-mindedness, 2 Cor. 7 ^1. James 4.1.
Spirits lusting to envy, with the spiritual wickednesses abroad in the world,
as Hypocrisy, Heresy, etc.

But yet though he think Sin (Root and Branch) to be the greatest Evil, Yet no
sin so great an Evil as Christ a good. Heb. 7.25.
yet not so great an evil as Jesus Christ is a Good; nor so mighty (though
mighty) to destroy, as He is (Almighty) able to save, He thinks Sins demerits
great, Christ's merits greater, whereby he is not only secured from Hell, but to
be saved in Heaven. And therefore He may plead even the greatness of his sin,
as an argument for his Pardon, Psalm. 25.11.
because He thinks the great Salvation to be so much the greater, that it
triumphs most in the spoils of the proudest sins, in the thing wherein they
have dealt proudly, to be still above them. When Sin grows up unto the
Heavens, Ezekiel. 9.6. Psalm. ^08.4. 1 John 4.4.
Gods mercy (in his Son) is above the Heavens; As when the wicked one is great
that is in World, yet greater is he that is in the Saints, than he that is in
the World.

Sect. VII.
IN thinking of HOLINESS, Of holiness. Isaiah 2.8. not only way to, but part of
happiness. Psalm. 119.11. Philip. 3.20. 1 John 5.3. Mat. 11.30.
not only as the high way to (as the Prophet calls it,) but also a principal
part of Happiness; the Duties of holiness, to be the Beauties thereof; Its
Practice, Privilege, Its Performances, great Rewards: Its inchoation, an
Heaven upon Earth; Its Consummation and perfection, the very Heaven of Heaven:
And therefore Its Commandments not grievous, Its Yoke easy, Its Burden light.

Of Affliction not so evil as s^^. Good to the good. Ps lm 119.67, 71. H^b^.
1.12.11. Verse 10. Profitable, 1 King. 17.18. Monitors of our frowardness, but
Fruits of Gods Faithfulness and Love. Psalm. 119.75. Rev. 3.19. John 16.33.
Christ's Legacy, Mat. 10.25. For many good ends.
Sect. VIII.
IN thinking of AFFLICTIONS, though Evil, not so Evil as Sin, and therefore
their being Sanctified desirable, rather and more then their removal Evil in
themselves, yet good to the good, and for the making of them Better; Its good
for me that I have been afflicted; before, I went astray, but now I have learnt
thy Precepts: sharp and bitter twigs, bearing sweet Fruit, peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness: A Fathers Rod, not for his Pleasure, but VERILY for our Profit,
that we may be partakers of his holiness. Remembrancers of our Sin, yet not so
much products of his Justice, Power, and sovereignty, as Fruits of his
Faithfulness: I know O Lord that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me) Tokens
of his Love (as many as I love I chasten,) Payments of our Legacy left us by
Our crucified Lord, a little before his Death (in the World you shall have
tribulation) and confirmed thereby ( For if they did so in the green Tree, If
such things befall the Master, it is sufficient for the Servant to be as his
Master, and as his Lord) And all to make Man more humble in himself, more awful
of God, more careful to please him, more fearful to offend him, more
conformable to Christ's sufferings, more contemplative of his sufferings, more
compassionate and fellow-feeling as to others, Sin more bitter, Christ more
sweet, the World more contemptible, Death more desirable, Heaven more
delightful, and glorious Grace more admirable in the Saints, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
thus troubled on everyside, yet not distressed; cast down, but not destroyed;
a burning Bush, yet not consumed; in a fiery Furnace, yet receiving no hurt;
nay more, that the very fiery Chariot of affliction should be pressed for the
service of carrying them to Heaven, their very tribulations made the door for
their entering into the Kingdom of God. Acts 14.22. James 5.11. and 1.2.
And therefore the Scripture counts them hapyy which endure, and teaches us to
count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations.

Sect. IX.
IN thinking of TEMPTATIONS, Of Temptations. 1 Pet. 4.12. 1 Cor. 10.13. Heb.
11.37. Best tempted. Heb. 3.18. Chap. 4.15. Christ himself in all points. Lust
of the eye. Mat. 4.2, 3. Verse 9. Pride of life. Verse 3. Verse 6.
not as strange (or as though some strange thing had happened) but as common to
men; yea the best of men, They were tempted (says the Apostle) yea the worst
of them to him that was more then MAN, who himself suffered being tempted (and
that in all points as we are,) that he might know how to succor them that are
tempted. In all points; To the Lusts of the Flesh, Thou art Hungry, Make these
stones Bread; To the lust of the Eyes, thou art poor, (Thou have not a hole
where to lay thy head) All these will I give thee; To the Pride of Life, Thou
pretendest high, prove what thou pretendest; show thine Authority, Command
Stones to be made Bread; If thou be a King, let us see thy Court, thy Heavenly
Guard, and that the Angels are indeed but thy Ministers, If thou be the Son of
God, do something or other, that ordinary men either cannot, or at least dare
not do, never fear to die like a man, Cast thy self down, and let us see
whether Angels will bear thee up. Now All that is in the World, 1 John 2.16.
is the Lust of the Flesh, and of the Eye, and pride of Life. And as the wind
of Temptation thus blew all the points of the Worlds Compass, Christ tempted
with temptations, base and forbid. Bloody and unnatural. Hellish and
blasphemous.
so also all the points of highest and most hideous aggravations; most base and
sorbid, transgress for a morsel of Bread, sell thy Birthright for a meals
meat, break thy Faith with God, that thou may break thy Fast with the Devil;
Most bloody and unnatural, if thou will not break thy Fast, break thy Neck,
Cast thy self down; Most Hellish and Horrid, If thou will not, or can not
prove thy self to be the Son of God, disown God, and own me for thy God, Fall
down and Worship me; Math. 4.9.
and is the Nature of Man capable of any thought more hideous, injections more
black and blasphemous then such as these? And yet for all this, Highly subtle
and deceiptful. Profit and pleasure. Verse 8. Wrested Scripture. Verse 6. Gods
ends pretended.
All points too of highest subtilty and hellish deceit that spiritual
wickedness could possibly hatch or imagine: This Hell of Temptations must not
only be covered over with a Paradise of Pleasures, the World and all the Glory
of it, but also with an Heaven of Scripture-warranty, Cast thy self down, for
It is written, etc. and so thou may show thy Faith, without hazard of thy
Life; nay of most High, Glorious, Good ends, the Manifestation of his Divinity,
the Credit of his Ministry, the Glory of God in having such a Son, the Glory of
Christ in having such a Father, (And all this in a seasonable point of time,
when all this was challenged, and called boldly in question by the great
Goliath, that at the very first word, Verse 3.
defyeth the Living God,) If thou be the Son of God, etc. which is as much as
prove it if thou can. Thus was Christ Tempted in all points, therefore well
may the Tempted think thus of his sorest Temptations, 2 Cor. 12.7.
These are thorns in my Flesh, but no other then what were platted together by
Satan, and worn as a Crown by my head and Savior; Saints tempted only, if need
be. 1 Pet. 1.6. 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Pet. 1.7. Revel. 3.10. Romans 5.4. 1 Pet. 5.8. ^
Cor. 12.8. Gal. 6.1. And for excellent end.
And now ordered by his hand that they cannot touch me sooner or longer then
need is for the Pricking of my puffing Pride, the trial of my Faith, the
exercising of my Patience, and experiencing of me by it; the exciting of my
watchfulness, the spirit of Prayer in my self, and the Spirit of meekness in
the restoring of others (when they are overtaken in a fault, considering my
self least I also be tempted.) The teaching of me to know more thoroughly both
my self and my Savior; both where my weakness, and where my strength lies;
That I am but a Reed shaken with the wind, that Christ is the Rock, higher then
I; yea higher then the highest; that when the proudest Temptations dash against
it, Shall be carried through all.
they are broken by it, that is Grace is only sufficient for me, and that his
strength shall be made perfect in my weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 10.13.
and that God is faithful, who will not suffer me to be tempted above what I am
able, but with the temptation will make a way to escape; 1 Pet. 2.9. May
triumph over all.
For the Lord knows how to deliver our of Temptations; And therefore, though
now in my m^nority, I may think of the day when I shall be at Age, the time
appointed of the Father; Gal. 4.2.
Though now in my Apprentiship, that I shall be one day made Free from mine
infirmities, and Temptations, 2 Cor. 1^.9.
and therefore I will even now Glory in my infirmities, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me; for when I am weak then am I strong, nay, in these
things, I am more then Conqueror, Verse 10.
through Christ strengthening me.

Sect. X.
IN thinking of PERSECUTIONS for Christ, Of Persecution, our Patrimony. Mark
10.30. Honor. Acts 5.41. Phil. 1.29. Gods gift, therefore cannot merit. Loss,
gain. Heb. 10.34. Disgrace, riches. Heb. 11.26. Verse 24. Persecuted happy.
Verse, 25. Mal. 3.15. Prosperous miserable. Psalm. 73.12. Psalm. 4.9, 6. Verse
18. The despised excellent. 1 Cor. 4.13. Psalm. 16.3. Heb. 11.38. Acts 20.24.
Persecution not enough without love. 1 Cor. 13 3.
as part of a Christians Patrimony (Ye shall receive an hundred fold in this
life with Persecutions.) An Honor to be counted worthy to suffer, a Gift to be
able to suffer, as well as to believe, (to you it is given.) And therefore he
is so far from thinking, that he merits by it as that he is but so much the
more beholding to God and to Christ for it. He thinks losses for Christ and the
Gospel to be gain, the spoiling of his Goods to be joyfully taken, As knowing
in himself that he has in Heaven a better and more enduring substance. He
esteems disgrace for Christ, the highest Honor in the World, and the Reproach
of Christ greater Riches then the Treasures of Egypt. He refuses to dwell in
the Tents of Wickedness, to have his portion in this life, He chooses rather
to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of ^in
for a season. Those whom men think to be the happy men, (who call the proud
happy,) having ONLY their portion in this life. Those that prosper in the
World, that increase in Riches, that boast of their Wealth, that say they are
rich and possessed with goods, etc. Such He thinks Poor, and Wretched, and
Miserable, and Blind and Naked. And those whom such men think the offscouring
of the World, He thinks the Excellent of the Earth; And whom they think
unworthy to live in the World, He thinks that the World is not worthy of them.
He thinks his Life not too much, nor too dear for Christ, nay not enough, if it
want the sincerity of his Love, and therefore labors as much that his heart
and love be found staming toward him, as (if he call for it) to give his body
to be burnt for him.

Sect. XI.
Right thoughts of the outward condition of life. Prove. 13.8. As fittest for
us, 2 Samuel 15.4. Hebr. 13.5. Contentment, without covetousness. Thinking of the
promise. Psalm. 23.5. For supply. Psalm. 17.3.
IN thinking of his present CONDITION of Life, that his lines are fallen in the
best place for him, that his own food is most convenient for him, That Saul's
Armor would not suit him, That another Condition would not fit him; not as
Absalom, O that I were Judge in the Land. He thinks it is his duty to be
contented with such things as he has, without coveting another: And thinks it
his Relief, that the less money he has, he may go the more upon trust; The
less he finds in his purse, seek the more in the promise of him that has said,
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; The Lord is his Shepherd, and he
thinks he shall not want; And therefore he will trust in the Lord, and do good,
And he thinks verily he shall be fed, or Truth shall be his feeding; (as some
read) so that he thinks no man can take away his livelihood, unless he can
first take away Gods truth.

Sect. XII.
Right thoughts of the present time of life. 1 Pet. 1.17. Heb. 4.1. To be past
in fear, that work may be done. Phil. 1.12. Jude 23. 1 Cor. 9.24. Luke 16.2.
Before time done. Time for work. Therefore be up and doing. 1 Chro. 22.16. A
time for every Work. Eccles. 9.4. Therefore hope while time, no room for
despair. Eccles. 3.1. Time for best purposes. Romans 13.11. Hos. 10.12. 2 Pet.
1.10. But a time, therefore no place for presumption. Time precious measured by
moments. Ephesians. 5.16. Right thoughts of death. Job 18.14. Chap. 11.20. Eccles.
11.3. Luke 16.26.
IN thinking of his present TIME of life, as the time of his sojourning here,
and therefore to be passed in fear; in fear, least he should come short, nay or
seem to come short, at his going out of the World of that which he came into it
for, the working out of his own Salvation, and the saving of others, pulling
them out of the Fire, and both with fear; with fear least his day be done,
before his work be done; least his Glass be run, before his Race be run; least
his accounts be required, before they be stated; with fear, and yet in hope,
that though his time be little, and his work great, yet if he be up and doing,
the Lord will be with him; And therefore as he that plows, plows in hope, so he
when he prays, prays in hope, and repents in hope, etc. For to him that is
joined to all the living, there is hope. So that his fear is a spur to his
hope, and his hope a bridle to his fear; That despair do not run away with him,
and Cast him quite down, for want of hope; Nor presumption make him loiter, and
loose both his time, and his soul for want of Fear. He thinks there is a time
for every purpose under Heaven; And therefore thinks he, can I find a time for
Eating and Drinking, and Sleeping, Buying and Selling, Building and Planting,
Marrying and giving in Marriage? and is there not a time, nay a high time to
awake out of sleep? A time to seek the Lord, to make my calling and election
sure, etc. surely there is a time, therefore there is hope; And no room for
desperation; And but a time, therefore no place for Presumption: But a time,
and therefore that time is most precious, (God measuring it, to us only by
moments, as we do precious Liquors by drops,) and therefore to be redeemed, and
so employed in looking out for a precious Christ, and in looking after the
precious Soul.

Sect. XIII.
IN thinking of DEATH, to the Unbelievers and Hypocrites, as a King of Terrors,
a grave of their hopes, which will then be as the giving up of the Ghost, as
the falling of the Tree (that must lie till judgment, as then it falls: No work
there, nor devise, no wisdom, no calling upon God with hope of help, or promise
of pardon; As the fixing of the gulf, (no passing, no returning, from a state
of torment, no means of Grace, no hope of Glory any more) as a cruel Jailer
haling the Soul to the dreadful Tribunal of God, and then to the Tormenter and
Executioner, even to him that has the Power of Death, the Devil: Hebr. 2.14.
And alas, how many thousands of black, yea bloody self-murthering mouths shall
then come to have their woeful wishes, before they thought of it, when God shall
damn them, and the Devil take them.

But to the Righteous (that has hope in his death) ^ King of Terrors too,
Prove. 14.32. To the godly, what.
but with a broken Scepter; A Serpent, but without a sting; A ghastly
countenance with an open mouth, but without teeth; A sturdy Porter, yet
standing only to open them their Fathers door. The Saints Bed-maker, Isa.
52.10. Hos. 13.4. Col. 3.41.
hard-handed, yet that makes their Beds soft and easy: An Enemy frighted into a
Friend by him that is the very Death of Death, but the believers Life. So that
their dying is but an entering into peace, Isa. 57.2.
a resting in their beds, and from their labors of Sins, Sorrows, Cares,
Fears, Temptations, Afflictions, Persecutions, Sicknesses, Pains, Wants,
Weaknesses, Wearinesses, Doubts, Difficulties; nay of Duties, of Fastings,
Watchings, Tears, which shall then be wiped away, and done away, Revel. 14.13.
as to the Labor, not the Reward, for so their Works follow them.

Sect. XIV.
Of judgment, Psalm. 49.14. Mat. 25.19.
IN thinking of JUDGMENT, As that glorious morning wherein the upright shall
have Dominion, shall sit with Christ on Thrones, judging the World, being
openly justified themselves, and set as Sheep on the right hand of God, 1 Cor.
6.2.
and Proclaimed by Christ the Blessed of his Father; As that glorious meeting
of that spiritualized body with its blessed Soul, and so with Christ, Mat.
25.34. To the sheep.
and with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Saints, to be dissolved,
divorced, divided, dissipated, dispersed no more.

1 Cor. 15.44. Math. 8.11. Mat. 25.33. and 41. To the Goats. Psalm. 1.5.
Mean while those Goats on the left hand, that burned with Lust, shall burn with
horror inwardly, shall be accused, accursed, sentenced and condemned openly;
And, as they would not endure the Sheep to live by them in the World, they
shall go by themselves, shall not come into the Congregation of the just, and
as they loved Cursing, It shall now come into their Souls, and like Oil in
their Bones. And so their miserable bodies (made vessels of wrath, fitted to
Destruction, ^ide to receive it (without spilling, Romans 9.22.
) strong to hold it (without breaking,) being reunited to their tormented
Souls; shall together be partakers of Misery (as they formerly had been of Sin)
unto all Eternity.

Sect. XV.
IN thinking of ETERNITY, Of Eternity, Right thoughts of it.
as that which is so shortly approaching, and nearly concerning every one, that
he thinks it strange that any one should almost think of any thing else, for
thinking of Eternity; But that he thinks again of that World of Atheism that
is in the World, never fully to be confuted, But by Death and Judgment; and oh,
thinks he, Atheists in this world.
what a sad thing it is that they are (...), we read, without God in the World,
but the word is, Atheists in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. No Atheists to Eternity.
yea but as soon as ever they go out of the World, they continue Atheists no
longer. Those that would not believe that there was a God, and a Christ, by his
patience and providence, by his preserving them, and proffering to save them,
Shall see there is a God and Christ. Rev. 1.7. Mal. 3.19.
shall then see that there is a God, and a Christ too (every Eye shall see him)
and feel that there is a God by his terrors taking hold upon them; Then shall
they return and discern (though they would not see the Lord when his hand was
lifted up in his Word and Works in the World) they shall see God, and be
ashamed. Isa. 26.11. Psalm. 58.11.
So that a man shall say verily there is a GOD. And those that would not
believe that there was a Devil, by their daily conversing with him, and his
influencing them, by his filling their hearts, because they say they never saw
him, Feel there i^ a Devil.
shall then certainly know they are with him, as he knows now that he is with
them; for, as he shares stakes with them in sin, they have their part, and he
has his part; In Hell share stakes with him.
so shall they be forced to share stakes with them in Hell, for they shall have
their portion with the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41. As he with them here
in sin.
And Oh thinks he, how will the dainty Dives, and the careless and delicate
Daughters do to spend that Eternity? That must have so many devices and
divertisements, Misery of the wicked.
Plays and Pastimes, (Ah! wretched word that thinks he,) and all to wear out
the tediousness of a little time. To spend that Eternity, when the smoke of
that bottomless pit, Rev. 14.10, 11.
must be their only Air; to breath in Fire, their Food; Brimstone, their
Perfume; full Viols of Divine wrath, their Drink; Astonishment, their Wine;
Bitter weeping, and flowing Fountains, Mat. 22.13.
and ever Running Rivers of Tears, in stead of their Rich Baths, and pleasant
Springs, Luke 16.28.
and artificial Fountains; And wailing, yelling, and howling, their only
Music; And so other men's torments an accession to their pains. As they had
taken pleasure in other men's sins (which made Dives so loath of his Brethrens
Company, Romans 1.32.
as we may well think.) The Books must be opened, in stead of their pleasing
Play-Books, and Romances, Gods Book, and the Book of their Consciences, Rev.
20.12.
(that they never could endure in all their lives to look into) must now be
pored upon by them, by the Fire of Hell, without intermission, recreation, or
other diversion; and the wanton Eye, that busy and unsatisfied Gazer upon
every thing (but the Bible) must be (otherwise) imprisoned in utter darkness
for ever; Mat. 25.30.
Psalm. 12.4.
And the Lordly tongue that must needs be their own, shall be their own to
torment them; as formerly set on Fire of Hell with a world of wickedness, James
3.6.
so now of woes; Red hot then with Rage against God, and revilings of his
Saints, now burning with flames, and not receiving so much as one single drop
of cold water, Luke 16.24.
that was wont to swim in Wine, and for that bewitching sense of touch, its
dalliances and delights, there shall only succeed those hideous gnashings of
teeth, and gnawings at Heart, in the woe that never cease, and by the worm
that never dies. Josh. 8.7, 16.
And thus, Ah thinks he, as Joshua taught the men of Succoth with the Thorns
and Briars in the wilderness,) The Hebrew is, He made them to know; to know who
he was, and to know what they had done, jn despising his Messengers, in
rejecting his motions, etc.) so will Jesus teach the Atheistical world with
tortures to Eternity, 2 Chro. 36.16. Psalm. 50.17. Prove. 1.3.
and make them to know who He is, whose Messengers they mocked, whose Laws they
cast behind their backs, whose Councels they hated, and would none of his
Reproofs.

But thinks He on the other hand, Eternal happiness of the Saints.
of those in whose Hearts are the ways of them that are holy Pilgrims, the
true Travailers, that declare plainly that they seek a Country, (viz.) an
Heavenly, that can say of a good Sermon, John 6.34.
Lord evermore give us of this Bread, of a lively stirring Sacrament, a
Soul-humbling Confession and Prayer, an Heart-raising Meditation, it is good to
be here; that think the present time too short, and their Hearts too narrow, to
hold enough of God and Christ; what a blessed state will they count that, when
the perfecting of their holiness, and so of their spirits, Heb. 12.23. Phil.
3.21.
and the changing of their vile bodies, and the fashioning them like unto
Christ's Glorious Body, shall widen them as much from the straits of their
hearts, as Eternity shall do from the straits of time, And so they shall have
as much of God and Christ as their heads and hearts can hold, and these shall
hold as much as they can desire, without Interruption, or Change, 1 These. 4.17.
or fear of Change for ever, for they shall EVER be with the Lord.

Sect. XVI. Right thoughts of Angels. Evil, worlds God. 1 Cor. 4.4. Sinners his
Slaves. 2 Timothy 2.26. Works in their Will. Ephesians. 2.2.

IN thinking of ANGELS, The EVIL as many in Number, (though for the
undividedness of their Kingdom) called the Devil and Satan; As the worlds God,
yet Gods Slave; having sinners in his chain, Taken Captive by him at his will,
yet cannot force their will, though he work effectually in their will, it is
with their will (for his Lusts will they do,) nay cannot so much as find out
their Riddle, except he plow with their own Heifer, But with it. John 8.44.
nor known their actual thought, (that is Gods Prerogative Royal, I the Lord
search the Reins,) but (as the cunning Angler does the nibling of the Fish at
the Bait under water, Knows not our thoughts but by indication. Genesis 4.5. Genesis
3.3.
by the motion of the Cork and Quill above water,) by some little outward
indication of the minds inward motion; as when Cains countenance was fallen, He
knew he was very wroth, and so hurtyeth him to Murder; and by Eve's mincing
the Threatening (least ye die,) when God had said, Verse 6.
ye shall surely die) and by her eying the forbidden Tree, He knew she had a
months mind, as we say, to the Fruit. Thus when he sees the eyes of the
Adulterer full ((...)) of the Adulteress, 2 Pet. 2.14.
he easily perceives how the Game goes; and so in other cases; yet that he is
himself much more in Gods Chain, Gods slave in his chain. 2 Pet. 2.4. 2 Cor.
12.7. Rev. 10.12.
and reserved and kept therein (ever since he left his first estate) and shall
be to the Judgment of the great day; And therefore though he vex and disquiet,
buffet and tempt, and accuse the Brethren before God night and day; and though
he set his Cloven foot, the foot of his Pride, upon the greatest part of the
World, so that the whole World lies (as it were) (...), 1 John 5.19.
in the very Maw, not Jaw only, of that wicked one; yet shall he never be able
to hinder Christ, or to hurt the true Christian: but as a Lion in the Grate,
though his roaring be terrible, 1 Pet. 5 8. Rev. 12.12.
yet his reach is but short; and he knows it, therefore we may think it; Nay
because he is but a Slave in Gods Chain, therefore all his tugging at the Oar,
shall but promote the purposes of Gods grace for his own Glory, and the good of
his chosen; And 2.7.
and ( as Jonah in the Whales belly was said to be as it were, in the belly of
Hell, yet was afterward cast up alive upon dry ground) the Devil shall be
forced to disgorge his Prey, and leave all Gods Elect safe upon the shore.
Shall the Prey be taken from the Mighty, or the lawful Captive delivered? Verse
10. Isaiah 49.24, 25.
But thus says the Lord, even the Captives of the mighty shall be taken away,
and the Prey of the terrible shall be delivered, for I will contend with him
that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy Children. So that after longest
and sorest Temptations and Assaults of the great Red Dragon, Rev 12.3.9. John
8.44.
the Old Serpent, the Deceiver of the World, the Liar and Murderer from the
beginning, with all his Policy and Power, Rage and Experience, James 4.7. Mat.
4.11. Good Angels.
He shall be forced to flee from those that resist him by Faith, as he left
Christ; Then the Devil leaves him, and the ANGELS, (viz.) the GOOD Angels,
came and ministered unto him.

And such indeed even Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. Ministering spirits to the
Saints, innumerable. Chap. 12 22. Rev. 5.11. 2 Chro. 32.21. 1 Kings 19.5. Acts
12.7. Psalm. 91.1.12. Luke 16.22. Mat. 21.31. A comfortable thought. 2 Chro
6.27. Psalm. 103.10. Heb 1.6, 14. Rev. 19 10. And an awful thought Mat. 18.10. 2
Cor. 11.10.
must we think them to be, even all of them sent forth for the good of those
that shall be Heirs of Salvation. So that all the innumerable company of (Good)
Angels, that ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, are
even all of them sent forth for the Good of them that are Good; to right their
wrongs, and to relieve their necessities, to Guard and Protect their Persons
while they live, to attend their Souls when they Die, and to gather their dust
together at the Day of Judgment, and the Harvest at the end of the World. And
therefore it may be a comfortable thought to Believers, that they have
innumerable invisible friends, to oppose to their visible and invisible
Enemies, Angels of God excelling in strength, worshippers of Christ, not to be
worshipped themselves; and Servants of the Saints, therefore called their
Angels; And an awful thought too, as one would not do any thing uncomely in the
sight of an Excellent person, so neither to admit any thing unseemly for
Saints, though no man should see them, because of the Angels.

Sect. XVII.
ANd above all in thinking of GOD, to have High, Right thoughts of God.
Holy, Reverend, yet withal Delightful, Affectionate and Comfortable thoughts,
but in (all points) Regular and Scriptural. For thus says the Scripture, Let
him that gloryeth, glory in this, Jerem 5.24.
that he understands and knows me, that I AM THE LORD which exercise LOVING
KINDNESS, JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Earth, for in these things I
DELIGHT, says the Lord. When the mind is thus intent upon this most glorious
Theme of Thoughts, the most Glorious LORD, in his Essence, (I am the Lord,) in
his Attributes and Operations (which exercise Loving kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness) then is this Kings Daughter All glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. 2
Cor. 3.18.
for we All with open face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit of the Lord.

The Heavenly mind is an Heaven-like mind; Right thoughts of Him whose Name is
I AM, Exodus 3.14.
and whose Title is THE LORD, must needs resemble Heaven in pureness and
clarity, Amos 4.13.
(for He declares to man what is his THOUGHT, and must be thought of by Man
just as He declares,) yea rise above the Heavens in Celsitude and sublimity
(for his Glory is above the Heavens) and be dapled, Psalm. 113.4, 5.
(like Heaven) with Love and Holy Joy (because of his loving kindness,) and
with Reverence and Godly Fear (for his Judgment and Righteousness,) and with
delight in all these, the Exercise of all which is his Delight. For though the
L^^d be High, Psalm. 138.6.
yet has he respect unto the Lowly, and as He condescends to think of us, so
also (provided we do it regularly) to be thought of by Us.

High thoughts. God most HIGH. Heb. 11.6. Genesis 14 18. Isa. 57.15. Eccles. 5.8.
Isa. 40.18, 25. Psalm. 76.12. Psalm. 135.6. J^b 33.13. Psalm 97.9. Psalm. 113.4.
Psalm. 16 2. Neh. 9.5. No thought of God high enough. Job. 11.7, 8 9. But that
God is above all thoughts. Yet minds the least and least things.
To begin then at the beginning of all things, we are instructed by Scripture,
to think that GOD IS, and that he is the MOST HIGH, and therefore to have High
Thoughts of him as of the Holy One that inhabiteth Eternity; HE is higher then
the Highest, To whom there is none like, no equal, none to be compared, That
cuts off the Spirit of Princes, That is terrible to the Kings of the Earth,
That does whatsoever pleases him in Heaven and in Earth, in Seas and all deep
places; That gives no account of any of his matters: That is high above the
Earth, and exalted far above all Gods; High above the Nations, yea His Glory
above the Heavens; High above our Services, for our Goodness extends not to
him; High above our Praises, nay above Blessing and Praise (Men's or Angels,)
And therefore that we can never think high enough of God, but in Thinking that
he is too high for our Thoughts. Can thou by searching find out God? Can
thou find out the Almighty to perfection? It is high as Heaven, What can thou
do? Deeper then Hell, What can thou know; The measure thereof is longer then
the Earth, and broader then the Sea. And yet they think amiss that think Him,
as some do, too high to mind the lowest matters (non vacat exiguis.) Some think
it a disparagement to his Highness that He should mind and order every minute
action, motion, inconsiderable worm or sly, the stirring of the hand, or moving
of the foot, etc. but all these must be left without particular providential
concourse, and all in respect as they think) to his Highness: But Scripture
teaches us to think, that not only in him we live, but move, Acts 17.18. Psalm
36.6. Mat. 10.29. Psalm. 104 29.14.9. and 139.16. Mat 10 30. Psalm. 147.5.
as well as have our being; Nay that He preserves Man and Beast, that a
Sparrow does not fall without him, That he takes away their breath when they
die, gives them their Food while they live; Nay that not only our members
book'd by Him, but even our Hairs, the very hairs of our head numbered, and all
this no difficulty nor diminution to him whose understanding is infinite.

Sect. XVIII.
TO have Holy and Reverend Thoughts of Him, Right and Reverend Thoughts, Psalm.
111.9. Isa. 8.13. Gods eyes pure and piercing^ Hab. 1.13.
for HOLY and REVEREND is his Name, and therefore to Sanctify the Lord God in
our HEARTS, that he be our Fear, and that He be our dread, as He was the FEAR
of Isaac. To think Him a God of purer Eyes then to behold Evil, or that He can
look upon Iniquity, (viz) without loathing; And yet to think Him a God of such
piercing E^es, as that he beholds the Evil and the Good, Job 24.21, 22.
for his Eyes are upon the ways of Man, and He sees all his goings, there is
no darkness nor shadow of death where the workers of Iniquity may hide
themselves; Dan 10.6. Psalm. 139.12.
for his Eyes are as Flames, or Lamps of Fire, and unto him the night shines
as the day, Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight:
Heb. 4.13.
But all things are naked and open in his sight with whom We have to do.

Sect. XIX.
God unchangeable. James 1 17. Ordering all changes. Psalm. 106.20.
TO think him God UNCHANGEABLE, without Passion, Perturbation, Variableness, or
so much as shadow of turning, Though as a Vesture, he shall change both the
Foundations of the Earth, laid by himself of old, and the Heavens, the work of
his hands, and they shall be changed; and mean while orders all Changes under
the Heavens and in the Earth; He prevails against man for ever, Job 14.2.
Chap. 23.13.
and he cease; He changes his Countenance, and sends him away; But as for
Himself, He is of one mind, and who can turn him? Do Sinners provoke me to
anger? Jerem 7 9. Job 35 6.
says the Lord, Do they not provoke themselves, to the Confusion of their own
faces? so that If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy
Transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? though thy wickedness
may hurt a man as thou art, etc.

Yet seems as moved with sin. Psalm 1^6.32. and 43. Heb. 3.10. Isaiah 63.10. and
43.24. Amos 2.13. Ezekiel 6.9. S^^^ suffering Deuteronomy ^^ 36. Jer. 31.20 Isaiah ^2.9.
Yet withal to think him a God so holy, hating sin so infinitely, that He is
said to be angered, to be provoked, to be grieved, to be vexed, to be made to
serve, to be wearyed, to be burdened, nay even to be broken by it. I am broken
(says God,) with their whorish heart; yea, a God so gracious, as that He
repents himself for his Servants, His bowels are troubled for them, and in all
their Afflictions he is Afflicted with them.

Sect. XX. Only God, John 17.3. 2 Cor. 16.26. Gal. 4 8. Romans 16.27. 1 Timothy
6.15, 16. Levit. 16.4. Mat. 19.17. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Unity yet TRINITY. Psalm 2 7.
Heb. 1.5. John 1.14. Chap. 15.26. 1 John 5.7.

TO Think Him the ONLY true GOD, (and the Gods of the Heathen but vanity.
Idols, and by Nature no Gods,) The Only Wise God; The blessed and only
Potentate, who only has Immortality, who Alone is Holy, And there is none
good but HE, And therefore no GOD but HE; Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is
but ONE GOD.

That the Being is One, the Substance undivided, and yet the Subsistonce
distinguished; so that the Father is not the Son, but Begets him; The Son is
not the Father, but Begotten of him; The Holy Ghost is neither the Father nor
the Son, but proceeds from both, (The Spirit that proceeds from the Father,
whom I will send, says Christ) yet these three are God, and yet God is but
One, for these three are One, without Division, Composition, or Confusion. And
O how High, and Holy, High thoughts.
and Reverend ought the Thought to be that receives this Mystery? And therefore
to help his weak Thoughts in this, The Believer perhaps fixes his Thought on
the Sun in the Firmament, where he finds light, heat, Sun and Soul of man short
shadows of this Mystery.
and motion, yet but One Sun; or to come nearer both to the Thing and Himself,
He thinks perhaps of the Soul in his Body, where he finds an Understanding,
Will, and Memory, yet but One Soul. But alas, thinks he, these are short
shadows, and dark resemblances of so great and high a Mystery, for that light
is not the Sun, though it be Sun-light, etc. and that Understanding is not the
Soul, but the Souls understanding power or faculty; But Jesus Christ is the
LORD, and the holy Spirit is GOD, and yet to us there is but One God, and One
Lord. But this He thinks, 1 Cor. 8.6. All in God, GOD.
That All that is IN God (Eternally, Imminently, Unchangeably) must needs be
God, As verily He thinks that GOD IS. And that God the Father has a perfect
KNOWLEDGE of himself in himself, God know^ himself.
This also He cannot but Think; and that this Knowledge, WISDOM, Wisdom. Prove.
8.22, 23, 25. John 1.1. Word Ver. 30. Image of God. Hebr. 1.3. Loves Himself.
Fathers love to the Son declared by the Holy Ghost. Verse 16.
or WORD is God, because it is IN the Father, who is God; And further, that He
cannot but LOVE himself, whom He thus Knows, and sees in that express Image of
Himself, begotten in Himself; and this Image or begotten WORD being in God, and
therefore being God, cannot love God again; And this Infinite, Mutable liking,
Loving and good will Proceeding from Both, and being in Both, cannot but be,
what Both are, (viz.) GOD. Thus We see, when there was a visible manifestation
of the Divine complacency (with a loud voice from Heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.) The Word being now made Flesh, It was
made by the Descending of the Holy Ghost, like a Dove, from the Father, and
resting on the Son. But Alas, after all, thinks He of Himself, who is he that
hides Counsel without knowledge? Mystery exceeding thought. Yet is to be
thought, for God is able to do above thought. Ephesians. 3.26. Therefore is above
thought. Trinity one in working, yet each his peculiar work. John 5.17, 19, 20,
21. Phil. 1.19. compared with 4.19. God only properly E^c^^^^. Psalm. 106 48.
Therefore have I thought that I understood not, things too wonderful for me,
which I knew not. God has indeed told me that THESE THREE are ONE, And if I
cannot tell how to think it, yet I will think it; For seeing Scripture teaches
me to Think that he is able to Do exceeding abundantly above all that I can
think, well may I Think that He Is above All that I can Think; And therefore
though it be above my thought it is the fitter (seeing He says it) to be
thought of him that is so much above me. These three thus gloriously, but
mysteriously, coequally, coessentially, and coeternally One, must be thought
also to be One in Working as well as Being, and yet each one to have his own
peculiar work. Thus Gods supplying by Jesus Christ, is called the supply of the
Spirit.

Sect. XXI.
THis God We must think an ETERNAL Being, and nothing properly Eternal but God;
Created Spirits, Angels, and Souls of men (and the bodies of these raised
Spiritual bodies at the last day) being Only E^erlasting; But from Everlasting
to Everlasting thou are God; Art not thou from Everlasting, Psalm 90.2. Hab.
1.12. Isaiah 48.12.
O Lord my God? And as if God were making answer to this Question, says He,
Hearken O Jacob, and Israel my Called, I am he, I am the First, I also am the
Last, Chap. 44.6. Verse 8. Jerem. 2.32.
I am the First, I am the Last, and besides Me there is no God, (and after
says he,) Is there any? I know not any. There is no Eternal, no First and Last
but God only: Hebr. 7.3.
And therefore Our First Thoughts and Our Last Thoughts, yea and all our
Thoughts should be of him, and for him. Thoughts should be Lasting where the
Theme is Everlasting. But O burning shame that We should forget him days
without number, who has neither Beginning of Days, nor end of Life, but is
Eternal.

Sect. XXII.
THoughts also must be holy and Reverend of the Infinite Immensity, Gods
Immens^ omnipresence filling all things. Psalm 33.5.
as well as Eternity of this one true God, His OMNIPRESENCE filling all things,
Hell with his glorious Justice and Severity, Heaven with the glory of his
Grace, Earth with his Goodness, Patience, and Providence; If I ascend up into
heaven thou art there, Psalm. 139.8, 9.
If I make my Bed in hell behold thou art there; If I dwell in the utmost parts
of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me. Jer. 23.23, 24.
Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide
himself in secret places that I shall not see him? says the Lord, do I not
fill heaven and earth? says the Lord. And it is repeated so, that the Lord
says this, because vain men do so little think of this. Thus does he fill all
things, but is contained of none; Contained of none. 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
But will in very deed dwell with men on earth? behold heaven and the heaven of
heavens cannot contain thee. Alas! How, should it? Can a Man be contained in
his own span? My right hand has spanned the heavens, Isaiah 48.13.
says God. Alas, how little can Our very hearts hold, or Our Thoughts contain,
of this Great God! now the less we can comprehend, the more and the greater
should our Admiring Thoughts be.

Sect. XXIII.
God All-wise omniscient.
HE is also to be Holily and Reverently remembered in the Immensity of his
Wisdom and OMNISCIENCE as well Omni-presence, That He is All Wise, Knows Us. 1
John 3.20.
as well as Onely-Wise, that knows us, better then we know our own Hearts, who
is greater then our hearts, and KNOWS all things. He knows whereof we are made,
Our frame. Psalm. 103.14. Psalm. 139.16. Our Sins. Job 13 27. Chap. 14.16, 17.
his eyes did see our substance being yet imperfect, He books our members; He
knows wherein we have sinned, he looks narrowly to all our paths, and sets a
print upon the heels (or as the Hebrew, upon the Roots) of our feet; And as he
books our Members, so he bags ^our Sins; Thou numbrest my steps, do thou not
watch over my sin? my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up
mine Iniquity. But then he knows our Sorrows too as well as our Sins, Our
sorrows. Psalm. 56.8.
thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy Bottle. Thou see how I
have Sinned, observe how I mourn; and indeed he does so; I have heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself. Jer. 31.18.
I saw him sinning, and I hear him groaning. He that has a Book for our
Members, a Bag for our Sins, has a Bottle also for our tears. He knows our
Soul in Sin, and he has (says David) known my Soul in adversity; Psalm. 31.7.
Our need. Matthew. 6.8. Job 23.10. 2 Pet. 2.9. All Man. 1 Cor. 3.20. Isaiah 2.15.
So that he knows also whereof we have need. Our heavenly Father does so, even
before we ask, as he knows our sins before we confess. He knows the way that we
take, and he knows what way to take with us, He knows how to deliver, if we be
Righteous, And how to reserve the wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished.
He knows the Thoughts of the wise, the way that they take (yea though they dig
deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord,) and knows too how to take them in
that way that they take, 1 Cor. 3.19.
so that the Wisdom of the World is foolishness with God, as it is written, he
takes the wise in their own craftiness, Knows how to bring good out of sin.
Be they Men, or Devils. We must think him a God so holy, as that he would
never suffer Sin in the World, and so Pitiful and Gracious, that he would
never suffer sorrows and sufferings on his Saints, Sufferings.
but that he is a God so WISE that he knows how to bring Glory to himself, and
good to his Chosen, out of All, to break Leviathans heads, Psalm. 74.14.
and to make it Food for his People; As the Apothecary would never suffer so
many Poisons in his shop, but that he knows one way or other how to make them
to conduce to the honor of his Art, And good of his Patient; for known unto
God are all his works from the beginning of the World: Acts 15.18.
And his ways are higher then our ways, because his Thoughts are also higher
then our Thoughts, as the heavens are high above the earth; Isaiah 15.18.
Isaiah 55.9. Chap. 40.28. James 1.5. Job. 13.3. Psalm 2. Psalm 9.12. Psalm
16.11. Psalm 43.3.
So that there is no searching out of his understanding. And therefore think,
If any man want wisdom, he is to ask it of God; Would I know my Sins, Lord make
me to know my Transgression and my Sin! Would I know the measure of my days,
how frail I am, Lord make me to know my end, so teach me to number my days, as
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom; would I know thy Path of Life, Lord show
it me; In thy light I shall see light; O send out therefore, thy light and thy
truth, let them lead me, and bring me to thy holy ^^ll, O thou Father of
lights, James 1.5.
in whom there is no darkness at all.

Seeing therefore that we are to light our Fire at this SUN, this Parent of
Lights, 1 John 1.5. All wisdom to be fought of God, but only in means and
measure prescribed. 2 Timothy 3.15. Romans 12.3.
who affords us the Burning Glass of his Word for our help herein, We are to
think thus, surely, of his Wisdom, if we will think of it rightly, That as we
are to be thankful for the Means, so contented with the Measures of KNOWING
that he prescribes and allows, inasmuch as they are such as are able to make us
WISE to Salvation; for he has expressly cautioned us (...). Ne quis sapiat
supra quam oportet, etc. (for so Beza, uulg. etc. not to be wise above what we
ought, but to be wise unto sobriety.

I know indeed that there is in corrupted man a Natural desire to KNOW, Romans
1.25.
but it is to study the Creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for
ever; to pursue the Science of other things, whilst the EXCELLENCY of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3.8.
is neglected, All which Natural Knowledge should designedly be made
subservient to such a Spiritual end as the holy Psalmist pursues in his
ASTRONOMICAL Observations, Psalm. 8.3, 4.
When I consider (says he) THY heavens, the work of thy Fingers, the Moon and
Stars which thou have ordained, What is Man that thou art mindful of him? etc.
But when Solomon himself who knew more, 1 Kings 4.29. Eccles. 2.12.
in Naturals, then any mere Man, since Adam, casts up the total sum, he tells
you, that what he did arrive at by all this knowledge, was to know this, that
the increase thereof is the increase of sorrow, Chap. 1.18.
and most notorious it is that ever since, who so comes nearest to him in that
point of knowledge, Troublesomeness and uncertainty of natural lawful knowledge.
does so likewise in that part of experience. Alas how long have some of us
been learning, how ignorant we are? And how great is his Wisdom, that has
locked up from us, in the intricate labyrinths of vexatious uncertainty, the
knowledge of that which he finds so apt to draw us from him, who make so little
right use of so much that is clearly revealed, being sufficient in its kind to
draw us to him? We know where it is said, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
that secret things belong to God, but things that are revealed belong to us,
and to our Children; that it is not for US to KNOW the times and seasons that
the Father has put into his own power; Acts 1.7. 2 Pet 2.18.
But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
John 17.3. Sinfulness of affecting to know by familiar spirits. Wizards. Isaiah
8.19.
for this is life Eternal, etc.

But besides a natural and lawful (if duly moderated and ordered) Desire of
natural knowledge, there is a desire of knowing such things, and by such means,
as we are to think sinful and Satanical, being no way approved in the Word or
the Wisdom of God; such is theirs, who seek unto them that have familiar
spirits, and unto Wizards that peep, and that mutter (as it is expressed by the
Prophet Isaiah) or that use divination, Ezekiel. 21.21.
that consult with Teraphim, that look into the liver, (that is, the intrails
of Birds or Beasts, etc. as Ezekiel speaks) to direct actions, or foretell
future events thereby. Judicial Astrology. Isaiah 47.13.
So also we find a severe and black brand fastened by the Scripture upon
ASTROLOGERS, Star-gazers, and Monthly Prognosticators, and such as are drawn
by them from their sole Dependencies upon God; 1 Timothy 6.20.
for admit we forbear to say that here is Science falsely so called, as the
Apostle speaks, whose Principles and Conclusions are certainly uncertain, Its
uncertainty.
and delusory (for the Conjunctions and Aspects of the STARS being the same
when diverse Children are conceived or born in the same Place and instant of
Time, (as in some great and Populous Cities,) how come they to diverse and
contrary Fortunes, (to use their own phrase) some to live longer, others under
the same Stars to die sooner, some to live and die in Wealth, Honor, and
Prosperity; Others born in the same article of time, and under as auspitious
and benign a Planet, to a life of Misery, and a death of Shame; or to add,
that undeniable experience frequently confutes the most positive Predictions
from the most acurately erected Schemes, and of the most confident
Practitioners and Masters in these curious Arts; Admit, I say, Pernitiousness.
Curiosity of forbidden knowledge. Out first Ruin. Genesis 3.6.
that some gratification might indeed be expected to the curiosity and pride of
Knowing more then others, or then otherwise we could possibly arrive unto, say
the Tree were to be desired to make one WISE, yet methinks the Burnt Children
of EVE, should Dread that Fire that God will certainly make even of a Tree of
KNOWLEDGE if a Forbidden Tree; Verse 17.
and certainly were the BOOK of GOD admitted in its power into the hearts and
minds of Men, it would bring such BOOKS OF CURIOUS ARTS, Acts 19.19.
as the prevailing Gospel sometimes did, to be burned in the Fire, instead of
the Authors, and such as trust to them who are (except they repent) doomed to
the same Condemnation by the same Book of God, Isaiah 47.13, 14.
for of Astrologers, Star-gazers, and monthly Prognosticators, says God by
the Prophet, BEHOLD, they shall he as Stubble, the Fire shall burn them, etc.
read also Deuteronomy. 8. to 16.

Sect. XXIV.
Omnipotent. Job 42.2.
TO have High, Holy, and Reverend Thoughts of Gods OMNIPOTENCE as well as
Omnipresence, and Omniscience, He fills all things, and knows all things, and
says Job, ^ know, O Lord, that thou can do every thing, and that no thought
can be withheld from thee; or (as it is read in the Margin) no thought of
thine can be hindered; mine cannot be hid, thine cannot be hindered. Seeing now,
says God, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can
deliver out of mine hand, (and thinks the Believing Soul further, neither is
there any that can hinder thy hand from delivering. Isaiah 43.10, 11, 13.
) Ye are my Witnesses, I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no
Savior, Yea before the day was, I am be, and there is none that can deliver
out of my hand; I will work, and who shall let it? He, and He only has power
after the body is killed, to cast the Body and Soul into hell, therefore we
should fear him; Number. 14.17.
He also, He only speaks in Righteousness, mighty to save, and therefore we
should trust in him. Sin would hinder, the great guilt of Sin, but says Faith,
let the power of my Lord be great in pardoning sin; Sin would hinder, the
Dominion and prevailing power of sin; and O thinks the Soul, it is impossible I
should ever be rid of such strong Lusts, that my proud heart should be made
humble, my froward heart be made patient and meek, my filthy heart made clean,
my worldly heart made heavenly; but thinks Faith, what things are impossible
with Men, Mat. 12.26. Romans 6.14. Micah. 7.19. Jer. 32.14. Amo^ 5.12.
are possible with God, who has said that Sin shall not have Dominion over us,
and that He subdueth our Sins under us, who has great power, and a stretched
out Arm, and there is nothing too hard for him, no not an hard heart. In one
word, it thinks Sin Mighty, but God Almighty; Genesis 17.1.
Satan a Principality and a Power, but the God of Peace able to bruise Satan
under the weak feet of the Saints, Ephesians. 6.22. Romans 16.20. Revel. 13.3. And
17.6.
and to do it shortly; Antichrist Rampant, The Woman upon the scarlet Beast
Triumphant, especially when All the World is wondering after the Beast, yea the
Saints wondering, though with abhorrency; and yet even then He thinks that in
one hour he shall utterly fall, Revel. 18.8.
and be destroyed Everlastingly, because strong is the Lord GOD that judges
her. 1 Cor. 1.26.
He has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the Mighty, He calls
the things that are not, as though they were; can make a Worm to thrash the
Mountains, Isaiah 41.14. Mat. 15.39. Ezekiel. 37.3. Revel. 11.11. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Isaiah 38.16. 1 Cor. 1.25. 2 King 19.7. Psalm. 107.20. ^oh. 24 12. 1 Kin. 17.4,
6. 1 Cor 10.1, 4. 2 Pet. 2.16. 1 Cor. 1.21.
is able of stones to raise up Children to Abraham, to make dry bones live,
dead witnesses revive: yea for this cause usually suffers a sentence of Death,
and so will he recover and make alive: for as the foolishness of God is wiser
then men, so the weakness of God stronger then Men. He can do what he will do,
and by what means he will do, He can send a noise and trouble, and a word and
heal; Stars in their courses to fight against Sisera, and the dust of the Earth
to Plague Pharaoh; The Hornet to chase the Amorite, and Raven to feed the
Prophet; can dry up the Sea, and make a path for his people, and strike the
Rock into a River, and make it both slow for them, and follow after them; He
can reprove a Prophets madness by an Asses mouth; and by the foolishness of
Preaching convert a Sinner, and save a Soul; He can silence the Oracles,
Cessant Oracula Delphis. Psalm 8.2. Heb. 11.34. Isaiah 40.29.
by the crying of an Hebrew Child in a Manger; and out of the mouths of Babes
and Sucklings ordain strength to still the Enemy and Avenger; out of weakness
he makes strong, yea to them that have no might he renews strength; He makes
the little one like David, and David as the Angel of the Lord.

Then lift up thine eyes on high, O my Soul, Isaiah 40.26.
and behold who has created all these, that brings out their host by number,
He calls them all by their names, by the greatness of his might, Psalm
145.11.12.
for that he is strong in power not one fails. Speak thou also, O my Soul, of
the glory of his Kingdom, Psalm 29.1.
and talk thou of his Power, to make the Sons of Men to know his mighty Acts,
and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom. And Give unto the Lord ye mighty, give
unto the Lord Glory and strength, Be wise by the Worms that told him to his
face, Acts 12.23.
that he was but their Brother, and should instantly die like Man, whom the
shout of the people cried up for a God; and learn (O thou Man of Sin) who
opposest and exaltest thy self above all that it called God, 2 These. 2.3, 4.
or that is worshipped, so that thou sit in the Temple of God, showing thy
self that thou art God, Even learn in him that was once in the Chair, that
there needs but Gods hissing for a fly to stop thy mouth of Blasphemies.
Isaiah 7.18. Job 9.4.
Behold he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him what do
thou? He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; And if God will not withdraw
his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him. But alas, Who can utter the
mighty acts of the Lord? Verse 12.13. Psalm. 106.2.
who can show forth all his praise? Indeed Great i^ the Lord, and greatly to be
feared, but his greatness is unsearchable. Go on, O my Soul, to admire what
thou can not utter; and think this at least of what God is able to do, Psalm.
145.3. Ephesians. 3.2.
that he is able to do above what thou can think.

Sect. XXV.
God Invisible.
TO think also, but to think holily, and with awful Impressions upon our Hearts,
of this INVISIBLE Lord God, dwelling in light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16. No Image to be made of God. Deuteronomy. 1.12, 15. and 24.24.
whom no man has seen, nor can see; of whom they saw no similitude in Horeb;
Therefore says God, take good heed to your selves, least ye corrupt your
selves, and make you a graven Image, or the similitude of any figure, etc. for
the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire, even a jealous God. So that the making of
any shape of God, though men may pretend they do it to advance God in their
thoughts, Images no help in godly thoughts.
or to help them in their thoughts of God, whether it be by Hand or Heart, Work
or Thought, IMAGE or IMAGINATION, does nothing conduce to the making man
Zealous, but God jealous; nor to the stirring of the Fire of man's affection to
his Maker, but of Gods Indignation against his Creature; whom whilst vain man
presumes to measure by his vain mind, He denies him to be God, for he is not
God except he be greater then our hearts. And thus the old Romans changing the
glory of the incorruptible God into an Image are charged not to like to retain
God in their Knowledge; Romans 1.23.
A Text of Scripture that cuts off every Dagon by the very stumps; for whilst
this is pretended as the great use of Images, Banish Gods knowledge.
Pictures, Shapes and Figures, to help the ignorant, to keep God in their
minds, to be Laymens Books, to help Devotion, to heighten Holy Thoughts, The
Text says expressly, that as these come in, God goes out; Verse 21.
because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in
their IMAGINATIONS, their foolish heart was darkened, and that in this
particular, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools: Verse 22.
so the Idolatrous Israelites, make us Gods that may go before us, These be thy
Gods, O Israel; Say they to the Golden Calf, and Aaron built an Altar before
it, Exo. 32.1, 4, 5.
and made Proclamation, and said to morrow is a Feast to Jehovah. (A Ghostly
device to keep God in peoples minds,) those very Images that they made to be
HELPS in Worship, (for we see there was an Eye, Jehovah looked at through the
Idol.
through the Image to Jehovah) exclude God out of their knowledge, and Conclude
them to be such as liked not to retain God in It; And seeing this comes in as a
Charge upon Pagan Rome, Pagan Rome excluded from the knowledge of God by Images.
when they wanted the discoveries of this invisible God, and glorious Christ,
which they after received by this great Apostles Ministry, and other blessed
helps; for even before this, says God, you had better Books, then Pictures or
Images, to have read me by, for the invisible things of God from the Creation
of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
Verse 20.
even his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse* I say,
After that Faith is come, (which is the Evidence of things not seen (that
spiritual Eye that sees him that is invisible) for Rome called Christian, Heb.
11.1. Verse 27. 2 Cor. 4.4. Rome Papal censured. 1 Timothy 4.2.
having received the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is THE IMAGE
of God, to return to dumb Pictures, Images, Doctrines of Damons, etc. may give
us occasion sadly to think and say, How is the faithful City become an harlot!
Isaiah 1.21. Rev. 18.24. Psalm 57.7.
come out of her ye People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye
receive not of her Plagues; for says the Holy Ghost, Confounded be all they
that serve graven Images.

True Pictures of God, what Living Pictures.
But may a man Think, if I love my Friend, I love his Picture, yea and love to
have his Picture; And shall I love the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
may I not have and love their Pictures? Yea, God forbid else; But then can
thou Think, if thou Think Rightly, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Grace.
Rationally, and Scripturally, that the Living God will have any other but
living Pictures? Grace in the heart is a true not a lying, because not a dead,
but a living Picture of the Living and true God, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Christ. Heb. 1.3.
have that and keep it: Jesus Christ himself is an express or a lively (because
he is a living) Image of the Father, have him, and hold him, and much good may
it do your very Heart with him: The Saints, Saints. Psalm 16.3. 1 Cor. 15.44,
50. 1 Cor. 14.25.
the Excellent Ones in the Earth, these also are Gods own Pictures, They bear
the image of the heavenly; love them, and like them, and admire God in them
(for of these it may be said, God is in you of a truth,) make much of them, and
learn as much as you can by them, for these are good Books indeed, as well as
Living Pictures, being but transcripts of Gods Book, 2 Cor. 3.2.
Living E^^stles, as well as living Pictures, known and read of all men. But
alas, These true Pictures of the living and true God are as much befriended by
the curious Pictures, that blind Devotion and Superstition have drawn for God
in all Ages, as man's Native Fire is by the Fever, or the Natural heat of the
Stomach by the praeternatural.

But may not Pictures be made of the Trinity, Whether Images of God may be made
for History or Ornament. Bp. ^aylors D^^svasive from Popery, Chap. 1. Sect.
8.9. See page 58. The Historical use of Images, did quickly pass into
Superstition.
The Father, The Holy Ghost, and of Christ, especially (seeing he took Flesh,
and was seen in humane shape) for ORNAMENT, and help in the History, and such
like ends, though not for Worship? What says the Doctrine of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND?

They be convict of foolishness and wickedness in making Images of God or the
Trinity; Homily against the peril of Idolatry, 3d. part, page 41. Edict. Land.
1640. Condemns all Pictures of God, Trinity, etc. Refutes the great argument of
descriptions in the Old Testament.
yea and once to desire an Image of God comes of Infidelity, thinking not God
to be present, except they might see some sign or Image of him, as appears by
the Hebrews in the Wilderness, willing Aaron to make them gods whom they might
see go before them, etc.

Thus it goes on,

Where they obje^^, that seeing in Esaias and Daniel be certain descriptions of
God, as sitting on an High seat, etc. Why may not a Painter likewise, etc.
seeing that Scripture, or writing, and Picture differ but a little? First, It
is to be answered, that things forbidden of Gods word, as Painting of Images of
God, and things permitted of God, as such descriptions used of the Prophets, be
not all one; neither ought, nor can, man's reason (Although it show never so
goodly) prevail any thing against Gods express Word and Statute Law.
Furthermore the Scripture, although it have certain descriptions of God, yet if
thou read on forth, it expounds it self, declaring that God is a Spirit,
Infinite, who replenisheth Heaven and Earth, which the Picture does not, nor
expounds it self, but rather, En langer the bringing in the Heresy of the
Anthropomorphites.
when it has set forth God in a bodily similitude, leaves a man there, and
will easily bring a man into the Heresy of the Authropomorphites, thinking God
to have hands and feet, and to sit as a man does, which they that do (says S.
Augustine in his Book de side and Symbolo, cap. 7.) fall into that Sacrilege,
Sacrilegious wickedness.
which the Apostle testeth in those who have changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corruptible Man. For it is
wickedness for a Christian to ere^^ such a one in his heart by believing it.
But to this they reply, that this reason notwithstanding, Images of Christ may
be made, Argument from Christ taking flesh refuted. Hom. against peril of
Idolatry 3. part. Images of Christ, lying Images.
for that he took upon him Flesh and became man. etc. The answer is easy. For
in Gods Word, and Religion; it is not only required whether a thing may be done
or no, but whether it be lawful and agreeable to Gods word to be done, etc. and
yet it appears no Image of Christ can be made, but a lying Image (as the
Scripture peculiarly calls Images lies) for Christ is God and Man, seeing
therefore for the Godhead, which is the most excellent, no Image can be made,
It is falsely called the Image of Christ; wherefore Images of Christ be not
only defects, but also lies, etc. wherefore as soon as an Image of Christ is
made, by and by is a lie made of him, etc. and now if it should be admitted and
granted that an Image of Christ could truly be made, Unlawful.
yet it is unlawful that it should be made.

unavoidable danger of Idolatry. page 43. Greek the Soul. Page 44.
And so it proceeds to urge the unavoidable danger of Idolatry, and the Judgment
of Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Lan^tantius, Augustine, affirming that they make the
Soul more crooked, rather then teach it, And therefore it adds, that as it is
written, Sap. 14. that Images were not from the beginning, neither shall they
continue to the end: so were they not in the beginning of the Primitive Church,
God grant (says the Homily) they may in the end be destroyed. Page 45. Hinder
conversion of Jews and Turks.
And farther, that, Truth it is, that Jews and Turks, who abhor Images and
Idols, as directly forbidden by Gods word, will never come to the truth of our
Religion, whilst the stumbling blocks of Images remain amongst us and lie in
their way: Thus the Homily. So then as Pictures in windows, ^o darken the
light with a fine show, so such representations of Divine things in the wisdom
of humane Imagination does hinder, Instead of helping, our sight of God and
Christ; who in this (as in other respects) is called the SUN of Righteousness,
Mal 4.2. God and Christ only to be seen in their own light. 1 Cor. 2.11. Chap.
1.21.
because as that glorious luminary is only to be seen in its own light, so will
God and Christ manifest themselves only in that way of discovery, which
themselves have sanctified through the Holy Ghost. So that while the World by
wisdom knows not God, In Gods own light the Saints of God do see light. And O
that God would help the blinded world to see the difference between fancy and
faith, Psalm 36.9. Difference between Faith and Fancy. 1 Cor. 2.14.
the Ones being affected in a carnal manner, and by carnal means, and the
others being acted upon that which is only spiritually discerned, by spiritual
means, and in a spiritual manner: So that whilst one man being gross in his
Imagination, and made the more so by his Images, embraces a Crucifix for a
Christ, a piece of Wood, Stone, Metal, or painted Cloth, and printed Paper for
God, like him in the Fable, embracing the Cloud for the Goddess: Math. 5.3.
Another being pure in heart is blessed with a true sight of God, so far as
Faith can reach, and the present state bear: for no Man has seen God at any
time; the only begotten Son, John 1.18.
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him; and this of him,
that not the carnal mind, 1 Cor. 2.18.
or by carnal means, not the gross hearted, but the pure hearted, the
sublimated soul, the spiritualized mind, such and such only have the blessed
sight of God here and hereafter. Therefore let us not think of bringing God
down to us, shaping his invisible and incomprehensible Excellencies by our
foolish fantasies and vain thoughts, but rather by Faith let us say with
David, unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul. Psalm 25.6.


Sect. XXVI.
TO think also, but with all awfulness, God terrible. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
of the Lord our God as God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a Mighty
and terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes Rewards, Heb. 12.29. Mal.
1.14. Psalm 65.18.
for even our God is a consuming Fire, whose Name is DREADFUL among the very
Heathen; who makes even the ends, or uttermost parts of the Earth afraid at
his Tokens; who is terrible to the Kings thereof; Psalm. 76.12. Job 4 18. Job
15.15. Isaiah 6.2.
who puts no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charge with folly;
who puts no trust in his Saints, yea the Heavens are not clean in his sight,
Before whom the holy Seraphims do cover both their feet and their faces, (as
coverings of old were used in token of Reverence and Subjection. Genesis 24.65.
) They cover their feet, in token perhaps of their utter unworthiness to be
looked upon by him, to whom it is a kind of bumbling to behold even the things
that are in Heaven; Psalm 113.6.
and their faces as unable to look upon him; as the Stars in a morning do carry
their Lights, Angels stand in aw of God. Job 38 7.
as it were in dark Lanthornes, upon the Suns appearing, So also do these
Morning Stars (as Scripture styles them) though of excellent glory themselves,
and such as is terrifying to the Children of Men, Though terrible to men.
to the best, as to Zechariah, to the worst and most obdurate, as the Keepers
of the Watch upon the Sepulcher, who for fear of one Angel did shake and became
as dead men; Luke 1.11, 12. Mat 28.3, 4. Heb. 1.7. Isaiah 37.36.
And now no wonder, for he makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
flaming Fire. So that one of them is able to turn 185000 armed Men to ashes in
a night. And yet as the very beams of the far distant Sun in the Firmament do
baffle, as it were, and nonplus the Fire that flames on your hearths, (which,
Oh how frightful is it to you, when it steals but a little out of its place,
and begins to reach the bones of your buildings, and ride triumphantly on the
tops of your houses?) so, and infinitely more then so, does the Dreadful
Majesty of GOD apale the Excellency of all Angelical glory. Job 15.15. Chap.
26.11.
And if the Heavens (that were never stained) thinks the serious Soul, be not
clean in his sight, but the pillars thereof tremble, and are astonished at his
reproof; If the Angels that never sinned are so afraid, De^^ls afraid of God.
How terrible is his presence to that wicked one that is such a terror to poor
miserable mankind that some Nations worship Him (as it is said of the Indians)
that he may do them no harm, whose very Apparition (though in a visible shape)
is so confounding to poor Man, that he becomes like Saul before the Witch of
Endor, or like Eliphaz, 1 Samuel 28.20
when fear and trembling came upon him, which made all his bones to shake, a
Spirit passed before his face, Job 4.14, 15.
and the hair of his flesh stood up. It is not needful to present purpose to
determine what sorts of Spirits those were. This is certain, that who shall not
fear thee, O Lord? Rev. 15 3, 5. (...).
is an Ode, as Scripture calls it; and as true, that as Saints and Angels do
fear before him, so the Devils also believe and tremble. And therefore when the
Soul thinks O I dare not pray, for the Devil tells me, James 1.19. Job 15.4.
Job 33.7.
that if I go alone, or retire my self to pray, he will appear to me, and
affright me; It thinks again, O I dare less restrain Prayer from the Almighty,
for then his Terribleness will make me afraid: And if his slave be so
terrible, how dreadful is he that has him in his chain? who can restrain him
if I go, God terrible to his Saints. Job 31.23. Cap. 23.15, 16.
and will sooner or later let him loose upon me for not going. Destruction from
God was a terror unto me (says Holy Job) and by reason of his Highness, I
could not endure; Therefore I am troubled at his presence, when I consider, I
am afraid of him, for God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me;
When I CONSIDER, etc. Oh what high and awful Thoughts had this Holy Person of
God! And indeed who would not fear thee, Jerem. 10, 7.
O thou King of Nations? For to thee does it appertain: as the Prophet speaks.
Would thou then be made soft, O mine heart, as Job's was under the awful
impressions of the most High? Would thou serve the Lord with fear, Psalm
2.11.
and converse before him with trembling? Go but to his Waterworks, or
Fireworks, for many hard things are made sof^ by Fire and Water; And think of
them a little seriously. ASK of them of Old times, God terrible in his
Waterworks. Genesis 7.1. Psalm 107.23, 25, 26.
when the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up, and the Flood Gates of
Heaven opened in the same day, and let them tell thee if God be not terrible.
Or if that be too far off, let them that go down into the Seas in Ships, that
do business in the great Waters, declare unto thee, when he commands, and
raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves thereof, they mount up to
the Heaven, they go down again to the depths, their Soul is melted because of
trouble, Verse 27. Fireworks. Genesis 19.24, 26.
they reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits
ends. Or let Sodom say if God be not terrible, and that Pillar of Salt that was
set like an Hand in the Margin of that Dreadful Text, Ask also of the trembling
Israelites, who saw the Mountain that burned with Fire; Deuteronomy. 10.16, 18. Heb.
12.21.
and so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.
Spo^t thy self on the top of flaming AETNA, or lay thy hand upon the hole of
raging Vesuvius: Bath thy self in the melted Minerals that flow in the bowels
of the cold Earth; Cool thy skin with Cantharides, or with the cold leaves of
that Plant in which one may feel so much of him that calls himself a Consuming
Fire, that a touch thereof does blister the skin, and burn the flesh: Harden
also the Eyesight against the lightening, and strengthen thine ears against
the voice of Gods Thunder. Thunder. Psalm 29.3.
Ask the Heathen, why he ran under his Bed, and that his Imperial Crown was not
thought by him a sufficient security to his Head. Ask Lebanon what it ails to
skip like a Calf, Verse 6.8, 9.
and Syrion like a young Unicorn? The Wilderness of Kadesh why it shakes, and
the Hinds why they cast their Calves before their time? or why men more wild
then the Wilderness, and Brutish then the Beasts, do tremble when the God of
glory Thundreth; especially when he makes his Fireworks and Waterworks meet
in One, when the Lord is upon many waters, Psalm. 29.3, 7.
that is, the Ocean, And there the voice of the Lord divides the flames of
Fire, that is, the Lightenings; Lightenings.
which Seafaring men find to be most terrible in Nocturnal Tempests. Nay ask
Men why they tremble without Thunderings, at the still voice of a poor despised
Man? Felix. Acts 24 25. Belstazzar. Da^^el 5.6.
Nay a Faelix, on the Bench; before a Prisoner at the Bar? Nay a Bold
Bels^azzar without any noise or whisper to affright him in the midst of
Merriment, and Godless security, and that upon the first appearing (not of an
Hand with a sword in it but the Fingers of a Man's Hand silently inscribing a
few words on the wall? Pashur. Jerem. 20.3. Spira.
Nay why so many are Magor Missabibs, fear round about, without voice or
vision, save what is within? Ask poor Spira what he ailed, and why he refused
to be comforted? And the many of the present Age that have been hung up in
Chains of the Spirit of Bondage, and made terrors to themselves, and
spectacles to all about them, Verse 4. Others under the Spirit of bondage. See
also M^ Brewers S^ on Mr. (...) Hevenin^
As one Dales Wife of Chelmesford in Essex, that lived many years in perpetual
horror to her self, and those that saw her; and one Maud, a man that (through
terrors of Conscience) starved himself to death, being otherwise prevented in
destroying himself by Hanging and Drowning which he attempted, and in accusing
himself that he might have been dispatched out of the way by the hand of public
Justice, for an old Murder which he pretended, but intended it as a plot upon
his own Life, which not taking, he never would admit any sustenance down his
throat (though forced into his mouth) till utterly famished; both recent
instances and within little more then twenty Miles each of other, and of both
which I have been an eyewitness; and other like might be added.

And now ask such as these, if it be not a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God. Heb. 10.31. Terrible in praises. Exodus 15.11. Goodness.
Hosea 3.5. Forgiveness. Psalm. 130.4. Spared not Angels. 2 Cor. 2.4. Old World.
Verse 5. Sodom. Ver. 6. Natural branches. Romans 11.21. His own Son.
He indeed is fearful in his very Praises, and his Goodness to be feared: His
Grace by no means to be turned into wantonness, but the forgiveness that is
with him is that he may be feared, He that spared not the Angels that sinned,
but cast them down into hell, that spared not the old World, bringing in the
Flood upon the World of the ungodly, and turning the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha into Ashes, condemning them with an overthrow, making them an Example
unto those that should live ungodly; that spared not the Natural Branches, O
take heed least he also spare not thee. If by terrible things in Righteousness,
God will answer them to whom be is a God of Salvation; Surely his Justice will
be very terrible to the Sons of Perdition; If God spared no his own Son, but it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isaiah 53.10. Rejoicing in the destruction of
the wicked. Isaiah 1.24. Deuteronomy. 38.63. Jer. 1.26, 27.
and to put him to grief who knew no sin, but had sin only imputed to him; O
how terrible, thinks the Soul, is God when he cries out, Ah I will case me of
mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mi^^ Enemies; I will rejoice over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to naught; I will laugh at your Calamity, and
mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you:
Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, Ezekiel. 5.13.
and I will be comforted. And oh how awful a thought it is that it should be
both casing and pleasing to God to destroy sinners? (...). 1.3.
That the God of all comforts, as Scripture calls him, should be Comforted in
the Perdition of ungodly Men; and laugh at their fear, (...) 6.14.
who forsake the fear of the Almighty? And Oh how fearful is He in his
punishments, who is so in his praises? How terrible in his Righteousness, who
is to be feared for his Goodness? 1 Pet. 1.17.
If they that Call on the Father must pass their time in fear, because without
respect of persons, Isaiah 33.14.
he judges every one according to his works, O how may the Sinners in Zion be
afraid, what fearfulness may surprise the Hypocrites? If they be unable to
Contend with his burning Agues, God terrible in present punishment. Jerem.
12.5. Isaiah 30.33. Chap. 66.^4. Nahum 1.2.
Plagues and Fevers, How will they dwell with Everlasting burnings? Oh what
will they do in the swellings of Jordan? when the breath o^ the Lord as a River
of Brimstone shall kindle upon them those Eternal flames that none shall be
able to quench? for the Lord is jealous and Revengeth: The Lord Revengeth and
is furious; The Lord will take vengeance on his Adversaries, and he Reserveth
wrath for his Enemies. Reserves of wrath terrible.
O those RESERVES of Wrath, how dreadful are they? That, when Millions of Ages
are expired, they remain unexhausted; There is still a certain fearful
expectation, and looking for, of Judgment and fiery Indignation still, Heb.
10.27. Psalm 90.11. God corrects whom he loves.
still. Ah Lord! who knows the power of thine Anger? according to thy fear so
is thy wrath. Thou Correctest whom thou love, what will thou do wi^h them
thou hate? If Judgment must begin at the House of God, what, Heb. 12.6. 1
Peter 17.18. What then shall be the end of the wicked. Zech. 13.7. Heb. 5.8.
Luke 23.31.
O what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? and If the
Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? thou
gatherest a Rod for every Son thou receivest, nay the Holy Child Jesus was not
excepted, nor exempted, who though he were a Son, thine Equal, a Man thy
fellow, yet did thy Sword awake against him, and He learnt obedience by the
things that he suffered. And if these things were done in the Green Tree, O
what shall become of the Dry? What Scorpions are prepared to be scourges for
the wicked? Psalm 9.13.
surely God has prepared for him the instruments of death, and ordained his
Arrows against the Persecutors, Upon the Wicked he shall Rain snares, Fire and
Brimstone, Psalm 11.6.
and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. Psalm. 119.^^
Wherefore, O God, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
for all the ways of the Lord are Judgment, a God of Truth, and without
iniquity, Just and Right is he; with him is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22, 23,
24. Prove. 23.14. Neh. 5.15.
He is excellent in Power, and in Judgment, Men do therefore fear him, and well
they may. Be thou therefore in the fear of the Lord, O my Soul, all the day
long; and however others may dare to presume upon him, yet so do not thou,
because of the fear of the Lord.

Sect. XXVII.
THe Lord thou hear, O my Soul! God of truth.
is a God of TRUTH is as well as Righteousness, Isaiah 66.5.
O Tremble at his word as well as works, and be thou afraid of the Judgments
of his mouth as well as of his hands, For the Lord confirms the word of his
Servants, Isaiah 64.26. Math. 5.28.
and performs the Counsels of his Messengers, neither is there any Iota of
his Threatenings any more then of his Promises, that shall pass away until all
be fulfilled; for the strength of Israel will not he nor Repent, 1 Samuel 15.29.
Isaiah 11.5.
for he is not as Man that he should Repent. The truth is, Gods TRUTH is as the
Girdle of his Loins. What ever God is, He is in TRUTH. As God is TRUE, In all
He is. 1 Timothy 1.18. Jerem. 10.10.
says the Apostle, Our word toward you was not yea and nay, The Lord is the
true God, says Jeremiah, the God of TRUTH (says the Margin with the Hebrew)
at his Wrath shall the Earth tremble, etc. Whatever God says, In all he says.
Psalm. 119.160.
He says in Truth, Thy Word is true (says David) from the beginning, and
every one of thy Righteous Judgments endures for ever. Psalm 19.9. Revel.
19.9. In all he does. Psalm 33.4. Psalm. 111.7, 8. Psalm. 80.7, 8.
The Judgments of the Lord are truth (says the Hebrew) These are the true
sayings of God. Whatever God does, He does it in Truth, All his works are done
in Truth, The works of his hands are verity and Judgment, they stand fast for
ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness. Therefore God is greatly
to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all
them that are about him, It follows, O Lord God of Hosts, who is like unto
thee, or to thy FAITHFULNESS round about thee? So that as the Girdle goes round
about All, and encompasseth and encloseth All, so Gods Truth and Faithfulness
does surround all the rest of his Excellencies, and therefore if our Thoughts
of God be Right, We shall have most awful and Reverend Impressions on our
Hearts, not only from the SEVERITY but from the VERITY of God, not only from
his Justice and Righteousness, but also from his TRUTH and Faithfulness.

Sect. XXVIII.
Thoughts of God must be Right. Psalm 2.11.
BUt then again, if our THOUGHTS of GOD be Right and Scriptural, they must be
CHEERFUL as well as FEARFUL, There must be a Rejoicing with our Trembling;
Divine Thoughts must be awful but delightful, as a Son thinks of his Father,
not as a Slave thinks of his Taskmaster, Cheerful as well as fearful.
or a Condemned Prisoner of his Executioner; for God is LOVE: and how can LOVE
be Rightly thought of, unless it be thought LOVELY? 1 John 4.8.16. Romans 5.5.
or how can this precious box or rich perfume the love of God be shed abroad in
the heart, and the thoughts thereof not be sweet-sented? and indeed the sweeter
(as perfumes are) for being held to the Fire of holy Fear; Our fear not a fear
of torment. 1 John 4.18.
There is a Fear that has TORMENT, which Love labors to cast out; but again
there is a Fear that gives temper to true LOVE of God, and strips it self of
its All, as it were, to the service of it (as Jonathan did by David) even to
its Sword, and to its Girdle, and to its Bow. 1 Samuel 18.4.
Our God is a CONSUMING FIRE, Here is Trembling, Heb. 12.29.
and good cause why; but this God is OUR GOD (as the Psalmist speaks) for ever
and ever, Psalm. 48.14.
He will be OUR GUIDE even unto death, here is rejoicing with our trembling.
And O how amiable is this Chequer-work of Man's thoughts in the sight of God?
surely things are not as they should be with us, when we Remember God and are
troubled: what? Psalm 77.3.
Harbor hard thoughts of the Father of Mercies? Think evil of the Fountain of
all Goodness? 2 Cor. 1.3. Good thoughts of God. Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.
ah wherein has God deserved this at man's hands? Is it because he swears as he
lives that he has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, But that the
wicked turn from his way and live, that is, but rather that sinners should
Repent and live? Is it because he cries out to you, turn ye, Chap. 33.11.
turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die? or because he cries out of
you, John 5.40.
ye will not come to me that ye might have life? or because he cries out over
you, how shall I give up? how shall I make thee as Admah, Hosea 11.8. Chap.
6.4. Psalm. 81.13. Isaiah 48.18. Luke 19.42.
and set thee as Ze^^im? O sinners what shall I do unto you? or because he
cries out for you, when it is too late, O that ye had harkened unto my voice,
that thou had known at least in this thy day the things that belong unto thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes? Wretched Miscreant! Will thou go
on to hate Wisdom, and to love Death, Prove. 8.35.
as indeed thou do, and then think that God is an Enemy to Mankind; and takes
delight in making Creatures merely to destroy them? O spit out thy Gall and
Venom, and clear thy Thoughts of prejudice against thy faithful Creator, and
most merciful Preserver, and account his long-suffering to be Salvation; that
he, 2 Pet. 3.15.
that reprieves thee, would pardon thee, did thou sue for his pardon, as thou
would beg for thy Life; for he is so Gracious that he waits that he may be
gracious, Isaiah 30.18. Hosea 12.6. Gods thoughts not to be measured by ours.
Prove. 12.10.
Therefore turn thou to thy God, and wait on thy God continually. And think not
to measure his pardoning Mercies by thine which are cruelties, nor by thy
frowardness and passions, nor by thy hard Thoughts and evil surmises, as if God
was altogether such a one as thy self, till thou can measure the space
betwixt the Heavens and the Earth (for so high are his thoughts above thy
thoughts) or till thou can find in thy heart to follow thine Enemy, Isa.
55.7, 8, 9.
moment by moment, all the days of his life with thine unwearied care for his
safety, and providence for his supply, and by that time that thou have done for
thine Enemy as God has taught thee by what he has done for thee, Gods
challenge to Man.
it is like that thou will have better thoughts of thy God; or if thou have not,
come and testify against him, If thou dare, or if thou can; for it is a
challenge of Gods own making, Micah 6.3.
O my people, what have I done to thee? testify against me; and I (as his
Herald) proclaim this his challenge to thee.

But if thou keep silence, let me speak, and tell thee plainly what he has
done unto thee. He made thee a Man, that might have made thee a Brute, and gave
thee a Soul endued with Reason, Jer. 38.16. Psalm 139.14.15.
Improveable by Grace, and so capable of Salvation. He gave thee thy shape,
that might have made thee a Monster, and made thee desirable to others, who
might have made thee a burden to thy self, The Hand of his Providence took
thee out of thy Mothers womb, and has ever since suffered thee to hang upon
it, though thou, Psalm 22.9.
like a Viper, have fastened thy teeth so deep in it that thy venomous biting
has often gone, as it were, to his very heart, and he, with more ease, might
have shaken thee off into the Fire of his wrath. Acts 28.5. Psalm 71.6.
He kept thee from ten thousand Deaths and Dangers in thy fearless Infancy,
careless Childhood, hardy and adventrous youth, and troublesome Manhood to the
very moment that thou art reading this. He made thy Bed in thy last sickness,
Psalm 41.3. Psalm. 36.6. Psalm 107.30.
bare thee up in his everlasting Arms the last time that thou fellest from thy
Horse, and saved both man and beast, brought thee safe to shore the last time
that thou gave thy self for lost at Sea. He gave thee thy Possessions, Thy
Promotions, Thy comfortable Relations, thy loving Wife, thy lovely Children,
thy health, strength, limbs, liberty, credit, Comforts of all sorts; even every
good gift; James 1.17. 2 Samuel 12.8.
And if these had been too little, as was said to David, he would have given
thee more and greater things then these, had thou not been wanting to thy
self. Mat. 23.37.
How often would he have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her Chickens under
her wings? How often would he have convinced, converted, humbled thee, healed
thee, given thee his Son, and given thee his Spirit; And now judge, I pray
thee, between God and thy own Soul, Isaiah 5.3.
what could he have done for thee more then that which he has done? Thou
need a Christ, and all the day long, Isaiah 65.2.
he stretches out his hand to tender his Christ unto thee; and why did he give
thee thy Reason, but to lead thee to close with his goodness, for thy good?

But besides, the Lord is GREAT as well as GOOD, God great as well as good.
Mat. 21.34, 37.
else he were not GOD; And has done more then he owes thee in spreading a
Table, without compelling thy appetite, that is more then thou expectest from
thy best friend thou have, that is but thine equal. 2 Pet. 3.19. Matthew. 22.4.
He has sent forth his Servants, and with them his Son, and in them his
Spirit, And all these say to thee, come, All things are ready, O taste then,
Psalm 34.8.
and see how GOOD the LORD is. Away then for shame with all thy sour and harsh
thoughts of God, Genesis 3.4, 5.
and purge out thy old Leaven whereby the old Serpent first soured the whole
lump of mankind with a hard opinion of God, as if he were not enough inclined
to man's good. Right thoughts of God must be sweet thoughts.
Our thoughts of God, if they be Right thoughts, must be SWEET Thoughts as
David's were; Bones of marrow, and not bags of gall; our Souls must be satisfied
with them (as his was) as with marrow and with fatness. Yea even for them that
were never yet brought into his Psalm. 104.34.
banqueting house (to taste of those dainties, Psalm. 65.5, 6. Cantic. 2.4. Psalm.
106.5. Revel. 2.17. God good to all. Psalm. 83.3. Romans 2.4. Acts 14.17.
which Scriptures call the good of his chosen, that hidden Manna, the meat and
drink which the World knows not of, the sweet repast of the hidden ones) there
is a Goodness, yea Riches of goodness to be thought of by them, and not to be
despised, but Improved by affectionate meditation till it lead them to
Repentance. For he leaves not himself without witness, even as to these, in
that he does good, and gives them Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness; And if he leave not himself
without witness, take heed he leave not thee without excuse. Think with thy
self therefore a little seriously O man, of this Riches both of the goodness,
and long-suffering, and forbearance of God. Sparing mercies an evidence
thereof. Prove. 12.10.
Have thou not found that there are sparing Mercies, and can thou not think
that there are pardoning mercies with the Lord? He that has laid it upon thee
to Regard the life of thy Beast, and has himself had so continual a regard to
the life of thy body, (which indeed is as thy Beast or brutish part) but
styles himself the Father of our Spirits, Heb. 12.9.
whilst he calls others the Fathers of our Flesh, can thou find in thy heart
to think that he has no regard for the life of thy Soul? Jer. 2.31.
Has God indeed been a Barren Wilderness to thee, that has given thee so many
fruitful seasons? or has he been only so to thy Soul? surely what ever he is
to other Nations, he has not been so to us: means of Grace have not been
wanting to thee, So the means of Grace.
not would his Grace have been wanting to thee in the humble and diligent use
of those means: Thou have not been straightened in the Lord surely, 2 Cor. 6.12.
whatever thou have been in thy own bowels. Has He been a Land of darkness to
thee, who has caused his Sun to arise upon thee, Matthew. 5.44.
though thou art Evil? Or has he been only so to thy Soul? Have thou not also
heard of a Sun of Righteousness that he makes to arise with healing in his
wings upon those that believe in him that justifies the ungodly? Mal. 2.4.
Romans 4.9.
And if all other thy ungodliness be no bar, O why should thy unbelief or hard
thoughts of this good God be so.

But some one may think, Micah 3.6
is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? nay does he not
own it? where is then the Goodness you spoke of? Out of the mouth of the most
high proceeds not evil and good? is not He said to frame Evil? to devise
evil, God the Author or evil. Lam. 3.38. Jerem. 18.11. Micah 2.3. Isaiah 45.7.
Answer. Joh 37.23. Lam. 2.33. God good in correcting. Micah 6.8. Chap. 7.18.
Isaiah 28.21. Mal. 1.8. Romans 9.20. And punishing. Punishment of the wicked good
to the good.
to create Evil? And can this consist with so great Goodness? But think again,
O Man, that the Scripture says, the Almighty will not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of Men. As a good Parent does not correct willingly, yet he
were not a good Parent, should he not correct. He has showed thee, O man, what
is good, to do Justice, and to love Mercy; And cannot God be good, though he do
Justice, whilst he love Mercy? for Mercy pleases him, or he delights in
Mercy, but Judgment he calls his strange work. But go thou and first offer
this to thy Governor, before thou presumest to reply against God, and tell thy
Prince, if thou dare, that His Government is not good, because He has
Bethlehems for Mad-Folks, and Houses of Correction for Rogues and Vagabonds,
and places of Execution, and instruments of Death for Traitors and Capital
Malefactors. But how should the Government be good to the Good, if it should
not restrain and punish the Evil? Nay surely the Lords goodness is never more
orient in the eyes of his people, then when he takes vengeance (not only of
their Enemies but) of their inventions, and yet pardons their sins, So of their
own sins. Psalm. 991.18.
and saves their Souls. And oh how shall he come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. Verse 8.
Even when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and obey
not his Gospel? So that the Goodness of God is never the less conspicuous, but
indeed so much the more glorious, being beheld (as the Apostle speaks) together
with his Severity, Rom 11.22. Goodness of God no less conspicuous for his
severity.
as bright colors are the most resplendent when they are heightened from the
darkest shadows: Behold, says He, the GOODNESS and the SEVERITY of God. Lo
here a Right Theme for Thoughts. Behold his Goodness, but Remember his
Severity; Think of his Severity, but forget not his Goodness; That the Thought
of Severity without Goodness, may not make thee desperate, nor of Goodness
without Severity make thee Malepart and wanton, but that both together may make
thee humble and hearty, and dutiful and diligent, fearful and yet cheerful in
all ways of Holiness and new Obedience.

If God be so good, why did he not make all men's condition such? Jerem. 2.5.
Answer. God did so. Eccles. 7.31. Romans 7.12. Genesis 2.16. Verse 17. Psalm 8.6.
But may thou think again, if the Lord be so good, He might have made all
Men's condition to be such? It Is true indeed, He might do so, and He did so, And
I may challenge thee yet again in His Name, what Iniquity did thy first Father
(and all his Posterity in him) find in God, that he went far from him (and they
with him) and walked after vanity, and became vain? Did not God make man
upright, and give Him a right Law, a Commandment that was Holy, Just and Good?
was it not Just, that He that gave man all the rest of the Trees of the Garden
should keep One to himself, and that, He that put all things under man's feet,
should appoint him a test for his obedience to His Supreme Lord? And was it not
good, Gods goodness in the first COVENANT.
that He gave Him a Law that He might keep, and a Principle and Power that
might keep it, if he would; that He forbad Him, and forewarned Him what would
hurt Him; and promised Him Life in keeping a practical Law, a Commandment that
was fair and that was facile, proper for Him, and profitable for all Mankind in
Him. Must the great God to show his goodness to poor man, Genesis 1. to 26. Verse
26.27. Chap. 2.17.
first build a world as a well furnished House, before He brings in his Guest,
and then call a Counsel as it were, in Heaven, about molding a clod of Earth
into an Excellent shape, and breathing therein a living Spirit and Imprint
thereon a Divine similitude, and place Him as his Viceroy upon Earth, and to
hold all, as it were, but by (the payment of a Pepper-Corn) the Forbearing of
one Tree; And when miserable Man after all this, has not made good his
Allegiance, but broken Faith with his Maker, selling Himself and his Posterity
for an Apple, or some such like thing, to the evil first of Sin, and so of
Suffering, shall man's Impudent Posterity presume in their Hearts after all this
to call in Question the goodness of God, for no other reason but his making his
Word good, his Threatening good, and so his Commandment good in the penal part
of it, which was that part which he undertook to make good, if Man failed to
make good the other part of Obedience? Ah how truly may it here be said, that
the foolishness of man perverteth his way, Prove. 19.3.
and his Heart fretteth against the Lord? When He that transgresses a good
Law, judges that Law, and pronounces it Evil by His disobedience; How can He
that made that Law, vindicate that Law, or be good in his place, without making
of it good, by punishing the Transgressor; Think therefore (vain Man) what thou will, but know that the Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake, Isaiah
42.21. Gods goodness in rewarding the least good in the wicked.
and (if a man vilify) He will magnify his Law, and make it honorable. Thou will grant him to be a good Master that rewards the Good, though He Punish
the Evil Servant: produce therefore thy Cause, and bring forth thy strong
Reasons; If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? But and if thou do evil,
Is it Gods fault that Sin lies at thy door? Genesis 4.7.
An Ahabs Humiliation (so good a Master is God, though the Man was but an
Hypocrite) shall have a temporal Reward; The Lord is so good, As far as he is
capable. 1 King. 21.29^ Ezekiel. 29.18, 20. Rewards spiritual good. Mat. 10.42.
With a spiritual blessing. 1 Kings 14.13.
that He will not set a Nebuchadnezzar a poor Heathen to work, but He shall
have his wages. A cup of cold water given in his Name shall not want its
Reward. If any one perform any Spiritual good, the good God shall give him a
spiritual Reward, yea will take great notice even of the least good thing, as
in the case of young Abijah in whom was found some good thing toward the Lord
God of Israel, in the wicked house of Jeroboam: and will remunerate the
performances^ of outwardly good things, with compensations suitable to the
persons and performances, as the removal of outward Evils, and the Donation of
outward blessings: The Ninevites they Repent them of their Sins (though it were
but after a fashion, as appears after by the Burden of Nineveh in Nahums
Prophesy) And this good God, Nah. 11, etc. Jon. 3.10.
He presently Repents him of the Evil that he had said he would do unto them,
and did it not, till they repented them again of their Repentance. Genesis 39.5.
Potiphar and Pharaoh make much of Gods Joseph, and God blessed their houses
for Joseph's sake. And must God pervert Judgment, Justice not derogatory to
goodness in a Judge.
and not punish the wicked, that he may have thy good word, or be well thought
of by thee? Is his Justice derogatory to his Goodness? Thou can applaud the
sentence of a Judge in Condemning the Injuries that have been done unto thee;
why can thou not as well say unto God with the Psamlist, Psalm. 119.39.
thy Judgments are good? Yea with many; He is the best Man that will least bear
an Injury, but is most vindictive, Heb. 10.30.
and must not vengeance be the Lords, and may not he repay, without incurring
thy evil thoughts.

A wrong thought of Gods goodness, to think He will destroy none. Isaiah 27.11.
It Is an evil Thought of Gods goodness that some Ignorant Ones have, or at least
would fain have, that he that made them will never destroy them, nor indeed
ever would he, had they continued what he made them; But this good God says
expressly, and He knows what he has to do, It is a People of no understanding,
therefore he that made them will have no mercy on them, and he that formed them
will show them no favor.

Sect. XXIX.
Gods goodness in the NEW COVENANT.
BUt and if thou think hardly of Gods Dealing with Men fallen under the first
Covenant, the Covenant of Works, O busy thy thoughts so much the more on the
New Covenant, and surely thou can not but cry, Heb. 8.8. Of GRACE. Zech. 4.7.
Math. 22.8. Chap. 11.28. 1 King. 21.16. Verse 6.
grace, grace unto it. O this is that where none are excluded, but
self-excluders, nor counted unworthy, but those that are unwilling: where the
worst are invited, and the most heavy laden best welcomed: where Sinks of Sin
(as Manasseth an Idolater and a Conjurer, who filled Jerusalem with blood) are
made vessels of mercy prepared unto glory: where Mansion-Houses of Devils (as
Mary Magdalen) become Temples of the Holy Ghost, Mark 16.9. Acts 9.15. Isaiah
11.6.
Habitations of God through the Spirit; where Persecutors (as Saul) become
Preachers of Righteousness, and the Wolf dwells with the Lamb, and the Leopard
lies down with the Kid, and the Cal^ with the Lion, and the little Child does
lead them, etc. Acts 2.23.
Where cruel Jews are saved by the Blood that they shed, and by putting forth
an hand of Faith to take hold on him whom themselves had taken before, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11.
and by wicked hands had Crucified and slain: And where Sinners of the
Gentiles, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate persons, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Raylers, Extortioners,
are washed, are sanctified, are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. Where blemishes are no bar to admission to the
Marriage-Supper of the King, but the Poor and the Maimed, Luke 14.11. Verse 23.
and the Halt and the Blind are entertained, yea the very Hedge-rows are
searched, and the very Vagabonds, and High-way-men are compelled to come in.
Isa. 35.5, 6, 8.
Where the eyes of the Blind see out of obscurity, and the ears of the Deaf are
opened, and the Lame Man leaps as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb does
sing; Where the wayfaring Man though a fool does not err; and they that erred
in spirit come to understanding, Isaiah 29 24. Job 33.27, 28.
and they that murmure^ to learn Doctrine, Where God looks upon men, and if
any say I have sinned, and perverted that which was Right, and it profited me
not, He will deliver him from going down into the pit, and his Life shall see
the light. Where Light is given to them that sit in Darkness, Luke 1.79.
and in the shadow of Death; and where Iniquity is forgiven, and Sin is
Remembered no more. Heb. 8.12. Free Grace.
In the First Covenant God was good to Man's Righteousness; in this New Covenant
He is merciful to his unrighteousness; In that He was Preserver of the
Innocent, H^sea 14.5. Romans 5.8.
in this a Restorer of Revolters, an Healer of Back-sliders, a Lover of
Enemies, a well-willer to Evildoers. O this is Mercy, tender mercy of our God
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us, Luke 2.14. Luke 1.78, 79.
Romans 3.12, 16, 17. Verse 24. Verse 25.
to guide our feet into the way of peace, who were all gone out of the way, and
were altogether become unprofitable, but destruction and misery were in our
ways, and the way of Peace we knew not. O this is Grace, Free Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, etc. willing it seems to gain all sorts of Buyers, though without
money and without price, Isaiah 55.1.
as the Salesman is who sets forth his Wares to invite Customers whom He hopes
most to get by, whereas all that He expects from us is but our taking what he
tenders, and receiving what he gives. O this is Mercy, and rich Mercy, Ephesians.
2.4. R c^ Grace. Verse 7.
and Love, and great love whereby he loved us; O this is Grace, and Riches of
Grace, and exceeding riches of Grace in his kindness toward us: The Apostle
speaks of it as if he could never speak enough of it, or high enough of it; and
it was not his study alone, but that about which he declares that all Saints
are thoughtful how they may be able to comprehend what is the breadth, Chap.
3.18, 19.
and length and depth, and height, and to know this love that passes
knowledge. Breadth of Love, covering the multitude of sins, (as it must needs be
a broad Plaster indeed that must cover all our Sores, Isaiah 1.6. Psalm 130.1.
who from the sole of the foot, to the head, are nothing but wounds, and
swellings, and putrefying sores) Depth of love, reaching us in the Deeps of sin
and misery, And 40.2.
the horrible pit and miry clay: Length of Love, stretching its wings from
Eternity to Eternity; Ephesians. 3, 11. 1 Cor. 15.45, 47.
and Height of Love, beating sinners up from Hell to Heaven, and to a more
blessed and glorious state in the second Adam, than they fell from in the
first. And O what a Theme for Thoughts is here? Here is Height for the Highest;
Covenant of GRACE the ^^mplest Theme (...) though^.
Depth for the Profoundest. Breadth for the largest; Length for the longest
Thoughts Man can possibly have, and indeed Thoughts are the largest things in
the World.

Sect. XXX.
THis, this was that, Ephesians. 1 9. With 3.11.
that took up Gods own Thoughts from all Eternity, this good pleasure of his
goodness, which He purposed in Himself. The Lord possessed me (says Christ) in
the beginning of his way, CHRIST.
before his works of old, or ever the Depths or the Fountains, or the Mountains
or Hills were settled, or the Earth made, Prove. 8.22. The object of Gods
Eternal Thoughts. Verse 30.31.
or the Clouds confirmed, or the Heavens prepared; Then was He with God as one
brought up with him, rejoicing always before him, and was daily his Delight,
even he whose Rejoicing is in the habitable parts of the Earth, and his
delights are with the Children of Men, that is to say, with Fallen Man; or, as
it is expressed in the Psalmist, even the Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18.
that God might dwell among them. The Lord possessed me, says Christ; Now the
Thoughts as we have formerly said, are the possessions of the heart.

This was that, And of all good men in the first Ages of the World. Of Adam.
Genesis 3.15.
that took up the Thoughts of all the best in the first Ages of the World, when
they had but a little hole to see day at; when this Infant Covenant of Grace
was wrapped in the Swadling-band of that short and single Promise, the Seed of
the Woman shall break the Serpents head; Wherefore when that Son was born, of
whom Christ was to come, Genesis 4.25.
Eve calls him Seth, a FOUNDATION: and how glad were they when God did but
never so little further open it, and make a way for their further Thoughts
about it. 'Twas a little plainer to Abraham, Abraham. Genesis 12.3. Job 8 56. Job
10.25 26, 27.
In thy s^ed shall all the Nations of the World be blessed; And says Christ of
Abraham, He saw my day, and was glad. How busy was Holy Job about the Thoughts
of his Redeemer, of his standing upon the Earth, and his seeing of him with
those very eyes of his at the last day: And gracious Elihu; about the way of
Gods dealing with penitent Sinners on the account of a Savior, Deliver him
from going down into the Pit, Job 23.24. ^gur.
I have found a RANSOM. When Agur was discoursing with Ithiel and Ucal, you may
see where his Thoughts were by his Question, Prove. 30.4.
What is his Name, and what is his SONS Name, if thou can tell.

Of David especially, Psalms a little New Testament.
And as for David to whom, as to a special Favorite, so large and glorious
discoveries were made, O how enlarged and affectionate were his Meditations, So
that David and the Book of the Psalms is quoted by Christ himself, as most
clear and copious concerning Him, Luke 24.44. Acts 1.16. and 20.25.29.34. and
4.25. etc. and 13 33.
All things (says he) must be fulfilled that were written in the Law of Moses,
and the Prophets, and the PSALMS concerning ME; And so in the Acts and
elsewhere, as if the PSALMS were a little New Testament in the middle of the
Old.

David's thoughts busied about Christ's Name. Psalm. 110. compared with Math.
22.43. Psalm 2.2. Psalm 45.7. John 4.29. 2 S^m. 22.3. Psalm. 118.14. and 21.
Luke 1.47. Phil. 3 3. Psalm 3.5 9.
How full were David's Thoughts of this great and glorious Name, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST. He calls him LORD in spirit, when he says, The Lord said unto my LORD,
sit thou on my right hand, etc. He calls him Gods Anointed, which, in the Greek
Tongue, is CHRIST, Yea the Anointed of God above his Fellows, which is as much
as THE CHRIST (as she asked, Is not this THE CHRIST? that is Christ above all
Christ's, for though there were many Christ's, they were taught to expect ONE
Christ above All) And he calls him his Savior, and his Salvation most
frequently, which in the Hebrew Tongue is JESUS. So that that saying of the
Blessed Virgin, My Spirit rejoices in God MY SAVIOR, and that of the Apostle,
We rejoice in JESUS, seem clearly to be taken from that of David, My Soul shall
be joyful in the Lord, it shall Rejoice in his Salvation, or (as it may be read
to the letter in the Hebrew Text,) My Soul shall Rejoice in his JESUS.

Person. Psalm 2.12. Verse 7.
Concerning his Person, his Thoughts were clear; He exhorts the Kings of the
Earth to kiss the SON, and tells you plainly, that he means the only BEGOTTEN
of God, when he says, the LORD has said thou are MY SON, Psalm. 89.26.
compared with Heb. 1.5.
this day have I BEGOTTEN Thee; and again, I will be to him a Father, and He
shall be to me a Son.

So also concerning his distinct Natures, Natures.
in one Subsistence, He calls him LORD in Spirit, because he knew him to be
GOD, who (he knew) was to be his SON after the Flesh, as MAN, Psalm 45.67.
yet says expressly to him, Thy Throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever, etc. Thou
love Righteousness, etc. therefore GOD thy GOD has Anointed Thee, etc. He
knew that Christ, the anointed of God, was GOD, Hebr. 1.8.
for (says the Apostle) It is unto the SON that he says thy Throne, O GOD, is
for ever and ever, etc. Yet He also distinctly and certainly knew that God had
sworn that of the fruit of his Loins He would raise up Christ (as concerning
the Flesh) to sit upon his Throne (as the Apostle speaks): Acts 2.30.
So that he may be thought to mean this when he says Truth shall spring out of
the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. Psalm. 85.11.
He might well call him TRUTH, as he was the Promised Messiah, for in this
respect he was to spring out of the Earth, to be born of a Woman in the City of
David; And he might call him RIGHTEOUSNESS, who is called elsewhere ( Jehovah
Tzidkenu, Jer. 33.16. Mal. 4.2.
) The LORD Our Righteousness, and the SUN of Righteousness (as another Prophet
calls him) now it is proper for the SUN to look down from Heaven.

Concerning his Incarnation and Birth, Incarnation. Psalm. 142.17. Luke 1.69.
which he calls the budding of the Horn of David, or (which is all one) the
raising up a mighty Salvation, or a Horn of Salvation for his people in the
house of his Servant David, he brings in Christ plainly thus speaking,
Sacrifice and Offering, and burnt Offerings thou would not, Psalm. 20.6, 7,
8. Hebr. 10.5.
but a Body have thou prepared me. So the Holy Ghost in the Hebrews renders
that of the Psalmist, Mine ears have thou opened, or pierced through, and
applies it to Christ's Coming into the World in the Flesh, Then said I, Lo I
come, in the Volume of the Book, it is written of Me, I delight to do thy will,
O my God, etc.

He had also most clear conceptions concerning Christ's bitter Sufferings.
Passion.


Psalm. 2.1, 2. Acts 4.26.
In the Raging Combination of the Heathen (that is the Gentiles) and the People,
(that is the Jews) and Consultation of the Kings of the Earth, and the Rulers
that is, Herod, and Pontius Pilate) against the Lord and his CHRIST, as it is
expounded in the Acts.

Psalm. 118.22. 1 Pet. 2.7.
By the Malice of the Priests and Elders (that should have been Builders of the
People in the Faith and acceptance of this Promised Messiah) Refusing that
stone which God has designed to be the Head of the Corner.

By the Treason of Judas that did eat of his Bread, yet lifted up his heel
against him. Psalm 41.9. Job 13.18, 21. Ps^^ 22.7, 8. Mat. 27.43.
By the scoffs of Spectators, and cruel mocking of passers by, wagging their
heads at him and saying, He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him, if he
will have him, and let him save him, seeing he delighted in him.

Psalm. 31.11. Mat. 26.56.
By the faintheartedness of his Followers, and Cowardice of his Friends, I was a
Reproach among mine Enemies, and a fear to mine Acquaintance, they that saw me
without sled from me; All this was done (says the Evangelist) that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled, then all his Disciples forsook him and sled.

Psalm. 69.21. Mat. 27.48.
By the cruelty of his Inhumane Persecutors, that in his thirst gave him Vinegar
to drink, and Gall in his Meat.

Psalm. 22.16, 17, 18. Mat. 27.35.
By the Savage Soldiers that parted his Garments, and cast lots upon his
Vesture, and Bloody Executioners that pierced his Hands and ^his Feet, and so
distended his Body upon the cruel Cross that one might tell all his Bones.

Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46.
And most of all by Divine Dereliction, which made him to cry out, My God, my
God why have thou forsaken me? And yet in all this not casting away his
Confidence, Psalm 31.5. Luke 23.46.
or loosing himself by Impatience, but committing himself and his Cause to God,
and crying out with a loud voice, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, and when
he had so said (says the Evangelist) He gave up the Ghost.

And as David was thus copions in the Thoughts of Christ's Passion, he leaves
him not there, Resurrection.
but pursues him with lively and comfortable Meditations of his Resurrection:
Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see Corruption, from which the Apostle
undeniably concludes the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, Acts 2.26.
nay even from those words in the Second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, Psalm 2.7. Acts 13.33. Psalm. 110.7.
This God has fulfilled, says the Apostle Paul, in that he raised up Jesus,
etc He shall drink of the Brook in the way, may be meant of his Passion (for
Christ calls it a Drinking) the Cup which my Father has put into mine hand
(says he) shall I not drink? John 18.11.
and therefore shall be lift up the head, in his Resurrection.

And as his Thoughts ran of his Resurrection, so also of his Ascension, When he
Ascended up on high, Ascension. Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.8.
and led Captivity Captive, he received gifts for men, yea even the Rebellious,
that God might dwell amongst them, expounded by the Apostle as meant of Christ
by the Psalmist. Session and Intercession. Psalm. 110.1, 4. Heb. 7.21.


So also of Christ's Session at the Right hand of God, and Intercession as an
High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck; All expounded of in
Christ in the Hebrews.

Of his Kindome, Throne, and Scepter; Kingdom. Psalm 45.6.
Thy THRONE, O God, is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy KINGDOM is a right
SCEPTER.

Of his Prophetical Office in Declaring the Decree, Prophetical Office. Psalm
2.7. and 45.10. Success of his Ministry, Psalm 110.5. Psalm 18.49. Romans 15 9.
Psalm. 117.1, 2. Romans 15.11.
in Instructing the Church, Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine
ear, etc. And the wonderful glorious success of his Gospel Ministers. Thy
people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, etc. and that not
only as to the Election among the Jews, but also the fullness of the Gentiles,
the Calling and Conversion of them by the Grace of the Gospel, I will confess
thee among the Gentiles. And again he says, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles,
and laud him all ye People, etc. for great is his loving kindness toward us
(us Jews, and you Gentiles) therefore praise ye the Lord.

Second coming to Judgment.
And finally his Powerful and certain second coming to Judgment for the
completing of the work of his Grace in bringing many Sons unto Glory, and in
gathering his people together, his Saints and his Covenanted ones, Psalm 50.1,
5.
even from the rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. And O how he
triumphs (and brings in other Creatures exulting as it were) at the thought
of this his coming, Psalm 96.
for he comes, for he comes to judge the Earth: with Righteousness will he
judge the World, and the People in his truth; Ver. 11, 12, 13.
for in all this it is evident, that his thoughts ran of Christ, when he says,
He has remembered his Mercy and his Truth toward the house of Israel, and all
the ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our God; and then it follows,
Let the Floods clap their hands, Verse 8, 9.
and the Mountains rejoice together, before the Lord, for he comes to judge
the Earth; with Righteousness shall he judge the World, and the people with
Equity.

In a word, as blessed Maryes Soul did magnify the Lord, though she were his
Mother, so David's Spirit did rejoice in God his Savior, though as to the
Flesh, he were his Father; and O how precious was that thought unto David,
which is, as it were, the sum and quintessence of all the rest. Thou spakest in
a vision to thy holy One, Psalm 89.19.
thou said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, that is to say (in the
New Testament-Language) He is able to save to the uttermost, Hebr. 7.28.
all that come unto God by him.

It Is proved that David understood and thought of Christ in all this. Acts
2.30, 31.
But some one may say, was David indeed so well studied in a Covenant of Grace,
and did he think of a Christ in all this? The Apostle Peter says he did,
because he was a Prophet, and knew what God had sworn, that of the fruit of his
loins he would raise up Christ concerning the Flesh, to sit upon his Throne,
and that knowing this before, he spoke of his Resurrection, etc. So that David
did not Prophesy (like wicked Caiaphas the High Priest) of he knew not what,
Joh. 11 50, 51.
but understood what he Prophesied, and thought of what he Prophesied, and was
in this respect a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.
because his heart was so much upon what Gods heart was upon, Prove. 8.30.
the Mystery of Grace in the Lord Jesus Christ: so that as Christ says, that
he was always before God, so David says of Christ, I foresaw the Lord always
before my face, Acts 2.25.
Christ was ever in his eye. But O how great is the advantage that our Thoughts
may have of his? His was but a foreseeing and a fore-knowing ((...)) and
therefore but a fore-thinking of a Christ that was to come, Verse 31.
but ours is a seeing ( before whose eyes Jesus Christ is evidently set forth,
Gal. 3.1.
even as if he were Crucified amongst us) and a knowing and a thinking of that
which is already, and fulfilled to a tittle in all that he fore-spake, and
forethought even eight and twenty Generations before it was accomplished: for
from David, Mat. 1.27.
until they were carried away into Babylon, was fourteen Generations; and from
the Captivity to Christ were fourteen Generations.

What shall I say now? Heb. 11.3.
the time would be too short (as the Apostle speaks) to tell you of Moses, and
all the rest of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and particularly of S. Paul,
whose heart was so full of a Christ, and his thoughts so big of him, that they
deliver themselves almost in every other Verse, of his very Name, and crowd it
in many times as if it were an ease to that Abundance that was in his heart, to
have his mouth speaking, or his pen dropping that sweet smelling Name of THE
LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Sect. XXXI.
THis, this is also that, 1 Pet. 1.12. Christ the Theme of Angelical Thoughts.
Luke 1.13, 14.
which the Angels desire to pry into; for you may know what all their Thoughts
run on, by what their Tongues run of, when they take to them Tongues (says the
Evangelist) there was with the Angels a multitude of the Heavenly Host,
Praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, on Earth PEACE, and GOOD
WILL toward men. On Earth Peace, no Peace for Hell; Goodwill toward Men, Yet
Christ is for fallen men, not Angels. Hebr. 2.16.
but not Devils; for Christ took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the seed
of Abraham. O this is that, the thought whereof is such matter of Admiration to
the good Angels, and such horror and Confusion to the fallen Angels, whose eye
toward us is so much the more Evil, because Gods has been so good. And shall
not all this procure God thy good Thought of him? Why, were there no more but
this, that Salvation is Possible for Thee, but not so for Them, this were
something to be thought of; But now that Salvation is Proffered and laid in thy
very way, that thou can not, if thou would, step toward Hell, without
trampling upon Gods bowels (of Mercy, Hebr. 10.13.
) and treading under foot the Son of God, and blood of the Covenant; where all
is Free to Thee, Covenant of Grace gives what it requires. Isaiah 1.16. Ezekiel.
35.25. and 18.31. with 13.26.
how ever dear to Christ, and the Yoke easy, the Covenant being GRACE,
Requiring only what it has to give, and giving what it requires; saying, Wash
you, and make you clean, etc. and again, I will power clean water upon you, and
you shall be clean, and from all your filthiness will I cleanse you, etc.
Saying, make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, etc, and again, a new heart
also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh, and I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments, and do them, etc. Having such Grace, Slighting of
Gospel Grace, a sin of Men, not Devils.
I say, proffered us as the Devil never had, let us think what will become of
us, if we sin such a SIN as the Devil never did, who never had a pardon
tendered him to sling it back into God's face; who never had a Christ, or a
Covenant of Grace preached unto him, but was forced to speak truth in that
(though he be a liar) that he has nothing to do with Jesus, Matthew. 8.29.
Isaiah 9.6.
except it be to his Torment. But, says the Scripture, To us is the Child
born, to us is the Son given; It says not to Angels, but to us; Though we may
well think that Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21.
as the Apostle calls them, are so in Him; but if Christ be their Head, yet not
so as he is Ours. Men otherwise concerned in Christ then Angels. 1 Pet. 1.12.
A head of Confirmation to them, of Redemption to us; and so born to us; And
shall He be so much thought of by Angels, and not thought of by us? Nay it is
our Concernment, that the Apostle says, the Angels do so much desire to pry
into; Dan. 9.23. Ephesians. 3.10.
and They are advantaged herein by the Church (as the Angel Gabriel by Daniels
Prayer) To the intent (says the Apostle) that now unto the Principalities and
Powers in beavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
God.

Sect. XXXII.
COncernment is wont to be the greatest Conducement to thoughts; Our concern.
Men will mind their own Business, when another shall be out of their
Thoughts, and this is our great, nay our only Concernment, for there is but
One thing needful: Luke 11.42. Christ Ours. Heb. 1.12. Luke 9.2. Matthew. 1.23.
Immanuel. God with us. Make all ours, Greatness. John 20.17.
for thus we may think, if Christ be not Ours, there is nothing Ours, for
Christ is Heir of all things, nay We have lost our selves, and are cast away;
But if Christ be Ours, All is Ours, for his Name is Immanuel, which is, by
Interpretation, God with us; and if God be with us, well may our Thoughts be
with God; and surely they cannot but be well, if they be with God. Gods
greatness is amazing, but when his goodness has made it Ours, how comforting?
I go, says Christ, to my Father and your Father, and to My God, and Your God.

Gods JUSTICE is terrible, Justice.
but his Justice paid off, satisfied, attoned, reconciled, Justice befriending,
how amiable? God is faithful and JUST to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.
if we confess our sins, what a word is there? If we burden our selves with
them, ^s the matter is ordered in the Covenant of Grace, Justice it self will
befriend us by discharging us of them; if we be but so honest and candid as to
own them, and to own him that has owned them, and paid for them (who is
mentioned there by the Apostle but a verse or two before) God is so just as to
pardon them. 1 John 1.7.
Deliver him, Job 33.24.
says God, I have found a Ransom, Justice disclaims a double payment.

Holiness.
The holiness of God, what a dreadful thought is it? and how may it make a poor
sinful man to cry out as the men of Beth-shemesh, 1 Samuel 6.20. Romans 8.3.
Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? But then to think again that
this Holy God is become Man, and in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin,
that he might condemn Sin in the Flesh, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and that He is made unto us of God, not only Righteousness, but
Sanctification, this may make us to give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness, Psalm 30.4.
as it is in the Psalmist.

Highness.
Gods HIGHNESS, what an awful thought is it to Us, that are at such an infinite
distance from Him? But to think withal, that though the Lord be high, yet He
has respect to the lowly, Psalm 138.6. and 136.23.
and regard to our low estate, and has so far humbled himself, as to embrace
our Dunghill, to cloth himself with our Flesh, to lodge in a Womb without
abhorrence, in a Manger, in a Grave, nay by his Spirit in a Sinners heart, so
that We may say with the Psalmist, Psalm 113.5, 6, 7.
Who is like unto our God, who dwells on high, yet HUMBLES himself, to raise
up the Poor out of the Dust, and the Needy out of the Dunghill; for Christ's
HUMILIATION and Condescension is our Exaltation; O what cause is here to
rejoice in his highness, as the Prophet speaks? And if greatness, Isaiah 13.3.
Cant. 1.3. Cant. 2.4.
and holiness, and justice, are made such Repast, by a Covenant of Grace, to
our Thoughts; well may We remember his LOVE more then Wine. Here, O here, We
should muster up our Thoughts, and bring them into a Full Body, and lay Gods
Commands upon them to stand to their colors, for the BANNER over us is LOVE.

Sect. XXXIII.
ANd here let me charge thee, O Reader, LOVE. 1 John 3.1.
to think seriously of this, if the Apostle cry out, as he does, Beloved what
manner of Love is this that the Father has bestowed upon us, that We should be
called The Sons of God? O think then what manner of love is this, that GOD
should be called The Son of Man? Nay become Man? In Christ's Incarnation. John
1.1. and Verse 14.
for the WORD was with GOD and the WORD was GOD, and the WORD was made FLESH.
For to think that Christ was only (...), a Divine Man, and not GOD-MAN, is a
thought both beneath a Christ, and below a Christian. John 5.20.
But thanks be to God) We know that the Son of Son of God is come, and He has
given us understanding, Christ true God.
that We may know him that is True, and We are in Him that is True, even in his
Son Jesus Christ, This is the True GOD, and the Life Eternal.

This is He of whom it was said of Old, Isaiah 9.6.
To us a Child is born, and yet his Name shall be called The MIGHTY GOD. By
whom, says the Apostle, Hebr. 1.2. Chap. 3 3, 4. Hebr. 1.10. Verse 3. John
1.10.
God made the World, and he that built all things is GOD; and to him it is
expressly said, Thou Lord in the beginning have established the Earth, and the
Heavens are the works of thine Hands. He was in the World, and the World was
made by him, and the World knew him not. And that He upholdeth all things by
the word of his power, who by himself purged our Sins, and sat down at the
right hand of the Majesty on high. Christ suffering was God satisfying himself.
Acts 20.28.
So that CHRIST Suffering, was but GOD Satisfying himself, and therefore He
cannot choose but have full payment, for the Purchase Blood was the Blood of
GOD. Feed the Church of GOD (says the Apostle) which he purchased with his Own
Blood. And God did Suffer, though He could not Suffer As GOD, the Nature
assuming, adding infinite value and virtue to the Nature assumed, both being
one Person; 1 Timothy 3.1^.
for God manifested in the Flesh, must needs be justified in the Spirit, or
Godhead of Christ, Hebr 9.14.
through which, or upon which, as the Altar, this (...), this middle Person (as
the Apostle calls him) betwixt God and Man (God-Man) as Priest, offers up
himself Suffering (as true Man) to Himself, 1 Timothy 2.5.
as One true God with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

This is that great Mystery looked into by the Angels, Preached to the
Gentiles, Believed in the World, Lord I believe it, help thou mine unbelief.

Sect. XXXIV.
1 Timothy 3.16. Mistake to think one drop of Christ's blood sufficient. Acts
20.28. The Death of Christ necessary. Heb. 9.15. Verse 16. As Testatour.
BUt though I dare not but Think with Scripture that the blood of Christ (that
is, the Death of Christ, for so the Scripture is to be understood when it
speaks of his blood) is of Infinite value and virtue, being Gods own blood, yet
dare I not think with those who (without Scripture) affirm that One drop of
Christ's blood was sufficient to save the world, for the Apostle says expressly,
that He is Mediator of the New Testament through DEATH, (...), to Redemption
(no Redemption without Death) for where a Testament is (says he) there Must be
the Death of Him that made the Testament. And He proves it by the killing of
the Sacrifices in the Law, Verse 22.23.
That without shedding of blood (he means dying) there is no Remission; And
that it was Necessary Christ should enter by his own Blood, that is, (for so he
explains it) by the Sacrifice (not of a drop or few drops but) of Himself, and
that no otherwise than by Death; Verse 26. Verse 27, 28. Surety. Genesis 2.17.
Heb. 7.22. Romans 5.21. Christ suffered in our stead. Genesis 22.13. Is^. 53.5, 10.
for as it was appointed unto Men once to die, So Christ must be Once offered.
For the Debt that We owe to the Covenant of Works is Death, In the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall Die: This Debt must Our Surety under the
New Covenant pay, though a Covenant of Grace, for GRACE must reign by
Righteousness; for Christ was not only for Our Good, but in our stead, (like
the Ram in the stead or room of Isaac) for the Chastisement of our Peace was
upon him. And therefore (not one drop of his Blood only but) his Soul must be
made the Offering for Sin, and he must power out his Soul to the Death, Verse
1^. Verse 4.
for He was to bear Our Sorrows, which were the sorrows of Death, as you have
seen: which Text, Grot. in loc.
though a learned man, who sometimes had written worthily for Christ's
satisfaction, falling afterward off by Temptation, would fain distort, by
expounding it of the Prophet Jeremiah, yet two great Apostles, Philip and
Peter, Acts 8.34, 35. 1 Pet. 2.24.
do understand and expound it of Christ, and no other, by whose alone stripes
we are healed. So Christ himself also, who knew what would serve the turn,
tells his Disciples plainly, that there was no way but one, he must go away, he
must depart, John 16.7.
yet he had long before this even at eight days old, lost more than a drop of
blood for them in his Circumcision, Luke 2.21. Mat. 16.21.
but still for all that, the Son of Man must go to Jerusalem, and must suffer
many things, and be killed: and it was his Life, Chap. 20.21.
and no less that He must give for a Ransom for many.

It Is true indeed, The preciousness of Christ's Death. Acts 2.24. 2 Samuel 18.3.
Christ fully Satisfied, was lawfully discharged.
this One Life of His was worth Thousands of Ours, as David's Men said of David,
and his Suffering Death (though it were not possible he should be held of it,)
gave Infinite Justice that Satisfaction and full Payment, because he that
Suffered was an Infinite Person, that Millions of Damned ones, (Men and Angels)
in Hell cannot give or make in Millions of Ages; but the subjects of the
Suffering being Finite, the duration or Term of the Suffering must be in some
sort Infinite, that is to say, without End; But now God sends his Angel, Mat.
28.2.
as a public Minister, to roll away the Stone from Christ's Sepulcher (not that
Christ needed an Angels help to further his Resurrection, John 10.18.
for He that had power to take up his life again, could not want strength like
another Sampson, Jud. 16.9, 12.
to shake off those sorry shackles of his Sepulcher, but) I say, the Key must
be turned by Gods own Officer, and the Prison door set open, to declare to All
the World that Our Debt, by his Death, was fully paid, in that Our Surety did
not Break Prison, but was set at Liberty, which the damned shall never be,
because they can never pay the uttermost farthing.

We must not pretend high Thoughts of Christ, to harbor hard thoughts of God.
1 Pet. 1.18. Verse 19.
But still We must take heed while We pretend high Thoughts of Christ, that we
harbor not hard thoughts of God, as if he would exact of Our Surety more than
was due, or were indeed profuse or prodigal of the Blood of his Son; No, no,
God counted it as precious sure as thou can do for thine heart, and if Men be
loath to be lavish of corruptible things, such as Silver and Gold, sure God
would never have been so of the precious blood of Christ, as a^ Lamb without
spot; for if a drop would have done it, Circumcision might have excused the
Passion, and the Propathia, or Bloody Sweat in the Garden, the Bloody Death
upon the CROSS: Gal. 2.21.
and so Christ have dyed in vain, a thought which the Apostle so much abhors;
for as he there reasons concerning the Law, I may argue in this present case,
if Righteousness could have been by a drop of his Blood, then ^hri^ dyed (...),
as one would say, Gratis, in a complement, and for a mere flourish of his
kindness, which the Apostle will by no means admit, Joh 2.19, 21.
No, no, The Temple of his Body must be de^troyed, which the loss of a Drop of
his blood would not do; Romans 6.23.
He must be made SIN for Us; now the wages of Sin (for he knew no sin, as to
the work of Sin, but he must be made Sin, as to the wages of Sin which) is
Death; Cor. 5.21.
That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. And that he might
Redeem us from the Curse of the Law, he must be made a Curse for Us; that is,
He must hang upon the Tree till he be dead, Deuteronomy. 21 22, 23. Scripture-thoughts
of Christ, our only right and high Thoughts. Luke 24.25, 26.
for in that sense it is, that the Apostle quotes, that in the Law of Moses,
where it is written, Cursed is he that hangs upon a Tree.

And the truth is, as our Scriptural Thoughts of Christ are our only Right
Thoughts, (O fools and slow of heart, ought not Christ to have suffered these
things? etc. so are they also our high Thoughts; for herein God commended his
Love to us (not that Christ was Circumcised for us, though that were Love, Romans
5.8. Not Christ bleeding, but his dying the grand commendation of his Love.
to loose a few drops of his precious Blood for Us, but this is the high
commendation of his Love) that he dyed for, (...) for many there are that would
willingly enough ^^ose a little Blood for a Friend, that would not die for
their Friend, but this was Love, that though We were Enemies, He not only Bled
for Us, but Dyed for Us. For suppose you had been ear-witnesses (...) the great
Council of Peace between the Father and the Son, Heb. 10.3, 4, 5.
(whereof we have such plain Intimations in Scripture) says God, Lo yonder are
a multitude of Sinne^^, and a multitude of Sacrifices, but I have no pleasure
in the One or the Other, but if Thou, my Son, wilt but come in the Room of
both, I shall be satisfied, in whom, Mat. 3.17.
as well as with whom, I shall be well pleased; But know then, that there must
be Dying, or there can be no Doing; Hebr. 9.12.
for the Sinners should Die; and the Sacrifices they do Die, and thou must Die,
or else my Wrath can not be appeased, the Sinner can not be acquitted; and then
that you had heard Christ thus making answer, If it must be so, Lo I come,
Lord, Hebr. 10.9.7. Verse 5. Isaiah 50.5, 6.
in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me, even to do this thy Will O God;
if this be the way, Let it be so; a Body have thou prepared me, and mine Ears
ha^t thou opened, and I was not Rebellious, neither turned I away back; Lo here
is my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks for them that pull off the hair, and
my Face for shame and spitting: And if all this be not sufficient, here is my
Soul too for a Sacrifice, for an Offering for Sin, Isa^ah 53 1^.
and if Thou be but satisfied, I am Satisfied, for as never had Mother sorrow
in her Birth-pains for a Son, like my Sorrow, so never was Mother satisfied in
a Son as I am in my Seed. Isaiah 53.10.
When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin, He shall see his Seed, and
the Pleasure of the Lord prosper in his hand: Verse 11.
He shall see of the Travail of his Soul, and be Satisfied. And therefore well
may Thou be satisfied, O my Soul, as with Marrow and with Fatness, to think
of all this. Verse 1^.
If it pleased the Lord to bruise him, that He might spare thee, and if the Son
were satisfied to be so served to justify thee, Verse 11.
and to bear thine Iniquities; shall this Thought not be pleasing to thee? That
He should not only be Cut (as in his Circumcision) but Cut off out of the Land
of the Living (as in his Passion) even Messiah the Prince, Verse 8. Dan. 5.24,
25.
be cut off for thee, to finish thy Transgression, to make an end of Sin, to
make Reconciliation for the Transgression, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness; That He should be delivered for thine Offenses, Romans 4.25.
and raised again for thy Justification, without thy desert or desire, or thy
care or thy Thought before all this was done for thee; does it not deserve now
thy Love, Jer. 23.6.
and thy Joy, and thy Care, and thy Thoughts, to be laid out upon it? nay to be
taken up with it? That The Lord should be Thy Righteousness; Isaiah 32.2.
and this Man thine hiding place, and thy Peace, and that by Blood only, Ephesians.
2.13, 15. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.
so making Peace; That thine Acceptance should be in Him, and thy Redemption
through his Blood, and neither the One nor the other by Doing, nor by thy
Dying, Romans 5.10.
but thy Rec^nciliation by His Death, and thy Salvation by His Life; Oh how
dear should the Thought of this Dying-Rising Lord be to thee, 1 Pet. 3.1^.
who once suffered for Sins, the JUST for the Unjust, that he might bring us to
God, put to Death in the Flesh, or Manhood, but quickened in, or through the
Spirit, that is, the Godhead?

Sect. XXXVI.
High thoughts of Imputed Righteousness. Romans 4 24. Phil. 3.8, 6.
ANd how Highly Reported should that Imputed Righteousness be by Thee, which the
Apostle counts a Gain, for which He willingly Suffered the loss of All, nay for
the working out of which Christ Himself became poor, that We by his poverty
might be made ^^ch. 'Twas this Righteousness that was looked at in the
Sacrifices, (...) 8.9. He^. ^.14, 15.
and through the Sprinklings of the Law, for says the Holy Ghost, If the Blood
of Bulls and ^oats, and the sprinkling them that are unclean, Sanctify as to
the purifying of the Flesh, how much more shall the Blood of Christ, etc. purge
your Conscience? etc. And that the Thoughts of the Old Testament-Believers ran
so much upon, David's especially, his very Dying Thoughts ran of this, 2 Samuel
23.1.
as appears by his last words, Although mine House be not so with God, yet God
has made a Covenant with me, Ordered in all things and sure, this is All my
Salvation, Verse 5.
and All my desire, etc. Blessed be God what ever is out of Order, the Covenant
of Grace is Ordered in All things and sure; my help and my hope is not in my
self, or in any thing of my own, it is laid up elsewhere in better keeping, One
shall say, Isaiah 45.24.
IN the Lord I have strength, and I have Righteousness: and IN the Lord, the
whole House of Israel (that is, Verse 25.
all that ever shall have Peace) shall be Justified and shall Glory; thus
Isaiah: So Jeremy speaking of the Church, Jer. 33.16.
He that shall call her is The Lord Our Righteousness; So Daniel, Now
therefore, O our God, Dan. 9.17. Ezekiel. 14.14.
hear the Prayer of thy Servant, etc. and cause thy face to shine, etc. for the
Lords Sake. You see Daniel, who is reckoned by the Holy Ghost with Noah and
Job, one of the best men that ever was, has not a Thought of any Acceptance or
Audience from any Righteousness or Works of his Own; but only for Christ's
sake, Lord do it, says he, for the Lords sake. 2 Cor. 12.12. 1 Cor. 15.10.
Acts 24.16.
Nay S. Paul that came behind no Man, and Labored more abundantly than All,
that exercised himself always to have a Conscience void of Offense, both
toward God and toward all Men, that Beat down his Body to bring it in
Subjection, etc. 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Cor. 11.22. to the end. R m. 4. chap. Rom 5.
chap.
In a word, Wherein-soever any might seem to have any thing to boast, He had
more, yet you find no man more triumphing in an Imputed Righteousness, by
FAITH, GRACE, FREE GIFT; No man more abasing, nay abhorring the very Thought of
all self-wrought Righteousness ( not of Works, says He, Ephesians. 2.9.
least any man should boast) but sweeping down, throughout his writings
(especially the Epistles to the Romans, Romans chap. 5. and 6.
Galatians, Ephesians) the Spiders Web, as the Holy Ghost calls all that Hope
and Confidence which Man Spins, Gal. chap. 2. and 3. Ephesians. chap. 2. Job 8.14.
as it were, out of his own Bowels; nay disclaiming all compoundings and
blendings in the business of Justification, He will have nothing there but a
Christ apprehended and received through Faith, and that too not of our selves,
Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 11.6.
but the Gift of God; for says He, If it be of Grace, it is no more of Works,
or else Grace were no more Grace; but if it be of Works, it is no more of
Grace, else Work were no more Work.

And how plain, and indeed terrible is that Text? What shall We say then? Romans
9.30.
that the Gentiles which followed not Righteousness, have attained unto
Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is of Faith: Verse 31.32.
But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to
the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not By Faith, but
as it were, by the works of the Law, for they have stumbled at the stumbling
stone, as it is written, Verse 33.
Behold I will lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a Rock of Offense; And every
one that Believes in Him shall not be ashamed. Let Papists then mock on, and
call this Imputed Righteousness a Putative (or an imaginary) Righteousness, yet
what is to them Foolishne's, 1 Pet. 2.6. Philip 3.3.
and to many a stumbling stone, let it be to thee, O my Soul, a Foundation;
Rejoice thou in Jesus, and have thou no confidence in the Flesh.

Sect. XXXVII.
P^^l 2.6, 7 8. H^^h thou his of Christ.
BUt then as God has Highly exalted Him that was Humbled, being equal with God,
yet in shape of a Man, even to the Death of the Cross: so think, that if ever
thou hope for benefit by Him, thy Life and thy Lips must exalt Him, and thine
Heart and thy Thoughts above all, not that thou can add to, but must own his
Greatness and his Glory. nay though thou had known Christ after the Flesh, 2
C^^. 5.16.
yet henceforth know him so no more. Away with low Thoughts, carnal conceptions
of Jesus Christ, who though He were Crucified through weakness, yet is raised
in Power, 1 Cor. 14.4. Isaiah 62.1. Heb. 11.34.
yea in the greatness of his strength became weak, that out of weakness thou
might be made strong: for if the Christian can say by believing in Christ,
when I am weak then am I strong, and can Glory in his Infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9,
10.
that the power of Christ may rest upon him, well may he Glory in Christ, whose
Glory, in the very days of his infirmity, they that saw him, beheld as the
Glory of the only begotten Son of God, John 1.4.
for whilst he dwelt among Men in the body of his Flesh, The Fullness of the
Godhead dwelt in him bodily. Colos. 2.9. Rom 9 5.
And O how awful and stupendous a thought it is, that Gods Benjamin should be
this Ben-oni, Nay the Blessed God himself. This man of Sorrows; Isaiah 53.3.
and 9.6. Gal 4 4. Isaiah 53.8. Gal. 4.4.
The Eternal Father, the Son of his Handmaid, made of a Woman; The Mighty God,
a Child born, so says Scripture, but who shall declare his Generation? The
Lawmakers, made under the Law, that He might make satisfaction to the Law, and
Fulfill all Righteousness, both by Doing and by Dying, by Serving and Suffering;
Matthew. 3.15. Rev. 19.16. Mat. 20.29.
The Lord of Lords came to Minister, And He that gives Life to All, to give his
Life a Ransom for many. Stupendous Thought may I well call it, that my GOD
should become GOEL, my near Kinsman, by Incarnation, and gain Right of
Redemption as to those in whom he had a right of Creation, for which Cause He
is not ashamed to call them Brethren; Hebr. 2, 11.
That the Infinite should be Confined; and Content in the Womb, though not
Contained in the World; ( Pellibus exiguis Ingens arctatur JESUS.
That a strait low-roof'd Virgin-Cell
Should lodge the Incomprehensible;


That the Eternal God should be Born, Isaiah 9.6. Matthew. 28.6. Luke 2.7.
and the Immortal God buried, after a Life of Sorrow, and a Death of Shame;
That the Majesty of God should take up with a Stable, for a Presence Chamber,
Mat. 2.11. and 27.29. Verse 2.
and a Manger for a Throne, where Wisemen must come and worship Him, a wreath
of Thorns for a Crown, a Cross for a Scepter, and for a Royal-Robe, the only
Crimson of a Bloody Passion lined with the Ermine of white Innocence, Heb. 1.3.
but spotted with the Contradiction of Sinners. That the Ancient of days
should become an Infant, The thundering God a Crying Babe; Heb. 1.2. Matthew. 2.13.
The Heir of All things be born to Banishment as soon as Born, and He that
fills heaven to be, as it were, a Fugitive in the Earth at his first coming
into it; That God Our Refuge should be forced to Flee, John 22.46.
yea to Run for his Life before he could Go, and to hide his Head in EGYPT,
John 6.41. Psalm 49.12.
who was the Light of the World; That the Bread of Heaven should be laid
amongst Oats and Hay for the food of Man, that was now become (by his Sin) like
the Beasts that perish; Acts 3.15. Luke 21.24.
That the Prince of Life should begin to Die from his very beginning to Live,
and the early shedding of his Precious Blood from the first weeks sucking of
his Mothers Milk; That He should be reputed the Carpenters Son, John 1.3.
by whom all things were made; That He before whom the Devils tremble, Matthew.
4.1.
should be lead into the Wilderness to be Tempted of the Devil; That the Living
Bread should suffer hunger, Verse 2.
and the Fountain thirst; That He that gives Rest to our Souls should Himself
suffer weariness, John 19.28. John 4.6. Luke 9.58. Isaiah 53.12.
and He that gives us all things richly to enjoy, not have a hole himself where
to lay his head; That He that Justifies the ungodly, should himself be Numbered
among the Transgressors; That God the Judge of All should be tried for his Life
at Man's Bar, And He that did All things well, should himself suffer among
Malefactors; John 14.6. Mat. 26.56. Luke 22.22.
That the WAY should be Forsaken, a^ He was by his Friends and Followers; That
the TRUTH should be Betrayed, as He was by Judas; That the LIFE should be
Killed as He was by the Jews; That the Great God should be Sold, to Redeem
Man; Acts 3.15.
And the Living God die, that dead Man might Live; And be shut up in the grave,
to set Man at Liberty; In a word, That the most high God should humble himself
to so sad a Life, and the Lord of glory to so base a death, Luke 22.28.
spending and ending his Doleful days betwixt Perils and Pains, Hebrew 4.7.
Luke 22.44.
and Temptations and Persecutions, and Wants, and Weariness, and Fears, and
Tears, and Sweat, and Blood, till at length his tender body was extended to the
utmost torture that a cruel Cross could stretch it, and his meek and Innocent
Soul stretched to the utmost extremity of sorrow that it could possibly be
extended to, and all for poor Man that never deserved it, that never desired
it, that never once Thought of it, before he heard of it, ready rather to cry
out with Nicodemus, How can these things be? (so slow of heart to believe it,
John 3.9. Luke 24.25. Chap. 6.58.
having heard of it) crying out with the Jews, How can this Man give us his
Flesh to eat? But oh the Folly of man's wit, and the unreasonableness of their
reasonings that have not Faith? 2 These. 3.2.
for why should it be thought an incredible thing that the Condescension of
Divine Grace should surmount all Humane Comprehension, Phil. 4.7. 1 Timothy 3.16.
the Effect of which Grace is peace that passes all Understanding? that the
Mystery of Godliness should be GREAT, The first Principle whereof is GOD
manifest in the FLESH! Isaiah 9.6.
or that He should be an object of our admiring thoughts in all his Story, Romans
3.3.
the very first letter of whose Name is WONDERFUL? But thanks be to God that
the unbelief of man cannot make the Faith of God without Effect.

Sect. XXXVII.
ANd Oh how Joyful as well as Awful, Delightful thoughts of Christ. Numb. 24.17.
and truly Amiable as well as highly Admirable a Thought it is* that it was
TRUE MAN as well as very GOD that was engaged in all this; 'Twas the Star
proceeding out of Jacob that was ushered into the World by that Star in the
East, Matthew. 2.2.
'twas the Seed of Abraham that was waited upon by the Multitude of the
heavenly best, Hebr. 2.16. Romans 8.5.
and to whom it was said at his bringing into the world, Let all the Angels of
God worship him; for of the Fathers concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is
over all God blessed for ever, Amon. For since man had Fallen, by aspiring to
be like God, there was no way for his rising again, but by Gods Condescending
to become like one of Us. O comfortable thought to poor Man! that it was MAN
that fulfilled all Righteousness, Math. 3.15. John 16.33.
that wrought Miracles, that overcame the world, that satisfied Justice, that
appeased wrath, that subdued Sin, that destroyed Death, and him that had the
power of it, Hebr. 2.14.
that is the Devil, And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed
over them, and having risen from the dead in that very Body wherein he
suffered, Colos. 3.15. Acts 31.2.
and showed himself alive after his Passion by many infallible proofs, being
seen on Earth for the space of 40 days, He afterward in open sight ascended
into Heaven, Hebr. 1.2.
and sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, from thenceforth
expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool. Chap. 10.13. Cant. 5.16.
Zech. 13.7.
O this is Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh; this is our beloved, and
this is our friend; This is the Man that is Gods fellow; the Man whom God has
appointed to judge the world, and happy We whose Sur^ty is to be Our Judge;
Acts 17.31. Hebrews 5.1.
this is the High Priest taken from among Men, to bring us to God, the Ladder
reaching Heaven, and touching Earth, that he might gather together in one All
things that are in Heaven, Ephesians. 1.10. Hebrews 6.20.
and that are on Earth; This is Our Forerunner that is for us entered, and
has taken possession in that very Nature wherein He paid the Price, and made
the Purchase, Math. 25.3.
who entered first into our Sorrows, and acquainted himself with our Griefs,
that We might enter into the ^oy of our Lord, John 17.24.
and be where he is, that we might behold his Glory.

And Oh methinks the Divine Thought of this Immanuel the Incarnate GOD,
notwithstanding All the Magic that the World can use to betwitch our
affections, or to Charm our Thoughts to the things below, Exodus 7.12.
should be like the Rod of Aaron among the Rods of the Magitians, even a
Thought swallowing up every other thought! A Thought so great and so good, so
admirable and so acceptable, even worthy of acceptance; A Thought so dearly
engaging us, and so nearly concerning us, a Thought without which All other
Thoughts can be but a mear Chaos of Confusion, and will prove in the Issue a
very Hell of Horror; and a Thought with which the thought of Death is without
a Sting, 1 Cor. 15.55. Luke 21.28. 1 Pet. 1.8.
and the very Thought of Judgment does lift up the heal, and fill the heart
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. In a word, a Thought that by mutual
entercourses between Love on Gods part, and Faith on Man's part, does bring
Heaven down to Us, and will, if We follow it home, raise Us up to Heaven, 2
Cor. 3.18.
for whilst we with open face behold (as in a Glass) the Glory of the Lord, we
are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of Lord,
For as Gods ways are above our ways, as high as his Thoughts are above our
Thoughts, Isaiah 55.8.
so our ways will be above other men's ways, above the Corrupt way of Nature,
the brutish way of sense and Carnal Reason, as high as our thoughts are above
their thoughts; for whilst their God is their belly, Phil. 3.19, 20.
and they glory in their shame, who mind Earthly things; Our Conversation shall
b^ in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

O welcome then the dear and precious Thoughts o^ the blessed Jesus! who
thought of thee, O my Soul, Christ deserves. Psalm 136.23.
in thy low estate, and therefore deserves thy Thoughts; and puts himself
purposely in thy way, which way s^ever thou turnest thy self, And desires our
thoughts. Luke 22.44. Knocks at the door of every sense.
and therefore sure desires thy thoughts; for as there was never a pore in his
Body but He did sweat out his Blood at it for thee, and thy Good, so is there
never a door even of thine Exterior senses, but He knocks at it to be let in to
thy thoughts; Can thou hear, or see, or feel? why, that which we have seen
and heard, says the Apostle, 1 John 1.1. And ver. 3. 1 Pet. 2.3. Cantic. 2.1.
Chap. 1.13. Verse 14.
declare ^e unto you, and our hands have handled the word of life. Or can
thou taste? and have thou not tasted that the Lord is gracious? or is the Rose
of Sharon the only Flower that can ^^t please thy smell? The bundle of Myrrh,
the Cluster of Camphire, etc. are there no sweets in All these? Methinks my
Savior does even court my Thoughts, And puts himself in the way of our
thoughts by every good thing about us. Isaiah 11.10. Eccles. 7.11. Rev. 12.16.
Mal. 4.3. Romans 13 14. John 14.6. Chapter 10.9.
meeting them and me at every turn, in every thing that is excellent and
obvious. If I shut my eyes, He is my Rest, and this Rest is glorious; If I open
them, He is my Light, and truly this Light is pleasant; If Night fall, he is
the bright and fixed Star; If Day dawn, it is writ with a Sunbeam upon my wall,
that he is my Sun of Righteousness: when I get up, can I forget my Cloths, to
put on the Lord Jesus? Can I go forth, and not think of him that is the way? or
come in again, and not think of him that is the Door? Can I sit down to Eat,
and forget him that is the Bread of Life? and take a turn in my Garden among
all my pleasant Plants, Revel. 22.2.
and forget the Tree of Life? or refresh my sweating brow amongst Rivers, Verse
1. Isaiah 32.2. Zachar. 13.1.
Shades and Fountains, and not mind him that is the River of Life, the shadow
of a great Rock in a weary Land, the Fountain set open for Sin, and for
uncleanness? Can I gaze upon Gold or Silver, the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and
forget him whose very Reproach is greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt?
or please mine Eye with the Brisk and sprightly Diamond, or beautiful Emerauld,
and not call to mind that Pearl of great Price, Mat. 13.42.
for the sake of which the wise Merchant sells all he has to buy the Field in
which He finds it? Do I see the welcome Officer bringing a discharge to his
weary Prisoner, and forget him that has the Key of David, who opens, Revel.
3 7.
and no man can shut, and shuts and none can open? Do I see the Mariner drop
his Anchor, and forget him in whom alone is Hope, (which is the Anchor of the
Soul) is sure and steadfast? Heb. 6.18, 19.
Do I see the Soldier run to his Colors, and forget the Captain of my
Salvation? Chap. 2.10. Genesis 31.40.
Do I see the watchful Shepherd expose himself (as Jacob) to Sun and Shower,
to Wind and Weather, and forget him that laid down his Life for his Sheep? John
10.11. Matthew. 9.33.
Or the painful Harvest-Man, and forget him that is the Lord of the Harvest? Or
the careful Father settling his Estate by Will, and leaving it to his little
ones that he leaves behind him, and can I forbear to call to mind my Saviors
Testament confirmed by the Death of the Testator? Hebrews 9.16.
Do I see the Virgins preparing to receive the Bridegroom, Mat. 25.31.
or the Country going out to meet the Judge of Assize, and not my Thoughts run
out to meet my Savior. 1 These. 4.17.
In a word, can I think of any thing, and not think of Christ, who is every
good thing; If I be well, Psalm 42.11. Matthew 9.12. Philip. 1.21. John 11.25.
it is He that is the health of my countenance; and if I be sick, he is my
Physician; and if I live, Christ is my Life; and if I die, he is the
Resurrection as well as Life. So that as there is a strange disease that takes
some in their Heads, who live many years, but so strangely loose their Memory,
that they forget their own Name, it is much more a monstrous disease, that
takes Us in our Hearts, that makes us forget the Name of Christ; that We should
be so strange, and so sottish, and so stupid to the thoughts of Christ, which
of all the things in the World, ought in duty, and might in Reason, be most
ready, frequent, and familiar to Us, since God has made every good thing about
us, a plain prompter to our weak memories, in spelling out the Name of his Son
and our Savior Jesus Christ. We need no sorry Crucifixes, dumb Pictures, or
dead Images to be our Remembrancers (blessed be our God) to put us in mind of
him, Especially by the Lords Supper, instituted for his Remembrance. 1 Cor.
11.26.
who has drunk to us in his own Blood, and commanded us to pledge him at his
Table, and as often as we do it, to do it in Remembrance of him: O there do
thou muse, O my Soul, till, the Fire burn! O there let thine Eye, and thy
Touch, and thy Taste affect thy Thoughts, and let thy Thoughts inflame thy
Affections, that the more thou think of Christ, thou may love him better;
and the better thou love him, thou may think of him more; for there the
Bread of life is broken, that it may be Eaten; and this Eaten Bread is never to
be forgotten; there the Blood of Christ is broached, that it may be drunk, and
being drunk, Cant. 1.4. Gal. 3.1.
that his love may be remembered more then wine; for there is Christ before mine
eyes evidently set forth, even as if he were crucified among us. Th^^ the King
both sits at his Table, Cant. 1.12.
and is set upon the Table; for Christ is both the Master of the Feast, and the
Matter of the Feast; both my Entertainer, and Entertainment: and whilst I thus
see him, and feel him, and taste him, How can I but think of him? and whilst the
Bread that strengthens mine heart, strengthens also my Faith, and so Christ
steals into my Soul, as it were, by my Sense, and becomes the very nourishment
thereof, as the Outward Elements (Bread and Wine) are of the Outward man, How
can I forget my Savior, whilst I Remember my self? or shut him out of the
thoughts of mine Heart, Psalm 73 26. John 6.5.
who is the strength of mine heart? whose Flesh is my meat indeed, and whose
Blood is my drink indeed; whose Death is my life and my Reconciliation, and
whose life is my Glory and my Salvation; who, by his continual Intercession,
Hebr. 9.28. Exodus 28.29.
ever bears me upon his heart, before his Father in Heaven (even as Aaron was
to bear the Names of the Tribes of Israel upon his Breast Plate into the most
holy place) till He appear the second time unto Salvation, John 12.20.
and come again to take me to himself, that where my Lord is, there may also
his Servant be.

Sect. XXXVIII.
Holy Thoughts of Christ.
ANd as we must away with all sou^re thoughts of Christ, and All low thoughts of
Christ, so much more with all unsavory and loose thoughts of Christ; Our
Thoughts of Him must be Holy, as well as High; Romans 6.1, 2.
and Fearful, as well as Cheerful; The Apostle puts an absit upon the least
Thoughts, as if the coming of Grace were for the countenancing of Sin. What
says Moses concerning Christ? Beware of him, and obey his voice, Exodus 23.21.
provoke him not, for he will not pardon your Transgressions, for my Name is in
Him. What says David? Psalm 2.12.
Kiss the SON least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little. The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that he comes to give Law
(as well as Liberty) the Isles shall wait for his Isaiah 42.4.
Law, the Prophecy of our Conversion, who are Islanders in the Sea) and that
this Branch out of the Root of Jesse shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, Isaiah 11.1, 2.
and with the breath of his Lips he shall slay the wicked. The Angel says of
Christ, that his Name shall be called JESUS, Mal. 1.21. Acts 2.27. Mal. 5.17.
because He was to save his people (not IN their Sins, but) FROM their Sins.
Christ, when he was a Child, was the Holy Child JESUS; and when he was a Man,
He tells us that He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; And as John
Baptist told the People, that his Fan was in his hand, Mat. 3 12.
and he would thoroughly purge his Floor, they found it so, for He went into the
Temple, Chap. 21.21.
and scourged out the Buyers and Sellers, etc. in token that no unclean or
profane thing must expect admittance by Him into the Kingdom of God. No, no,
Mat. 3.11. John 16.8. Hebr. 10.1. Mat. 16.24. John 17.17. Acts 15.9. Philip.
4.7. Col. 3.25. Gal. 6.16.
The Baptism of Christ is a Baptism with Fire, and the Spirit of Christ is a
Reprover of Sin, the example of Christ a pattern of Obedience, and the Doctrine
of Christ is a Doctrine of Self-denial, the Truth of Christ a Sanctifying
Truth, and the Faith of Christ an heart purifying Faith, and the Peace of
Christ is a War with Sin, for it keeps the heart, and rules in the heart, and
it is only unto them that walk according to Rule, that the Gospel of Christ
says, Peace be upon them; but Tribulation and Anguish, Romans 2.8, 9.
Indignation and Wrath upon every Soul of Man that does evil, of the Jew first,
and also of the Gentile.

Take We heed then of thinking basely of Christ, Mat. 11.19.
as the friend of Sinners in their vile sense, who indeed thought him to be
altogether such an one as themselves; Psalm. 50.21. Psalm. 35.7.
but David's Thoughts were otherwise, thou love Righteousness and hate
Iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of
Gladness above thy fellows. A Friend indeed of Sinners, for he Dyed to save
them, yea the chief of them, 1 Timothy 1.15.
but yet an Enemy to Sin, for He came to make an end of Sin (says the Apostle
St. John) to redeem us from our vain Conversation (says S. Peter) and to
purify to himself a peculiar 1 John 3.8. 1 Pet. 1.18.
people, Titus 2.14.
zealous of good works, to sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water,
by the World, that we might be holy, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
and without blemish (says S. Paul.)

And now tell me, O Reader, is there any shelter for Sin, or license for Lust
in all this? O be not deceived, Gal. 6.7, 8.
God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap, for
he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption, but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting. For the GRACE
of God that has appeared bringing SALVATION, 2 Tit. 11.12.
teaches to deny ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, etc. Psalm 45.6.
For Christ is KING as well as PRIEST, and LORD as well as JESUS, and the
Scepter of his Kingdom is a RIGHT SCEPTER, and We cannot THINK RIGHTLY of it,
except we think it so. And O how terrible is this THOUGHT, that if We slight
this way, Hebr. 2.36. Chap. 10.26.
neglecting so great Salvation, by sinning wilfully against this Sacrifice,
there remains no (other) SACRIFICE for Sin, for there is no other Name given
but the Name JESUS: Acts 4.12. Heb. 10.28, 29.
And if He that sinned against Moses 's Law dyed without Mercy, how much sorer
must his punishment be, that trampleth under foot the SON of GOD?

Then think this of Christ, that if he be not thy Foundation-Stone, 1 Pet. 2.6,
Mat. 21.14. Rev. 5.5.6. John 5.22.
Elect and precious to thee, if thou be not built upon him, he will fall upon
thee, and grind thee to powder; for the Lamb of God is a LION too, and God
has committed all Judgment to the SON, and the WRATH of the LAMB shall one day
be found intolerable to the proudest of Men, when the Kings of the Earth, Rev.
6.15, 16, 17.
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
Men, and every Bond man, and every Free man shall call to the Rocks and the
Mountains to fall on them, to hide them from the face of him that sits upon
the Throne, and from the WRATH of the LAMB, for when the great day of his Wrath
is come, O who shall be able to stand?

O think of this ye Loose, Licentious, Caution to loose Christians. Rom 2.24.
(Sacrilegiously so called) CHRISTIANS, through whom the Sacred Name of Christ
is blasphemed among the Gentiles, what thanks will He give you that a TURK
should say (as they are ordinarily observed to do) What? do you think I am a
CHRISTIAN that I should break my Oath, or falsify my Faith? Or that an HEATHEN
should say, as that Indian Prince did to the Spaniards, who being about to put
him cruelly to death, but in (Ghostly Charity) persuaded him to turn Christian
before his death; He asked them, what he should get by that? they told him he
should go to Heaven with the Christians, He demanded whither went Indians, when
they dyed? They said, to Hell: He shortly Replied, He would die as he was; for
he had rather go to the Indians Hell, then to the cruel Spaniards Heaven; 'Twas
severely said by one, Aut hic non est Christus, -- pudet haec opprobria nobis
and dici potuisse, and non potuiste refelli.
aut hi non sunt Christiani; Either He, (whom you profess) is not the CHRIST,
or You are not the CHRISTIANS. Men and Brethren, let me freely speak to you, if
CHRIST'S coming into the World be signalized by Bacchanalian Rites and
Revellings, what shall a Jew or Infidel think either of Christ, or else of Us?
'Twas truly said, Peccatis nostris fortes sunt Barbari. Christians sins make
Barbarians more barbarous, Homil. against the peril of Idolatry. 3 P. page 45.
Jerem. 7.12.
Turks more Turkish, Jews more Jewish, as our Homily has observed, that
Popish Idolatry gives the great fixation to Turkish and Jewish Infidelity.

But as of old God sent the old Jews to Shilo, where He first set his Name, to
see what he did to it, for the wickedness of his people Israel, so may I send
the now Christian World to the once seven flourishing Churches of Asia, Revel.
1.11.
for if Christ be not glorified by Us, He will glorify Himself upon Us; and
therefore let every one that thinks of a Christ, think of this; 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let Every One that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity.

Sect. XXXIX.
Right thoughts of God, the Holy Ghost.
ANd as our Thoughts of the Father and the Son are only Right, when Regulated
by Scripture, so also of the Blessed SPIRIT; For as the Sun is not to be seen
(as we have said) but in its own light, (which yet is but a finite Created
Emanation from God the Father of Lights) much less can we conceive aright of
the Holy Ghost, Must be Scriptural. 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Cor. 2.14. Thoughts of the
Holy Ghost strange to the carnal mind.
but by Conceits congruous and harmonious to that Word which holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; For if the Natural man cannot
receive the things of the Spirit, He cannot surely conceive aright of the
Spirit himself, without both a spiritual light to discover, and eye to discern
him; Otherwise He must needs be both out of his sight and out of mind; For
Scripture says, that such a man's very Mind is carnal, and speaks of the Spirit
of this World as directly opposite to the Spirit which is of God. 1 Cor. 2.12.
We are great strangers to our own Spirits. John 14.7.
Alas what strangers are We to our own Spirits? (How little is our knowledge,
and how few are our Thoughts of them?) How strange then must the Knowledge and
Thoughts of the Holy Spirit of God be unto Us? This is that Spirit whom the
World cannot receive because it sees him not, Thoughts of God the Father.
neither knows him. The Thoughts of God the Father do more easily occur to
the natural mind, for Heathen Poets, and even the light of Nature teach us,
Arat. (...). Acts 17.28.
that We are All his Offspring, as the Apostle speaks out of the Po^t, and so
to seek the Lord, if happily we may feel after him, and find him, (though the
light that Adams Fall has left in us is little less then Darkness, so our
searching after God our Father, Verse 27.
is called a Feeling, as blind men use, a Gropeing, as they that have much
darkness, and but little light,) And as God the Father is not very far from
every one of us (as it is there said) so the Thoughts of God the Son are the
more obvious to us, And of God. The Son more obvious then of God the Holy Ghost.
because by his Incarnation he is come so near us, and there is a true Humane
Nature in his Blessed Person for humane Thoughts to employ themselves upon; 1
Cor. 12.3.
And yet it is said, that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, (that is, make
any right acknowledgment of the Son) but by the Holy Ghost; How then can any
man have any Right Knowledge or Thoughts of the Spirit, Right thoughts of the
Holy Ghost. Acts 9.31. Are Reverend. John 16 7. The Holy Ghost GOD.
but by the Spirit, who speaks by the Scriptures? And here as before, we are
taught to Rejoice with trembling, walking in the fear of the Lord, and the
comfort of the Holy Ghost. For who can but Rejoice in the Thoughts of Him whom
the Scriptures call the COMFORTER? and can but tremble before the SPIRIT? who
as He is One with the Father and the Son, (for there are three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, 1 John 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One) so is He to be considered and
Thought upon with one and the same joyful Reverence, and awful Rejoicing. A
SPIRIT in his E^s^nce.
As to his Essence, the Scriptures declare Him to be a Spirit, in declaring Him
to be God (for God is a Spirit) and declare him to be God, John 4 24. 2 Timothy
3.17. 2 P^^. 1.2^.
in declaring themselves to be the Word of God; for whilst one Text says,
that ( All Scripture (or the whole Scripture (...) is given by Inspiration of
God, (or God Inspired) and another, that holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, Isaiah 62.2.
the Natural Conclusion from the premises is this, Therefore the Holy Ghost is
God. And if we ought to tremble at the Word, how much more before him that
inspired and gave it forth? Agreeable hereunto it is, Isaiah 6.1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9.
that when the Prophet Isaias in that tremendous Text describes the Lord
sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and Seraphims crying one to another,
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts; which made the holy Man cry out, Woe
is me, I am un lone, because I am a man of unclean lips, etc. and mine eyes
have seen the King, The Lord of Hosts; The Apostle Paul expressly says, that
this holy Lord God was God the Holy Ghost; I heard the voice of the Lord, says
the Prophet, and he said go and tell this people, here ye indeed, but
understand not, etc. now says the Apostle, Acts 28.25, 26, 27.
well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, unto our Fathers saying, Go
unto this people, and say, hearing ye shall hear and not understand, etc. So
one while it is said the Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David; Acts 1.16.
Chap. 4.24, 25
Another while it is said, Lord thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth,
and the Sea, and all that is in them, who by the mouth of thy Servant David
have said, etc. and so Ananias his lying to the Holy Gho t is called a lying
unto God; Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Again Scripture (and Reason says)
that He that built all things is God. Acts 5 3, 4. Hebr. 3.4. Job 33.9.
Now the Spirit of God has made me, says Elihu, and if he made man the
Masterpiece, Man the Microcosme, well may it be said, Job 26.13.
that by him were the Heavens garnished, and by the sending forth of Him All
things else were Created; which Text by the after clause of renewing the Face
of the Earth refers to works of Providence. Psalm. 104.30.
Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. And as he made All things, 1 Cor. 2.10.
Isaiah 40.13.
he knows All things; The Spirit searches All things, yea the deep things of
Go^, for who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor
has taught him? And as He is Omniscient, he is Omnipresent; Psalm. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? says David, or whither shall I flee from
thy presence? In a word, He that prepared Christ a Body at his coming into the
World is God, Heb 10.5.
for says Christ, a Body have THOU prepared me, then said I, Lo I come to do
thy will, O GOD. But says the Angel to the blessed Virgin, Verse 7. Lu^e 1.35.
The HOLY GHOST shall come upon thee, and the power of the highe^t shall
overshadow thee; Therefore also (the Inference is most full to our purpose)
That Holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the SON OF GOD.
Therefore the Holy Ghost is God.

Sect. XL. The Holy Ghost called the SPIRIT as to his subsistence. Joh. 4.23,
24. Hebr. 1.3. Heb. 9.14.

ANd as the Holy Ghost is a SPIRIT in respect of his Essence, being One
glorious God with the Father and the Son; (for as God the Father is said to be
a Spirit, the Father seeks such to worship him as may do it in Spirit, (and
then it follows, God is a Spirit) and God the Son (who is expressly said to be
the express Image of his Fathers Person,) through the Eternal Spirit, (that is
to say) his Godhead) offered up himself,) So the Holy Ghost is The Spirit in
respect of his wonderful Subsistence in the blessed Trinity by way of ineffable
Spiration between the Father and the Son, Mat. 3.16, 17.
betwixt whom He carries and re-carryeth the mutual and Eternal expressions of
Divine delight and complacency which the Father and the Son have naturally,
necessarily, and unchangeably each in other; Gal. 4.6. Job 33.4. Romans 8.9.
who therefore said both to proceed from the Father, and yet to be the Spirit
of his Son, and called in the Old Testament, the Breath of the Almighty, and in
the New, the Spirit of Christ; His Mysterious Subsistence being most nearly
shadowed out to our weak apprehensions by our breathing, Romans 3 8. Mat. 3.11.
Isaiah 44.3.
which is the Going and Coming, Efflux and Reflux of our Breath, (and so he is
compared to the three fluid and moving Elements of Air, Fire, and Water, but
never to the dull fixed Element of Earth) for as the personal property of the
Father, is to Beget; of the Son to be Begotten; so of the Holy Ghost, John
15.27.
to Proceed. And now how awful should the Thoughts of Him be unto us, who is a
SPIRIT in his ESSENCE, THE SPIRIT in his SUBSISTENCE; in both, Uncreated,
Infinite, and Eternal; who dictated and Indicted the Word, built the World,
garnisheth Heaven, furnishes and renews the Face of the Earth, made Man,
Knows all things, fills all Places, Col. 2.16.
and is every where present at all times; whose peculiar and stupendous Work
it was to Sanctify the Womb, the Fruit whereof was to be the Savior of the
World, Mat. 28.16.
and prepare him a Body in whom the fullness of the Godhead was to dwell
bodily; 2 Cor. 15.14.
in whose Name, together with the Fathers and the Sons we are Baptized, and
whose Communion, together with the Grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, Hebr. 7.4.
and the Love of God, we do Implore; Of whom therefore I may say (as the
Apostle of Melchisedec, Now Consider how great this man was) Consider how great
this Spirit is.

Sect. XLI.
The high Reverence we ow to the Holy Spirit.
ANd yet Woe is Us! What slight, and low, and mean Thoughts are the Carnal Minds
of Men apt to have of the holy Spirit of God, which the Scripture foreseeing in
Deep wisdom (as in Parental Relation, the Mothers fear to be most easily and
usually neglected and forgotten by Children; It sets a special Guard upon it,
Levit. 19.3.
saying, Ye shall fear every Man his Mother and his Father, though her Order be
Lust, because the Fear of the Mother is ordinarily too much the least) so in
the cause of the Third Person, whose Order of Subsisting is after the Father
and the Son, though in Honor he be Coequal, and in Essence Coeternal, Sin
against the Holy Ghost.
I say, It (sets a most dreadful Guard upon that Awe and holy Fear that We owe
to the Holy Spirit, when it says, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men, Mat. 12.31, 32
but THE BLASPHEMY against the HOLY GHOST shall NOT be forgiven unto Men, And
whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him,
But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in his world, neither in the world to come; which last words are no
Indication that there is any Forgiveness of any Sin in another world that is
not pardoned in this, But a vehement assertion that there is no forgiveness for
this Sin in any world, Luke 1^.10. Mark 3.29.
Therefore where S. Luke says plainly, It shall not be Forgiven, S. Mark
explains this Phrase of S. Matthews, saying, It has never Forgiveness; And so
in the mouths of three Evangelists you have this dreadful Word established, and
this Guard set (like that terrible Cherubim and Flaming Sword) to preserve that
High Reverence that Mortals owe to the Holy Ghost. All other Blasphemies (says
Christ) wherewith soever they shall Blaspheme shall be Forgiven, Mark 3.28.
and indeed have been so; I was a Blasphemer, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13.
But I obtained mercy; But whosoever shall (wittingly, wilfully, and
maliciously ( Reproach the Holy Ghost (as the Pharisees here did, Mark 3.30.
they said (of Jesus) He has an unclean Spirit, whose works did testify of
him, That he cast out Devils by the SPIRIT of GOD, Luke 11.47. Mat. 8.12.
and that the Kingdom of God was come unto them (as himself speaks) Ten
Thousand Woes shall be the Portion of such an One.

Sect. XLII.
ANd here once for ever let me caution this Impious Age of coming near unto any
thing that looks like, or comes near the sin that is unto Death, Caution
against Reviling the Spirit. Numb. 26.16.
even as Moses charged the Congregation of Israel concerning Corah and his
Accomplices, 1 John 5.16.
that they should not come near those wicked persons, Let me charge thee, O
Man, whosoever thou art, in the fear of God, that thou entertain not a
Contemptuous thought, In Scripture.
much less utter a word against the written word of God, for it is (as you have
seen) the Dictate of the Holy Ghost. And here I cannot but make an Honorable
mention of that Honorable Person, Mr. R. Boil la his late piece of Scripture
style.
who has made Himself truly so, by that most serious and ingenious complaint
of his, of the Prodigious folly of the Times, whose only wit seems to lie in a
profane and scurrilous abuse of Holy Scriptures. But it may be observed as of
Our Saviors, so of these Scripture-scoffers, that as they were part of our
Saviors proof, that He was the Prophesied Messiah, for even those scoffs, as
we have seen, were part of what was fore spoken concerning him Eight and twenty
Generations before he was born; so are these part of the accomplishment of the
Prophecies of that Book which told the World of these Men ( sixteen hundred
years almost) before they came unto it, Be mindful (says the Apostle) of the
words which were spoken before by the Holy Prophets, 2 Pet. 3.2, 3.
and of the Commandment of Us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior: knowing
this first, that there shall Come in the Last days Scoffers. Wherefore We
revere in our Thoughts what they revile with their tongues, and so much the
more Because They do so. Matthew. 18.7.
But as Our Lord says, Offenses must needs come, yet they bring their woe with
them, so let me say to these Men in the Prophets words, Isaiah 28.22.
Be not Mockers, lest your Bands be made strong.

Further, Take we heed that our THOUGHTS despise not any of the Operations of
this Holy spirit, 2 Samuel 6.26. In Prayer. Jude 20. Ephesians. 6.16. Zech. 12.10. Romans
8.15. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.26.
as profane Michal did holy David in her heart. S. Jude speaks of Praying in
the HOLY GHOST; and S. Paul of Praying always with all Prayer and supplication
in the Spirit. The Old Testament speaks of a spirit of supplication, and the
New of a spirit of Adoption, crying or whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The spirit
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what to pray for (there is matter) as
we ought (there is the manner) but the spirit it self makes Intercession for us
with Groanings which cannot be uttered: Verse 27.
And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit, etc.

Preaching. Romans 12.6. Verse 7.8.
So likewise says the Apostle, having gifts differing according to the grace
that is given us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the
proportion of Faith, or Ministry, let us wait on Our Ministering, or he that
teaches, on teaching, or he that exhorts on exhortation; Now the
manifestation of the Spirit (says he) is given to every man to profit withal,
1 Cor. 12.7.
so that where there is no manifestation of the Spirit in the Preacher, there
can be no profit to the Hearer, for to One is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom to apply, Verse 8.
to another the word of knowledge to explain, (some excel in one thing, Verse 3.
some in another: but all) by the same Spirit, And (says he) I give You to
understand, that no man speaking by the spirit calls Jesus accursed: Verse 4.
John 15.26. and 16.14. Acts 2.4. 1 Cor. 2.4.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. It Is the Spirit when
we meditate, that must take of Christ's, and show it unto us; And when we speak,
it is the Spirit that must give us utterance, and Preaching must be not in the
enticing words of Man's wisdom, Sanctification^ 1 Pet. 1.2. Romans 8.9. Every true
Christian is a Saint. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Chap. 6.11. Ephesians. 1.1, 15. Romans
1.7. Mock Saints. Revel. 2 9. and 3.9. No ground for reviling the True. Genesis
34.30. Gal. 4.29. Dan. 7. Mat. 24.24. All the godly have Gods ^spirit. Romans
8.15. Verse 5.9. Gal. 5.16, 25. and 6.18. Romans 1^.15. 1 Cor. 6.19. Gal. 5.22.
Romans 8.2. Ephesians. 2.22. 1 Cor. 3.16. Romans 8.9, 11, 13. John 16.7, 8. and 14.26.
and 16.13. Psalm 51.18. and 143.10. Ephesians. 1.13, 16. Romans 8.14. Ephesians. 4.3. and
2.18.22. 1 John 4.13.
but in the demonstration of the Spirit.

Sanctification, moreover, is a peculiar work of the Spirit in every true
Christian; For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of
his. The Corinthians were made Saints, when they were Converted and made
Christians. To the Church of God which is at Corinth, etc. called to be Saints;
And such were some of You (says the Apostle to them) but now you are
sanctified by the spirit of our God so the Apostle salutes the Saints in
Achaia, Rome, Ephesus, etc. We have known indeed the Blasphemy of too many who
have said they are Saints, and are not, but do lie, but are of the Synagogue of
Satan (like those Brethren in Iniquity, who troubled Israel, and made him stink
among the Inhabitants o^ the Land) who shall bear their own judgment, yet this
shall no more excuse those Ishmaels, who persecute those that are truly born
after the spirit, and Revile the very Saints of the most High (as the Prophet
calls them) then it does the Indignities done to the True Christ, because, as
was Prophesyed) False Christ's do arise.

The Scripture says expressly, That the Children of God, are led by the Spirit,
do mind the things of the Spirit, are after the Spirit, do walk after the
Spirit, are in the spirit, must walk in the spirit, do sow the spirit, do reap
the spirit, have received the spirit, who is in them, whom they have of God as
Fruit-bearer, Lawgiver, yet a Liberty-giver, and Life-giver, as a Builder, and
as an In-dweller, to mortify and to quicken, to Convince and to Comfort, to
teach and to bring to remembrance, to guide into the way, to uphold in the way,
and lead to the end, to be the earnest of their Inheritance, and the Witness of
their Sonship, the seal and the sealer, wherewith and whereby they are sealed
unto the day of Redemption, by whom they have an access to the Father, who are
also an habitation of God through the spirit. Such are the undoubted Operations
of the Spirit in those that shall be saved, for hereby we know that we dwell in
Him, and He in us, because He has given us his Spirit.

And therefore take heed, good Reader, of reviling any of these workings, or of
scoffing at the words (for surely we cannot but think that the Holy Ghost knows
best how to express his own workings) O think of this, Hebr. 10.62.
that despite done to the Children of Grace supposes a Trampling under foot
the Son of God; And truly one would think one might say in this Case, as
Ahasuerus did in another, who is he, and where is he that durst presume in his
heart to do so? Hestr. 7.5.
O Tremble, good Christian, at the very Thought of such a thing, that the Holy
Spirit of God should be grieved or vexed by the sons of Men, Ephesians. 4.30. Isaiah
63.10.
but especially that any should presume to Blaspheme him. And let this serious
thought dwell with thee, That it is the Sin against the Spirit of Grace, that
excludes from Grace to Repent of SIN. Thou therefore that bowest the knee at
Our Father, and at the Name Jesus, Remember that there is a Third, who together
with the Father and the Son, is to be worshipped and glorified.

Sect. XLIII.
High thoughts of our Obligations to the Spirit.
TO proceed, He that has Right Thoughts of the Spirit, thinks himself alike
beholding to the spirit, as to the Father and the Son, in the business of his
salvation, for to the working of the Father and the Son, both which are Great
and Glorious in Man's salvation, there must be added the supply of the spirit,
For God has chosen us to salvation, Phil. 2.19.
as well through sanctification of the spirit, 2 These. 1.13. John 14.16.
as through the Belief of the Truth. And therefore (says Christ) I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you
for ever, even the spirit of Truth, etc. And again, It is expedient for you,
that I go away, And 16.7.
that I may send Him to you.

It is expedient; that is a great word, He says not only, it will be as well
for you if He come to you, as if I had stayed with you, but it is expedient for
you that I go, that He may come; As in works that must pass through more hands
then one, it is Expedient that the First hand be taken off, that the Finishing
hand may come. The finishing work in man's Salvation the Spirits work.
And therefore the Finishing work is the Spirits work. The Father (by his
Mercy,) The Son (by his Merit and Mediation) and the Spirit (of the Father and
the Son) by his Indwelling,) as these Three are One in themselves, so in Man's
salvation, which (Scripture says) is in the Son, 1 John 5.11. John 3.16. John
15.21.
given us by the Father, but sent us home by the spirit. When the Comforter is
come (says Christ) whom I will send to you from the Father, even the spirit of
Truth, He shall testify of Me. The Grace of Our Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and the Love of God is brought home to us, and We to it, by the Communion of
the Holy Ghost. The Son by his Incarnation (which was the Work which his Father
gave him to do) brought Heaven Down to us, John 17.4.
and the spirit in our Regeneration (wherein we are said to be Born of the
spirit) makes us his Temples and Gods Habitations, and builds us up to Heaven.
John 3.8. Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Hebr. 9.14. Ephesians. 1.6.
The Son Offers up himself, and makes us acceptable to a just God, through his
comeliness, that is to say, his Righteousness, put upon us; And there is also an
Offering up of us, a making of us amiable to an Holy God by the Holy Spirit,
Romans 15.16.
That the Offering up of the Gentiles (says the Apostle) might be Acceptable
being san^tified by the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 6.8. Hebr. 8.6.
The Maker of the New Covenant is the Father, The Mediator of it is the Son;
And the great Matter of it is the Spirit, for this is the sum of All, I will
put my spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36.2.
who is therefore called the holy spirit of Promise. Ephesians. 1.13. Holy Spirit the
great New Testament promise. Luke 2.25. Acts 1.4. Verse 7.8.
For as the Coming of the Messiah was the Great Hope and Expectation of the
Fathers of the Old Testament, which is therefore called a waiting for the
Consolation of Israel, so the coming of the Holy Ghost in the New, and
therefore called a waiting for the Promise of the Father; And therefore when
the Primitive Disciples were curiously inquisitive, and desirous of the
Knowledge of the Times and Seasons, Our Gracious Savior who best knew what was
best for them, confines them to and comforts them with this Expectation that
the Holy Ghost should come upon them. And Oh that many whole vehement Desires
run out that way, (viz.) after knowledge of times and seasons, would endeavor
more for the sweet Influences and Incomes of the Holy Ghost, Fruits of the
Spirit. Gal. 5.22, 23.
whose Fruits (says the Apostle) are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against which there is no
Law.

Sect. XLIV.
Blessed fruit.
O Blessed Fruit of the thrice-Blessed Spirit (for this was the Blessing of
Abraham come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.14.
even that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. The Fruit
that undid us was Forbidden Fruit, Genesis 3.17. Chap. 2.17. Romans 8.2. and 6.22.
Fruit against Law, but against such there is no Law: Man Eating of that Fruit,
was to die the Death, but this Spirit of Life makes us free from the Law of
Death, so that now We have our fruit unto holiness, and the end Everlasting
Life.

Sweet Fruit. 2 Cor. 3.17.
Sweet Fruit, may I well say, if Life be sweet or Liberty (for where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is Liberty) or if Peace be sweet, or Love lovely, or Joy
joyous: Or if these be not enough, here is Temperance, Meekness, Faith,
Goodness, etc. We may say here (as it is said in the Canticles) at our good are
all manner of pleasant fruits: Cant. 7.13.
Here, I am sure, I may say, and not beguile my Reader, Genesis 3.6.
are fruits pleasant to the Eyes, and good for Food (for the Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, Romans 14.17. 1 Cor. 2.11.
and Joy in the Holy Gho^t) and truly to be desired to make one Wise, for the
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, Verse 12.13.
now we have received not the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we may know the things that are freely given to us of God, which
things also we speak not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual; and therefore
He is called the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
that We might know the hope of his Calling, and the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints.

The Fruit forementioned was of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Genesis
2.19. Ephesians. 5.7. In all goodness and truth.
but the Fruit of the Spirit is in all GOODNESS, Righteousness, and TRUTH. Here
is ALL Good, and No Guile. So then if Goodness it self be Good, if
Righteousness be Desirable (for We through the Spirit wait for the hope of
Righteousness by Faith,) if Truth be amiable, Gal. 5.5.
(for He is also called the Spirit of Truth, John 15.26. and 16.13. Ephesians. 3.16.
2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 2.1.
and said to guide into All Truth.) In a word, if according to the Riches of
the Glory of God, We are strengthened with might in the inner man by the
Spirit, changed into the same Image from glory to glory by the same Spirit; If
there be any Consolation in Christ, or comfort of Love joined with the
fellowship of the Spirit; If God be a good Guest, (for Ye are the Temple of
God, if the Spirit of God dwell in you, 1 Cor. 3.16.
) Or if Heaven be worth having, or that it be good for us that dwell in this
Tabernacle, to be clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.4.
that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life, the Earnest whereof is the
Spirit, Verse 5.
Surely well may the Fruit of the Spirit be said to be in All Goodness. As Money
answers All things, in temporal Respects, Eccles. 11.19. Spirit answer^ all
good things.
so where one Evangelist says, how much more shall your Father give good
Things, etc. The other reads, How much more shall he give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him, so that the Holy Spirit answers All good Things.

Drunkards quench this Spirit. Isa^ah 28.1. 2 These. 5.19. Hosea 4.11. Ephesians.
5.18. Luke 21.38.
And here I cannot but lament the Drunkenness of our Ephraim, who by abusing
good things, sin away the Best Thing, quenching the Spirit with strong Drink,
which as it takes away man's heart, so it keeps away Gods Spirit, as Scripture
says, be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the
Spirit, for that clean Spirit can not dwell in an Heart (especially)
overcharged with Surfeiting, Drunkenness, and odious excess.

Sect. XLV.
Pray for the Spirit. Psalm. 143.10. and 51.11, 12. Acts 1.4. Survey his
Workings. Romans 8.20.
WHerefore, good Reader, say as David, Thy Spirit is good, and Pray as David, O
take not thy holy Spirit from me, but uphold me with thy free Spirit, Pray and
wait for the Spirit, having put the Promises in suit by Prayer. Survey his
daily workings, and work thou with him, for the Word himself uses as to his
helping our Infirmities, (...), is a Metaphor taken from two that lift together
one over against another at the same stone or piece of Timber to lay it in the
Building.

Prize his Witnessings. Verse 16.17. Acts 9.31.
Moreover, prize his Evidence, for as he works, so he witnesses with our
Spirit, that We are the Children of God, and if children, then Hens, etc. walk
in the comfort of the Holy Ghost (as Scripture speaks) even of his Evidence,
who is both Earnest, Seal, and Witness.

Listens to his motions. Revel. 22.10.
Listen to the Spirit, who never bids us to our hurt, the spirit says come,
take of the water of Life freely; His Charmings are Wise, his Reproofs an
excellent Oil, his Convictions, Kindness; and all his motions, James 3.17. Rev.
2.7.10, 29 Chap. 1.6, 13, 22.
Dictates and Counsels are first pure, and then peaceable. He that has an Ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, it is six times over in two
Chapters; it seems We are dull of hearing when Our best friend is speaking; We
could hear the Serpents first hissing, listen to Satan when he does but whisper
to us, but when the Spirit speaks so loud, that All should hear, even to the
churches, He finds deaf ears growing upon our Hearts; and when he comes unto us
by his sweet insinuations, we treat this Heavenly Messenger, as Hanun did King
David's, 2 Samuel 10.4.
cutting off his motions in the middle, and so we send him grieved back, to the
high provocation of God that sends him. But the Spirit is (as his Fruit is)
Long-suffering, or else He would not so long strive with Man, with froward and
stubborn man, but yet think He will not always do it, as God roundly told the
Old World. But Woe, Woe unto thee if thou Sin away the Spirit, Psalm. 51.11.
for casting away from Gods presence is inseperably annexed to the taking away
his holy Spirit, (as it is in the Psalmist) and those Spirits are sad proofs of
it, 1 Pet. 3.18.19.20.
to whom God went and Preached by this Spirit in the days of Noah, for being
then disobedient, they are now in Prison; And sure We cannot but think it just
and reasonable that we carefully hearken to him, when ever he comes on Gods
Errand to us, Who (if ever we would speed) must go on Our Errand to God, and
make Intercession for us. Romans 8.26. Grieve not the Spirit. Ephesians. 4.21. to
25.26. How that may be. By Commissions.


And oh how disingenuous and injurious must we needs think it, on the other
hand, to grieve him that Comforts us, which the Apostle says we do, when we
put not off, concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man which is corrupt,
according to deceiptful Lusts, and put not on the new Man, etc. when we put not
away lying, corrupt Communication, undue courses for a Livelihood (instead of
diligence in our lawful Calling,) anger, Bitterness, Evil-speaking, and all
Malice; even by All such undue Affections, Words and Actions; Nay that We
should Vex, yea Resist him, Isai h 63.10. Acts 7.51.
as the uncircumcised in Heart and Ears; nay quench the Spirit, with excess of
Wine, etc. as is said before, put him quite out (as Saul said, God is departed
from me, 1 Samuel 28.15.
and answers me no more) now Fire is put out as effectually by not putting on
of Fuel, as by putting on of Water, and the holy Spirit quenched by Sins of
Omission as of Commission, Omission.
by Contempt and wilful neglecting of holy Duties, Means and Ordinances; and
therefore Pray without ceasing, give thanks in every thing is put into the
front, and Despise not Prophesyings comes up in the rear of that Apostolical
grand Caveat Quench not the Spirit. 1 These. 5.17, 18, 19. Revel. 5.10.
Rather let us (as made by Christ Priests unto God) keep always burning upon
our Hearts this holy Fire: and stir it up by meditation, How to cherish the
Spirit. Psalm 39 3. Psalm. 143.10. Revel. 1.10.
while I was musing, says David, the Fire burned; and blow it up by Prayer,
Teach me to do thy will, O God, thy Spirit is good, etc. Especially let us
Pray, and watch, and wait (as the Primitive Disciples) for the Lords Spirit on
the Lords Day; And let us add the Fuel of diligent and industrious Observation
to all his fervent motions, when we hear the sound of his goings, 1 Samuel 5.24.
Heb^. 5 3.
then let us bestir our selves; When the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will
hear his voice, let us not harden our hearts, nor put him off till to morrow,
for the Spirit (is as the Wind that) blows where and when he lists; John
3.8. Rev. 2^.17. Harbor no base thoughts of the Spirit. Acts 8.19, 20. Acts
5.9.
when the Spirit says Come, let the Bride say Come, and let him that hears
say Come. Let us not harbor any Carnal, Low, base Thoughts of this glorious
Spirit, this was Simon Magus his sin. Especially let us not by close Hypocrisy
or secret dissimulation agree to lie to the Holy Ghost, and so to tem^t the
Spirit of the Lord, this was Ananias and Sa^hira's sin, and it cost them dear,
and they are peculiarly said to tempt the Spirit, because it is his peculiar
work to search All things. 1 Cor. 2.10.


Sect. XLVI.
The wonderful condesce^tion of the Holy spirit in the work of Men's salvation.
Mat. 6.9, 3. Romans 16.24. 1 Cor. 16.23. Gal. 6 13 Ph^l 4.23.
ANd now to shut up all, what Holy Fear and Love of this Holy Spirit may at once
fill Our THOUGHTS, when we consider that although HOLINESS be the ^eculiar
Attribute of the Spirit, from which he receives his Denomination (even as
Greatness is peculiarly ascribed to the Father (who is therefore said to be in
Heaven, and Kingdom, Power, and Glory to be his) and Grace to be the Son^ in
respect of which special property of the Spirit, All sin against God is said,
in a special manner, to Vex the Spirit, 2 These. 3.18.
yet such is the rich Mercy of this Holy Spirit in Condescension to poor man's
Salvation, that He undertakes it (as his peculiar Office and Work) to come into
man's Heart unsitted, and unfurnished, when Zijm, Ochim, and lim have dwelt
there, when vain Thoughts have lodged there, into a very sink of sin, a house
without windows, a heap without order, a very Hell of cursed Confusion and of
every hateful and hurtful lust, and that when there was none to go before him,
or to prepare for him, Whereas though herein God commended his love to us in
that while We were Enemies Christ dyed for us, yet would not the Son be born to
die, or lodge in a Womb, or come into the world, till this Spirit went before
him, Hebr. 10.5. As in the Margin.
to prepare a place for him, and to fit a Body to him, for so may the word be
rendered, a Body have thou prepared me, or a Body have thou fitted me.

O sweet spirit! what Tongue can praise, or heart prize thee according to thy
glorious Grace to poor sinners? Genesis 2.7.
When God first breathed into man the breath of Life, He was a lump of innocent
Clay; but when thou come to breath the breath of New Life into sinful man,
thou breathest into a noisome Carcass, an heart full of Rottenness, 1 King. 8
28. 2 Chronicles. 6.29.
and take up thy Dwelling in that very part where his Plague sore runs. And
now seeing Thou do not shun those that have the Plague of the heart; Come in,
thou blessed of the Lord, to this Heart of mine, Mat. 3.11. Isaiah 44.3.
Thou art a Fire that can purge my Dross, and not be impaired; a Water that can
wash away all my filth, and not be defiled; Now to thee, Blessed spirit, with
the Father and the Son, be Glory for ever. Amen.

Sect. XLVII.
FINALLY, As our Thoughts of God, Thoughts for God must be by Scripture Rule.
See Bp. Andrews, on the second Commandment. Image and Imagination, Cogitation.
Col. 2.23. Mat. 15.9. S^e Bishop Tailors Dissuasive, page 48. Isa 29.13, 14. 2 Samuel 7.2. 2 Chronicles. 3.3. and 29 25.
so our Thoughts For God are only Right, when agreeable to Scripture Rules,
For as the second Commandment forbids all IMAGES, so also all IMAGINATIONS in
the things of God that are not warrantable by the Word of God. The Hebrews
express both by one word, for Thoughts are the Images of things in our minds.
What the Apostle calls Will Worship, Our Savior calls Vain-Worship, though the
things may have a show of wisdom and humility, where the fear toward God is
taught (as in Popery) by the Precepts of Men.

When David took up thoughts of Building God an House, he consulted Nathan the
Prophet, which when Solomon was allowed to accomplish, it is said, Now these
are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the Building of the House of
God; which when Hezekiah did restore, it is said also, he set the Levites in the
House of the Lord with Cymbals, with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to
the Commandment of David, and of Gad the Kings Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet,
for so was the COMMANDMENT of the LORD by his Prophets.

Romans 10.2.
Zeal without Knowledge is Heat without Light, which is so like Hell, that it
cannot be pleasing to the God of Heaven; Mark 9.44. Mat 25.3^.
for Hell is a Fire that never goes out, and yet Outer Darkness. Wherefore,
Reader, when ever thou think to do any thing for God, Ask his Word first,
whether it will be well taken. How lamentable is it to think how perniciously
Our Thoughts for God may miscarry for want of this. John 16.2. Acts 26.9. 2 Samuel 6 6, 7. Bp. Tailors Preface to his Dissuasive. The Roman Church can never
justify her self from Idolatry, yet if it were but suspicious, God is jealous
and will not endure any causes of suspicion, or motives of jealousy. Things
like Idolatry can no ways be excused. Bp. Tay ors Diss^asive from Popery, page
57.
Some kill Gods Saints, yet think they do God good service, and says Paul, I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Poor Uzzah, no doubt, thought to do God a good piece
of service, when He put forth his hand to stay the Ark, when the Oxen shook it,
but God smote him for his Error, that he died. A severe punishment, may some
man think, and a slender error, especially considering that the Man meant
well; But when we consider that of all the Decalogue, the mention of Gods
jealousy is only annexed to the second Commandment, (now jealousy has a
sharp Eye not only upon the down right Act, but also upon every thing that
comes near it, or leads to it, or looks like it,) We cannot wonder at the
formidable instances of Gods severity recorded in Scripture, such as Uzzah
here, Chap. 9.24.
and Nadab and Abihu were, who offered ('it is not said Forbidden Fire, but)
strange Fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not, and there went out a
Fire from the Lord and devoured them. Lev. 6.13.
Only just in the Verse before there was holy Fire upon the Altar, which God
sent down from Heaven in the sight of the People, and God would have this Fire
reserved, Levit. 10.1.
and (it seems) only made use of in the case of holy Offerings. I shall shut
up his head with that remarkable Text of Scripture, Show them (says God to the
Prophet Ezekiel) the form of the House, and the fashion thereof, Ezekiel. 43.21.
and the goings out thereof, and the comings In thereof, and all the forms
thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
Laws thereof; and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them.

THE CONCLUSION Of the Whole, With Motives and Rules for the keeping of
Thoughts RIGHT.
Sect. I.
Exhortation to self reflection by and upon our Thoughts.
ANd thus having given Rules for the Trial of Thoughts, and certain Schemes of
such Thoughts as are according to Rule; Let me earnestly Exhort Thee, O Reader,
to think seriously of thy Thoughts, That Thou may know what to think of thy
Self, and what God thinks of Thee.

For, Non Aper Auditu, ^phynx visu, Simia gustu, etc. Prove. 12.^6. Verse 5.
For as man Excels not other Creatures in seeing, hearing, tasting, etc. but in
Thinking; So therefore is the Righteous said to be more Excellent then his
Neighbor, in this same Chapter where the Thoughts of the Righteous are said to
be Right; for herein a good man excels Another, more then another excels a
Beast, Psalm 49.25.
For even Man that is in honor, and considers not, is like the Beasts that
^erish, says the Psalmist. Therefore says he to God, Psalm 2.5.
Consider my Meditation, and if God consider our Thoughts, it concerns us sure
to Consider them; And therefore says also of himself, Psalm 49.2. Ab^eadom Rad.
The Meditation of my heart shall be consideration, or Anim-adversion (for so
the word signifies as well a^ understanding) and so may refer to the Reflex
Acts of the mind upon it self, as well as its direct A^^s upon other Things.

Sect. II.
ANd yet alas such is the Corruption of Man's Mind by Nature, that few can be
found free to think of their Thoughts, except it be corruptly to think them
FREE.

But yet They that are Partakers (...), of a Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Hebr,
1.3.
(to speak with Scripture) will bear some Resemblance of the Divine Mind, which
begets in it self the express Image of it self (as the Apostle speaks) by
self-Reflection. And as the Internal begotten WORD was the Eternal Delight of
the DIVINE MIND, ( I was daily his DELIGHT, Prove. 8.30.
) So if Thou make it thy Daily Business, conscientiously to converse with the
hidden man of thine heart, 1 Pet. 3.4.
in this Excellent way of self-Reflection; This will be not only as the
Chewing of the Cud in the Levitical Law, a sign unto thee of a clean heart,
Levit. 11.3.
but will also embalm thy soul, as it were, with a certain Divine delight, a
Caelestial serenity and satisfaction.

Sure I am that the best Christians do find themselves shortest fed with
spiritual Joy, when through Sin, Sloth, or Dissuetude, they are least Wont or
willing to turn into themselves by this self-Reflection.

The hidden Manna is meat for the hidden Man, Revel. 2.12.
and thou must turn in there, if thou would taste of Gods Dainties. Christ
will not sup with Thee, except He find thee at home, Revel. 3.25.
I will come in to Him (says Christ) and sup with him; And therefore if Thou
would sup with Christ, Thou must also turn in to Thy self. The stranger (to
God and the stranger to himself) does not interme Idle with this Joy. Prove.
14.16.


And now hoping, good Reader, that this little Treatise will find thee thus at
home, and All well there. I shall only add a few helps for the keeping
Thoughts Right, (for it is not enough that the Watch be well set, but it must
be well kept.)

1. In some moving Notional Considerations.

2. In some practical Rules.

Of each of these very briefly, and so we shall shut up all.

I. Motive to Right Thoughts.
1. Motive to Right Thoughts. Psalm. 146, 3. Thoughts will be always stirring.
Psalm 57.21. Isaiah 57.20. Isaiah 57.20.
COnsider that as thy Pulse, so thy Thoughts will be always Stirring to thy
Dying-Day. Now what is always in Motion, had need be well Ordered. If thy
Thoughts boil not up with a good matter, as the Psalmists did, they will be as
the Raging Sea that cannot rest, but is still casting up Mire and Dirt. Though
Thou can not always be waking, yet thou can Sin sleeping, Prove 24.9. Deuteronomy.
23.16.
because thou can Think sleeping, and we have seen that the very thought of
foolishness is sin. As in the Law, a Man might be unclean by that which
happened in the Night, so our Thoughts may drop Defilement upon our
Consciences, when we are asleep in our beds: And Oh let this Consideration
awaken us to Repentance even for Thought-sins of our ^^ep!

It Is the Policy of Princes to keep working HEADS well employed, and so must we
deal with our working HEARTS.

II. Motive.
2. Motive. Glorious Theme for thy Thoughts. Heb. 12.2, 3. Colos. 2.3.
NExt Consider what a Glorious Theme for thy Thoughts, God has provided (even
All GOOD in One) in that short and sweet Rule, CONSIDER JESUS ( in whom are hid
all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

Astronomy does but survey a Dunghill, for Stars are but Dirty Clods in
comparison of that Glory that lies within Reach of the ASTROLABE of thy
Thoughts if thou do but Rightly Consider JESUS.

Truth is, it is a wonder a Christian can much think of any thing for thinking
of his Christ, but that we are so much Corruption, and so little Christian.
Saint Paul could hardly do it; perhaps He forgot his Cloak at Troas, when he
left it behind him; yet he had nor, good man, much else to think of but the
Cloths to his back. But however, we are sure that we find him wrapping himself
up, almost every other line, in the warm Thoughts of a JESUS. Blessed Soul!
strip him to the Back, or rip up his Bosom, there you still find the marks of
the Lord JESUS. Gal. 6.17. As it is said, Callis might have been read in Queen
Mary's heart, if it had been ripped up.
And here methinks I could even forget my self, and run along in my Thoughts
with this sweet Apostle, but that I must not forget my Reader, for it is time to
be hastening toward a Conclusion.

III. Motive.
AGain, 3. Motive. Keep Right Thoughts, and they will keep thee right.
Consider that to keep thy Thoughts Right, is the way to keep Thee so. My Life
for thine, He that keeps his Thoughts Right, shall never die Traitor to God or
the King. Not to the King; for Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought, says
the Rule of Righteousness. Not to God, for Right Thoughts will yield the Fruits
of Righteousness. Fruits of the Lips, Psalm 45.1.
My heart is Inditing a good matter, I will speak of the things I have made
touching the King, Psalm 119.15.
my Tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer, so says the Psalmist. And the Fruit
of good living; I will meditate (says He) in thy Precepts, and have Respect
unto thy Ways: and again, I have remembered thy Name, and have kept thy Law.
Verse 55.


IV. Motive.
4. Motive. Right Thoughts will yield peaceable Fruit. Mal. 3.16. Verse 17.
ANd lastly Consider, That Right Thoughts will yield as the Fruits, so the
Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. For these are thy fair Evidences that thou
art in Gods Books (as we say proverbially of One highly favored) that Thou art
one of his Jewels; for a Book of Remembrance was written before him, for them
that Thought upon his Name; And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in
that day when I make up my Jewels. And how should We count and keep that as Our
peculiar Treasure, in respect of which God counts Us so.

And therefore in the II. place to Direct thee.

I. Practical Rule.
1. Practical Rule. Repent of evil Thoughts. Acts 8.22.
THe First Practical Rule for the Keeping of Right Thoughts, is Diligent and
daily Repentance of Evil Thoughts; what says the Apostle? Repent and pray God,
if perhaps the Thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven Thee. And O what cause
of deep Humiliation for our Thought-sins is here, that the very Thought of a
man's Heart may bring a Man to a peradventure, or a Perhaps, whether ever He may
be forgiven.

Matthew. 3.8.
What says John Baptist? Bring forth therefore Fruits meet for Repentance, and
think not to say within your selves, etc. Hence thus much is Evident, that
where Fruits meet for Repentance are brought forth, Evil Thoughts are expelled
and cast forth. Now as nothing can banish Darkness but Light, so can nothing
expel Evil Thoughts but Good Thoughts,

And as the Ablaqueation and laying of the Roots bare in the time of year, is
the way to make Trees bring forth Fruit well in their season; so the laying Our
hearts bare in the sight of God by Confession, Compunction, Contrition, deep
Humiliation for our Evil Thoughts is one way to be fruitful and abounding in
Good Ones.

II. Practical Rule. 2. Practical Rule. 2 Samuel 13.20. Make the evil of thine
heart subservient to thy good thoughts.

NExt, as the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every man his
Share, and his Colter, and his Axe, and his Mattock, because they would not
suffer a Smith in Israel; So deal with the Corruption of thy Nature, that would
not suffer One good Thought in thy Soul. Whee thy Thoughts for good, by that
very Contrariety that is in thee to good, For instance.

Thou complainest that such is the corruption of thy Nature, that thou can
not of thy self think one Good Thought; Why, Think then of the Corruption of
thy Nature, and even this Thought well followed, shall be a Good Thought in
Thee, and a Good Thought for Thee.

Thou complainest that thou can not think of Heaven for the thoughts of
Earth, and of things below; why, think of these things, only think of them
aright (viz.) as Gods Word, and thy Reason, and thy Sense tell thee, as what
God has placed under thy feet (as the Psalmist speaks): Let me tell thee,
Psalm 8.6.
that Right Thoughts of Earth, and of things below, may help, not hinder thy
thoughts of Heaven.

In Nature, the ambient Winter-cold makes Springs in the Bowels of the Earth,
(they say) the hotter. Man's heart is a Spring, and Thoughts are its flowings,
and thus David (we have seen) waxed hot with musing, while the wicked were
before him. Psalm 39.1, 3.
God can make Corruption of Nature subservient to Grace; as Joshua said of the
Canaanites, Numb. 14.9.
they are Bread for us; God can make the very Evil of our hearts to be Food and
Fuel to our Good Thoughts.

III. Practical Rule.
3. Practical Rule. Heave at thine heart. Numb. 15.20.
NExt Heave daily at thine heart, for our Thoughts are our Heave-Offerings. Lift
at thine heart, as they do at a great Stone, or piece of Timber, which is, by
raising, to be laid into the Building. Unto thee, Psalm 25.1.
O Lord, do I lift up my Soul (says holy David.)

But not in thine own strength. Pray for the Spirit to help thee to right
Thoughts. John 14.26.
But then still Remember, that of thy self thou art not sufficient to think any
thing (aright) as of thy self. Therefore Pray in aid of the Spirit, whose work
it is (as in Prayer so) in Meditation, (...), to lift with us, and to help us
to lift. And Pray in Faith of that Promise, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my Name, shall bring All things to your Remembrance, that is, good
Thoughts to your minds. And here let me desire thee carefully to Remember this,
That, if Gods Spirit do not, Satan will be filling thy heart. Acts 5.3.


The very First Petition in the Lords Prayer, teaches us to pray for Right
Thoughts, for by these we sanctify the Lord God in our hearts. Isaiah 8.13. 1
Pet. 3.15. Luke 11.13.
And therein also to pray for the Sanctifying Spirit, whom God has promised to
give to them that a^k him.

Be thankful for right thoughts. Psalm 30.4.
And further, be sure to be thankful to God, when he helps thee to be thoughtful
of that which is Good; in this sense, Give thanks at the Remembrance of his
holiness, even when he helps thee to Remember it. Humble thankefulness for what
we have is a cleanly way of begging for more.

Labor for holy affections.
And that thou may always be full of good thoughts, Implore Gods Grace to
fill thee with those sanctified Affections that carry the Key, and command of
the thoughts, (viz.) Holy Fear and Love.

Fear.
For the first of these, even slavish Fear can carry the thoughts before it (the
Mariners in a storm can easily think of their Danger) Jonah 1.5.
And shall not an holy and Filial fear? they feared the Lord, Mal. 3.16.
and (says the Text) they thought upon his Name.

And as for Love, And Love. Levit. 2.7. Cacabus ^ Rad. Hebr. ebullivit. Psalm
45.1.
as the Holy Fire under the Drying Pan, made the Oil of the Oblation to bubble
and boil up, (which is the Psalmists very word) Holy Love is this Fire that
makes Thoughts boil up, for the very first word of that Psalm, which is
entitled a Song of Love, is this, My heart boileth up with a good matter.

Experience tells us, Animus est non ubi animat, sed ubi amat.
that the affectionate and tender Mother can leave her thoughts behind her at
home with her sucking Child, when she goes abroad. Thus worldly Love will have
worldly Thoughts, and Gracious Love will have Gracious Thoughts. O how I love
thy Law! it is my Meditation all the day. Psalm 19.97.
And it is a sign Holy Love is but weak and feeble, when holy thoughts are but
faint and few. Deuteronomy. 6.5.


And here let the Reader most carefully observe, that where Moses lays down
the First and great Commandment, thou shall Love the Lord thy God, only in
three words, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might
(or strength. Mat. 22.37. Mark 17.30. Luke 10.27.
) Our Savior (repeating the Law) adds a Fourth, (viz.) (...), ex omni
Cogitatione so Bez. and vulg. etc. with all thy Thought or Mind, plainly enough
suggesting unto us, that the Strength of the Heart cannot be reckoned as
engaged to the Love of God, where the Thoughts of the Heart are not drawn Out
by it.

And therefore labor to ascertain and to clear up thine Interest in God, and
Christ, Mark 12.30.
and Heavenly things daily more, and more, for Christ says not where Another,
but where your treasure is, Luke 10.27.
there will your heart be also, for as Interest raises Love, Love has power
to levy Thoughts, and to keep them in readiness for its use and service, so
that if thy Treasure be in Heaven, there will thine heart be also. Luke 12.34.


IV. Last Practical Rule.
4. Practical Rule. Begin thy Days and thy Weeks with Right thoughts. Exodus
12.1. John. 20.2. Coloss. 3.1. Revel. 1.10.
LAstly, As the Israelites were to reckon their Beginning of Months from the
time of their Deliverance, so let the Thoughts of thy DELIVERER still begin
both thy Weeks and thy Days; for it was both upon the First of the Week, and
of the Day, that our Blessed Lord Rose again from the Dead, and We must imp our
Thoughts, if we would help their flight, upon the wing of Our Saviors
Resurrection.

S. John was in the Spirit on the LORD'S DAY, that is, on the First of the Week,
for it is generally confessed, that the First day of the Week was as well known,
by the Primitive Christians in the Apostolical Age, by the Name of the
Lord's Day, as any other day was or is, by Jews or Gentiles, known and
distinguished by any other Name.

Thus did the dear Disciple begin the Week, and thus did Holy David still begin
the day, whose constant course was to take his slight for Heaven on the wings
of the Morning, Psalm. 139.18.
( when I was awake (says he to God) I am still with thee.) And thus should
the First-lings of the flock of our Thoughts be for God still, Gen 4.4. Matthew.
6.33.
still; First seek the Kingdom of God, that is, not only above All, but also
every Week, and every Day, first of All.

Of all the Ten there is but One Commandment that begins with a REMEMBER, O
forget not that. Exodus 20.8.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. This is the standing Law,
commanding one Day, or Seventh part of the Week, (blessed of God above all the
rest) to be set apart for God, for so also the Commandment ends, Verse 11.
Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy.
the Lord Blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it. The Perpetual
obligatoriness of which Law, is strongly asserted by the Learned Hooker, and
declaredly owned by the Church of England, there being subjoyned to the public
reading of this fourth Commandment, as well as of the rest, a Lord have mercy
upon us, See also the Hom. of the Place and Time, etc. Titus 1.16. John 1.3.
and incline our Hearts to keep this Law. And if in Words we confess this Law,
O let not our Works deny it.

Now as the SON of God, being Maker both of the First Creation and Sabbath, for
by Him were All things made, and without Him was nothing made that was made,
(as we have already seen) First blessed that Day wherein He first Rested, for
the Commemoration of that First and Glorious work of his; So after that He
became the SON MAN, Mark 2.28.
being still LORD of the SABBATH, He has dignified the First Day of the Week
with the glorious Title of the LORD'S DAY, having Rested therein from a greater
Work (viz.) the Suffering and state of Death, which was the last and Finishing
Work of his state of Humiliation, and therein blessed and hallowed it for our
Commemoration of the more glorious work of Redemption. For as the glory of the
later Temple, Hag. 2.9.
was greater then that of the former, because Christ was more manifestly to
appear in it, it may be (as truly and for the same reason) said of Gods
Workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in CHRIST JESUS unto good works, that the glory of the New Creature
excels that of the Old, for the more manifestation of Christ, still the more
Glory, till at last He shall come to be perfectly glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all them that believe; 2 These. 1.10.
For herein has he obsignated, and given an undubitable pledge of that REST or
SABBATISM, that remains for the People of God, Hebr. 4.9.
when (upon the general Resurrection of their Bodies) they shall Eternally rest
from Sin and Death, 1 Cor. 15.20.
for Christ is risen as the First Fruits of them that sleep, and therefore
(says He) thy Dead Men shall live, Isaiah 26.19. John 14.19.
together with my Dead Body shall they arise, for because I LIVE, Ye shall live
also.

To allude then to that Word of our Savior, John 12.31.
When I am lifted up, I will draw all men to me (and indeed when the King is up
and gone, it is not for the Courtiers to loyter and lag behind.) O methinks
this Resurrection of Christ should DRAW All our Hearts and Thoughts to him.
Colos. 3.1.
If we then be Risen with Christ (says the Apostle) Let us seek those things
that are above, Psalm 24.7. Psalm 110.7.
and then especially when He arose, Then Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be
ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, for this Day did your dearest Lord lift up
that head from the Conquered Grave, John 19.30.
which He bowed before upon that bitter Cross, that as his Death was the Death
of our Sins, so his Resurrection might be the life of our Souls. Psalm. 118 24.
This, this is the day that Our Lord has made, We will Rejoice and be glad in
it; Every other Sunrising can make another Day, Mal. 4.1.
but it is only the Rising of the Sun of Righteousness, with healing in his
wings, that made the Day we style the LORD'S DAY, and therefore when the Burden
of the Week (for sufficient to every day is the Evil thereof) has made our
Shoulders shrink, Mat. 6.34.
and galled our back, this blessed Day takes off the Burden, and lays on the
Balm, heals the aching Heart, Relieves the weary Thoughts, and (in a word) it
brings Heaven half down to us, and takes us half up to Heaven.

Wherefore, good Reader, let thine Early Thoughts and Spicie Meditations begin
every morning of this blessed Day (as the good Women in the Gospel) with a
gracious and holy visit of thy Saviors Sepulcher, Luke 24.1, 6.
till the Heavenly Ordinances of that Day proclaim to thee, as the Angels to
them, He is not here, but is risen, John 14.2, 3.
and is gone before thee, to prepare a place for thee, that he may come again
and receive thee, that where He is, there may thou be also.

And as the First day of each Week thus employed, will sanctify unto thee the
rest of the Week, so will the First of each Day, the rest of the Day; when by a
Sunbeam thou can climb to God, Herber^ in Temple. Close thy days with good
thoughts.
as Divine Herbert most sweetly expresses it.

And now having found thee with Him and Holy David in the Morning, I would
choose to leave thee with Isaac in the Evening, who was wont at that time to go
out to MEDITATE, That as God is Alpha and Omega of all things, He may be the
Beginning and the End of thy Thoughts, for with Him it is that this little Book
both designs and desires to leave Thee. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

