THE Whole Life and Progress of Henry Walker the Ironmonger.

First, The manner of his Conversation. Secondly, The several offenses, and
scandalons Pampehlets the said Walker has writ, and for which he is now a
Prisoner in Newgate. Thirdly, The form of the Indictment which is laid
against him, by the Kings Sergeants at Law, and his learned Counsel. Fourthly,
His Conviction by the Jury. Fifthly, His Recantation, and sorrow for the
public wrong he has done his Majesty and the whole Kingdom.
Here are also many remarkable passages concerning the offense, and
apprehending the said Henry Walker, with a true Relation of his several
escapes and rescues from the hands of Justice; etc.

Collected and Written by John Tailor.

Printed at London 1642.

Walkers Recantation, together with his Life and Conversation.
IT is too much apparent to this whole Land or Kingdom (which our Gracious
Sovereign is the Lords, Anointed over) what, and how many, and numberless
Pamphlets, seditious and scandalous Libells, impudent over-bold, impertinent
and saucy Petitions, to the great discontent of his Majesty, the abuse of the
High Court of Parliament, and disorder or cause of the (too much confusion
throughout all his Majesty's Dominions have bin dispersed.

The chief or maine stickler in this cause has bin this Henry Walker, of whom
I (...) to treat in these ensuing lines; and first to begin w^ th his
beginning (as far as I know) The truth is, he was an Apprentice to one Mr.
(...), an Iro^ monger in Newgate Market; his time being expired (I know not how
or when) he did set up that Trade in diverse places of this City of London; but
his Trade and (...) felt at odds one with the other, so that there was a breach
betwixt them, and being there was no (...) they parted, and never mean to come
together again: Then he having left selling Grydirens and (...) a gadding
(...) walked and found out a softer occupation, and (...) up a Booke-sellers
Shop, fell to Booke-selling; He not having any word of God in his said Shop
above the bulk or fize of a Horne-booke. In these troublesome times Mr. Walker
set his wits a work to compose such things as he supposed would vent or be
(...), amongst such people as understood them not, loved contention, or were
willing to believe any thing that tended to rend or shake the (...) of either
Church or State, and such (and no other but such) were all the Pamphlets, which
he (the said Walker composed, (...) (...) printed and sold, of which kinds of
stuff it is supposed that he (...) near 300. several ones, of which number
many (...) bin printed 1500. or a 200. at an Impression. and (...). ((...)
least) of any one of them, besides some of them have (...)twice or thrice over,
so that there has not bin (...) 4. or 500000. of such Pamphlets of his
dispersed, by which (...) or doings, some hundred (...) threadbare (...) Trade
of scandalous Writing, and News making, and would be called (...), some half
a year (or there abouts) Mr. Walker did set his (...) to his worthless
works, till at last his name grew odious and contemptiblc, so that his (...)
would not sell, if people did perceive that they were of his doing. Then he
set out his Rarities, namelesse and shameless, in greater numbers than
formerly he had done, so that all this Kingdom or Island of Great Britain,
with the Principallity of Wales and Realm of Ireland, were (...) over with
Lies, (...) and Lice; nay these scandalous fooleries (or knaveries) were of
such Attractive force and power, that they drew at least 500. Vagrants and
Vagabonds from all the Shires round about London, and they were all suddenly
Metamorphis'd and Transformed into wandering Book sellers; every one of them
(like apt Scholars) had quickly learned the Art to Cry, Will (...) buy a new
Book, new^lye come forth. This has past without controlement to the abuse of
Church and State, the scandal of the whole Kingdom, the injury (...) this
Honorable City; the raising of strifes, divisions, and bad (...) in many
people of weak (...) and judgments; and to the mighty impeachment and
detriment of the Worshipful Brotherhood of the Stationers, who are at great
charges in paying all duties and Taxes, and that now (almost two years) the
Bread has bin eaten out of their mouths by those (...), commonly called
Mercuries and Hawkers.

Walker continuing still in this course, cursed course, his ragged Regiment of
Tatterdemallions daily vending and dispersing his (...) Pamphlets, at last, one
night late he was by a Watch in London taken for a Rat and carried to the
Counter; the next day he was brought before the Right Honorable Sir Edmond
Wright, (then Lord Major) where (upon some occasions) was one (...) Brown a
Stationer, whom Walker desired to speak a good word for him to the L. (...),
to whom Brown answered that he would speak.

And speak he did to the purpose, for when my L. came to examine Walker what
he was, and how he lived, he being not able to give a good account for
himself, then Brown began to certify my Lord of Walkers good behavior in
manner and form following.

My Lord ((...) he) I do know this Walker to be an arrant Rascal, an (...) by
his Trade, which though it be a Worshipful Company, yet it cannot contain
him, nor he it; but he is a base intruder, and a (...) into the Trade of the
Stationers or Booke-sellers, wherein (...) unlawfully does invent, write,
print, and scatter all the (...) bables (or the most part of them) that (...)
the City and (...), and I do humbly beseech your Lordship to take some (...)
him, in restraining him from doing any more. Upon these words (...) Major would
have bound Walker to answer at the Sessions, but he (...) to desist and return
to his old Trade again, was dismissed, and (...) for that time got off. Yet for
all the promises Mr. (...) walked (...) in his callumnious Art and mystery of
Libelling, until at last his old Master (...) him a shame, paid him in his
own Coin thus:

He having gotten some notice from some of his (...) scowtes, that his (...)
intended to come to London, to the Guild Hall (...) next day, which his (...)
did, and dined at Sir George Garrets Knight, and one of the Sheriffs and
Alderman of the City, (near (...) Church) Walkers invention being mounted upon
the Altitude of (...), he plotted and contrived with a Printer, the said night
before to write and print a perrillous Petition to his Majesty, and borrowed
the (...) wives Bible, out of which he took his (...) out of the first of
Kings, Chap, 12. ver. 16 part of the verse; To your (...) O Israel. There was
writing and printing all night, and all the next day (...) Libels were
scattered, and when his Majesty had dined, and had taken Coach to returue to
White Hall, Walker stood watching the Kings coming by amongst the Drapers in
Paul's Churchyard, and having (...) of his 'Pamphlets in his hand meaning to
have delivered it to his Majesty, but could not come at him by reason of the
press of People, insomuch as Walker (most impudently (...)) threw it over the
folks heads into his Majesty's Coach. The Earl of Essex being also in the
Coach took it up, and kept it till his Majesty came to his Palace, where
(...) caused it to be read, and finding it a most seditious thing, the next
morning after caused the L. (...) Justice of the Kings Bench to be sent for,
who obediently came to his Majesty, to whom the said Pamphlet was delivered,
with charge with all diligent speed to send forth Warrants, for the taking of
(...) and the Printer, in which business there was used such vigilant care,
that they were both taken that very day and brought before the said L. Chief
Justice, and being examined apart, Walker said he wrote it (...), but that he
bought it of a young S (...) all in (...) in Westminster Hall, and that it cost
(...) two shillings six (...), this was Walkers Consession, which he
subscribed unto.

But afterward the Printer was examined, and he (...) that Walker (...) it all
with his own hand, and for the doing of it made use of his Wives Bible, in his
house, to which confession the Printer has also set his hand.

My Lord Chief Justice caused both their Mittimusses to be made, whereby they
were sent to the Kings Bench in Sonth-warke by two Officers of good place and
trust; in which Prison they remained a (...) or near, until it was thought
meet to remove them from the Kings Bench to Newgate, whereby they might be
tried at the next approaching Sessions, for which purpose they were removed as
aforesaid two days before the Sessions; (...) they taking Boat on the Bankside
were landed at the black Friars, whereby a Rout or rabble of (little better
then) Rebels, they were violently taken from their Keepers rescued, and so got
away that there was no finding of them in many weeks search and enquiry.

But all these fair warnings could not make M. Walker give over writing, lying
and Libelling, (selling scurvy base words for good money) lodging in by places,
holes and Cellars, till one time he was seen to go into the house of another
(...), one Fisher a Barber an Associate of his, but as some would have
apprehended him, he made use of his (...), for at that time there was no
Officer to be found to take him.

From this second escape he (...) into St. Martins, whither he was pursued, and
where he had a Printers Press at work, but being not able to recover that
house, he got into an Alehouse called the sign of the Castle, the owner of it
(as I have bin certified) is one (...) White, but from (...) he was set free by
the disorderly stir and force of some unruly (...) Shoomakers (who surely knew
not what they did) and this was his third escape.

The news of this caused more and more Warrants to be issued out for his
(...); and there was such narrow search made for him that he was (...) of all
his starting holes, and (...) sculke no where secure, so (...) he was feign to
(...) himself in the disguise of (...) Minister (...) a (...) Cloak pendant to
his (...), a spiritual (...), girt to him with a (...) girdle and a Canonical
(...).

With this Artificial borrowed habit (and some natural impudence of his own)
he presumed to mount into the (...), at Saint Mary (...), at (...) in
Southwark, where (...) so handled a (...), and made such a preachment, that
what with liking and (...) the people were ready to go together by the (...);
at (...) time an Aldermans man ((...) curious to hear what stuff (...) would
vent) was abused much, and beaten (...) little.

All this while his Majesty is justly and highly offended, that no (...) is
taken for the suppressing of (...) and (...), and in two (...) at several
times from his Majesty to both the Houses of Parliament, he nominates Walkers
Pamphlet of To your (...) O (...): and indeed whosoever shall read that Text
and consider the (...) it did in the (...) of (...), the Son of Solomon, in
making 10. of the 12. (...) to fall from the King to (...) the Son of Nebat,
(they being both wicked Kings) may think it (...) strange piece of Scripture
to be spoken, written, or (...) in those (...) so mild and gracious a King, to
(...) or estrange the hearts of wavering (...) from their (...).

Well, great (...) is made night and day, and (...) having a house about (...),
he forsakes it, and escapes when it was beset for him, from thence (...) got
into the Tower liberty (...) an Upholsters (...) in the (...); and being heard
of, new Warrants being (...) for (...), he was (...) in the said shop by one
that knew him, and that he knew came to take him, wherefore by the help of two
women there, he violently burst away, running toward the Tower Stayers, (...)
an Arrest, an Arrest, and so got into a (...), offering any gold or silver to
be carried away.

Thus (...) he in the Boat almost a quarter of an (...); hundreds or
multitudes of people standing on the shore on the (...) the Officers not daring
to fetch him of the water least they should entrench upon the liberty of tho
water Bayliffe, so that some would rescue him (amongst whom two (...) to be
(...)) and do (...) to have a reward over the shoulders; others would have him
come on Land and yield (...): at last the Officers that were appointed to take
him went to Sir John (...) Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, (...) crave his
Command for taking him. Master Lieutenant presently sent his Clarke to the
water side, upon whose coming the (...) began to stowe away with (...); then
strait four pair of (...) made after them, who beleagured him on both sides,
and with much (...) brought him to Land, and into the Tower, where he now
remains, expecting his time of Trial, and let him escape how he can or may,
it is (...) that (...) has done more mischief by his (...) sed^ tions, (...)
Lies and railing Libells, then one thousand of his heads are worth.

But now to come a little nearer, Henry Walker, who is now to be removed by a
Warrant directed to the (...) of the Tower, which was on Tuesday last being the
fifth of this month of July, (...) have the body of this (...) Walker to be
removed to (...), and there at the (...) house in the (...) to have an
Indictment framed and drawn up against (...) said (...) Walker, for the
several acts which he has committed in and about London: the true Indictment
being made by the advice of the Kings (...) and Counsel at (...), was
preferred against the said Walker on (...) after being the eighth of the (...)
month, which being read openly in the Court, and Walker there present (...)
the Bar; pleaded to the said ^^^^^tement not guilty; and being (...) how he
would be tried, answered, by God and his Country, and withal further d^sired
of the honorable Bench; that he might first have a Copy of his Indictment.
Secondly, that the Judges who were then present with the rest of the honorable
Bench, that they would be pleased to (...) him the liberty, in regard he knew
not the Law, that he might (...) Counselor of the Law to plead his (...) for
him; both which requests were granted to him which was a great favor. (...)
the Bench asked Walker what time he would require to make his (...) then Walker
(...) but till the next day in the morning to make his defense, which was
Friday; Friday being come about ten of the clock the (...) Attu^ney and two
(...) at Law, (...) the Indictment to be read; which (...) done, they (...) to
show and did make it plain how odious the matter was, and how it was a (...) of
a high nature; first against his Majesty, to make him as it were odious to his
people: To your Tents O (...); as if the King were a Tyrant, bidding as it were
every man to take his Sword and (...); and oppose all Authority whatsoever,
obeying no Law but that of their (...) humor and will; what can there be more
said, but that (...) was (...) plain, but that this Walker did by (...) words
labor to (...) and stir up the Kings Subjects to (...), and to cause tumults
to (...) in this Kingdom, nay in the heart of this Kingdom, in the City of
London too; not only to teach these words, but to cause them at his own
charge to be printed, and to divulge the same through his Majesty's Kingdoms:
Nor did this Walker rest himself therewith satisfied, but in an (...) way, and
in a bold manner, as the Kings Majesty passed through the City of London riding
in his Coach threw one of them into the very Coach it (...), and in the very
face of the King; what an affront was this? can any age parallel it, or any
Chronicle make mention of the like and in a Civil Commonwealth; and in a well
governed City; I (...) not: nor is this all for this Walker has invented and
writ diverse Pamphlets, and other scandalous Books, to the great disturbance of
his Majesty, and of (...) Liege people, a (...) sower of division, an upholder
of a new (...); an inventer of a new Doctrine, nay, he is become a (...) and a
deliverer of this his humor even in the Church, and openly in the Pulpit too,
and on the Sunday: drawing after him, and seducing poor ignorant people to the
very ruin of their souls, if it were possible. This act of his, it was done
with much venom, malice, bitterness, and (...); (...) the time because the King
and his Parliament were then at some difference, who did as much as in him lay
to set his Majesty and his Subjects together at discord; it was drawn with
cunning, (...) at such (...) time published, that if envy itself had plotted
it, it could not (...) come forth in a more dangerous season. He confessed it
was his own work, and (...) by night; and the next day by him exposed to
sale: it was a foul (...), and it was published with an ill intent. Nay what
is this (...) not, what wrong he has done let his own conscience, his
several Books and Pamphlets, which he has both written, made, and printed
them himself witness. Well, the Jury hears the information, the several
pleadings, the several Witnesses that this Walker was the only framer,
inventer, publisher, and disperser of that Book (...) your Tents O (...); upon
which several Evidences, the Jury withdrawes themselves, (being 12. honest men
and of a good rank and quality) to consider of the matter; which being truly
weighed, and a long time debated and scanned, agreed all in one mind, calls
for Henry Walker to the Bar; who being come to deliver their Verdict they all
declared him by the voice of their Foreman to be guilty both of the Trespass
and of the misdemenour. He was convicted, 1. For writing of it. 2. For the
composing of it. 3. For the publishing of it himself at the Printers house,
and receiving money for them. Which done he had nothing to say for himself,
nor his Counsel neither, but only he did it not with an ill intent to (...)
any harm. And now he is heartily sorrowful for it, and begs the Kings mercy,
and the charitable censure of all men for his rashness and over-hot zeal;
especially of his sacred Majesty, whom he has most offended; and for his
Majesty's clemency to him, he will ever be bound to pray for him; because his
Majesty did give Command that his (...) should not be put against him for
Treason, but only for a misdemenor; which if it had bin preferred for Treason,
it might have bin as well found and have cost him his life, as for this fact of
misdemenour; and so I H. Walker am heartily forry, and desire God, his Majesty,
and all his Majesty's Subjects to forgive me, and by my example to forsake
these private and secret meetings, or rather conventicles; and so with (...) I
submit my self to the Law; and the punishments whenever it shall be
denounced and inflicted upon me.

Dated the 12. of July, 1642.
FINIS

