A TESTIMONY FOR THE LORD, THE GOOD SHEPHERD, Against All the false Shepherds
and Hirelings of the World, and more especially, or particularly those of that
Sort in the Nation of England.

By Thomas Tailor.

Woe be unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of my Pasture, says
the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God of Israel, against the Pastors that feed my People, Ye
have scattered my Flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them;
behold, I will visit upon you the Evil of your Doings, says the Lord, Jer. 23.
1, 2.

Printed in the Year 1675.

A Testimony for the Lord, the good Shepherd, and true Minister of the
Sanctuary, and true Tabernacle which God has pitched, and not Man, against all
the false Shepherds, and hireling Ministers, and Teachers of the World, under
what Name, or Notion, or Form soever, who have run, and God never sent them,
and therefore cannot profit the People at all.
HEar the Word of the Lord God, that is gone forth against you like a Flame of
Fire, in this the mighty Day of the arising of the Almighty Power of the Lord
God Almighty, who is jealous of his Honor, and who is tender of the poor
Souls, whom you have deceived, and do daily make a Prey of for filthy Lucre,
your End is 2 Pet. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 1^. Dan. 5. 26, 27.
come, the Day has revealed you, and in God's Balance are you weighed, and
found altogether wanting, and therefore is your Kingdom departed from you; and
now the Lord God is setting up his own most Heavenly and Everlasting Kingdom in
the Hearts of his People, who in the Leadings of his Light are come out from
amongst you, and D^ 1. 7.
who through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their Testimony, have
gotten Victory over the Beast, the Whore and false Prophet, who have defiled
the Earth with their Abominations, Lies and Lewdness, and he will yet gather
more from amongst you: And now the Kingdom under Dan. 7.
the whole Heavens is, and shall be forever the Portion of the People of the
Saints of the most high God, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all
Dominions shall serve and obey him, who lives forever, who is arisen in this
his glorious Day, not only to reveal, but even to destroy to the uttermost the
Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition in all the Earth, which has fate in the
Temple of God, 2 These. 2.
as God, saying he was God, and has long exalted himself above all that was
called God, which alone ought to be worshipped; but the Lord is arisen to
dethrone him, even that wicked One, who would not suffer the true Seed, the
true Heir, Christ Jesus, the true Light, to reign, but has always, like an
enraged Beast, pushed with his Horns against the Lamb in every Appearance,
whereby the tender Buddings of Truth in many People have been often hurt, and
the Growth of the good Seed often hindered, and some of the feeble Ones, even
in their Comings out of Egypt, have been cut off by this spiritual Amaleck, the
Dragon, upon which the Whore, the false Priesthood and Ministry rides, whom God
will have War with forever, and will destroy him to the End; for now is the
Ancient of Days upon his Throne, and the Thrones of the Wicked are cast down;
and one like unto the Son of Man to wit, the Lord Christ Jesus, in and with his
numberless Number is come Acts 9. 10, 11.
with the Clouds of Heaven (for as sure as he went up, so is he certain come
again) and brought near to the Ancient of Days, and is in the actual
Possession of that Kingdom, Glory and Power given him of the Father, that all
People, Dan. 7. 26, 27.
Nations and Languages should serve and obey him; for his Dominion is an
Everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed; and now the Judgment is set, and the Books are opened,
Glory to the Lord forever; and now is the Revelation of all Things, and
fulfilling of all Things which have been Rev. 16. 19.
spoken of by the true Witness, since the World began: And now the Tything
Hireling Priests, and Merchants of Babylon, who by their Works deny Christ come
in the Flesh, run to the Powers of the Earth; and cry out, and say, They Rev.
18. 15, 16.
will not pay us, they will not put into our Mouths, they will buy none of our
Merchandise any more; Alas, alas, our great City: But for all their crying God
will not hear not help them, for they have left off to do good, and God has
shaken his Hand at their dishonest Gain; and the Son of God, that ever blessed
Light, is arisen, and is at Work to lead out of Darkness the Souls of the
simple, that they may know him alone to be their Priest, Minister and Teacher,
and may not be a Prey any longer to the Wolf in the Sheep's Clothing, the Wolf,
who is inwardly gone from God, and ravenned into the dark Wilderness, and has
stolen the Saints and Christ's Words, and makes a Trade on them, to deceive
withal for filthy Lucre: Woe unto them, they have gone in the Way of Cain, and
after the Err^r of Balaam, for worldly Ends, and shall p^rish in their gain
saying of the 2. Pet. 2. throughout. Rev. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Truth, as Core did. And the Lamb shall have the Victory; and the Lord is at
Work, leading his Flock by the Streams of living Waters; Glory to his Name
forever.

And what shall I only complain of the Unrighteousness, and declare of the
Downfall of the Kingdom of fal^e Teachers and Hirelings amongst the Turks, or
of the proud imperious Prelates of the dark See of Rome? Or shall I not rather
come nearer home, to wit, to the Place of my outward Nativity, the Land of Old
England, who pretend to be n^^her of the Spirit of Turks nor Papists, but
People of the R^formed Religion, called Protestants, as who should say,
Protesters against Romish Usurpat^ons and Antichristian Innovations? But alas!
to the Shame of thy Nakedness, O England, England, there is found in thee a
Conspiracy, a Company of lewd and treacherous Men, who stand over thee Jer. 13.
as Teachers, covered with black both Inwardly and outwardly, who wear a black
Garment now, as the false Prophets of old wore a rough Garment to deceive, who
cry, Give, give, and can never have enough, for they are as Graves; and if one
put not into their Mouths, they bite with their Teeth, and prepare War against
them, suing People at Law Mich. 3.
for Wages, for whom they do no Work, most unreasonable of all Men, and
contrary to all other People, reaping where they never sowed, neither spiritual
nor temporal Seed; they claim the Tenth of such Men's Labors and Increase, as
they themselves excommunicate out of their Synagogues, and in their false
Judgment judge to Hell; what! does not the Destruction of their Souls seem
enough, but you must destroy their Estates and Families, and sometimes their
Bodies and Life also by long and unheard of Imprisonments and Plunderings?
Shall not the Nations of the World (who profess not as you the Priests and
Prelates of England do) rise up in Judgment against you? For which of the
Priests in Turkey or Rome are more eager for their Bellies then you are? What
Means do you leave unessayed against those, who for Conscience sake cannot put
into your Mouths? Will any whose Eyes are open believe you to be Ministers of
the Gospel, who rather then loose a little of the Earth, will expose both your
selves and your Gospel to all the Blame and Shame that may be.

The very Name of Tithes shows you to be Jewish, and of Easter-Reckonings, and
such like, to be Popish; and now where is your Reformation? You may well
confess, there is no Health in you, who have so palpably done (and do) what you
ought not to have done, and left ndone nwhat Isa. 14. 5, 6.
you ought to have done, as in your Custom you confess: Health, nay, nay, how
should you have any spiritual Health in you, who live in such manifest
Opposition to the Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Physician. Christ Jesus
says to his Disciples, Freely you have received, freely give; but you are all
for Money, and great Earthly Revenues, that you may live in Pride, Idleness and
Fullness of Bread. Christ says, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God; but your Care
is how to get great Livings and fat Benefices; and as for the Heavenly Kingdom,
which Christ compared to a Grain of Mat. 13. 31.
Mustardseed, you neither know it, nor are willing to learn; you will neither
enter into it your selves, nor suffer others, Mat 23. 13.
but by your Traditions you shut it up against Men. Christ says to his, Swear
not at all; but you teach for Doctrine, Mat 5. 34, 37. Jam. 5. 12.
that Christians may swear, and you do swear, not only before the Magistrates,
but even some of you in your ordinary Communication; yea, and which is most
abominable, in your very Church Service, compelling the Men called
Churchwardens to swear (and that oftentimes with an Unwillingness of Heart and
Condemnation of Conscience) to perform your Church-Offices, which lays a kind
of Impossibility upon them. Oh sad! may it not be said, The Land mourns because
of Oaths? What, have you no Shame nor Care of your Credit, that can do such
Things in the open Sun, and not blush? Will you never open your Eyes a little
to see your Works? What do you mean Hos. 4. 2, 3.
to do? Or where will you hide your selves in the Day of God's Judgments, when
he calls you to an ^ccount, and pleads with you in Flames of Fire for all your
mighty Sins? Do you indeed believe, as in Words you say, That you regenerate 2
These. 1. 8.
the little Infants, by sprinkling a little Water on its Face, and speaking a
few Words of your own devising over it, which it knows nothing of? Do you
indeed, I say, believe, that by this kind of Baptism, they are made the
Children of God, the Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of God?
Or do you not rather do these Things to get Money by? Oh Cursed Covetousness,
the Root of all Evil; Oh, how it has drowned your Souls in Perdition; Mat. 13.
15.
how it has blinded your Hearts, that you can see nothing of the Kingdom of
God: You bring in a Company of poor deluded Souls, who follow you blind Guides,
to promise for the little Infant, That it shall forsake the Devil and all his
Works; then what shall these bold Promisers suffer, if the Child do not so?
Will they, or you their Teachers for them, be content to suffer the Pains of
Hell, the Reward of such as break Covenant with God? And when will you see that
this Custom of undertaking for the little Infants, greatly derogates from the
Honor of Christ, who is the only Undertaker for Man toward God: But what if a
Child, through Grace, be so strengthened, when it grows up, as to see your
Wretchness, and so to forsake and bear Testimony against all the Works of the
Evil One that are done amongst you, will you not call him Heretic, and put him
out of your Synagogues? Yea, yea; for you can have no Fellowship with any that
have Health in them; for by your own Confession, you are miserable Offenders
all the Days of your Life, and have no Health in you, and so cannot endure to
hear of Perfection or perfect Soundness on this Side the Grave: Yea, though you
read in Scripture, Ephesians. 9. 11, 12, 13.
That Christ's Ministry perfects to God, Ephesians. 4. Yet there is not so much
Faith amongst you as a Grain of Mustard Seed, to believe any such Thing; for if
any come to be healed by Christ, and so made perfectly sound to God, and
witness forth the same, they are not for your Company, even you who have no
Health in you, but are miserable Offenders. Oh you that cry out against
Separatists and Separation, what a woeful Separation have you made; you are of
them who have separated your selves from the Lord Jude 18, 19.
in Unbelief, and are sensual, not living in God's Spirit, but in the broad Way
of the World. Oh when will you be weaned from the Breasts of Mystery Babylon,
and learn to suck at Truth's Breasts, and draw Water out of God's Zach. 13. 1.
Rev. 22. 1. etc.
Well, which in the Light and Life of Jesus Christ is opened to the true
Hungerers and Thirsters after Righteousness this Day.

But you have transgressed the Everlasting Covenant, and offered Violence to
the righteous Law of the Lord Jesus, and miserably wrested and perverted the
Holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
which witness of him and his glorious Appearance in these latter Days; and
this you do, that you may establish your own Traditions, that you may keep your
selves up in the Earth, in the Glory of this World, and Esteem of fallen Man,
who knows not Christ nor his Kingdom; and therefore John 5. 44.
has the Lord already discovered your Skirts, and will 2 These. 2. 8.
yet daily more and more by the bright shining forth of his Light, make you so
manifest, naked and bare, that every Isa. 66. 24
Eye shall see the Shame of your Nakedness; And to the Nations of them that are
saved, who walk in the Light of the Heavenly Jerusalem, shall you be an
abhorring forever; and the redeemed of the Lord shall daily flock to Zion out
of your frozen Land, to offer their spiritual Sacrifices to God upon his holy
Altar; and shall see the Smoke of your Genesis 4. 5.
defiled Sacrifices go downwards as Cain 's did, which God had no Respect to;
And the Smoke of your Torment shall go up Rev. 14. 11.
forever and ever, for strong is the Lord that judges you, because you have
given his Lambs Gall and Vinegar to drink, and have pushed them with Side and
Shoulder; and therefore Rev. 16. 19.
a bitter Cup will God give you to drink.

Oh how has the Lord born with you? how has his Voice uttered it self amongst
you in your Streets, in your Assemblies, saying in your Ears, O Repent, repent,
Give Glory to God, by giving over to deceive your own and the poor Peoples
Souls, which are precious to God: O ye that have exalted your selves into the
Place of Teachers, and are untaught your selves, into the Place of Bishops, and
Overseers of others, and have not looked into your own Hearts and Souls, to see
what grows there. O the deep Sleeps and Slumbers that you are seen to be in
this Day, even all you Mich. 3. 6, 7.
who have run, and God never sent you, and therefore you have not, nor never
can possibly in that State profit the People at all. Oh all you that love to be
called of Men Master, and Doctor, and Lord Bishops, and Archdeacons, and such
like worldly Titles, which Christ, the meek Lamb, and Mat. 23. 10, 11. Mat. 20.
25, 26. Mat. 15. 13.
lowly in Heart, did always forbid, and his Spirit is against forever and
ever, and says, It shall not be so amongst his, but he that is greatest must
be least, and Servant of all, not in feigned Words and deceitful Shows, but in
Deed and in Truth, Glory to the Lord, who is arisen to root up the false
Ministry, and to bring in his own, as in the Beginning, That the Earth may be
covered with the Knowledge of G^d, and Jesus Christ our Lord, as the Waters
cover the Sea, Amen and Amen. Isa. 11. 9. Hab. 2. 14.


O Ye Priests and Parish Teachers, when will ye consider of the Entrance of
your selves into your Offices, and the People into your Church; you have laid
another Foundation then Christ has laid; Christ said to his Messengers and
Ministers, As my Heavenly Father has sent me, so I send John 20. 21, 22. Heb.
7. 16.
you; But Christ was not made a Minister by the Law of a Carnal Commandment,
but by the Power of an endless Life: And so you that are Ministers of the
Letter, and made Ministers thereof by the Law of a Carnal Commandment, and your
Fittedness for your Work is gathered not from the holy Spirit's Ability, but
from some Worldly Endowments, 1 Cor. 1. 20 21. Rev. 3. 18, 19, 20.
as natural Languages, Arts and Parts, which can only fit a Man for a
Heathenish Oratory, but could never help in this great and Heavenly Matter of
Christ's Kingdom; and your Bishops being made by the human Powers, could never
say, That by the laying on of their Hands you received either the holy Ghost,
or any Gift of it: And so you being of the World and empowered by the World,
how can you claim Audience or Obedience from Christ's Members, who know not to
follow your Voice, which is the Strangers Voice; and so you Men of the World
are heard, upheld and obeyed by the World, who are ignorant of Christ's Voice
from 1. Joh. 4, 5.
the Strangers; and so being such blind Guides, whether can you lead the People
but into the Ditch? and there you are Mat. 15. 14.
who are always doing what you ought not to do, and so have no Health in you,
and so dangerous to join to, and are miserable Isa. 55. 2.
Offenders, for taking the poor Peoples Money for that which is not Bread, and
causing them to spend their Labors Isa. 56. 10. Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6.
for your Traditions and empty Sound of Words, which are never able to satisfy
their Souls; and you are very miserable Offenders also, in not only coming in
by a wrong Door your selves, but also in persuading the poor deceived
Multitude, Joh. 10. 1.
that you enter them into the Pale of the Church, by your baptizing or
sprinkling of them, when Infants, for which there is no Scripture; nay, more as
your common Custom is, and as is said before, that you regenerate them by it;
for God never regenerated any by a Means which he never ordained, as this Usage
of yours is manifest to be: So all your Entrances being impure, and your
Foundations unspiritual and Unscriptural, what Building must needs be builded
thereupon, the wise in heart do easily see: So you and your Work being Mystery
Babylon, the Lord God Mat. 7. 2^ Rev 17. 5 and 14. 11.
of Heaven is engaged against y^u, and his Vials of Wrath is he pouring forth
upon you, and he will not fail, n^r be discouraged, until his Judgments be
brought forth to Victory over you. And now to you the Magistrates and Powers
who rule in this Nation of England, Lend not your Power, much less give it to
this dead Image; uphold not this Ministry, which cannot profit you nor the
People at all, lest God plead with you in his Wrath for your Abuse of it; for
though they may persuade you that Christ is not against them, yet such as God
has redeemed from amongst them, know them to be no Ministers of Christ, but
Hirelings, who have run without Christ's sending; and so not going Christ's
Message, they cannot be content with Christ's Maintenance, but cry unto you, O
Magistrates, help, help, the People will not pay us their Tithes, and the like,
lend us your Laws, your Prisons, Acts 21. 2
etc. O Rulers, Consider, consider what Teachers these are, who instead of
compelling People to Love, and contribute to them by the Power of the Word, are
glad to run to the Worldly Magistrates Sword; Is not God against them that are
thus against him? O leave them, leave them to try and prove themselves to the
Peoples Con^cien^e, to be true Ministers by a free and powerful Ministry of the
Word, not of Man, but of God, unto them, or never own them, for Christ's
ancient and true Ministers had freely received, Mat. 10.
and therefore could freely give; and did plant before they eat and fed the
Flock before they had the Milk thereof; but these bay their Words, and
therefore sell them like Merchants of Babylon; They eat the Fat, and clothe
with E^ek. 34.
the Wool, and k^ll them that are fed, as the Prophet speaks; but God's Flock
they feed not, but pers^cute them, calling them Heretics, and all that is
naught, as the old Jews, who persecuted Christ and his Followers, did; But
after the way that they call Heresy, so worship we the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, believing his living Word which Acts 24. 14.
perfects us to himself, and the Scriptures which testify thereof; Glory to
his Name forever.

And all ye People, who are Lovers and Followers and Upholders of this false
Ministry, which keeps you always learning, and never brings you to the
Knowledge of the Truth, (...) ^. 5, 7.
as it is in Jesus, which alone perfects to God; cease from it, and the
masterly Teachers in it, and from them turn to God; for what are their Dreams
to the Living and Eternal Jer. 2^. 28, 29
Word of God, which is as a Hammer and a Fire in the Hearts of all that receive
it; and what are their Inventions to the Ordinances of Christ? The Lord loves
your Souls, Ez^k, 18. 23. Ezekiel. 32. 11
he has no Pleasure in your Death; it is not his Will that your precious Souls
should be lost for the pleasing of vain Men, and answering their ungodly Lusts:
What is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Christ, no Physician in England,
Jer. 3^. 17.
that the Breach which Sin has made betwixt God and your Souls can never be
made up, but the Wound must stand open still, like a bloody Issue, running out
the very Hos. 4. 2.
Life of your Souls, so that you have no Power, no Victory over Sin, but Sin
stands still in its Strength and perfect Dominion over you? O when, O when will
you come to the Light, that your Eyes may be opened to see the dangerous Paths
that you are in, by following these blind Rev. 3. 18.
Guides, who having shut up the Kingdom of God against Men, will neither enter
into it themselves, nor suffer others. Mat. 23. 13
Oh why will ye dye ye People of England? Why will ye sit in Egypt's Darkness
still, and the Land of God's People Exodus 10. 21, 22, 23. Isa. 11. 10. (...) ^.
19, 20 Genesis 3. 1, 4.
so full of Light? The Lord God has lifted up the Standard of his Truth in the
midst of you, but you choose rather to fight under the Banner of the Power of
Darkness, because of your Love to the World to your Hurt; and so the old
Dragon, who beguiled Eve, leads you Captive at his Will, who will not have
Christ, the true Light, the good Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul to rule in
you. The Word of the Lord God unto you all, both Priests, Magistrates and
People; Awake, awake, the great and mighty terrible Day of the Lord God is at
Hand, is very nigh to come upon 2 Pet. 3. 16. 2 These. 5. 2, 3. Prove. 1. 27.
Mat. 4. (...). Romans 1. 18.
you, like a Thief in the Night, like an armed Man, like a terrible Tempest to
scatter you, to spoil you of your Glory, to leave you neither Root nor Branch;
For now is the Lord Jesus Christ mighty in Power, arisen to plead with you in
his Wrath, because you have made void his Law, and transgressed the Everlasting
Covenant of his gracious Light, and instead there of have set up a dead Image,
a liveless Form Rev. 1^. 14.
of Man's devising, the Image of Jealousy, a Religion and Worship which makes
nothing perfect to God; your Root is seen and judged by the true Light, Christ
Jesus, the Root and Offspring of David: It is so.

And if you still continue in your vain Thoughts, thinking to please God with
such a Life, wherein you are daily doing what you ought not to do, and leaving
undone what God commands you, and never come out of that wretched and miserably
defiled State; but think a customary Confession of Sins, without forsaking of
them, is a Worship worthy the pure God, who is of purer Eyes then to behold
Iniquity; I say, if these Thoughts and this Heart continue in you, the Lord
will cast you off, and will utterly for sake you, and bring his fore Hos. 1. 6,
9.
Plagues upon you; and you shall know in that Day that God will not be mocked,
but will be sanctified and exalted in his Judgments over all his Enemies,
especially over such as you, who take his Name daily in your Mouths in vain,
saying, Lord, Lord, and living in a continual Breach of his most holy
Commandments, and who instead of waiting for his holy Spirit, to kindle a pure
heavenly Zeal in you toward G^d and Christ, do offer the false Fire of your
own blind Lev. 10. 1, 2.
Zeal, as Nadab and Abihu did, whom God in his Jealousy consumed with a
grievous Destruction.

And now unto you the two Mothers of these Priests of this Nation of England,
called Oxford and Cambridge; see what Isa. 1. 4
you have brought forth and nourished at you Breasts. O, a sad Generation it
is; O, what a Generation of Evildoers are your Children (whom you have given
Suck unto) become? How have you with your Heathenish Arts and Sciences
strengthened them against the Simplicity of the Everlasting Gospel, which Christ
has restored unto us in this his glorious Col. 2. 8. Isa. 1. 26. Rev. 14. 6, 7.
Day, after the long Night of Apostasy. The Lord Jesus Christ never ordained
such Ways and Means as you use for the furnishing and enabling of his Servants
for the Work of his Ministry: But when he ascended up on high, he gave Gifts
unto Men, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and
Teachers, for the edifying of his Heavenly Body, and perf^cting of his holy
Ones, Ephesians. 4. But what Jam. 3. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 2. from ver. 4. to the End.
can you edify or perfect to God, whose Wisdom is from below, and whose
Studies and Exercises for the most Part run in the Channel of the Heathenish
Philosophy and vain Deceit of the World's Spirit, which can neither receive in,
nor minister forth any Thing of Christ's Kingdom: And so we are given by the
Lord's blessed Light and Spirit in this Day of the Lord, to see and declare,
That you are gone from Christ, and the Way of the true ancient Christians, into
the Way of the Heathens, who know not God, as the Apostle said, The World by
Wisdom knew not God: And so the People of the Country are greatly deceived by
you, and their Children extremely wronged and corrupted by you; for many send
up their Youth to learn some Good amongst you; but alas, how can you that are
so evil, bring forth good Fruit? Nay, nay, for if any come amongst you, and
conform not to the filthy and bad Customs of your Universities, how are they
looked upon as strange Things? how are they hooted at as Owls in a Desert? You
are altogether corrupt, from the Crown of the Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6.
Head to the Sole of the Foot, no Soundness in you. Oh what Lewdness and
Debauchery has mine Eyes beheld in you? The Lord will ease himself of you,
your high Looks and high Towers he will pull down; Your Theater that you glory
in shall Isa. 2. 17. Isa. 31. 4, 5 Jer. 6. 15.
be a Curse; And the Lord will deliver his Lambs from your Teeth: What a Face
have you that you cannot blush? what will you never give over provoaking God
with your Acts and Degrees? what Heathenish Stuff is this, to find you at this
Time a Day telling of and glorying in? Your Bachellors of Art, and Masters of
the same, Bachellors of Divinity, and Doctors of Divinity, and such like; but
if any come amongst you, who through the Grace of God has attained to that
blessed Degree of a true living Member of Jesus Christ, and Man of God, to
preach the Mystery of God's Kingdom, to awaken you out of your deep Slumbers of
Sin and Death, him Isa. 56. 10.
you persecute, him you disallow, as your Forefathers, the old Scribes and
Pharisees, rejected Christ Jesus, the true Foundation Mat. 27. 21, 22.
and Cornerstone of the Heavenly Building, with his blessed Followers: And
therefore will God's Controversy be with you forever, until you repent of your
Sorceries and great Abominations, where with you have burdened his good Spirit
Days without Number: But the Everlasting Gospel of God's Light and Love shall
spread, and the Branch thereof Rev. 14. 6.
shall over all your Walls grow up to his Praise, who is come in this Day of
his Power, to judge the great Whores Works in England, as well as in other
Countries, that the Earth may be swept, and fill^d with the Knowledge of God,
Isa. 11. 9.
as the Waters cover the Sea. So be it, so be it, says my Spirit.

Thomas Tailor.
And now the Heavenly Free Mother, with her happy Children, Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. Gal. 4. 26.
is come and coming down from God out of Heaven, to possess, inherit, and
everlastingly to enjoy the Kingdom of his endless Love, Peace Righteousness and
Joy, where Mystery Babylon, with all her false Mothers and sinful Children
shall have no Name nor Place at all; for at the Downfall of Mystery Babylon,
does arise in the Saints the pure unspeakeable Joy, which none of the Children
of the d^rk World understand any Thing of at all. It is so, See Rev. 2. 17. and
Rev. 7. from. ver. 9. to the End. And Rev. 11. from ver. 15 to the End. And
Rev. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And Rev. 14. from ver. 1. to ver. 13. And Rev. 15. 1,
2, 3, 4. And Rev. 16. 17, 18, 19. And Rev. 17. 18. And Rev. 18. 24. And Rev.
19. from verse. 1. to verse. 10. It is done, HALLELUJAH.




