Impostor Magnus, OR The Legerdemain of Richard Delamain, NOW Preacher in the
City of Hereford. BEING A Narrative of his life and Doctrine since his first
coming into that County. Faithfully collected and published by one that will
assert the Truth of each particular.

YAY.

Jude, verse 11. and 2 Pet. 2.15. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way
of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam (the Son of Bosor, who
loved the the wages of unrighteousness) for reward: and perished in the
gainsaying of Core.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1654.

To the Reader.
IF thou take no more pleasure in the reading of this Tract, then I did in
the writing of it, I Will assure thee thou shall never be inebriated with any
delight that it can afford thee: and perhaps you may wonder at this so large a
collection of passages, perpetrated in the space of four or five years; but
your admiration will cease, when you find that you never met (before this) with
such a designed piece of imposture as this is: the whole transaction of his
(scarce) quinquennial labor, being nothing but a continued series, and close
reiterated concatenation of deceits; so that what thou have here, is not a
tithe of his actings which might have been gleaned up, nor the moiety of what I
have heard and know: but what thou have is upon sound grounds, and not
surmises. This Treatise is an Historical application, and partly explication of
the Epistle written by Saint Jude, those characters of Apostates, being his
choice rules by which he ordered himself, both in life and Doctrine. Here is
not a confutation, but only a relation of his errors, and succinct annotations
upon them; which the ingenuous candid Reader may enlarge with his own
observations; for if confutation had been intended, the necessary conclusions,
probations, and responses which would have followed, and must have been taken
in, would have swelled this Book, far by much beyond the intentional bulk of
it. And truly it had been no prudence to have alleged Scripture to him, that
did deny the authority of it; our arguments must have risen from the same Basis
as the Fathers and Ancients used to Heathens; to persuade them first of a God,
etc. what therefore is here exhibited by way of animadversion (Courteous
Reader) is for thy use: if it should make any impression upon the heart of him
that is the subject of our present and subsequent discourse, I shall be joyful
to hear of it, and joy Angelically at his conversion from a blasphemous Saul to
a preaching Paul; God being able to command that these stones be made bread:
but if he after all these should continue resolute and refractory in his ways
of evil, he will not miss of a second reproof; in the mean time (Reader) hold
fast the Faith once delivered, and be not carried about with diverse and strange
Doctrines; Heb. 13.9.
for it is a good thing that the heart be established.

Farewell.
Impostor Magnus.
I Have by search endeavored to find somewhat for matter of sublimity to run
parallel to this History that I am now about to write, but find, that what
Ebion, Photinus, Samosatenus, Sabellicus, Servetus, and others the ancient
Captains and Ringleaders of this sort of loose Heretics did embrace; nay, what
Socinus the Monopolist of all the former, with the additional fermentations of
his own brain, comes far short of those dangerous positions which our Impostor
has divulged and practiced: for, as if to collect the signs and notes which
the Spirit of God in the Scriptures has given us to know, and by them to
distinguish deluders from others, were the rules and Gnomon to direct him to
shape his opinions and practice by, and the end and scope he endeavored at, and
pressed unto, it could scarce be otherwise, that he should so point blank in
himself accomplish those characters of Apostasy and Errors which are so flatly
repugnant to the rule of life and Doctrine: And in the prosecution of this
discovery, I shall be so sparing of wresting things beyond their intended
weight and allowance, that I ingenuously confess and assure you, it is the
highest Acme my desires have aspired unto, that there might have been a
possibility of sparing the whole, by some one the smallest sign and token of
repentance and alteration; which being undiscerned, and finding of how great
use and concernment to a public and private good the unvailing of knavery is,
especially in such, who by their callings should be ensamples of good to
others: I could not still or quiet those motions and susurra's I had within me,
till I had yielded to those importunities, and sent this abroad for the benefit
of the poor distressed and over-ridden County of Hereford, and all others that
may find themselves concerned in this discovery; whether it be for matter of
establishment or prevention: it being the second volumn or Treatise of
Machiavillian piety, and contains in it a Scheam or representation of the
manners, preachment and speeches of that Grand Impostor, Richard Delamain, who
with enticing words, gilding over his bitter pills of blasphemy and error, has
done much mischief in the neighboring Counties; and if in this Tract the
Reader should be molested with the want of method, I beg his excuse; for that I
hope he will be pleased to conceive it no easy matter or task, to methodize
Accidents, so much disjoined in reference to place, persons, times, and matter,
as these ensuing are.

He was the wicked Son of a good Father, from a Publican, turned a Pharisec,
from one that sat at the receipt of Customs, to one that by a more indirect
course accustomed himself to the receipt of gain; he used his apparel
supermodish, powdering his long hair, but that the sweet Gentleman was much
beholding to him that brought him down, for his friendly advice of cutting it
shorter, though in this short cut it reached his shoulders. He was persuaded
into the County of Hereford, and brought thither by Mr. M. H. of Webley, one
that has been a dogmatical Camaelion ever since the many colored and
monstrous headed Hydra of errors have been in fashion; upon his first coming,
which was in the year 1648. he was for a new light (though sheltered in a dark
lanthorn) brought to Mrs. V. a Gentlewoman of good family and respect, then
living at Bredwardine in that Tract; where of the minister of the Parish leave
being obtained for this our Hyperbolical Angel of Light to hold forth his
gifts, he preached a Legal Sermon; full sraughted with the greatest Terrors of
punishments and damnation, which was highly disliked by the chiefest, who
leaned very much to an Antinomian plausibility (for in those times this Country
had not many baits to busy themselves about, and were ignorant of those
profound Soloecisms, called new Notions: Independency, Presbytery and
Antinomianism in the lesser volumn (not to the shaking off of duties) were the
greatest divertisements then in practice) and truly the ill management of that
mistaken Sermon, had almost in the Threshold caused him to have dashed his foot
to the stumbling and undoing of his hopes; for by this you may plainly perceive
him a designed Temporizer, who for his gain could have become a downright
Legalist, as well as a high flown Notionist; and in few words, to give you the
print of his foot, by which you may imagine his stature; Gain was his
Godliness, his Religion it was his God, his whole aim, and he resolved (which
by his leaving his small place in the Custom-house you may perceive) to obtain
it per fas aut nefas, holding that Heterodoxal Maxim for his first point of
Doctrine: dulcis odor lucri ex re qualibet; this enforced him to leave
Bredwardine awhile, and go with M. H. to Webley, where by his means having
insinuated into the acquaintance of Mrs. K. one nearly related to that Family
at Bredwardine, then living at a place about two miles from Webley, who out of
her tender affection to good, imagining by his carriage and demeanor some
superlative knowledge of Gods ways; at least some eminent sanctity in himself,
gave him countenance (and you may see here he first makes practice with women
and widows) where fishing with the bait of Socinianism, and perceiving it
taking, prosecuted his fortune eagerly, making use of all advantages for
leading of some Captive with his Tenants and absurdities, and imagining his
interest did much consist in the getting into favor with the old Gentlewoman at
Bredwardine, because there was the best quarters, it being the nature of such
deceivers much to mind their bellies; For what they naturally know as bruit
beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves, Jude 10.
and are the black spots in the feasts of charity; and because of the eminency
of the place and Family, which by the means of these his forementioned
acquaintance, he with some labor, at last, to his content, achieved; causing
in some an admiration of his Doctrine which he now holds forth, I dare not say
an approbation of it. I know it is Satan's Master-peice to lay stumbling blocks
before the feet of the Saints, and if it be possible, to cause such as have
been renowned for their profession in the strictest ways of Godliness, to be
the Antesignani, and chiefest abettors of Heresy and error, to make such whose
light should be set, as it were, on an hill: who should by their lives and
conversations be the flaming Beacons of Good works before men, that they seeing
them, may glorify our Father that is in Heaven; to cause them in a more
especial manner to be the greedy examples of falling, and sucking in those
damnable positions of Christian Lethargy. Here now this ungodly man having
crept in unawares, spends his time betwixt the two Families; instructing them
with his depraved principles; and all such as came unto them, either out of
humanity, as to visits, or out of the instigation of an itching ear to hear
novelties, of which last sort more especially then others, some were caught,
and did embrace Doctrines of the Devil: Tenants that now stink in the
Nosethrils of some of his admirers, worse then his breath does to such as
approach him, he labored to seduce; some of which I shall now give you a sight
of; though I know that errors (like oaths in telling stories) better concealed
then repeated; yet because he goe's on still, making practice with deceits,
deceiving and being deceived, aspiring to eminent places, there to make
shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience; not only in himself, but to others,
insulting over the Ministers, who are laborious and painful; intermedling in
civil affairs, in which he is nothing concerned; despising powers and
authorities, and all this and much more under the cloak of Religion and
conscience; this is therefore to undeceive such who by his fair persuasions may
be drawn into the deceit of believing his lies: for having, as in a draught or
picture, seen his carriages and life; they may with little straining their
Logic, believe, that out of such an impure polluted puddle, cannot proceed the
limpid-living streams of the water of Life; that whilst himself is the very
Epitome of Hypocrisy, and Herefie, and the abstract of baseness and leudness,
he can in the mean time preach to others by his example the Doctrine of Truth,
holiness and sincerity: That which he now buckled himself unto when he was
received into favor at Bredwardine, was that common maxim which all Impostors
use; to despise Dominions, and speak evil of dignities, to decry all those that
may by any means be a remora in his proceedings; either by authority, Doctrine
or disputes; and to that end he declaims against the Ministry in general, as if
the sins and faylings of particulars, were annexed as inseparable companions to
the calling; even so, because some have received poison in their meat, it were
necessary or reasonable we should wholly desist from the use of it; Here begins
a loud invective against them, for many crimes which they are guilty of, and
among the rest, scorning them for their receiving Tithes, (though since he has
received them, and threatened trouble to those that did not conform) and
persuades his Disciples (to avoid the disgrace and foyls, which else he and
they were subject to in disputes) that what he said could not be understood be
any, but such who were under the the same dispensation as he was; (truly I
think so too) and in imition of their Master, you should have ignorant silly
women, tell men both learned and knowing: That they could not understand those
high mysteries, because of their carnality; and further tells them, that what
was nonsense to all people out of his way, was the very sense of the Spirit to
him: by which he seemed to anticipate and confute all controversies that might
arise, and which was a very succinct method of satisfying all questions and
doubts: and further, that what he delivered, though it were seemingly
contradictory to the received truth, and though he could not prove it out of
the written Word of God, yet it was to be received as the immediate dictate of
the Spirit. He slighted and scorned at duties, as performed by such who were in
a lower form, and should in time have greater light. And upon that place, Rev.
3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open
the door, etc. he held forth that the Ordinances of God were the door; that
they do keep Christ at a distance from the Soul, and keep him in darkness, or
dark to us; was not this a notable ingredient for his mass of errors? not
valuing the Spirits injunctions of praying continually, and rejoicing always,
exhorting, rebuking, etc. in season and out of season? Tells us that the
Scriptures were but the mind of the Spirit in several administrations, and that
there were several dispensations of God.

Of Adam.

Of Noah or Abraham.

Of Moses. Here is strange stuff.


Of John the Baptist.

Of Christ.

Of fire burning up corruptions.

Of Heaven or the Spirit, under which dispensation he then was. That the
Scriptures were darkness; that the same Spirit dwells in us, that did in them
that penned the Scriptures, which he prosecuted with strange deductions and
conclusions, never considering that testimonies are for clearing, not
obscuring; that the Scriptures testify of Christ, and do reveal him, that
darkness does not reveal things; it is light that makes manifest; that what is
darkness, is in our understandings, by reason whereof we apprehend not the
Scriptures, etc. He further declared that we were taught of God immediately,
and not of men, whereupon Mr. S. the School master of Hereford asked him, why
he then took upon him to teach men; he answered, we do not teach, but only show
men ( a learned distinction) but that you may further see what he meant by
Scriptures, or how in himself he did approve of them, being urged to back some
Tenent or other of his with Scripture, he answered, That he did not much
trouble himself with the Scripture. I need not apply it, for by this you may
easily know his mind: but he proceeds and tells you, that that which is in us,
is Christ, and he cannot sin; that it was needless for a Saint to ask or make
request for any thing, because all was theirs, and they could want nothing; his
phrases were mostly obscured in Allegories (dreaming the whole Scripture was
nothing else) and here he rumbles up strange applications of old Adam and new
Adam, light and darkness, lise and death, Christ and Antichrist, flesh and
Spirit, heaven and hell, Sion and Sinai, bright clouds and dark clouds; vails,
dispensations, administrations, illuminations, living up, the Allegorical
applications of Grace, and glory: of Christ's cross, grave, burial, resurrection
and ascension, with all his miracles and actions which were so misused,
misapplyed, misapprehended; so bumbasted, squeized, wrested, wrung and wreathed
into a seeming sense, that it would have puzzled a man of judgment, in the
least, to have apprehended them; These are the clouds without water, Jude 12.
carried about of winds; trees, whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice
dead, plucked up by the roots; 2 Pet. 2.
These are empty wells without water, clouds that are hurried with a Tempest,
to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, for when they speak great
swelling words of vanity, they allure them to error, while they promise
liberty; but being now wrapped up in the admiration of his own nonsense, it was
asked him, how it was that he preached such a Sermon of terrors, when he first
came to Bredwardine? he answered (as his use was most commonly, with some
misapplyed place of Scripture) that he was persuaded to it by Mr. Hill: but it
was his liberty, and he could become all things to all men, to gain some: (he
should have said for some gain) nevertheless some of his admirers were not so
far deserted, and led aside, as totally to leave off duties, which by his
example and preaching he always held forth; for as he said of his preaching
that admission or probation Sermon at Bredwardine, it was much against his
inclination and Spirit, so was the use of any duties at evening or morning,
either before or after meat, Jude.
feeding himself without fear; and where he had liberty with some of his most
absolute proselites, he laughed at them, saying, we perform duties, because we
look on God as a judge, and that it is the Spirit of bondage; yet at
Bredwardine (which is observable) he was in a sort constrained for keeping in
with the old Gentlewoman, before and after meat to pretend a duty, which was
nothing else but an impudent complement with God, not prosecuting the designed
ends of those duties, which were to pray for a blessing on the creatures, or
give thanks for the reception of them; but his words were an odd pack of stuff,
Delamains Grace at meals.
of nonsense and blasphemy; as these, O Lord, Thou art us, and we are Thee,
Thou art in us and we in thee, Thou fillest us with thy presence, and we are
full of thy fullness, Thou love none but us, and we love none but thee; The
creatures are thou; Thou art our light, our all, our all in all; To thee we
give our all, we receive thee, we see thee, we delight in thee, and thou in us,
to thee be glory, etc. all this was not much to the purpose; but observe I
pray, what a sad object of Audacity is set before you; what strange blasphemy,
to hold forth not only that every Christian is God, but that every creature is
God; may even the Devil himself, because a creature: does not he spin a fine
thread, and wind up a skein or clew of strange Corollaries? How can he be said
with this complement, Heb. 12.28, 29.
to come before God that is a consuming fire, with reverence and Godly fear? or
how does he follow the example of Christ, who for our pattern prayed for a
blessing on the creatures before he used them; The Spirit enjoining us in all
things to make known our requests by supplications and prayers, and that
continually: yet to what a degenerate impiety was this fellow grown, to confess
him in words, but in deeds to deny him? but if you will needs have duties, you
must take them as he can afford them, for he tells you, that he has waited
many years and could never find comfort while he used them, Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus, Juven.
but leaving them, he found much; that before, he in duties sound nothing but
dryness and deadness, mislaying that upon duties which was really the
epileptical disease of his own Soul; and though at first in public he
concealed his venom and poison, yet in families he very freely traded with it;
nay, he would preach one thing in public and another in private; and in
private again deny what he had preached in public, thus did he at Worcester,
and truly he was engaged to it upon a force or constraint, else he could not
maintain his position into practice; of becoming all things to all men to gain
some, nor have been suffered to preach openly again; but that in the mean time
you may see how he laid himself open to his proselytes in these opinions:
observe what one of them answered to an honest man of Ludlow, who at Leominster
demanded of him why Delamain, at the time of the public exercise did preach in
private, from whom he received this account, because that he preached there
what was not fit to be preached or heard in public, or if you will hear
Delamains phrase, it was because as yet people could not bear his words and
Doctrine. Thus did he frame himself to his work, in the prosecution of his
design, of causing his Disciples to sit loose from duties; because we are
frequently warned not to rest on duties, he would have us leave them off. (That
is a sure way not to rest on them indeed) which would open a Gate to all
licentiousness and prophanness; for if we were not bound to keep close to a
known rule, but left at liberty to follow the dictates of our own carnal
appetites, to live and practice accordingly; if religion be some thing at
large, not bounded or bonded, if it were only in this or that man's particular
liberty, (and in pretense) to become all things to all men, and this liberty to
be explained by the respective owners and pretenders, then sarewell to the very
genuine sense of the word Religion, and to all civil society: to oppose them in
their wicked wills, is an infringement of their liberty, and what can be else
expected but a mere confusion in Government and propriety, which is his longed
for expectation, knowing the best fishing is in the muddiest waters. But that I
may not long detain you from a Sermon which I know you expect from our profound
Doctor, though as yet no Minister, for Crab-like he crawled backwards into
these degrees, first a Preacher, and afterward (as he says) ordained: I shall
here present you with the Sceleron of one of his Sermons, which your
imagination may help out, because having such rich conceits and far fetched
novelties for the bare-heads, you may easily believe the covering was not much
different; he believes not the litteral meaning of the Scripture, and therefore
allegorizeth the three first verses of the third Chapter of Matthew, whence he
would have us note that the voice of John the Baptist crying in the wilderness,
was the incomes of God into the wilderness of men.

That those Incomes of God,

1. Do make the ascension of Christ within us; for Christ is dead and buried in
the Soul till these Incomes come.

2. Are an exceeding weight of glory.

3. Are a Soul-saving glory.

4. Do set a Christian on the shoulders of Christ, and then he may see
completely.

5. Do bless the Soul.

6. Do deliver the Soul.

7. Do deaden all things to the Soul beside God, so that nothing but the Lord
shall live there.

(Then makes some shift, I know not how, to fall aboard with heaven, and tells
you; (if you can understand him) for I confess I cannot.)

That Heaven is an estate of God; nothing to be seen but God, and when thus I
see God, then Heaven is manifested.

It contents a carnal Christian to have Heaven without, and Christ without,
etc. but a spiritual Christian looks for God within, and heaven within.

That there is no heaven but in the hearts of the Godly, Hogs-wash.
nor hell but in the Hearts of the wicked, so that a man converted is hell
changed into heaven.

That Hell fire is nothing but the Spirits consuming and burning up of Lusts,
etc.

Now I hope for my repetition, I shall be excused from my Exposition; and how
would you have me expound that which I do not understand? I confess my
ignorance, and will leave it to that generation, whom he imagines have a more
glorious dispensation, above Scriptures and Ordinances, or else to some that
understand him, for he knew no other death, burial, or ascension of Christ, nor
heaven nor hell, but in the Soul, and how can you expect other from him?

At other times, that he might shake and overturn the basis and foundations of
the Faith once delivered to his Disciples, it was his use in his familiar and
private converse to low the seed of the Doctrine of the Seekers, from that
place of Scripture, If ye are risen with Christ, Col. 3.1.
seek the things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of his
Father: making the whole intention and scope of the holy Spirit a notional
Allegory; and holding out from thence, that in matters of Doctrine and Tenants
there was nothing certain, especially what was at any distance from his way;
and that indeed was his practice with his Neophytes or Novices, to preach to
them of shakings of Mount Slon and Sinai, (and what is written by the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews) yet once more, and I shake not only the earth but
the Heavens; you may easily interpret it his way; considering his design of
beating Christians off from duties, and his imagination of the locallity of
heaven and earth, to be the souls and hearts of people; by this he endeavored
to shake men from off their confidence in Scripture-rule or way, then putting
them upon a seeking way; and to whom should such as were thus in their
foundations shaken, have recourse, but to such as were able to shake them? and
so as it was said of the Pharisees of old, may be said of our new one, Math. 23.
that they compass Sea and Land, to make one Proselyte, and when he is made,
they make him twofold more the child of hell then themselves.

When he had tempered them to this pass, they were sit subjects to receive any
impression; and then he makes known to them, that there are nor either three or
two persons in the Godhead, and was much offended at the word Trinity, not
understanding that it signified a Three; but it is the practice of Impostors to
speak evil of those things which they know not; Jude.
not minding what the Scripture says, that there are three which bare record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7.
and these three are one; here is Trinity in Unity; but it is no marvel that he
that spoke so slightly of the God Head, should deny the holy Trinity; he that
dare, contrary to the plain words of the Scripture, which says, God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all, belch out this blasphemy, That God is
darkness, and prosecute his horrid positions with pretended reason, and with
telling his reprovers they wanted understanding; can you imagine he would stick
at any eeror? yet favor him a little further, and he will tell you Christ is
Faith, and Christ is Repentance: That the world sees Christ till the Spirit
comes, and then the light of the Spirit puts out the eye of the world: That
external administrations shall be shortly abolished; That the body shall not
rise again, and that the humane nature of Christ did not rise again; he may as
well say so, as deny the history, contrary to those places of Scripture, which
affirm Christ's resurrection, and plainly say that Christ is now risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of those that slept; and those many
undeniable arguments wherewith the Apostle Paul does syllogize the Corinthians
into an understanding and belief of the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.
in the fifteenth Chapter of his first Epistle.

He commends to their readings the inexplicable Treatises of Chimital Divinity,
written by the German Doctor Behmen, therein admiring what neither Writer,
Reader, or Hearer could understand or make sense of; much applauding his
Tincture, his Ignis fatuus, and Turba magna; (Reader, these were all, as simple
as they stand here, terms of Divinity) there was another such-piece of extasied
nonsense, written by a melancholy Friar or Brother of the Teutonick order,
and smelt extremely of the ingredients of Sulphur and Rhenish wine, (whose name
I have forgot) who was in great veneration among them: so were also Mr.
Colliers works, and truly with Randalphs discreet translations, such
opinionists might have been furnished with a small library of such Books, whose
very names would have troubled you, more then the wooden horse did the Trojans:
but that you may not be troubled with the reading of them, you shall have them
epitomized in two words, They were profound nonsense: yet our Impostor would
have had ready an answer for you, and so had his Disciples also; They were non
sense to you, because you cannot understand them, and what they could not
express themselves in the interpretation, that they did admire, hoping sometime
or other they should with waiting have it revealed unto them; and they could
conceive something more a great deal then they could utter, but the women they
understood it as fast as could be: and their admirations were at their own
understanding: even so do the Turks admire Idiots, thinking they have something
extraordinary of God in them, because they understand them not. This jigg that
our Impostor used, was not the armor of good lives, but only the
canva-painted-stalking horse of delusion.

One Sabbath day he urged from these words in Ecclesiastes, For to him that is
joined to all the living, there is hope: Eccles. 9.4.
for a living dog, is better then a dead Lion. Where only naming the latter
part of the verse, without looking or considering the first, either through
wilfulness or negligence, he declared and insisted upon it, that the living dog
was Christ Jesus, and the dead Lion were Believers, and how sweetly this indign
exposition may serve for his notional frenzy, let any one judge; but this I
have been assured, that when he had finished his half hours folly, being
reproved for such an interpretation or application, this reproof being before
the most and chiefest of his Auditors, with a request to him to read the
foregoing verses, and the precedent part of that verse, by which he might
plainly have seen his mistake (the wise King speaking there of life and death)
he made this public replication, first by an interrogation, whether his
reprover did hear him give that interpretation of it? to which having received
a positive affirmation, because he had wrote it after him; he then made this
reply, that his reprover did not hear with spiritual ears: that though that
interpretation were false to his reprover, yet it was true to him; and so being
netled and in passion, flung out of the room: which answer and carriage was
somewhat disrelished by some of his Auditors, and excused by man's frailty.

But what he meant by the two contrarieties of Truth and falsehood, you may
plainly-see by another passage that was uttered by him, much about that time;
for having paced the groundwork of the ruined Castle of Snowdle, in the gilden
valley, and making a draught of the ground-lines upon a piece of paper,
seigning a small scale to it for the dimension, which how unlike a
Mathematicians work it was, I will not now declare, though if he had had any
ingenuity he might have had a little more insight in the Mathematics from his
Father, who had some skill in them; he superscribed the Scale with these words,
Scala passium; and being before some of his admirers, reproved for false
Latin; he replied, that though it was false Latin to his reprover, yet it was
true to himself; by which you may perceive the Blades opinion of true and
false: but to his Doctrine; the Scripture says otherwise of ambiguities, That
there is but one Faith, 2 Pet. 1. Ephesians. 4.
one Baptism, one Truth, one Way, and one Lord Jesus, and that no Scripture is
of a private interpretation; whereas he says it may be false to one, and true
to another: this is rare, but real.

Upon an extraordinary convention of friends at Bredwardine, in the presence of
Colonel Tailor, Mr. Tombs, Captain Tailor, Mr. Bedwell, Mr. Swayn and others,
he made shift in his arguing (which was carried on by him with such an elated
arrogance and impudent scornfulness of the Ministers that were there) to
pronounce in plain words, without welt or guard; That himself, was God.
(Replic.) God is essentially God, are you essentially God? Delamain answered: I
am God, as God is God. (Replic.) If you are God, then we must worship you;
Which he presently went about to confirm with Scripture; unreasonably wresting
and applying to himself that text, and saying, it is written, Esa. 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens your nursing Mothers, they
shall bow down unto thee, with their face toward the earth. Yet at the same
time declared himself to be a beast, and that God did oftentimes speak through
such beasts; which they granted: for to strengthen his position, it was there
acknowledged that God had spoke through Balaams Ass. What is there wanting now
to the Completion of the Characters of Deceivers; Does he not deny the only
Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ? Does he not bring in damnable Heresies? Even
denying the Lord that bought us, bringing upon himself swist desstruction? Is
he not Antichristian, in exalting himself above all that is called God, 2 These.
2.4.
or that is worshipped as God, sitting in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God? Is not this man fit now to be entrusted with double Benefices,
and the care of Souls? being such a blasphemous novice, wresting the Scriptures
unto the destruction of himself, and of those that hear him and follow him;
despising learning, and learned men, because such are able to fathom and unvail
his setches; and yet forsooth himself would be thought a Scholar, owning
himself of the University of Oxford; and being demanded by Mr. S. a Gentleman
of Worcestershire, of what College he was, he answered him, of Emanuel
College: oportet mendacem esse memorem, here his friend the Devil, did not
readily assist him, but left him to shift for himself, which how poorly he did,
I need not tell you: for though Emanuel be applicatory to his notions, yet I
understand not how Oxford is.

At Wyebridge house in Hereford, being discipling his auditors to a very great
height of whimsy; he pointing to a silver Beer-Bowl standing on the Table,
said, that that was God to him: (I believe he spoke truth before he was aware
of it) yet his baseness was great, in comparing the great Creator of Heaven and
Earth, to vile, contemptible and corruptible things, as silver and Gold: These
blasphemies are not the tenth nor the hundredth part of what he has practiced
his profane mouth withal; yet enough to startle any one from having either
belief or confidence in him, or in his Doctrine; still he proceeds gaping after
filthy lucre, and plots now to get into some public place, because he knew all
people would in a short time grow weary of him: for that by his familistical
carriages he seemed to discover his rotten heart, plainly discovering he turned
the Grace of God into wantonness, Jude.
manifesting that he is one of those filthy dreamers that defile the flesh, and
who walk after their own ungodly lusts; he began to distill by circumlocutions,
such things that but to name were a shame; community of goods and women, was a
thing very consistent to his zealous Breeches, saying that he had a propriety
in another man's wife, as also in his goods; this feared not he openly to avow
before diverse Gentlemen, Ministers, and others at Bredwardine, which how like
his future carriages it was, and how necessary for his practice, you shall hear
anon.

He now practices his deceits at Worcester, where for his Doctrine and life
after some small time, he was justly spued out; the abominations of which I
shall reserve for a particular Treatise, because I would not have this of
Hereford-shire swell too big; that of Worcester having another variety of
blasphemy and lust in it.

And being cast out there, he would try his fortune with Lieutenant Colonel
Wroth Rogers, Governor of the Castle of Hereford, because he was resolved he
would try all means of getting himself into some place for gain; and procuring
him self into an intimacy with the said Governor, (as it is no hard matter for
any flatterer or fawner) the Governor was resolved to get him into places and
preferment; first then he gets into the great Guns of the Castle; and for my
part I should have thought he would have fitted the Mortar piece for a shell,
because of his emptiness; and for a Granado also, for I believe there is not a
greater incendiary happened into civil society; but now he practices the
Mathematics, and measures out his ware by the length of his gilded hilted
Rapier, strutting in a Souldier-like posture, for a scurvy Matross of the
Castle, like a Crow in a Gutter; owning himself a Mathematician, and declaring
his greatest learning consisted in the knowledge of the Mathematics; (but that
was by his favor in taking the dimensions and length of men and women's feet, so
as he might from a miserable Preacher, turn a Mathematical parasite) but for
his skill, I have reason to believe, he was not guilty of much, nor so much as
to make him a Gunner, yet here he stays, disparting the small fire-Drakes of
his erroneous dreggs, and begins with much devotion to leave his old courses of
blasphemy, because they had left him; and people began to grow weary of that
course of course ware.

But being solicitous for his gain: he lacks nothing but a substantial man that
may have the honor to convert him, and so himself become his Proselyte; and
that nothing may be wanting to the completing of this ridiculous Scene, Enter
Major General Harrison, he who did but look upon him, and by his physiognomy
assured us of his conversion, and further (nay we must believe it) that he had
made his recantation; and it may be better believe it, then go to disprove it:
for if his recantation were called to public Test, and seriously searched
after, it would be much like the story of Enoch his Pillars, on which were
wrote many strange things, but all washed away with the Deluge, and so it must
be returned with a non est inventum; and prove at least to be but a Greek
Ogygies, an invisible record; but however this superficial conversion served
his turn, he hastens to get a Church, and being a Gunner, almost at the first
firing caught one alive; and how he has bred it up to his hands, and out of it
framed a thing to his own ends, you may perceive by the sequel: He now lives at
Nathan Cogans, where he shows himself more effectionate to Mr. Cogans wife,
then to his own child when it dyed (being void of natural affection to it);
Romans 1.31.
for Mrs. Cogan being very much troubled with Convulsion fits, he in those fits
embraced her, kissed her, and showed very much love to her; yet having entered
into a Church way, knowing his proneness to fly out, he told his Church he
would do nothing without their approbation now, and therefore desires they
would give their consent to take a wife, naming her whom he since has married,
being a servant maid to Lieutenant Colonel Rogers his wife, and further makes
it his request, that in regard it would be very convenient for his wife to have
a maidservant, that they would grant him leave to take a hired servant from her
Mistress, which they poor wretches did easily grant to him; and so he seduced
Jane South of Greendon her maid from her, whom she had long kept and bred: he
had been tampering with her, when as a guest he was entertained in Jane South
her house, where betwixt himself, this servant and Jinny Clare, there was such
pretty night pastimes, of warming of pillows, and other midnight works, that he
began shrewdly to be suspected there, if not detected, at leastwise much
disrelished; making good what the Apostle warns us of: 2 Pet. 2.13, 14.
spots and blemishes they are, sporting themselves with their own deceivings,
while they feast with you, having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease
from sin, beguiling unstable souls.

But that you may also see of what generation of people his Church consists,
following the example of their Pastor, (though I am confident many of them are
truly Godly, and such seeing his misdemeanors and wickednesses, do daily desert
him, and being discovered, will all leave him) but such who please themselves
in their trade of sinning, will glory in their Cloak, delighting to make
Religion a covert for their baseness, of which sort are two of his Church, John
Davis a Tailor, and Anne Madox a School-mistress, both near neighbors at
Aresland in this County of Hereford: this John Davis was husband to a woman
simply honest, who persuaded his wife to permit Anne Madox to lie with them
(her house being close by) there they lie all night, and in the morning very
early, Davis persuades his wife to rise and go to the Bake-house, for to
dispatch her affairs there; which she (poor woman) very readily consented unto;
and left her husband and Anne Madox fast asleep together; (nay further, you
must believe that there they lay without waking four hours together, or you
shall be none of Delamains Church) the wife knowing no hurt in the thing,
divulgeth it at the Bake-house to her neighbors, by which means it came so
public, and was so plain, that diverse and the wife having her eyes opened,
complained of it, the witnesses proved it, notwithstanding the Governor of
Hereford his threatening of them, to fine them one hundred pounds; yet I say it
was proved; now were the Governor and Delamain put to their shifts, to cover
this spiritual wantonness; and truly it was a poor shift; for Isaac We^^^^^,
one of the prosecutors and witnesses, being seduced by the^^ promises or
threats, pretends, that as he was going in the prosecution of this business, he
had seen in a vision at Canon-peon, an Angel or Spirit, who told him, that
although John Davis and Anne Madox lay commonly together, yet they did not so
much as kiss one another, etc. I hope you cannot choose but believe it, with
miracle and all: these are, or lately were of Delamains Church, to the pablick
shame and reproach of all congregated and gathered Churches in the Nation: but
here it is, like Priest, like people. He has also persuaded this his Church,
under the Title of we the Godly, to set their hands to papers, being
certificates against some honest man or other that took notice of his
villainies; which certificates they had not the liberty either to see, read, or
know the substance of; but assured them that they were for the glory of God,
and good of the Godly.

During this time, our lusty Priest had but a foot Soldiers pay and a
Canoniers, and he found it was not sufficient; he was provided therefore by the
Governor, of many other pretty missets and portions, for if those two former
would not do, he shall be a Muster-master and play master, a Clerk or Trooper in
the County Troop; so that you may now behold him a double beneficed Mirmidon,
having a great command both in horse and foot; and truly there was great
occasion for it, because he was a Godly man, and it was good to engage such an
one to our party, for that the Scots were coming toward Worcester, for which
pay he kept intelligence with our dear Brother Colonel James, (one of Major
General Harrisons valiant Croneys) and let a furious party on Malvern hills
know that the Governor of Worcester, Colonel James, was fixedly resolved in his
Canon proof armor, with his sword out drawn, being so fearful, and with that
fear beside himself, that he could not stir; for attempting to have run away on
the other side Severn, he found the Drawbridge so strongly fastened, that
hindered his design, and put him into a great amazement, and can you blame him?
for I Will assure you, the Scots were within 15 or 16 miles, and how ugly the
High-Landers looked in their plades, would have amazed any one that could not
have preached them away: but at that very place our Hero offered the Hereford
assistance, which Colonel James refused, and I think wisely too; for he had men
enough to run away withal.

But these military places were not the things aimed at, because they were
subject to mutation; therefore it would do well to have something that might
bring in an annual gain; and truly the Militia of the County of Hereford,
having resolved themselves into a Committee, upon serious deliberation, for his
military achievements, gave him the three parishes of Aymonastree, little
Hereford, and Longtown; but because he could not receive Tithes in point of
tenderness of conscience, He procures Mrs. W. of Aymonastree to receive them,
and give him the money, she being his dry nurse, and fed him with silver
spoons, for his spiritual food to her, and for making her Son (a pretty boy) a
Justice of the peace for the County, which was a place, with Hereford
Husbandry, that will (for all your laughing) bring in meat, drink, and clothes.

For Longtown, he had some dealing with an honest Tailor, with his party
colored beard, who not pleasuring him with an expected sum, seized on his
horse, or threatened to seize on him; but whether he did, or only threatened, he
by it forced the poor man to condescend to his demands, notwithstanding he
showed him how he had been at about thirty shillings charges; which he would by
no means allow the man; according to what S. Peter foretells of such: That
through covetuousness, they with feigned words shall make merchandise of you, 2
Pet. 2.3.
whose judgment lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not: but this that
he received was not Tithes, it was but Tithe-money: and what made also much for
him, was the convenience of the Parishes together, that so having undertaken
the cure, with such facility he might provide for them; I believe there was not
one of them within 8 miles of the other, and some further distant: but not
content with these; he exercises his heart with covetous practices, Jude.
running greedily after the way of Balaam for reward: and labors to get added
to these, the Parish of Pembridge, by the wages of iniquity, promising one
Rich. Byrd one hundred pounds, if he would bring sufficient matter to out the
incumbent, and prosecutes the design vigorously, having already by his trust to
his potent friends, swallowed it, yet missed of it: this practice up and down
he continued till the year 1652. when by the assistance of his party and
friends, he procures himself, into the room of Mr. Smith, into the Minster
Church of Hereford, (one that was a Godly sincere plain dealing man, but
disturbed in his Pulpit by the Soldiers of the Garrison, and frighted away) to
which place the Parliament had settled and continued to three Ministers, 150.
pounds a year on each; now you would think that he should have had enough,
having wrigled himself into this place; but such was his greediness of filthy
lucre, that with this he keeps the other Parishes, till he was shamed out of
them: yet notwithstanding the Governor (his great friend) being called up to
the new Parliament (keeping himself all that time in the Government of the
Castle of Hereford) improves his interest with his friends, helping him not
only to his Fathers arrears, but also to the Minsters Salary, for that very
time as he had kept the forenamed Parishes in his own hands (and this also by
the Governors knowledge, by which you perceive they prefer their own private
interest before the public) and not being able to endure to have but one
employment or benefice, by the same means he was got into the mastership of the
Hospital, and Thompsons gift; in which two charitable places, he behaved
himself so unworthily, that he is become the common talk and curse of the poor;
he rayles up an ancient, undeniable, and unquestionable way, for watering in
the Castle ditch to the City: instead of giving to ten or twelve poor people
cloth for clothes, according to their use, at half a crown a yard, he searched
over all the City, and found a parcel of cloth at sixteen pence a yard, which
he bought, and wherewith he clothed them; so you may perceive he will rob the
Spittle, rather then miss of his purpose for gain; the Governor after procures
an Order for Mr. Voyle, one of the Ministers of Hereford, and Delamain, to
attend the service of preaching in the City; which when once Delamain had got,
he usurped the principal place, (the Minster) to himself, though second in the
order; then what work did he make with the rest of the ministers, forbidding
them to preach; charging the Sextons of the Churches, not to open the doors or
ring a Bell without his permission; scarce giving way to Mr. Primrose to give
his Parish of S. Nicholas notice of the Order, or take his leave of those
people to whom he had preached many years: labored to hinder Mr. Low from
preaching at one of the Churches that day on which he had accustomed to stay in
the City for breaking of bread. And whereas for the supervising the raparations
of the Minster, it was referred by the Committee for plundered Ministers, to
Captain Tailor, and Mr. Thomas Seaborn: because he found not Captain Tailor at
all inclinable to comply with his designed plots, he and the Governor causes
Seaborn to certify an untruth to the Committee, that Captain Tailor had
Country employments, and so could not intend this work, upon which were ordered
an addition of the Governor and Captain Mason; whereas the quarrel was, that
Captain Tailor would have done that work gratis, and the Governor was privy to
it also, which might have been prejudicial to Delamains designs, for he was
resolved nothing should escape him, but he would have a finger in it, and he
intended to flay flints, rather then miss of the sweetness of getting; and if
Captain Tailor had stayed in equal trust, how could Seaborn, that sold so many
Bells for this work, have gone on so merrily with his gettings, or get so much
as to become a Purchaser; or how could they have given Delamain the power of
supervising besides their order, they themselves being but Deputies? which
employments (as we have lately named them unto you) caused him to surcease the
Tuesdays Lecture at the Minster; which for many years had been continued, for
being spoken unto to continue them, he answered, that the business of Saint
Ethelberts Hospital did take up so much of his time, that he could not attend
it, by which means it has been long discontinued.

That was not the only trouble neither, his surveying the works of the Minster,
of which he reckons himself parochial Pastor, (but that must then be by some
invisible order) and where he orders all things to his own whimsical will and
pleasure, the referrees being but servants to his orders; and there makes so
many baubles and fooleries, with so great an expense of the Parish money, that
it is admirable: shows his spite and malice against all to whom he was
disaffected, turns them out of their seats, falls upon Colonel Birches seat,
pulls it down, takes away and converts the materials to other purposes, breaks
open the lock of Captain Tailors seat door, and alters it, without restoring
him the key, proclaims in his Pulpit, that those that expect seats must come to
him, turns out the Sextons, causes almost a total alteration in the seats and
alleys of the Church, painting figures and letters upon the doors of the seats,
and to show his skill in the Mathematics, bestows the sign Taurus, with the
horns toward the Pulpit, upon the Governors seat; Gemini upon the Mayor and
Aldermens; Aries upon the Officers of the Castle, and the Governors attendants;
which learning he got out of an Ephemeris and discourse of the elevation of the
Pole, long since imagined by Sir Thomas de Cantelupo, who lay intombed in
Herefond, and whose fountian or jitteau has been long immerged, under the
watery region of the Castle sink; and thus does he abuse his chiefest friends,
rather then not innure himself to his resolved practice and trade of abuses;
his squeazy stomach has thoroughly digested Tithes, and the calling of the
Ministry now: and one would think him a much altered man, but that being taxed
for his former opinions and course of life, he declares, he is the same man
still; and this he has done lately, which also compared with some late
Socinian flashes, will make the matter clear and indubitable, and are frequent
to the diligent observers.

On July 25. 1653. at Alhallows in the City of Hereford, speaking of changes
wrought in a man at his conversion, said, that then his Soul is made a Spirit;
(this is pretty) further alleging the Col. 1.20. to prove the gathering
together into one person Christ; he expounded all things in heaven to be God,
and all things upon earth, Man, ( Galilaeus and Copernicus their conceits were
toys to these knick knacks) and adds, that wicked men can cast out Devils, but
not Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, out of the 7. of Matthew. it is against his
liberty to preach the Tuesdays Lectures, but not to preach funeral Sermons to
commend the dead, and pray over them, to sing over them in the Church, and the
same Psalm as heretofore in Cathedrals was authematically used, and after all
threaten the Sextons for the mourning-borrowed-Pulpit-cloath, as his fee: this
was his liberty: so also was a Christmas Sermon out of Bishop Andrews, upon
the text, Great is the mystery of Godliness, Christ manifest in the flesh; but
not being able to read or pronounce true Latin, he tells you, hoc est magnum
mysterium quae, etc. and though he has taken up this Trade, his studies are
not very elaborate, which in all reason would have concerned him; but who more
bold then blind Bayard? not trusting to his own invention, he commonly makes
use of some good Author or other for his Sermons, as the forenamed Bishop
Andrews, Downam, Dyke; nay, Causinus and Drexelius the Jesuits must not escape
him, and yet though he has a great memory (which is his all) he has not as
yet attained to the faculty to remember Latin or Greek well, but out of some
Author or other, rimes up a Catholic or Latin chime, and tells us that three
things are inseparable companions, ingentia beneficia, ingentia peccata, and
ingentiae poena; he preaches downright, that no one ought to preach, but such
as have a call both from God and men, and the call from men to be by the
Officers of the Church, visibly, and not long after confutes himself again; but
it is his liberty: he declares he is ordained: a huge altered man; and it may be
so; (for in imitation of it, he has the happiness himself to do many things
hand over head.) but I call him altered and reformed, because he has
heretofore publicly declared in these words, I am no Minister, nor never will
be, I know no cause why any man should: but to our story, he does not only say
himself ordained, but sent to London John Garnons to be ordained for his
leavings at little Hereford, because he himself the father had got great
Hereford; this is he whom he calls his Son Timothy; or rather Onesimus in the
first vellom, (volumn I should have said;) because of his running away from his
master, and leaving his trade of a Glover, to draw on the Kid-skin of
dissimulation, by a seeming care and zeal of conversion of pelts: this young
boy he sent to be ordained, that so he might have an easier trade to live on,
then by stitching: and can you blame him, for following this counsel; being not
for his liberty to stay with his master, working on the week days, writing
Sermons on the Lords days, and then to repeat them at night: Oh! this was
irksom and tiresom to his tender gristles; but because that the Law may not
proceed against him, the Governor of the Castle must lift him a Soldier there,
and keep him to his sewing till he become fit for the Ministry: Here is brave
juggleing, brave Garrison, brave Governor, brave Priests, brave people, brave
maintainers of Law, Liberty and Propriety.

But this Gentleman, John Garnons, Glover, may have another character, for I
have seen his depositions at Haberdashers Hall against Captain Tailor, in which
he followed his Father Delamain, in the lie and slander of alaruming the Castle
of Hereford with a musick-meeting; only our business is principally with
Delamain at present.

You might now think that our deceiver and familism had shaken hands and
parted, but that you have heard that he does declare to diverse, that he is the
same man still: else would he have labored to have set those in the right path,
whom he has seduced, and have at least made public his leaving his own
erroneous ways: and how sadly this shows, let any Christian judge, that those
whom he has infected with his leprosy and scurf of heresy; those who by his
means have left the good old ways and paths, wherein they walked, in spite
of all the scorns and derisions of the world; those that for the testimony of a
good conscience have suffered from friends and enemies, from relations and
acquaintance; that they should lie sleeping with the soporiferous opium of his
enchanting dregs of error; 2 Pet. 2.18.
having allured with great swelling words of vanity through the lusts of the
flesh, etc. those that were clean escaped from them; who live in error, while
they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, and
how sad it is for such who have escaped the pollution of the world, through the
knowledge of Christ, to be again entangled and overcome: to such the latter end
is worse then the beginning, and it had been better for them never to have
known the ways of righteousness, then after they have known them, to turn from
the holy commandment, like the dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing
in the mire: if he had any sense or feeling of the miserable condition he has
drawn them into, if there were any knowledge of his own ways, if himself were
converted, sure he could not suffer such as these aforementioned to continue in
those dangerous courses; but should labor to beat down the strong holds of sin
and Satan, to unfold the mysteries of error, to strengthen those that are in
the right-way, to bring back those that are in the wrong, to undeceive those
that he has seduced, which being often pressed unto; and to such from whom he
has formerly received the food for his belly, the raiment for his back, he
has refused to go to them; (because he is the same man still) wanting
Christian compassion to save others with fear, pulling them out of the fire
that he has led them into, setting himself most ungratefully against those
familyes who have offered most civilities to him, and from whom he has
received the greatest engagements; but he is so wedded to this present world,
that he neglects friends, engagements, civilities, and all things that may term
him man, to enjoy it: money that he borrowed to buy a suite of clothes in his
necessity, he refuses to pay in his plenty and abundance; returns of humanity
he ungratefully detains from the family at Bredwardine, and particularly from
one of that family who has stood up for him; which passage shall be the last
in this Treatise, as being the most transcendent for villainy and detraction of
all; but yet it is no marvail, for since he denies God, what fear is there left
in him, when he solemnly invokes God by an oath? to bear false witness can be
no trouble to his conscience, when he believes neither a heaven nor an hell.

The time (that you may perceive whether he be an altered and reformed man or
no) was no longer ago then September. 6. 1653. at Gloucester, Captain Mason having
scandalously abused Captain Tailor by Articles exhibited against him in
Haberdashers-Hall, for refusing to comply with him in the deceiving of his
trust, contrary to his oath, and not being able to prove any one, though in the
attempt the witnesses much forswore themselves, yet that there might be
somewhat found in the depositions, more then in the Articles; they the accusers
and privy prosecutors, having in writing drawn up the depositions, and worded
them for the witnesses; which Delamain not approving, because they lacked
somewhat of venom that he would have had inserted against Captain Tailor, with
his own hand mended and inserted many words, which the witnesses were to swear;
causing many of them to own such terms and words in their oaths, as they (poor
people) could not understand; but that you may see he would not be behind
himself in such an action as he puts others upon, have patience to read his
oath, as it was by himself framed in writing, and returned to
Haberdashers-Hall, where it now lies attested and subscribed with his own hand.

Richard Delamain, sworn and examined to the second Article against Captain
Tailor, deposes and says, that the Soldiers in the Garrison of Hereford,
upon Monday and Tuesday the 3. and 4. of January, 1652. were necessitated to
keep all to their arms, by reason of a convention of Papists and Delinquents
then in the City of Hereford, occasioned by a Musickmeeting, appointed by
Captain Tailor: and whereas it was expected, that he would have extenuated and
mitigated the too too positive sense, by those cross examinations upon
interrogatories exhibited by Captain Tailor; being demanded whether he knew
them Papists and Delinquents, and desired to name them; it was beyond his
ability, he could not name any of them, nor did he prove any of them to be
Papists or Delinquents; but gives his passion vent, and discharges such a
Torrent of choler, swearing the second time, That the Soldiery of the
Garrison of Hereford were necessitated to stand to their arms, upon occasion of
a Musick-meeting of Papists and Delinquents, by Captain Tailors appointment:
and further adds, (as under his own hand is in the office to be seen) that he
does not know of any of the honest party he does either converse or keep
company with; (this is very large): but here he swears himself, the Governor,
Captain Mason, and the rest of his own party knaves; for I am credibly
informed, Captain Tailor kept not company more with any, then with them; and
with them by much too much, as by their unhandsome undermining and juggling
with him did appear. But I pray you observe the first part of his first oath:
that the Soldiers of the Garrison of Hereford were (on such a time)
necessitated to keep all to their arms, by reason of a convention of Papists
and Delinquents, occasioned by a musick-meeting, appointed by Captain Tailor:
what credit he does the Soldiers, to be afraid of a Musick-meeting; surely
the Soldiers of that Garrison are fraughted with very unharmonious Souls, to
be frighted with fiddles; ( Delamain being Engenier, it may as well be, that
the new rayles set up in Castle street, were to hinder a surprise by a Camisado
of Hobby-horses.) and pray who were the company that put them into this
terrible Alarm, and so much insisted upon affrightment? Do you think any of
their own party could be there? truly you shall find Mat. Price of the States
Arms, Inholder, Gent. and G. Lynne, their own Croneys, participants in this
dangerous enterprise, and to whom they were beholden for the story, or else
they had missed of an Article, and Delamain of matter to forswear himself
withal, besides whom were but ten men and about six women, most of them
inhabitants of the City of Hereford; were not these dangerous people, and those
dangerous instruments, to surprise a Castle manned with about 70. or 80.
Soldiers, and of whom Delamain swears they were all necessitated to keep to
their arms? They were in a good posture.
yet one of them being brought to swear to this plot, (I think his name is
James Vaughan, but it is Vaughan) tells you, he believes there was a design,
because he had much a do to escape casheiring, for being absent then; (it
seems then it was not for kissing the Governors maid) so that all were not
there (honest Delmain) but when it came to be strictly searched into, neither
the Soldiers, (for the greatest part) nor Officers of the Castle ever knew of
any such meeting at Captain Tailors; till such time as half a year after, and
above, the plot was found in the Articles against Captain Tailor, and perhaps
some were so long after affrighted, and brought near to that pass, as the poor
man that dyed the next day after he had passed a narrow plank that lay cross a
decayed Arch on Rochester-Bridge, upon the imagination of the danger he had
escaped: Lieutenant Jenkins being at that time Deputy Governor, in the absence
of Lieutenant Colonel Rogers, did declare, when he was summoned to depose this
against Captain Tailor; (for such a plot could not be known more plain to any,
then to the then Governor) he called the Officers of the Garrison together, and
diligently enquired of them, whether they ever heard of any such meeting at
Captain Tailors? To which with one accord they answered, they never knew or
heard of any such meeting; and that they did not keep to their arms by reason
of any convention at his house; which Lieutenant Jenkins did also declare for
himself, by which he escaped the journey to Gloucester, it being the place
appointed, where, if he could or would, he should have sworn the plot, and this
their ignorance, and not knowing then of the meeting, and their not standing to
their arms, by reason of the convention at Captain Tailors music, they will
attest. Further, I have heard declared and ascertained, that one of those very
nights, Delamain courted Captain Tailor, in case there should be any risings in
the Country, or stirs in the City, directing him a back way from his dwelling
in the Palace of Hereford, into the Castle; were I acquainted with Captain
Tailor, I could have given you many more circumstances, which I have heard of;
but because I would do nothing without a certain and sure ground; nor
anticipate his formerly-intended resolutions, of exposing the whole carriage of
this business to a public view; which would have been a great help to me in
the management of this small tract, and it may be a remora to the whole, (if he
had done it effectually.) I have contented my self with these few passages, in
respect of the multitude of his Prevarications, because that I have thoroughly
informed my self of the real truth of them, from honest Godly persons of that
County, who had seposited certain collections of his enormities; and by my own
search into Haberdashers-Hall, at my own charge, of taking out orders and
depositions.

And now that you may see the horridness of Delamains forswearing himself; the
little account he makes of other men's reputations; (having lost his own) the
improbability of his conversion, the small hopes of his amendment, his
perverse, malicious and obdurate heart; as also Captain Tailors innocence
adjusted; and the good opinion and sense after this charge against him, the
Commissioners of Haberdashers-Hall had still of him; be pleased to accept of
the Order, as it lies there Registered; viz.

By the Commissioners for Compounding, etc.
IN the Cause depending before us, upon a charge of misdemeanor exhibited by
Captain Mason, against Captain Silas Tailor, one of the Commissioners for
Sequestrations in the County of Hereford; upon reading the several proofs and
depositions taken for and against the said Captain Tailor; and upon deliberate
hearing and debate thereof, and of what was offered and alleged by the Counsel
on both sides. -- Resolved that we do not find the said Captain Tailor to be
guilty of the crimes contained in the aforesaid charge: and do therefore acquit
him of the same, And do Order that he be forthwith restored to his employment
as a Commissioner for sequestrations in the said County of Hereford; and he is
hereby enabled and empowered to act with the other Commissioners serving for
the said County, as formerly, in as full and ample manner, as if no order had
been for suspending him from the same.

R. M. J. V. E. C. R. W.



I hope by this you perceive him an egregious knave upon Record, and with what
a piece of pestilence you have to deal: and by this let all his friends and
fautors be warned of his friendship, Romans 3.
for, latet Anguis in herba; his throat is an open Sepulcher, with his tongue
he has used deceit, and the poison of Asps is under his lips; he makes no
conscience of his actions or ways neither to God or men; I need not further
characterize him, these his actions, his words, his demeanors, and his
practices are enough to render him in his own capacity, without any strain or
force, sufficiently odious to the world.

And now I challenge any one, that finds himself either in part, or in whole
concerned in this History, to disprove the Truth of it: having received it from
men truly religious, and of unblamable life and conversation, and out of such
undeniable and unquessionable Records, as that the truth cannot suffer; yet
before I conclude, let me humbly petition those that are in Authority, to
interest themselves in the rooting out of such profaneness, blasphemy, heresy
and hypocrisy, left hearing of these things, and not redressing of them, they
draw on their own Souls the guilt of tolerating and connivence, if not of
abetting such Impostures as these are, to the undoing of many souls; it being
the policy of that Grand Impostor, Satan, to work into a disrelish and dislike
of the truth, all such as any ways (though it be in bare profession, without
the root of sincerity) do set themselves to worship God in a stricter and purer
way then the common course of the world do: and to lay the heaviest load of
temptations upon such that buckle themselves to walk in the paths of Gods
precepts: Heb. 12.
running the race with patience that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the
Author and Finisher of our Faith; clothing our selves with circumspection and
vigilance, continually to stand upon our guard, Rev. 18.
lest instead of Angels we entertain Devils, and instead of the mystery of
Godliness, we participate of Mysterious Babylon, and so become pertakers not
only of her sins, but of her plagues; her plagues that shall come upon her in
one day, death, mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire,
for strong is the Lord God who judges her.

FINIS.

