A TREATISE OF CONTENTMENT. Leading a Christian with much patience through all
afflicted Conditions. By sundry Rules of heavenly wisdom. Whereunto is
annexed, First, a Treatise of the Improvement of Time. Secondly, The Holy
War: in a Visitation Sermon.

Greg. Moral. l. 5. Si men's forti intention in Deum dirigiter, quicquid in hac
vita sibi amarum sit, dulce aestimat; omne quod affligit, requiem putat. By T.
T. D. D. etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Gilt Cup, near S. Austins Gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir FRANCIS DARCY Knight, my much honored friend:
All happiness in Christ JESUS.
SIR, not having of mine own, wherewith I might tell the world of your great
and continual favors unto me, by such a pub^ke testimony, I thought good to
do it by publishing this work of another, whose Person and Doctrine you well
knew and respected. Which I do the more willingly, because it is suitable to
the Contentment here treated of. I am well contented with that mediocrity of
gifts and abilities, which God has bestowed on me. I hold it better in this
life, to be faithful in a little, then ruler over much. No doubt but some are
Masters of great parts, and estates, and faithful too: rich in this world, and
rich in good works too: high in place and respect among men, and high in the
favor of God too. But, both such have their hazzards and temptations, against
which they need to be watchful; and the brother of low degree has cause (in
God and his love) to rejoice and be contented. And oh how happy were it with
godly Christians, if they had taken forth this lesson of Contentment! How
comfortless would their lives then be! How blessedly free from those torturing
passions of emulation, envy, murmuring, impatience, and the like, wherewith
the spirit is too often, and too much disquieted! Godliness with Contentment
is great gain, says the Apostle: as if the purchase were small, where
Contentment is wanting: And indeed much of the benefit and advantage is taken
away, where this lesson of Contentation is not taken forth perfectly. And how
unbeseeming is it to an heir of the promises, to be Malecontent for worldly
wants, or afflictions! How thwarting to the wisdom of God, as if he knew not
best to make allowance to his children! How terrible to lie disconsolate in
death, or any deadly trouble, moaning as that great Emperor when he lay dying
at York; In my life time I have been all (...). Sev.
things, and now nothing does me good! I w^sh to your Worship all the comforts
and mercies of God in Christ, both in life and death; and thereunto at this time
I commend to your reading this little Treatise of Contentment: resting ever,

Your Worships much obliged, W. JEMMAT.

A Table Alphabeticall of the chief things in this Book.
A
ADa^s sin had many sins in it. page 35 Afflictions foiled by Contentment. 3.
the necessity of them in three respects. 6 disposed of God for time, measure,
and end. 4
Age: the incommodities of it. 114 privileges of it. 115 comforts of it. 116
Aged people called on to prove time well. 179
B
Barrenness to be quietly endured, how. 105 Bernards description of worldly
pleasure. 92
C
Callings: crosses in them to be borne contentedly, how. 77 Commonwealth?
evils in it: how to be borne. 24 Comparisons: two fold use of them. 192.
Contempt of the world: how to be born contentedly. 52 Contentation the daughter
of godliness. Praef. means and motives to work it. 131 power of godliness to
breed it: whence. 139
Country and friends left: comfort in it. 62
D
Death terrible. 118 comforts in it. 119 necessity of dying. 121 utility. 123
Death of friends: comfort in it. 73 Deformity of body to be borne quietly:
how. 100
E
Estates we live in, yields discontents, yet be comforted in them: how. 85
Examples of holy men persuading Contentment. 136 Experience without grace
avails not. 107
F
Friends unkindnesse: comfort in it. 70 and in their death. 73
G
Glory obtained by afflictions: how. 14 Godliness what it does to breed
Contentment. 145 Goods lost: comfort in it. 64 Graces bred, beautified, and
exercised by afflictions. 8 Grave terrible: comfort in it. 127 Great sins
should not overtrouble the soul. 38
H
Happiness of Saints raised by certain stairs. 127 Heavenly happiness
attained in death. 125 Honor from above, how to be getten. 98 Honor due to
Ministers: threefold. 210 Honors of the world, lost, or not had: comfort in it.
94
I
Judgment at the last day not dreadful to believers: why. 129 all
imperfections and blemishes then done away. 101
Justification the ground of Contentment. 143
L
Liberty lost: comfort in it. 61 Life lost: comfort in it. 66 Lingering
sickness: how to be borne contentedly. 111 why suffered by God. 113

M
Martyrs very forward to suffer. 69 Ministers calling most crossed: comfort for
them. 83 they are Christ's soldiers in two respects. 197 their weapons: 198,
204 their enemies. 199 cause of war. 200
Ministry no easy calling, but dangerous. 201 Misery all ended in death:
four ways. 123 Molestation Satanicall: how to be borne quietly. 28 Multitude
of sins should not too much trouble. 32 Mystery in godliness, and in
Contentment. 152
N
Nature content with little, Grace with less. 136 Nature teaches not the
price of time. 168
O
Opportunities of good: nine Instances. 156 Orbity uncomfortable: comforts in
it. 105
P
Persecution to be endured contentedly, how 57 Pleasures lost, or lacking:
comfort therein. 90 Poor men, how profitable in their times. 184 Preparation
to death: what, and how. 121
R
Redeeming of time: what. 161 Relapses: comfort in case of them. 44 Repentance:
two effects of it furthered by afflictions. 10 Rich men should be specially
careful of spending their time. 182
S
Scandals and Schisms: foretold: turned to good, etc. 18 Sickness to be born
co^tentedly: how. 107 Sins merit afflictions, and are purged by them. 6
Sins multitude, greatness, relapse: how answered. 32
T
Temporals mercifully withholden. 137 Time to be wholly improoved for good.
155. Motives. 185 preciousnesse of time: in six things. 162. 165 skill to prize
it comes of God. 168 be sparing of time: 7 Motives. 172
Thieves that steal time away. 174
V
Union with Christ not dissolved in the grave, 128 Unite forces against the
common enemy. 208 Uses of sickness sanctified, six. 108
W
War of Christians, especially of Ministers. 193 Wealth lost, or not had:
comfort in it. 85 Works good, mentioned to the Saints in the last judgment:
not bad. 131 Worlds hatred: contentment in it. 47
Y.
Young people admonished to spend their time well. 177
FINIS.
THE AVTHORS PREFACE:
AFter we have showed the gain of godliness (out of 1 Timothy 6. 6.) now we come
to speak of the privilege of it, that it brings Contentment with it, whereby
the heart of a godly man is stayed, and rests in God, well apaid with that
estate and measure of goods which the Lord has made his portion, be it more or
less. A most rare virtue, and full of sweetness: when as the mind, grounded
upon Gods providence and promises, reposeth it self in GOD, and has learned
with Paul in every estate to be Content, to want and abound, to be full and
hungry, etc. Phil. 4. 11, 12.

Doctr. True Contentation is the daughter of Godliness. One ly delight in the
Lord can give us our hearts desire, Psalm. 37. 4. He that drinks of this water,
shall thirst again: but he that drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst, John 4. 14. And blessed is he whom thou choosest, and
make come unto thee: he shall dwell and be satisfied with the pleasures of
thy house, Psalm. 65. 4.

Reason 1. Because true Con tentment is a fruit of Faith, ari sing through
persuasion of there mission of sin, and reconciliation with God; together
with as surance of our Adoption, whereby we become sons, and are interes sed
in the fatherly providence of God, which will watch over our good, and reserve
for us such an estate as his wisdom and love shall see meet for us.

2 It is the disease of corrupt hearts (which all of us carry) that they cannot
but insatiably long and covet after worse things if they be not filled with the
best: even as a bad stomach not filled with wholesome food, will suck in w^nd
to torment it. But if once God and his grace take up our hearts, that by Faith
and Hope we can sat^ate our souls in his goodness, we shall no more want
ea^thly vanities, then we can want a Candle when the Sun sh^neth.

3 No earthly thing can bring Content; and therefore it must be the daughter of
Godliness only. For earthly things be mass^e and drossie; whereas the mind
is of a divine and spiritual nature. Can earthly treasures fill the soul, as
they do a Chest? or can you fill a Chest with graces and virtues? Can you fill
the stomach with wisdom, as with meat? These be not capable one of another:
there is no proportion between them. These earthly things are unnatural
nourishment for the soul of man, and cannot satisfy the hunger of the mind.
So says Solomon, Eccles 5. 10. He that loves money shall not be satisfied
with it. It is only the bread of Life, and Christ's righteousness, a
spiritual nourishment, that can replenish emptiesoules. Nothing less then God
can fill the heart, being of a spiritual substance, created to his Image, and
to be a Temple for his Spirit.

4 It is proper to godliness, if the estate be not fitted to the mind, to fit
the mind to his estate. And this is partly by the Rules it affords for every
afflicted condition, partly by the power it has to give the soul Contentment,
though other comforts fail: those in the general body of this Treatise, this
in the last Chapter.

Use I. It follows hence, that an ungodly man can have no content, but is as
the raging Sea, casting out mire and dirt. He may have riches; but no rest. He
may fill his Chest, but not his mind. For it is not in those things, to give
peace; nay, as the curse attends him in other things, so, in this specially, He
eats, but is not satisfied, as the seven lean Kine ate the seven fatones, but
were never the fatter.

Use 2. This teaches us, how a man may be rich without riches (which is a
riddle in Christianity) namely, when godliness and contentation meet together.
For,

1 He is rich, whom God accounts rich, and that is the godly man.

2 He is rich, who has enough, not who has much. For it is better to have
enough, then to have much: and he has enough whose estate agrees with his
mind: As he is poor, not who has little, but who not being sufficed is ever
craving more. Ahab had a Kingdom, yet was not content without poor Naboths
Vineyard: whereas Naboth had but a little, yet was so content and rich, as he
wished not the Kings substance. Of every poor godly man may be said, as the
Spirit speaks of the Church of Smyrna, Revelat. 2. verse 9. I know thy
poverty, but thou art rich. This it is, which makes a man whole without health,
warm without clothes, and in cause of outward heaviness to be glad. Whereas
without it men turn peace into trouble, riches into poverty, health into
sickness. No happiness where contentment dwells not. Experirience lets our
eyes see many of them, whom the world has with her best means made as happy
as it can, yet pressed down with the weight of their own felicity, thinking
themselves unhappy sad, and complaining, and cannot tell of what. It is nothing
for Absalom to be the Kings son, unless he may have the Crown presently
from his fathers head. Caesar can abide no superior, nor Pompey an equal.

Use 3. Labor for this fruit of godliness, which is content meant. The means
and motives are in Chap. 20. Read, medi tate, affect thine own happiness,
and what is delivered to thee in Rules, express and bring forth in thy
conversation.

A TREATISE OF CONTENTMENT.
1 TIMOTHY 6. 6. But godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he
has.
CHAP. I. Of Afflictions in general, foiled by Contentment.
SIngular is the benefit of Benefit of Contentment.
Contentment which goes no where, but it bestows a rich Reward on the
Entertainer, and makes him a gainer in all Conditions, even then when the
world sets it self to make him, and so cannot but account him a loser.

There is no virtue but it is as a bright Stone in a dark night, set in the
midst between two vices in extremity, both to show the cleerenesse and
beauty of it self; as also that it can never want encounter, being so beset
with contrariety; and likewise to note the truth and soundness of it, when as
pure gold it passes the fire, not consumed, but brighter.

So is it with this grace of God in Specially in afflictions.
special, which is never without onsets and sharp skirmishes by whole Bands
and Armies of Discontentments from within and without; but nevertheless
shining and beautiful; yea, so much the more glorious and precious, as the
battle is doubtful, and the victory carried with difficulty.

I have thought good therefore to set this secret and rare grace in a clear
light in the midst of her enemies which come about her like Animus aequm
optimum est aerumnae cond mentum. Pla^t. in Rud.
Bees or Hornets with poisoned stings. You shall see it like a mighty Sampson,
slaying with a Iaw-bone a thousand Philistines: You shall see her strength, her
skill, her valor, her value. You shall see this virtue breaking strong cords,
as fire does Flax. You shall see thousands and ten thousands fall before it,
and on every hand, in the foreward, rereward, wings and squadrons of the Army
pitched against it, till the whole host be discomfited.

The general of this Army is, Afflictions Grounds of Contentment therein.
in general, which godliness teaches Contentment to foil by these weapons.

1 From the Author. No misery arises out of the dust, says Job, 1 God
inflicteth: Job 5. 6.
nor comes by chance or fortune, but by the good providence of God: He creates
peace, and he creates evil; namely, of sense and punishment, not of sin,
Esa. 45. 7. and Ruth 1. 20. call me not Naomi, but Mara, for the Lord has
humbled me.

And as he inflicteth, And disposes them for time, measure, end. Luk 22. 53.
so also he disposes the time. measure. end.


He allotteth an hour for the power of darkness to work: he appoints the
place, the house, field, wilderness, and paradise.

He disposes the measure and quantity, that it shall not exceed our strength,
much less overturne the Elect, but as the Bush burned, yet Exodus 3. 3. 1 Cor.
10 13
^as not consumed, so the Church in the furnace may be proved, not wasted.

He disposes also the end: both of Intention; He will not have them condemned
with the world, He will fit and conform them to the image of his Son, He
admonishes them of the vanity of this present life, and inviteth them to the
meditation of a better, finally, He passes them by the Cross to the Crown:
and of Execution; Afflictions last not always, they are momentany, their end
is determined, His anger endures but a while, even for a night, and at length
he gives a blessed deliverance Psalm. 30. (...).
out of all, Psalm 34. verse 19.

Now the heart acquainted with godliness, by these considerations frames it
self to Contentment in Affliction: What, is this the good hand of my heavenly
Father? and shall not I his child be Content, but rise up against it? I will
be dumb and not open my mouth, because thou do it, Ps. 39. 9. If Shemei
rail upon me, God has bidden him rail upon David, and who can say, What
do thou? 2 Samuel 16. 10. If losses come upon me, the Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken, I content my self, and blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1.
21. Let my brethren intend evil against me, as Joseph's, God has an hand in
it, and will dispose it for good, Genesis 50. 19. If I should look only on your
malice, I must needs revenge and break patience, but God sent me before you,
to save you by a great deliverance: therefore let us all be content. 2
Afflictions necessary to the godly, two ways.


II. A godly man looks at the necessity of his Afflictions: and this is
inevitable.

Both in regard of Gods Word foretelling them, In the world ye shall 1
have tribulation; Ye shall weep, but the world shall laugh: as also his word
commanding, to enter into the strait gate, and to take up our cross daily,
Luke 9 23. and his word promising, that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 11.

And in respect 2
of our selves: our sins. our graces. our glory.
For all these three estates our troubles are necessary.

In the first respect they are merited. Wherefore is the living (...) Our
sins merit afflictions.
sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin, Lam. 3. 39. In this regard the Church
is content to bear the Lords wrath, because she has sinned against him, Mic.
3. 9. and David says, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments Psalm. 75. Luke 23. 41
are just, and that thou have afflicted me righteously: and the penitent
Thief, We are righteously here, therefore I will be content.

Necessary also they are for the purging And are purged by (...).
and consuming of sin. As plowing of the ground kills the weeds, and
harrowing breaks hard clods; so afflictions weaken and soften the heart, and
(as the Lords drawing plasters) draw out the core of pride, earthlinesse,
self-love, covetousness, and the like. A godly heart will here stoop and
content it self. This is the Lords Plow to subdue the hardness of my heart,
the Lords Flaile to thresh me as good Corn to be laid up in his Granary,
Simili^s.
the Lords pruning Knife to cut away my rank Boughs which would make me
fruitless, the Lords potion prescribed and prepared by the most wise Physician
of souls, to rid me of my deadly disease of sin, and to work an happy cure
on my soul, the Lords Soape wherewith he washes his foul linen, that I may
be clean in his sight: I will therefore be contented.

Secondly, in respect of our graces; for the begetting and breeding of them.
Beautifying and clearing of them. Exercising and strengthening of them.


Afflictions are necessary and useful Graces are bread by Affliction.
Instances. 1
to beget grace: as

1 Humility, which is the way to honor. These repress natural pride, whereby
every one conceives of himself as a petite god: these serve as a sharp bit to
an unruly Colt, and will tame the worst, even Pharaoh himself. Manasseh in
tribulation sought the Lord greatly, and hereby proud Nebuchadnezzar had his
understanding restored. When God chasteneth man for sin, he makes his beauty
to consume, Psa. 39. 11. David himself will be ready to say, In my prosperity
I shall never Psalm. 30. 6.
be moved, till God turn away his face, and then he is troubled. The Prodigal
Son can by no other means be brought home to his fathers house, but by the
pinching famine and misery which his own folly had brought upon him.

2 Knowledge of God is bred by 2
Afflictions, Psalm. 119. 71, It is good for me that I was afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes: and 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
and teach in thy Law. And when vocal teaching will not serve, the Lord will
teach really, by his hand, when the word of his mouth God teaches vocally and
really. 3
is too weak.

3 Obedience in doing and suffering Gods will. And this was the fruit of
Christ's suffering, who though he were the Son of God, yet learned obedience by
the things he suffered. Hence Afflictions break the wicked as Oaks, but bend
the godly as Reeds.

4 Invocation and prayer. David 4
upon his repenta^c^ exceeded himself in prayer, Psalm. 51. The thorn of the
flesh made Paul pray thrice, that is, often and fervently. See Hos. 5. 15. Esa.
26. 16. and Judge. 10. 16.

5 Tribulation brings forth patience, 5
and patience experience, and experience hope, To. 5. 3, 4. yea, and as
Afflictions abound, so do consolations abound through Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
Hence also arises denial of a man's self through sense of weakness, and
confidence in God for time to come through sense of former mercy and strength:
as, verse 9. We received the sentence of death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in God who raises the dead.

6 True repentance, in two special effects of it. 6 Two effects of repentance,
^urth red by Affliction. Ioh. 33 16.


1 Consideration of their estate: for Affliction opens the ear that was
sealed: when men are at peace in their sins, then trouble awakens them. Io^as
sleeps soundly in the side of the Ship, till the Sea be troubled, and then he
is wakened. Manasseh, whi^^ he was in his kingdom, prided himself against
God, and was extremely wicked; but bands and captivity in Babylon brought him
to the sight of his sin. Famine made the prodigal son consider and compare
his estate with Culpa ^la^^i^ oculo^, p^na ^p^rit. Greg.
them in his fathers house, and so come to that resolution of returning,
Joseph's brethren (Genesis 42. 21.) for twenty years together were never troubled
with their sin, in selling their brother, which was a confluence of sins; but
in their Affliction and crosses they met with in Egypt, they began to bethink
themselves what they had done, and their sin, so many years before committed,
came fresh to their remembrance, We have verily sinned against our brother, in
that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear him, and therefore is this trouble come upon us.

2 Conversion and amendment of life, which is that blessed fruit of
righteousness, which Afflictions, bring to them that are exercised, Hebr. 12.
11. And this proceeds from the hatred of sin, which the former
consideration did manifest in the ugliness of it. Hence schola cruc^s est
schola lucis, and justitia. By lying under the cross we receive instruction,
and settle to reformation.

The second consideration working content in respect of our graces, Graces
beautified by Affliction.
is, that troubles in general not only beget graces, but beautify and clear
them. The same fire which consumes dross, purges gold. The world is the
Furnace, the godly are Gold, Tribulation is the fire, which as it turns
chafe into ashes, so it cleanses gold from dross and ashes. See 1 Pet. 1. 7.
and Psalm. 66. 10. Look as stars shine brightest in the night, but are not
seen in Sunshine; so Gods graces, which make little show while the Sun of
prosperity shines on us, make a great shine and show when the night of trouble
comes.

Further, how does their faith and constancy gracethem in trouble, as in Job
and Abraham's trial; which if their troubles were not, could not so bewray and
commend themselves? like Camomile trodden, Niti^ur in pondus, etc.
and the Palm pressed, but rising under the weight. Besides that trouble
fitteth them to much fruitfulness: for the good husbandman purges and pruneth
the Vine, That it may bring forth more and better fruit, and so be more
profitable and beautiful, John 15. verse 2. And indeed, as an earthen vessel
is never fit for use before it be burned in the fire, so is it with us, who
are never fit to be vessels of honor, till the fire of trial have purged,
formed, and confirmed us.

Thirdly, troubles exercise grace, Graces thereby exercised and strengthened.
and so strengthen it. As a man by wrestling is stronger and more expert; so
Affliction holds all graces on work, faith, patience, Prayer, Meditation,
watchfulness against sin, holds the heart in the fear and love of God, and
of the love of the world. You shall never see a Christian more Christian, then
in trouble, as the three children never more glorious then in the Furnace,
CHRIST himself never more strong then on the Cross, and in the grave rising
from under all the burden and curse of sin.

Thus in respect of our sins and graces are Afflictions necessary.

Lastly, if we consider our estate Glory obtained by Afflictions, how.
of glory, and how trials conduce unto it, we shall not want reason to be
contented under them: for, they are so far from being prejudicial to our
glory, as they are helps and furtherances of the same: for,

1 Christian bearing of trial is 1
made a note of such, as shall partake in glory; with whom it must not be
better then with Christ himself, who did wear a Crown of thorns before his
Crown of glory. And how can it be other, seeing they testify the love of God,
who loves to the end? Hebr. 12. 6. whom he loves he chaste eneth. They are
marks of our Adoption: for if ye be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, ye are bastards and not sons. Heb. 12. 8.
They are marks of such as are in the highway to heaven, which is all strawed
with crosses and troubles; Acts 14 22. Through many Afflictions we must enter
into heaven. And they are marks of such, as by drinking of Christ's Cup are
conformable to the Image of the Son of God, Romans 8. 29. Christ said to
Zebede^^ sons, Ye shall drink of the Mat. 20. 23
cup that I drink of; namely, of trouble: the nearer to Christ, the sooner
drink it: they that are farthest off, that is, his enemies, drink the dr^gs
Psalm. 75. 8.
and bottom. And therefore if you would know them, as by an express mark,
see Revel. 7. 14. These are they that come out of great tribulation.

2 To such only is promised 2
glory: Iam. 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him, Revel. 2 10. Ye shall be tried ten days: but be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

3 Glory is accomplished to such 3
as endure trials: for they cause an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
And this is just with God, to render to you which are troubled, rest with us,
when Christ shall appear, 2 These. 1. 6, 7.

Now the godly heart, out of these grounds (to which many might be added)
fenceth it self, and contenteth it self in all troubles in general: Has my
affliction such special goodness, through Gods disposing, to beget such
excellent graces as humility, knowledge, obedience, prayer, patience,
repentance? does the Lord know and intend to beautify, purge, and perfect his
graces by the fire of Tribulation, and make them shine and show as jewels? does
he exercise and hold in work, and so increase and strengthen his grace given,
by the same means? Yea, and more, does he further my glory with himself? does
he testify his love, and lay in me the marks of my Adoption, of my way to
heaven, and of conformity to his Son? has he promised, and will he
accomplish that promise of glory to such as are troubled? Why then should not I
content my self, and lean on the word in the hopeful expectation of that
blessed end of my trouble? See I not the Saints partners in the cross with me?
I am. 5. 10. Take the Prophets an example of enduring affliction. Nay, see I
not my Lord Jesus consecrated by Afflictions? shall Heb. 2. 10.
not I contentedly partake in the sufferings of Christ? shall I cast off, or
impatiently carry such light Afflictions, which cause so great a weight of
glory? Would I fall out with my daily bread, and are not these as necessary?
shall I measure Gods love by my outward estate? did he never love any of the
Saints, nor his dear Son, of all whom none escaped many troubles?

CHAP. II. Of scandals, heresies, and the like, conquered by Contentment.
NOw we come to more special troubles, wherein we are also to see, how
godliness stays and contenteth the heart, and makes a godly man a
Conqueror, when many round about him sink into the gulf of discontent and
despair.

Special troubles are either more public, or more private.

Public evils are either in the Grounds of contentment in scandals, heresies,
etc.
Church, or in the Commonwealth.

In the Church are scandals, heresies, schisms, Apostasy, contempt of the
light, falling back to Antichrist; and this offends many, they know not what
or whom to believe, and so fall from, and are discontented with every Religion.

Against all which, the godly heart fenceth and contenteth it self with these
Meditations.

First, of Gods counsel, providence, 1 Foretold.
permission, and moderation of all these evils in the Church. The Lord sleeps
not (as the servants in the Parable) while the malicious man sows these tares
in his field, but foretells that they must be so: Matthew, 24. 10, 11. Many
shall be offended: and many false Prophets, and false Christ's shall arise, and
seduce many, Act. 20. 29. I know that after my departure shall enter grievous
Wolves, who shall not spare the flock, Matthew. 18. 7. it is necessary that
offenses come, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be heresies among you. Why? what
necessity? God might hinder them.

Ans. Yea, but a necessity in regard, 1 The necessity of them. Jd^o magistri
er^ori^ existunt, quia veritatis discipuli non fuerunt. Leo.
of God, who has decreed not to hinder them: 2 Of Man, whose fr^ewill to evil
determines unto them: 3 Of the end, threefold: As a punishment of sin, while
the truth is not received in love, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. As a trial of those
that are sound, 1 Cor. 11 19. That they which are approved may be made
manifest. And to stir up the godly to watchfulness, and sound study of
Scriptures, and Prayer.

Secondly, the godly know, that in the greatest confusions of the Church, 2
Turned to good.
the Lord so moderateth and disposes of all these evils, as that he gets
himself glory, and leads his children to glory also. He brings light out of
darkness, and good out of evil. For he makes his truth shine in opposition to
falsehood. He makes it triumph Both Gods glory.
and carry victory against Satan and all his limbs, Heretics, Apostates,
contemners, yea, that great Apostate and son of perdition, Antichrist
himself. He makes all the children of wisdom to acknowledge, that Luke 7. 35.
that truth is divine and from heaven, which Satan and sinners of the world so
oppugn in vain, and that it is defended by divine power, not by the arm of
flesh.

And for the godly themselves, And the glory of the godly.
they cannot be seduced, Mat. 24. 24. the foundation of God abides sure:
greater is he that dwells in them, then he that is in the world, Ioh. 4. 4
Heresies, schisms, scandals, apostasies may molest and grieve them, but cannot
overturne them; because they are preserved by the power of God to 1 Pet. 1. 5.
salvation, they are begotten of immortal seed: and all that are begotten of
God, overcome the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. and let Antichrist come into the world,
the Elect are fenced, c. 4. 4. Little children, ye are of God, and have
overcome them. They are sealed, marked, and exempted from hurt, Rev. 7. 3. Hurt
not the earth, nor sea, nor trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God
in their foreheads: So as God gives not scope to any of these evils, to
prejudice the faith of the Elect, and only those are deceived, whose names are
not written in the Book of life. Rev. 13. 8.


Thirdly, the godly look not for a Church on earth without spot and 3 Ever
pestered the Church hitherto. Propter Ca venda scandala, quo ibu extra mun^um,
nisi f^gias ^deum qui f^^it mund^^? Aug.
wrinkle, nor without combat: the battle is not ended, but with the world: for
it has ever continued, and been renewed with the several ages of the world.
In Paradise was a serpent, a Devil: the Patriarchs families not without their
Cain, Cham, Ishmael, Esau, who were profane Apostates: Christ's family not
without a Judas. What scandals and divisions were in the Churches of Rome,
Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus and other; even in the Homo circ^ mortem pha^t a^^a^
videt: Si^ and mundu^ in e^itu s^ mul^o^ pa^ ^ie^ur err^ res. Chrysostom. Mat. 24. 1^
Apostles days, when the Church of the New Testament was a Virgin, and in her
prime, witness the Epistles of the Apostles, and history of the Acts. And can
we look that now in the decrepit age of the Church, in which the Lees of all
corruption are settled, and in which Christ himself prophesied scarcity of
Faith, and coldness of Love, should be more exempted from such molestation,
then those former servent and purer Ages? Shall not Christ's own Doctrine from
his blessed mouth be exempted from murmuring, dissension, captious quarrelling,
and shall we look that ours can? Shall many at once take occasion of Apostasy
from his Doctrine, and shall we disdain Ioh. 6. 66
that men fall off from ours? Shall he come to his own, and they not receive
him? shall he which is above all testify that he has seen and heard, and no
man receive his testimony, John 3. 31. and shall we think much, if our
testimony be not received? Shall his Prophets and Apostles be smitten with the
tongue and sword, and shall we think strange of it? Ier. 18. 18. Acts 12.

Fourthly, the godly patiently wait the time wherein God will fully deliver 4
Destroyed one day utterly.
them from all this molestation, and danger of seduction. They know Satan must
have his time, and wicked men their time: but as in 2 Pet. (...). 9. the Lord
knows to deliver the just in temptation: and then, as Moses Exodus 14. ^3
said of the Egyptians, Those your enemies whom your eyes have seen this day,
ye shall never see more.

Thus the godly heart stays it self contented in God, as knowing that the
Church is as the Arc of Noah, let floods and storms fall, let the windows of
heaven be open, and let it rain as if heaven and earth would go together, let
the waters rise, and the waves and billows beat, and toss it, let the winds
totter and shake it; yet it shall rise as high as the waters, God is the
faithful Pilot, he guides the stearne, and shall keep it happily aloft,
notwithstanding the danger. It is like the ship in which Christ was, shaken and
ready to sink while Christ slept; but he will awake in due time, and rebuke
the Winds and Sea, and save his Disciples.

CHAP. III. Of troubles in the Commonwealth, borne with Contentment.
THe other kind of public calamities, Grounds of Contentment in evils of the
Commonwealth.
are the troubles, tumults, and confusions in the Country and Commonwealth,
disturbing public peace; such as are Oppression, War, Rebellion, or any such
common evil. Against all which godliness teaches Contentment, and setleth
the heart by these considerations.

1 Because, whatsoever the wicked do by error or violence, it is not 1 Plebs
and ru(...), pascua ^yra^^orum and mili^^^: tyranni and milites, pascua
diabolorum. Ludov. 12.
without Gods providence, or his righteous judgment. He observes the
oppression of the wicked, to revenge, moderate, order it, Eecles. 5. 7. If in a
Country thouseest the oppression of the poor, and defrauding of judgment and
justice, be not astonished; for he that is higher then the highst regards. God
casts not off the care of that Country, but his eye is upon it, his ears are
still open to hear the oppressions of wicked men, and the cries of the
oppressed: And he is higherthen the highest, both to reserve revenge for the
wicked, and to bring all into order again in his good time.

2 Godliness teaches to be content 2
in public evils, inferred by Magistrates, because it teaches, that subjects
are bound in conscience to obey Romans ^3. 5.
their Magistrates in suffering, and patient, bearing of wrongs and injuries, 1
Pet. 2. 19. Servants must be subject not only to the good, but froward: for
this is praiseworthy, if a man for conscience endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. Godliness looks to Gods Ordinance, not Hos. 13. 1^.
man's perverting of it, saying, God has set up this person over me, therefore
I must and will obey, actively and passively.

3 Godliness teaches the heart 3
the first lesson of Christianity, namely, continually to take up injuries and
crosses: daily, says the Text: and Luke 9. 23. Mat. 5. 39.
after a blow on one che^ke to turn the other, that is, expect and endure
another, promising to themselves nothing but a continual bearing of evils; and
in the mean time never to return evil for evil, (which Romans 12. ^7.
were to shoot with evil men in their own bow) but Do good for evil, bless
when cursed, and by prayer 21.
and patience overcome evil with goodness, not to repel or repress it by
rebellion.

4 Seeing Christ has foretold of Wars and rumors of Wars, the 4 Mat. 24
6. Romans 5 1.
godly heart (according to his counsel) is not too much troubled, because it
has peace with God, and in it self, in our Lord Jesus Christ; and so much the
more labors in the preservation of that peace, which the world cannot take
away. It wars so much the more with it own sins, and if it can over come
these enemies, it cares for no other.

5 It sets before the eyes of it the 5
examples of the Saints, who in all ages were the beholders of common
calamities, and yet carried themselves with much contentment in God. Moses
beheld the oppression of Gods people in Egypt. Noah the confusion of the old
world. Jeremy of the whole Kingdom of Judah by the Babylonish captivity: and
yet without grudging, or impatience: because they knew, that these confusions
were among men, but God still kept his order, his providence still watched over
his own people, while the sword ateup the enemies: so Jeremy was safe in the
captivity, Noah in the Arc, and the comfort which God gave Baruch, Ier. 45. 5.
I will bring a plague upon all flesh, but thy life will I give thee every where
for a prey, where thou go.

Now says the godly heart, If God watch over these public evils, to moderate
and revenge them, if I be bound in conscience to suffer evils patiently, if my
profession bid me to expect no other, if God have given me peace by Christ,
and exercised his Saints in the like trials, why should not I stay my self and
lean upon God, expecting an issue?

CHAP. IV. Of Contentment in Satanicall molestation.
NOw follow more private calamities, Grounds of Contentment in Satanicall
molestation.
against which godliness fenceth the heart with contentation. And they be
either spiritual or temporal.

Spiritual, are from 1 Satan, 2 Sin, 3 the World.

The assaults and molestation of Satan often bring much disquietnesse and
trouble to the mind: but godliness at length reduces the heart to
contentment by these or the like meditations.

1 That though Satan be never 1 Voluntas semper iniqua est, po^entia nunquam
injusta. Asemet ipso voluntatem habet, potestatem a Deo. Formidari non debet,
quia nil ^i^permissus valet. Greg. Mor. 2.
so cruel and malicious, yea, the prince of the world, and the god of the
world, of exceeding great power in his attempts, yet he has but the power of a
creature which is finite, and cannot execute any part of that power, at his
own pleasure, but only when God permits him. Till God said to the evil
spirit, Go against Ahab, and thou shall prevail, he could neither prevail
nor go, 1 King. 22. 22. Till God said of Job, Lo, all that he has is in thy
hand, only spare his life, he could not touch him. Till Christ say, Go into
the herd, a legion of devils could not possess one swine.

Yea, it is not only a created and finite, but a determined power, limited and
bounded by God, so as he cannot pass an inch beyond his commission: spare his
life, says the Lord, and Jobs life was spared. Whence it follows, that God
will never suffer his power to be enlarged, to the overthrow and destruction of
his children, against whom the gates of hell must not prevail.

2 God armeth and fenceth his 2
children, that they shall be able to resist and overcome in the evil day: he
will confirm and stablish them: whereto he has appointed and put on them an
armor ^f proof, able to keep out (...).
all the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians. 6. 13. If we be not wanting in the
getting and keeping in our armor, Satan cannot hurt us.

3 Christ our head has overcome the Devil, and we his members 3
are partakers of his victory: his head is broken: the prince of the world is
cast out: well he may nibble at the heel, but cannot reach the head.

4 We have an assured defense, 4
namely hearty prayer and effectual invocation of the Name of God, to whom (as
being our Father in Jesus Christ) we may have access, calling upon him for the
restraint of Satan's power and malice. The Devil is cast out by fasting and
prayer.

We have the Angels, to whom he has given in charge our safety, Psalm. 91. 10,
11. The power of good Angels is far the greater.

We have his own faithful Word: that he will be a wall of fire round about
his people, Zech. 2. 5. and that he will be with them in the greatest
dangers, of which, these are the principal.

We have the gift and comfort of his blessed Spirit, which is the Spirit of
wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength, and knowledge, Esa. 11. 2.

5 We stand not alone against 5 ^icu^ ass^ dua est in mari tempestas, sic in
isto mundo persecutio Satana. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 39.
Satan's malice: but, as there is perpetual enmity between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the serpent, so have all the seed of Christ (of which,
Esa. 53. 10.) been in their times molested by the Devil, the children of Job,
and Job himself, and Luke 13. 16. Acertaine woman the daughter of Abraham,
that is, a Believer, and following Abraham's faith. Nay, Christ himself in his
second temptation was carried by the Devil from the Wilderness to a Pinnacle
of the Temple, and there tempted to destroy and cast down himself. We then
may well be contented.

CHAP. V. Of the multitude of sins, the assault, and Contentment.
OTher spiritual calamities are from sin, which makes assault against our
faith and sweet content in God, in regard of, first, the number, secondly, the
greatness; thirdly, relapse into the same.

Against the number of sins, repentance Grounds of contentment against the
multitude of sins. 1
and godliness fenceth the heart by these meditations.

1 The multitude of mercies in God, who is rich in mercy, as able and willing
to forgive ten thousand talents as one, as in the parable of the servant
indebted, Matthew. 18. 27. all is one with him. He has a multitude of mercies
and compassions, and will Psalm. 51. 1.
cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea. Isaac had but one blessing in
Mic. 7. 19.
comparison of this multiplicity.

2 Oppose the price, value, and merit of the Blood of Christ, which 2 1 Ioh. 1.
7
cleanses from all sins, be they never so many. We are not redeemed with 1
Pet. 1. 19.
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but the precious Blood of Jesus
Christ. And if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkled on the unclean, sanctified as touching the purifying of the flesh,
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot, purge the conscience from dead works to serve
Hebr. 9. 13, 14.
the living God? This blood is never dry, the virtue of it never wasted: the
good Samaritan will pay all.

3 The promise of God is, that 3
upon our repentance the multitude of our sins shall be no bar to his
mercy, Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked man shall turn from all his wickedness,
all his transgressions shall not be mentioned unto him. Nay rather, where sin
abounds, grace shall superabound, Romans 5. 20.

4 Mercy pleases him, yea, unstinted 4 Mat. 18. 21.
mercy: when Peter asked our Savior, how often his brother offending should be
pardoned, whether unto seven times, our Savior answered, I say not unto thee,
till seven times, but unto seventy times seven times, that is, so often as he
repents. If God require in man (in whom is but a drop of mercy) that he
should not pardon by tale and number, but, so often as the brother returns, he
must have all forgiven; how much more must the Lord, whose ways are above Esa.
55. 8, 9.
man's, and with whom is the Ocean of mercy, and who delights in nothing more
then mercy, be infinite and unstinted in pardoning when we truly return?

Indeed the number of our sins is such, as may well set us in a maze, and
astonish us: and when we see them grow to so great a reckoning, if the Lord
did pardon by number, and not beyond such a number, we might sink under them:
But when when we see him a Surgeon that has salve enough for all wounds,
and infinite playsters of compassion to heal all our sins; this upholds us,
and make us sue to him for pardon. We have a sea of rebellions, but he has a
far more bottomless sea of compassions to drown them in.

5 Oppose the examples of great 5
sinners, readily received to mercy: Many sins in the sin of Adam Aquin 2. 2.
163. 3.
As of Adam, in whose one sin were couched many: first, contempt of Gods
Commandment, who charged him not to eat of the forbidden fruit: secondly,
incredulity, not believing that word, In the day thou eatest, thou Genesis 2. 17.
shall dye: thirdly, unthankfulness, not contented with their good estate:
fourthly, pride, desiring to be like unto God, and know good and evil: fifthly,
presumption, that they should not die though they did eat: sixthly, murder and
homicide, bringing death upon themselves and all their posterity. In a word,
this one sin All the Commandments broken by it.
was the breach of all Gods Commandments, and was a sin out of measure
sinful. First, in regard of the fruits of it, the contagion of all mankind:
secondly, of Adams person, Ubi sublimior est prerogativa, ibi major est calpa.
Salv de gub. l. 4.
whose excellent gifts might easily have resisted; thirdly, of the facility of
the Commandment, it was no hard one; fourthly, of the place, Paradise, where
he wanted no content, and had no provocation. And yet Adam thus tumbling in a
multitude of sins had mercy offered before he required, and a gracious
promise of the like to all his posterity. Here we see the father of the
Prodigal child running to meet his son a far off, even before he say, I
will return to my father.

Consider also the example of David, And in the sin of David.
who sinned grievously.

1 Against God, who had done many things for him above other, as he confesses,
Against thee, against thee have I sinned. Psalm. 51. 4.

2 Against Uriah: by defiling and dishonesting his wife, more dear to him then
all his substance: by making him drunk, and taking away his sobriety: and by
taking away his life, being so faithful and good a subject, adventuring his
life for the safety and honor of his Country. A bloody sin.

3 Against Bathsheba, whose sober and formerly chaste mind he had corrupted,
and whose body he defiled.

4 Against his own house and family, by bringing into it dishonor,
uucleannesse, death and sword: Dishonor, by bring^^g in a bastard, by which he
made the (...), (...) God to 2^ (...) ^2 4.
blaspheme: Vncleann^sse and f^^lenesse by the sin, so much the f^uler as the
person was higher: Death of the child borne in adultery, and the sword which
never departed out of his house.

This sin was every way odious; and yet see the readiness of God to pardon
this multitude of sins. Nathan comes and tells David of it, David said, I have
sinned, and Nathan says presently, The Lord has put away thy sin, 2 Samuel 12.

Whereunto add, that God by forgiving many sins (as to Mary) will be loved
so much the more, Luke 7. 47.

And let this stay and content the heart laden with many sins, if repenting,
believing, and saying, There is mercy with thee that thou may Psalm. 130. 4.
be feared.

CHAP. VI. Of the greatness of sin, trouble, and Contentment.
AGainst the greatness of sin, Grounds of contentment against the greatness
of sin. 1
a penitent and godly heart quieteth it self by these Meditations.

1 The promise of God to them that return and repent: Esaias 1. 18. If your
sins be as red as scarlet, and as crimson, I will make the^ as white as snow.
What offenses can be more heinous, or enormities more capital, then these
bloody scarlet sins? and yet God offers mercy for them. But that Text has
more comfort: for he doubles the words, scarlet and crimson sins, which notes
the reign and dominion of sin, and the doubling of their sins: for these
colors Di^a^b^^.
are not made without a double tincture in the wool and cloth; of a double
die, and deeper color. So, though a man be died in grain, with a double die of
sin, original and actual, and so resemble scarlet, yet upon his repentance
here is an offer of free grace. Beside, the doubling of the promise should
double our hope and confidence in the certainty of this grace and favor of
God, that our sins of a double dye, seeming hard to be washed out, yet shall
not foil the gracious promise of mercy. The like is that of Christ, Matthew. 12.
31. Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, only excepting the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which is joined with final impenitency.

2 The merit and price of Redemption, 2
which is the Blood of Christ, the Son of God. God shed Act 20. 28.
his Blood: and was this only to get remission of smaller sins (that had
been but a small thing to us) and not of greater? But herein is this blood
preferred above all the blood of Bulls and Goats, that, what that could not put
away, this precious blood of the unspotted Lamb washes as white as snow. This
was notably figured in the sacrifice of the red Cow, offered for a
sinne-offering for the Congregat on of Israel, Numb. 19. 6. S^e ^ore^ (...)
(...) the A^th^rs book^ of the Types. p. 175.
The Cow must be red whole burnt and in the ^urning the Priest must cast into
the midst of the fire, Cedar-wood, Hyssope, and Scarlet L^ce: Christ was
figured by this Cow, red as she, strong and fresh, without blemish as she, or
spot of sin; on Which never came yoke (as she) not subject to any commandment
of m^n: slain without the gate as she, that is, crucified without Jerusalem,
Hebr. 13. 12. burnt whole as she, that is, as it were consumed with the ho^e
wrath of God, due to sin; an Holocaust: With Cedar-wood and Hyssope as she,
to be a sacrifice of sweet smell: and with scarlet lace, to put us in mind of
the fruit of this sacrifice, to expiate the most scarlet and bloody sins, by
so precious a blood, which is not only (...), a price, but (...), a
counterprice able to satisfy for the sins of all men, yea, for them that
have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, whose offense is not greater then
the merit of Christ, but, because the party neither can nor does apply this
merit, is therefore unpardonable.

3 The call of Christ. He calls 3
sinners to him, yea, the greatest sinners, the most weary and laden, to whom
he has promised most ease. The sick need a Physician: he came not for the
whole: the parable of the Prodigal son shows, that there is more joy in
Heaven for the return of one such sinner repenting, then for ninety nine that
never offended: and the promises of the Gospel are general and indefinite,
excluding no sort of sins, so that the condition of faith and repentance be
performed.

4 The examples of great sinners, 4
who found mercy. Ahab at the best was but an hypocrite in his repentance: yet
when he made a show of repentance, though he had sold himself to work
wickedness, he obtained much mercy: much more shall 1 Kin. 2, 29
true repentance.

Can there be a sin greater then to blaspheme and persecute the Church of
God? yet Paul obtained mercy for these, that he might be an example to others
to come, that should believe unto everlasting life, 1 Timothy 1. 16. insomuch as
that blessed Apostle said, This is a true saying, that Christ came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am the greatest: were I the greatest sinner in
all the world, as in my sense I must be, Christ came to save me, upon my
repentance.

Could there be a greater sin then Peter's, after so many warnings and vows to
deny and forswear his Master, and curse himself, and this again and again?
and yet our Lord mercifully looked back upon him, and gave him repentance and
mercy.

Nay, as though this were a small mercy, to one great offender, did he not
vouchsafe mercy to them that had crucified the Lord of glory, that had denied
the holy and just One, and desired Barrabas a thief and murderer to be
delivered? yet of these he converted above three thousand at one Sermon of
Peter's, Acts 2. 41.

What shall I say of David's sin, of Salomons, of Manasseh a Witch and
Conjurer; one that made all the streets of Jerusalem run with the blood of
the Saints, and yet the Lord was entreated of him?

Whereupon a heart fenced with godliness Magnam injuriaem Deo facit, qui de
ejus misericordi^diffidit: etc. Aug. enchir. c. 23.
will be far from that desperate speech of Cain, My sin is greater then can
be forgiven. Thou lie, Cain, says Augustine: for Gods mercy is greater then
the sins of all men: and it is great injury to God, to distrust of his mercy.

5 The Lord measures not the 5
sins of his according to the nature and measure of them, but according to
the affection of the sinner: and therefore the most outrageous sins, being
heartily bewailed, carefully resisted, and by hearty sorrow cast out, the
sinner shall get his suit of pardon at the throne of Grace. Never was godly
sorrow unanswered with a joyful harvest: neither is it any sin that shall
condemn, but lying and continuing in it.

CHAP. VII. Of Relapses, and how the heart may be quieted.
AGainst Relapse into the same Grounds of Contentment, and comfort in case of
Relapses. 1
sin, a penitent and godly heart settleth and contenteth it self with these
Meditations, or the like.

1 That howsoever to turn to sin as a dog to the vomit, and swine to the
wallowing (that neither instruction, nor experience of our own sins can work
in us a care to avoid sin) be a dangerous estate, yet it is neither hopeless
nor desperate: seeing they are the same men after sin they were before,
carrying the same corruption which dwells in them, and no more privilege from
error then before, no stronger in themselves, etc.

2 The Article of remission of 2
sins excepteth not Relapses, because the promise of remission does not:
neither is the virtue of CHRIST'S merit restrained to sins once committed, but
to all sins truly repented. No sin but one is unpardonable.

3 Howsoever it is not ordinary, 3 Peccata incursionis qu^tidia^ae.
that the child of God fall diverse times into the same great and grievous
sin, yet experience shows, that the best go every day over the same wants
and common infirmities, negligence in hearing, wandering thoughts in prayer,
idle speech, unjust anger, and the like. If often falling into the same sin
excluded from grace, or debarred of pardon, we were hopeless. But seeing we
are commanded often to repent, and lay hold daily on Christ's merit for
salvation, by renewing repentance as we do our sins, we have good
confidence. And this repentance is an effectual instrument to seal up
forgiveness of former transgressions, but not a fence from all force of sin
following.

4 View the examples of many of 4 Genesis 19. 31.
the Saints, raised out of Relapses. ABRAHAM twice lied. LOT twice overcome
with Wine and Incest. PETER thrice denied.

Mary checked twice of Christ for curiosity, Luke 2. 49. and John 2. 4. The
Disciples twice had emulation, and debates about primacy. John twice worshipped
the Angel, Rev. 19. and 22. The whole book of Judges is a notable proof
hereof: for how often is it said, that the Jews returned to their idolatry,
and yet Judge. 2. 16.
when they called upon the Lord, he ever sent them a Savior? Most of the
Ancient lived in Polygamie, (...) Cor. 5. 20. Paul writing to the Corinthians,
that were fallen away, says, We beseech you in Christ's stead to be reconciled
to God.

5 The mercy of God is everlasting: 5
The hills shall move, and the mountains tremble, but the Covenant of my peace
shall not bemoved, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Esa. 54. 10.

But if godliness thus ^ence the heart, know it by two notes. Two notes of
right comfort (...) this case.


1 It preserves in the heart an hearty sorrow for sin past: else the repentance
was not sound, but shallow: godly sorrow is permanent, not transient.

2 It preserves a fear for time to come. The burnt child dreads the fire: he
that has been once assauited by the enemy, and wounded, the smart of it will
make him ever after go better fenced: he that has tasted of the poisoned cup
of sin, if his conscience have been sick at heart, and ready to give over,
he will not easily be brought to taste of it any more.

CHAP. VIII. Of the worlds hatred, and contentment in it.
THe third sort of spiritual calamities Grounds of contentment in the worlds
hatred.
are from the world. I call them so, though in themselves they be external,
for that the cause is internal, namely, the profession of Christ, and walking
in the light, which the darkness of the world cannot abide, but loadeth
faithful Christians with 1 hatred, (...) contempt, 3 persecution for Christ's
sake.

Against the hatred of the world be fenced thus.

1 Christ our Lord was hated to 1
the death, in the world, and by it, whereby he comfort his Disciples and
us, Ioh. 15. 18. If the world hate you, it hated me before you: it is enough
that the servant be in as much request as the Master. Nay, there never was
member of this Head, but herein less or more it was conformable to him; that
all the Israel of God may take up that complaint, Psalm. 129. 1. They have
oftentimes afflicted me from my youth up, may Israel say, they have oftentimes
^fflicted me from my youth up. So then, by this hatred thou art the liker to
Christ, and meeter for God.

2 The cause of the worlds hatred 2
makes it more easily borne. It hates God, because he is the Author of truth:
it hates Christ, because he is a witness of truth: it hates his members,
because they testify against the worlds wickedness, as himself did, John 7.
7. the world hates me, because I testify of it, that her works are evil: and
1 Pet. 4. 4. therefore they hate you, because ye run not with them to the same
excess of riot. What hurt has God or Christ done to the world, to be so
hated? or else true Christians?

3 How can a Christian make 3
other account, then to have the worlds hatred, seeing Christ has chosen him
out of the world, John 15. 19. therefore the world hates you, and loves but
her own? And they must profess hatred to the world in such hostile sort, as
they must either renounce amity with it, or be at enmity with God, ^am. 4. 4.
and 1 Ioh. 2. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. Is it not a folly for him to make account of the worlds friendship, who in
his entrance into Christianity by Baptism makes solemn profession to renounce
the world, and the vain pomp and glory of it, and to abide a faithful soldier
under the Standart of Christ against it to his lives end? If a man now actuate
his profession, and not like a runnagate Soldier (as too many do) steal out
of Christ's Camp, must not he contentedly bear the displeasure of the world?

4 A Christian knows, that God will take his part against the 4
world, being his enemy also. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse
them that curse thee, Genesis 12. 3. Consider the examples of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, of the accusers of Daniel, of the enemies of Daniels fellows, and
other: c. 6. 25. and 3. 22. Hence is it, that we have assured hope of victory
and good success; seeing Christ has conquered the worlds hatred for us, Ioh.
16. 33. In the world ye shall have affliction: but be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world. If we have faith, that 1 John 5. 4.
i^ our victory: for Christ gave himself to deliver us from this present evil
world. 5 Nemo potest perfect diligere qu^ vocamur, nisi ^derit ^^de revocamur.
Aug.


5 It is good for a Christian to be hated of the world for well-doing. First,
for the trial of his sincerity, whether he will hold out with Christ.
Secondly, to weane him from the world, and lift up his affections to heaven;
whereas otherwise he is hardly plucked from the breasts of it. Thirdly, to
fence against many alluring temptations. Is it possible to have familiar
conversation with a wanton Harlot, and not be inveigled with her bands and
snares? The smiles of an enemy are worse then the wounds of a friend. Were we
friends with the world, we should walk together; which is not safe, seeing the
whole world lies in wickedness. Fourthly, it forces the Christian to get and
keep God his friend, the only shield against the worlds hatred: as Abraham
was called the friend of God, Iam. (...). 23. and, says Christ (Luke 12. 4.) I
speak to you my friends. And, beside the help, what an honor is this in our
way? Fifthly, it is a testimony, and spur to him in goodness, to have wicked
men his enemies. He is a good man who carries the malice of evil ones.

From these grounds a godly heart will thus conclude. Was Christ hated in the
world? is the cause such, because I run not the ways of the world? and because
I am chosen out of the world? Have I professed hostility to it in my baptism?
Will God take my part, and give me victory? yea, is it overcome already? Does
God bring me such light out of darkness, and his own love and friendship out
of the worlds frowns and hatred? I am then well content to carry it. If it
hate God, let it not love me.

CHAP. IX. Of the worlds contempt, and contentment in it.
THe contempt and contumely of Grounds of Contentment in the worlds contempt.
the world goes very near the godly, because after a sort the holy profession
it self and piety is despised in them, yea, God himself and his image: which
made David make a mournful complaint, Psalm. 69. 19. thou have known my
reproach, my shame, and my dishonor: and (in the next verse) says it had even
broken his heart. Yet godliness fenceth the heart against it, on these grounds.

1 My Lord Jesus Christ was 1
scorned and rejected of men, mocked by Herod and his Courtiers, and by his
reproach has sanctified and lightened mine: nay, it is he that is still scorned
in me, I bear his rebuke, Hebr. 13. 13. and I am partaker of the afflictions
of Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 13. and may I not be well content to be conformable to the
image of Gods own Son in reproaches and calumnies? Romans 8. 29. If they
called the Master Beelzebub, may they well not call me Devil? is the Disciple
above his Lord? Matthew 10. verse 24.

2 I suffer not this reproach as an 2
evil doer, nor of good, but evil men: and therefore I am neither sorrowful,
nor ashamed. I suffer as a Christian, and therefore glorify God in this
behalf, 1 Pet. 4. 15. If they had Christ among them, he could not escape
their scorns.

This contented David, Psalm. 69. 7. for thy sake have I suffered reproof, and
shame has covered my face. See Esa. 8. 18. and Iere. 20. 7. So a godly heart
has the testimony of a good conscience, that it has given no just cause, but
suffers for Gods sake: thence contentment. How glad may a good heart be, when
it can appeal to God, and desire him to witness the innocence of it?

3 It appears not now, what 3
godly men are: their worth is not known: therefore are they coursely used. But
the time comes, wherein it shall be manifest what they are, 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 2. Now
we are the sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be: but when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, and see him as he is. Now where
godliness has taken up the heart, it will quiet it thus: Has God chosen me,
and graciously respected me? what need I care to be rejected of bad men? He is
not praised, whom men praise, but whom God commends. Has God adopted 2 Cor.
10. ult.
me to be his son? what care I, if the sons of men turn my glory into
shame? There is a day, when it shall appear that I am a son of God. A Pearl
cast into dust or clay, loses not the virtue, nor the shine; but a day will
find it, and see it in the due price of it: So the godly, now darkened in the
dirt of calumnies, at length shall be revealed, and according to their worth
respected. In the mean time we must be content, that our glory be hid, even as
our Lords was. And indeed, shame and infamy from evil men is no shame, but a
crown: Job would carry the book of libels upon his shoulders, as an ornament,
c. 31. 36.

4 God has a good hand in all 4 2 Samuel 16. 10.
this contempt powered on his servants. For they suffer according to the will of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 19. David thus comforted himself: the Lord has bid Shemei
rail. And the Lord Good we should be despised by the world.
sees it good for his children, that it should be thus: First, to try their
faith, hope, patience, charity, if they can bless being cursed, and do good
for evil, wholly abstaining from revenge. Secondly, to teach them not to seek
praise of men, nor expect it, but the true praise which is from God. Thirdly,
to confirm them in the good way, as by a sure mark, wherein all the Saints
have walked before them, Prophets, Apostles, others, who went through good
report 2 Cor. 6. 8.
and bad report, fame and infamy: so there is assurance of a blessed end and
issue, Mat. 5. 11. 1 Pet. 4. 14.

5 Lastly, if I look at examples, 5
I have not only Christ himself, who was railed on called a Samaritan, one
that had a Devil, one that cast out Devils by Belz^bub the prince of Devils,
etc. but his Apostles who were reviled as drunk, or full of new wine; Act. 2.
13. 26. 24. 17. 18. Tert. Apo log ^ap. 7. and 16.
and Paul by Festus, that he was mad, or beside himself; and by Athenians,
that he was a babl^r. And the Christians after the^ in the Primitive Church
were divellishly s^andred for killing their own children, for worshipping the
head of an Ass, for Incest, and other wickednesses. And therefore (as the
Apostle says) this is no new thing befalling me: and 1. Pet. 4. 12.
if I be not slandered thus, I must expect it, and in time of peace prepare for
it.

CHAP. X. Of persecution, and Contentment therein.
THe persecutions of the world Grounds of Contentment in persecution.
for Christ's sake are a sore trial, and have made many of Gods children at a
stand, and brought them into the degrees of discontent with their estate;
seeing the power and prosperity of wicked men.

But godliness reduces the heart to contentment, by sundry considerations.

1 It looks up to God, and sees his hand in them; and that they 1 Gods hand
is in it six ways.
come not by chance, or merely by Satan's and the wickeds malice, neither God
being ignorant or careless of his Church: but first, by his will, 1 Pet. 3.
17. it is better (if it be the the will of God) that ye suffer for well doing.
Secondly, by his foreknowledge, who therefore has foretold them, and
forewarned his children of them, that they should before armed against them: 1 Thessalonians. 3. 4. For verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we
should suffer tribulations, even as it came to pass, and ye know it. Thirdly,
by his determining them to the very subject and person, as v. 3. for we were
appointed there eunto. Fourthly, by his wise and loving providence: both in
respect of his Ipse adver ^ario^ nomini su^ exciat -- ut devotionem a^ fi^em
suorum vel probet, vel vel co^^ob^ ret; done^ pressura verberibus deflue^^
corrigat dis cipl^n^m, Lact l. 5. c. 23.
children, whom by this means he keeps out, and helps out of many sins:
as also of his own truth, which must by this means against all man's reason be
preserved, through constant and courageous maintenance of it unto the death.
Thus his glory shines through the worlds darkness. Fifthly, by his moderating
and ending them: for ^e suffers them not to be perpetual, as the Devil and
wicked men would, but, lest his children should faint, ^ee puts a good end
unto them: for the rod of the wicked shall not always lie on the lot of the
righteous, lest they put forth their hand to iniquity, Psalm. 125. 3. Sixthly, by
his upholding to the blessed fruit and issue, promised, Matthew. 5. 10. Blessed
are they which suffer persecution: for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. For
the sufferings of this life are not like the glory that shall be revealed: the
suffering indeed is great, but the glory far greater: and if it be long, yet
is it not eternal, as the glory is. Therefore be content, as the Apostle
reasons, Romans 8. 17, 18.

2 Godliness looks up to Christ, 2 ^r^^ Christi, gloria Christiani.
and sees him a companion in suffering, an example of suffering, and now being
departed the world, has left his Church the heir of his cross; but with this
comfort, that as he went from the cross to his Crown; so, if we suffer with
him, we shall also reign with him, ibid.

3 If it look at men without it 3
self, it wants not comfort.

At friends: so persecuted they the Prophets, Matt. 5. 12. so the Apostles 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15. so the Saints believing in their word, Hebr. 10. 32, 33. Yea,
and all that will live godly 2 Timothy 3. 12
in Christ, must suffer persecution.

If it look at enemies, it sees them weak and impotent: they are able perhaps
to kill the body, but cannot hurt the soul, Mat. 10. 28. They may kill them,
but not conquer and overcome them.

If it look within it self: First, Inward helps and comforts.
it sees a good cause to suffer for, it suffers for the Kingdom of God, and
is glad to be counted worthy to suffer for it, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Secondly, it
sees the note of a true Christian, which is the Cross of Christ: bears his
marks, and so is content. Thirdly, it sees in these sufferings a certain
testimony of Gods just and righteous judgment, wherein all their wrongs shall
be righted, and the persecutors revenged, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6. It is just with
God, and a token of his righteous judgment: and Luke 11. 50. There is a time
when all the righteous blood, shed from Abel to Zachary, shall be required.

4 If it looks to the losses it suffers, 4
though of the dearest things, it can be content, being assured of abundant
recompense.

The losses are great: as of Liberty. Country and friends. Goods. Life.
Yet in all is a godly heart contented, thus.

In the loss of liberty. First, He Comforts in the loss of liberty. 1
that is prisoner for God, is the Lords freeman: and they cannot lo^ke out the
Spirit, nor bind him. Paul and Silas can sing Psalms to God in prison. If the
Son have set them free, they are free indeed, Ioh. 8. 36.

Secondly, it makes restraint and imprisonment a mean to preserve 2 Liber est
is existi(...), qui nu^ii ^urpitudini servit. Cic. ^d Heren. 4.
that liberty, in which Christ has set them free, by repentance daily breaking
off the bolts and bands of sin and native corruption, and getting out of the
deeds of the flesh, and bondage of sin, which is the greatest captivity of
all.

3 It sees Gods dear children in the like condition. Joseph was cast 3
into a deep dungeon, where he saw neither Sun, Moon, nor Star, Genesis 41.
42, Jeremy cast into a pit where he stuck fast in the clay, and was ready to
be sterved. John Baptist cast into Herod's prison, and there lost his head. The
like of our own Martyrs.

4 It waits Gods gracious deliverance, 4
who sometime by such strait keeping prepares them to their advancement, as
Joseph, and the Butler of Pharaoh restored to his office: or else by delivering
them from the prison of the body, sets them out of all bands, and danger of
Tyrants, into the perfect liberty of the sons of God.

In the loss of Country and Comforts in the loss of Country and friends. 1
friends, godliness contenteth the heart on these grounds.

1 Because the Lord is our habitation, Psalm. 90. 1. that is, in our exiles and
wanderings the Lord is a dewlling place, whose dwelling is every where. He
knows our wanderings, and leads us in and out: Ezekiel. 11. 16. Though I have cast
them from far among the heathen, and scattered them among the countries, yet
will I be to them a little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.
As the Heathens were Omne solum forti patria.
wont to say, To a valiant man every soil is his Country, so may the godly
much more; every Country is their home, one as well as another, for their home
is in heaven.

2 It has been the lot of Gods 2
Saints, who knew the discommodities of banishment and exile. Abraham was
commanded to get him out of his own Country, from his kindred and fathers
house, he knew not whither, only he knew the Lord went before him, and with
him: and therefore, Heb. 11. 8. By faith Abraham being called, obeyed God, and
went to a place, not knowing whither. How was Jacob forced to fly from his
fathers house, for fear of Esau? Christ himself must fly his Country
as soon as ever he was borne, to save his life: and Heb. 11. The Saints wandered
up and down in Mountains, in caves, etc. An happy thing to wander in faith,
and for keeping faith and a good conscience, as they did.

3 It makes the Saints look to 3
their Country and Fathers house in heaven: so did those ancient Believers,
Hebr. 11. 9, 10. and to acknowledge themselves strangers and pilgrims on
earth, as Jacob, Genesis 47. 9. They were content with promises only a far off,
and received them gladly, and every where built Altars to God, where they came.
A stranger in his way takes all things patiently: when he comes home, he
knows he shall have audience, redress, and supply.

In the loss of goods for Christ, Comforts in the loss of goods. 1
godliness contenteth thus.

1 It is wealth enough, to be poor with Christ, and for Christ: for God is
the portion, and Godliness the great gain. His wealth is within.

2 This is a thankful return of duty. We know, that Christ being 2
rich became poor to enrich us: and 2 Cor. 8. 9.
therefore we may be content to be so for him. We cannot lose so much, nor so
precious wealth for him, as he for us. Alive he had not a place to hide his
head, nor ground to bury him being dead.

3 The Lord takes away but his own, which he had lent: for we 3
brought not hing into the world: and if they shouldnot have left us, we should
have left them ere long: the Lord has given, and taken, blessed be his name.

4 God has more and greater 4
things to bestow on his children, then any they can be spoiled of. Hence the
Saints suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in
Heaven a better and enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. And the promise is no more
largethen faithful, that whosoever forsakes goods, lands, or houses for
Christ's sake, and the Gospels, shall have an hundredth fold for the present with
affliction, and in the world to come life everlasting: Ample restitution, Mat.
19. 29.

5 Even for the present a godly 5
heart rests on the gracious love and powerful providence of God toward it.
It sees him do great and wonderful things for the soul, and dares trust him
for the body too. It sees him feeding the Ravens and Sparrowes, and knows it
self dearer to him, then many of them. David never saw the righteous forsaken:
nor was it ever seen, that he or his seed begged.

In the loss of life for Christ, a Comforts in the loss of life. 1
godly heart sets before it:

1 Christ's giving his life for him: and was not his life and glory as dear to
him? and is not ours become adebt unto him whenever he pleases to call for
it, and sanctified by his?

2 The Lords most gracious promise 2
for encouragement: that whosoever shall lose his life for Christ, shall find
it, Mat. 10. 39, viz. with usury and advantage, He that spares his seed, loses
it: but he that sowes it, saves it, and finds it with best advantage.

3 The Lords special providence: 3
not an hair of the head can fall without it, much less the head it self: and
precious in the sight of the Lord is the Psa. 115. 16.
death of all his Saints. Our lives are in the hands of God, and not of
tyrants, who cannot take them awoy, all God have said the word. Nebuchadnezzar
could not burn Sidrak and his fellows. Pharaoh could not drown Moses an
infant, but Moses must drown him and his.

4 It is an honorable thing to suffer 4
for righteousness, how shameful and painful soever the death seem to be: as
with Christ himself. Never so glorious and powerful a death, never so shameful
and painful, Godliness sets Jesus before our cies, the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and
despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2.

5 The enemy inte^ding to kill them, 5 Martyrium est delictorn^ finis, periculi,
^erminus, dux salutis, etc. Cyp. de laud Marty.
cures them. The gold of God by death is purged from al dross. The wheat of
God beaten by this flaile, from al chafe: free from all sin and misery. By
banishing them out of the earth they call them out of their banishment, to
inhabittheir heavenly Canaan, as Pharaoh by oppressing Israel, and thrusting
them out of his land, helped them on to their promised Canaan. They seek to
destroy the Church, as in man's reason it would: but the blood of the Martyrs is
the seed of the Church: the enemies of it by violence plant and water it. They
think to bring shame and infamy upon Gods people by most ignominious death:
but, as the sweet drugges cast out the pleasantest smell when they be stamped,
so the Martyrs are as sweet incense cast into the fire. They think to keep
low, and work wisely, as Exodus 1. 10.
Pharaoh to root out Gods people: but as Camomile, the more trodden, the thicker
and greener it grows: so Gods people even under the foot of Pharaoh increased
more mightily for the bloody decree. Nay, when they think to bring death, the
chief of all evils they can inflict, they deliver them from all evils of sin
and punishment, and send them speedily to the fruition of the chief good,
which is God himself, and all the pleasures at his right hand.

6 The faithful are fearelesse of 6
the most extreme torments, and can contemn them, because they know themselves
invincible, and their faith inexpugnable. They may be slain, but not overcome.
Enemies may kill the body, but withal they free the spirit from the burden of
it. Neither can they keep the body ever in dust and ashes, no more then by all
their strength and policy they could the body of Christ in the grave; but it
shall rise out of the ashes, to a glorious and everlasting life: in which faith
it is content the life be laid down for Christ. Hence the Disciples were glad
they were accounted Act. 5. 41.
worthy to suffer for Christ. Hence the Martyrs in the Primitive Church Eusebius.
hist. ^cc. l. 4. c. 15.
were so forward to offer their lives to Christ; as the woman of Edissa came
running with her young child in her arms, left the Christians should be
burned before she came, and she not burned with them. The like of Polycarp^,
of Blanditta, a peerless woman, of Acolus a mirror of patience, and others.
And what of our own Martyrs, who could sing to God in the midst of the flames?

By these and the like Motives a godly heart becomes not only contented to dye
for Christ, but joyful and desirous.

CHAP. XI. Of friends unkindnesse, or death, and Contentment therein.
We have spoken of private evils in the first kind, namely more spiritual,
against all which we have heard how godliness fenceth the heart with
contentment. Now we are to proceed to temporal: and they respect either
others, or our selves.

The former is especially when we are afflicted in our friends, and that two
ways, either in the unkindnesse of them living, or loss of them by death.
Grounds of Contentment in friends unkindnesse.


Godliness contenteth the Christian man in the former, upon these or the like
grounds.

1 It lets him see, how unkind 1
himself has bin to God, and well deserved that his friends should use him as
he has done his best friend.

2 It has this good use to draw 2
near unto God and grow up into familiarity and acquaintance with him; as
David, Ps. 27. 10. my father and mother forsook me, but the Lord took me up.
And a faithful heart knows, that Gods love is not so flitting, but loving once
he loves to the end. Al they who were John 13. 1.
bound in bonds of nature and other offices to David, were forced by Saul's
malice and tyranny to leave him to himself: but then God stuck to him.

3 It sees it self in no worse condition then the Saints of old. Who slew
Abel, but his own brother? who mocked Noah, but his own son Cham? who sold
Joseph, and hated him, but his brethren? who unjustly blamed our Lord Jesus
Christ, but his brethren and kindred according to the flesh? Ioh. 7. 3, 4. Who
betrayed him, but one who^ he had chosen to be his Disciple, and he that ate
bread with him at his table? It Psalm. 55. 13.
was thou, my friend and familiar.

Oh but this is a great cross, Ob.
out of mine own bosom, from husband or wife: or out of my own bowels, from
child: where should I look for comfort, but from hence?

True: but first, So long as the combat Ans.
is not with God, if he look graciously on thy soul, if Christ thy husband
smile upon thee, thou may bear the frowns of a froward husband or wife the
better.

2 This is a great outward trial: but perhaps other inferior ones have been
neglected, and small things will not make great hearts stoop. Besides, crosses
of another kind would not smart so much, nor stick so long. Here is a
continual dropping. Be sure to be well softened.

3 It is nevertheless no other then the dear Saints of God have bin humbled
and bettered by. Was not Jobs greatest trouble out of his own bosom? Was not
his breath strange to his wife, who would not be entreated for their childrens
sake? Was it not Sampsons overthrow? Was not David mocked by his Michal?
Besides, had not Jacob his greatest exercise from his own bowels? his only
daughter defloured, one son banished, another an adulterer, another
incestuous, another; yea, sundry of them murderers? Was not David exercised by
his rebellious Absalom? See we not at this day most gracious Parents tried and
shamed with most graceless children? wherein is seen, that men beget children
in their own image, in corrupt nature, not according to grace, and that every
good child is of God?

In the loss and departure of our Grounds of Contentment in the death of
friends. 1
friends by death, godliness quieteth the Christian by these Motives.

1 The decease of our friends is not by chance, but by Gods disposing, who
turns man to dust; and Psalm 90. 3.
says again, Return ye sons of men. And herein we must imitate holy Job, who
blessed God as well in taking away his children, as in giving them.

2 Our good friends perish not, neither have we lost them, but sent 2 N^n
exitus (...) asitus Cypr.
them before unto the Kingdom of Heaven. Their death is not an end, but a
passage. They are blessed that are dead in the Lord, or rather sleep in the
Lord, Ioh. 11. 11. We must not envy their happiness, and quiet rest, into
which they are arrived out of the restless sea of this world, nor immoderately
mourn in black for them, who are clothed in long white robes, washed in the
blood of the Lamb.

3 They shall be restored unto us in their bodies glorified, and made like 3
the glorious body of Christ, and joined for ever unto us again in a better and
eternal life.

4 Our best friend never dies, nor fails us, and therefore we may more 4
contentedly part with other that are not so near us, neither can do us so
much good. Strait is the knot between man and wife, which so long as it
lasts, other losses of acquaintance and kinsfolks are more tolerable, if the
loving husband and wife remain together. But the love of God cannot be broken:
there is a nearer and straiter bond between him and the godly, then between
man and wife. If we can see this bond tied between God and our friends, and God
and our selves, we shall in decease of our dearest friends comfort our selves:
neither fearing to commit them into the hands of their best friend, God, the
father of mercies, nor yet our selves without them to be destitute of friends;
seeing our best friend stands by us, in whom and for whom they are to be loved.

This consideration may quiet those, (...) ^oritur, q^^^ies ami^tit suos. 1 Samuel 1. 8
who are as impatient in the death of their fr^ends, as Annah was in the want
of children: to whom Elkanah said, Am not I better to thee then ten sons? Say
with Elkanah, Is not God better to me then ten husbands, or ten thousand
children? Simeon having Christ in his arms, could die in peace.

5 We shall not want friends on earth, in stead of them who are taken 3
from us, so far as God sees good for us. His hand is not shortened? ^ee can
rais^ us better friends: and if men were wanting, faith in his promises would
make the bruit beasts friendly to us, before we should fail. The Lions shall
preserve Daniel. The Ravens shall feed Elias. The dogs of the rich glutton
shall lick Lazarus sores, and show more mercy then their miserable master. A
Whale shall preserve Jonas, and a Fish give Peter money to pay his tribute.
Where God is a friend, all his creatures are friendly.

Imitate here holy Abraham: when God called him to sacrifice Isaac, he
willingly offers him up to God: he might have reasoned the case, and said,
Where shall I have another Isaac, another son of the promise? but faith made
him give over reasoning, and give up his son. And indeed, if we would duly
examine our hearts, we should find, that our fear and grief in giving up our
friends in the time of their sickness, or death, proceeds commonly from want
of faith, and contempt of life eternal.

6 The Saints have with faith 6
and contentment borne part with us in the loss of their friends: Adam and Eve
an heavy funeral for Abel: Noah mourned a whole year for the funerals of the
whole world: Abraham saw the funerals of his Sarah, Iocob of Rachel. Ezekiel
lost the delight Eze. 24. 16 St^^temleg^, fle^tem non lego. Ambros.
of his eyes, but must not mourn. The blessed Virgin stood by the Cross of her
only and dear Soune, and yet (as Ambrose notes) she wept not.

CHAP. XII. Of Crosses in our Callings, and Contentment therein.
NOw we come to the external trials, which concern our own selves; and they
are reduced to three heads, as respecting, 1 Our Callings: 2 Our Estates:
Grounds of Contentment in our Callings.
3 Our Persons:


The Crosses of several Callings. are sundry and burdensome, which sometime
so distract men, that they are ready to cast off all. But godliness works
contentment against them, on these grounds.

1 It judges aright, which are 1
true Crosses of the Calling indeed, and not rather vices of the person
exercising it. It will be sure it be a cross. For some men think so well of
themselves, as they grow discontent with their calling, as not sufficient or
good enough for their deserts, and so affect higher places, which oftentimes
they are crossed in. But this is the ambition and vice of the person, and not a
cross of the calling. Again, it is common, that men think themselves greatly
crossed, if they see one whom themselves judge equal, or inferior to
themselves, to be placed in an an higher place then themselves, and so vex
themselves, and are troubled if they rise not to his pitch at the least. But
this is but the envy of the person, not the cross of the calling. But if
godliness step in, it will teach that callings are dispensed, not for the
private, but public and common good: and that the greater place a man is in,
the greater is the charge, and the straiter the account.

2 It teaches a man, that every 2
one must walk in a personal calling, in performing the duties, of which he
must avoid both idleness, which omitteth the duties of it, and sloth which
does them negligently, It is a general law, In the sweat of thy Genesis 3 19. Job
5. 7. Psalm. 19. 5.
brows shall thou eat thy bread, and, man is borne to travel, as the sparks
fly upward. All creatures move us to pains and labor. The Son whose
Tabernacle, is in Heaven, comes forth as a Bridegroom, and ejoyceth as a
mighty man to run his race unweariably. The Moon keeps her courses, and
never cease. The earth brings forth her fruit abundantly, and is not
wearied. The Pismire is a pattern of pains, and the wise man sends us unto
her, Prove. 6. 26. Yea, the Angels themselves have their personal offices, in
the service of the Lord. To come to our selves: Adam in innocence had a
personal calling: and the second Adam, Christ himself had a calling, in which
he diligently labored, till they said he was mad.

3 God has tied to several callings several crosses, and to all callings, 3
Alleallings have their crosses: why.
some for special purpose: first, because the special course of life must be a
school of all virtues, and a Christian man's calling must be an exercise of
faith, humility, patience, constancy; which could not be without troubles.
Secondly, to teach men to begin their calling with God, that they may be able
to say, God (...) me here; and then the troubles will be lighter. Thirdly, that
the Christian in his p^^vate course should not want admonitions and motives, to
join his general and special calling together. Fourthly, that he should
sanctify it by the word and prayer, which is a daily arming of himself
against these troubles.

4 Godliness beats back impatience and discontent, when a man 4
is opposed and reviled by men for doing his duty. A great trial: but
Godliness holds up the heart to God as to the own Lord, and makes it approve
the works of the calling, not so much to men as to God. Also it makes a man
intend them in love to men as well as faith in God: so as the offense is (...),
not given. And finally, it (...) him cast his eyes upon the dearest servants of
God, how they were opposed by men in their callings; yea and upon the Son of
God himself.

Further, when a man is crossed in his calling, that all his labor will scarce
maintain his mouth, and is still kept under poverty, here is a great trouble,
but godliness ^teppeth in and persuades;

First, that every particular estate and calling is to be judged best for him,
till God change it.

Secondly, in all things to behold the care and providence of God over his
own, and brook every condition: seeking no greater measure of temporal
things, then is sufficient for the present estate.

Thirdly, to ply the general calling so much the more, which a man is sure to
thrive by: turning the affections from earth to heaven, to Christ, and that
inheritance which is purchased by him.

5 Godliness teaches a man to 5
hold out and abide i^ the calling wherein God has (...) him, notwithstanding
the crosses of it, 1 Cor. 7. 20, and, that it is nothing to begin well, without
perseverance: and whosoever will leave their calling for the troubles of it,
must resolve either to live out of every calling, or else to change but old
crosses for new, seeing every calling has his particular troubles; and he may
fear by Gods just judgment, lest his case may be that of Jonas, who found
more crosses, and more heavy and desperate ones in the new calling, then in the
old which God had trained him unto. Daily experience shows Gods displeasure
upon such as turn themselves too and fro in the change of callings, who prove
like rolling stones which gather no moss.

Thus of callings in general.

Specially; of all callings it is the Specially in the calling of Ministers.
greatest grief for Ministers to lose the fruit of their labors: Because such
a ones love to his people is as a Nurse, tendering the state of Gods people:
Because his labors are greater then others, spending himself for their good;
he toils in planting and watering, but God denies blessing and increase:
Because of peoples danger, despising so good means; a cursed earth, whose end
is to be burned: Because his joy and crown is gone, and he gives up his
account with grief.

Yet here godliness contenteth a good Minister, on these grounds.

1 We are a sweet smell unto 1
God, both in those that are saved, and in those that perish: and the Prophet
Esaias herein comforted himself, cap. 49. 4, 5, though Israel be not gathered,
yet my work is with the Lord, etc.

2 We are not Gods to convert, nor change the heart, and we being 2
faithful, God accepts the will for the deed. The barrenness of a field shall
never be attributed to the Husbandman that ploughes and tills it; but to the
stiffenesse, stoninesse, or badnesse of the soil. If we bestow faithful
pains, and reveal the whole counsel of God, we have planted and watered, and
done our part: leave Gods part, which is the success, unto him.

3 We perhaps do more good then we see, in repressing some sins 3
and sinners, and convincing them by life and doctrine, and in preparing them
to grace. The seed comes not up so soon as ever it is cast into the earth, but
lies, and dies, and rots a whole Winter, and at length rises up to a glorious
harvest. The Disciples heard many things of Christ, but understood not, nor
remembered them till he was risen again.

4 Our Lord Jesus preaching among the Jews as never man did, 4
and confirming the same by many powerful miracles, yet gained but a few of
them, as he complains, Esai. 49. 4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength in vaint: and the Prophets complained, cap. 53. 1. Who has believed
our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? even to a very few,
if any at all. The Apostles preached in many places, and found nothing but hard
measure from the world. We are short of their power, spirit, and gifts, and may
be better contented.

CHAP. XIII. Of trials in our Estates, and Cententment therein.
THe second sort of trialls concerning our selves, which godliness fenceth the
heart against, respects our estates: reduced to three heads; namely, the want
or loss, 1 Of wealth and riches. Grounds of Contentment in the loss or want
of riches.
2 Of delights and pleasures. 3 Of honors and preferments.


In the want or loss of riches, godliness persuades contentment, thus.

First, it turns up the eyes of the soul unto God, and beholds in him many
things, all which afford sweet contentment: as,

First, his providence and overruling hand, in which are the heave^s, the earth
and creatures. It is he that lays the lines for the sons of men: but his
eye especially is upon them that fear him, to whom so long as he grants them
life, he will provide sufficient maintenance.

Secondly, his affection to his children is such, as cannot let them want what
is fit for them. For, whom he chose to be his children before they were, and
those for whom he sent his Son, being enemies, will he withhold good things
from them, being reconciled? Hence Christ persuades contentment, Mat. 6. 31.
your heavenly father knows what you stand in need of. Mark the Evangelist
says not, God knows, but your heavenly Father, by that loving name the more
to strengthen and assure us, that if we who are evil, can give to our
children good things, much more our heave^ly Father will give good things to
his children, asking them of him. Can a mother forget her child, etc. Esa. 49.
15. no, say as David, the Lord is my shepherd, I shall want nothing. Ps. 23, 1.

Thirdly, his unchangable truth, which never fails, but stands for ever. He
has promised that no good thing shall be wanting to the^ that fear him; but
he will increase their stock and state in his time, viz. when it shall make for
his glory and their good. Joseph was made next man unto Pharaoh, that without
him none should lift up his hand or foot in all the la^d: but he must first be
sold of his brethren, accused of his mistress, bound fast in the prison, where
the irons entered into his soul. Our Savior Christ did not presently turn the
water into wine at his mothers desire, because his hour was not John 24.
come. If Gods hour be come, thou shall see thy water turned into wine, thy
want into wealth: or else he will give great blessing on small means, that the
little which the just man has, shall be better then the abundance of Prove. 16.
8.
the wicked.

Secondly, it looks up to Christ our head, who was poor, and had not where to
lay his head, when Foxes had their holes, and Birds their nests, Mat. 8. 20.
And many of the faithful were ever poor, or else made poor, as Heb. 10. 34.
and 11. 37. Yea the stock of Christ, the posterity of King David, of whom
Joseph and Mary came, were brought to great poverty: and yet it never impeached
the promise, or love of God to that family. Yea Christ has sanctified our want
and poverty: and as his Father loved him never the worse for it, no more does
he his members. He accepts not the person of the rich or poor because they
are so, but in every nation he that Act. 10. 135.
fears him and works righteousness is accepted of him. To him a godly poor
man is in more request then wicked Kings.

Thirdly, godliness makes men 3 Si non sunt a^^^ cu^ haber^t^r, non (...)
(...) cu^ a^i^teren tur. Aug.
esteem of wealth in the due place and value. As the having of them cannot make
a man the better man, so the not having of them cannot make him much worse. The
want of them cannot hinder Gods Election: nay, has not God chosen the poor of
this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, James 2. 5? It
cannot hinder from the means of grace and life: nay, the poor receive the
Gospel, when not many rich, not many noble receive it. It hinders not
salvation: no, poor Lazarus shall be in Abraham's bosom, when Dives shall be
in torment.

And even for this present life, whereto riches be only servants: godliness
teaches, that man's life stands not in abundance, Luke 12. 15. It is not bread,
but the staff of bread, which feeds us: the blessing of God makes rich, and
he adds no sorrows to it. And, if I have lost wealth, I lose some movables,
my inheritance I hold, and my enduring substance.

Fourthly, godliness makes the 4
heart seek for and purchase other wealth so much the more, and content it
self to make the Lord his portion: that Christ is become his wealth: that
faith, hope, love, and other graces are his goods: the pearl is better then
all. Christ never comes alone: yet if he did come naked, he were wealth
enough. The lines are fallen in a good Psalm. 16. 6.
ground, if God be present. What can be wanting to him that enjoyes God a
Father in Jesus Christ? Let God give me himself, and heaven mine inheritance,
let him do with his movables as he please.

Thus of wealth and riches.

Next, in the want or loss of worldly Grounds of Contentment in the want or
loss of pleasures. 1
pleasures and delights, godliness contenteth the heart thus.

1 Because the Disciple of Christ is known by a contrary color: He must
daily take up his cross, and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh
and lusts of it, Gal. 5. 24. Shall Christ so willingly buckle under his cross,
and shall we be as Simon of Cyrene, who wi^^ not bear it unless it be forced
upon us? The whole life of Christ was a continual sorrow: we read he wept
thrice, over Lazarus, over Jerusalem, and in the garden, but never that he
laughed.

2 The pleasures worthy a Christian are the pleasures of Gods house, standing
in remission of sin, peace with God, peace of conscience, joy in the holy
Ghost: and these are so proper and peculiar to the godly, as they agree to no
other. These are the pleasures of an high and excellent strain, which we are
to reserve our hearts and affections for: and the other, in comparison of these
heavenly and spiritual joys, to be loathed and contemned. Delight thy self
in the Lord: of all other delight, say as Solomon, It is madness.

3 Solomon who tried his heart 3 E^cl. 2. 11.
with all worldly delights, pronounced of them all, that they are vanity and
vexation of spirit. And the Apostle affirms of widows living in pleasure,
that they are dead while they live. And what other is the profit of the lives
of Epicures and b^lly-gods, who seek nothing more then to live in ease and
pleasure? They choke all holy cogitations, unfit them as enemies to all godly
studies, refuse as incapable all good admonitions, and degenerate men from men
into filthy beasts. How do they infect the mind, oppress the soul, dull the
wit, waste the body, and bring harms on a man a thousand more? This made one
of B^rnard. Descriptio of worldly pleasure.
the fathers describe worldly pleasures thus: It is an harlot fitting in her
chariot, whose four wheels are Gluttony, Lust, Pride in apparel, Idleness;
the two horses are, Prosperity and Abundance; the two drivers are, Idleness
and Security; and if he had added the retinue or attendants that follow and
wait upon her, as grief, too late repentance, pale-faced sickness, lean
consumption, beggary and death, he had made a most absolute description. But
who cannot by the quality of the Mistress gather the nature of her handmaids?
Now this being the troup of earthly and unsanctified pleasures, they are not
only to be contemned, but hated of all Christians.

4 Consider this present life as a 4
warfare, a pilgrimage, a moment on which eternity depends, a day of grace, a
space of repentance, and of strife to enter in at the strait gate: the time of
our absence from home, and from the Lord. And how can we sing so merrily in a
strange land? What a number of enemies besiege us, and watch for our security?
What a bad constitution is my heart of? How labors it of the poison of sin?
How is it with me other then a seafaring man? When he is safest, there is but
an inch between him and death: and how can I in all these miseries set my self
on a merry pin, as the rich glutton did, who heard that sentence, Son, remember
thou had thy pleasure here, and Lazarus pain, but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented? Or how shall God wipe away my tears in heaven, if I shed
none in earth? And how shall I reap in joy, if I sow not in tears? I was borne
with tears, and shall die with tears: why should I live without them in this
valley of tears?

5 Since our sin cast us out of 5
Paradise, that place was shut up, that we should look for no Paradise on
earth any more, but toward that heavenly Paradise whereof the other was a type.
We must therefore use the world as not using it, rejoice as not rejoicing, and
not suffer any worldly 1 Co^. 7. 29, 30.
joys to be as the Devils birdlime, to hinder us from mounting aloft in
heavenly meditations here, and much less to dim our sight from beholding
those admirable joys and pleasures at Gods right hand, prepared for the
Saints. How easy a thing were it to be a lover of pleasure more then of God?
but withal how dreadful and unhappy? Therefore I have them, I must be
watchful: if not, I must be thankful and contented.

6 All the world cannot take my joy from me, if I rejoice in these 6
things: That my name is written in Heaven: That Christ is mine, as when Si^^on
had him in his arms, and Zacheus in his house: And in the testimony of a good
conscience, and a life purely led, according to the Word.

So of earthly pleasures. Grounds of Contentment in the want or loss of
honors.


In the want or loss of worldly honors and preferments, godliness inforceth
on the heart contentment, upon these grounds:

1 It teaches to lay the foundati 3
on of true Christianity in humility, and in the knowledge of our selves. Our
selves are in our best metal but dust, and clay, and ashes. Our estate is, to
be borne to misery, as the sparks to fly upward, Ioh. 5. 7. And by sin, we are
the children of death, which by sin entered into the world. This sin of ours,
dishonouring God, has laid all our honor in the dust. And the way to come to
true honor again, is, by humility, which can neither greedily desire worldly
advancements, nor too impatiently bewail their loss. For this purpose Christ
proposes to us the example of a little child, to whom we must be like, Luke 9.
47.

2 It lets a man see the truth of that (...)
our Savior, answering the woman who desired that one of her so^s might sit at
his right hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom, Ye ask ye know not
what, Mat. 20. 20. It is the blindness of ambitious men, that excessively love
and prize their honors, to seek to be aloft. Little do they know or think,
that they are climbing up to a greater and sudden fall: as our Savior says,
He that exalieth himself, shall be brought low, Mat. 23. 12. Haman that was
lifted up above all the Princes of Ahashuerus, within one twelve months space
was hanged on a pair of gallows fifty cubits high, of his own making. Trees
which stand in higher hills, are subject to more vehement and blustering winds.
Little do these see the temptations, which their high estates expose them
unto. If smaller cares in a lower place distract a man from prayer and other
spiritual exercises, how should a man give himself to God, when he is
burdened with more change and cares? Little see they, how little soundness
and stability is in that honor, which they raise themselves unto by
dishonouring God, by Machiavilian policies, by supplanting others, by playing
the hypocrites, and making show of good parts which were never in them; yea,
and which is supported and maintained by the same means doubled and repeated. A
building so weakly, or rather wickedly founded, threateneth a great ruin.

3 Earthly honors are so far from furthering heavenly, as they rather hinder
the same. In the history of Christ's temptation, may be observed what Chrysostom,
notes, that the Devil caries men up aloft, that he may throw them down
headlong. What an headlong fall had we all in Adam, when not content with his
estate he would be liker God the^ he was? Neither was he so wary to answer his
wife in the midst of the delights of paradise, as Job was to answer his,
sitting in the ashes.

Again, not many wise, mighty or noble are called, but by the weak and 1 Co^.
1. 26
vile things of the world God confounds the great and mighty. Generally, the
poor receive the Gospel, when great men have other things to intend. So as
greatness with men is no binder to God.

Often also it does not grace the profession of christ, but hinder it: as is
said, many of the rulers believed in Christ, but durst not confess him because
of the Pharisees; and the reason is give^, because they loved the praise of men
more then the praise of God, Ioh. 12. ver. 42, 43.

Finally, earthly preferment makes men rather forget then remember their
benefactor. Pharaohs Butler forgot Joseph, when he was restored to his place.
And hardly do men in these high places consider or remember the afflictions of
Joseph, of Gods people.

4 Godliness teaches a man to fly from this shadow of earthly honor, 4 How
to get the true honor. 1 Samuel 2. 30
and seek the honor which comes from above:

First, by honoring God: Him that honors me, I will honor, says the
Lord. And who were ever honored in the Scripture, but the friends of God, and
servants of God? Now the property of a good servant is, to love his Masters
honor more then his own.

Secondly, by magnifying Christ and his righteousness; as truly estimating the
things which men can confer, from those which Christ bestows. Paul was
circumcised the eighth day, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the tribe of
Benjamin, which had the King chosen out of it as well as Judah, a Pharisee,
lived unreprovable in his sect, spoke with tongues more then all the Apostles,
and was called by Christ in glory: Yet all these things, and whatsoever else
men magnified so much, were but loss and dung to win Christ, and be found in
him.

CHAP. XIV. Of bodily deformity, and Contentment therein.
NOw we come to those trials which come upon our own persons, which we are
not able to encounter, but must needs lose our peace and patience, if
godliness should not support and stablish us with true contentment. These may
be reduced to six heads; 1 Deformity: 2 Barrenness: 3 Sickness: 4 Old Age: 5
Death: 6 Grave and Judgment*


The first of these, is either by Grounds of Contentment in case of de^ormity. 1
birth, or by accident.

Godliness persuades contentment in both, thus.

1 We made not our selves, but were as the clay in the hand of the Potter, to
make a vessel of what form he pleases, Ier. 18. 6. and shall the clay say to
the Potter, why have thou made me thus? May not God do with his own as he
will? Does he owe any (...). 20, 15
thing to any man?

2 Godliness causes the heart 2 Good ends for this deformity.
to look unto Gods ends, and so, many ways to better it self:

As, first, to supply wants of nature with increase of grace: so Zacheus, being
low of stature, climbed up into a tree to see Christ.

Secondly, by imperfections and deformity of body to see and hate the deformity
of soul by sin, which was the Parent of it. Lots wife for her sin was
turned into a senseless pillar of salt. Nebuchadnezzar for his sin was made
in conversation like a beast. Good Zachary for his distrust was made
speechless.

Thirdly, not to rest in our selves, since we have a continual badge of
imperfection, but in the perfection of Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 9. my grace is
sufficient for thee. And so much the more to labor in the decking of the
soul, that the Lords strength may be perfected through weakness.

3 Faith teaches the heart, and 3
upholdeth it unto that time, when all imperfections and blemishes shall be
done away. For when sin shall be cast into the lake, all the deformities and
infirmities of it shall be abolished, and soul and body shall be united in
most absolute perfection and beauty, in the resurrection of the just: and that
body which is now far wanting of other men's in feature and perfection, shall be
made like the glorious body of Jesus Christ. That eye which is now blind or
blemished, shall perfectly and clearly behold God as he is, and see his
Redeemer. The stammering tongue shall resound the praises of the Lord in all
eternity. The lame shall be restored to his limbs, to walk in white with
Christ. And that body which is now deformed, yet is now a member of Christ, and
shall bring no blemish to Christ's glorious body.

4 Deformity of body may be a blemish in respect of man, it is not so 4
in regard of God: for he judges not acording to the outward appearance, but
according to the frame of the heart. For as in a wicked man the Lord sees no
beauty, but accounts of them as if they were transformed into the shape of
beasts (Nero a lion for cruelty, Herod a fox for craft and subtilty, and Peter
calls them dogs and swine for filthiness:) so the Lord sees no deformity in
the godly, but of the church consisting of her members, is said, Thou art all
fair my love, there is is no blemish in thee. Beauty Cant. 4. 7.
without Gods fear is as a Pearl in a swines snout: but Gods fear without
beauty of body is as a Diamond, which is never less precious if it were set in
clay.

5 If deformity come by accident, 5
as by persecution of Tyrants, by racking, dismembring, or the like, godliness
will make a man content; yea, and glad he is worthy to bear the marks of
Christ Jesus in his body: so was Paul, Gal. 6. 17. These deformities are rather
ornaments to Christians. And seeing our Lord did bear in his body the print of
the spear and nails, why should we be ashamed of the like? Nay, these marks
have been highly esteemed of Gods children. We read in the Ecclesiastical
history, that Constantine the Emperor kissed the wounds of their eyes, which
in time of persecution were pulled out for constant bearing witness to the
truth, and Theodlib. 1 cap. 2.
received and entertained them honorably. The marks of a soldiers wounds for
his King and Country, are his glory.

But if deformity or defect come otherwise, a godly heart rests it self in
this, that all things fall out and shall be turned to the best to them that
love God. God can in his wisdom tell how to prevent greater evil from his
children, by Jesse, and to draw them good out of evil. For example:
Mephibosheth was lame by birth, but God disposed it to good for him. If he had
been of a strong and able body, it was likely enough he might have affected
his Grandfathers Kingdom, as his uncle Ishbosheth did to his own destruction:
but now being lame, and unfit for the Kingdom, he is contented with his
condition, without any aspiring attempts, and so lives in peace long days and
to old age, who else might have perished young. Experience gives us store of
examples of such as being like Absalom, who was the fairest young man in all
Israel, of strength and valor, it had bin better for them to have been
perpetually lame or bedridden, then have enjoyed that blessing, which not being
able to weild has proved their overthrow.

CHAP. XV. Of Orbity or Barrenness, and Contentment therein.
THe second personal evil, in Grounds of Contentment in Barrennes.
which godliness no less contenteth then in the former, is Orbity or
Barrenness. Thus.

First, promotion of children makes 1
none blessed.

Secondly, children are not simply 2
blessings, nor always given for a blessing, but often prove a curse, Job 27.
15, 16. We read of children multiplied for the sword, and for famine. We
often see some one child, not only the sorrow and shame of godly Parents, but
the ruin and overthrow of the whole family. We have heard of Absaloms that
have risen in rebellion against their parents, according to our Saviors
prophecy, Matthew, 10. 21. children shall rise up against their Parents. Better
were it to be without Children, then to be parents of such, as for whom the
Lord made a Law, that the Parents should follow them to the stoning, and cast
the first stone at them, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20. Numbers of such roiotous sons
are every where at this day.

Thirdly, the case often so falls out, that they are at best ^ase, who have 3
no children; especially if troubles and persecutions arise for the Gospel.
When Jerusalem was to be besieged, woe was to them that gave suck in those
days. And in ordinary times, the Parent charged with children must have
trouble in the flesh, for the godly educating, and also providing for them. And
such as have none, have less care, and more liberty and opportunity to serve
God, and to care for the things of God, how he may please him: the Apostles
reason, 1 Cor. 7. 32, 34.

Fourthly, children are the gift of God. The fruit of the womb is 4
a blessing from God, whose wisdom is such, as he disposes them where he
knows it is fit for his glory, and good for his children: and where it would
make for neither, he withholdeth them. Elkanah was not God, to give Annah
children. And a good heart will rest in Gods wise disposition, who opens, and
no man shuts, and shuts the womb and no man can open it.

Fifthly, though sometimes it was 5
a curse to be childelesse, and inflicted for sin, as Coniah was written
(...). 22. 30.
destitute of children; yet to the godly it is not so; nor a sign of Gods
anger, no more then it was in Abel, Melchiz^d^^k, Elias, Paul, and others.

CHAP. XVI. Of Sickness, and Contentment therein.
THe third personal evil is Sickness Grounds of Contentment in Sickness.
and diseases, which often infect the mind with heaviness and impatience,
especially if they be more tedious and lingering; and so much the more
burdensome, by how much health' (which is next to life, the best earthly
blessing of God) is overprized. But godliness suggesteth many motives to
contentment, in this estate.

1 It looks up unto the hand 1
of our Father, lovingly chastening in measure, not above our strength; in
mercy, not to our desert; and to a good end, for his own glory, as Lazarus his
sickness was, John 11. 4. and for our glory too, even as our Head Christ must
first suffer, and so enter into his glory, Luke 24.

2 Sickness is the Lords school, wherein we learn not only the knowledge, but
the practice of many Christian The good uses of sickness. 1
virtues.

First, it tells us, that we carry about with us a body subject to death,
upon which sentence is past, that being dust it must return to dust. It
shows the frailty of man by bringing down the lustiest bodies, abating the
strength, and abolishing the beauty of them.

Secondly, it humbles men, by drawing 2
a confession from them, that all flesh is but as grass, and the grace thereof
as the flower of the field.

Thirdly, it abates self love in men, 3
and tames the rank flesh, when health, strength and prosperity lift up the
mind, and make men overweane themselves, and kick against the Lord.

Fourthly, sickness of the body is the medicine of the soul, which labors 4
more with weakness of faith, hope, love, then the body with diseases. And
therefore as physic, though it be unpleasant to the Patient, yet is
profitable, so is it with the sickness of the body to the soul: For then (as
all men can witness of themselves) they are most wise, most humble, most
sorrowful for sin, most earnest for pardon, most fervent in prayer, most
watchful against sin, and in one word, best affected in soul in the
sickness of the body. Did not Naamans sickness of lep^osie bring him to the
Prophet Elisha, where being healed he confesses there was no God in the world,
but in Israel? 2 Kings 5. 15, 16. Was not that a most notable prayer of Ezekiah
in his sickness? Esa. 38. 9. How many hearty prayers did David pour out to
the Lord in his sickness? Psalm. 6. and 32. and 38. Look upon Job in his
sickness, a mirror of patience, confidence, humility, other holy virtues, and
as a model of grace he came tried and refined out of the furnace.

Fifthly, sickness is a preservative 5
against many sins; in that it makes us think of the cause of sickness,
which is sin; and of earnest repentance, the waster of sin; and of seeking
to the Physician of souls, which is Christ himself, who makes a confection
of his own heartbloud to cure all our sins, which are our spiritual
diseases and sickness.

Sixthly, in that it lets us see that the house of this Tabernacle must 6
be dissolved, it moves us to bid adieu to the world, and seek for that life
which is everlasting, not capable of age, sickness, or any grievance. The
nurse in weaning the child lays mustard on her breast: And this life must
have some bitter tang, to make us seek for a better.

Were not my sickness so lingering O. Comfort in lingering sickness. Ans. 1.
and tedious, I could be better contented.

1 Thou lingrest in the cause, which is thy sin. Hasten thy repentance.

2 See thou get soundness of 2
soul so much the more, and the spirit of a man will bear his infirmities.
Make sure remission of sins, get faith, etc.

3 Christ has not taken away the lingering of diseases, but the malignity 3
and poison of them. It may long exercise and molest thee, it shall not hurt
thee, nay be turned to the best: neither can the sickness belong, where the
life is so short.

4 Perhaps thou have abused or 4
forfeited thy health, or would abuse it to Gods dishonor. See we not
numbers, it were better for them to be bound on their beds, and be perpetually
sick or bedrid, then continually to pursue wickedness with high hand as they
do? And assure thy self, were health as good for thee as it is in it self,
thou should have it. Better to be broken with grief to salvation, then
enjoy health to condemnation.

5 Think not God has forgotten thee, if he longer hold thee 5
under. Look upon that godly woman that labored of a bloody issue eighteen
years, and was bowed together, Luke 13. 8. Another whom Christ cured, that had
an issue twelve years, c. 8. 43. Behold the man that was lame thirty eight
years, John 5. 5. And Aeneas that was sick of the palsy eight years, Act. 9.
33. and yet were respected and cured in due season.

But of all examples, most comfortable is that of our Lord and Esa. 53. 3.
Head, Gods dear Son, who was a man of sorrows, and his whole life nothing
but a burden of sorrows: and never was any sorrow like unto his, and yet he
ceased not to be dear to his Father. And the same is the condition of the
members. 6


Lastly, God has just causes to defer 6 Why God suffers sickness to linger
long on his children. 1 2
help, and seem to hide himself.

1 To try our faith, love, and patience, and bring it forth into example. as
Job, David, the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 23.

2 To acknowledge the greatness and continuance in sin by continuance of his
hand. Were our correction always short, we would not be persuaded of the
greatness of our sin.

3 To make us more watchful 3
against sin for hereafter. A disease soon cured is not much cared for.

4 To keep our peace with God 4
more carefully: hardlier gotten, surelier kept. And to whet our prayers, and
means of fellowship with him.

5 That we may acknowledge how 5
heavy and continual those torments are, which be prepared for impenitent
persons, if repentant sinners be laid under such lingering evils in this life,
1 Pet. 4. 17. If judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end of the
wicked be?

CHAP. XVII. Of old Age, and its evils, and Contentment therein.
THe fourth personal evil, is old Grounds of Content meant in the evils of old
age.
age, which is a continual disease or dying, and many burdens are in it,
which godliness persuades contentment in, thus.

First, although it must be granted, that the incommodities of old 1
Age are many, both in respect of body and mind, as, the shaking of the head,
stouping of back trembling of joints, languishing of spirits, decaying of
vital heat, the less of all the senses, the presence of many diseases which
are the forerunners of death, as palsies, gouts, cholickes, and many more: Yet
the weak and diseased body is no hinderance to the discreet and good mind:
Neither are these inconveniences always appropriate to old Age, but often the
punishments of intemperate and disordered youth. Abraham being 120 years old
begat six children of K^turah after Sarahs death, Genesis 25. 2. Caleb was as
strong in body and mind, and as fit for want or government, at eighty five
years old, as at forty: Moses dyed at 120 Josh. 14. 10
years, and yet his eyes were not dim, nor his natural force abat^d, Deuteronomy 34.
7.

Secondly, old age is a thing which 2 (...)
every one desires: and shall no man like it, when it comes? Besides, if a
man live, it is unavoydable: for we all wax old as a garment: the whole
world, all the parts and ages of it teach us this: and the course of the year
coming from Spring to Summer, and from Summer to Autumn, and ending in
Winter, is proof enough.

Thirdly, there be sundry singular 3
privileges of years: as,

1 God has commanded reverence Privileges of age. Ioh 12. 12
unto it, Levit. 19. 32. thou shall rise up before the hoare head, and honor
the person of the old man.

2 Their experience and years have set them above the younger in wisdom,
counsel, and government: and their counsel neglected has been the overthrow
of Kingdoms, as in Rehoboam, 1 King. 12. whence God sometimes threatened a
great judgment, that he will take away the Esa. 3. 2.
aged. Hence also has God given them the first place in speaking, which Elihu
well observed, Job 32. 11. and the younger are to reverence their counsel and
instruction: and cap. 25. 15. to hear, and wait, and hold their tongue at
their counsel.

3 God has set them as Copies and patterns to the younger, that they should
express all good virtues, which they have learned by the word of God, or their
own experience in their lives and conversations; in which sense properly their
gray hairs shall be a crown of glory to themselves, being found in the way of
righteousness.

4 There be also sundry comforts of old age: as, 4


First, as ripe fruit is most pleasant, Comforts of Age. 1
and old wines the best, so is old age seasoned with piety. What a comfort is
it to a man's heart, that he can say, Thus long have I served God? if he can say
with Polycarpe the Martyr, fourscore and six years have I served Christ? How
rich is such a one in his grace, how happy in his account, and in his reward?
Beside we like ancient coins, and make much of old pictures: And can we set
small by a godly old man, who carries an express image and stamp of Gods
^t^rnity?

Secondly, aged persons have passed 2
the troublesome and dangerous time of their life, and are even in the haven;
and therefore have great cause to praise God, no less then the Israelites did
when they were were come over Jordan, and entered the land of Canaan.

Thirdly, as the Husbandman rejoices in his harvest, when 3
he gathers in his corn, and lays it up safely in his barn: so the godly
man may in his old age, which is as the harvest of a good life, immediately
after which he shall enjoy the fruits of his faith, hope, and holiness in the
Kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. Of death, and its terrors, and Contentment therein.
THe fifth personal evil is death, Grounds of Contentment in the approach and
terrors of death.
which of all evils is most fearful and dreadful to nature, because it is
the extinction of it, and in it self a curse of sin, a passage to hell. But
godliness leaves not the heart destitute of true content and comfort, even in
this great combat, but stays the mind thus.

First, it lifts up the eye of the soul unto God, of whom we first (...)
had our life, and in whose hands our life is. We had not our life by chance,
nor part with it by chance, but by the gracious disposition of God. He says
to Moses, Go up into the mountain and dye: and Psalm. 90. 3. he says,
Return again Psalm. 31. 15.
ye sons of man: and says David, My times are in thine hands. Again,
looking up to God, it sees how precious to him is the death of all his holy
ones, Psalm. 116. 15. And further, in that by death the godly soul is more
nearly united unto God, and comes to the fruition of that pure, chief, and
immortal good, it can be contented to commit it self unto him to keep, as
Paul, I know (...) Tim. 1. 2
he will keep what I have committed unto him.

Secondly, it looks to Christ, and 3
sees in him.

1 Death changed and qualified Christ qua (...) (...) for us. (...) (...). 15.
55 (...) vitam ^ors, ut a ^ita (...) ^etu^ mors, Aug.
by Christ's death, being in it own nature a curse and the very suburbs of
hell: now it is disarmed, and the sting of death pulled out. It is a fiery
serpent, stinging deadly, but a look toward the brazen serpent is a ready cure
Immoderate fear of death is a daughter of ignorance; it being with us as with
children, who are frighted with the name of terrible things, and at the sight
of some disguised person, but when they come to riper age, and years of
discretion, contemn them. We are frighted as the Midianites, with the sound
of broken pitchers, voices, and lamps, and cowardly fly before we see any
apparent danger.

2 It sees the death of Believers, sanctifies it:
not only altered, but sanctified by Christ's death: that it becomes of a curse
a blessing, and as a stage whereon a Christian manifests his faith,
fortitude, love, patience, and constancy, and openly triumphs over death, as
his Head has done before him.

3 It sees Christ in Heaven, in and takes us by it to himself.
glory, who is our Head and Husband, from whom while we live here, we are
strangers and pilgrims, separate from that happy society which we shall enjoy
with Him, and all our fellow members in the Kingdom of Heaven. Whereupon it
does desire his presence, and is not only contented, but willing to be
dissolved and be with Christ. Paul considered, that he was now absent from the
Lord, and desired to be present. Simeon having Christ in his arms, said, Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Steven in the midst of the
stones saw the Heavens open, and the Son of man standing at Gods right hand,
and so slept quietly.

A sweet death, if Christ be in sight. Let him fear death, that would not go
to Christ.

So of the second ground.

3 It looks upon death it self, 3
and sees in it:

First, the necessity of it. It is appointed The necessity of dying.
for all men once to dye, a statute law of Heaven, inevitable, Heb. 9. 27. And
seeing it knows it to be so, it rather fits it self cheerfully to bear it,
then fearfully to decline it.

Quest. How may that be done?

Answ. 1 We must deal with this With preparation the^eunto, what.
Giant and mighty Sampson, who slayes heaps upon heaps, as the Philistims did
with him:

1 Sift out where his strength lies, and finding it lie in his locks, cut them
off. The strength of thy death Si tantum de defere^d^ morte satagitur, qua^
(...) de au f^exda laborandum est? Aug.
is thy sin, these are his strong locks, cut them off by repentance, and
death shall be too weak to hurt thee.

2 Labor to dye in faith, as the Saints, Heb. 11. 13. all these dyed in faith.
Let thy faith fasten upon Christ, as himself did in his extreme agony, fix
his confidence upon his Father, saying, My God, my God, and, Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit.

Another necessity of death is, because without it we can never attain
immortality and eternal life. The seed is not quickened, unless it dye first:
neither can eternal life be had, but by the passage of this wicket. We have
here no abiding City: our houses are rather Innes in which we sojourne: our
bodies Tabernacles, ready for removal and shifting: And the condition is, that
when this earthly house shall be dissolved, we shall have a building eternal
in the heavens.

Secondly, godliness sees the advantage and gain by death: that The utility
of dying.
it is no detriment to the faithful, but a gain, as says the Apostle, Christ
is my life, and death is to me advantage, Phil. 1. 21. And it is a great gain
in two respects:

1 Because it is an end of all evils and wretchedness.

2 Because it is a beginning of heaven and happiness.

For the former:

1 It is an end of misery, sorrows, 1 An end of all misery 4 ways.
cares, fears, tears: an end of sickness, pain, poverty, shame,
persecution, and the like: for in death attended with tears, God wipeth away
all tears from the eyes of his children: and then shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor wecping, nor pain, Rev. 21. 4.

2 It is an end of temptations by Satan. The soul in this world is in the
bonds and snares of temptations: and the law of sin in the members ministers
strength to Satan against our selves. But in death the soul is loosed from that
bondage, and the body cease to be an instrument either active or passive in
sin. What a gain is it never to sin more against God, yea to be wholly out of
danger of sinning?

3 It is an end of wicked men's molestation: for death delivers the godly out of
this evil world, (...) Lot out of Sodom, whose righteous soul was vexed
amongst them day by day. They are safe from seducers and deceivers, who in
these last ages come so armed, as, if it were possible, they would deceive the
very Mat. 24. 24.
Elect. They are got without the reach of Persecutors, and those enemies their
eyes shall never see more.

4 It is an end of our own pilgrimage, Psalm. 119. 19 Heb. 11. 13.
and absence from the Lord, wherein we stand in so doubtful and dangerous a
battle, not only with enemies without us, but within our own bosom, our
own covetousness, wrath, ambition, voluptuousness, lust, envy; and not a
head can be cut off from this Hydra, but another rises in the room: and no
watch can be sufficient against them.

Now what man being absent from his own house does not long to dispatch his
business, so to return home? And thus the Saints, 2 Cor. 5. 2. We sigh,
desiring to be clothed with our house which is from heaven. It is our haven,
and an end of our dangerous voyage upon the troubled sea of this world: a
passage from corruption and mortality to immortality and incorruption: a sweet
sleep after our travel and labors, and an end of all the toils of our
lives, Ioh. 11. 11. our friend Lazarus sleeps.

But more then this: It is a beginning 2. A begin ning of heavenly happiness.
of happiness, the entrance to Heaven, the Evening wherein the Laborers
receive the penny of perpetual joy and glory, a repossessing of Paradise lost
by the first Adam, won again by the second. By it we come to the company of
Saints, and the first borne written in heaven:

We come into the bosom of Abraham, even to our dear friends, who are gone
before us to Heaven. But above all, we come to Jesus Christ the Mediator, into
the house of our heavenly Father, wherein he^e has prepared us mansions,
whither the forerunner is for us entered in, Even Jesus, Heb. 6. 20. And we
have boldness to enter into the holy place, by the new and living way which
he has prepared for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, cap. 10. 20.
And by Jesus Christ we come to behold the face of God, being made like unto
Christ in holiness and honor, and shall for ever with him inherit the
Kingdom prepared from the beginning of the World.

CHAP. XIX. Of Grave and Iudg^ment, and Contentment therein.
THe last personal evil, which Ground^ of Contentme^t about the Grave and
last Judgment 1
is horrible to nature, is the grave and last judgment. But godliness
quieteth the heart against all such terrors, thus.

First, that by these two we are raised, as by two stayres, to the fruition of
full happiness. For whereas there be three degrees of life eternal;

The first; when we begin to repent and believe, which is the beginning of it;

The second at the day of death, which enters the soul into eternal
happiness, and prepares the body to be partaker also of it:

The third is at the day of judgment, when soul and body reunited enjoy God
as he is, in eternal glory.

Secondly, because the union between 2
Christ and the Christian lasts, and cannot be dissolved when death
dissolveth all natural bonds: for the bond is mystical and spiritual,
neither knitteth the soul only to Christ the Head, but the body also even the
whole person: so as the bodies of the faithful, being dead and turned into
dust many thousand years ago remain the members of Christ; still cared for by
the Head, and preserved to be made like to his glorious body, by that mighty
power whereby he is able to subdue all things to him self, Phil. 3. 21. In
the winter, all the sap being in the root, there appears no difference
between a living tree and a dead: but in the spring there is a sap which will
ascend, and revive the decayed branches. So our bodies turned not to nothing,
but to dust, and devoured, by beasts, fishes, or the elements, seem to be
perished, but by reason of the former union must be raised, and partake of the
glorious life of Christ.

Thirdly, as the death of the god ly is a quiet sleep, so the grave is a
resting chamber, yea a sweet bed perfumed by Christ's burial for the bodies of
all the Elect; out of which they must awake (for the earth and sea must give up
their dead) and be admitted into the presence of God, and of Christ. Neither
can the grave ever hold under the members of Christ, no more then it could
their Head: but as he gloriously rose again from the dead, so shall they in
glory and immortality. Much less can the grave destroy the body, of which
Christ has said, O grave, I will be thy Hos. 13. 14.
destruction: nor so disguise it, but that with these eyes we shall see the
Lord, and in that glorious vision shall become glorious, Job 19. 25. The
darkness of the grave makes it the fitter for sleep.

Fourthly, the Believer need not 4 Confidence in the last judgment, whence. 1
feate the last judgment.

1 Seeing Christ is the Judge. If the kind husuand may be the Wives Judge,
sheee need not fear.

2 The Judge of all the world 2
cannot but do righteously. He cannot condemn those whom himself has by his
blood redeemed and justified, Romans 8. 1. there is now no condemnation to them
that are in Christ.

3 It is the wicked man that cannot 3
stand in judgment: his wicked conscience covers him with confusion. But the
godly on that day attain their full redemption, Luke 21. 28. When ye see
these ^^ings, Psalm. 1. 5.
then lift up your heads; for the day of your redemption draws near. The day
of Pharaohs drowning was Isreal's deliverance. The day of hanging Pharaohs
Baker, was the lifting up of the Butlers head.

4 Christ did not therefore carry our sins, to lay them again upon 4
us. He was not made a curse for us, to return the curse upon us. He was not
condemned to death, to condemn us: nor made himself a sacrifice for sin,
that we should remain guilty; but that we might receive the sentence of
absolution and blessedness, Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father,
possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the begin^ing of the world. Where
is to be observed, that Christ makes mention Note.
of many good works performed by the Saints, Ye gave me to eat and to
drink, ye clothed me, and visited me; but never reckons up any of their
sins, for that they are washed away in his blood, and covered with the robe
of his mercy.

CHAP. XX. Of Means and Motives to work Contentment.
COutentment being so excellent and beneficial a grace, as we have seen, it
were good we labored for it with all diligence. Whereunto the Means and
Motives are of three sorts: In respect of God. In respect of our selves. In
respect of the Saints.


For the first of these. What in God may work us to Contentment. 1


1 Consider the affection of God, If thou be as thou professest, Gods
child, he is thy father, and thou, if thou be a good child, wilt rely on
him, and content thy self with his allowance. Every master of a family may
dispose his goods as he pleases.

2 Consider his wisdom. The 2
child must think, that the Fathers discretion exceeds his. And herein the
Lord manifests his wisdom, in that he does not always actually bestow
these outward things so largely on his children, as on others, because he
nurtereth them, and will have them wholly depend upon him.

And both these our Savior (Mat. 6. 32.) coucheth together to work
contentment: your heavenly Father knows, what ye stand in need of. He that
can give riches without contentment, knows also to give contentment without
riches. And cap. 7. 11. if ye which are evil, can give good things to your
children, etc.

3 Consider his promise, that 3
the righteous shall never be forsaken, nor will he ever fail or leave them:
and if we fear God, no good thing shall be wanting, Psalm. 34. 9. And from
hence, Heb. 13. 5. the Apostle persuades to be content with the things we have,
because he has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.

Ob. But for all this I see I want many comforts, I feel such and such wants,
etc.

Answ. Every thing good in it self is not good for thee. If this be thy case,
thou want not want and affliction, which now God sees good for thee, and so
shall be, if thou be not more wanting to thy self then other things be. And
the more thy crosses be, and the greater, the more and greater love by virtue
of the promise is wrapped up in them.

4 Consider his powerful providence: 4 Qui crea^te never a^, ordinare (...)
non novit? Aug.
who provides for sparrows, and has care of beasts, fowls, flowers, and
hairs of the head; yea he created light before Sun, Moon, and stars: he
made grass grow before rain or dew: he can preserve Israehtes forty years
in a bar ren wilderness, can bring Mann^ from the clouds, water from a rock,
yea without all these can preserve Moses and Elias forty days. What an
unmovable foundation of godly Contentment is this?

5 Consider his rich supply. God has given himself to thee to become 5
thy portion: he has given his Son to thee, and for thee, and the holy
Spirit, to seal up to thy heart this gift. Now if he give the greater, will
he deny the less? (...) he give his Christ, how will he not with him give all
things also? Is Romans 8. 32.
the Lord my portion, and are not my lines fallen into a good ground? shall I
believe him for salvation, and not for preservation? for eternal, and not for
temporary life?

Next, if we look at our selvts. What in our selves may make us cont^ted 1


1 All of us enjoy much more then we can deserve: if we have bread and breath,
this is forseited and lost; therefore we must crave our daily bread: and we
must as well look upon our receipts to be thankful, as on our wants to
rep^ne: and look upon them behind us, as well as them before us.

2 If we want outward things, it is very just upon us, because we esteem no
more of inward graces and spiritual blessings; which are promised no farther
then men seek Gods Kingdom and righteousness. And whereas in innocence Gods
blessings were united, since the fall they be so divided, as seldom do
spiritual and worldly things go together. Just also, because God sees we
would abuse them, and would prefer them before spiritual things: and the
better things are often brought into better request by want of the worse.

3 Such is the ripeness of our 3
sins, that it is Gods mercy we are not consumed. His singular patience it
is, to continue us in any being, whom he might long since have cut off.

4 If we remember how little nature is contented with, and yet grace 4
is contented with much less, because it persuades, That the Lord is a
freegiver, and may do with his own as he will: That for preserving humane
society it is fit some be rich, some poor, some weak, and some strong; and
thou have deserved no better: That the world was made for the trial, proof,
and affliction of Gods children, their heaven and home and joy unmixt with
sorrow reserved till hereafter; and if God cast thee down, to raise and exalt
thee, he deals no otherwise then with his dear Son, who by the Cross
must go to the Crown: That if he have need but of little, it is folly to heap
up more; as a man in a journey, if one pot of water will serve him, it were
madness to load himself with a barrel; if two hundred will serve him, it
were folly to load himself with a thousand.

Lastly, if we look at the Saints, we have a cloud of examples. Jacob, when
Examples of holy me^ persuade co^tentme^t.
he went from his fathers house, vowed that if the Lord would give him but food
and raiment, to return back in safety, the Lord should be his God, Genesis 28.
20. The Prophet Jeremy (chap. 45. 4.) rebuked Baruch Do thou seek great
things for thy self? seek them not. And Paul advises, If we have food and
raiment, let us be therewith content. And himself had learned to want and
abound, and in all things to be content. Our Lord also teaches us to pray but
for daily bread.

And if thou judge aright, thou Forte in^pia ^rudiet copi^ corrumpet. Q^aeris
tu copi^m corruptionis, cum necessaria fortasse sit in^pi^ eruditionis. Aug.
shall see no less favor of God in withholding these things from thee, then
in bestowing them. Thou think, to rise in the world, were a fine thing; but
it is not thy lot, because he sees it might be thy fall in grace. Thou
think thou could use honors well: but he sees it might make thee more
proud and insolent. Thou think thou could enjoy and tumble safely in
carnal delights: but he sees this might make thee come short of the joys of
heaven. Oh but werst thou rich in goods, thou could do much good: but he
knows this might make thee poor in goodness. Thou know not thine own
heart, were it proved with such things. Give him leave to carve for thee what
he knows to be most safe and wholesome.

Object. If I thought God loved or respected me, I could be the better content.

Answer. If thou be a godly man, whom he can behold in Christ's
righteousness, be thy estate what it will, God must love his image on thee. If
thou be the Lords gold, he may try thee: but the Goldsmith loves his gold as
well in the Furnace as in the treasury. It is for men to respect fine clothes
and gay rings (as the Apostle James says) and by them to set men higher or
lower: but God highly esteems of all, who are rich in faith, and heirs of
grace: let this be thy care, and all is well.

CHAP. XXI. Of the power of godliness to breed contentment, whence it is.
Whereas in the former discourse Whence godliness has power make con tented.
we have referred the whole strength and benefit of Contentment unto
godliness, it will be good in the close of this Treatise to enquire, wherein
the great power of this Sampson lies, and whence it is, that godliness
draws so great virtue to give the Contentment above specified.

First, without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 16. And this is the foundation of al
Contentment, even God incarnate, God with us, God in our nature, Jehovah our
righteousness, our Peacemaker, our Advocate and Mediator, our King, Priest
and Prophet, our portion and great reward; wholly ours, what ever he is, or
has, or can do, or has done, or suffered, to make us happy; as namely
redemption, reco^ciliation, justification, adoption, and all his benefits.
These are complete every way, and adequate to the nature, need, and desire of
man. Man's soul, being a divine particle, is infinite in desires, and cannot be
satisfied but with an infinite good. This good is not to be found in any
creature, nor in all the creatures put together, which are all finite, and
changeable, and if God pleased, reducible to their first nothing. Only the
glorious and infinite God can give satisfiction to the soul, and make it rest
in his love, as a contentfull and sufficient Object of delight. After the
resurrection, and in his heavenly kingdom, there is an absolute fullness to
the creature in the fruition of the Creator: as Psalm. 17. 15. I shall be
satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness.

Here in this life the only Contentment is by faith, which lays hold on the
promises, and on Christ by whom God is certainly and comfortably made ours:
that though there was a great breach made by man's sin, God estranged and
provoked infinitely, the creatures yielding vexation of spirit, the best not
able to help, nor man to help himself; yet now, upon atonement made, the
Lord wholly returns to man, with all the good he has and is able to do for
him: Genesis 17. 1. When Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am God all sufficient, walk before me,
and be thou upright, and I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and I
will multiply thee exceedingly. Afterward, as this Covenant is more firmly
believed, and application of the promises more steadfastly made, and assurance
of Gods love more comfortably gathered; the believing soul grows to be more
quiet, and filled with joy unspeakeable, and full of glory; and, seeing God
has dealt so graciously with it in the maine, therefore whatsoever shall be
his portion of temporal or spiritual gifts, it will be well contented, and
rest satisfied. Not an attribute of God, but yields abundant matter of sweet
repose in the bosom of our heavenly Father: infinite mercy, infinite power,
infinite holiness, infinite wisdom, infinite truth, every excellency
infinite and incomprehensible, must needs ravish and swallow up the soul with
infinite admiration and contentation.

The Greek word here used to signify (...)*
Contentment, implies a selfe-sufficiency: and that is a great matter to be
affirmed of a creature, especially now after sin admitted, and the woeful
desolations and confusions which sin has brought. God alone is properly
selfe-sufficient. But take it with godliness, the Mother of it, as has been
showed, and then it is no Ipsa s^is pollent opibus, ^il in diga nostri. Lucret.
strange thing. A godly man, who has this great mystery sealed up in his
breast, is selfe-sufficient, and needs not any carnal or sinful additions
to make him blessed.

Philosophers disputed of blessedness, and called it the highest and Arist.
Eth. Nic. l. 1. c7.
perfectest good, being the end of all our actions: and perfectest, because it
is sufficient to it self, without any further desirable good. But this they
affirmed blindely, not reaching at that which is the top of man's felicity; and
therefore fell into other expressions of perfect virtue, perfect life,
contemplation and the pleasure thereof, and the society of man, by the which
they expected their blessedness. Only the believer attaines this autarkey,
being in fellowship with the Allsufficient Iehova; and this blessedness,
because his sins are forgiven, and his person accepted in Christ, and withal
enriched with so goodly endowments, that he may well be both contented and
thankful abundantly.

There be diverse inferior, philosopicall, Senec. de Tranq. animi. ^^trius de
consol. philos. etc.
rational persuasions, which may work Contentment; and especially those rules
and grounds of godliness, formerly delivered. But presupposed always, that we
begin in the Article of Justification. Without reconciliation for sin there
is no sound tranquillity of mind to be expected. If the conscience be once
thoroughly enlightened, awakened, and affrighted with sin, there is no right
pacifying it but by the blood of Christ, sprinkling and purging it from dead
works. The guilt of them Heb. 9. 14.
will ever lie as a clog upon the ^ou^, and take the next occasion to clam^r
against the Master. In va^n do you go about to comfort an impenitent sinner,
and work him to Contentment in such and such afflictions. Your first labors
should be, to drive him out of himself, and get him to make his peace with
God, in whom alone he can obtain a sufficient stay and supply for his sad
condition. True: numbers content themselves with their riches, honors, friends,
children, other comforts: but how often is it seen, that one Mordecai not
bowing (one slight cross or other) marres Est. 5. 13.
the fashion of all their glory? and, though the evil spirit go from Saul at
the Music which David makes, yet soon afterward he returns again, and
torments him as much as ever? Add hereunto the pricking thorns of
covetousness, the gnawing pains of envy, the torturing fits of impatience,
fury, frenzy, which often interrupt the seemliest Contentment of a natural
man. All which does hold, even in the stolen waters of hypocrites, who either
in the Ministry or by private conference receive a prop for their miserable
estate, that they are both contented and comfortable; yet, for want of Christ
dwelling in the heart by faith, they soon return to their old distempers, or
after a while show plainly they used a wrong phrase or method for Contentment.

Secondly, godliness has this power 2
to breed Contentment in all estates, while it is of power to change a man into
another man, by the grace of regeneration and conversion unto God: thrusting
the old man out of doors, and putting the new man into possession, which after
GOD is created in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness: laying the
foundation of all in self-denial, in resigning the own will to the will of
God, and in care to please him, though himself and all the world be
displeased. None but the new creatur^ is capable of Contentment. Another has
his unmortified and unsubdued passions (in the goodliest civility that Nature,
Art, or Education can afford) which in time of vehement trouble will have a
vent, and make a great commotion in the soul and life. Well may such discourse
of the passions, and the quieting of them; but shall never obtain what they
propose, till they consult Religion and power of godliness, which sets up a
new frame in the soul, in which Contentment may be harbored.

It is true: sundry godly persons are many times distempered, and subject to
great discontents. But this is only by the imperfection of godliness. If they
were so good as they might be, and should be, they should not so often go out
of tune as they do. As any are partakers of the divine 2 Pot. 1. 4.
nature more fully, so they are more rid of these discontents. They that have
learned well to deny their own will, wisdom, reason, and carnal resonings,
have learned also to be quiet in greatest afflictions, as those holy men, It is
the Lord, let him do as he pleases: and, good is the word of the Lord which
thou have spoken. Pride, passion, selfe-willednesse, envy, earthlinesse, other
corruptions being almost dead and gasping, needs must the soul remain in good
temper and quietness; as the Sea is quiet, when no winds are abroad to toss
it. Whereunto add the^ strength of faith, of hope, of patience, of humility,
and other graces, which as godliness brings nearer to their perfection, so
the soul shall have more benefit by them to rest well contented with Gods good
pleasure in every thing. And the very exercises of godliness (when rightly
performed) are notable diversions to put off discontents: the Christian can
fall to prayer when he is likely to be surprised with sorrow, anger, fear, or
the like passion, can sit and sing a Psalm, can take a Bible and read a
Chapter, can go and confer with his Minister, or some faithful friend; and
thus, finding other employment, he forgets the matter of discontent. And, is it
indeed Gods will, that he should not be more rich, healthy, high, befriended,
accommodated with outward blessings, or endowed with inward gifts of the
Spirit, better ability of mind, etc? his will is laid down long ago, and
therefore he can traffic contentedly with his two Talents, as well as another
with his ten. Not my will, but thy will be done, O Father.

Thirdly, godliness (after those two 3
things so settled, I mean justification and sanctification) has power to frame
the heart to Contentment by those manifold Rules of Christian moderation, which
we have above rehearsed: all being Shields and Targets out of the Lords Armory,
able to guard and keep the heart in the love of God, against all assaults of
the enemy whatsoever.

Fourthly, godliness proposes, (...)
and also persuades the heart of the excellency of spiritual things; namely
the favor of God, the image of God, the providence of God, his Son, his
spirit, his Angels, his Word, his creatures sanctified, his corrections
mitigated and made profitable, his glory worth having, though we stay long for
it, and though in the mean time we endure many and sharp trials. When the
palate is oncein a good relish (as godliness is able to set it) it finds the
Word in all the blessed co^tents of it sweeter Psalm. 19. 10. Prove. 3. 14, 15.
then honey and the honeycomb, richer then Rubies and Diamonds, and all that ye
can think or speak of; mere nothing in comparison of this heavenly wisdom.
Now the Christian is able to make a right estimate of things, and be affected
toward them according to their worth. A world of advantage, above men of the
world.

Fifthly, godliness does two things 5
about earthly matters, which are the ordinary causes of discontent. One, to
show the vanity of them: that they are the slenderest and slightest favors
which God bestows on his children, and many times thinks good to bestow most
largely on his very enemies: Which if we shall often and earnestly think of,
we shall be the better contented either to want them, or be scanted in them.
The like of cSmon gifts, of illumination, memory, utterance, eloquence,
courtlinesse, and the like. The other, to teach us to accustom our selves to
have what we have, as if we possessed not, and to use the world as not using
it, namely, with much weignednesse and retyrednesse, as those that are forced
to make use of them, and not those that come willingly and eagerly to an
enjoyment, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. Contempt of the world brought some of the
Philosophers to a strange kind of resolution, for quieting their minds in all
sad accidents. Pity it should not do the like for true Christians, who have
better Principles, better Evidences and matters of comfort, and better
assurance of the glory and felicity of heaven.

Sixthly, godliness teaches, that 6
we must go farther then Contentment; namely, to be thankful and bless God,
even for afflictions: to rejoice in the Lord always: to count it a mercy, that
we are not consumed, and already in hell: to esteem our selves less then the
least of all Gods mercies: to rejoice in tribulations, and account it all joy
when we fall into diverse temptations: to make our selves equal to them of the
lower sort, who, though they deserve as much as we, or more, yet fare not so
well: and, How many dear children has God in sundry places, who would be glad
of our scraps, together with the peace of our Sion, and prosperity of the
Gospel? And finally, to suffer persecutions with Joy and Contentment, as did
the Martyrs and Confessors in those bitter days: which how shall they do, who
have not attained Contentment in a better and quieter condition? they that
cannot run with a footman, how can they think to keep company with an
Horseman?

Consider learn to be godly, and thereby learn to be contented. There (...),
1 Timothy 3. 16 (...), Phil. 4. 12, 13.
is a mystery in godliness, and a mystery in Contentment. In both we must
become scholars, and be instructed. Both Arts to be had in the school of
Christ, and by the power of Christ. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, says the Apostle, where he speaks of learning Contentment.
It is thine own fault, if thou obtain not this grace as well as other, and
thou must not complain of crosses, but of thy self who make not use of the
grace that is offered. He that gave commandment to be content with such things
as we Heb. 13. 5.
have, is ready also to give power thereunto. And it is pity but he should be
eaten up of discontent, who respects neither the one, nor the other. No
marvel, if men wonder at him, asking how it comes to pass; and if himself
find no quietness Qui fit, Mea^as, etc. Hor. ser. 1. sat. 1. Inde^fi, ut ra^o
etc. ibid. John 2. 8.
in any calling or condition; nor die contented with his term of life, and
that portion of goods which the most wise God thought fit to commit unto him. He
that observes lying vanities forsakes his own mercies. To say nothing of
those, whom discontent has brought to selfe-murder, to the mudering of others,
to take counsel of the Devil, to change their religion, to prostitute their
consciences to Antiachrist, etc. Had they not been crossed and discontented, they
had never done as now they have done: nor should we ever have heard of such
doleful conclusions and confusions.

LUKE 3. 14. Be content with your wages. 1 TIMOTHY 6. 8. Having food and raiment,
let us be therewith content.
FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE IMPROVEMENT OF TIME.
CHAP. I. Every part of our time may and must be improved for good.
THere is no part of time, which the Lord has not specially fitted for some
good use, and by wise application may not be a season, either to do good, or
receive good. One way or other, in the general or special calling, a
Christian may be profitably diligent, even every day and hour. Numbers for
want Temporis ja^^ura da^^o^^ss^m^. Plut.
of skill or care, in the midst of great means are very beggars and bankrupts
in grace, find nothing to do, and all the day long stand idle in the
marketplace. For whose better direction, I will in few words show, that the
LORD orders such a multitude of good occasions to wait on every part of our
life, for doing good to our selves or others, that if we were wise to apprehend
and take them up, no hour of our many days could passeus without
accomplishing some notable good,

First, what time is there, in which Opportunities of good.
the Lord holds not out one benefit or other to us, spiritual or temporal,
wherewith he stretches out his hands all the day long? Where can a man go, but
he enjoyes the creatures of God, the Sun, the air, meat drink, or the like
helps of nature, or of grace? Where may he not observe these benefits, to
provoke himself to thankfulness? Lord what is man, that thou art mindful of
him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him! Psalm. 8. 4.

Secondly, where shall a man go, but he may find an altar to offer the 2
sacrifice of alms, even some object of mercy? and with such sacrifices God is
well pleased, Heb. 13. Oh how might an able man (that is willing withal) be
ever furthering his reckoning, and drawing on himself the prayers of poor
Saints, and resemble God himself who is ever communicating his goodness to
the creature! and in conclusion, help himself into everlasting habitations.

Thirdly, through the day a man 3
may meet with some rubbes, crosses, afflictions: And how should these help to
keep him humble and lowly in his own eyes, and set him a new on examining his
own heart, and turn all other sorrow into godly sorrow, for sin which is
the cause of affliction.

Fourthly, at other times God offers 4
cause of rejoicing for some blessing on a man's self or his, or some special
work of mercy to the land, to the country where he lives, to the Church, to
the Churches abroad, etc: And now a Psalm would relish well. David would
rather rise at midnight to praise the Lord, then slip such a season: and would
ask himself, What shall I render unto the Lord? Psalm 116. 12.

Fifthly, sometimes through the day a Christian may hear of, or see the 5
misery and affliction of others, in their souls or bodies. And now if he
would go into the house of mourning, Eccles 7. 2.
he might come forth wiser, more mortified, more weined from the world, more
fit for death, and for giving up his accounts with joy. And to put on bowels of
compassion, remembering the afflictions of Joseph, and be affected as true and
feeling members use to be, would argue him a sound and living member of that
mystical body whereof Christ is the head.

Sixthly, who is he, that has not 6
some good motion through the day, by means of the Spirit moving within, or
the Word sounding without, or some other occasion from himself or others, by
conference or example? Now were a good time to work with God, to follow the
Spirit whither soever he leads, to foster his motions, and cheerfully and
readily go on in holy obedience, even to perfection. While the Sun shines,
make Hay. Take the Tide of grace: perhaps it will not be long.

Seventhly, sometimes a man is 7
solitary: and then the most know not what to do with themselves, but consume
their time in roving and ranging thoughts: whereas now indeed a Christian may
watch and advance his own greatest advantage: Now that he is alone, separated
from company and business, he may disburden his soul of sin in the presence
of God, by free confession. In any want he may be bold with God, in as
powerful manner as he can: and freely enjoy his fellowship, and communing
with God, without distraction. And, can that man be alone, who is with God in
the mount? Or if the heathen could say he was never less alone then when
alone, Nunquam minus sol^^ qua^ cum solus. 8
may not a true active Christian say so much more?

Eighthly, sometimes in the day he is in company, and then he shall make use of
his time, to wait for some fit occasion that he may speak of the works of
God which are fresh in memory. And though communication of worldly and
indifferent things be allowable, yet when liberty is for both alike, prefer
the best, and show thy self willing to forgo thine own talk to do good to
others.

Lastly, he is sometimes in the 9
company of some wise and godly man, able to give good counsel, to resolve
doubts, answer objections, and satisfy in cases of conscience. And now he
has a chief season and opportunity to do himself good, if his own folly and
trifling hinder him not: now he must not let such an on slip, but as the Iaylor
when he had Paul and Silas in keeping, he got resolution of that great
question, What Act. 16. 30.
shall I do to be saved? But numbers want the sweet and gracious waters which
they might draw from good men, because they want a will and Bucket to draw.

Thus in these few instances you see, how a Christian by applying his heart to
wisdom might no time be idle, but improve every part of it to help himself
toward heaven.

And this every good Christian ought to do, by virtue of that Apostolical
direction, Ephesians. 5. 16. where Saint Paul willing them to walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise, adds presently, Redeeming the time, as without
which a man cannot walk wisely, circumspectly, and profitably, as Gods
servants ought to do. And this redeeming of our time is, by apprehending
Redeeming of time, what.
wisely all those good opportunities (before specified) which the LORD presents
unto us for our own and others good. It is taken for Merchants and other
Chapmen, who knowing the benefit of such and such commodities, will watch their
seasons, Marts, Markets, Faires, days of return and negotiation, and suffer
none to buy them out of their hands. So wise should Christians be for the good
of their souls, and doing good in their times. And, whereas precious
opportunities have been lost, the only redeeming of time for such is, to
amend their pace, double their diligence, and do the more good in the time
remaining.

CHAP. II. Of the preciousnesse of time.
IT is true: our time is short and vain, even as a day; and by our sin it is
full of vanity and vexation of spirit: yet withal, it is most precious, and if
it be well employed, it is a gainful day. Moses makes so much account of
days, that he desires God to teach him in the numbering Psalm. 90. 12. On which
Text these notes were delivered.
of them. And wise men scorn to fall a numbering pinnes and points, and such
like trifles. We number things of value. Men tell money after their father: and
if there be a small piece of suspected coin, they touch, and try, and weigh,
and will be sure of the currence of it: reason teaching them sensibly, that
mistaking brings an apparent loss. So for our days, times, and opportunities
of good, the Lord teaches to weigh them, and be well advised before we part
with them, and not exchange them without something answerable to their worth.

Even the dim light of Nature and common experience teaches men to set a
dear rate and reckoning of time, for some outward profit to be gotten by it.
One utters his Apophthegme, No day without a line, Nulla dies sine li^i^^.
and shows a day is so special a commodity, as he that is not a gainer by it,
is unworthy to live it through. Another complains, Alas I have Titu^
Vespasian.
lost a day, being much grieved at night, that he had done no good that day. It
seems he esteemed time excellent, and some excellent thing to be attained in
it.

The husbandman observes his seasons accurately, and it is his wisdom so to
reckon of his seasons, as that the Seed-time slip him not before he has sown,
nor his harvest come upon him before he be ready; and this he watches and
provideth for, because he sees these times yielding him again and increase
which he will not lose. The like of the Merchant and all other occupiers: they
know not the place only where, but their season when their commodities may be
had at best hand, and will not come short in times of their chief return:
they will be sure the ships shall not be gone, before their packs be ready: and
all because they see an income and increase of outward profit. What shall we
say of the Usurer, who has found too easy a trade to be good and lawful? he
lives by selling days, and keeps such an exact account of them, as he can tell
what his money will make to a minute.

And if nature teaches time to be precious, surely grace much more: Moses and
David, by better principles, saw much more good might be got by time, then
they: the one here preferring this petition before many heavenly requests: the
other afraid to lose the least particle of time but would contend with the Sun
in early rising, to praise God, and often prevented it. Early in the morning
do Psalm. 119. 137, 148.
I cry, and mine eyes, eyes prevent the morning watch. And, what advantage
might we make of our time, who are (...). Apud Plut. in Ant. Times
preciousnesse, wherein. 1 Psalm. 63. 3.
in Christ, and watch by a clearer light and have our time fitted to the state
of the Gospel. Quest. Wherein stands the price of time?

Answ. We may gain Gods favor and love, which is better then life it self.
In which sense it is called tht pay of grace, because in this day we gain the
knowledge of God in Ieus Christ w^^ is eternal life, Ioh. 17. 3.

Secondly, We may gain assuance 2
of salvation, which is worth all diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Whence the time of
the Gospel is called the day of visitation, the acceptable time, the day of
salvation; that we should not consider it in the fleeting vanity of time, but
in the blessed use and employment of it.

3 In this short and painful time 3 Mat. 6. 20.
we may as well treasure in heaven, as rich worldlings do in earth: only if
in this our day we can know the time of our visitation.

4 Acknowledging this our 4
time, by thrifty husbanding it we may gain a great estate in grace, to be
rich in knowledge, in faith, and in all good works; to which we are invited by
the parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. Traffic till I come, And what think
we? is the Masters absence, for eating, drinking, gaming, and breaking out into
all manner of riot, and not rather for employment, and occupying with the
Talent, that a man being faithful a small time in small things, may be made
ruler of much?

5 In this our seed-time we may 5
gain the assurance of a blessed harvest. If we sow to the Spirit, we Gal.
6. 8.
shall reap of it eternal life. And what if we go forth in tears and
tempests? yet must we not neglect to sow: the Husbandman will sow in a
storm, or shower: the sorrow shall pass as a storm, but he shall bring his
sheaves with joy.

6 We may gain a ready and 6
comfortable account, to which we know not how soon we shall be called: and
our chief use of the present time must be, to do it with joy. The unjust
steward was commended, who Lnke 16.
knowing he was to be no longer steward, thought it time to provide for
himself while he might. His wisdom was commended, not his injustice.

CHAP. III. Showing whence the skill comes to prize and improve time aright.
TO number our days may seem God alone teaches, rightly to prize time.
easy, and soon done: yet is no such plain point of knowledge, but of
singular skill, which none but God can teach. Moses himself, a man of greatest
reach, and learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, the man of God, an
holy man, a friend of God, can neither teach himself this skill, nor any other
of Gods people, but goes to God to be taught; who challenges to be the God
hearing prayer, and in the want of Wisdom has appointed his servants to come
and ask it of him. Iam. 1. 6.

And if we consider, we shall easily find, that nothing in the world can make
men wise, without the special teaching and grace of God. Not nature.


Nature teaches it not. Never did natural man attain this skill, to benefit
himself by his own or others frailty. The voice of nature rather is, Let us
eat and drink, for Esa. 22. 13.
to morrow we shall die. And that speech of David in temptation is the speech
of nature, In my prosperity I said, I Psa. 30. 6.
shall never be moved, though it see taller and stronger oaks shaken, and
overturned every day. Or how comes it to pass, that children seeing their
Fathers mortality, can yet live in their Fathers sins? Who is it, that has
not something to show of his deceased Parents? either lands, or houses, or
jewels, or garments, or some other remembrance: by which he might be put in
mind of their and his mortality: And yet how few make this use of it for
reformation of their lives, or bestirre themselves to lay hold on this point of
wisdom for their spiritual advantage? And all, because, as nature cannot
reach it, so they go not to the Sanctuary of God, where only this skill is
attained?

Neither does the sense and experience Not sense.
of a man's own or others mortality teach a man thus to number his days, if
the Lord instruct him not. For in Moses time the plague had often broken out
against the people, and licked them up by thousands and ten thousands: yet
could not all this get within their hearts, unless the Lord pleased to carry
it deeper then the sense and impression could.

For if the Word without the Spirit cannot prevail, nor open the ear, much
less can the Works of God. And all see, that if the Ministry be not a
Ministry of the Spirit, it is not 2 Cor. 3. 6.
saving, but a dead letter.

As for experience, that may teach the shortness and uncertainty of life, and
make a man say as David, I am Not experience. Psalm. 39. 12.
a stranger here, as all my fathers were: and every man sees numbers of his
neighbors, friends, kindred, and acquaintance, laid up daily in the house of
death: and this which runs into their senses, can draw out thus much, that
we shall all dye, and death is most certain. But where is this skill of
numbering, urging men by burials and executions to reform their own lives?
where is the living man, that lays this to heart? that hence labors to
make God his portion, before himself have no more portion of all things done
under the Eccles 9. 6.
Sun? or that stirs up himself to remember his Creator in the days of his
youth, before his sun be dark, and his 12. 1.
pitcher be broken at the Well: What is the reason, but because Gods Grace and
teaching goes not with sense and experience? he has spoken to the eyes and
ears, but not to the heart: and nothing that a man sees or hears, or that
is before him, can make him wiser, unless God nurture him, and teach him to
profit thereby.

All which must draw us before God daily with that petition of Moses in our
mouths, Lord teach us so to number our days, that wemay apply our hearts unto
wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12.

CHAP. IIII. Corollaries out of things foregoing.
TIme being short and precious, it were good to make account of 1 Application.
it, for which account must be made unto God: and ever hold it in thy hand, or
let it go, for something better then it self; as wise Chapmen part with their
money.

Or if thou have lost any time, redeem 2
it again, Ephesians. 5. 16. Recover it by a price; as when we lose a thing of
value, we will give much to receive it again. Exchange those lusts, by which
thou have lost thy time, with better courses: Christ mourned, that Jerusalem
had lost her day, Luke 19. 42. and how should we bewail the loss of many
days?

Be more careful of time for the future, and waste not prodigally so 3
precious a commodity. Consider and meditate. 1 Motives to be sparing of time.


First, what reason to be niggardly of wealth, and prodigal of time, whereas
all the wealth in the world cannot purchase one day to live longer?

Secondly, why will thou not know 2
the worth of time before the want of time, as the most do, who let it run
irrecoverably from between their fingers, and never know what they lose, till
it be too late?

Thirdly, why should thou not spare before the bottom, before the 3
vessel be drawn out, whereas thou can as easily draw back the sun in
his course, as call back an hour of time when it is past?

Fourthly, were it not more wisdom, 4
to set an high price on time in earth, then in hell? Where (as Bernard says)
time were a good commodity, and the traffic of time most gainefull: where for
one day a man would give ten thousand worlds if he had them.

Fifthly, why do we complain of the 5 V. Stob. c. 98.
shortness of our lives, and not of the loss of time, seeing there is none
but has more time then he uses well?

Sixthly, why do we put any time 6
into the account of our lives, but that Simonides. Diu fuit, non din vixit
Damascen.
which we carefully pass, and well, spend? seeing the heathen could say, He
was long, he did not live long: and one Barlaam being asked of Iosaphat how old
he was, answered, Five and forty years old; to whom Iosaphat replied, thou
seem to be seventy: true (quoth he) if you reckon ever since I was borne:
but I count not those, which were spent in vanity. If we should thus reckon
the lives of some old men, we might esteem men of seventy years scarce ten
days old.

Lastly, consider how God in justice sometime cuts off those, who 7
make no reckoning, nor set price on their time, as they ought: Job 15. 32. the
wicked shall die before he has accomplished his days, and his hand shall be
cut off as the Uine in the bud, that is, young and tender.

All which, together with the preciousnesse of time, should make us careful,
and to do for time as we do Prevent thieves that steal away time.
for things of price; even beware of thieves who would steal it away, as
namely.

First, worldly cares and covetousness, 1
whereby the mind is surcharged and sunk in the gulf of earthlinesse, and
whereby men live as if time were made for nothing but the getting of wealth,
and laying up treasure in Chests, and no time to lay up treasure in heaven, as
our, Savior commands. Oh what a pilfering thief is worldliness, which
engrosseth all the time! The Oxen, the Farm, the Wife, the like vanities take
up the whole man, while the supper of the great King is despised. The thorny
ground choakes all seed.

Secondly, Pleasures and Pastimes, 2
which waste and drive away time, even that precious time which can never be
won again. A woeful thing, that men should devise and dote on Pastimes, seeing
the Scripture speaks of no pastime, but only of passing our time in fear, and
only time well 1 Pet. 1. 17.
past is good pastime. A woeful thing, that professed Christians should dare to
spend half days, whole days, many days together, yea, the days of Gods
solemn worship, in vain sports and pleasures, which rob them of their heart,
wit, time, and grace, that they can scarce willingly afford themselves an hour
in a week to do their souls good in. A fearful snare of Satan there is in
it, and a sorcery in gaining, that holds a man a willing prisoner to his lusts
so many hours together, that he would think himself in woeful bondage to be
held the hundredth part of the time in any good duty.

Thirdly, Eating, drinking, and feasting. This eats up much of our 3
time, and makes lean and starven souls. For, while men drink in delights,
how is wisdom banished out of the soul? how is the time insensibly stolen
away? besides that these cast a man into excessive sleeping, by day as well as
by night, wherein he passes his time as in a shadow of death.

These, and many other pilferers of time must a good husband of time watch
against: as idleness, roving thoughts, bad companionship, distractions, and
unprofitable employments; al^ which set themselves to steal away our time and
hearts.

CHAP. V. Admonition to four sorts of people.
THe doctrine of times usefulness Fourefold admonition. 1 To young people. Vt
in minore corporis habitu potest homo esse persectus: sic et minori tem. poris
modo esse vita perfecta. Seaeca l. 2. Epist. 93.
and preciousnesse may (in particular instances) be specially applied.

First, unto youth. Young men and maidens, who think it a fine life to look
upon their rising sun, must consider what price they set on their days. Why
do thou that art young, account thy life more precious then an old man's? is
it because thou art in thy strength and vigor, which in him is past? If these
were the price, the life of a brute beast should be more precious, then of any
man: for the beast has more sensible and violent pleasures then he, and is
less restrained in them. But the price in truth stands in this, that now thou
have good wit, fresh senses, and all the powers of nature quick, to be the
servants of grace, and means to enrich thee in godliness; wherein thou art
before the aged, if thou know thy season. Now examine thy self: Have I
after Saint John's precept, or do I use (...) ^^rength to overcome the world, 1
Ioh. 2. 1^
a^^ mine own lusts which fight against my soul? Whether has grace seasoned
my young years, that if I should be taken away young, I should be fit for God?
Whether have I sowed to the flesh, or to the spirit? If to the flesh, I must
look to reap destruction: for, as a man sows, so must he reap. And why
does God continue my youth, and give me all the powers and quickness of
nature, and strength, and beauty? What, to fight for sin? was this the
Covenant I entered into in Baptism? and when I have done, will it be a good
answer to say, I did but as other youth did?

How stands the case with me? do not I see my mortality in many of mine own
degree? young men and maids cut off in their vigor and beauty? see I not
youth to be as uncertain as age? yea, the flower of youth to be but as the
flower of the field? How had the case stood with me, if God had summoned me,
and cut me off, when he cut off such and such of my years and acquaintance? Oh
therefore I will now remember my Creator in the days of my youth, and grow to
this point of wisdom, while I have means to be the better for them.

Say not, I am young, and God looks not for much at my hands: for God accepts
no man's person, because old or young, but according to the knowledge, faith,
virtue, subjection, and grace, he accepts both young and old: which how little
it is considered in our youth, is too plain and woeful.

Secondly, to those of more years, 2 To the aged.
whom young ones look on for examples, as such as should be more expert in the
word of life, and should have more experience, as they have had more warning
then the other. It behooves them to consider, how they have prized and
husbanded their time. Let me ask an ancient man or woman: Why has God given
thee more years then those that are younger? is it not, that thou should
exceed them as far in piety and grace, as thou do in years? and also in
means? and to be an ensample to them, in making a good account of both?

Paul puts the Colossians in mind, Col. 1. 21.
what they were in times past: and Peter, to bring the Jews to shame Pet. 4. 3.
for that they had formerly done, tells them, that it was sufficient they had
spent the time past in the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness,
lusts, drunkenness, gluttony, revellings, and abominable idolatries. So every
man of years should recount his time past: What, have I lived thus long,
^ainly, sinfully, and earthly? Have I all this time little thought of Gods
ways, of treasuring in heaven, of my latter end, and of my reckoning? Oh
therefore, so much time as remains in the flesh, I will have care to spend
according to the will of God.

To this end, consider to whom Peter and Paul wrote: to new converts, who had
lately heard of God and his Gospel. But thou have had daily means, wast bred
up in them, wast in the cradle entered into the Covenant, and daily mustred and
reckoned amongst Gods servants: In all these years thou have had a great many
talents and receipts, many blessed opportunities, and it will be expected thou
should be so far from living in lusts, as to bring in a good return of
knowledge, virtue, and grace. It is not now sufficient to thee, but too too
much, a great shame for thee, to be so long, and under such means, and yet
neglect only the one thing necessary. Yet how many, after so many years, can
scarce think of any one thing backwards, soundly to comfort them, but all
things may justly cause them to hang down their heads? How many riots,
surfets, disorders in their lives? Night and day too little to spend in the
effusion of their lusts: What escapes them unabused to Gods dishonor, their
own harm, and spoil of the creature? What waste of time, thoughts, and
means, in pride, gaming, and the like? Can there be more horrible drunkards and
adulterers among Turks and infidells, then among us?

Let the conclusion then be, that though by examination in many years thou
find many errors, and much time lost, yet bewail what is past, as
sufficient, and too much, and be careful for time to come: The only way to
have thy sins blotted out, and be able to hold up thy head in the day of
reckoning.

Thirdly, To those that (beside 3. To the rich.
their years) are great and rich, They are double bound to this duty, because
they have double means and opportunity. For being freed from such cares and
distractions, which poor men are folded in, it is not that they may be the freer
to wallow in their lusts, but that they may intend so much the more to piety
and the making up of their account. A poor man cannot hear, read, confer so
much: he has not so many spare-houres in a day, but must labor perhaps his
twelve hours, whereas the rich has five, or six, or more, and some are freed
most of the day: such therefore must think to give up their account after six
or seven or twelve hours release, to hear, read, confer, and pray
proportionably, and so have six or seven, or twelve times so much grace, as
they have so much more time and opportunity. And oh that you could bring in
such a reckoning, as more hours, more grace!

Another help that rich men have, is the having portion and means to help
themselves into heavenly habitations: Luke 16. 9.
and therefore to make a good account, they must see they be not only not
worse for their wealth, as the most are, but better. Let them see how they have
strengthened their lusts by riches, sweld in pride, bathed themselves in
pleasure: whereas they ought to bring in their reckoning, how they have
inquired into the necessity of the poor, to clothe, harbor and feed them,
that themselves may be clothed and harbored in heaven: and how they have done
good, diabounded in good works to the stributed, yea, praise of God. This is
another care, then to devise how to spend them upon lusts, and by them shut
heaven upon themselves.

Fourthly, For the poor: however 4. To the poor.
the Lord has dealt unto them a weak estate, and they may think themselves
hardly used, as wanting, means to make up their reckoning yet are they not
exempted from the practice of this point of wisdom: And for their
encouragement let them know, that though they want those hours, and that
wealth which the rich have, yet may they bring in as good a reckoning as the
best: Be thou never so poor, thou have the Word of God, and all the public
means; thou have also some private means, thy family-exercises: and hence
thou may treasure knowledge, and nourish good conscience: the case being
with thee, as those that gathered Manna, every man even to the poorest gathered
for his necessity, Exodus 16. 18.
and whosoever gathered, had no want. Neither can poverty prejudice salvation,
so much as wealth: for, to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, and who
receive the Gospel, but poor weak ones?

Object. But I can give nothing.

Answ. Yes, as much as the rich. Have thou a desire? can thou pray? have thou
bowels of love in thee, and compassion in thy heart? have thou commended his
comfort unto God, whom thou would, but can not comfort? Even this shall
stand on thine head as a sufficient relief, and be returned abundantly. The
poor Widow cast in a mite or two, and it was more then all the superfluity of
the rich: the least gift was the best, because it had the best affection; and
let the rich want this, their work has no reward. In one word, let riches, and
poverty meet with like affection, the latter gets as far into heaven as the
former.

CHAP. VI. Motives wisely to employ and improve our time.
FIrst, whatsoever thy hand finds Motives. 1.
to do, do it with all thy might: for there is no wisdom nor counsel in
Eccle. 9. 10.
the grave. That which thou confessest must be done, do it diligently and
seasonably. What a madness is it, to riot out the time which is not ours to
dispose, but in the hands of God? And how know thou, what a day may bring
forth?

Secondly, every creature condemns him that knows not his time 2 ^cr. 8. 7.
(...):
and season: the Crane, Storke, and Swallow know their times, and the little
Emmet likewise. Good trees bring fruits in season, Psalm. 1. 3. And we see how a
natural man observes (...) tempore urato negotin. Prove. ct. 24. 25.
seasons for every thing. What a fondness was it for Felix to put off the
matter of Religion, having Paul before him, till another time? did he know that
ever the same opportunities would be offered? When the Israelites knew that
the river Iordane would be dried up, they would not lose that opportunity, but
hasted to pass over, Josh. 4. 10. It had been no wisdom to have stayed till
the morrow, nor one hour longer for as soon as the soales of the Priests feet
were on dry land, Iordane reflowed

Thirdly, consider the benefit. How 3
rich might the soul be by time well watehed and spent, and by awaking the
heart continually to take hold of God? how plentiful in good works? how many
fervent prayers might be stored up in heaven, if men would stir up their
desires hereto? how ready might they be to give up a cheerful and
comfortable reckoning, and receive a large retribution.

Fourthly, consider thou carriest 4 Vnius certe diei in dolentia magnum lucrum
est.
mortality in thy nature ever about thee, as Uriah in David's letters. Thou have
no privilege above other, no lease of thy life, death not bound to give thee
warning: and therefore while it is day, do thy work, and do it to the
uttermost: while the day of Gods grace and thy life lasts, walk and work.
Now is the Sunshine of the Gospel: to Psalm. 95. 7.
day hear his voice. Thy Sun also yet lasts, while thou have life, health,
youth, memory, and strength of body, treasure up instructions and comforts.

Earthly men care for age, and natural contentments: but do thou get a better
stock to spend upon, which will never fail thee: then shall the latter days,
and days of sickness be passed with more content and quietness: and an happy
death must needs succeed a godly and careful course of life.

Fifthly, consider how much of thy life thou have wasted out already, and 5
that the patience of God still spares thee to recover what thou have lost.
Think it now too much, that thouhast spent so much time in the lusts of the
Gentiles, and now enjoyne thy self a constant task of prayer, reading,
meditating, reckoning: and do it to purpose, not by halves, not for form: for
then thy other practices will be answerable. And for time to come labor to
set before thee in every particle of time an image of eternity; this life being
but as a moment, on which Note.
eternity depends.

Sixthly great is the danger of omitting 6
and slipping this season. How can they be acceptable to God, who refuse his
acceptable time? Is not his Esa. 49. 8.
Axe laid to the root of the Tree, to hew it down, if it be still
unprofitable? And does not the Master of the evil servant come in an hour,
which he knows not?

Oh think often of the reckoning and account of your time, and thus resolve:
Oh how far am I behind with God for my time! such an unthrift I have been
of it, as I cannot give account of one day among a thousand: Now therefore
while I have time, I will live every day as if it were my last day, and do
that every day which I would have found in my hands on my dying day. I will
forget that which is behind, and hasten to that which is before: and, after
the example of the Saints, the nearer I know I am to lay down this Tabernacle,
2 Pet. 1. 14, 15.
the more diligent will I be to do my self and others good: that, as the good
servant, my Master may never come but find me well-doing, and so take me up
into his own joy.

FINIS.
THE HOLY WAR, Proclaimed in a Visitation Sermon.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 4. No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of
this life, because he would please him who has chosen him to be a soldier.
THe parts of the Chapter are two: one hortatory, to the 16 verse: The other
dehortatory, thence to the end.

In the third verse the Apostle exhorts Connection.
Timothy to suffer affliction; and adds a reason drawn from his calling,
because he was a Soldier, a place of pains, of peril, and molestation: Upon
which occasion he makes a description of a soldier by two properties in the
verse read unto you including two duties more, which secretly he commends to
Timothies practice, and in him to every faithful Minister: 1 Not to entangle
himself with secular affairs: 2 To please his Captain.

But what have we to do with war? we are men of Peace, Ministers of the Object.
Gospel of peace, and expected not this day an Herald of Arms, or a Trumpet
to call us into the field: and does not your Text forbid us to be entangled
with such secular affairs?

First, Comparisons serve for illustration, Answ. 1. The use of comparisons.
and conviction. For the first: high points are made plain by them: for we
cannot see the Sun in his own body, in water we may: and therefore it is, that
Christ makes us understand our spiritual union, by the Vine and branches. For
the second: high 2
spirits are plained and checked by them: and therefore Christ, when he saw
that neither John's austerity, nor his own lenity would a whit move the Jews
to amendment, especially the Scribes and Pharisees, he compares them to little
froward and sullen children, whom neither piping nor mourning could prevail
withal, Mat. 11. 17.

This serves notably for both: and it is an argument a minori ad majus, If
earthly soldiers do thus, a shame for spiritual not to lay aside
distractions, and seek to please their Captain.

Secondly, our War is a most honorable 2 2 Timothy 2. 3
War: We war not after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. We are soldiers of Jesus
Christ, as may be seen in the former verse. We are not pressed into the field
by a temporal Commander, nor stand in the face of bodily enemies, nor arm our
selves with carnal weapons, verse 4. But we fight the Lords battles, stand
under CHRIST'S Colors, contend against spiritual wickednesses, covered with
Gods armor of proof, and having our Captain in the field before us for
encouragement, and with us for victory. Why should we be heavy to be led out
after him? Good Vriah would not go home to his house, because his Lord Ioab
did lie in the field: and if our Lord Jesus be in the field, what should we
do at home?

Thirdly, Peace is dulce nomen, but 3
especially that peace with God, and men, and our own consciences, whereof we
are Preachers. But as peace is procured by war, and the end of war is
peace, so we can never procure or preserve this peace, unless by war we
keep under the enemies of peace: so that preaching of war I aim at peace,
and to hear of a rumor of war, which has no other hurt then to establish
our peace, is profitable.

Fourthly, a good and teachable heart will learn something from 4
every thing. Christ from earthly things taught heavenly: and not any thing but
it ministered him matter of instruction, the sun, bread, water, other. And so
must we, as from this day of Visitation consider the day of Gods Visitation,
wherein we shall be countable of that we hear, or speak, or do this day.

No man that warreth entangleth What this entanglement is not.
himself. Soldiers must be free from distraction. Not according to the
glossses of Papists, who say,

First, tstat Ministers must be free 1
from marriage. If marriage be a distraction or defilement, as they say it is,
then is it not a Sacrament. Besides, the Prophets, Aposties, Bishops,
Presbyters, in and after the Apostles time: were married.

Secondly, That they must be Monks, and live a part, shut up from 2
the world. But how then shall they be examples to the flock? 1 Pet. 5. 3.

Thirdly, that they must be voluntary beggars, which is a state of perfection,
and freedom from encombrance. But 3
with greater encumbrances, the Apostles had famililies, and Bishops must be
such as can rule their own families, wives, and children: and in old Canons
the proper goods of a Minister must be distinct from the Churches goods.

Fourthly, it is not meant, that he must not have any knowledge in humane 4.
affairs: for then how shall he resolve Cases of Conscience, and compound
Controversies, which are Appendices of his calling?

But this is the meaning: He must What it is.
abstain from such things as hinder his Calling, the course of his public
Ministry, for these causes:

First, because of the greatness of his function, whence S. Paul says, Who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16


Secondly, Because of his own weakness: being an earthen vessel, though
filled, with heavenly treasure. 2 Cor. 4. 7.


Thirdly, Because of the contrariety of the Word and the world: no man can
serve these two Masters.

Out of the Title or Appellation of Mat. 6. 24.
a Minister we may learn that,

Every faithful Minister is a soldier, warring under Jesus Christ; Doctr.
Good Ministers are Christ's soldiers.
not only as he is a Christian, but also as he is a Minister. As a Christian,
he begins his strife in Baptism, and ends with life. As a Minister, it begins
so soon as ever he sets himself faithfully to discharge his duty. In two
respects.
Christ no sooner inaugurated, but begins combat with the devil. As a
Christian, the place of battle is the world: as a Minister, the place is his
special standing and office in the Church. As a Christian, his chief strife
is with himself, his reason with his reason, his will with his will, and every
part with other: as a Minister, his greatest strife is without him, fighting
with the corrupt reason and wills of the wicked angels and men.

The Apostle especially aymeth at this latter, and so must we. A minister by
virtue of his spe^iall calling is a soldier of God; and, not a common one, but
a leader.

First, His Ministry is a warfare: The warfare it self
a special calling set apart to batter the walls of the Devils kingdom, and
maintain Christ in the right of his kingdom: so that every good Minister must
imitate Nehemiahs soldiers, hold the sword in one hand, and the trowel in the
other; fight with one hand, and build with the other.

Secondly, his weapons are Ministerial Weapons.
gifts, of sanctification, and of his function; the use of which is, to
stablish truth, and convince error. His contention stands not in the exercise
of the strength of the body, but of the graces of the mind, faith, prayers,
and tears. Nor his victory in showing greatness and headiness of Spirit, but
in modesty, charity, humility, patience, and suffering. Christian fortitude is
in ferendo, non in feriendo: not in smiting, but suffering.

Thirdly, his enemies are, Satan himself who stands at his right hand Enemies.
Zech. 3. 1.
to hinder him, as Iehoshua in his Ministry; and all the bands of Satan, or
troops in which his chief power consists, as idolatry, empiety sin, error,
the stubbornnes and pride of man's heart, which ever resists the truth of God;
and all such persons as are more special agents and negotiators for Satan, as
first, Heretics, who are soldiers, but the devils Champions, and under 1
his pay. Among them all, that which we must most oppose, is the heresy of
Popery, which has many great and resolute Defenders; who are soldiers too,
but not of Jesus Christ, but of Antichrist, his arch enemy: and yet, because
Popery should be manifest to be the mystery of iniquity, under the colors of
Christ it fights against 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Christ. Secondly, openly wicked and 2
profane persons, who under a profession of Christianity stick not to live as
heathens, following the fashions of the world, and trading in the lusts of
their own hearts. Thirdly, secretlywicked men and hypocrites, who in 3
show profess Christianity also, but in heart cleave to the world, and their
own lusts, as Judas did. Fourthly, Apostates and revolters, traitors unto 4
Christ, who after they have taken his pressemony and good wages, turn into
the enemies camp. Fifthly schismatickes 5
and Separatists, who are not able to distinguish between the City and the
wall, the body and the disease, the face and the spot, id est. between
substance and ceremony, and with as great heat fight against our Church, as
against a Synagogue of Antichrist.

Against all these, as every Christian else, so especially the Minister must
contend for the faith, which was once given to the Saints, Jude 3. But one rule
must be observed in all these, We must intend paecem cum hominibus, cum vitijs
bellum: peace with the men, war with the vices.

Fourthly, they never want the just and lawful causes of a necessary Causes of
war. Bellum benestu^ tur^i paci praeferendum est. Demosth. 1 2
war: as First, to suppress spiritual enmities, as the Judges did the
heathens. Secondly, to deliver the oppressed: such as are taken captives of
Satan and sin, and laden with the bolts of lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 26. So Abraham
rescued Lot, and David his two wives. Thirdly, to recover things wrongfully
taken: Gods 3
image, holiness, righteousness, grace, and the Kingdom of glory. Fourthly,
war is publica quaedam vindicta: 4
so Israel revenged the wrong done to the Levites wife. Fifthly, breaking of
leagues is a just cause of war: 5
as 2 Kings 24. 1, 2. when Iehoiakim rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, God sent
against him the Chaldees, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites. So David served
Hanun.

Now if the Ministry be a warfare, Use. 1. Ad agendum nati milites. Cicero.
Dangerous warfare of Ministers. 1. Israel going into Egypt had no enemies: but
into Canaan, never free.
certainly it is no calling of ease; but he that is to enter into this
calling, must look for labor, pains, peril, disgrace, persecution, and, as
a good soldier of Jesus Christ, suffer affliction. Never was there a more
difficult and doubtful war undertaken.

First, in respect of the adversaries, Satan and all wicked men, who
continually bend their forces against a godly Minister. Christ was no sooner
baptized, but tempted: nor Paul sooner converted, but persecution arose. They
are hosts iurati, the unholy, and yet that that calls it self the holy
league.

Secondly, In respect of the invincible 2
holds they are to assault; even the kingdom and throne of Satan, which he
has been fortifying almost 6000. years, and has so entrenched himself in
the world, as only the power of God is able to cast down his towers. Besides,
what pains is required to subdue the stubborn heart of man, which stands
diametrally opposite to the Gospel, and will not easily yield up it self? With
what sweat and labor are those high thoughts, that are 2 Cor. 10. 5
erected against god, brought under?

Thirdly, In respect of the aids 3
and fortifications, which the adverse party daily receives from Allies and
Confederates. The world (the devils faithful Armor-bearer) sets upon a
Minister on the right hand, with entisements, preferments, and encombrances,
and ministereth a thousand occasions to call him from his business, that the
devil may make havocke of the flock: On the left hand it besets him with
persecutions (if the former succeed not) as Joseph's Mistress first used fair
entising speeches, and, these not prevayling, fell foul with him presently.

Fourthly, in respect of the Ministers 4
function and standing. He is a leader in the foreward, and forlorn hopes,
that must stand the first encounter with fresh, fierce, and furious enemies.
The chief aim of an Army is against the standard bearer: and David knew what
it was to set Vriah in the first rank.

No marvel then, if the Apostle would first of all arm Timothy against
afflictions. What do we soldiers dream of ease and delicacy? What stand we
upon sweat and pains, who are called to hazard our blood? What, will we part
with blood, and not with sweat? He mistakes his Cowards delight more in plumes
of feathers, then martial arms 01 service.
mark, who thinks the Ministry only a matter of maintenance and preferment:
And people also, that think it an easy life to be a good Minister. A soldier
must stand in continual danger of his life, yea to the loss of his life: as
Paul, whose life was not dear Act. 20. 24.
to him, that he might fulfill his course with joy. Look for rest and ease,
when the field is won. In the mean time, the soldier of Christ must do
Militi multa agenda, patienda plura.
many things, and suffer more. And as the marks of blows and wounds are
truest notes of a soldier, so are the marks of Christ, of a good Minister.

Again, if Ministers be soldiers, Use 2.
let them (with other parts of Christian Armor) put on these Ministerial
Ministerial weapons to be put on. 1 Courage.
weapons.

First, courage and resolution. For, strength is for the war: namely, of the
mind. They must not be timorous and fearful, as most of Gedeons soldiers (a
nation whereof would do no good in this war) but courageous, like leaders and
Captains. The Proverb is, Tutiores cervi duce leone, quam leones duce cervo:
It is more likely, that Hearts will get victory, with a lion to their leader,
then lions with a leading Heart. Joshua a Captain of the Lords battles must be
of good courage, cha. 1. 7. So must Ministers be bold and confident in every
good cause. And as a soldier goes out with an hostile mind against his
enemies: so must we against sins and vices. Number. 25. 17. vex the Midianites,
and smite them, let them know you are enemies, because they evil entreated
you. But alas! the Midianites know not many Ministers to be their enemies, they
are so cowardly and faint-hearted.

This valor and prowess will keep a Minister from recoyling and retyring,
and make him say with Nehemiah, Neh. 6 11.
Should such a man as I flee? should I be weak as another man? no, I will dye
rather. Pulchrior in praelio occisus miles, quam fuga salvus. Better be slain
in the bed of honor, then be safe by running away.

Secondly, wisdom and counsel. 2 Counsel. (...). Eurypid.
Solomon advises, by counsel to undertake war: and Ecc. 9. 16. 18. better is
wisdom then strength: as also the light of nature could say. Counsel with God:
1. With the word, that teaches thy fingers to fight. 2. By prayer: as 1 Samuel
17. 45. David went against the Why should good friends be set at variance?
Discendo ac ducente deo flamm^m inter et ho^^es Progredior. And then, Dant tela
locum flammaeque recedum. Aeneas.
Philistine in the name of the Lord. Fight with sword and shield, word and
prayer. Some wish a praying Ministry, not preaching. Plutarch in the life of
Paulus Aemilius shows, how the heathens commended the prayers of a captain
that prayed for victory, with his sword in his hand, and fighting called for
aid; and condemned them that withdrew from the battle, under color of
praying for good success: because the gods accept not the prayers of Cowards;
and because they were unreasonable prayers. Unreasonable they thought it, that
he who shoots not, should hit the mark, or that he should win victory, who
abides not the battle. Thirdly, consult with expert soldiers, by diligent
reading the Scriptures, Expositors, Fathers, Controversies: these will instruct
a man, which weapon to use, how and when, and agreeing with Scripture are like
the sling and stone, by which David overcame Goliath.

Thirdly, sobriety. What good use 3 Continence.
in war can be made of a drunken and intemperate soldier? he runs into the
field without his weapons, or rather not able to bear up himself, much less
to overthrow his enemy. If he strike, he is as ready to strike and wound his
next fellow, as any enemy. How great reason had the Apostle to charge Titus,
that Ministers should Tit. 1. 7, 8.
be temperate, sober, no drinkers, that is, affectedly and excessively, either
of wine or tobacco?

And one branch of sobriety is contentation with a man's estate: not to be
covetous, but take up the lesson of John Baptist (to the soldiers that asked
him, what they should do) Luke 3. be content with your wages. A little will
serve a soldier, much is a burden. Roman Captains were poote themselves, and
enriched their soldiers: insomuch as Publicola, Valerius, and Menenius Agrippa
(great soldiers) kept not so much as to discharge their funerals. They would
enrich the State, not themselves. So we the Church.

Fourthly, conscience, and religious 4 Conscience.
affections: Deu. 23. 9. when thou go out against thine enemies, keep thee
from all wickedness: for the Lord walks in the midst of the Camp. These
soldiers must not only have moral virtues, as Caesar and Pompey who were
rarely gifted, but Theological, godliness and holiness; on these stands the
prosperity of this war: Deu. 28. 3. He that has so many enemies incamping
against him, had not need make God his enemy too: nor be his own enemy, as
Bellonaes Priests who used to lance and cut themselves like the Baalites. A
soldier Tertul. Apologet. cap. 9.
standing in the face of his enemy must never be in such an estate, as wherein
he dares not dye: no more must a Minister. And besides, a wicked Minister
weakeneth the whole army, as Achan did the Israelites.

Of such soldiers, thus qualified, we may justly say, One shall chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, Deu. 32. 30. Because they go in
the armor, strength, cause, and name of God; they shall surely prevail.

Thirdly, if Ministers be soldiers, serving in the wars of Christ, then Use
3. All must join against ^he common enemy. Divide, et impera. August.
must they learn to unite their forces against the common enemy. United forces
prevail much. It is a Maxim in policy to sow seeds of discord, and cast bones
of dissension amongst enemies: for a Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand: discord in a City makes of one City two: and the same does mutiny among
soldiers, it makes of one Army two. Faction among soldiers was the overthrow
of Jerusalem, which, while they agreed among themselves, was so invincible and
impregnable, as no man on earth would have thought, that ever the enemy should
have set foot within the gates of Jerusalem, as Lam. 4. 12. but when the fire
of mutiny and faction was kindled in Sion, that one slew another, and burnt the
Granaries and storehouses, then were the foundations of it devoured; that Titus
himself, viewing the City being won, cried out, We have had (...).
God to fight with us, and if God had not fought against them, they had never
been foiled.

The light of nature could say, that the thickest wall of a City in peace, and
the safest rampart in war, is unity.

Would to God we that are led by the life of grace, would all labor to rear
up and thicken this wall of the Church, the City of God. We cannot be all one
in judgment, having diverse gifts both for kind and measure: but we may be one
in affection, and must. We cannot all think one thing: but we must all embrace
charity.

Would God that wholesome law, called (...), or immemory were Justin Hist. 5.
brought in, that all former heats and injuries were forgotten, and buried and
rotten in the dust of Oblivion. Let the Midianites thrust every man his sword
into his fellows side: but let our swords, and pens, and censures, and
arguments be sharpened against the Popish Midianites.

Fourthly, if Ministers be soldiers, Use. 4. Honor due o Miniers, hreefold.
then people owe unto them double, yea treble honor. First, of reverence and
respect. Commanders in the field are in places of honor. Elias was honored as
the horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof. It is a sign of secure times,
when soldiers arenot set by. How necessary a Captain is in time of war, a
Physician in time of sickness, a reaper in time of harvest; so necessary is
the Minister. Secondly, of prayer for their forces: while Moses held up his
hands Israel prevailed. Thirdly, of maintenance: that they be not entangled
with worldly affairs: 1 Cor. 9. 2, no man goes to war, of his own cost. A
labourer deserves wages, and the soldier his pay. And seeing Tithes are
appointed by law, as the most equal pay, the Law of God is, that the laborers
hire stay not in thy hands all night. And the people shall find the fruit,
when without distraction the Minister does apply himself unto them. But
nowadayes, many that tend the flocks, scarce taste of the milk. And pity it
is on the other side, if people justly complain of their Minister, saying, Oh
he is an hard man, he reapes where he sowes not, and gathers where he scatters
not; he takes pay, but serves not in the field; feeds not the flock, but feeds
upon it; preyes upon it, seldom prays with it.

Fifthly, if Ministers be soldiers, we Use. 5. In re militari nunquam anar chia
coleratur. Plato de leg. 12.
must learn to keep our ranks, and not run out of our own array and
standing. The camp is the soldiers City: the safest, fittest, and most
honorable place for him: and an army out of order is as a body, whose members
are out of joint, which can neither march nor fight. No captain can in reason
command one soldier to two services in several places of the field at once,
nor can one soldier serve in two fields at one time. God likewise is not so
unreasonble. And it is a sin for Jonas, who should go to Ninive, to flee to
Tarshish.

What have Priests to do to be Popes, heads of the Church, warriers, and
welders of the two swords? Christ gave Peter a key, not a scepter. What have
the Jesuits to do, to meddle with all State-matters in Christendom, to dispose
and transplant Kingdoms? which meddling of theirs in other men's matters has
brought just hatred on them, to be cast out of many nations.

Is Christ's Commission changed? Absolving of men from sins, into absolving
them from civil obedience? Are these Jesuitical Synonimies? I will give thee
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and I will give thee the thrones and
earthly Kingdoms, to set up and depose whom and when you please? Is it all
one, to be a fisher of men, and to fish for Kingdoms?

To come home to our selves: we must hear always, Propter quod venis, hoc
age, Hold this plough. We are called out from home into the field, and set
apart by God to call others out of the world. Why then should we be inordinate
in our care for the world? Aboveall other men, our special calling must not be
entangled with inferior cares. The Levites were of Gods finding, to wait on
the Altar. Why should we entangle ourselves with other men's affairs, as Peter,
Master what shall this man Ioh. 21. 21.
do? Or with contentions and brablings in law, like common barreters? Why
should any be a Minister of peace with Jacobs voice, and a man of war, or a
rough-handed hunter, as Esau was?

What are you, our Governors Commissioners, but sent to see to the keeping of
our ranks and order in this battle? An Order established by Gods word, and
example. When the Church was but in herba, or in the seed, and grew crooked in
Paradise, God was the first Visitor, who set it in order again by the promise.
When it was but in a family, the Patriarchs were Visitors. Jacob in his house
which was then the Church, commanded them to put away their idols, if they
would fear the Lord, Genesis 35. 2. When it was in the Kingdom of the Jews, the
Prophets were Visitors: as Ezekiel. 8. the Prophet went farther. into the Temple,
and still found more abominations. The son of God was the most honorable
Visitor of his Fathers Temple, who made a whip, and cast out buyers and
sellers. The Apostles after him (Act. 15. 36.) were Visitors of the Church, and
were glad to see their order, Coloss. 2. 5. (...): the word signifies the
Array of soldiers, well appointed against the enemy: Upon which words
Chrysostom has an Chrysostom in Col 2. 5.
excellent Gloss, (...).

All good Visitations ever tended to the purging of the Church from idolatry,
urging of men to Gods house and service, the casting out of buyers and sellers,
the driving out of insufficient men, and planting a learned and able Ministry,
the removing of scandalous and hurtful men, as no Leper might come before the
Lord, to stand before his Altar; the repressing of strange and corrupt
Doctrine, which as strange fire might not be offered before the Lord; the
encouragement of the diligent hand, and the censure of open sinners, that
others may fear.

These things set before you, and when the great Visitation-day comes,
wherein righteousness shall be remunerated, and iniquity be forced to hide her
head, if the hills would be persuaded to fall upon her, and hide her, you shall
be remembered in goodness for all the goodness you have done to the house of
God, and the Offices and Officers of it.

Postscript.
FIrst, soldiers must be called, and do all by authority, warranting them to
do things which otherwise were unlawful. To kill, sack, and spoil, without
calling, were murder, robbery, and oppression. Command is the key of war,
whrch else were a Chaos, or Akeldama, a confused field of blood. Apply it to
the Ministry.

Secondly, As Soldiers must be trained, armed, united, honored, and ordered,
so must Ministers, spiritually; and all for the glory of Christ in the Church.
Look at him, who for our good despised ease, and for our example sent not his
servants only, but came himself in person: And a soldier being pressed must
not send a Deputy, but serve in his own person. Or will thou be (as Arnobius)
absque Christo Christianus? a Christian, and a Preacher too, and not for Christ?

Thirdly, As good Leaders, we must lead our people out of dangerous ways, and
be sure all passages be cleared; for that there are many times more dangers in
odd meetings and skirmishes, then in open field.

Fourthly, We must not scorn plainwayes, wherein our company may go along with
us: Not mount up aloft in high and Scholasticall speculations, as if we would
lead men over the Alps to heaven. Nor in rough and craggy ways of knotty
Controversies, or abstruse passages: But in a fair and beaten path, that with
our selves our company may come safely and speedily to the end of our march and
journey. And wisdom will teach people to live, not to dispute, and accustom
them rather to fight with their own vices, the other men's opinions. The most
profitable combat is that, which every man makes with with himself: And if
with others, then, when not victory, but truth is sought: else both truth and
charity are lost together.

Fifthly, Use allowed weapons of (...).
proof. Those be not (...), silver Lances, which the Oracle would have Philip
of Macedon use in winning an impregnable Fort. Nor golden sentences, strong
lines, froth of wit. It is iron, not gold, that kills in the encounter. It is
the Steel sword, not the golden, that wins the field

Lastly, Take heed we let not Benhadad go, id est, men committed to our trust
and keeping; lest our lives go for their lives.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of such Tracts and Sermons of Doctor Tailors, as are licenced for
the Press, but not yet Printed.
SEventy three Catechisticall Exercises on the grounds of Religion, upon the
Lords days in the afternoon. Sermons on the eighth of Amos 11, 12. The
warrantable hatred, on Revelations 2. and 6. A Pattern of Peace, on Heb. 12.
14. A Caveat against offenses, on Mat. 18. 7. A Mirror of ingratitude, John 26.
A President for Preachers, on Luke 4. 43. A Sermon on Cantic. 5. 2. A Sermon on
Mat. 6. 24. A Sermon on Exodus 23. 2. A Sermon on Mat. 6. 26. A Sermon on Luke
10. 42. A Sermon on 2 Cor. 6. 16. A Tract on 2 Cor. 6. 1, 6. A Sermon on 1 Samuel
1. Iephtah his vow, on Judge. 11. 35. Sermons on the Powder Treason, on Genesis 45,
5, 6, 7. On Prove. 12. 20. Massacre at Bethlehem, on Mat. 2. 13. The Badge of
true Christians, on John 13. 35. Sermons on Mat. 26. 47,

