A Funeral Sermon, Occasioned by the Sudden Death Of the Reverend Mr. Nathanael
Vincent, LATE Minister of the Gospel in Southwark.

By NATHANAEL TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey, and Thomas
Cockeril at the Corner of Warwick Lane, in Paternoster Row. 1697.

To that part of the Church of Christ in Southwark, of which the Reverend Mr.
NATHANAEL VINCENT was Pastor.
Beloved in our Lord,
It Is commonly and justly esteemed an Instance of the Wisdom and Goodness of
God, that the Dispensation of the Gospel is committed to those who are of the
same Make and Frame with the People to whom they Preach. But that which is a
Happiness in one respect, is a disadvantage in another, viz. That though they are
never so Eminent and Useful, they must Dye as well as their Hearers: As it was
in the Mount of old, though Christ himself remain with his Disciples, (and will
do so even to the end of the World) yet Moses and Elias, though Excellent
Prophets, and glorious Creatures, must withdraw, and sometimes vanish in a
Moment.

Of this you have a sad instance in the surprising Death of your beloved
Pastor, which was the Occasion of the following Sermon, the Design whereof is
to quiet your Minds under, and quicken you to improve so awakening a Providence
by a diligent Preparation for your own Decease.

I am the rather encouraged to expect, that this, which is the main Scope of
it, will be complied withal, because many of you did immediately and readily
in several Instances follow the advice which I gave you, (and which you may
here find) in the Close thereof.

Your so doing gives me great hopes, that you will demean your selves as you
ought, toward a Successor, when he shall he settled among you; as you have
done toward him who is removed from you. I have often heard him speak with
great pleasure, of the many Testimonies you have given, of a more than ordinary
affection to him. Indeed it would have been strange, if it had been otherwise,
because he could use the Apostle's endearing Argument with a great many of you,
1 Cor. 4.15.
Though you have ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet you have not many
Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

But the great Proof and Trial of you will be, when another who has not that
additional Advantage, shall enter into his Labors, and build upon that
Foundation which this Wise Master Builder has laid, and so successfully
carried on among you.

Give me leave to put you in remembrance, though you cannot but know it already,
Heb. 13.7, 13.
that you are not to govern, but to be Ruled, as well as Taught by him; not to
Trample on him, but to Submit your selves to him; not lightly to esteem him,
but show him double Honor in Love for his Works sake, and out of respect to
him whom he shall Represent. For a Faithful, Ordained Minister, is not the
People's Creature, 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 4.11.
but an Ambassador of Christ; his Gift from Heaven to the Church, and a Great
Blessing to those over whom he does Preside.

That the God of Wisdom and Order would direct you to pitch upon such a One,
and Treat him as such, with one Common Consent; and by prospering his Labors
among you, build you up in Faith, Holiness and Comfort to Eternal Life, is and
shall be the Earnest Prayer of

Your Servant for Jesus sake, Nathanael Tailor.

A Funeral Sermon, etc.
LUKE XII. 40. Be ye therefore ready also: For the Son of Man comes at an Hour
when ye think not.


OUr Blessed Savior having Preached an Excellent Sermon, full of very Serious
Advice, in many Particulars, of which you have an Account in the Foregoing
Verses of this Chapter; for the better Fastening of the whole upon his Hearers,
he falls in the Close of it, upon a Subject of a very Affecting and Moving
Nature, namely, the approaching Day of Judgment, and the Necessity of living in
the Continual Expectation of, and making daily Provision for it. This he enters
upon in the 35th. Verse of the Chapter, and prosecutes to this 40th. Verse,
which I have now read unto you, wherein you have these four Things observable:

1. The Duty that he presses upon his Hearers, Be ye ready.

2. A Strong Motive to back and enforce it: For the Son of Man comes at an
Hour when ye think not.

The Son of Man comes: It Is that more Eminent and Famous Coming of Christ, to
judge the World at the last Day, which is here plainly meant. But under this,
is comprehended also the Day of a Man's Death; For so you shall sine the
Scripture uses this Expression, Philip. 1.10. That you may be sincere, and
without Offense till the Day of Christ: 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this Commandment till
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. These Phillipans and Timothy have been
dead many Ages since, and yet the Day of Christ is not come, he has not yet
appeared: How therefore is this to be understood? It Is meant of the Day of
their Death; and so the Scripture words it, because the Day of every particular
Man's Death, and the Day of the Universal Judgment, is to him in Effect one and
the same; his State is as truly, and as fully determined thereupon, as it will
be when Christ shall come to judge the World; no Alteration can possibly be
made in it after we are once dead: As to that, such as we are when we leave
this World, such shall we be when we come to stand before the Bar of Christ at
the last Day, to receive our Unchangeable Sentence.

And as this Coming of Christ is Certain, so many times it is a very sudden
thing too; The Son of Man comes, that is, Death and Judgment come in an hour
when you think not.

3. The Persons here spoken to: Who they are, you may learn from Peter's
Question, in the Verse immediately following my Text; v. 41.
wherein, says he, Lord, speak thou this Parable to us, v. 42. etc.
or even to all? And from our Lord's Answer, wherein he continues this
Discourse of his, and particularly applies it to the Wise and Faithful Rulers
and Stewards in his House. So that the best of his Ministers are as much
concerned in it, as any of the Family; they are as liable to a Sudden Summons
by Death and Judgment, as any of their Hearers; and it is as much their
Interest, yea more, because of the heavier Account they have to make, to be
Always ready for it.

4. The Connection of these Words with the Foregoing Verse, Be ye therefore
ready also. Which suggests another Motive to our Thoughts. In the preceding
Verse our Savior had represented the Suddenness of his coming, by the
similitude of a Thief, who sets upon a House unexpectedly in the Night, which
if the Owner thereof had known of, he would certainly have watched, and not
have suffered it to have been broken open. And then comes in my Text, Be ye
therefore ready also: q.d. If Men are so prudent and careful, that they be not
surprised in Matters of a lower Nature, where the utmost that they can lose is
their Worldly Substance, and their Temporal Lives; how much more should they be
so in a matter of the highest Concern, whereupon their Souls, their Everlasting
Welfare, their All does depend? And therefore be ye ready in this case also;
for the Son of Man comes in an hour when ye think not.

From the Words thus divided and opened, I shall raise this Doctrine, as the
Subject of my present Discourse.

Doct. Seeing Death and Judgment may suddenly and unexpectedly seize upon any,
even the best of Men and Ministers, therefore every Man should be always ready
for them.

In the managing this Point, I shall do these four Things.

1. I shall say somewhat to Vindicate and Justify the Providence of God, in
the sudden and unexpected Death of Good Men and Ministers.

2. Show you wherein this Readiness for Death and Judgment does consist.

3. Set before you the force of the Argument, from the Suddenness of them, to
be always ready.

4. Apply the whole.

I. I shall say somewhat to Vindicate and justify the Providence of God, in
the sudden and unexpected Death of good Men and Ministers. And this is
requisite, because such thoughts as these, upon such Occasions, are apt to
arise in our Minds. For a Vile Person indeed to be Driven away in his
Wickedness, like Chaff and Smoke before the Wind, in those Storms which his own
Sins have raised, may be easily accounted for; but that very Holy Men, in the
height of their Usefulness, and in the midst of their Work, should be snatched
away almost in the same manner, seems at first View to be very strange and
severe. Their Enemies will be apt to censure and reproach them, and look upon
this as a Black Mark from Heaven upon them; and their Friends cannot but
bitterly bewail it. For had Death made its Regular and Leisurely advances, they
might have had many an Opportunity of speaking in Commendation of the Ways of
God and Religion, from their own Experience, and of giving suitable Advice and
Counsel to us; and the last Words of our dying Husband or Father, of our dying
Friend or Pastor, would to be sure have made very deep and lasting Impressions
upon us, and have been of mighty Use and Service to us all our Days. Why
therefore, O why, did God deal so unkindly with him and us, as to hurry him
away from us in so hasty a manner, as hardly to suffer him to speak one Word,
when he took his Everlasting Farewell of us?

By way of Reply to all this, I have these five or six Things to offer.

1. Consider the Absolute Sovereignty and Dominion of God.

This Divine Attribute is displayed when he closes his Right Hand to hide
these Stars, Rev. 3.1.
wherein they were formerly held; or when he seals them up in a Sudden and so
thick a Darkness, Job 9.7.
that we can neither see them, nor receive any further Influences from them.
And if we had nothing else to urge in the Case, even this alone were enough to
stop all our Mouths. Shall we not allow God that which we challenge to our
selves, to Do with his own what he pleases? Ps. 46.10.
Be still, and know that I am God. And the Exercise of this Attribute about
Good Men, even when it seems to bear a little hard upon them, should least of
all be regretted by us; because it has been employed about them in vastly
greater Instances, so much for their Advantage. For it was Divine Sovereignty
that selected them out of the Common Mass of Mankind, when others were passed
by, and Crowned them with all those Gifts and Graces wherein they did excel.
Now if the same Hand that framed them into Vessels of Honor, break them in
pieces with one single stroke, it becomes us to bow our Heads, and humbly adore
him, crying out, How unsearchable are his Judgments, Romans 11.33. Ephesians. 1.11.
and his Ways past our finding out, who yet Works all things according to the
Counsel of his own Will!

2. God orders it thus, That Men may not judge of his Love or Hatred by mere
external Providence. This is a deceitful Beam, at which we are very prone to
weigh Men and Things; but hereby God gives us a plain and sensible Proof of the
Truth of that Scripture, Eccles. 9.2.
that All things come alike to all, and there is one Event to the righteous and
to the wicked. The best Rule whereby to form our Judgments as to this point, is
from the manner of Men's Lives, and not from that of their Death: And that the
suddenness of their Departure alone, is no Black Mark from Heaven against them,
is very plain, from this convincing Demonstration, that there shall be Saints
alive at that very hour wherein Christ shall appear to judge the World, 1 These.
4.17. 1 Cor. 15.52.
who shall be suddenly Changed, and Caught up in the Air, to meet him in a
moment, in the twinkling of an Eye.

3. God orders it thus, Because he would prevent the Prayers of his People, for
the prolonging such a Man's Life when his Day is come. Such a Value has God for
his People, and their Prayers, that he would not have them wrestle with him,
for what he intends not to grant; and therefore when Wrath is determined
against any, and there is no Remedy, he is wont in a great measure to restrain
the Spirit of Prayer, and take off the Hearts of his People from interceding
for them. But it neither is, nor can, nor ought to be so with them, when the
Life of an Eminently Useful, Christian or Minister is in apparent danger; such
a one is always very Dear and Precious to them; they would, Gal. 4.15.
as the Galatians for Paul, Pluck out their very Eyes for him; much more will
they pour out their Souls to God in his Behalf: The Church would do by him,
Act. 12.5.
if the Lord's Prisoner by a lingering Sickness, as they did by Peter when he
was Herod's, Prayer was made to God for him without ceasing. Now when such a
Man's Work is done, and his determined Time run out, God suddenly removes him,
that he may not give leisure to the People to lay hold on his Arm, and
endeavor to prevent that Blow, which he is resolved to give.

4. God does this as an Act of Favor and Kindness to the Good Man himself.
Hereby he is effectually preserved from many of those Evils, wherewith some of
the Saints of God, who have more slowly gone off from the Stage of this World,
have been sorely distressed. As,

1. The Great Pains and Anguish of a long and tedious Sickness: This darkens
the Mind, shatters the Judgment, breaks the Spirit, stakes and binds down the
Soul to a Continual, sad Meditation on the Misery it feels, making a Man pine
away in the bitterness of his Soul from Morning unto the Evening.

It indisposes a Man for any Duty, even that of a Delightful Communion with God
in Private; hinders his Activity in it, and quickly diverts him from it. Alas,
they are but a few Fragments only that we can then present our God withal; a
few, short, broken Petitions, that we can offer up to him, and those also with
much ado; ^art up a Prayer to Heaven one Minute, and fetch a longer Groan the
next. The Sense of our pressing Evils will be like a Clog or a Weight, to
hinder the flight of our Souls toward Heaven, check them when they are
mounting, and presently pull them down again. When God from Morning even to
Night is breaking his Bones like a Lion, Isa. 38.13, 14.
even Hezekiah himself can but Chatter like a Crane, or a Swallow, or mourn
like a Dove; O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me? When the Instrument, the
Body, is thus out of Tune, and its Strings slackned or broken, the most Skilful
Artist cannot make that Melody before the Lord, as at other times he does.

Besides, this is a strong Temptation to Impatience, to Jealousses, to hard and
suspicious Thoughts of God. When he thus smites us, the best of us betray too
much of Opposition to his good Will, and too strong an Affection to our own
Ease.

Further, sharp and long Bodily Pains, often prove the Occasion, even to Good
Men, of groat inward Trouble and Distresses of Soul. David's Sickness often
cast him into great Doubts and Fears about his Sins, that God had not for given
them. Indeed all his Griefs springing from other causes, at last did run into
this Channel, as any Distemper turns to the Plague in the Time of a Raging
Pestilence. The troubles of my Heart (says he) are enlarged, Ps. 25.17, 18.
I am desolate and afflicted. But what was the Reason of this? he lay under
Affliction and Pa^n, and that ^^us'd many desponding Thoughts about the Pardon
of his Sins.

A sudden Dispatch to a Prepared Soul is a Favor more Eligible, than to be
continued a long while upon such a Rack.

2. The Uneasiness of taking a Solemn and Formal Ear well of Near and Dear
Relations and Friends; which is very unpleasant at all times, but more
especially in some cases.

As for Instance, When a Good Man considers the Difficulties, and the Siorms
wherein he shall leave them. This was the Gose of Holy David. Though he had the
Covenant of God, (...) choice and rich: Cordial at his Heart, for the Support
of his Fainting and Sinking Spirits; yet methinks I see how the (...) stood in
the good Man's Eyes, at the Thoughts of those Calamities which he foresaw were
coming upon his Children, after his approaching Decease. And this is very plain
from the Beginning and Ending of that Verse, in the 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my
House be not so with God, yet has he made with me an Everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my Desire, and all my
Salvation, although he onake it not to grow. He begins the Verse with these
Words, Although my Non so be not so with God, that is, not as the light of the
Morning whon the Sun rises, even a morning without Clouds, as he expresses it
in the beginning of the foregoing. Verse; but many a sad Providence will
overshadow it, and darken the Glory of it. And then he ends the Verse with
these Words, Although he make it not to grow, that is, not to Spring as the
tender Grass out of the Earth, by clear shining after the Rain; as he
expresses it in the latter End of that 4th. Verse; but my Family will wither
away, like the Grass of the Field, when burnt up by the Heat of the Sun. Hereby
he evidently shows, that the Distresses that were coming upon his Family made a
deep Impression upon him, cut him to the quick, and created some very uneasy
thoughts in his Mind, as he lay a Dying.

Another Occasion, wherein this taking our solemn Farewell is so very uneasse a
thing, is, when our Friends cannot resign us up without the Indecent Workings
of a Violent and Passionate Sorrow: A thing that Paul himself could not bear,
to whom the Weeping of his Friends was more grievous than any Death that he
could endure from the Hands of his most Euraged Enemies: And therefore he that
was Ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of
the Lord Jesus; cries out, What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart: Act.
21.13.
As though he could better endure the shedding of his own Blood, than the pouring
out of their Tears.

3. The Sore Buffetings of Satan. He is very busy about the Deathbeds of good
Men, and more especially may we suppose him ready at such a time to fall with a
greater Degree of Fury and Malice, upon an Eminent Minister; whose Business it
has been all his Life long to batter and destroy his Kingdom. When such a one
retreats slowly out of the Field, the Enemy has the Fairer Opportunity, and
being animated with Revenge, will be sure to summon up all his force, and draw
his Bow with his full strength, to shoot his most envenomed Arrows against him.
It Is a Mercy to be carried away into that Heaven, into which he can never
enter, in so swift a manner, that he shall not be able to fling one of his
fiery Darts after us, to wound, or so much as to affright us in our Passage
thither.

For my own part, on mature Deliberation, I don't think it a desirable thing
for a good Man, who is ready, to be worn away like a Stone, by a long and
continual Dropping. May my House and Soul be in order, and then the sooner it
quits this Vile Body, and leaves this wretched World, if in the twinkling of an
Eye, so much the better. To which there is but one Circumstance more, which I
should desire may be added, viz. that I may dye Preaching the Everlasting
Gospel, or Administering the Lord's Supper. May my Taper be blown out in the
Sanctuary, and may I presently pass in an Instant from Serving the Church
Militant here on Earth, to join with the Church Triumphant in Heaven. But we
must not be our own Choosers; and to be sure God will dispose all things in the
best manner for them that are his.

5. God orders this, as a Punishment to surviving Friends and Relations. When
he sends long Sickness, he weans our Hearts from them by degrees, gives us time
and leisure to get our Souls into a readiness for parting with one another,
(though even then too it is hard work for the most of us.) This is like digging
about the Roots of a Tree, loosning and preparing of it for a more easy fall:
But a very Sudden-Death, is like the violent blowing of it down with a
Whirlwind, which tears up the ground along with it, and makes a gap so wide,
that it is not easily filled up again.

6. And Lastly, God does this for the Instruction of others. We think, that if
a Holy Man had but time and leisure given him, his dying Words would have a
great influence upon us: And I grant there is somewhat in it; and they must
needs have very impenetrable Souls, that should not be at all affected with his
last Speeches. But when God hastily snatches away a good Man, Providence it
self turns Preacher, and cries with a loud Voice, and the Man of Wisdom will
hear, and learn; and he who does not do so, would not be made better, not only
though the Preacher had taught him with his dying Breath, but though he should
rise again from the Dead to warn him. For,

1. This is an awakening Consideration to us, to use great Diligence in doing
good to, and receiving good from our Friends and Relations, while their Lives
and ours do last. With what Care and Diligence should Parents and Ministers
instruct their Children, and their Flock, Watch over them, Warn, Reprove,
Exhort, Beseech, Counsel and Comfort them, Travel in Birth with them, 'till
Christ be formed in their Hearts; endeavor to bring them into, keep and
quicken them in the ways of God, and prepare them for Heaven, as not knowing
how soon Death, that great Silencer of Ministers, whom none can resist, may so
effectually stop their Mouths as not to suffer them to Preach their Farewell
Sermon, or utter one single Sentence for the good of those whom they leave
behind them.

With what readiness and thankfulness should Children and People listen to
their Instructions, receive their Reproofs, hearken to their Wannings, show
them that Honor that is due to them for their Works sake; not only rejoicing,
but walking in the light, while they enjoy it, as not knowing how soon either
one, or the other, or both, may be in the Grave, Job. 3.18.
where the Voice of the Preacher is not heard, no more than that of the
Oppressor. It is but a Melancholy thing, Luke 17.22.
to have that Scripture sullfilled upon us, The day is coming, when you shall
desire to see one of the Days of the Son of Man, and shall not see it.

2. It is a loud Call to Repentance, for our Non-improvement of those
Advantages we enjoyed whilst such Relations were continued to us. Such is our
Folly, that we seldom duly value, or rightly use any Mercy while we possess it,
which gives but too much cause for deep Remorse of Spirit when we are deprived
of it. It Is true indeed, no Man can weep his Father, his Friend, his Pastor out
of the Grave. Our Loudest Cries will not awaken them that are fallen asleep in
Jesus; nor can our Sighs infuse a new Breath into them, whose Spirits are
departed. But what cannot profit them may be of great Advantage to our selves:
And so it will be if our Grief run in the right Channel; if our unsuitable
Carriage toward them be deeply laid to heart, as it ought to be, when our Sins
have been the Occasion of cutting down the Spr^^ding Tree, because we sat idly
under its Shadow, and did not stretch our our hands, to gather the good Fruit
wherewith it was laden.

3. It Is a proper Means to Cure our inordinate Affection to, and Dependence
upon surviving Friends, and all Wordly Comforts. Cease ye from Man, Isa. 2.22.
whose Breath is in his Nostrils, whence it easily passes out, or where it may
be presently stopped by any little matter, and therefore, Wherein is he to be
accounted of? Hereby we see, these Pipes may soon be cut off, these Springs be
presently dried up; and therefore, because at the utmost the Time is short, and
may be much shorter than we are aware, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
it remains that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none; and
they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use
this World, as not abusing it, for the fashion of this World passes away.

4. It Is a plain Admonition, that our Time and Life are in God's hands.
Sometimes indeed they are said to be in our own; I put my Life in my hand,
Judge. 12.3. Ps. 119.109.
said Jephtah; My Soul is continually in my hand, says David. But then hereby
is meant the great Dangers to which our Lives are perpetually exposed; as a
brittle Glass, which may presently be broken by slipping from him that
carelessly holds it; or a valuable thing, that may be easily snatched away from
him that shows it in his open hand. But as to Dominion and Power, Ps. 31.15.
Eccles. 8.18.
so our times are in God's hand alone, he prolongs or shortens them as he sees
fit, and no man has Power over his own Spirit, (much less over that of his
Brother) to retain it one moment when he calls for it. Ps 49.7. Dan. 4.35, 36.
The most high does what he will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, as the proudest of Kings
acknowledged, when his Reason returned to him; and so snall we, except our be
departed from us.

5. It is a sensible Evidence of the Frailty and Uncertainty of our Lives: That
the best of Men, in their best Estate, are but as the Flower of the Field, Ps.
103.16.
which, as gaudy as it looks, if the Wind do bus paltiover it, immediately it
is gone.

6. It Is ^loud Call to us to Redeem our Time. What Stupidity is it to lavish
away one Day or Hour, which for ought we know may be our last? and then there is
no Preparation to be made for Eternity. We stand upon hollow ground, which may
presently fall in, and therefore Whatever thy hand finds to do, Eccles. 9.10.
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go.

7. It Is a mighty Check to Carnal Security, and pleasing our selves with the
hopes of a long Continued Happiness in this World. This is but too natural to
us all, when we are in flourishing Circumstances. They that lie at Ease are
very Subject to such idle Dreams. That rich Man in the Gospel, was not the only
Person that ever said to himself, Soul, thou have Goods laid up for many years,
Eat, Drink, Luke 12.19, 20.
and be merry. And how like a Fool did he look, When God said unto him, This
Night shall thy Soul be required of thee? David himself was so over-seen, Ps.
30.6, 7.
that He said in his prosperity he should never be moved. But Providence soon
confuted him, and his Mountain which he thought stood so strong, was presently,
moved and shaken to that Degree, that he himself was suddenly cast from it
within a Hairs Breadth of the Grave; whereupon he immediately adds, v. 9.
What profit is there in my Blood, when I go down to the Pit, shall the Dust
praise thee? When others drop in this manner before our Eyes, it is a lively
Comment on that Scripture, Go to now ye that say, James 4.13, 14, 15, 16.
to day or to morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a year,
and buy, and sell, and get gain; whereas ye know not what shall be on the
morrow: (Thou may travel to thy long Home before thou reach that City) For
what is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away. And therefore, Ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall
live and do this or that: But now ye rejoice in your Boastings, please your
selves with such vain Thoughts and Projects; All such rejoicing is evil: It Is a
sottish Thing so to do, for you are not Lords of your own Lives, and therefore
not of your own Actions; and if your Breath fail, in that moment all these
great Thoughts of yours, shall perish like a proud and swelling Bubble that is
broken by a single puff of Wind.

8. It Is a strong Motive to Thankfulness to God, that he has nor so surprised
us it our Natural state, or in the very Act of some Sin and Folly. A single
Affront puts our Thoughts and Spirits into a mighty Ferment, and Agitation,
which makes our Wrath immediately kindle, like an heated Vapor, by its own
Motion, in a sultry Evening; and we are apt to be quick and severe in avenging
our selves on our Adversaries, if it be in the Power of our hands. How easily
could God have cut us off when we were Enemies to him; struck us down dead at
his Foot in an Instant, when the Weapons of Iniquity were in our Hands, without
affording us any leisure to bethink our selves what we had done, or whither we
were going? Astonishing Patience, that he has not long since torn away our
guilty Souls from our Wretched Bodies, sending one to the Grave, and plunging
the other into Hell: That his Wrath has not smoaked against us, yea, broke
forth into a devouring Flame. His Forbearance is so much the more admirable,
Eccles. 8.11.
because perverse Man takes an Occasion from hence to Embolden himself in Sin.
Because sentence against an Evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the
Heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. His Power over
himself is great as well as over us, otherwise his Anger had been let out like
a Flood upon us, and we had been violently and hastily carried away before it.

9. And Lastly, It Is an evident Demonstration of the Necessity of our being
continually in a prepared Posture for Death and Judgment. And this Naturally
leads me to the

II. General propounded; which is, to show wherein this readiness for Death and
Judgment does lie.

This is twofold. First, Habitual. Secondly, Actual.


The one, as to the State; the other, as to the Frame of our Souls: The one, in
Order to a Safe Departure, the other in Order to a Comfortable one.

1. There is an Habitual Readiness for Death and Judgment; which lies in these
two things, Justification by Faith in the Blood of Christ, and Sanctification
by the Spirit of Christ.

1. Justification by Faith in the blood of Christ. He is a miserable Creature
who has the guilt of any one Sin cleaving to his Soul, because that single
guilt binds him over to Eternal Wrath. Who then can conceive the misery of that
man, who has upon him the guilt of all those innumerable Sins which he has
committed throughout the whole course of his life; every one of which, and much
more all of them together, expose him to the Fury and Everlasting Vengeance of
God? Such a one is far from being fit for Death and Judgment, who must fall
under that condemning-Sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. What terror and confusion will the very
presence of Christ strike into the Souls of these men! Genesis 45.3.
Joseph had concealed himself from his Brethren a long while; but when at last
he made himself known to them, and said, I am Joseph; the thought of those
Injuries which they had done him, struck them dumb, and they were troubled at
his presence, and could not answer him. When our Savior shall appear, and say
to an Unbeliever, I am Jesus, That Jesus, whose Blood thou have despised, whose
Gospel thou have slighted, whose Spirit thou have resisted, whose merciful
Design thou have opposed all thy life long, and would not be reconciled to
God through me, I am that very Jesus: These words will strike and pierce him to
the very heart, and cause him to wail, Rev. 1.7.
and call to the rocks and mountains, saying, Fall on me, and hide me from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the
great day of his wrath is come, Rev. 6.16, 17.
and who shall be able to stand?

2. Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ. The most glittering Profession,
where there is not a work of Regeneration, will not avail in that day. The
Foolish Virgins that had Lamps in their hands, but no Oil in their Vessels,
will find the door shut against them when the Bridegroom comes, Matthew 25.10.
as not being ready to enter in with him. Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord. If we are not true Penitents and
Converts, Acts. 3.19.
our Sins are not blotted out, but shall remain in God's Book against us under
our respective Names; and then it will not be a time of refreshing, but of
scorching Heat, which we shall never be able to endure.

In a word, There is not a more miserable Wretch out of Hell, than an
unpardoned, and an unsanctified Man; who is going to it, and considers not
whither he is hasting. All this man's Happiness lies at the mercy of a Disease,
of an Accident, of one moment; for if this night God should take away his Soul,
where is he? Nay it all lies at the mercy of one wise and sober thought: For
did he but understand and consider the true state of his Soul with reference to
Eternity, his Mirth would be changed into Trembling, and all his Songs into
Howlings and Lamentations, into Agonies and Horrors of Conscience: For it is not
more certain that he is at present out of Hell, than it is, that if he live and
die in his present State, he shall in a few moments be in it.

II. There is an actual readiness for Death and Judgment, and that lies in
these following things.

1. In a careful abstinence from every wilful Sin, and a speedy and deep
repentance for any such, 2 Pet. 3.14.
if we have been guilty of it. Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye look for such
things, be diligent, that you may be found of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless.

Our principal care must be to refrain from such Sins. For tho Repentance be a
good thing, yet Innocence is better. Some men walk in a round, and a circle of
sinning and repenting, repenting and sinning again: Their hearts seeming to be
much divided between God and their Lusts. According as Conviction on the one
hand, or Corruption awakened by Temptation on the other hand does work in them;
they sometimes forbear their Sins, and at other times yield to them: As the
tops of Corn that waver and incline this way or that, according as the force of
the Wind does bend and carry them. Now the Hearts of these men rise or fall
with the change of their Condition, as the Quicksilver in a Weatherglass does
according as the surrounding Air is either bright and clear, or thick and
foggy. A threatening Sickness does as much alarm them, as the furious march of a
powerful invading Army does the weak and defenseless Inhabitants of any
Country. Indeed, as the aching of one small part of our Bodies causes more
sensible grief and pain, than the sound and healthy state of all the rest does
of ease and pleasure; so a few wilful Sins do cause more of terror in the
Conscience, than a great many good Actions are able to convey of support and
comfort to it. And I dare appeal to the Experience of all sober men, when they
are any thing serious, whether these are not the things that do shake their
confidence, and make them jealous of themselves. So many wilful Sins as a man
has, of late especially, been guilty of, even after he has repented of them,
so many Arguments has he to make him doubt of his own Sincerity; so many
weights there are in the other Scale, that make the Balance at least to hang
even, so that he hardly knows what to think of himself; and in a dying-hour his
misgiving-Heart will be apt to say the worst, and reproach him that he has not
been right with God, nor sound in his Statutes. And as all wilful sins must be
diligently watched against, so

In particular, Cruelty and Oppression must be avoided. Jam. 2.13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy.

A rigid exacting those Debts which our poor Brother is not able to pay. Matthew.
18.33, 34.
The Lord was wrath with that wicked servant that would not forgive his
fellow servants a few pence, and commanded him to be delivered to the tormenters.

Drunkenness, and Smiting of our Brethren. Luke 12.41.
If that servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall
begin to beat the menservants, and maidens, and to eat and drink with the
drunken; the Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for
him, and in an hour when he is not aware.

And it holds, not only as to these particular Sins, but as to all other wilful
ones; as appears from what our Savior adds, And that Servant that knew his
Master's Will, Verse. 47.
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will (and much more if
he knowingly went against it) shall be beaten with many stripes.

2. In great diligence and readiness for the doing of every good work in its
proper season; every Duty respecting either God, or our Selves, or our
Neighbor: For a Christian is like a Clock or Watch that has several distinct
Motions; and as to every one of these, will the Judge examine us, when he shall
appear. This is what our Savior means, when he tells us, Luke 12.35.
our loins should be girt about, in a posture ready for any Service that our
Master calls us to. And blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons
ought ye to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness!

3. In the lively exercise of every grace, as we have occesion for it, whether
active or passive. Some Graces are to be exercised every day, be our
circumstances what they will, such as Faith in Christ, Love to God, and the
like. Others are to be exercised under some peculiar circumstances, as the
Providence of God gives us occasion, and a call thereunto; such as Patience,
Submission to God, Faith in his Promises, etc. If need be, ye are in heaviness
through manifold tribulations, 1 Pet. 1.7.
that the trial of your faith, being much more precious than that of gold which
perishes though it be tried with fire, might be sound unto praise, and honor,
and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. That is, either that you may be
praised, and honored, and glorified, as having given such evident proofs of
the Sincerity of your Faith under very trying Providence; or else, that Christ
in that day may be glorified, when your so noble Behavior shall be displayed
in the view of all the World, as the Fruit of his Death and Grace; and men
shall see what excellent persons his Followers have shown themselves to be,
through his strengthening of them, which will reflect an Honor upon him, as
well as upon them. The Skill of the Artificer, and the Beauty of the Vessel
will be both admired together.

4. In the diligent improving of every Talent for his Service, Life; Health,
Strength, Reputation, Interest, Power, Authority, etc. These are Talents which
he has committed to our Charge; and when he comes, he will strictly enquire
what use we have made of them. And we know what became of the Unprofitable
Servant: Those Feet which carried him to the place where he buried his Lord's
Money, instead of walking with it to the Exchangers; and those Hands which were
employed in concealing of it instead of trading with it, were bound; and for
hiding it in the Earth, he himself was cast into Hell. What then will be the
case of him who abuses many of them, contrary to the intent for which they
were given?

5. In perseverance in Faith and Holiness to the last. Heb. 10.38.
For if we draw back, his Soul will have no Pleasure in us. And how then shall
we be able to look him in the Face? Deserters are wont to be more severely
treated than those who were always open and professed Enemies. A sense of this
has come with so great a weight on some Backsliders in Judgment and Practice,
as to break their Spirits, and sink them down into the Depths of Despair in the
close of their Days. Their awakened Consciences have lasht them with Whips of
Steel, and with siery Scorpions. And therefore, Little children, abide in him,
that when he shall appear, 1 John 2.23.
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. If Christ
when he was a Frisoner, by one Look did so dash Peter out of Countenance, when
in Words he disowned him, as to make him go forth immediately and weep
bitterly; what overwhelming-Sorrow and Confusion will his Majestic and angry
Countenance strike all those into, who deny him in their Works, when he shall
appear in all the Solemnity of a Public Judge, in the Glory of his Father,
surrounded with all his holy Angels!

6. In a great weanedness from this World, and having our Affections strongly
set upon Heavenly things. Our Savior plainly warns us, That too deep a concern
about earthly matters, exposes men to a fatal Surprise by this great day. Luk
21.34.
Take heed (says he) to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
so that day come upon you unawares. How bitter are the Thoughts, and much more
the Approaches of Death to him whose Affections cleave strongly to this
wretched World! Violence must be used to separate him from it. But he who sits
loose to all things here below, is easily parted from them: Like the Beams of
Light, which gently touch the Earth, but not being tied to it, are easily
withdrawn from it, as soon as ever the Sun begins to set, and the Evening to
come on.

7. In getting our Evidences for Heaven bright and clear. Heb. 11.8.
Abraham indeed, at the call of God, readily departs from his own Country into
a Foreign Land, not knowing whither he went. But it is impossible any one should
be willing to leave this World and pass into the other, if he be at a great
loss in his own mind whither he is going, to Heaven or Hell, and which of these
two must be his everlasting Habitation. Where Eternal Happiness or Misery is
the Doubt, it must needs be a very uneasy thing to a serious Person (and men
are generally so in their last minutes) to be tossed up and down between Hopes
and Fears. But when our Title to that blessed Inheritance is clear, and our
Assurance is strong, we may cheerfully lay down our Bodies and resign up our
Souls. No man can live with half that Comfort and Joy as such a man may dye
withal.

8. In watching, waiting, and expecting Death and Judgment every day: not
fancying that certainly we shall dye; but thinking within our selves, that for
ought we know we may dye every day. Frequently seasoning our Hearts with such
serious Reflections as these, will be like a daily watering the Tree at the
roots, which makes the Sap to rise and shoot up into every Branch, it will
quicken us to the performance of all the forementioned particulars; and have
the same good Influence upon us, as the expecting that Thieves may come every
Night, which makes us careful to provide for our own Defense.

9. In well settling your worldly Estates. Do this in the time of Health, that
it may be your last Will; yours, and not the Will of those that are about you,
who otherwise may be practicing upon you when you are sick and weak in Body and
Mind too. The neglecting, or the not doing this to their own full Satisfaction,
has caused very great uneasiness of mind in many, when they have been suddenly
within the near Views of Death. We need not to have these worldly matters to
distract and discompose us, when we have much weightier Affairs, enough to take
up all the little remainder of our Time, and our most serious Thoughts. For,

Lastly, If our Heads be clear, and we have leisure, we must seriously review
the State of our own Souls. Otherwise it will be as improper for us so to do,
as it would for a man that is to make a Map of any Country, to pretend to
survey it in a foggy day. In this case we must live upon, and draw Comfort from
the former Trials of our selves. We must also renew our Repentance for all
those particular Sins we can remember, and our Faith in the Blood of Christ for
the pardon of them; and again commit and give up our Souls to him; recalling to
our minds some of the Promises of God, that are most suitable to our present
condition; speaking somewhat, if we are able, in the behalf of God, and Christ,
and serious Holiness, that may be of use to those that we shall leave behind
us; lifting up our Hearts to the heavenly Glory, and commending our departing
Spirits into the hand of God and Christ.

III. General. I come to show you wherein the force of this Argument lies, from
the suddenness of Death and Judgment, to be always ready for them. And,

1. Death and Judgment will not stay beyond the appointed time, till we get
ready. Thy Days are numbered, thy Glass has been turned up, and running for some
time; there are, it may be, but a few Sands more, how few God only can toll;
and when they are run out, ready or unready all is one, away thou must. Now God
gives thee Time, improve it, that the long-suffering of God may be Salvation to
thee. But if thou trifle it away now, when the Decree is gone forth to cut down
the barren Tree, it shall not stand a moment longer. Many a Time have thou been
sick, and the consciousness of thy having made little or no Provision for
Eternity, has made thee cry out in the bitterness of thy Soul, O spare me a
little longer! God has been merciful to thee once and again; but the time is a
coming, when he will be so no more. How many have thou known of thy sinful
Companions, who have cried as loudly as thou can do, Yet a little more time!
But God would not vouchsafe it, but they have been hurried away to Judgment
before they have made up their Accounts.

2. Little or nothing is to be done to get ready upon a sudden Surprise by
Death. Thou may be struck dead in a moment. Thy Disease may lie in thy Head,
may so distract and cloud thy Brain, that as one well says, if the mere
saying, Lord have mercy upon me, would save thy Soul (as it will not) yet thou
shall not be able to utter so short a Petition. But suppose thou have a little
longer warning, how unlikely is it thou should get thy Soul into a meet
posture for Death and Judgment, if then it be to begin? When thou have spent
Forty or Fifty Years in Wickedness, is a few Hours time sufficient to make thy
Peace with God for such a multitude of Provocations, or procure the Change of
thy Heart and Nature, so consirmed in Sin? Soul and Body, by Physic and Pains
are miserably indisposed for so serious a matter; and there is little hopes,
that the Grace of God, which thou have so long resisted, should then convert
thee in a moment. It may be thy Ignorance will be so great, that having a clear
sight of thy manifold and crying Sins, and little or no knowledge of a Savior,
thou will be at thy Wits-end, not knowing what to do. It may be God's Spirit
will withdraw, and leave thee to the hardness of thy own Heart; and then thou will remain stupid as a Block: Or else the Thoughts of so many Sins, of the
Terrors of God, the near Approaches of Death and Judgment, and amazing Fears of
Hell, will cast thee into terrible Pangs and Agonies of Conscience, and
overwhelm thee with a total Despair. Some such I have known, who upon their
Sick and Deathbeds have cried out, Undone, eternally undone, there is no Hope,
no Mercy for us; there remains nothing but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation from the Lord to consume us: Who have hereupon
howled like a Beast, and roared out like a damned Soul; methinks I hear the
doleful Sound continually in my Ears, and I hope I shall never totally forget
it.

But for the present, let us suppose the best; Provided thou should prove a
true Fonitent (which is very unlikely) yet, without a Divine Revelation thou will not be able to know it. Many have been affrighted by Sickness into
seemingly very serious Purposes, and have been taken for sincere Converts; but
when they have recovered, have returned again, like the Dog to his Vomit, and
the Sow that has been washed to her wallowing in the mire. It may be this has
been thy own case, a Fit of Sickness made a great change in thy Countenance,
but a greater in Thoughts. But with thy Health thou have recovered thy ancient
Looks, and returned to thy Old Sins again; and all thy good Resolutions have
vanished away like the Visions of the Night when a man awakes, or the Dew of the
Morning when the Sun is risen. The Pangs thou have undergone have not been like
those of a Woman in Travel, which end in the Birth of a living Child; but like
the racking and tormenting Pains of the Gout or Stone, which wear off, but no
good comes of them. And who can assure thee that special Grace has now fixed
and established thy Heart, which has so often started aside like a deceitful
Bow? So that thou will unavoidably dye in a dreadful Cloud, and pass by the
very Gates, and within a near View of the Flames of Hell, even though thou
should be received into Heaven.

3. It will greatly torment thee, if Sickness should find thee unready. Oh how
will thou befool and condemn thy self, and say, How often was I put in mind of
such an Hour as this? How often have I been called upon to prepare my Soul for
it? How often did I purpose to do it? I was even ready to yield sometimes, but
still I deferred it till a more convenient Season (as I called it;) such a Fool
was I, and so like a Beast have I carried it! Surely I had not the
Understanding of a man within me.

4. Great is the Happiness of those who are ready for a sudden Death. Nothing
can make them miserable; they walk in the Light of God's Countenance, Peace of
Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, and a daily delightful Communion with God; a
thing so ravishing, that as that Nobleman said, when in his low condition he
was tempted with the offer of a Bag of Gold to return to Popery, Their Money
perish with them that would not prefer one Hours Communion with God before all
the Silver and Gold in this World. They drink abundantly of that sweet Wine,
which has a far more delicious relish and taste than all the Pleasures of this
World, were the Spirits of them all extracted and mingled together in one
Draught.

And as they do not live, so neither do they dye at the common rate of other
men. Much of their Master's Joy comes down into them, before they are received
up into it; they dye smiling, yea go away in Triumph into that blessed Place
where Delight and Praise shall be their everlasting Work and Employment.

5. And Lastly. The Consequences will be very dreadful, if thou art not ready.
If thou have not the habitual and fundamental readiness, that is, if thou art
not justified and sanctified, thou art lost for ever. And except these men's
Consciences are seared, if a Cloud be but gathering, if some threatening
Sickness do but hover over them, it casts them into a mighty Confusion: But if
it actually seize them, they are in the same condition with Belshazzar, when he
saw the Fingers of a man's hand writing he knew not what; though he could not
read nor understand the mystical Character, yet his guilty Conscience concluded
it was a Sentence of Death and Wrath; whereupon his Thoughts troubled him, and
his Knees smote one against another; and his Countenance changed white as that
Wall on which the Handwriting appeared: And he could not be more in haste for
his Wisemen, than they are for the Physician, to tell them what their Fate is
like to be.

And though thou have the Fundamental, yet if thou have not the actual
readiness for Death too, thou will be full of Fears and inward distress of
Soul, dye very uncomfortably, and go away trembling into the other world.

IV. And Lastly. The Application.

1. Learn hence the Reason of Holy Men's strictness in Religion. They dare not
follow a multitude to do wickedly, nor assume to themselves so great a latitude
in practice as their Neighbors. They think, and therefore they walk otherwise
than the rest of mankind do. They take heed to their Feet, because they don't
know but the next step they make may be into the other World. They have
impressed upon their Minds a deep sense of those Words of our Savior, Rev.
16.15.
Behold I come as a Thief: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

2. How sad is it, that so few are, or take any care to get themselves ready?
There is not a plainer instance of the deplorable Corruption and Folly of human
Nature than this, That we stand in need of Divine Instruction by a powerful
hand practically to know this common and obvious thing, how frail we are. God
had pronounced that Severe Sentence against the Israelites, That that whole
Generation should die in the Wilderness within less than forty Years. And
consequently in so vast a body of men, who were all of them to drop in so short
a compass of Time, they could not choose but have daily Spectacles of Mortality
before their Eyes; and yet Moses was jealous that not a man among them would
duly apprehend so plain a thing without Help from Heaven; He therefore digests
his own serious Thoughts on this Point into a solemn Prayer, for the use of the
Israelites; that so he might lead the People in their Devotions; as well as in
their Wars and Journeyings through the Wilderness. Yea, though he was so eminent
a Saint, and so well skilled in all the Learning of the Egyptians, of which
Arithmetic was one part; yet he saw a necessity of Divine Grace for himself
too, that he might be able to reckon aright in this matter; which therefore he
prays for in his own behalf as well as theirs, So teach us to number our days,
Psa. 90.12.
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

But the Folly of the generality of Mankind as to this point, Deuteronomy. 29.4
is so very manifest, that we have too much cause to take up Moses's Complaint,
That the Lord has not given them a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear unto this day; which is a plain argument that he has not been
seriously applied unto, nor his Instructions obediently complied withal. Our
Savior indeed in his Parable supposes the number of the Wise and Prepared, the
Foolish and Unready Virgins, to be equal, five of the one, and five of the
other: But surely in our days there is a vast disproportion between these two
sorts of persons.

3. Are you ready for Death and Judgment, yea or no? Would not an immediate
Summons to appear before the Bar of Christ, put you into as much Disorder and
Confusion, as a sleepy and careless Army, by the sound of their Enemies warlike
Instruments in the dead of the Night?

4. Will you make it the great business of your Lives, from this time forword,
to prepare for this day; that you may not be surprised by it? To do this, is
the Wisdom of all: But it would be a most unaccountable Folly in some men, if
it should be neglected by them. Ex. Gr.

Those who have weak and crazy Bodies, and are frequently alarmed by Sickness.
If the Roof of the House be fallen, and the Floor be rotten, and several pieces
of the Wall broken down, and the ragged Remains are visibly bowing and
tottering every day, it is evident to our very Senses it cannot stand long.

Those who are old, whose gray Hairs make 'em look like Ears of Corn which are
white and ripe for the Harvest.

Those who are the Watchmen of Israel, and whose business it is to awaken
others; how inexcusable would they be, if they fall asleep themselves? Mr.
Kentish, (both the Brothers.) Mr. Oaks, Mr. Shown of Coventry, Mr. R. Mayo.
Several of our Orde of late have been struck in the Pulpit, and though they have
languisht some days, never recovered the fatal Blow they there received. They
have been like a Taper, which while it is burning and shining in the
Candlestick, on a sudden drops down into the Socket, where it lies for a little
time, shooting up its wavering and trembling Light, which is immediately sucked
back again, and extinguished in a few moments. That you may not be surprised by
this last Enemy,

1. Strengthen your Faith about the coming of Christ, and be much in
consideration of it, and the suddenness of it too.

2. Be often putting Questions to your selves, in a very serious anner; Am I
ready indeed? What if I should dye before to morrow comes? O my Soul, art thou
in such a Posture as thou art willing to be found in, when Christ shall appear.

3. Shame your selves by considering what care you use to be ready, and prevent
a Surprise, in matters of a lower nature.

4. Reflect upon your selves, What Thoughts you had the last time you were
Sick, and knew that you were unready, and were inwardly tormented in your minds
at the Thoughts thereof.

Lastly, Improve the sudden Death of others to this end. This is the Voice of
that Providence, that so hastily removed your late excellent Pastor, Mr.
Nathanael Vincent. I need not to tell you, June 22.
How on Tuesday was sevennight he was suddenly taken ill in the Morning, and
had leisure only to say, I find I am a dying; Lord, Lord, Lord, have mercy on
my Family and Congregation. So near did you his People lie to his Heart, even
in his last Moments. Herein he resembled his and our common Lord, who having
loved his own, loved them even to the end.

He was the Son of a Godly Minister, Mr. John Vincent; and a living Confutation
of that Scandal, that the Children of the Prophets do more commonly than others
prove Sons of Belial: As also was his late Brother, Mr. Thomas Vincent, a
Minister of eminent Usefulness in London while he lived, especially in the time
of the dreadful Plague, and whose Memory is still deservedly very dear and
precious to those that knew him; like a Rose which adorns the Garden, and
perfumes the Air while it is growing on the Tree, Mr. Baxter's Life. Part 3d. p.
95.
and has a fragrant smell too a long time after it is gathered and dead. For
he was a serious, humble, godly man, of sober Principles, and great Zeal and
Diligence; as the Incomparable Mr. Baxter does truly describe him.

He was of such pregnant Parts, and so strong a Memory, that by the help of
that, when he was but Seven years Old, he was wont, for the ease of his tired
Father, to repeat his Sermons in the Family in the Evenings of the Lord's Day.
He was admitted as a Member of the Famous University of Oxford about the
Eleventh Year of his Age, and went out Master of Arts about Eighteen; Preached
publicly as a Lecturer at Pulborow in Sussex before Twenty; and at the Age of
One and Twenty was Ordained and fixed as Rector of Langly-Marsh in
Bucking-hamshire.

After his Ejectment, and a few years spent in a private Family, he came to
this City the year after the Fire, and quickly settled among you in this Place.
And this being the most public Sphere wherein he moved, let us briefly
consider him as a Minister, and as a Christian (for I shall not draw him at his
full length).

1. As a Minister. He had a good share of Learning, and other Ministerial
Abilities; which he was daily improving by great diligence in his Study, as
wisely considering, he that spends on the main stock, how large soever that may
be, and does not endeavor to lay more in, will quickly come to Poverty.

He had a great Zeal against bold Intruders into the Work of the Ministry. And
I hope you that are his People will herein resemble him; turn away from those
Men, and do not so much as vouchsafe them the Hearing. These Vermin begin to
swarm among us, and disturb us by their hideous Noise, not in Corners or
Chambers, but in our very Pulpits; and are like to prove an Egyptian Plague to
us: If these Illiterate Antinomian Usurpers are not speedily and effectually
discountenanced by Ministers and People too, they who are already the Blemish
of Nonconformity, will quickly prove the total Ruin of it.

He had Luther's Three Qualifications to make a Man a Gospel-Minister; he gave
himself much to Meditation and Prayer to his last, that he might work things
upon his own Soul, and thence more effectually convey them to yours. If Divine
Truths are first Engraven on our Hearts, then are we most likely to Print them
on those of our Hearers. And as for Temptation, he had been sorely exercised
and distressed by it in his Younger days; though from that time Satan left him,
and molested him no more in that manner.

He had a natural Fervency of spirit, which made him somewhat vehement in every
thing that he espoused; which Time and Experience did correct in some matters,
making him more Calm and Moderate toward our Brethren who differ from us in
things that lie remote enough from the Foundation.

He had a mavelous Readiness and Quickness in Answering any difficult
Questions, as soon as ever they were Propounded to him. His Notions were fast
locked up in a faithful Memory, but yet the door did presently fly open at the
first knock, so as that he could easily bring them forth at pleasure.

But the Gift of Breaching, that most essential and useful Part of a Minister's
Work, was that peculiar Talent wherewith God had Blessed and Honored him. He
opened and applied the great Truths of the Gospel, with that mixture of
Plainness and Majesty, with that measure of Life and Power, that showed he had
a deep sense upon his own Heart of the great Ends of the Ministry, the Glory of
God, and the Salvation of Souls. His Delivery and Carriage were Graceful; his
Speech Sound, such as could not be Condemned; his Sermons Warm and Serious,
such as commanded Attention, raised Affection, and struck an Awe into the
Consciences of those who heard them. And no wonder then he had so general an
Acceptance, and so eminent Success. Many were the Seals of his Ministry; of
this and that man it may be truly said, That they were born here.

2. Consider him as a Christian. He has been noted for this, that he was very
ready upon all occasions to start some holy and serious Discourse; a thing that
is grown almost out of fashion among the Professors of this Age. When we meet
together, we talk of News, of worldly Affairs, it may be of the Sins and
Miscarriages of our Brethren; we can spend whole Hours together, and hardly
drop one word, of God, or Christ, or Heaven, all the while. But hardly any
Company could he come into, but he was like an open Box of precious Ointment,
he would leave some sweet Persume, some Heavenly Discourse behind him.

His Compassion to the Poor was great, to whom he gave Alms, and Holy Advice at
the same time; and was very liberal in both, doing Good at once to Body and
Soul too.

He was a Close Walker with God, and found the fruit of it, by enjoying a
constant, settled, calm Assurance of the Divine Love, for many years together;
which passed the trial, and stood firm and unshaken, several times, when he
verily thought himself to be near his End. When his nearest Relation expressed
her great Sorrow at the Apprehensions of his Death, in a former Sickness, he
replied, Why weep you for me, who am going to the Eternal Inheritance? And then
brake forth into a large and serious Discourse of the Joys of the Saints above.

He had frequent Alarms by the Providence of God, and had a deep sense of his
own Mortality thereupon. He said to a Friend a few days since, I do not expect
to live long, but I bless God I am ready. Any one that would see his very Heart
and Soul, let him read the Introduction to those useful Sermons of his about
the benefit of Affliction, Preached and Printed on the occasion of his having
been twice seized with a Death-threatning Calamity.

His Patience and Resignation under Afflictions, and sharp and severe pains,
was very remarkable. When, upon that occasion, a near Relation expressed too
much of concernedness, as he thought, for him; His Answer was, Submission,
Submission best becomes Creatures. And it was a frequent saying with him, I am
in the hands of my gracious God and Father, who best sees what is best for me.

This was the Man, this was the Minister, this was the Christian, whom you have
lost. They who saw his Face here so often, and with so much delight, shall
never see it more in this place. They who heard the Voice of this Charming
Preacher with so much content, shall never hear it more. He shall watch over,
exhort, rebuke, guide, direct, comfort you no more. Seeing he is gone whence he
shall not return, and can give you no more Advice; suffer ^e to do it. And I
shall speak a few things to you as a Society, and I hope my Counsel will be
acceptable to you.

1. Be not too hasty in filling up the Breach which God has made upon you; and
yet be not too dilatory neither.

2. Seek out a man, that comes as near as may be to your deceased Pastor, in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Ministerial Gifts; a better Pattern I cannot propound
to you. And though this be no very easy matter, yet I do not totally despair
but such a one may in time be found out; especially if the United Ministers in
and about this City, be applied unto, as I think they ought to be upon such an
Occasion.

3. Till this be done, be very careful whom you admit into the Pulpit. It Is not
sit that every private Brother should assume the liberty of thrusting up whom
he has a mind unto. Nothing should be done of this nature, without the
concurring consent of those who have had some share in the managing the Affairs
of this Society. And if this Rule be neglected, it opens a. wide Gap for
Breaches and Divisions, for Confusion and every Evil work.

4. Let the Lord's Supper be kept up at its usual and stated times. The
Neighboring Pastors lawfully may administer it to you; and I doubt not but
they will at your request. This will keep your Members from scattering, who
else will be ready to run into other Folds, and may be tempted from an
Occasional, to six in a Stated Communion: And hereby no opportunity will be
given to any of those People, who whether by Commission from others, or not, I
list not to enquire, are turned Privateers, endeavoring to pick up any Rich
Vessel that is separated from the rest of the Fleet.

5. Let not any of the Members of this Society, take this opportunity of
leaving it. I know what the Plea of some will be, The remoteness of their
Dwellings. But surely, though your Pastor be, yet your Houses I suppose are not
removed, but stand still in the same place they did, and are altogether as near
as formerly they were. But, whatever you may do hereafter, don't drop off now;
stay till a Successor be chosen, and the Society well fixed under him; the
pulling out of one or two Pins at such a time as this is, may shake and
endanger the whole Building. If there be a necessity, and you must, or will be
gone; be not in haste; wait but for one year, till things are settled, and then
you may slide off without much Observation or Danger.

6. And Lastly, Break not into Parties and Factions: Beware of hard Speeches,
unjust Surmises, secret Heart-burnings and Jealousies one of another. Beware of
private Cabals, and of being practiced upon by any without Doors, who may have
little and wicked Designs upon you, for the tearing and dividing you in pieces,
and sending a Fireship in among you, in order to the scattering of you: And
such there are, who, while they are at a distance, and by the Colors that they
hang out one would take for Friends, but shall find them at last to be real
Enemies.

I shall close all with the words of the Apostle; Heb. 13.7.
Remember him that had the Rule over you, that so often spoke to you the word
of God; whose Faith follow, considering the end of his Conversation. And
consider his End aright, so that you may all fall in with she Exhortation of
our Savior in my Text, To be always ready; For the Son of man may come upon
you, as he did upon him, in an hour when you think not.


