OBEDIENCE AND SUBMISSION OF THE Present Government, DEMONSTRATED FROM Bishop
Overall's Convocation-Book.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Sign of the Peacock in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, 1690.

OBEDIENCE AND SUBMISSION To The Present Government, etc.
THAT those of the Church of England, who have taken the Oaths to Their
Majesty's KING William and QUEEN Mary, have Deserted their Principles about
Allegiance and Government, is the common Reflection cast upon them, by some,
whom either Malice or Ignorance does Dispose to Reproach 'em: But since Bishop
Overall's Convocation-Book appeared, they now Plead Reason and Authority to
Justify the Scandal, and pretend that they have got a whole Convocation of
Unprejudiced and Learned Men, who have Unanimously Condemned the late
Submission, and such, as being far removed from any Temptation, are the fittest
and most fair Judges that we can be Determined by; (though their Proceedings not
having the Royal Confirmation which is absolutely necessary for Canons, does
(as some think) very much, if not altogether invalidate their Authority, and
makes 'em as insignificant as the last Convocation we heard of.) I thought
therefore I might do some Service to the Church, and its Members, if I could in
some Measure Vindicate It and Them, by proving that their Compliance with the
present Settlement, has not in the least deviated from the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as it was Professed and Taught in that Convocation.

I shall begin therefore with laying down the Doctrine about Government and
Allegiance in Four Propositions extracted out of the Convocation-Book, to which
may be Reduced, whatever almost can be pretended in this Controversy;

And they are these,

First, That the Power of Kings was Originally Patriarchal, Derived from GOD
and not from the People, C. 2.6, 13.

For though Kings are, or ought to be Bound up, and Limited in the Exercise of
their Power by Laws, C. 15. yet that proceeds from GOD and Nature, who never
intended Princes to be such Leviathans, whose wilful Pleasure should be Laws;
but Parents of their Country, Empowered from Above to Maintain the Native
Liberty and Property of their Subjects, as of their Children. For the Conceit
of Absoluteness never did, or could prevail in any State, but where
Superstition or Ignorance blinded Men's Reasons, as in Turkey, and most of the
Eastern Empires; or Parasitical Flattery, and the naked Sword Maintain the
Arbitrary Usurpation, as it is in a Neighboring Kingdom.

Second Prop. That Descent in Hereditary Kingdoms, is the ordinary Way whereby
a Right and Title to the Crown is Claimable.

I say, Prove. 8.15.
is the ordinary Way; For since Kings Rule by GOD, it is only, as the
Convocation-Book says, The Lord, who both may, and is able to overthrow Kings
or Emperors, notwithstanding any Claim, Right, Title, or Interest which they
can Challenge to their Countries, Kingdoms or Empires, page 53.

Third Prop. That no Violence is to be used to Kings from their own Subjects
for any Irregularities that they commit, C. 22.

For the Doctrine of Passive Obedience to a Government Established by Law,
whether the PRINCE be Limited and Sworn to Govern by Laws Chosen by the People,
and Enacted with his Consent, or the PRINCE be Absolute, and his will
sufficiently Declared, be the Law, is of absolute necessity to the Support of
any Government; and they who deny that, can never clear themselves from the
Suspicion of some Designs against this.

Fourth Prop. That having sworn Allegiance to a Prince, we cannot without the
Dreadful Guilt of Perjury, transfer our Allegiance, whilst he continues to have
an Authoritative Right and Title to the Crown, C. 36.

I say an Authoritative Right and Title, because the Case may so happen, that
these being separated, the Claim of Right without the Authority, cannot
Challenge our Allegiance, as in the Case of the Kings of Israel and Judah, that
were led Captive by the Babylonians, who they survived in Babylon, and some of
them out of Confinement yet, (as it appears from Jeremy's calling for the
Peoples Prayers, and Obedience to the Babylonish Kings) could lay no Claim to
the Allegiance of their late Subjects. The Reason of which, is, Because it is
the Authority, which is GOD's, that Commands our Allegiance; and though no Mortal
can separate this Authority from the Person invested with it, yet GOD can, (of
which more hereafter) and if he do transfer it to another, wherever it is
placed, it calls for our Allegiance.

This is the Sum, I think, of what can be pretended in the present
Controversy. To Reply to which, I will not Expatiate on what has been
abundantly offered by others, but Confine my self, as much as possible, to the
Convocation-Book, that the Impartial Reader may judge which side, the Jurors or
Non-Jurors, the Old Established Doctrine of the Church of England does
countenance.

And as to the First Proposition, That Government in general, whether Monarchy,
or any other Form, derives it is Authority from GOD, the Author of Nature, and
consequently of Humane Society, and not from the People, (though their Consent be
ordinarily necessary to the Constitution, both of the Form of Government, and
the Persons Governing) is that which is to be the Groundwork of the whole
Discourse, and therefore in the first Place to be admitted, which I the more
Confirm, by observing from the Right Reverend the Author; First, That all
Kingdoms are now (what was more peculiarly appropriated to the Jewish Nation in
their First Constitution) in some sort Theocracies, wherein GOD according to
His own Pleasure, takes away Kings, and sets up Kings: For C. 35. P. 83. GOD
being the Universal Lord, and Ruler over all the World, the whole World is His
Universal Kingdom; in the Government whereof, He uses the Ministry of Civil
Magistrates, as well in other Countries, as amongst His own peculiar People
Israel, without any Desert of theirs, but as in His Heavenly Providence, He
thinks it most convenient, p. 84. Howbeit He does not leave them at Liberty to
do what they list, but holds Himself the Helm of every Kingdom, and uses their
Services in such sort, as be they Good or Bad, and their Designments Holy or
Wicked; He ever makes them the Executioners of His own Just Judgments, Will,
and Good Pleasure, according as He is minded to Punish any Kingdom, People, or
Country. And this He does by reserving to His Providence, the Prerogative of
the Designation of the Person whom He intends for His Vicegerent, and that
even in Hereditary Kingdoms, 1 Chro. 3.25.
as Adoniah, who was Solomon's Elder Brother, and Anointed by Abiathar to
succeed his Father, so his great Disappointment may be an Instance. Nay, GOD
sometimes for the only designed Usurpation of a Prince, whose Title, and that
in an Hereditary, was altogether Indisputable, does deprive him of the
Government in Part or Whole, and will not allow him so much as to Endeavor the
re-gaining of it, which was the Case of Rehoboam. And how often he has
Extinguished the Line Royal, and Advanced to the Crown such as had no Relation
to it, the History of the Kings of Israel does amply Testify. In all which
Cases, since it was GOD's doing, the Dethroned Prince could have no Pretense
unto the Subjects Allegiance. All that I will Note hence, is, That the Line of
Descent in an Hereditary Kingdom may be Interrupted, and yet the Law of
Succession not Violated.

Secondly, I Remark, That a Sovereign may be Divested of his Power which he
received from GOD, and Decline into the Inferior Condition of a Subject.

This is plain from the Kings of Israel and Judah, who of Independent Monarchs,
became not only Tributary, but Subjects to the Kings of Babylon, and being
Subjects, whatever other Duty might, yet Allegiance could no way be due unto
them, that being in general, peculiar only to a Sovereign Prince, not Dependent
on, or Tributary to, another. This is Confirmed and Improved from the
Convocation-Book, which in the Case of Jehu intimates, That his former Prince
became his Subject, Chapter 25. p. 40. and both he and Ahud are excused from Guilt
in laying violent Hands upon their Liege-Lords, in that, though they had been
Subjects, yet before the Commission of the Fact, they were Advanced to be
Judges, Princes, and Rulers of God's People, C. 27. p. 53. I will make no
Corollary from hence, because of the Reverence that I bear to all such Heads as
ever wore a Crown. I therefore hasten to the Last Observation; which is,

Thirdly, That when a Prince is thus Divested of his Power from GOD, and
another Advanced to his Throne, our Legal Allegiance may justly be Claimed by
the Possessor.

We have been told this from our Law Books again, and again, and now you shall
hear the Decision of it from the Convocation-Book, which taking Notice, C. 28.
p. 56. of the strange Variations of Governments in its Forms, and Governors in
their Persons, whether by Usurping Nimrods, or Traytorous Phocas's, gives
hereunto this Satisfaction, p. 57. That when either Ambitious Kings by bringing
any Country into their Subjection, or Disloyal Subjects by their Rebellious
Rising against their Natural Sovereign, have Established any Degenerate Form of
Government, ( viz. Aristocratical, Democratical, etc.) amongst their People;
The Authority either so unjustly gotten, or wrung by Force from the True and
Lawful Possessor, being always Gods Authority (and therefore receiving no
Impeachment by the Wickedness of those that have it) is ever (when any such
Alterations are thoroughly Settled) to be Reverenced and Obeyed, and the People
of all sorts (as well of the Clergy as of the Laity) are to be subject unto it,
not only for Fear, but also for Conscience sake.

Here you may see that upon a Revolution from the worst of Circumstances,
Usurpation, and Rebellion, Obedience to the Establishment is acknowledged Due.
And sure I am, That Malice it self cannot be so bitter as to think the present
Settlement Parallel to this Representation: For,

First, Here was no Ambitious Monarch, but a Prince that had a Just Cause of
War, on the Account of the Pretended Prince of Wales, which whether he was
Real, or Supposititious, since he had not that Satisfaction which was but
Equitable as he Demanded, he might Appeal to GOD to Decide the Truth and
Justice of it by the Sword. And,

Secondly, As for those who did Desert King James, thus much may be said for
them, That they could not with a Safe Conscience Assist him in that War,
because they Esteemed it on his Side Unlawful, and therefore they were Obliged
at the least to Lay down their Arms.

Thirdly, The Monarchy is not Degenerated into a baser Form. We have the same
Constitution, the same Laws, the same Liberties, or Greater than we had before;
and therefore if in want of all these we ought to yield (as the Book asserts)
Obedience; in the Enjoyment of them, we ought to add unto it, Thankfulness.

All that can be moved hereupon, is, When a Government may be said to be
Settled.

And with Submission, I cannot but conceive, That the Government is Settled,
when the Crown with all its Dignities, Prerogatives, Administrations,
Authorities, Revenues, etc. are generally Recognized, and Personally Enjoyed,
which must be supposed to be, when all Places of Power and Trust, of Royalty
and Importance, are in the Sovereign's Hands, and wholly at his Disposal. For
to say, Because there are Foreign Wars, or Secret Plots, that the Crown is not
in full Possession, since there always was, and always will be Discontented
Parties at home, and Politic Machinations abroad, that either Actually do, or
Craftily design to Disturb the Peace; so that we cannot but acknowledge that to
be a Real Establishment, which has the Countenance of Laws, and Parliament, to
Own and Confirm it.

Thus since GOD has been pleased to Divest the Late King James of that
Authority which he had once Committed to him, and Transferred it into another
Hands; both Clergy and Laity according to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, ought to Reverence, Obey, and be Subject to it, not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience sake.

I have almost Flattered my self, so as to Believe the most moderate Persons
will Subscribe what I have said, if I could but Produce any Moral Evidence that
this was GOD's Doing: To Answer whose Expectations, I will Search after such
Criterions, as may Evince the present Revolution to be the Will and Pleasure of
Almighty GOD. I therefore before hand, declare my Aversion to such Doctrines
(as have not long since been Censured by one of our ^lourishing Universitys)
wherein, Success Aproduc'd for an Argument of the Divine Aprobation of such
Means, Methods, and In^^ments, as are concerned in a Revolution

But then I must assume, That GOD's Providence in permitting, is a sufficient
Indication of his Will and Pleasure as to the Event; which whether He designs
it, that he may thereby Punish the Sins of his People, or that he may Protect
the Peace of the Church, is above my Capacity to Determine. But since Prophecy
has ceased, sure I am, that nothing but his Providence is Vocal to us; and
such strong Arguments may we produce from it (especially where we can find a
Parity of GOD's Proceeding) as will not with Ease or Ridicule be Eluded.

I cannot therefore but observe, and that from this Convocation-Book, C. 24. p.
47. That even the Success of Divine Benedictions are to be left to the
Disposition of GOD's Heavenly Providence, which is there ascribed to the very
Reason, why David, though already Anointed King, was not Advanced to the promised
Crown till Readiness Death, Whence, sin^ a Prediction, though Divine, is not
suffici^^ Ground to proceed upon, until GOD's ovidence does interfere; I cannot
restraimy Pen from moving this Query, viz. Whether the manifest Interpositions
of a Gracious Providence, that tends to the promotion of GOD's Honor, and the
Establishment of his Church, (without which, Predictions themselves are not
rashly to be Executed) be not to us (now that Prophecy is ceased) a Justifiable
Ground for any Rational Man to Act upon, especially when it holds Analogy with
those Proceedings, wherein GOD has already Notify'd His Holy Will and Pleasure?

I think this will hardly be denied, and therefore all that remains, is to
produce some Precedents wherein Royal Authority has been Translated, and GOD
has owned it for his immediate Doing. For if his Head was Interposed there, I
see not how we can Exclude it here: Therefore,

First, When Kings have Illegally Oppressed their Subjects, and been too
Arbitrary in their Imposition, GOD has been pleased (...) Discharge them of
their Trust: The ^eason of which is, because they are GOD's Roresentatives, and
therefore what they doby Implication is, and cannot but be Interpreted to be
GOD's Work; and then as he says of the Judges in the Execution of their
Office, 2 Chronicles.
That they Judge not for Man, but for the LORD who is with them in the
Judgment. The Wrong, if they do any, is an Injury to GOD, whose Judgment it is
supposed to be; which Injury, he will not suffer to go unpunished. So the
Usurpations of Princes, being Reflections upon GOD, whose Trustees they are,
his Honor stands Engaged, (when our sins are sufficiently punished by such
Scourges) to Vindicate its own Innocence, in Removing or otherwise
Animadverting upon them that so abused his Trust. We have a notable Instance of
this in Rehoboam, who being Rejected of the People, because of his Resov'd
Usurpations, and Endeavoring to Regain his Right by the Sword, is forbid by
GOD; for which Prohibition, the Reason that is given by no mean Statesman, my
Lord Clarendon, is this, Because I had been in the Fault himself. The Applicaon
I leave to the Reader.

Secondly, The Instance of Time is another Mark of GOD's Interposition. For
when His Church is on the Brink of Ruin, and the Designs against Her, have been
so prevalent, that it is not in the Power of Man to overruled Them, than (...),
He is a Present GOD in Trouble. This the Deliverance of the Israelites out of
Egypt, will Attest, who have made upon it, this Comfortable Observation; then,
whenever the Tale of Bricks, i. e. The utmost Servitude is imposed; Moses, i.
e. A Deliverer is near at hand. And the Methods prescribed by Father Parsons,
for the Reduction of England to the Roman Yoke, found in the Closet of the Late
King James, and so religiously observed throughout his Reign, is too great an
Evidence of our designed Extirpation for Impudence it self to deny.

Thirdly, The Way and Manner of this Revolution, which was without Bloodshed
and Battles, i. e. Such as beseems the God of Peace, does confirm the same. For
not to enlarge on this, I desire any of the Non-Jurors to speak plainly, if
they do not think the Peaceableness of the Restoration of King Charles to be an
unanswerable Testimony of God's Work, and Interposition; for my part, I must
confess I always did. And then I know not how to deny the Infatuation of his
Brothers Desertion to intimate, that the same Hand that restored the One, was
very much Confenting to the withdrawing of the Other.

I have done, and will provoke no Man by Reflections, but yet I earnestly
entreat our Non-Juring Brethren, to Consider;

First, That the refusing of an Oath which may Lawfully be taken, as this in
Controversy may, (if what these Canons say, be True) makes the Refusers
Responsible for the Want of all that Good, which their Officiating in their
Cures might have produced, together with all that Unsettledness in the STATE,
which their Example has encouraged.

Secondly; If what I have produced, be the Canonical Doctrine of the Church of
England, let them be advised of the Mischief of that Fatal Division, which
their Obstinacy will bring amongst us, and is already designed, if not begun,
in a Form of Prayer pretended (though I think it smells too strong of Jesuit)
to be theirs.

Therefore, for the Sake of Peace, whereof Christ is the Head, and his Doctrine
is the Gospel: For the Sake of our Church threatened with a more Affecting and
Pathetical Division than ever: For the Sake of the Reformation, which this
Breach, above all things, will prejudice; and above all, for the Sake of GOD,
Whose Truth and Worship, if another Revolution come, are, as far as we can see,
to be extinguish't. I entreat and beg of you seriously, to lay aside all
Passion, Heat, and Peevishness, and whatever else may bias your Reason; and
Consider, if what I have wrote be the Genuine Doctrine of the Church of
England. For if it be not, I must Acknowledge my Mistake, and beg GOD Pardon
for the Guilt, which by taking the New Oath I have incurred; which, till my
Conscience be more enlightened, I am so far from suspecting, that I would not
as my Conscience, for more Kingdoms than King James has lost, be in the same
Guilt with those, who by refusing to take the Oaths, Contribute too much to the
Designs of such, as will favor neither Them, nor Us, if our Sins should ever
prevail with GOD to give them the Ascendency. Which GOD prevent for the Merits
of His Son, the King of Peace and Truth. Amen.

FINIS.

