A SWARM OF SECTARIES, AND SCHISMATIQVES:

Wherein is discovered the strange preaching (or prating) of such as are by
their trades Cobblers, Tinkers, Pedlers, Weavers, Sowgelders, and
Chymney-Sweepers.

BY JOHN TAILOR.

The Cobbler preaches, and his Audience are
As wise as Moss was, when he caught his Mare.
Printed luckily, and may be read unhappily, betwixt hawke and buzzard, 16^1.

The ods or difference betwixt the Knaves Puritan, and the Knave PURITAN.
And first of the Knaves Puritan.
HE that resists the world, the flesh, and Fiend,
And makes a conscience how his days he spend
Who hates excessive drinking, Dr^bs and Dice
And (in his heart) has God in highest price;
That lives conformable to Law, and State,
Nor from the Truth will fly or separate:
That will not swear, or cousen, ^ogge or lie,
But strives (in Gods ^^are) how to live and die:
He that seeks thus to do the best he can,
He is the Knaves abused Puritan.
The Knave Puritan.
HE whose best good, is only good to seem,
And see^ing holy, gets some false esteem:
Who makes Religion hide^^^ocrisie,
And zeal to cover (...)lany;
Whose purity (much (...) devils Ape)
Can shift himself into an Angels shape,
And play the Rascal most devoutly trim,
Not ^^^ing who sinkes, so himself may swim
He Is the Knave Puritan, and only He,
Makes the Knaves Puritan abused to be
For (in this life) each man ^^^ must take,
Good men must suffer wrong for bad men's sake.
To he that will.
THou that this little Book in hand do take,
Of what thou read'st no false construction
Be not prejudicate, to carp, or grudge, (make
And look thou understand before thou judge:
My Muse is Musical, and runs division,
And holds all Critic Cock scombs in derision.
The wretch, that true Religion does despise,
Is like the Atheist, that his God denies,
And those that do contemn Religious Rites,
Must look for portions with the hypocrites:
And therefore with all Reverend due respects
To Truth, I have displaid some peevish Sects;
Full of foul errors, poor, and bare of sense,
Yet tending to some dangerous consequence.
It Is past a Butchers (...)ers reach,
To perch into a Pu(...) to preach;
A pot, a platter, dripping pan, or spit,
Are for a Ladies Bedchamber unfit:
Rich Hangings, Curtains, Carpets, garments gay
Do not become a Kitchen any way.
A Preachers work is not to gelde a Sow,
Unseemly it is a Judge should milk a Cow
A Cobbler to a Pulpit should not mount,
Nor can an Ass cast up a true account.
A Clown to sway a Scepter is too base,
And Princes to turn Pedlers were disgrace:
Yet all these, if they not misplaced be,
Are necessary, each in their degree,
If each within their limits be contained,
Peace flourishes, and concord is maintained.
The good man Job Job 10.22
describes it plain and right,
Where order is not, darkness, and the light
Are both alike, for blindefold Ignorance
Of perfect wisdom has no glimpse or glance.
But such as against all order do rebel,
Let them not do as did Achitophell, 2 Samuel 17 23.

To set his house in order home went he,
But what became of him, pray read and see.
Kind Brethren, I do wish you better fortune,
And with tongue, pen, and heart, I you importune
To have the patience but to hear, or read
What kind of fellows do you thus misleade;
I do inveigh here with impartial pen
Against no silenced, learned Clergy men,
Nor any man that understands me right,
But will approve these lines which here I write:
For let base spite say what it dare or can,
I know, what is writ, offends no honest man.
I write of some, that with tongue, pen and print
Have writ and railed, as if the devil were in it.
I could name many of that precious crew,
And for a taste I will recite a few.
First, of one that was a Merchant of Pitchards, Black pots, Double Iugges, and
Pipkins, and was forward to preach, not being called or sent.
Near to the lower end of Cheapside late,
There dwelt one Knight that sold much brittle plate,
As glasses, earthen dishes, pans and platters,
Pots, pipkins, gallipots, and such like matters.
This Knight the Brethren (by appointment sent
To Loving-land, (an Isle) in Suffolk went,
And at a Village (Summerlayten hight)
A Sermon there was preached by that Knight.
His prayer extemp're done, he op'de the book,
And Unto us a Child is borne, he took
To be his Text, and handled it so gravely,
That for it did in Yarmouth Jail, the Knave lie.
Knight had to aid him to negotiate,
One Gault (a Shoemaker). Ass-so^iate,
Both which were quickly to promotion risen,
Preferred from Yarmouth, unto Norw^ch prisen.
From thence Knight was unto the Gatehouse brought
Whence upon Bail, his liberty he sought,
And was bailed, but his bail and he both fled
To Amsterdam, and there he published
Strange Libels, full of mischief and debate,
Which here were scatterd against the Church and State.
Whereby he to the world did plain reveal
His mallapert, most saucie, purblinde zeal.
Another sweet youth in a Basket.
ONe Sidra^h Cave made Baskets late in Elie,
A constant brother, raised up his maids belly:
But 'twas in Gandermonth, his wife lay in,
His flesh rebelled, and tempted him to sin;
And Cave's wife took the wrong most patiently,
For which the Brethren praised her sanctity.
A third Bird of the same Nest.
ANother (one John Howgrave) dwelt at Yarmouth
(Not hot, or cold, but with a mere lukewarmmouth)
From country, wife and household late he fled
To Rotterdam, for's Conscience as he sed;
At John Burgaries house, he took his Inn,
And wooed his Hostess to the Paphean sin.
Burgaries wife by him with child was got,
That Howgrave fearing Rotterdam too hot,
Fled back to Yarmouth, whence at first he came;
His fault was known, and he chid for the same:
He said it was not he did that vile deed,
But sin that dwelt in him that fault did breed;
And that the devil should more damnation win,
For tempting Gods dear child to such a sin.
Another like that.
OF young, and old, both sexes late, a crew
were bound from England old, to Engl: new:
And staying long at Yarmouth there together,
Expecting Ships for passage, wind and weather,
A Brother came to Howgraves wife, and kissed her,
And told her sad news of a new fallen sister,
Fallen (quoth she) from the Word? I hope not that,
And let her fall then, to no matter what:
Ah no, she is fowly got with child (quoth he)
Now out upon her, pray by whom (quoth she)
'Twas by a faithful Brother he replide,
Well, well, quoth she, we all have gone aside;
If 'twere a Brothers, deed she could not shun it,
But 'thad been naught, had one of th'wicked done it.
A precious youth.
ALso one Spilsbery rose up of late,
(Who does, or did dwell over Aldersgate)
His office was to weigh Hay by the Trusse,
(Fit for the pallat of Bucephalus)
He in short time left his Hay-weighing trade,
And afterward he Irish Stockings made:
He rebaptiz'd in Anabaptist fashion
One Ea^on (of the new found separation)
A zealous Button maker, grave and wise,
And gave him orders, others to baptize;
Who was so apt to learn that in one day,
He Would do it as well as Spilsbery weighed Hay.
This pure Hay-lay man to the Bankside came,
And likewise there baptized an impure dame,
A Basket-makers wife, known wondrous well.
In Moss his Alley he and she does dwell.
As good as the rest.
AT Brentford dwells the widow Constable,
(As wise as was the Dean of Dunstable)
Her husband died, and she great have did make,
Our Church, and Churches doctrine to forsake;
Professing purity, chaste, undefiled,
Yet in a Gravel pit was got with child,
And now she bids Religion quite adieu,
Turned from a Nonconformist, to a Jew.
THese kind of Vermin swarm like Caterpillars
And hold Conventicles in Barnes and Sellars,
Some preach (or prate) in woods, in fields, in stables,
In hollow trees, in tubs, on tops of tables,
To the expense of many a tallow Tapor,
They toss the holy Scripture into Vapor:
These are the Rabshekaes that rail so bitter,
(Like mungrill Whelps of Hells infernal litter)
Against that Church that has baptized and bred them,
And like a loving mother, nursed and fed them,
With milk, with strong meats, with the bread of life,
Like a true mother, and our Saviors wife.
Here follows the Relation of the most famous preaching Cobbler Samuel How.
OF lare a wondrous accident befell,
A zealous Cobbler did near Morefields dwell:
A holy Brother of the Separation,
A sanctified member by Vocation.
One that did place his principal delight,
To set such as do walk aside, upright,
To mend bad Soales, and such as go astray,
Discreetly to support, and underlay.
This Reverend translating Brother (HOW)
Puts both his hands unto the spiritual Plow;
And at the Nags head, near to Coleman-streete,
A most pure crew of Brethren there did meet,
Where their devotion was so strong and ample,
to turn a sinful Tavern to a Temple,
They banished Bacchus thence, and some small space
The drawers and the Bar-boy had some grace.
There were above a hundred people there,
With whom few understanders mingled were,
Who came to hear the learned Cobbler HOW,
And how he preached, pray mark, I Will tell you now:
He did address himself in such a fashion
As well befitted such a Congregation.
He made some faces, with his hands erected,
His eyes (most whitest white) to heaven directed:
His hum, his stroking of his beard, his spitting,
His postures, and impostures done most fitting.
A long three quarters prayer being said,
(The good man knowing scarce for what he prayed)
For where his speech lacked either sense or weight,
He made it up in measure and conceit.
A worthy Brother gave the Text, and than
The Cobbler (How) his preachment strait began
Extemp'ry without any meditation,
But only by the Spirits revelation,
He went through-stitch, now hither, and now thither,
And took great pains to draw both ends together:
For (like a man inspired from Amsterdam)
He scorned Ne su^or ultra crepidam;
His Text he clouted, and his Sermon welted,
His audience (with devotion) almost melted,
His speech was neither studied, chewed or champ'd,
Or ruminated, but most neatly vamp'd.
He ran beyond his latchet I assure ye,
As nimble as a Fairie, or a Fury:
He fell courageously upon the Beast,
And very daintily the Text did wrest;
His audience wondered what strange powerdid guide him,
It Is thought no man can do the like beside him.
Yet some there were, whose censures were more quicker,
Said Calveskin doctrine would hold out no liquor.
Against Schools, and learning he exclaimed amain,
Tongues, Science, Logic, Rhetoric, all are vain,
And wisdom much unfitting for a Preacher,
Because the Spirit is the only teacher.
For Christ chose not the Rabines of the Jews,
No Doctors, Scribes, or Pharisees did choose:
The poor unlearned simple Fisherman,
The poling, strict tole-gathering Publican,
Tent-makers, and poor men of mean desert,
Such as knew no degrees, or grounds of Art;
And God still being God (as he was then)
Still gives his Spirit to unlearned men,
Such as are Barbers, Mealmen, Brewers, Bakers,
Religious Sowgelders, and Button-makers,
Coopers, and Cobblers, Tinkers, Pedlers, Weavers,
And Chimney sweepers, by whose good endeavors
The flock may fructify, increase, and breed
In sanctity, that from them may proceed
Whole multitudes of such a generation,
As may hold learning in small estimation.
The Latin is the language of the Beast,
Of Romes great Beast, that does the world molest;
Besides the Bishops speak it when they will,
And all the Preachers babble Latin still;
Then since it is the Romish tongue, therefore
Let us that do not Antichrist adore,
Leave it to Lawyers, Gentlemen, and such
Whose studies in the Scriptures are not much.
THis was the very sum, the root, and pith,
The Cobblers Lecture was full furnished with:
And having said his All (his prayer past)
He blessed his Brethren, and came to his Last.
And in some points, the Cobblers case is clear,
Christ chose not learned men when he was here,
Not Masters, or expounders of the Law,
(For he knew all things, and all things foresaw)
For had he chose great men of wealth and arts, (hearts)
The Jews (with slanderous tongues and hardened
Would then have said that what he did, or said
Was done by their assistance, and their aid.
He therefore chose poor men in means and tongue,
That by weak means he might confound the strong.
Yet this is certain, that at Pentecost,
(When on the Apostles fell the holy Ghost)
Each of them spoke, each several language then,
And were, and never shall be such learned men.
Not all the Universities that are,
Or were, or will be, with them may compare,
For never Bishops, or Divines inferiors,
But did acknowledge them for their superiors
For sanctity, and working Miracles,
For preaching sacred heavenly Oracles,
For perfect knowledge, and integrity,
For life and doctrines pure sincerity
The Apostles had more tha then whole world had,
Therefore the Cobbler and his crew are mad.
Objection.
BUt some (perhaps) may answer me, that then
No humane learning did inspire those men.
And that the Spirits mighty operation
Gave them the language of each several Nation:
Indeed true Christian Churches have confessed,
That long agone all miracles are ceast,
We must not look for signs and wonders now,
God plentifully does his Word allow,
And Tongues are not so easily discerned,
But men must study for them, to be learned.
For when the Apostles all were gone and dead,
By learned men the Gospel was or 'espread:
And published, and translated every where,
Els^ we had never had a Bible here.
'Twas Scholars, and grave learned men that did
Translate the Scriptures, which had still been hid
From all Sects, that would Order undermine,
Maintaining learning fits not a Divine.
Therefore if they (as they do boast) inherit
So large a measure of th'unmeasur'd Spirit,
Let them speak tongues, as then the Apostles spoke,
To work great wonders let them undertake;
Let them convert unto the Faith of Christ
Whole nations (whom the devil has long enticed.)
Let them the Moors, and barbarous Indians reach,
And to Man-eating Canniballs go preach:
Let all those Brethren leave great Britains Coast,
And travail where the devil is honored most.
All you that are this Kingdoms pestilence,
I wish you go, and drive the devils thence;
And then my Muse and I, in Verse will tell,
You and your Spirit have done wondrous well.
A Short relation of some of the mighty Miracles done by the Apostles in the
name and power of JESUS.
THree thousand Souls, S. Peter in one day, Acts. 2.41.

By preaching, turned into the heavenly way;
He cured the Cripple, read but Acts the third,
Struck dead two deep dissemblers with his word: Acts 5.1.

Cur'de old AEneas, palsied, weak, and lame, Acts 9.34.

These things Saint Peter did in Jesus name.
Cured people with his shadow, and revived
Tabitha (whom Death had of life deprived, Acts 9.40.

And after (fettered) in close prison shut,
An Angel him at liberty did put.
Let me see one of you such rare things do,
And then I Will say you have the Spirit too.
Saint Paul gave Sergius Paulus heavenly light, Acts 12.7

Enchanting Elimas he reav'd of sight;
Did Lidia and the Jaylour both convert, Acts 13.and 16.

And did the holy Ghost to twelve impart,
And they straitwaies spoke several tongues most plain, Acts 19. 16.

And I believe never went to school again.
If Napkins or handkerchiefes did but touch
The corpse of Paul, the force of faith was such,
That fiends did fly, and vexed souls had rest;
And from possessed men devils were dispossessed,
And were but some of you well hanged or whipped,
And that your shirts were from your corpses stripped
Or else your whip, or halter well would try,
If (by their touch) they would make the devils fly,
And leave possession, I dare lay my life
There Is many a man would use them on his wife.
But no such virtue does from you ensue,
For if there did, the devil would fly from you.
Sweet Brethren of the Sect of Ignoramus,
You that despise Te Deam and Laudamus,
You that do for our humane learning blame us,
I wonder what Religion you would frame us;
You, without any learning, barbarous, rude,
How dare you sacrilegiously intrude
In Church-affaires, not being called or sent,
And with your brazen faces impudent,
To pick Gods secret Closset open, and pry
(Most saucy) In the Almighties secrecy:
Is It not enough, you have his Will revealed,
But you will needs know his secret will concealed,
Break up the closset door, and boldly get
Into the eternal, heavenly Cabinet.
This is a theft contemptible most high,
(Transcendent Felony and Burglary)
And those proud thieves, at doomes day must not look
To be reprieved, or saved by their book.
Some there have been, so malapertly mad,
To guess what talk Christ with the Doctors had:
To know where Moses body buried lies,
Wh^^^ E^^^s garden was, or paradise,
What God did do Before the world the framed,
And where hell stands (appointed for the damned)
These curious Constables would search and peep
Through heaven, earth, sea, air, and the infernal deep,
And for their ^ee ^^ ^^dies, pains, and care,
They do conclude (like Cox-combs) as they are,
In boasting know ledge they themselves advance,
When all their skill is blinded ignorance^
All you of this o^^e self-conceited Sect,
That brag your selves to be the Lords Elect,
Me thinks it is too much for you or yours,
To be God^ Come^ers, not his Counselors,
Where have you that ^a^e reve^^tion found,
The Ser^p^^^es close'st my ^teries to expound,
Is it because you wit and learning want,
Or will the truth dwell with the ignorant:
Must the best preachers be unlearned fools?
Then down with Universities and Schools,
Your Libraries, your Halls, and Colleges,
If ignorance surpass your knowledges.
The word of God was faithfully translated^
By learned men, o^re spread and propagated^
'Twas done by Schooliers, had it not been done ^
Till you had done, we all had been undone.
Y'er bid to search the Scriptures ^ it is confessed,
You are not bid the Scriptures sense to wrest,
To metamorphose, after, wring, and wrie,
Gods Word ^ecording to your ^^ahtasie,
Ye'have leave to hear, or read it, it is not fit
You, or your Ke^nell should interpret it;
For should we trust to your interpretation,
We should have an unhandsome Congregation.
When God declared his Law in dreadful thunder
Upon Mount Sinai, full of fear and wonder, Exodus 19. 1^.

'Twas present death to any that was there,
That dared to touch the hill, or come too near.
When as the Ark was back returned again,
That seven months with the Philistines had lain,
Then fifteen hundred Bethshemites were struck
Stark dead, for daring in the Ark to look. 1 Samuel 6. 19.

When Vzzib, fearing that the Ark would full, 2 Samuel 6. 7.

Put to his hand, was straight struck dead withal,
His office only was to drive the Cart,
To touch the Arc was no part of his part.
Since Vzzab for his good will to hold up
The falling Ark, did taste dea^^es bitter cup,
Since those that once to look into it dared,
Or those that touch^ Mount Sinai were not spa^d,
What can a Cobbler look for, or a Knave,
Who in the Church (or Arc) no function have?
Yet dares most saucily to preach and prate
Against all orders, learning, Church and State.
It is most lamentable that so far,
Men so besorted or be devill'd are,
That witless Rascals are held more divine
Then ^rome, Ambrose, Gregory, Augustine,
Or all the ancient Fathers (in a word)
Their learnings and their labors held absurd,
By scabs, and varlets, of no worth or merit^
But impious boasting of th'inspiring Spirit;
And had each one of you his right and due,
Your spirit should be sharply whipped from you,
And when you felt the acuteness of the lash,
You would esteem your doctrine Balderdash.
For in Saint Austins time, he made complaint,
That eighty two Sects did the Church ^^^
Since when, could I all Here si^^ recount,
The number (trouble) treble will amount;
Yet in that Fathers days, that reverend man
Did never hear of the Sect called Puritan,
And sure the name of Puritan does yield,
A good man's nickname, and a bad man's shield,
It is a cover for a cheating Knave,
And 't is a jeare, a good man to deprave;
But both the good and bad, who are they be,
They get no name of Poritan from me.
I write of Separatists, and Schismatiques.
Of shallow-pated, hare brained Heretics,
Such as do make the Text a Lesbian rule,
Whose faith or reason (like the Horse or Mule)
Whom neither Law, or sense can curb or bridle,
Who never are well employed, nor never idle.
A man may well compare those Separatists
Unto the hot Gunpowder Romanists^
For though they do each other deadly hate,
And one the other feign would ruinate,
Yet both in their conclusions do agree,
The ruin of our Church and State to be.
Their head's (like Sampsons Foxes) ^undned wide,
But yet their tails are fast together tied;
For both do jointly join, and both desire,
With firebrand zeal to set our Corison fire.
To spoil our Government established,
And (through the world) most famous published,
They join together to consume and burn,
And with confusion waste and overturne
All ancient order, rule, and decency,
And doctrine, from the prime antiquity.
Thus both the grounds, and aims of both those Sects
Agree both (in their tails) for their effects,
How er'e their heads, East, West, South, North, may fever,
Their ends are one, to seek our downfall ever.
And of these two opposers (I Will bar swearing)
It Is hard to know which barrell's better Herring:
But (of the twain) a man shall always find
The Schismatique most obstinate inclined,
And the more ignorant he is, the worse,
Most stubborn, sense less, shallow in discourse,
The Papist makes some show of wit and sense,
And seeming reason for his false pretense,
And from him I may something gain, whereby
My faith (more firmly) I may fortify;
For though I do not credit his dispute,
Yet (by disputing) I may gain some fru^^.
But from the other side I dare presume,
I shall have nothing else but froth and fume,
With hasty answers, peevish, testy, snappish,
Untoward, wayward, nonsense, fruitless, apish.
These, none but these hold learning in disdain,
And all for use divine, accursed, and vain,
All humane knowledge therefore they derest,
Th'unlearn'd (they say) do know the Scriptures best:
That humane learning breeds confusion,
Most fit for Egypt, Rome, and Babylon,
And that the learned ones were, are, and shall
Be ignorant of humane learning all.
These with some other idle fancies mixed,
In their unfix'd opinions are all fixed.
But stay (my Muse) hold, whither will thou gad?
The earned Reader sure will think thee mad,
Because thou art so tiring, tedious, long
About these Screet ^howles with thy Cuckoes song:
And though I seem those Caitiffes to condemn,
Yet idle babbling makes me seem like them.
'T is best therefore, no longer time to spend,
But some few lines, and briefly make an end.
A Zealous brother did a sister meet,
And greeted sweetly in the open street;
Thou holy woman, where have been said he,
I came from a baptizing Sir (quoth she)
Pray whose child was it (he again requires)
She answered, such a Tailors in Blackfriars,
He Is one of us, the man replied again,
He Is one (quoth she) that does the truth maintain;
Quoth he, what might the child baptized be?
Was it a Male SHE, or a Female HE?
I know not which, but it is a Son she said,
Nay then (quoth he) a wager may be laid;
It had some Scripture name, yes, so it had
Said she, but my weak memorie's so bad
I have forgot it, 'twas a godly name,
Though out of my remembrance be the same,
'Twas one of the small Prophets verily,
It was not Esaias, nor yet Jeremy,
Ezekiel, Daniel, nor good Obadias,
And now I do remember, 'twas Golias.
ANother sister (as the Spirit raped her)
Said to her Boy come sirrah, read a Chapter:
The Boy por'd on the Book, and fumbling sat,
And had more mind to be at Ball or Gat;
His mother said, why do not read thou knave.
The Boy asked her what Chapter she would have
Thou paltry Imp (quoth she) can thou find none
'Twixt Genesis, and Revelation;
To learn thy duty, read no more but this,
Paul's nineteenth Chapter unto Genesis.
ON London Bridge I lately did confer
About some business with a Stationer:
A young man came into the Shop, and sought
Some holy Ballads, which he viewed and bought,
And there he prayed the Shopkeeper to look
The Epistles of Saint Ovid (a fine-Book)
Upon Saint Peter, Paul, John, Jude, or James,
They will not put the Saint unto their names,
But yet their ignorance impure, precise,
A heathen Poets name can Canonize.
ONe Mapleton, at Reding late did dwell:
Because his flesh did against his mind rebel,
He cut it off so close unto the stumpe,
That he scarce left himself a pissing pump;
And he is one of those wise men, and 'twere good
That all the Tribe of his sweet Brotherhood
Would ^^^ his (...)
Then they would (...)
Then peace and rest our Church and State should gain;
All windmills, and vagaries of the brain
Would from unquiet England banished be,
And from disturbance we should soon be free.
These, with the rest (unknown) may be compared,
Whose love to learning I have plain declared.
To woeful pass our Church were quickly brought:
If these companions had but what they sought,
From Rome, from them, from all that wrong us thus
Good Lord of Heaven And Earth deliver U S.
AMEN.
Postscript.
IF Prelates have by fraud, or frailty
My ^^shall not in Gall of Aspes ^^^,
I Will pray we may have better in their places,
Whom Grace may guide, to shun the like disgraces;
Let trade s^en use their trades, let all men be
Employed in what is fitting their degree,
And let the Pastors Urym, and his Thummim
Be upright, and sincere (as does become him)
Let each man do his best, himself t'amend,
And all our troubles soon will have an END.
It Is madness, that a crew of brainlesse blocks
Dares teach the learned what is Orthodoxe.

