Pray for the Peace of JERUSALEM.

A Visitation Sermon, PREACHED AT Gainsbrough, May 7th. 1691.

By NATHANAEL TAILOR, M. A. and Master of the Grammar School at Brigg in
Lincolnshire.

Psalm 133.1. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre in Fleetstreet.
1691.

TO THE Reverend Mr. JOHN HVTTON, ARCHDEACON of STOW, And my Brethren of the
Clergy in that Archdeaconry in the County of LINCOLN, All Present and Future
Happiness.
WHen I was obliged to appear to preach a Visitation Sermon amongst you, I made
it my business not to court Applause, nor use a popular Text; but to insist on
what might really be suitable to our Times, and serviceable to our Church and
Holy Calling.

And considering the Foreign War our Nation is engaged in, the intestine Schism
our Church and Religion suffers by, I could not suppose a more fit Subject
might be found, than what I chose, to oblige the Prayers and Endeavors of all
our Church's. Members for its Peace; which I am sure none can be against, but
such Incendiaries as delight in public Miseries.

When I appeared, I must gratefully own, the Serenity of your Complexions
showed what you are happy in, and my Endeavors wanted, an inward Goodness and
Candor.

But though my Sermon was then received so kindly by many of you, yet have I and
it met with such Censures and Reflections since, that I am forced to let it
speak for it self. And as I never yet was concerned in the least Prosecution of
any Dissenter, (tho living always in the midst of them, I endeavored by
Reasons to reconcile them to our Church:) So I hope these Pages will
demonstrate me to have had no other Design, than the uniting us at home, that
our Church and Nation may be happy, whose Felicity next to Gods Glory, I shall
ever make the great End of my Study, who am,

Brigg- School, May 23. 1691. Your Humble Servant, Nathanael Tailor.

Psalm 122.6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love
thee.


THIS Psalm, as also the two preceding, and Twelve succeeding Psalms, are
styled Psalms or Songs of degrees; whether because Godwin 's Jewish Antiq. l.
2. c. 1. p. 65.6. Ainsworth, on Psalm. 120. Pelling's Good old way. p. 50.
sung upon the 15 Steps that went up into the House of the Lord, as R. David
Kimchi, on Psalm. 120, thought, and the Chaldee Interpretation favors; or
because they were select Psalms chosen and sung by the Jews at their return
from their Babylonian Captivity, as other Expositors Diodate in Assembly. lec.
Wilson 's new Diestonary.
suppose, I shall not determine; both may be probable, these Psalms generally
speaking of Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3.132.5, 13.133.3.
the excellency of the Temple, inviting to it, and directing to Duty in i^, and
some of them expressly Psalm. 124.6, 7.126.1.2.
mentioning their Slavery under, and happy deliverance out of their Captivity
of Babylon.

However, about the penning of this Psalm, Expositors (...) Jans. ^^n. ^^emel.
agree 'twas penned by the Prophet David, after he had conquered Jerusalem 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7, 8.
(which was then held by the Jebusites,) and had brought the Ark of God
thither, 2 Samuel 6.15. Psalm. 122.4.
and made Jerusalem the place of the public Worship of God, who after owns
Jerusalem and Mount Zion as the place where he would dwell, and where his Rest
should be; as appears fully at Solomon's 2 Chronicles. 7.12. ^ 18.
Dedication of the Temple.

Jerusalem in the Original of the Text, is expressed in the Dual Number, (...)
and some Pasor 's Lex. on the Word.
thence think it to refer to the Earthly Jerusalem, the place of God's public
Worship here; and the Heavenly Jerusalem where his Throne of Glory is, and his
Saints with him, shall enjoy happiness hereafter: And indeed St. John, Rev.
21.2. expresses that place of Glory by Jerusalem.

But because those Heavenly Mansions are no ways disturbed with noise or
clamor, cannot be infested with Schism or Heresy, nor can the fury of Men or
Devils disturb their Peace; I shall humbly beg leave to suppose another sense
of it, and that is, that Jerusalem in the Text, refers to the Church Militant
on Earth, whether of Jews, as literally before Christ, or the Christian Church
of both Jew and Gentile, by Allegory, since Christ as St. Paul uses it, Gal.
4.26. And then besides some Modern Expositors, Bucer and Jansen.
the ancient Father St. Prosper, St. Prosper in Psalm. 122.2.
expounds the place of the Christian Church.

Non in ista Jerusalem quae occidit Prophetas and lapidavit ob se missos, quae
ad impietates multas stare non potuit, sed in illa Coelesti Jerusalem, quae
est Sanctorum omnium Matter, Filii ipsius stare laetantur: Qui licet invia sint
and adhue illo tendunt, ita tamen quasi pervenerint guadent, quia de
Adipiscendis fide, forma non dubitat.

And if the Prophet David, and the Jewish Nation were so joyful under their
Economy, much more cause have the Christians to rejoice under the Gospel
Dispensation; they had but the shadow, we the substance; they believed in a
Christ to come, we in a Christ already come.

And of all Christians, we the Ministers and Members of this best of Churches,
the Church of England, have reason to bless God for, and rejoice in the
happiness as yet continued to us, that we have Peace in our Jerusalem, that we
may go into the House of the Lord; that we have liberty to dispense, and you to
hear, and receive the Gospel and its Ordinances.

But since the Ambition of some, and the fiery Zeal of others from abroad,
endeavor to consume us, the Schisms and Heresies at home to undermine us, many
to divide us, the remisness in our Office, and irregularity in the Lives of our
Members to betray us, it concerns every Christian and Minister to practice the
Duty of the Text.

Nor is it beneath the greatest Prelate, or above the meanest Laick, while in
the Church Militant on Earth, with David Psalm. 122.1. to 6.
in this Psalm to delight in, and to be zealous for our Religion himself, and
entreat others in the words of the Text, to Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem,
and let all prosper that love her.

In the words are Three Parts. Divis. of the Text.


I. A Precept, (...), the 70 Expetite. Jun. Trimel. II. What to Pray for (...)
the Peace of Jerusalem, that there may be no War without to disturb her, nor
Schisms within to divide her. III. The motive to this Prayer; They shall
prosper that love thee.
Of these in their Order.

I. Here is a Precept to a Duty, Pray, not coldly, Part I.
but earnestly, for Jerusalem's welfare. Every mercy for our private use, or
the public Good, comes from God, James 1.17. Mat. 7.7, 8.
who gives freely to all that importune him by Prayer; and surely we have
little desire of, or care for our own or the Churches Peace, if we pray not for
it: So great Mercies are worth our asking, or else God may justly think us
unworthy their enjoying.

The Prophet David resolved never to forget his Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.5, 6.
and wished his Tongue might cleave to the roof of his Mouth, if he preferred
not Jerusalem to his chief Joy. And how earnest do we find him interceeding
with God for it? Do good unto Zion, O build Psalm. 51.18, 19.
up the Walls of Jerusalem. But especially in Psalm 80, where he complaining of
the Churches Misery, and how that the Wild Boar wasted it, and the wild Beasts
devoured it; Begs of God to return and visit his Vineyard, to cause his Face to
shine on his People, and save them.

And surely this should excite our Zeal; we are in as great danger, environed
with Enemies who strive to devour us; and our Church like its Dear Master, is
nigh being Crucified between Papists and Dissenters. And it is the God of Peace
that can only grant and continue ours; it is he that makes Men of one Mind in an
House, and who can cause our Enemies Prove. 16.7.
to be at peace with us, or stop their Fury against us.

And suppose no other means were left but Prayer, yet that may be prevalent
with God to grant us Peace in our Days: The Israelites under their Egyptian
Bondage, when denied the public Worship of God, and deprived of uniform and
unanimous petitioning him, for deliverance, had their Sighs and Exed. 2.24.3.7.
Groans heard by him, and they prevailed with God to send them Moses for their
Deliverer. And if the Sighs or Closet Prayer of a private Christian shall Mat.
6.6.7.7.
be answered, and where Two or Three are met together in Christ's Name, Mat.
18.20.
he promises their Prayers shall be heard, how prevalent must the Prayers of
an whole Congregation, yea of all the Members of this Church of God in this
Nation be?

When God accepted of Solomon's Temple, he promised 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
that in all Calamities, would his People assemble there and pray, he would
hear them, and grant their Desires.

Nor are we without Instances of the prevalency of of the Prayers of God's
People in behalf of the Churches safety and its Enemies overthrow. Moses by
Prayer Exodus 17.1^.
prevailed for the Destruction of the Amalekites, and the preservation of the
Israelites. When Hezekiah heard of Senacherib's Blasphemy against God and his
Religion, and his Bloody design against his Church, he by Prayer prevailed with
God to destroy 2 King. 19.2 Chron. 20.19, 22, 21.
Senacherib's Army, and preserve his Church. When Jerusalem's Wall was broken
down, and its Inhabitants were in a very distressed condition under Artaxerxes,
Nehemiah prayed, and God gave Ne^e^. 1. Chap. 2.
him favor with the King, so that he got an order for the redress of the City
and People. In a word, while Daniel was praying for Jerusalems restoration,
Dan. 9.2^.21, 22, 23
he had an Angel dispatched to inform him, that his Prayer was heard, and
granted.

So that no Calamity or Troubles can be so great or many, felt and feared by
the People and Church of God, but by Prayer they may prevail for Deliverance.
And God is the same Almighty God as ever, his promises to the Christian Church
as full and free as to the Jewish; and therefore to remove all Troubles felt,
and to prevent all Miseries feared, let Ministers and People from the highest
to the lowest, from one end of the Land to the other join in the performance of
the Duty of the Text.

Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; and the Lord grant us a gracious Answer.

But Prayer to God is not what alone is required of us for the Peace of
Jerusalem. For Verbs of Affection in the Holy Language imply Action; nor can he
have any earnest desires God should grant what he prays for, the Peace of
Jerusalem, who takes not all care he can, and uses his utmost endeavors to
promote it. And indeed the word (...) in the Text is from the Radix, (...)
which is rendered by Buxtorf, not only Petiit but Consuluit; and the Prophet
David explains it, Psalm. 122.8. by I will seek thy Good. And Jansenius in his
Paraphrase on that Verse has it: Precando optavi tibi bona, and omni studio
tibi prodesse, quod in me est conatus sum. Bucer comments on it thus; Omnes
suas quisque curas, omnes cogitationes convertat, quo illi omnia secundat. And
he adds the Reason; Nam quicquid serio petimus, ad id parandum quoque, si quid
ad hoc modo possumus, totis viribus ferimur.

So that we must not only in observance of this Precept, pray to God, and that
with all Importunity, Zeal and Affection; but with our utmost endeavors seek
after, consult for, and labor to promote what is the subject to be prayed for,
and the Second part of the Text.

II. Part II. of the Text.
The Peace and Prosperity, the Integrity and Welfare of Jerusalem, as the
Original Word imports; but also (...), as the Septuagint has it, or (...), as
Dr. Duport translates it. In the 70, some suppose Jansen. in loc.
an error of the Accusative (...) for the Genitive (...), unless by way of
Emphasis, the Psalmist meant; and the 70 would Translate it, O pray for the
Peace, the Peace I say of Jerusalem. However Ainsworth in loc.
both will oblige our care, and endeavor to promote those things that make for
the Peace of Jerusalem, of which I shall humbly offer Four.

1. Unanimity in Doctrine; Thus this Jerusalem of God is styled a City compact
together, Psalm. 122. v. 3. and the Psalms in our Common Prayer Book, as a
Paraphrase on it, render if a City at Unity in it self, and most agreeable to
the Original, if we may take Bithner's Bithner 's Lyra Prophet. i^ Loc.
Judgment, who tells us the (...) imports Consociata, united in one Society,
unanimous; and yet as if this was not enough to declare its unanimity, the
Original has as it were an exegetical Word more (...) signifying Buxtorf.
Lexicon.
ad unum simul; so that God's Jerusalem or Church, is a Society of People
Compacted, United, and by such an Unanimity knit together.

And as the Rule of the Jewish Church for their Faith to which they adhered,
was the Law Isa. 8.20.
and Testimony, declining what was not agreeable to it; and to this Law and
Testimony, the Scriptures, our Savior appealed John 5.39.
to prove himself to the Jews their promised Messiah. So our Church of England
allows of nothing for Doctrine but what is plainly made known in Scripture, or
may be genuinely deduced from it.

Our Faith is founded on the Sacred Word of God, epitomized in the Apostle, and
explained by the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, confirmed by the Writings and
Decrees of the Primitive Fathers and Counsels, and sealed with the Blood of
Martyrs.

Our Church in her Articles, adores the holy and undivided Trinity, without any
Rivals of Saints or Angels; receives the Faith of Christ without any thing that
destroys his Divinity, as Images and Pictures, or that nulls his Humanity, as
Transubstantiation; and owns all his Offices without the Doctrins destructive
to them of the Pope's Supremacy and Infallibility, of Merits and Purgatory, and
so Believers of the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost, as to be free from
Enthusiasm or Profaneness. She admits of no Doctrine concerning many States of
Creation, Apostasy, Grace and Glory that any way ecclipseth God's Glory and
Mercy, and Christ's Merits and Satisfaction; but all things in her Articles and
Homilies are so proposed, as may most set forth Gods goodness, and Man's
vileness, our Misery by Sin, and Happiness through a Savior, and all this in
so plain and familiar a Style, and in our own Language, that no Member of her,
can justly plead a cause of Ignorance of her Principles.

Let us then be Unanimous in our Doctrins, and have a care of basely betraying
or denying her, or Apostatizing from her: It becomes not us to prostitute our
dear Mother to the pleasure of every Malecontented Adversary, to substract from
her Ancient Catholic Principles, or to add to their new Opinions, as this or
the other Party pleases, whose Zeal against our Church outruns their Knowledge
of her Doctrins: And when I earnestly beg to lay aside prejudice and heat, and
employ that Liberty of Conscience granted them, in searching impartially, and
seriously weighing our Doctrine in the 39 Articles, and Book of Homilies; I
doubt not but they would soon find Reason and Religion persuading them to
repent of their past Folly and Sin of Schism, and to unite with us, and pray
for the Peace of our Jerusalem, Our Church of England, which is the envy of all
Dissenters, and the Glory of the whole Christian World.

For us Ministers, in public or private, to detract from the Doctrins of our
Church, is Judas like, to kiss and betray her: And let us but seriously ask the
Dissenters, or consider with our selves, should we recede from our Received
Principles, where should we center?

Are our Adversaries agreed what to ask? And if we should grant what they now
desire, would they adhere to their present Proposals, or oblige their
Congregations to unite with us? How indeed can this be thought on, when there
are so many Sects contrary to us, and to one another amongst us? The Papists
deny the Truth of our Church, because of their Multitude: The Dissenters
separate from us, because we are so many, and not selected Congregations: The
one upbraids us with Novelty, the other dislikes our Antiquity, and would have
us change our Religion as often as they please.

To gain some, we must part with the Apostolic Regimen of our Church by
Bishops; and instead of one, have every one to Lord it over us. To bring in
others, we must throw away Infant Baptism, and reduce the Church to Heathenism
again, and make it always gathering, never gathered. To engage a third Party,
we must deny all Christianity, in a manner, Christ's Incarnation, both
Sacraments, the Resurrection of these our Bodies, and must own an Infallibility
in every one. whenas now but one pretends to it, and he grandly mistaken in it
too. To reconcile the Papist, we must disown almost all the Articles of our
Church, and not only them, but of our Creed also; and receive Twelve new ones
on necessity of Salvation, though of no longer Date as such, than the Trent
Conventicle. Nor is this all, to unite with them, we must not only lay aside
Christianity, but our Humanity also; and must deny our Reason and Senses to
believe Transubstantiation: For though we see, smell, taste, and feel Bread and
Wine, yet must we believe it to be Christ's Flesh and Blood, the same he had of
the Virgin Mary.

And now consider where we should stop, or what a Chaos our Church would thus
be! Jerusalem would become a Babel; and it would be a strange Reformation, in
order to our being purer and better reformed, to lay aside Religion, Reason,
and our Senses, and turn any thing but Christians and Men.

The Heathens had a Form of Doctrine delivered down to them, to which they so
adhered, that one says Cotta in Cicero. de Not. Deorum l. 3.
,

Opiniones a majoribus acceptas defendam, and defendi semper, nec me ex ea
opinione quam a majoribus accepi de cultu Deorum immortalium ullius unquam
oration aut docti aut indocti movebit. Much more reason surely have we to keep
to our Religion which is truly Apostolical, was that Faith once delivered to
the Saints, Jude 3. Rev. 2.10.
and in which being constant to Death, we may expect a Crown of Life.

Let us then not be wheedled or frighted to recede from Antiquity, or be
imposed upon by Novelty. We have subscribed the Thirty Nine Articles, and they
include the Book of Homilies. Let us not then, against our Judgment, our solemn
Profession and serious Subscription of them, turn from, or be ashamed of the
best of Churches: 1 Timothy 7.20.
Such Persons may remember that Hymeneus and Philetus are stigmatized for their
Apostasy to all Posterity.

Let us rather propagate this Faith by Catechizing, that the People committed
to our Care, when Men, may not be Children tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
and after some years preaching among them, Heb. 5.12.
have need to be taught again what are the first Principles of the Oracles of
God.

The Heathens own the necessity of instructing Youth, Theog. v. 1001.2.
-- (...)
(...).
The Roman Orator Cicero, l. 4. ad Heren.
accounts it a great piece of Wisdom, and the greatest Service we can do in our
Generation: God calls for it, and our Church enjoins Can. 59.
it, Prove. 22.6.
punishing its continued neglect, with Suspension and Excommunication; most, if
not all Dissenters practice it. And shall they be industrious to propagate
Error, and we not careful to train up our People in the true Faith? God forbid!

Let our past remisness make us more zealous in this Practice. Our Church
injoyns a Catechism which contains the Sum of the Christian Religion, the
Credenda in the Creed, the Agenda in the Ten Commandments, the Petenda in the
Lords Prayer, and the Recipienda in the Doctrine of the Sacraments; and she
explains them all concisely, obliging her Members to their performance from
their Vow in Baptism, and the Benefits they receive thereby.

This Practice would stop the Divisions of this, and lay the Foundation for the
Peace of our Jerusalem in another Generation, by causing an Unanimity amongst
Men in Religion; to which see how earnestly St. Ephesians. 4.1, 2, to 8.
Paul beseeches all Christians from their being Children of one God, Members
of one Christ, etc.

And let me beg (with the sincerest Affection of a Christian and Minister) the
Dissenters to unite with us against a Common Enemy, and not expose themselves
and us to inevitable Ruin, by their needless Divisions; for it is impossible (if
they bring Ruin upon us) themselves should escape in that public Misery.

In a word; If a common Officer commanding you in the King's Name, can make you
keep the Peace in a Civil Sense; if Julius Caesar could, Sueton. Jul. Caes. c.
78.
and did appease the Roman Decumani when multiplying, by that Trisvllable,
Quirites, intimating they were Roman Gentlemen and Soldiers, and ought not to
quarrel amongst themselves; let me as an Ambassador of the God of Peace, beg,
Cor. 5.20.
and begging prevail from that Tetragrammaton compounded of quiescent Letters,
(...), with every of the Members of Christ's Church, or that own themselves the
Children of the God of Peace, by Unanimity of Doctrine to endeavor the Peace of
our Jerusalem; and let our Prayers, St. Prosper in loc.
and St. Prosper's words conclude this Head, Fiant unitas and abundantin
diligentium te.

2. Another thing conducing to the Peace of Jerusalem, is, Uniformity in
Worship: This we find the Israelites exemplary in, Psalm 122.4.
in this Psalm, Let us go, say they, into the House of the Lord -- our feet
shall stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of
the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the Name of the Lord.

They must be very Strangers to Heathen Writers, who know not, that as they had
their Gods, so they had their Temples set apart wherein to worship them, and a
distinct Order of Men to be Priests to perform that their Worship; Arist.
Polit. l. 7. c. 8. T. 3. p. 581. c. 9. p. 583.
which Order, the Philosopher (to the shame of many Christians) accounted
(...), the chief Order; and he gives this good reason for it, because they had,
(...), the Care of Divine things, the Worship of their Gods.

And that they had Forms of Prayer, is plain from their Historian, Live. l. 4.
c. 30.
who tells us, That when through a great Drought, about 326. V. C. Diseases
fell on Man and Beast, Animos multiplex Religio and pleraque externa invasit,
novos ritus sacrificando, etc. Donec publicus jam pudor ad primores civitatis
pervenit, cernentes in omnibus viris sacellisque peregrina atque insolita
piacula pacis Deum exposcendae: Datum inde negotium Aedilibus, ut
animadverterent, ne qui Dii nisi Romani, neu quo more quam patrio colerentur.

And as for the Jewish Church, that was under a Theocracy, the immediate
Government of God himself, and had Forms prescribed by him, and observed by
them.

Aaron and his Sons were especially set apart by God for the Ministry, and were
consecrated by Man also; Heb. 5.4. Exodus 28.
they had their appointed places for Worship, the Tabernacle in the time of
their sojourning, and the Temple after; and the People were (especially the
Males) obliged to appear three times in the Year before the Lord, in the place
the Lord had chosen, which was where the Ark or Tabernacle was, at first in
Shiloh, after at Jerusalem, where the Leaned Mede observes, Mede 's Works, l.
1. c. 48. on Deuteronomy. 16.7. Assembly in Deuteronomy. 16.17.
they had not only stated times by God, but a place; they were to appear not at
every place of their own choosing, but at one of the Lords choosing. They had
also general Feasts appointed by God, the Passover, agreeable with our Easter;
and their Pentecost, or Feast of Weeks suitable to our Whitsontide. Their
Sacraments of the Circumcision and the Passover, with their Order and
Ceremonies, Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.
were appointed by God to be observed by them, on pain of being cut off from
Israel. Yea, they had Forms of Prayers and Praises prescribed them by God: Thus
Aaron was ordered how to bless the Children of Israel, or pray to God for them.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Numb. 6.23.24.5, 6.
speak unto Aaron, and unto his Sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the
Children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the
Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious to thee. Which Form we
use in our Visitation of the Sick. Thus also in a time of Gods punishing them,
Hosea 14.2.
Hosea from God tells the people a Form of Prayer, saying, Take with you words,
and turn unto the Lord, say unto him, Take away all our Iniquity, and receive
us graciously, so will we offer the Calves of our Lips. And by the Prophet Joel
a public Fast being set apart, Joel 2.17.
the Ministers were charged to use what is part of our Litany, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach.

But what need particular Instances of the Jewish Forms of Prayer, whenas the
whole Book of Psalms was the Jewish Liturgy, or their Vocal Service, which is
intimated by the Titles of the Psalms, Mode l. 1. c. 1. p. 2, 3.
showing them to have been recommended to the several Choirs and Masters of
Music; and by their beginning with Oremus, Cantemus Deo, Venite exultemus,
it is plain they were Forms used by the Jews in their praying to, and praising
of God.

And as for the Christian Church, the ever-blessed Jesus, our great Lord and
Master, not only instituted the Christian Sacraments, Baptism and the Supper of
the Lord, as agreeable (as could consist with the Gospel-Oeconomy) with the
Jewish Circumcision and Passover, which were Types of them, but did himself
teach his Disciples and all Christians a Form of Prayer; for tho He in Matthew.
6. seems to propose it as a Pattern to pray according to it, yet at another
time when his Disciples asked him to teach them to pray, as St. John also
taught his Disciples: Luke 11.1, 2. 3, 4.
He charged them in express Words, when they prayed, to say, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc. And himself and his Apostles used Forms of Prayer: Thus our
Savior, though filled with the Holy Ghost above all Pretenders to it now, yet
repeats the same Petition in the same Words thrice, Mat. 26.39, 42, 44.
Father, if it be thy Will, let this Cup pass from me. And St. Paul in most of
his Epistles uses the same Form of Prayer in the beginning, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor.
1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Romans 16.24.
as Grace be unto you, and Peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. And he uses also the same Form of Blessing at the end of them: The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4.23.
1 Thessalonians. 5.28. 2 Thessalonians. 3.18. Philemon 25.
And since the Apostles days, it is easy to prove Forms of Prayer have been
used by the Christian Church all along in the public Worship of God.

And since the Church of God always used Forms of Prayer, Dr. Cumber. Dr.
Falkner.
why should not we be uniform in our Worship? A Worship serious and devout, Dr.
Hamond.
concise and pathetical; a Service suited to all Occasions of Prayer or
Thanksgiving for the Church in general, or private Christians in particular.
Fox. Acts, vol. 3.
A Liturgy compiled and reformed from Popish Errors by those who died Martyrs
for it, and did especially recommend it to Posterity.

Our Worship, blessed be God, Oracles of God, a Christ. Birthright, by the
Author of the Whole Duty of Man, p. 183.4.
is not concealed from the people in unknown Tongues, as the Popish is, and
must be where Popery prevails; for in our time some of the French Bishops and
Clergy having translated the Roman Mass Book into the French Tongue, that that
People might understand it; The then Pope Alexander VII. damned the Book and
Translators as Heretical, orders the Book to be burnt, and the Translators to
be excommunicated. So great a Crime is it for poor Souls in that Communion to
understand their Prayers, who only say them as Parrots, who are taught to prate
they know not what: But thanks be to God, our Service is in the known Tongue of
the Nation; so that every Member of our Church may (as St. St. August. on Psalm.
18.
Augustine says a man ought) serve God, not chattering like Birds, but with
the Reason and Understanding of a Man.

Every person of our Communion may know what Petition or Thanksgivings are to
be put up to God, and so join them with suitable Affections.

And indeed our Devotions are accompanied with such Zeal and Fervency by all
true Members of our Church, that as Tertullian styles it, Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
We offer holy Violence to God, besieging him by Prayer. And like those
Devotions in St. Basil's time, through the Unanimity, Uniformity, and Zeal of
the Devotees, she thunders out Prayers and Praises, each Member striving to
exceed other in this holy storming of Heaven for Mercies wanting, and in
returning Praises for Blessings received, and all this without any expectation
of our Prayers being heard or answered for our Merits, but through the Merits
and Mediation of the ever-blessed Jesus alone.

Let us, Ministers, then be uniform in our Worship; we have all declared our
unfeigned Assent and Consent to all things in our Service, Act of Uniformity,
12 Car. 2.
before our Respective Diocesans at our Institutions, and before our several
People soon after our Inductions; and twould be a shame to us, and a Scandal to
the Church, for us to act otherways.

And as for our Brethren of the Laity, What can they desire better, and more
edifying than our Divine Service, where they know what to petition, and to
bless God for, and may join both with suitable Affections, and are not confined
to the Extemporary Prayer of a Minister, with any of whose Petitions they know
not whether they can join, till heard; and too many may, upon good grounds
probably, not say, Amen.

The Minister being the Mouth of the People to God in Prayer, as he is the
Mouth of God to them in preaching, ought to pray what the people understand,
may be most affected with, and may heartily say Amen to; which surely is best
done by a Form of Prayer understood by them before. This would prevent that
Consusion the Church and Congregation would be in, if every one was left to his
private Devotions and Petitions.

St. Paul rejoiced to see the Order in the Church of the Colossians; for by
their Uniformity in Worship, an awful Reverence would be gained to Religion,
and its very Enemies could not but think them the Servants of the God of Order;
whenas should one come into a Congregation that is not uniform, but one has an
Hymn, another an extemporary Prayer, a third a Form, every one as he thinks fit
at his Devotion, would not a Man think that Congregation mad, as St. Paul
infers, 1 Cor. 14.23, 26.33.
and however grants, such a Course unedifying, and not of God, who is not the
Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints.

Yea, was the greatest Pretender to, or Pleader for Extempore Effusions against
Forms of Prayer, but to speak to his Landlord, a great Man, or however to the
King, I am confident he would a little consider, and premeditate what Form of
Words he should express himself in; much more ought we to do, when we who are
but Dust and Ashes, are to speak in our Prayers to the great God. Solomon's
Advice surely is very necessary, That we take heed when we go into the House of
God, Eccles. 5.2.
and be not rash with our Mouths, or let our Hearts utter any thing before God;
for God is in Heaven, and we upon the Earth, therefore let our words be sew.
And indeed to avoid the Battology of the Pharisees, Mat. 6.
our Savior taught us that Compendium, the Lords Prayer.

And let any Opposer of our Forms consult but their Directory, and they will
find almost as great a Formality, and as strictly enjoined, though with less
Piety and Devotion: Directory, Preface, p. 8.
And the very Compilers of that Book in its Preface declare for Uniformity in
Divine Worship, for two Reasons; (1.) To answer the Expectations of other
Reformed Churches; and, (2.) To perform what they were obliged to, by their
Promise in their Solemn League and Covenant. Now how can they be uniform
without a Form? Or can their Directory, which they established, (when they
threw away the Churches Liturgy) show their Uniformity, when every Minister is
left to pray as he pleases? It Is true indeed, it prescribes and injoyns the
Matter and Pattern of Prayer, why then may not fit words to express that Matter
in, be enjoined? Is not the prescribing the Matter for Prayer, as much formal,
and as great a stinting of the Spirit, as to enjoin fit words? Or can the
Spirit dictate Words, and not the Matter, to their Pastors? If they be for
Uniformity, why not pious Matter in suitable Expressions, as our Liturgy
injoyns? If not for Uniformity, Why do they pretend to it, Ludovicus Capellus,
These. Theolog. de Liturgia, p. 656, ad 670.
and by their Reasons for that pretense, grant what is easily proved, That all
the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, whether from Calvin or Luther; and also the
Assembly of Divines themselves did see the Necessity and Advantage, and did use
Forms of Prayer, and that with great Reason.

For surely the Prayer put up by the whole Congregation, with which all
Congregations of our Church through the Nation join, must be more acceptable
to, and prevalent with God, than the private Prayer of a single person that
has scarce another in the whole World joining with him.

But however they please to act, let us, the Ministers and Members of the
Church of England, adhere to our Liturgy and Uniformity in Worship. Let the
Ashes of our Reformers and its Compilers, warm us with Zeal for it, and make us
ashamed to disown that for which they died.

Let us show our selves the Tribes of the Lord, Psalm. 122.4.
as the Text imports, by our Uniformity of Worship in our Jerusalem, that our
Prayers may be prevalent for its peace: And let others that will not do so,
answer it at their perils; the Text implying, they are not, nor do belong to
the Tribes of the Lord, that neglect this uniform Worship of him, as St.
Prosper remarks on that Verse. St. Prosper in loc.


3. A third thing tending to the peace of Jerusalem, is Impartiality of
Discipline. The People of the Jews had God himself for their Legislator, and
had both Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws to punish Sin by; and so have we
Christians from the same God and Christ, in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, the just and holy God endeavoring in them by Threats of
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Misery to deter the Wicked from the evil of
his way, and by Promises of Felicity for both Soul and Body here and hereafter,
to encourage the Good in the way of Holiness.

But, alas! such is man's stupidity, that he is led more by Sense than Faith,
and is more afraid of temporal Mulcts and Punishments from the Civil and
Ecclesia. stical Magistrates, than of the Frowns and Threats of Eternal
Vengeance from the great God.

And therefore, as the Philosopher observed, Arist. l. 5. c. 5. de Moribus. T.
3. p. 79.
(...). The Law of Nature commanding us to live according to every Virtue, and
forbidding every Vice: All Nations have provided Laws for the punishment of the
one, and the encouragement of the other.

And were the Statutes and Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical of our Nation,
impartially executed, we should soon see Sin disgraced, the Sinner ashamed, the
Sabbath better kept, our Churches fuller, and have greater hopes for the peace
of our Jerusalem.

Let not then those to whom the Executive Power of them is committed, connive
at, or partially punish sin, lest we incur the Censure we cast on the Church of
Rome too justly, of selling Pardon of Sins for Money.

I would gladly hope the Concern of our Religion, Letter to Bishops, 1689.
the Danger we are in, the late Request and Command of our Governors, will
engage the impartial procedure of Justice to punish Vice wherever.

But this being not mine, but the Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrates
Province, I shall leave it, and only beg they would endeavor by such a good
Administration, the Peace of Jerusalem, to which nothing can more conduce than
it, as what would promote what I shall urge in the last place for Jerusalem's
Peace; and that is,

4. Integrity and holiness of Conversation in all its Members. Plautus Persa.
Act 4. Sc. 4.
The Comedian's Observation is very true; Oppidum, si incolae been sint morati,
pulchre munitum arbitror: But if Vice abound in a City or Nation, Centuplex
murus rebus secundis parum est. And the sacred Writ affords as many sad
Instances of persons, whose sins cried for, Genesis chap. 6, 7.
and pulled down Vengeance on the places of their Habitations, witness the
Inhabitants of the old World, and of Sodom and Gomorrha. Genesis chap. 18.19.


Sin disturbs inward Peace, hinders outward Comforts, and exposes to
inevitable Ruin; no wonder then every of Gods People the Jews were charged to
be Holy, Lev. 11.44.
as their God was Holy; and we Christians are commanded, if we dare to name the
Name of Christ, to depart from Iniquity: 2 Timothy 2.19. Titus 2.11, 12, 14.
And if we expect Salvation through him hereafter, to be a peculiar People to
him in serving him here.

And if the sins of common Christians add to the sins of the Nation and Church,
and call for Vengeance on both, much more will the sins of Ministers be
provoking.

The Learned Dr. Dr. Cave 's Introduct. to vol. 2. L. Fathers, p. 32.
Cave tells us, the very Heathen Emperor Julian commanded the Heathen Priests
to abstain from all vile and wicked Actions, to study, and live strictly,
performing Religion with a great care.

We are sure the great God forbids all Natural, much more Moral Deformities in
his Ministers under the Law, Lev. 21.23.
and charged them to bear on their Breasts Vrim and Thummim, Learning and
Sincerity, Exodus 28, 30, 36, 39. etc.
and on their Foreheads or Conversation, Holiness. And Christ, under the
Gospel, expects no less. The Charge St. Paul gives to St. Timothy, and in him
to all Ministers, is great; 1 Timothy 4.14.
To be an Example in Conversation as well as Doctrine, in Purity as well as
Faith. And no Church can more strictly enjoin her Ministers an Holy Life, than
ours does. Can. 75.


But since the best of men on this side Heaven have their failings; and as St.
Romans 7.18, to 24.
Paul himself found reason to complain of his sinfulness, I shall turn my
Advice to you, into Prayer to God for us all, Prayer for Ernber Week.
in our Church's Words for all her Ministers; That God would so replenish all
of us called to this holy Function, with the Truth of Doctrine, and Innocence of
Life -- That both by Life and Doctrine, we may set forth the Glory of our God,
and set forward the Salvation, not only of our selves, but of all men. And I
promise my self, that all of us will endeavor effectually to answer, Amen.

And thus have I considered the (...), the things that make for the Peace of
Jerusalem, which we ought to pray for, and endeavor after: Unanimity in
Doctrine, Uniformity in Worship, Impartiality in Discipline, and Integrity in
Conversation.

And to incite to the practice of these, I shall very briefly add a few Motives.

1. The Zeal the Heathens had for their Religion: For though by our Apostasy we
depraved Gods Image, Romans 3.23.
in which we were created; yet the very Remains of that Image in fallen Man did
dictate to him the Being of a God, and that he ought to be worshipped; Cicero
l. 2. (...) Not. D^oru^
so that the Roman Orator brings in one Saying, Omnibus innatum est, and in
aninto quasi insculptum Deos esse -- esse Deos ita perspicuum est, ut id qui
negat, vix eum sanae mentis existimem. And the Orator himself says, Cicero l.
1. de Legibus.
In hominibus nulla Gens est neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae non
(etiamsi ignoret qualem habere Deum, deceat tamen) habendum sciat. And the
Philosopher tells us how God is known by them; (...). Arist. de Mundo, c. 6. T.
1. p. 863.
And as they acknowledged a God, so they seldom mentioned his Name, especially
Jove's (which may probably be a Contract of the Jews, and our Jehovah) without
some Epithet declaring their Esteem of, and Honor for him; as Jupiter Optimus
Maximus, Immortalis, etc.

And it is probable they had some notion of a Christ, and the Son of God
becoming Man; and perhaps this was the reason why about the time of our
Savior's Birth, Sueton. Aug. Caesar, c. 53. Bishop Tailor L. of Christ. S. 4.
p. 25. Platina, f. 6. Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Augustus Caesar, in Honor to our Savior, Dominum se posthac appellari, ne a
Liberis quidem aut Nepotibus, vel serio vel joco passus est. However, it is
certain Tiberius Caesar, under whom our blessed Savior suffered, would have
had our Christ reckoned among the Number of their Gods.

And as they had thus a Notion of God, and Honor for him, so they made it
their first and chief Business to take care of his Worship: Thus one; (...)
Pythag. v. 1. Phocyl. v. 6.

(...) -- And another, (...).


Nor was the Worship of God their chief Business, but they were zealous and
uniform in it; Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
thus Ovid brings in Jupiter declaring it: Signa dedi venisse Deum, vulgus
precari
Coeperat --
And of Dencalion and Pyrrhus's Zeal, Ovid tells us thus: Vt Templi tetigere
gradus procumbit uterque, Lib. eodem.

Pronus humi gelidoque pavens, dedit oscula saxo.


But it would be tedious to insist on their Devotion, let one Instance serve
for all to show their Zeal for Religion. Val. Maximus says of the Heathen
Rome; Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1. n. 9.
Omnia post Religionem ponenda semper nostra Civitas duxit, etiam in quibus
summae majestatis conspici decus voluit.

Surely then we Christians, and Ministers of the best of Churches, ought to
esteem its Peace, and our Religion more than our Lives and Fortunes: A Religion
far better than they (poor Creatures) could pretend to. Their Heathen Idols,
even that at Delphos, being silenced at our Savior's Death, as Plutarch
himself grants, Plutarch. de Orac. defect. Dr. Cave introduct. to v. 1. L.
Fath. p. 10. Dr. Heylin's Cosmog. l. 2. Phocis.
and others witness; which was a Demonstration that Christ came to put an end
to their Idolatry; and certainly if they were so zealous for their Idolatry, it
should excite our Zeal for Christianity, and our Prayers and Endeavors for the
promoting and continuing the Peace of our Jerusalem.

2. Consider the fidelity of the Jews to their Temple and Religion. Scripture
abounds with Evidences of their strictness in their Services and Devotions, and
how hardly any of them closed with Christ, when he came, though their promised
Messiah, but in zeal to their Law and Church, they cried out, Crucify him,
crucify him.

And as for the Honor the Jewish Nation had for their Temple at Jerusalem,
it is recorded, Philo Legate. ad Cajum, cited by Bp. Usher in power of Princes
obed. of Subject. p. 191, to 198.
That when the Emperor Cajus, after our Savior's time, would have had his
Image set up in the Temple at Jerusalem, with the Title he had assumed to
himself, of New Jupiter, all the Old Men, Young Men, and Boys in one rank; all
the Old Women, young Ones, and Virgins in another, offered themselves to be
slain by the Emperor's Fury, rather than they would suffer their Temple to be
prosaned with Idolatry. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Dr. Cave, v. 2. L. F.
L. St. Simeon, p. 94, 95. v. 1. L. F. L. St. Stephen, p. 11. L. St. Cyril, p.
352, 353.


Though afterward this Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus Vespasian, and
scarce one stone left upon another, according to our Savior's Prediction,
Matthew. 24. And when the Emperor Julian, to prove Christ a false Prophet, did
encourage the Jews to rebuild it, no sooner had they cleared the Rubbish, and
laid the Foundation, but a terrible Earthquake shaked it down, and all the
Buildings about it, and destroyed the Undertakers of it: And when the next day
others attempted it, a great Fire broke out, and forced them to give over, as
is attested by Writers Heathen as well as Christian.

By which the ever-blessed Jesus demonstrated his putting an end to the Jewish
Economy, and his bringing the World to a purer Religion, that of the Gospel,
Christianity. And surely if the Jews were so zealous for, and so faithful to
their Religion, which was so obscure and chargeable, so burthensom and
troublesome, we should join all our Prayers, and use all our Endeavors for the
Peace of our Jerusalem, and the Welfare of our Religion which sets us free from
that Yoke of Bondage, Gal. 5.1. Mat. 11.28, 29.
eases us of those Burdens, and makes our Service perfect Freedom. Especially,

3. If we consider the Zeal of the Primitive Christians, who, rather than they
would comply with the Worship of false Gods, or suffer their own Worship of the
true God to be profaned, were themselves sacrificed, and rather chose to part
with their Lives, Dr. Heylin 's Cosmog. in 4o. l. 3. p. 193, 293. Leigh on
Caesar's, p. 247. 9.
than their Religion, witness the Disciples and Apostles of the ever-blessed
Jesus, most of whom died Martyrs, witness the Ten Primitive Persecutions; in
the last of which under Dioclesian, it is said 5000 Christians were martyred for
every day of the year, except the first of January, on which they shed no
Blood, as St. Hierom writes. Nor did our Religion lose by their Sufferings, but
was rather the more propagated, occasioning that Christian Adage, Sanguis
Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae.

Let the like Zeal be in us, our Faith is the same, our Hopes, and
Encouragements of Support under, and of Glory after Sufferings, are as great as
they had; they were Flesh and Blood as well as we. Let us not then fear to bear
a Cross with Christ on Earth, if called to it, since we expect to wear a Crown
with him in Heaven.

Death we must meet with; and to suffer it for Christ's and our Religion's
Cause, will make that which is a Debt to Nature, an Advantage to us; our thus
suffering here, adding to our Crown of Glory hereafter. 2 Cor. 4.1^, 18.
For assuredly, if they who live to Christ, shall be happy with Christ, much
more shall they be glorious, who with the Noble Army of Martyrs, die for
Christ, rather than they will disown, or betray him.

4. Let us be earnest and zealous in our Prayers and Endeavors for our
Religion, and the Peace of our Jerusalem, from the sad Effects of Schism in the
Church, and Civil War (its usual Product) in the State. See how St. Paul brands
those who cause Divisions, and deters us from them: Now, I beseech you, Romans
16.17.
mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them: For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Bellies, and by good Words and fair Speeches, deceive
them that are simple. And the same Apostle tells us of some that withstood
Moses and Gods Institution among the Jews, as Jannes and Jambres; 2 Timothy 3.5.
to 9.
and he parallels the Christian Schismatics with them, who having a show of
Godliness, but not the power of it, creep into houses, and lead silly Women
captive. Lev. 10.2.
We read also of some that usurped the Priests Office under the Law, as Nadab
and Abihu; but their false Fire provoked God to burn them; Nemb. 16.
and Korah doing the like, the Earth opened and swallowed him up, and Fire
burnt his Companions. Let this deter all from Schism and usurping of the
Priests Office, who are not called to it, as God under the Law and Gospel,
appoints; called by God, Heb. 5.4. Exodus 28.
and consecrated by Men in Authority to do it, as Aaron was. Yea, Christ
himself, though endowed with a greater measure of the Spirit, than any now can
pretend to, yet took not on him that Office, without a Commission from his
Father, 1 John 3.1, 2.
as Nicodemus grants.

And as God sent him, he sent his Apostles, ordaining them to the Work of the
Ministry, 1 John 20.21.
and they ordained others, 1 Timothy 5.22.
and appointed Bishops over Churches, and charged them to lay hands suddenly on
no man, and to ordain them whom they found fit for the Ministerial Office.
Titus 1.5.


Let the black Mark St. Paul (as is premised) sixeth on the Schismatic, deter
from it; and surely none can be fond of becoming their Proselytes, whenas twice
St. Paul styles all such, simple People, and silly Persons, Titles with which
few are pleased.

And as the ill Consequences of Schism in the Church may incite us to pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem, and oblige us to unite among our selves, so surely the
Danger and Fears of a Civil War in the Nation (the usual Effect of Schism in
the Church) will enforce us to the Duty.

Methinks that dreadful Account of the Civil War between Caesar and Pompey,
Lucan, l. 2. v. 102.3.
Lucan gives us, may affright us

Stat cruor in Templis, multaque rubentia caede
Lubrica saxa madent, nulli sua profuit aetas;
Non senis extremum pinguit urgentibus annis,
Praecipitasse diem, ne primo in limine vitae
Infantis miseri nascentia rumpere fata.
-- Infandum Domini per viscera ferrum Lucan lib. cit. v. 145.

Exegit famulus, Gnati maduere Parentis
Sanguine, certatum est cui cervix caesa parentis Cederet. V. 180.

Avulsae cecidere manus, exsectaque lingua
Palpitat, and muto vacuum ferit aere motu
Hic aures, alius spiramina naris aduncae
Amputat, etc.
But we need not go so far for sad Instances of the Effects of Civil Wars; if
we look back into our late Times, might we not find our Church a Chaos, and the
Nation an Aceldama, when Persons out of a pretended Zeal against Popery,
murdered their Lawful Sovereign, and were imposed on by Popish Emissaries in
their several Conventicles?

What Person was then so sacred? What Place so secure, but it was profaned and
injured? The Royal Diadem and Sacred Mitre trod under-foot, and no tie of
Religion or Nature hindered them from Sacrilege and Murder. From which Wounds
our Church and Nation yet retain Scars, and the Original of all our late or
present Fears may be thence dated.

Let then the fiery Zeal of those of the Roman Communion, (whose most cogent
Arguments are Sword and Faggot) make us abhor that Religion which the Christian
World grows weary of, and I hope will in short time throw off: Let the
Commotions in Germany, the sad Catastrophe of our Royal Martyr, and the
dreadful Effects of those times dissuade us from being imposed on by such
Incendiaries, and oblige us to pray for, and to our utmost power endeavor the
Peace of Jerusalem. Because,

Lastly, of the Motive in the Text, They shall prosper that love thee; Buxtorf.
Bithner, ^ansenius, Prosper.
where the original Word (...) comes from the Radix (...) which fignifies,
Tranquilli erunt, faelices erunt, they shall be happy both in Mind and Body;
all inward Contentment, all outward Felicity shall be enjoyed by them that are
at Unity with, and uniform to our Jerusalem, our Church of England, which I am
consident will be continued and preserved by God, as long as he has a Church
upon Earth.

Let then all Dissenters from us, I beseech them, see the design of their and
our Enemies of Rome, whose grand Endeavor is to divide us, and so destroy us
by our selves; and let it influence them to unite with us against a common
Adversary.

Let them lay aside that unreasonable and unjust Prejudice against our Church,
of being Popishly affected, by asking themselves seriously, What Party of
Dissenters did, or dared to speak or write against Popery a few years since,
when they at the same time did apprehend it coming in like a Deluge? Nay, they
rather then closed with, and are now fond of a Liberty of Conscience, whereby
Popery is most probably to be promoted, and the Dissenters imposed on in their
own Meetings by Popish Emissaries.

It was (as must be confessed) the Church of England Men alone, who from their
Pulpits and the Press, (as they had no Reason to be ashamed to own their
Religion, so) were not afraid to defend it; and have shown that it is our Church
which is the greatest Bulwark against Popery, by daring rather to suffer for
it, than betray it, to arrive at the greatest Honors, or keep the grandest
Privileges.

And would our dissenting Brethren but unite with us, (which they have just
cause to do) 'twould free them from the Trouble and Distracting of halting
between diverse Opinions; this would free the Nation and Church from Schism and
Faction, cause both to enjoy peace, make us all happy at home, and formidable
abroad: This would, in a word, prepare us for Gods Spirit and its Graces in the
Church, where all its Members were (...), Acts 2.1.
of one mind, when the Holy Ghost descended on them, and would entitle both
Church and State to Gods protection, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against us.

And therefore with the words of my Text, let Tongue and Heart of every one of
us pray earnestly for, and let all our Endeavors be to the promoting of the
Peace of our Jerusalem; and we need not doubt, but the God of Mercies, who ever
took care of his Church amongst us, will grant us the gracious Answer of the
next words, They shall prosper that love thee.

To which, God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and one God, be
ascribed of us, and all the World, all Praise and Thanksgiving, now and
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

