TRVTH'S TRIUMPH: OR, Old Miracles newly revived in the Gracious preservation
of our Sovereign Lord the KING.

By JOHN TAILOR.

-- Miranda ^anunt, sed vix credenda Poetae.
Printed in the Year M.DC.XLIII.

TRVTH'S TRIVMPH, OR, Old Miracles newly revived in the Gracious Preservation
of our Sovereign Lord the KING.
GOds glorious, gracious Volume does relate
How (out of Nothing) He did All Create:
Made man, True, Holy, Just, who (fowlely) fell
And God Redeemed him from sin, death, and hell:
His Miracles of Judgment, fearful, rare,
His Miracles of Mercy Mighty are;
Which makes my Muse this Miracle to Sing
How graciously God has preserved my King.
The Ravens fed Elias in his need,
And Hungry Daniel, Abacuck did feed,
The Meal and Oil, did every day increase
In Rich Abundance, till the Dearth did cease,
King David, oftentimes to flee was forced,
And (like a Partridge over the Mountains Cours'd,
The Almighty still being their Great defense
Sav'de them from Famine, Sword, and Pestilence,
And as these Miracles long Since were done,
Yet God has Lately showed a Gracious one,
Which proves my King the Adopted son of God,
Else he had Ruined been, or down been Trod.
For when Rebellion had the Land or'espread,
And that the foot durst kick against the Head;
When each Fox had a Hole, each Bird a Nest
And He no place his Royal Head to Rest;
Deprived of Houses, Castles, Towns and Fortes,
Of Shipping, Ammunition, Havens, and Ports,
Of Powder, Shot, Guns, Pikes, only one Sword
Was Left him, which is Gods Eternal Word;
Besides all this, his Magazins, his Tower,
His Means, Rents, Customs, Ravished from his power,
All his Revenues stopped, his Aides all staid,
His Friends, and faithful Subjects prisoners laid,
Or Banished, or undone, both they and theirs
Whilst Povertie's their Portions, and their Heirs.
His Ancient Servants, (like poor sheep forlorn)
Despised and Looked on with the Eyes of Scorn,
Because they could not, or would not Maintain
Disloyal war against their Sovereign.
Nay more, His Gracious Queen (that Royal she)
Was for Her safety forced perforce to flee;
What Wickedness Could worse be Hatched then
When He, that is the only man of men,
And She, the Woman for Her Virtues wonderd,
So woefully should be divorced and sunderd.
He whose Integritie's Admired, Approved,
She who deserves of all to be belov'de,
A Blessed fruitful Mother, and Thereby
Her issue may the whole world dignify.
He, should my pen presume his praise to write
'Twere like a Taper to give Phoebus Light;
She, that in Princely virtues does excel,
In whom the Goddesses and Graces Dwell,
In heart Heroicke, like the Thund'rers Bride,
Like Citherea, She is Beautifide,
Magnanimous, Like Jove's Brave Braine-Borne Girl
In State and Mind of Majesty the pearl.
This Matchles Pair, (with whom none may compare)
By Rude, unruly Rebels sundred were.
Their only faults are, they are both too good
For such as have their Goodness thus withstood.
A Mild ^osias will not serve their Turn,
But Graceless they against his Mildness Spurn:
A Nero, or an Heliogabalus
Were fitter far, for Such as wronged him thus.
His Blessed Reign (from Cruelty exempt)
Requited with disloyal Cursed Contempt,
Traduced in Pulpits, and in printed Lies,
Abused with needless fears, and Jealousies;
Taxed, he would bear an Arbitrary sway,
And turn Religion to the Romish way:
In Conventicles, Sermons, Drinking, Walking,
Or in discourse, Treason was safest talking.
Besides all this (to all true Subjects Grief)
His never Broken Word gained no Belief,
His Vows, and Protestations, firm and Just
(Which I account High Treason to distrust)
All unbeleev'd, Misconstred, wrongly wreasted
By false Surmise of men, Disloyal Breasted.
No faith was Left'em, doubtful diffidence,
Had Banished all Belief, and confidence;
God and the King, were both used in one fashion,
The Creed was thrust out of the Congregation:
The devil amongst them did such Whimseyes fling,
They neither would believe God, or the King.
For if they thought there were a God indeed,
They then would know damnation is decreed
In Scripture, for Resisting powers ordayn'd
By God, which should be honored and maintained.
It is a Maxim, has been always held,
The Protestant Religion never Rebelled:
Their Doctrine teaches humbly to obey,
And, Whatsoever Seperatists can say,
It plain Appears, they are not Protestants
That ('against their King) uncivil Wars Advance.
Thus did new Englands Sects Strive Impiously,
To turn old England to an Anarchy.
Thus was my Gracious Liege of all Berest,
And (in the world's opinion) little left;
Then was he Rich in God, Then had he most,
The Almighty Raised for him a mighty Host,
Brave Arms, and Armies, in his Cause to fight,
And set faithes true Defender in his Right.
With Hope, and Confidence he is armed still,
And humbly waits upon his makers will:
With thief he has opposed false fortunes frowns,
With these he has Recovered Strength and Towns,
With these he has got money (wars strong nerves)
With these He Is served because his God he serves.
With these his Magnanimity has won
Triumphant Honors, that shall never be done.
But Beyond Time his fame shall ever last,
And he in blessed Eternity be placed.
All praise to thee, Eternal King of Kings,
That coveredst Him with thy protections wings
With Such Miraculous Grace, that all may see
My Sovereigns Safety All Consists in Thee.
When as Assiria's King, (or the Aramite)
Against Israel came, with Numbers Infinite, 2 Kings. 6. 8.

The Man of God (Elisha) did disclose
The plots and purposes of Israel's foes.
In Dothan then the Prophet did Reside,
And Aram did a Mighty Host provide,
And Seidg'd that Town, (with terror much dismayed)
Elishaes Servant also was afraid:
Alas Master, How shall we do said He,
The Prophet said, fear not, for with us be
More then with them; Then did the Prophet pray
His man's Minds Blindness might be took away,
And presently Such Sight did Him Inspire
He saw his Master Compast Rownd with fire,
And all the Mountain full of wondrous forces
Of Heavenly Soldiers, Charets, men and Horses.
Elishaes Prayer did such favor find
That all the Aramites were Strait Struck Blind
And so Captived, their mighty Host did bring
Into Samaria, unto Israells King.
Again the Prophet praid unto the Lord,
And presently their Sights were all Restored,
With fear, V. 20.
they saw themselves environd Round,
By those, whom they had purposed to Confound.
The Assirians Being in this piteous plight,
Quoth Israel's King (twice) Father, shall I Smite,
The Prophet Answered, I say Smite them not,
Those with the sword whom thou have Captive Got;
Although they are foes they are men, oppressed with grief,
Give Bread and Water to'em, for Releife.
Then did the King Great preparation make,
And (on his foes did much compassion take,
He fed them, and in peace he sent them back
Who came to be his Ruin and his Wrack.
So, thus the Almighty pleased his foes to tame,
And Arams Bands no more to Israel came. V. 23.

Thus unto Israel was deliverance given,
Miraculously by the hand of Heaven.
When Ammon Joynd with Moab, and Mount Seir,
Good King Iehosophat to overbear 2 Chr. 20.

With Multitudes of Horse, and men of war,
So that all Humane Hope, and Help was far.
God then a Prophet raised who truly said,
Stand Still Iehosaphat, be not dismayed,
Behold the Lords Salvation, he has spoak,
The field is thine, thou shall not strike a stroke.
Strait the mistakeing Ammonite (pell mell)
Together by the Ears with Moab fell,
Each, thought the other Judah's force to be
In Bloody Battle deadly blows did flee.
At last Mount Seir, (or the warlike Edomite)
Came in, and on them both, Renewed the fight;
The slaughter was so Great, that death was Cloyd,
And thus Gods foes, themselves, themselves destroyed.
Thus whilst they did each other overthrow,
The King had victory and struck no blow.
My application of all this, is this,
That God that ever was, for ever Is,
He saved Samaria from the Aramites,
And Just Jehosaphat from Ammonites,
And from the Incestuous brood of Moabites,
And Esaus Rough-haird seed, the Edomites.
The thoughts of Kings are open to his sight,
And he does know, King Charles his heart is right.
By Miracles of old it is Manifest,
The Almighty has his wondrous power expressed;
And Sure, the Miracle, God showed of late
Is Admirable, Loving, Gracious, Great.
The Kings own Subjects, His own servants too
Paid, and gave Aid, their Sovereign to undo:
With His own Weapons, Arms, and every thing
They, (in the Kings Name) war against the King.
Then, in that Low, unworthy exigent
The Powerful hand of the Omnipotent
Raised him again, to beat Rebellion down,
And to regaine again, (in peace) his own.
When (like to Aram) our Blind Separatists
Have Cleared their Blear'd Eyes from Erroneous Mists,
The Nose-wise Brownist Gravely does begin
To see the foolerie he has lived in,
The Anabaptist likewise has found out
How he has gone the furthest way about.
The Papist (as I hope) is quite past Hope
That England shall be pestered with the Pope,
And every Idle Sect discountenanced,
And only Protestants true faith advanced.
This God by Miracle for us has don,
And England Has it is ancient glory Won.
Prophetically true, I hope these Lines
Of mine will prove, for (as my Soul divines)
The Lord these things to pass will shortly bring,
And God, for ever Bless and Save the King.
FINIS.

