TAYLOR^ ARITHMETIC. FROM ONE to TWELVE. WITH A Sollid Discourse BETWEEN
YESTERDAY, TOMORROW, TODAY, and A LOVER,

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 16^^

Tailors ARITHMETIC, etc.
0 00 000 0000 00000 000000
IN the first line you naught but Ciphers ^ee*
10 100 1000 10000 100000 1000000*
But (adding One) they more then Ciphers be:
And take that One from them, what are they then?
Just nothing (Ciphers) as they were again.
So some who were but Ciphers in estate,
One set before them raised them to some rate,
To tens, to hundreds, thousands, thousands ten,
From Ciphers unto millions, mounted men.
One raised up Numbers, Numbers laid One low*
Thus (with Vicissitude) goes weal and woe:
Now that One's gone, some are left bare and p^r,
Just nothing, Ciphers, wanting One before*
And is it but for One we make this moan*
(Before us now are many more then One)
But One did make me something, then I had
Supportance from One to be fed and clad;
But many (many sins) a Cipher made me:
Just nothing (nothing) ten years has been paid me,
Coin is man's earthly life, life's Nerves and Si^^wes
And I should have some from the Crowns Rev^,
For which I Have su'd, and su'd, but have it not;
The fau^t's not mine, it is my unlucky lot.
And I might seek again (if I were mad,)
And have as much as formerly I had;
Were I as free from want as clear from hate,
I would not with an Alderman change state:
But cares and wants in Troops assault me thick,
Past numbering with my poor ARITHMETIC.
Thus upon One a little I have played,
Zet more of One a little must be said.
The Father's One, One likewise is the Son,
The Holy Ghost One, and all three but One.
One Faith there is, (he that has two has none)
And in the Firmament One Sun, One Moon.
Man has One soul, one Corpse, One head, one brain,
One Tongue, One heart, (some very Knaves have twain)
One Life, (one span) if one inch more it be,
It stretches to unmeasured misery:
The World's but One, and that is a Cipher round,
And nothing but a Cipher 'twill be found,
All shall lose, All do lose, all have lost,
Who shall, does, has the false world trusted most.
If in Jerusalem One man had bin,
That had loved God, and strived to shun all sin,
The Almighty on them would compassion take,
And spare the City for that One man's sake;
But as the Psalmist truly made his moan,
The Lord beheld none does good, no not ONE.
On the number Two.
Two Natures the most High, most bl^st did bear,
The Godhead great, the Manhood pure and clear.
Man has two substances, both soyl'd and ^oule,
A body cloyed with crimes, a sinful soul)
He has Two Eyes to see, Two Ears to hear,
Two hands to work, Two legs the rest to bear,
He has Two choices, Life, Death, Good or ill,
(Yet has no free will to choose which he will)
^
Man's will to choose the good, and ^un the (...).
Two lives, Two deaths, Two temporal, Two eternal,
Two ways from hence, Celestial, and Infernal.
I could speak more of Two, and more of One,
But Three calls for me, and I must be gone.
On the number Three.
Three is that blessed Trinity, and I
Do beg the blessing of that Trinity.
Three times the Apostle Paul with Rods was beaten,
And Three times suffered Shipwreck, death did threaten,
Three are the Graces Theological,
(Or Virtues called Divine Celestial)
Faith is the Creed, and who so holds that fast,
Hope (the Lords Prayer) Gods gift will crown at last,
And Charity obediently presents
Her service in the Ten Commandments:
Th^se Three are the Handmaids of Salvation;
These guide men what to do, or leave undone.
On the number Four.
The Four Evangelists, the Story penned
Of him who never began, and never shall end:
His low discending, his high Pedigree,
His Innocence, wondrous works, and misery;
His sufferings, and his bitter Death and Passion,
To free poor sinners from deserved Damnation.
Four Virtues Cardinal, Justice, Fortitude,
Prudence, and Temperance, these Four include
All man's perfection here, from these proceeds
The effects of our best thoughts, our words and deeds*
Four quarters of the World, are Asia,
With Afric, Europe, and America*
^
(...), (...) E^t (...) South, and Su^-set West.
Four seasons round about the year does bring,
The Summer, Autumn, Winter, and the Spring.
Four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth are three,
And the Air (unseen) which no man e're did see.
Four Dispositions, Dry, Moist, Hot, and Cold.
Four strange Complexions, (humerous manifold,)
Intemperate Sanguine, Lazy Phlegmatic,
Sad mad Melancholy, rash Choleric,
And various mixtures of those four Complextions,
Possesses us with contrary affections;
And which of these four humors are most in us,
The same to Vice or Virtue still does win us;
And were there not worse Knaves then four in the Cards,
(I mean no Dukes, or Dons, or Lords, or Lards)
The grieved peoples plaints had not been such,
And Englands miseries not half so much.
Thus having done with Four, I think it meet,
To fall to work on Five to Fill my sheet.
On the number Five.
Blessed He (whose Grace and Glory has no bounds)
For's Enemies received Five mortal wounds.
Cursed he that with both tongue and teeth does tear
That glorious Name, and by those Wounds do swear,
And forswear too; those cursed sons of Caine,
Do Crucify Christ every day again.
He that is the Bread of life, the living Bread,
He that Five thousand men with Five loaves fed,
He whom Five Virgins wisely waited on, Mat. 25.

With Oil in Lamps: Five foolish ones had none.
Five Senses in our body he has placed,
^o Hear, to See, to Smell, to Touch, to Taste;
But all those Senses senseless men do use*
The gracious giver of them to abuse.
Men never were more cruel, merciless,
Never more Pride, or vain voluptuousness*
Hypocrisy is masked in Robes of Zeal,
And Avarice preyes on this Nations weal.
Blind fortune in her wisdom thought it fit,
To give some all, and many nere a whit:
Though times be dangerous for an honest man;
With Gods help I Will pass through all as I can.
And thus my fingers Five do make an end
With Five, because on Six I must attend.
On the number Six.
Six I Will be brief with, for my mind I fix,
To write more large of Seven and short of Six.
Six days the Almighty did preordinate,
To be the time the whole world to create:
He said but Let there be, and every thing
Was made for Man, and he made Man sole King
Of all the Creatures, but he quickly fell,
He against God rebel'd, all things rebel
Against him for it, he 'th lost both Grace, and pl^ce
In Paradise, and all his wretched Race
Unto his sin Original are Heirs,
Increased still with the actual sins of theirs.
For which the Curse was, Man his bread should eat,
With Six days work in Seven with toil and sweat*
On the number Seven.
Since the Creation still (from Age to Age)
Seven is a number of most high presage:
Amongst all days the Seventh was chiefest blessed,
A resting Sabbath, type of endless rest*
The Planets (in their revolutions) s^ven.
The 7 Stars in the Firmament of Heaven.
Pharaoh's 7 (dreamed lean Kine devoured 7 fat,
And want and plenty Joseph found by that. Genesis 41.

Yea more than forty times Leviticus As the 12. 13, 14, 15, 16. 23 25. 1 King.
18 44.

Does in 6 Chapters mention 7 to us.
Six times Eliahs man went out in vain,
He went the seventh time, and brought news of Rain.
Seven Priests, 7 times did with 7 trumpets blow,
And then fell down the walls of Jericho Josh 6.

King David 7 times every day did praise
The Lord for's judgments just, and righteous ways. Psa. 15. 164.

Th'Assyrian Naaman (at the Prophets word)
Did wash himself 7 times in Jordans Ford,
Because he did the Seers command obey, 2 King. (...).

His loathsome Leprosy was cured straightway.
The Widows 7 sons in the Maccabees, 2 Mac. 7.

In liv^s and deaths renowned for constancies.
Pe^^^ions 7 taught by our Lord Supernall,
Include (...) blessings, temporal and eternal,
Christ (in compassion) in his Passions grief,
Spoke 7 sweet words to the believing Thief;
Then he who paid our great Redemptions price.
Said, this day shall thou be in Paradise: Luk 23. 43.

These 7 words were Celestial Gileads Balm,
Midst storms of death and hell, a blessed calm.
One said to Christ, shall I forgive him free,
That has done 7 offenses against me?
The answer was, those that will happy live,
Must 7 and seventy times (and more) forgive:
Thus seven times seventy plainly does express.
If man remit, God quits sins numberless.
Seven Asian Churches in the Revelation,
Seven Angels in them to preach man's salvation.
Seven golden Candlesticks, with heavenly light,
To guide us from the wrong way to the right:
These sevens, and many more each man may view,
In Gods two Testaments, the Old and New,
Man has seven Ages, first his Infancy,
Puerillity, Man's state, Youth, Gravity,
Old age, and state decrepit, these seven are
From Birth to Burial our appointed share;
And every seventh year we may justly call
Our life's division Clymactericall:
And nine times seven, of years are sixty three,
Man's dangerous age, and death as often we see.
And ten times seven amounts to seven times ten,
Just David's span the common age of men:
Thrice seven years past that time, some may survive,
Till grief and sorrow unto death them drive.
Seven are the Sciences, so called indeed,
Because from them all other Arts proceed.
Seven are the deadly sins, whose root and stem
Grew first in hell, and all sins else from them.
Seven were the wisest men ere Gotham had,
But England has seven thousand sevens as mad.
Seven Sages ^nce in Greece renowned, admired
For wisdom, (in these times not much desired,)
Rome once had seven wise Masters, they are dead.
Seven thousand Knaves and Fools left in their stead*
Seven Wonders had the world since it began,
But the eighth wonder were a righteous man.
Seven Saxon Kings this Kingdom once obeyed,
But never had peace, till one the Scepter swayed.
Of Sacraments the Roman Church has seven,
H^re only two directs the way to heaven.
A holy Prophet long ago fore told,
Seven Women should upon one man take hold. Isai. 4. 1.

Which Prophecy is very near fulfilled.
By bloody wars thousands of men are killed.
By Sea and Land death does to men befall,
Besides the common way that is natural;
Males are in multitudes of life bereft,
That one man for seven Women's scarcely left.
The Seven Electors at an Emperors choice.
Are Seven to make up a prevailing Voice.
Seven years Apprentiship the Law ordained.
Whereby men have their freedoms here obtained.
On the number Eight.
When the old World was drowned, Eight then survived,
And from those Eight the new World was derived.
On the number Nine.
It Is plainly and undoubtedly expressed,
Nine sorts of people certainly are best. Mat. 5. Luk 17.

Ingratitude Nine Leapers did de file,
Their Leaprosie was not so loathsome Vile.
Nine are the Muses and the Poets bliss,
They make him sing his mind a Kingdom is;
But in that Kingdom's not one foot of ground,
Or any thing esteemed if it be found;
The pur-blinde world, and Fortune holds it fit,
That Reverend wealth should make a Fool of Wit;
Because each Poet wants a good Mecoenas,
I live and lack, and wander like a lean Ass.
On the number Ten.
The Ten Commandments are the Law Divine.
(To keep those Laws, good Lord our hearts incline;)
But from those Ten, should Ten men each pluck one,
It Is to be feared that left we should have none.
The Atheist (which the Psalmist fool does call)
As he believes will have no God at all.
The Idolater will stock, block, Idols have
To save him, though themselves they cannot save.
The Roarer that delights to damn and swear,
From the Commandments he the third would tear*
The Sabbath-breaker would pluck out the fourth,
The fifth with Rebels is of little worth,
The sixth the Murderer would stab and wound,
The seventh the hot Adult'rer would confound,
The Thief would steal the eighth away, and then
False witness spoil the ninth: and for the ten,
The Wretch that is coveteous would rend and bite,
And pluck the rest in pieces if be might.
Thus would these Ten (this cursed Catalogue)
Each race out one, and spoil the Decalogue.
On the number Eleven.
Man seems to know (by Art and study great)
Eleven long steps from The Earth to Gods blessed seat:
The first step to the Moon, and secondly,
He mounts unto the sphere of Mercury:
The third staire he to Venus Orb does soar:
And fourthly, to the Sun make one step more:
The fifth to Mars, the sixth to Jupiter:
The seventh to Melancholy Saturns sphere:
Eighthly to the fixed stars (...) ascends on high:
And ninthly to the Primum Mobile*
The tenth step to the Heaven called Christaline:
And last where never ending glories shine.
Here Is knowledge with man's Ignorance so tainted.
He nothing knows, nor with himselfe's acquainted.
On the number Twelve.
Twelve Patriarks, Twelve Prophets, and Twelve Tribes,
These sacred Twelves the holy Writ describes.
Twelve Gates has heavenly new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.

Each Gate's a whole Pearl (unvalued jem:)
Twelve thousand Furlongs, the Walls are, four square,
And in each square three of those Pearl Gates are.
Twelve Angels, Twelve Apostles, Twelve Foundations,
That all Believers from all Lands and Nations
May enter there, from North, South, East, and West,
And there be glorified with endless Rest:
God grant the Writer, and this Reader may
Keep there an everlasting Holy Day.
Those blessed Twelves in Twelve lines I have Penned.
And thus my poor ARITHMETIC does END.
Too late to call back YESTERDAY: AND To MORROW Comes not Yet. The words
fancied in a Dialogue, supposed between a LOVER and the DAY.
Lover. HO* Yesterday.

Yesterday. Who calls?

Lo. A Lover.

Yest. Why?

Lov. Dear Yesterday come back.

Yest. Lover, not I.
I dare not so transgress against Times Glass.

Lov. One word -- but one word.

Yest. Not one, let me pass.

Lov. By the Dews that decked thy Locks:
By thy Herds, and by thy Flocks:
By Times often well-taken Lock:
By the Swallow, by the Cock:
By the dainty languag'd Lark:
By every thing that hates the Dark: good Yesterday come back.
By thy fair and lovely face:
And by the Sun which gave that grace:
Sweet Yesterday come back.

Yest. What should I do?

Lov. I gave my Mistress vows, nay, and tears too;
Bring them all back, for (O sad truth to say!)
She seemed true then, I find her false to Day.

Yest. What Is this to me? their griefs they past cure find
Who (to give Love Eyes) strike their Reason blind.

Lov. I stained thy fair face with a foul sin, bri^ but that then back.

Yest. Fool! hope for no such thing:
Go grieve, go weep, and let thy tear-stain'd face
Court Mercy, and beget thee new to Grace:
For, to repent is never too late, all say;
But it is too late to call back YESTERDAY.

Lov. Why then (my blinded Reason to restore)
I Will leave to Love, and love to sin no more.
To Morrow comes not Yet.
Lov. Since then YESTER^Y is gone,
TO MORROW wing thee, haste come on.

To Mor. I must not look to Day in the face.

Lov. Yet good To Morrow mend thy pace.

To Mor. I dare not.

Lov, Why?

To Mor. If I too swiftly pass,
I press Times Sand too hard, and break his Glass.

Lov. By my hopes to thee extended:
By the fears of men condemned:
By the Joys thou bringst along:
By the Griefs that with thee throng:
By the promised meetings made:
By the money thou't see paid:
By their gladness that receive it:
By their sadness that do leave it:
By those sweet Maids languishings:
To whose beds thine Evening brings:
Kind Husband, good To Morrow make haste.

To Mor. Why?

Lo. Shall I tell thee merrily?
With thee my Lands comes to my hands, and sums of money store;
With thee I Will Laugh, Caper and Quaffe, and never ^de a Mistress more.

To Mor. This hastes not me, I must perforce refuse thee:
Better not see, then see me and abuse me.

Lov. Why then, To Morrow, make a friendly haste,
And my wild, rough, old Will, I will new cast:
I that To Day am practiced in the Trade
Of sin. I will To Morrow be new made:
Therefore to Morrow make haste.

To Mor. Thus some say:
We are found worse To Morrow then To Day.
When Verbalists subdue our easy Trust.
We Plough in Sand, and write our hopes in dust:
Dissembler cease, swift vows we soon forget;
Repent To Day, To Morrow comes not Yet.

Lo. Why then (to shun succession of my sorrow)
I Will be new made To Day, yet mend To Morrow.

To Day, while I may. Lov. Well ^et to Day,
Why such great haste?

To Day. To please
The longing eyes of the Antipodes.
Yesterday*s their Day, in joy and sorrow,
And I that am thy Day, I am theirs tomorrow:
The round-fac'd wo^ld is looked on by us three,!
I pursue yesterday, tomorrow me.

Lov. Yet good Today do not so swiftly slide
By the Causes this Day tried
By thy Beauty; and by all
Thy dainty deckings; by the fall
Of thy sweet fertile showers; and by
Thy again unclouded eye:
By the Birds that sing thy grace,
By the Winds that fan thy face;
By thy four and twenty steps,
By thy minutes active leaps,
By my intended goodness; and
By times strict observed sand;
Since it is too late (as all men say)
To call back gadding yesterday,
And since tomorrow comes not yet,
To my pain a Period set
Being left alone to thee
Good today stay, be kind, and pity me.

Today. And why (important Pleader) should I stay?

Lov. I feel another change, methinks, Today;
My souls dear Lover calls for me, his choice,
And I desire Today, to hear his voice:
Enlarge not then my griefs by thy neglect,
But let my high cause court thy kind res^ect.

Today. This stops not me. farewell. I ^st away.
Lovers call for me past America.

Lov. Why then dear Lover of my soul,
(Since I cannot Times control)
Seek thy sheep, lost in this worlds brackey ^round,
Seek him that does desire to be found.
Christ. Why wood'st thou me? have sinners hope ^o speed?

Lov. True Lord, a sinner, yet a broken Reed.

Chr. Thy life is spotted, foul, and black as night;

Lov. True Master, but thy life was Virgin-white;
By thy love, my hearts delight,
By thy unmatched excellence,
By thy victorious patience,
By thy comely silence, when
Thou (my God) were scorned of men,
By that sweet and saving look
Thou did cast back on Peter, book
Me in thy mercy* let thy Grace abound,
Seek him that does desire to be found.

Chr. Tell me, oh thou for whom I bled, I see
A Majesty in thy humility;
And there fore tell me, my lost sheep, be true,
And tell me where thou feed'st, a tear or two
Will bring thee back; or if you are gone astray,
I Will send a voice behind thee, that shall say,
This is the way walk in it.

Lov. I am not in
A Spicy Garden, but a Sea of Sin;
I feed not Lord among the Lillies; no.
I feast with mine own follies: Since it is so,
That yesterday I was lost in this ground,
And being not sure tomorrow to be found,
Dear Master and good Shepherd mind thy gains,
Find me to day, ^d take me for thy pains.

FINIS.

