JACOB Wrestling with GOD, AND PREVAILING: OR, A Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith IN PRAYER. Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about Praying in Faith, are stated and resolved. For the
comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulous Consciences: The Conviction of
formal Hypocrites, and awakening of all Saints both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great duty of Prayer.

By one who has obtained mercy to be a Minister of, and Sufferer for, the
Gospel of Jesus Christ in this hour of temptation.

John 16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. LONDON,
Printed in the year, 1663.

TO THE READER.
WHoever thou art that take this Book into thy hand, know, that as to thy
spiritual state, thou art either a Sinner, or a Saint; a Believer, Joh. 3.36 1 John 5.12
or an Unbeleever, in Christ, or out of Christ; for betwixt these there is no
Medium, or middle state.

Now if thou be a sinner, an unbeleeving Christless soul,

Then here is the root of all thy spiritual misery (which is great beyond
expression) and the bar, that keeps out all spiritual good and mercy from thy
soul, that thou art at a distance, and estranged from communion, the sweet, and
soul-enriching, soul-sanctifying, soul-saving, and soul-satisfying communion of
Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3
which is the life of grace, the life of glory, the life of God! Ephesians. 4.16.
Alienated form the life of God.

And this is thy Hell upon Earth, Ephesians. 2.12
though thou know it not; that thou art without God, and without Christ in
the world, i. e. without true spiritual enjoyment of God, and Jesus Christ,
through want of the life and exercise of Faith in thy soul, and through a
sinful neglect, or a mis-performance, as of all other holy duties, so
especially of this great duty of prayer; in the constant and right performance
whereof, such sweet and blessed communion with God may be enjoyed; as
Galeatius Caracciolus, that famous Italian Convert (having tasted the
sweetness thereof in his own soul, and having forsaken all that was dear to
him in the world upon that account) was wont to say; That he was not worthy
the name of a Christian, that did not prize one moments communion with God
before a thousand worlds!

Now Reader, know, that if thou be such a one as art yet a stranger to
communion with God; it is one design of this following Treatise, to lead thee
unto the Father, by the Son, and to instruct thee into this great duty and
mystery of praying in Faith, which if the Lord shall give thee rightly to
understand, and wisely to improve, will open such a door for escape out of thy
spiritual misery, and for the letting in of all spiritual mercies and blessings
into thy soul, as may make thee happy to all eternity.

If thou be a Saint, a Believer, a Soul in Christ, Psa. 37.25 Cant. 1.2
Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3.5
then to enjoy communion with him is thy life, thy glory, thy joy, thy crown,
thy heaven upon earth; nothing so sweet, nothing so precious, nothing so
desirable to thy soul, as communion and fellowship with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ, through the spirit, and in the constant and right use and
performance of these heavenly ordinances, and holy duties, which are the sweet
walks of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.13
wherein he delights to communicate himself to the souls of his people; And
those spiritual Galleries, Cant. 7.5
in which the King is held and retained by his beloved Spouse, Cant. 4.9
in most sweet embraces, Cant. 2.4, 5, 6
and soul-endearing converses, to the ravishing of the hearts of each other.

Amongst which spiritual walks and galleries, there is none in which Jesus
Christ does more delight, and abundantly communicate himself to the souls of
his people, than in this great ordinance of prayer, which is therefore called
his delight. Prove. 15.8


Now it is also the design and scope of this Treatise, to further thy souls
communion with Jesus Christ in this ordinance of prayer, by showing thee

1. The Necessity.

2. The Efficacy of Faith in Prayer.

Resolving diverse scruples, and Cases of Conscience about it.

Awakening and stirring up thy soul to it, teaching thee to be spiritual and
heavenly in it, and revealing unto thee the great and glorious things that may
be done and obtained by it.

Therefore whether thou be Sinner or Saint, in Christ, or out of Christ,
strong or weak in grace, read this small Treatise; and the Lord give thee to
understand what thou read; sincerely to embrace, and faithfully to practice
what thou understandest, and to reap the spiritual fruit thereof in grace here,
and glory hereafter: And if thou reapest any fruit and benefit to thy soul by
this discourse, give him the glory, who is the Author of Truth, not the
Instrument. And if thou reapest no fruit, or be made worse by it, blame
neither the Author, nor the Instrument, but thine own heart as the cause of it.

To the Reader. By a Friend of the Authors.
THis ensuing treatise was put into my hand, by the worthy Author thereof, whose
humility was jealous of the publication of this piece; By a cursory view of it,
I quickly perceived the spirit of it, and pressed to the publishing of it, for
the relief, quickening, and consolation of such as understand praying in the
Holy Ghost. And do therefore think meet to acquaint you that the Author of this
treatise of prayer, is well known to be a judicious, and faithful Minister of
God, and servant of Jesus Christ, who has witnessed a good confession, and
that in bonds, for the Commandments of God, and the testimony of Jesus; In
which condition, no doubt, his soul was conversant in this heavenly exercise,
and was taken, (as others of his fellow servants,) into a more intimate
communion with Jesus Christ, whose breathings and cries, with others of his
brethren, are gone up into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, Psa. 97.11.

The Accuser of the Brethren has great wrath against the Spirit of prayer, in
this Hour, and has blasphemed it at the highest rate that ever was heard of
in any generation, being greatly tormented thereat, crying out, Oh, Away with
this praying in the spirit. Wonderful it is, that men pretending Christianity,
and to have read the Holy Scriptures, should decry praying in the Spirit,
(which is perfectly opposed to stinted forms) but that the way of the Spirit in
the hearts of the called of God, is foolishness, even to the wise and learned
that know it not.

The Author of this Book, as a good witness of Jesus Christ, has given out a
holy and experimental Testimony to this Spirit of prayer, and has discovered
the abomination of Hypocritical praying, in the vain repetitions and saying
long prayers for a pretense, Mat. 6.7. and 23.14. to justle out the spirit of
prayer, promised to all Ministers sent by Jesus Christ, and all Saints,
especially in the New Testament days. If this therefore come into the hands of
any prayerless souls, know thou art yet without the spirit, and so art none of
Jesus Christ's. Romans 8.9. Wherever the Spirit of Grace is, it is a Spirit of
prayer, Zach. 12.10. Do thou feel the guilt of sin, the want of pardon,
peace, grace, holiness, thou would not need the words of others to help thee
in praying, but thou would know what it is, for the spirit to help (the
proper and only help in prayer) thy infirmities, and could be no more
satisfied with dry and empty forms, then a hungry man with Air.

If thou art a weak doubting soul, and complainest of an unbelieving heart,
(which is a good symptom) here thou may meet with plain and spiritual
resolves to thy doubts, about the acceptance of thy prayer, and the looking for
answers thereof, and what faith thou art to exercise on promises in order
thereunto.

Yea all Saints may be further instructed in the efficacy and prevalency of
prayer, and to be encouraged that the Lord will not cast off a praying
Generation that cry day and night unto him. The Lord hasten to power forth the
spirit of light and prayer upon his people and upon the world, as the best sign
of his own approaching to judge the earth. In the waiting for which, let all
that have received the first fruits thereof be found at this day; To which
expectation, Reader, I commend thee, and this spiritual treatise to thy
perusal, and it, and thy self to the blessing made over to the seed of Jacob,
that wrestle it out with God, and prevail over him. The Saints do in a sense,
govern the World with Jesus, Christ already, by the spirit of Prayer that is in
them, making intercession in them according to Christ's intercession in heaven,
and usually we may know what God is about to do in the world by the prayers of
his Saints, especially in this last age of the world, when their souls travel
and are in pangs for Sions Redemption, and the earthquake to come into the
Nations of the world, till all the foundations of it, (as laid for the interest
of Babylon and Antichristianism) are shaken and out of course, which the Lord
will hasten in his time. But I must break off, and be-speak thy prayers for the
Author and my self, and all the Lords afflicted Ministers, that are mourning in
corners, resting,

Thy Servant for Jesus sake.

Jacob wrestling with God, and prevailing.
Matthew 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer believing, ye
shall receive.


THis Text is brought in as an Epiphonema or Closing speech to the history of
the fruitless Fig Tree, which being cursed by Jesus Christ for its barrenness,
presently withers, and is dried up, v. 19. to the great admiration of the
Disciples, verse. 20. which action, as it was extraordinary and miraculous in
its self, so in the tendency thereof it was of extraordinary use to the
Disciples, and did carry along with it a double instruction.

First, To beware of an outside formal Profession, without spiritual fruit, and
a suitable conversation, which is always attended with the wrath and displeasure
of God, and is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.8.

Secondly, To teach the great Efficacy and Power of Faith, and what great
things may be done thereby, either extraordinary, according to that
dispensation of working miracles, which was but for the time present, and
peculiar to some, verse. 21. for all had not this gift, nor faith of miracles, 1
Cor. 12.29.30.

2. Or else ordinary, according to the gift and force of prayer, which is
perpetual and common to all the Saints, by which they have a constant and joint
access to the Throne of Grace in all causes whatsoever, and may accordingly
prevail with God, provided they pray in Faith as in the Text. And all things
whatsoever, etc.

In this Text of Scripture there are two things principally taught and
commended to our consideration.

1. The Necessity of Faith in Prayer. 2. The Efficacy of Faith in Prayer.
The first, viz. The Necessity of Faith in Prayer, is gathered from the word
[Beleeving] which is brought in as a specifical and qualifying adjunct, or
necessary ingredient to all our prayers. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer believing, ye shall receive.

The Necessity of Faith in Prayer, is also gathered from other Texts of
Scripture, as Heb. 11.6. But without Faith it is impossible to please God; for
he that comes to God must believe, etc. And again, James 1.5, 6. If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, etc. But let him ask in Faith. And look, as
the body without the soul is dead and useless, and cannot perform the actions
of a man: So also Prayer without Faith, is dead and unprofitable, James 1.6, 7,
8. So that Faith is the soul and life of Prayer, and therefore a necessary
ingredient thereto.

1. Quest. or Case of Conscience.

But what kind of Faith is that which is so necessarily and indispensibly
required in all our prayers to God? is it the Faith of Assurance? or the Faith
of Relyance? seeing James says, it must be without wavering, and in nothing
doubting: Therefore it would seem that there is required in all our prayers to
God, a Faith of Assurance, yea, of full and perfect Assurance, which admits of
no doubting or uncertainty of the mind in the thing asked, and that a Faith of
Relyance is not sufficient, seeing that is always attended with some doubting,
as in Esther, [If I perish, I perish] she relied upon God in the use of means,
but yet was doubtful as to the success and event thereof. Now if this Faith be
not accepted in prayer, then the prayers of most of the Children of God are
ineffectual, seeing most of them have not the Faith of Assurance.

That saying of the holy man James, shall be cleared in its proper place.

Answ. But in answer to the Question, it is affirmed, That although it be the
duty of all Christians to press after the Faith of Assurance, as that which
tends exceedingly to their comfort and inward joy: Yet where there is a Faith
of Relyance, i.e. the heart does inwardly rest upon Gods alsufficiency, mercy,
faithfulness, truth, etc. yet with doubting and uncertainty of the mind,
whether the thing shall be done which is asked of God in prayer; the prayer is
accepted of God, and shall certainly have a gracious return in due time.

But that we may be the more clear and distinct in our handling this point, to
the satisfaction and comfort of weak and scrupulous consciences: we shall first
give a brief description of these two kinds of Faith, in their distinct and
different natures; that so the person who is scrupulous may the better judge of
his Faith, of what kind it is: And then we shall by Scripture and experience
make good our assertion, viz. that a Faith of Relyance is accepted of God in
prayer, where the faith of Assurance is wanting.

Faith of Assurance described.

The Faith of Assurance therefore is a full persuasion, Heb. 10.22 1 John 5.13,
14, 15 1 John 5.6 Romans 8.16
and certain Assurance of the mind of a Believer, of the thing asked or hoped
for, grounded upon the clear and infallible testimony of the Word and Spirit of
God in their joint witness.

Faith of Relyance described.

The Faith of Relyance is the inward resting of the heart upon God, his name
and attributes, Psa. 37.7 Jonah 3.8, 9 Esther 4.16 Job 13.15 Dan. 3.17, 18
viz. his power, wisdom, mercy, faithfulness, truth, etc. for the performance
of his Word and Promise in general, without any certainty or assurance of the
mind, with application thereof to its self in special, wanting the particular
witness and testimony of the Spirit in the case, which always is present in
the Faith of Assurance, but always absent and wanting in this Faith of
Relyance. Of this kind was the Faith of the Leper, Mat. 8.2. [Lord if thou will
thou can make me clean] there was a relyance upon the power of Christ to do
the thing asked, but a doubtfulness or uncertainty of the mind as touching the
application of that ability and healing power to himself in particular. And
therefore he puts it with an if; [Lord if thou wilt] speaking of his particular
and secret will in the case propounded, which was not yet made known, and
therefore he might without sin doubt of it: But as to his general will, and
infinite readiness to heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, etc. which was
abundantly revealed and made known both by Scripture and Experience, he could
not have doubted thereof, without great sin; and so would consequently have
been reproved for it.

Thus having described these two kinds of Faith, in their distinct and
different natures, whereby every one that comes unto God by prayer, may be
able to judge of himself, and know what kind of Faith it is, that he comes
withal. We shall proceed to make good the Assertion, viz.

Asser. That a Faith of Rely ance is accepted with God in prayer, where a Faith
of Assurance is wanting. Proved, 1. By Scripture, 2 Cor. 8.12. It is accepted
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not. The
general equity and force of which Rule reaches not only unto the case of
Alms; to which the Apostle does there apply it, but also unto all other cases
wherein we have to do with God, and particularly unto this case of prayer, for
otherwise God should seem to be a hard Master, reaping where he has not sown,
and gathering where he has not strowed, and expecting to receive, where he
has not first given, which cannot at any time, nor in any case be justly said
of him, who is infinite in mercy, and with whom there is no unrighteousness,
all whose commands are equal and reasonable. And who receives not from his
creature, but according to the gift of his own grace, which he has first
bestowed, Romans 11.35. [or who has first given to him?] Now forasmuch as Faith
is not of our selves, but is in an especial manner the gift of God, who works
all things after the counsel of his own will, and planteth in the hearts of his
people different kinds and measures of grace, according to his own good
pleasure, and the use he intends to make of them: It remains, that where the
Lord has wrought a Faith of Relyance in the hearts of his people, to whom he
has not given the Faith of Assurance. And they come to him in prayer, and in
the use of all holy means which he has appointed for the good of their souls,
with such a Faith as himself has wrought in them; he does graciously accept
them according to what they have, and not according to what they have not.

graciously accepted of the Lord and received a gracious answer o^ such
Prayers. As in the case of the Leper abovementioned, Mat. 8.2, 3. who when he
came to Christ in prayer, only in a Faith of Relyance upon his power to help
when as he had no assurance of his particular will and purpose a^ to himself,
and therefore puts a^ if upon that; [Lord if thou will thou can make me
clean] wa^ graciously accepted of the Lord, and obtained a speedy and full
answer of that prayer, in the very thing he asked, verse. 3. [And Jesus put
forth his hand, and touched him, saying, (I will) be thou clean, and
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed.]

Canaan, Mat. 15.22, -- 29. who came to Christ in prayer on the behalf of her
afflicted daughter, verse. 22. Saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of
David, my daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. Now here was wrought in
this Woman (though a Canaanite, a stranger, an alien from the Commonwealth of
Israel) a mighty Faith of Relyance, by which she did marvelously cling to Jesus
the Son of David, relying upon his mercy, and power, to help her, though she
had no certain assurance, that she should have her petition granted; but many
discouraging passages from Christ. As,

First, His silence to her prayer, answering her not a word, v. 23.

Secondly, His seeming denial of her request, with this reason against it; That
he was not sent, save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, verse. 24.

3dly. His upbraiding her with her stock and generation; being descended of the
cursed stoc^ and generation of the Canaanite^ in respect whereof he calls her a
dog, verse. 26. by all which it is most clear, she neither had, no^ could have
any assurance, but on^ ly she exercises her Faith of Relyance, notwithstanding
all difficulties and discouragements, and still she prays, and worships the
Son of David, confessing her own vileness and unworthiness, an^ Justifying the
Lord in calling he^ dog, and taking advantage there upon to hope that yet there
might besome crumbs of mercy for her verse. 27. Truth Lord, yet the Dog eat the
crumbs that fall from their Masters table. And at length with this Faith she
prevails, and has a full answer of her petition, with a high commendation of
her Faith, verse. 28. Then Jesus an swered and said unto her, O Woman great is
thy Faith! be it unto th^^ even as thou will: And her Daughter was made whole
the same hour. And so much by way of answer to the first Question.

2. Quest. or Case of Conscience.

But whether is it sufficient to have the habit and being of Faith in the heart
when we pray? or is the exercise and acting of Faith necessarily required also?

Answ. That it is not sufficient to have the habit and being of Faith in the
heart when we pray, but the exercise and actuality of our Faith is required in
our addresses to God by prayer: it is not enough that the person praying, be a
Believer, but also that the prayer made be a prayer of Faith, or a believing
Prayer: hence it is put in the present tense: [Beleeving] And all things
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer [beleeving] not having believed, but
believing, in the present tense: intimating to us, that a present exercise of
Faith is required; otherwise the prayer may be an unbeleeving, and so by
consequence a fruitless prayer, though the person be a believer; for a godly
man may make a carnal prayer; a believing man may make an unbeleeving prayer.
As the good man Joshua seems to do, Josh. 7, 7, 8, 9. The truth is, we are
said to have no more Faith than we act. And therefore Jesus Christ reproves his
Disciples as faithless, when, as it is clear, they wanted not the habit, but the
exercise of Faith in that particular case of casting out the dumb spirit, Mark.
9.19. Those prayers therefore are faithless prayers, in which there is not a
present exercise of faith, though the person or persons praying, be in a state
of grace, and have the habit of Faith in their hearts.

3. Quest or Case of Conscience.

If the exercise and actuality of Faith be necessarily required in all things
whatsoever we ask of God in the name of Christ, then whether may such an
exercise of Faith be accepted, as is accompanied with some doubting and
wavering of the mind? or is such an exercise of Faith only current with God in
Prayer, as is clear and steadfast, without the least doubt or wavering?

The reason of this scruple or question is, that saying of the holy man James,
in his chap. 1. v. 6, 7. But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering; for he
that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed; for
let not that man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Now if
such an exercise of Faith, as is attended with some doubting, be not accepted
of God, and the prayers of such be altogether fruitless and unprofitable, as
this Scripture seems to import, then is the hope, comfort and experience of
the most of Gods Children thereby cut off and denied; And if otherwise, then
how is this saying of James to be understood, and reconciled with other
Scriptures?

Ans. Two kinds of doubting.
There is a twofold doubting or wavering of the mind, spoken of in Scripture.

The one which does always exclude and oppose Faith; so that where such
doubting is^ there is not the least acting o^ stirring of Faith in the heart.

The other, which does only argue weakness of Faith, and is consistent with
the exercise and actuality thereof at the same time in some degree.

The saying of the holy man James abovementioned, is to be understood only of
the former, Kind explained.
viz. such doubting or wavering of the mind, as does oppose Faith, and is
exclusive to it; as is clear by the antithesis or opposition of Faith, and
wavering being set in the Text the one against the other; for says James, Let
him ask in Faith; And then he opposes thereunto this word [wavering] nothing
wavering, (...), i. e. not disputing or cavilling; so that it is manifest the
Apostle speaks of such a doubting or wavering, as argues a nullity and
privation of Faith, where there is no believing of the Promise and Word of God,
but a disputing and cavilling against it, and an opposing of it. As in the case
of that Lord, on whose hand the King leaned, when the Prophet by the Word of
the Lord foretold so great plenty to be on the morrow in the gate of Samaria;
who disputing and reasoning against the Promise and Word of God, out of an
unbeleeving heart, answered the man of God: Behold, if the Lord would make
windows in Heaven, might this thing be? 2 King. 7.1, 2. This was such a
wavering as James speaks of, which argued a nullity of Faith, and strength of
unbeleef in the heart of that Noble man, who thus disputed and cavilled against
the Promise, giving no credit to the Word of the Lord, spoken by the Prophet,
nor in the least acknowledging or relying upon the power of God, for the
performance thereof: And therefore was made a spectacle of divine vengeance,
for his disobedience and unbeleef, being trodden to death the next day in the
gate, which verified the Word spoken to him by the Prophet: Thou shall see it
with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof, verse. 2. compared with v. 19, 20.

And of such a doubting as this is that saying of the Apostle Paul to be
understood, Rom 14.23. And he that doubts is damned, because he eats not of
Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. It Is evident in this place the
Apostle speaks of such a doubting, as argues a want of Faith, and right
understanding of true Christian liberty, in that particular action of eating:
In which he that eats without Faith, is condemned in his own conscience,
though the thing in it self be lawful, yet to him it is sinful and unlawful,
for want of Faith in what he does: Otherwise a man is not condemned in that
action which he does with some doubting; wherein there is also a real and true
exercise of Faith, though in a weak and low degree. As Simon in letting down
the Net at the command of Christ, Luke 5.5.

The second kind of doubting or wavering spoken of in Scripture, Kind explained.
is such a doubting as is consistent with the present exercise of Faith, and
argues only weakness of Faith, but not the want of it; which kind of doubting
is found in the true Children of God, even in their best duties often times; the
consideration whereof does also much trouble and afflict them. Now this kind of
doubting, Genesis 18.13 Mat. 8.26 Mat. 14.31
though it is sinful, and to be reproved, yet being a sin of infirmity, and
weakness, not o^ wilful rebellion, or presumption, the Lord does in mercy cover
and pass it by in his people, and does not therefore reject their persons, or
any their sincere and faithful services, but does graciously accept them in his
Son Jesus Christ, notwithstanding such infirmities as by the following
instances does appear.

Sarah was accepted of God in the exercise of her weak Faith, when the Lord
made a promise of a Son to be given her in her old age, though therein she was
not without some doubting, as appears by comparing Genesis 18.12, 13, 14. with
Heb. 11.11. In the former, viz. Genesis 18.13. She is reproved for her doubting:
Wherefore did Sarah laugh? is any thing too hard for the Lord? But in the
latter, viz. Heb. 11.11. She is commended and approved for her Faith at the
same time, and in the same action; Through Faith also Sarah her self received
strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age,
because she judged him faithful who had promised: So that by comparing these
two Scriptures, which relate to the same person and action, it is manifest that
Sarahs doubting through weakness of Faith, did not hinder her acceptance with
God in that action, wherein there was the real exercise of her Faith, though
weak and wavering: for says the Text, She judged him faithful who had
promised; therefore she did believe the promise, and rely upon the
faithfulness of God for the performance thereof, notwithstanding the great
doubting and stirring of unbeleef in her heart at the same time, which yet she
resisted, and also at length did overcome. Whence these two things may truly be
gathered.

1. That great doubting and wavering of the mind may consist with the real,
though weak exercise of Faith in the same holy action.

2. That such holy actions are accepted of God in Christ, notwithstanding such
doubtings.

Mark 9.18. he begins through unbeleef to haesitate and doubt concerning the
power of Christ also, and puts an [if] upon the matter, verse. 22. But [if] thou
can do any thing, have compassion on us and help us: so that here was great
doubting and stirring of unbeleef, which Christ reproves, verse. 23. and replies
to him; If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes;
which reproof of Christ prevails so far upon him to the breaking of his heart,
and humbling of him for his unbeleef, that he cries out with tears, from a
sense of his sin, as well as of his childs misery, Lord, I believe, help mine
unbeleef. Now here was some Faith mixed with great doubting and unbeleef, yet
being bewaile^ and confessed, the prayer of this distressed and afflicted
Father, o^ the behalf of his child, is heard and answered; for the dumb spirit
is cast out, and his child^ healed, verse. 25, 26, 27.

Oh the infinite riches, an^ condescension of free grace! tha^ ever such a
prayer as this should be heard and answered, that pu^ an [if] upon the power of
Christ [If thou can do any thing, have compassion on us] And yet there being
found some Faith in this prayer (though attended with so great doubting and
acting of unbeleef) it is accepted and owned by the Lord Jesus.

The answer and resolution therefore of the question, is, That although it be
the duty of the people of God, to press after such Faith in prayer, as is
without doubting and wavering of the mind: And all such doubting and wavering
of the mind, is in it self sinful, and to be reproved; and by no means to be
cherished and allowed: Yet such doubting and wavering as does arise only from
weakness of Faith in the mind of a believer (where there is also a real
exercise of Faith, though in the weakest and lowest degree) does not, nor can
at any time hinder the acceptance and efficacy of their prayers with God;
Ephesians. 1.6 1 Pet. 2.5 James 5.17, 18
but their persons and prayers are acceptable to God, through Christ Jesus,
with a Notwithstanding to all such infirmities.

4. Quest. or Case of Conscience.

If the exercise of Faith be necessarily required in all our prayers to God,
then whether is it at all times, and in all cases required, that he who comes
to God in prayer, does absolutely and determinately believe for the very thing,
that he prays for? or that he prays with a submission to the will of God,
either to have the thing that he prays for; or that which the Lord may see to
be better for him?

The occasion and ground of this Question, is, That some Christians being
earnestly carried out in prayer against some particular lust or corruption, as
pride, envy, inordinate love to the creature, or against the inward motions and
lustings of any other sin, which they feel stirring in themselves, praying that
the same may be removed, and taken out of the way, or for any other particular
mercy which they have an earnest desire to obtain at the hands of God: Now
because they find not an answer in the very thing asked, but the same lust or
corruption remains still unsubdued, and the mercy so greatly desired, still
denied, notwithstanding all their prayers; They usually conclude, that they
prayed not in Faith, and that their prayers are not at all accepted or
answered, because they have not the thing asked; referring their case to that
of James 4.3. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss. And not only in
this case of inbred corruption, but also in many other cases Christians are
much put to it, to know when they ask in Faith, and when they ask amiss: Many
concluding they ask not in Faith, because they have not the very thing asked.

Ans. The exercise of our Faith in prayer, must be either absolut^ and
determinate in the very thing asked, or conditional and latitudinary, referring
to what may b^ most agreeable to the will o^ God, whether it be the ver^ thing
asked, or something else according to the nature of the thing which we ask.

The Rule therefore which the Apostle proposes to himse^^ concerning prayer,
is diligent^^ to be observed by every Christ^an, 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray wi^^
the Spirit; and I will pray with u^derstanding also. It therefore co^cerns
every Christian to unde^stand the nature of the thing which he asks of God in
praye^ otherwise he may ask amiss.

The things which we ask of God in prayer, may fall under a double distinction.

1. In respect of God.

2. In respect of our selves; which every Christian ought diligently to mark
and consider, that so he may frame his petitions, and exercise his Faith
therein, according to the Rule of the Word; for Faith is guided by the light of
the Word, and cannot go against the Word, nor without the Word in any thing.

1. In respect of God.

The things which we come to ask of him in prayer, are either clearly and
absolutely revealed, promised, and foretold in his Word; or else secret, and
not revealed, which he has reserved in his own power.

2. In respect of our selves. The things which we come to ask of God in prayer,
are either absolutely, and perse good and necessary for us; or they are good
and necessary for us only upon such and such variable considerations, and
suppositions, as we are very apt to mistake about.

Now to apply these general Rules to our case and question in hand.

John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he
hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we
desired of him. There is no room for the least doubt or scruple in such things
which we ask according to his will; but we are to pray with full assurance of
Faith and confidence in such cases, that the very thing we ask is granted. As
for instance in some particulars.

Babylon (that Mother of Harlots.) I am to believe in prayer absolutely and
determinately (without If or And) that the very thing which I now ask, is
granted in Heaven, and shall be performed in due time; because God has clearly
revealed, and absolutely foretold and promised the same in his Word, for the
comfort of his Church and People, Rev. 18.2.

Psalm. 37.39.40.

promised the same in his Word, Mat. 16.18. Mat. 18.14. Mat. 24.24. 2 Timothy
2.19. And so in all other petitions for things of this nature.

In things which are not clearly revealed, Second part of the Rule
nor absolutely determined by the Word of God, but left dubious, obscure, and
uncertain as to us, the mind of the Lord concerning the same not being
declared: we are not in such cases to believe positively for the thing that
we ask of God, but to refer our selves to his wisdom and choice therein, with
submission to his holy will.

Ninivites in that solemn work of fasting and prayer, joined with repentance,
did not, nor could positively believe for the thing they asked of God, viz. the
aversion of that national wrath which did hang over their head; but came to God
in prayer with a [may be of Faith] a [peradventure] a who can tell, if God will
turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not,
Jonah 3.9. and yet were accepted of God therein, and had their petition
granted, verse. 10.

Zeph. 2.3. The meek of the earth are there exhorted to seek the Lord, to seek
meekness, to seek righteousness, with this motive: It may be ye shall be his
in the day of the Lords anger. Where the mind and will of the Lord in the case
is not clearly revealed and made known: There no more is required than a may be
of Faith; for Faith cannot go beyond the Word of the Lord.

Peter says to Simon Magus, Act. 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God; if [perhaps] the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee. His sin was great, his case very difficult and singular; the
mind of the Lord not certainly known: Therefore the Apostle exhorts him to
repent, and to pray; but it must be only with a may be, not a certainty of
obtaining, with a perhaps: [if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee.]

the good of his people: here my duty is to act Faith upon his Word and Promise
absolutely; for the thing I ask, without the least doubting or wavering, for so
I am commanded, James 1.5, 6. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, etc.
But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering. There is no room for doubting or
wavering in such a case as this; in things of this nature.

It is not lawful to doubt or waver, though in some other cases it may be
lawful, as has been already showed; which hint may give some further light to
the right understanding of this text of Scripture, which reaches not unto all
cases, but only unto cases of this or the like nature.

A pregnant instance in this case, Instance.
is that of Solomon, 1 Kings 3.5, 7, 8, 9. Where Solomon, from a sense of Gods
great goodness in calling him to so great a place, and of his own great
unworthyness, and inability to manage the same, to Gods glory, and his peoples
good. Omitting other things of more private concernment, he makes his request
to God for Wisdom and Understanding, suitable to his place and station, ver. 9.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I
may discern between good and bad; For who is able to judge this thy so great a
people? It being a thing absolutely good and necessary for him, in order to
Gods glory, and his peoples good; he asks absolutely and determinately for this
very thing, and no other, in exchange for it, and how acceptable and well
pleasing this request of Solomon was in the sight of the Lord, is sufficiently
declared in the story, verse. 10, 11, 12, 13.

But in things which are not absolutely and per se good and necessary for us,
Last part of the second Rule.
but may be good or bad for us upon such variable considerations, which are
best known to God, and about which we are very apt to mistake: In all such
cases we are not to believe for the very thing which we ask, but by Faith to
rely upon, and refer our selves to the wisdom of God, for that which he
sees best for us.

Neither are we rashly to conclude, that we have asked amiss, and our prayers
are not heard, because we have not the very thing we desire; forasmuch as in
all such cases there is an exercise of Faith, in submitting such desires of
ours unto the will of God.

Either Expressed or Understood.

1. Expressed: As in that petition of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 26.39. O my
Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thouwilt. Which exercise of his Faith, in submitting to his
Fathers will, is yet more vigorous, v. 42. and Heb. 5.7. It Is said, he was
heard, in that he feared; for, though he was not heard in the very thing
asked, viz. that the Cup might pass from him; yet he was heard in that, wherein
he submitted himself to his Fathers will.

Implicit or understood, as in that petition of Paul, when he prayed against
the thorn in the flesh, that it might depart from him, 2 Cor, 12.8. In which
petition questionless he did exercise his Faith, and believed, though not
positively, that he should have the very thing he asked; yet that he should
have either that thing, viz. the taking away the thorn in his flesh, or else
that which the Lord at that time should see to be better for him, viz. a
sufficiency of grace to resist and withstand it. In which respect his petition
was granted, verse. 9. And he said unto mee^ My grace is sufficient for thee^
which was much better for him at that time, than that it should have departed
from him; for he stood in great need of such an exercise at that time. And the
thor^ in his flesh, though it was sharp and grievous to him, was of special use
and benefit to him, to keep him humble, and to prevent spiritual pride, and
self-exaltation after his abundance of Revelations, and high enjoyments, verse.
7. And least I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of
Revelations, ther^ was given to me a thorn in the flesh; the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, least I should be exalted above measure.

Hence we may observe and learn, that the Lord knows how to make use of the
Saints inbred corruptions, and Satan's temptations, for their good and benefit:
And therefore when we pray against the motions and stirrings of inward
corruption, and Satan's temptations, that they may be taken from us. It ought to
be with this proviso and condition expressed or implied, if the Lord sees the
same to be good for us, otherwise to have such a sufficiency of his grace, as
may enable us to resist and withstand them: for though the presence of such
things be as a thorn in our flesh, i. e. very grievous and troublesome to us;
yet thereby many times a greater evil is prevented, viz. spiritual pride,
selfconfidence, self-conceitedness, etc. And though such motions of inbred
corruption and temptations of Satan are sinful: Yet where they are resisted and
withstood by Faith, Prayer, Watchfulness, etc. they are not imputed; as the
Apostle Paul teaches Romans 7.17. Now therefore it is n^ more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me. Yea such motions and stirrings of the flesh, and
buffetings of Satan, are oft-times given to the children of God in great mercy
to prevent a greater evil, as the Apostle says, verse. 7. There was given me a
thorn in the flesh.

So that in such cases Christians may not conclude that their prayers against
such motions and temptations, are not heard, or that they have not prayed in
Faith, because they are not presently removed and taken away; for there is an
exercise and work of Faith in submitting such desires unto the wisdom and will
of God, and an answer is given to such prayers, though not in the very thing
desired, yet in that which the Lord knows to be better for them; as in this
case of Paul is most clear; he prays, and he prays earnestly, and
importunately, That the thorn in his flesh, the messenger of Satan, might
depart from him, verse. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it
might depart from me. And he has his prayer answered not in the thing
desired, but in that which was better for him at present, verse. 9. My grace is
sufficient for thee. The thorn in his flesh, the buffeting of Satan remains,
notwithstanding all his prayers against it: and yet his prayer is heard and
answered, in that he has a sufficient measure of grace and strength from
Christ to resist and withstand it.

Israel in the wilderness, when being stung by the fiery flyin^ Serpents, the
sting whereof w^ deadly, and by which many dye^ they come to Moses with the
request, Numb. 27.7. Pray un^ the Lord, that he take away t^ Serpents from us.
And Mos^ prayed for the people: And though he was not heard in the very thing
asked, viz. That the Serpents should be taken away which questionless they
though^ to be best for them; yet was the prayer answered in the lifting (...)
of the Brazen Serpent; which upon other considerations the Lord saw to be
better for the^ at that time. So verse. 8. And t^^ Lord said unto Moses, Make
thee (...) fiery Serpent, and set it upon a po^ and it shall come to pass, that
ever^ one that is bitten, when he looke^ upon it shall live. Wherein wa^
exhibited a most lively type (...) Christ, and of that healing virtue which the
children of God do receive from him by Faith, against the deadly sting of sin.
The sting whereof would be deadly unto them, as well as unto others, were they
not healed by looking unto Jesus Christ, who was lift up for that very end, Jo.
3.14, 15. And whereas many the dear children of God, when they feel this sting
in their consciences, do pray earnestly and importunately to have these
Serpents of their own in^red corruptions, and Satan's temptations taken away,
that they might never more be stung and hurt by them (who though they do well
to express their zeal, hatred, and holy indignation against sin, which
questionless is well pleasing in the sight of God) yet in praying so posi^ively
and absolutely to have these removed, they do not pra^ with that understanding
an^ knowledge they ought, neithe^ do they therein pray according to the will of
God, otherwise tha^ by an implicit submission, which always ought to
accompany suc^ petitions: Romans 8.24.25 1 John 2.1, 2 1 John 1.9
But have such prayer answered in the remedy vouch safed in Christ, which is
best (...) all.

Having as briefly as we w^ could, passed through these v^rious and weighty
questions, (...) cases of conscience, about the n^cessity of Faith in prayer,
for the satisfaction and comfort of Go^ hidden ones, whose property it (...)
not to take things of this natu^ upon trust, but conscientiously (...) enquire,
till they be satisfacton^ resolved from the Word of Go^ and have proved what
his go^ and acceptable will, and their d^ty is, in all things pertaining to
(...) worship and service; and wherein so much of their spiritual peace and
comfort is bound up, we shall proceed to give the reasons, and then the
application of the Point.

substratum, Joh. 14.13, 14 1 Pet. 2.5 Rev. 8.3, 4
that they are offered up in the Name, and by the hand of Christ: now if they
fail in this, they lose all their work, which is but lost labor; prayers
without Faith, are prayers without fruit, because they are without Christ: that
which is Faithless, is Christless, and therefore must needs also be fruitless,
for in him is all our fruit found, Hos. 14.8. We cannot bear any fruit by any
spiritual service or sacrifice we tender up unto God, but in and through his
Son Jesus Christ. Now we cannot pray in the Name of Christ, if we do not pray
in Faith; it is Faith only that takes hold of the Name and merits of Jesus
Christ, and so bring our services unto God by him Ephesians. 3.12. To pray in the
Name of Christ, is to pray in the Faith of his Name; we may pray with the Name
of Christ in ou^ mouths, and yet not pray in hi^ Name, unless we pray with the
Faith of Christ in our hearts.

And observe it as a most certain and infallible Rule of interpretation, that
wherever wee^ are in Scripture commanded to do, or promised to receive any
thing in the Name of Christ; the meaning is, that we should do and receive the
same by Faith in his Name, and not by the bare use of his Name in our mouths;
and to repose any confidence, or lay any stress upon the bare use of the Name
of Christ in our mouths, any otherwise than we have, and exercise the Faith of
his Name in our hearts, is to act more like unto Conjurors, than Christians;
more like Sorcerers than Saints, Act. 19.13, 14, 15. Then certain of the
vagabond Jews, Exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil
spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preaches. And there were seven Sons, of one Sceva a Jew, and chief of the
Priests, which did so. And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, but who are ye? And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on
them, and overcame them, etc. It seems by this Scripture, that it is a piece of
the Mystical Doctrine of Necromancy, and the practice of sorcerers, to trust
much to the virtue and power of names; but this is no part of the Doctrine of
Christianity, nor the practice of true Christians; they do not expect to
prevail with God by the Name of Christ in their mouths, but by the Faith of
Christ in their hearts; here the seven Sons of Sceva come with the Name of
Christ in their mouths, thinking as many carnal Christians do, to do great
matters by the power of that Name; but wanting the Faith of Christ in their
hearts, they prevail nothing, but come off with shame and confusion of face,
through their miserable and unexpected expected disappointment, and so will all
those do that trust to their Carnal Forms, and Lyturgies, and as they suppose,
most Excellent, and Absolute forms of prayers, which they conclude with the
Name of Christ, which they often, and in vain do take into their mouths, whilst
they have not the Faith of Christ in their hearts: To pray with the Name of
Christ in the mouth, is fruitless and vain, where there is not the exercise of
the Faith of Christ in the heart; therefore the exercise of Faith in prayer, is
of absolute and indispensible necessity.

light of Faith only by which the children of God are guided and governed in
all the spiritual and heavenly exercises of Religion; the things of the Spirit,
the things of eternity, are unseen things, things that are notseen by the eye
of sense, and natural reason; and the light of Faith only, is that, by which
these things are seen and made manifest, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of
things not seen. No inferior light can be sufficient to guide in and about
those things that are superior to it; the light of sense being an inferior
light in man, which is common to him with the brute, is not able to guide him
in and about the things of a man, which are proper and peculiar to him as a
man: as to argue and discourse, by fit mediums conducing to such an end; to
meditate upon the works of Creation and Providence; to search out the natural
Cause, and Reason of things, etc. To be guided in, and about such things he
must have, and exercise the light of Reason, which is a superior light to that
of Sense, and fitted and suited by the wisdom of his creator, and planted in
him for such an end.

So also the light of natural Reason, which is an inferior light to that of
Faith, cannot guide a man in those actions and things which are Spiritual,
sublime, and above the reach of Nature, depending only upon Divine Revelation.
A man by the light of Nature cannot understand nor discern the things of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Now Prayer being a Work of the Spirit, and the things about which we converse
with God in Prayer, being Spiritual and Heavenly things, depending upon Divine
Revelation, upon the testimony of the Word and Spirit of God, we must of
necessity have a superior light to guide us in those things, i.e. the, light
and evidence of Faith; which is a Heavenly gift, from the father of lights, to
the children of the Kingdom, by which only, they can converse with God, and
offer up their spiritual Sacrifices and services to him in a right manner. And
as it is impossible for a man to see, and hear, and smell, and feel, and taste,
without sense, or to meditate, discourse, argue and understand the natural
cause of things, without Reason; so it is impossible for a man to Pray, Hear
the Word, Receive the Seals of the Covenant, or perform any other spiritual
duty, in a right manner without Faith, Heb. 11.6. He therefore that prays
without Faith, prays amiss, and therefore receives not any fruit of his
prayers, James 4.3.

Object. But may not a man that has no true Faith, make such a Prayer, which
for the matter of it is very good and holy, and ask such petitions as are right
and good, and which no man can find fault with?

Answ. We grant he may; but yet such an one does ever ask amiss; for though
he asks right and good things in prayer, yet the grounds upon which he
asks, and his ends and aims, and the frame of his heart in asking, are rotten
and naught; and therefore he ever asks amiss, James 4.3. Ye ask and have
not, because ye ask amiss; to spend it upon your lusts.

Reason and common light may direct a man to ask good and right things of God
in prayer; but these cannot help him to right grounds, to right ends and aims,
and to a right frame of heart in prayer, only the light of Faith which is
influenced by the Spirit and Word of God can do this, Romans 8, 26.27. To pra^
without the real exercise of tru^ Faith, is to pray in vain, because so to
pray, is to pray amiss; there fore the exercise of Faith i^ prayer is of
absolute necessity.

Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him. Now that is the glory of a duty, and that which crowns it with
life, sweetness, efficacy, blessing and honor, when it comes off with divine
acceptance.

And therefore when God the Father would put the greatest honor upon his Son
Jesus Christ, and crown his work with he greatest glory, he does it by
witnessing his approbation and acceptance thereof from Heaven, Mat. 3.17. And
again, Mat. ^8.5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And where
this is wanting, we may write upon our highest enjoyments and performances
[Ichabod] The glory is departed; the like ^weetness, glory and blessedness of a
duty is lost, where this is wanting, Genesis 4.5. Mal. 1.10. Now therefore it
mainly con^erns us to look unto this in all ^ur holy services and sacrifices,
that they may come upon Gods Altar with acceptance; but this cannot be without
Faith, we cannot pray with acceptance, if we ^o not pray in Faith, Heb. 11.6.
But without Faith it is impossible to ^lease him. And again, Whatsoever is not
of Faith is sin. So t^ faithless prayers (like blind a^ lame sacrifices under
the La^ Mal. 1.8.) are both unaccepta^ and sinful; upon all which con^derations
it does more than s^ ficiently appear, that there is necessity of Faith in
prayer.



And first by way of Inform^tion; it may serve to inform us three things very
needful a^ profitable for all men to know.

1. How worthless, vile, a^ useless; yea how sinful and ab^ minable the prayers
of all unb^ leevers, wicked persons, and for mal hypocrites are.

If the efficacy, excellency an^ worth of prayer depends upon, and is
according to the exer^ise of Faith in it, and Faith be ^he life, glory, and
strength of ^rayer, as has been already ^^ewed; then how fruitless, vile and
worthless must the prayers ^f all unbeleevers, wicked persons, and formal
hypocrites in the world needs be?

It Is the manner of wicked persons, and formal hypocrites, whose Religion lies
in a few ex^ernal services and ceremonies, to glory much in their book^rayers,
their say-prayers, their ^orm-prayers, which they cry ^p with as much
superstitious, and blind zeal, as the Athenians ^id their Goddess Diana, the
^mage which fell down from Jupiter, Act. 9.35. But if we confider the persons,
who are the ^dmirers and Authors of such ^ormal services. The visible
Characters of unbeleef, enmi^ against Christ, profaneness, (...) godliness,
and hypocrisy, wh^ are so legible in their hearts a^ lives, that he that runs
m^ read them; (For out of the ab^ dance of the heart, the mouth spe^ eth.) We
need no more to co^ vince and assure us, that the b^ of such their services are
(...) worthless, vain, and unprofita^ things, which God takes no ple^ sure in,
and which thomselv^ can have no profit or fruit by. (...) Mal. 1.10. Where the
Lord Hosts speaking to a generati^ of corrupt and ungodly Prie^ and People, who
by their unha^ lowed and unsanctified course^ had polluted his Name, and co^
rupted his true Worship, as a^ peareth, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. Tell them plainly,
verse. 10. I have (...) pleasure in you, says the Lord (...) Hosts, neither
will I accept an offe^ing at your hand. And again, Isa. 1.13. Bring no more
vain oblations, Incerse is an abomination to me, the New Mons, and Sabbaths,
the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting. Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul hates, they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them, and when ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: Yea when ye make many prayers, I will
not hear; Your hands are full of blood.

It is mavelous to consider the admirable wisdom of the holy Spirit of God
in the mouth of this holy Prophet, in cutting asunder the very sinews, and
casting down the very bulworks and strong holds of the hypocrites confidence,
ripping open their hypocrisy and falsehood to the quick, and casting most
contempt and holy disdain upon those things wherein they do most o^ all glory
and boast themselves Of those things wherein the^ deal most proudly, does the
holy Spirit speak most contemptuously.

1. Their festivals, and sel^ sanctified holy days, in the observation whereof
they place (...) much of their Religion, and d^ so confidently bless themselves
how does the Lord contem^ with utmost disdain? and cast o^ even with loathing
and hatred^ verse. 14. Your New Moons, and yo^ appointed Feasts, my soul hates
they are a trouble unto me; I a^ weary to bear them.

2. Their service, which a^ swers to the Sacrifices of ol^ yea, their offerings
and oblation^ which they bring and perform with so much carnal devotion and
contest for with so much blind zeal, how does the Lord reject and protest
against as most hateful and displeasing to his holiness, and a burden too heavy
for him to bear? verse. 13. Bring no more vain oblations, Incense is an
abomination unto me, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; It is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

Oh what shame and confusion will one day cover the faces of those wicked and
ungodly hypocrites? who persecute, oppress, punish and condemn the generation
of the righteous, because they cannot in conscience own or join with their
Idolatrous Assemblies? which because of their number, they call solemn and
public, when as the Lord himself does reject and disown them, and calls them
iniquity and wickedness; not only wicked, and unjust, or ungodly, but
wickedness, and iniquity, in the abstract; because it is iniquity under a
pretense of Piety; Idolatry and false Worship under a pretense o^ worshipping
God; spiritual wickedness is the greatest wickedness because it has in it the
spirits o^ wickedness; Simulata sanctita (says Austin) duplex iniquitas and
quia iniquitas, and quia simulati^ i. e. feigned sanctity is doubl^ iniquity,
both because iniquity and because feigned.

The Religion of Idolaters an^ false worshippers, is their wor^ piece; their
profaneness, swearing, cursing, drunkenness, exces^ of riot, chambering,
wantonness fornication, adultery, oppression cruelty, with all other their
fleshly wickedness, is bad enough; b^ their Religion, viz. Idolatry,
Superstition, Will Worship, is wor^ of all, and therefore called emphatically,
and by way of eminency [(...)] i. e. The unclea^ thing, which the Saints of God
are forbidden so much as to touch, as ever they expect and hope to be received
and owned by God in that relation of Adoption: Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord: And touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and my
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Yea it is called, the abominable thing
which the Lord does hate, Jer. 44.4. Oh do not this abominable thing that I
hate: Intimating that the holy God has a special and peculiar hatred,
abomination and detestation thereof above all other things.

3. Their formal prayers, which they make and say over with much ignorant
devotion, with all their [significant] Ceremonies attending the same; their
vestures and gestures, as bowing, cringing spreading forth hands, etc. which
hypocrites do so much magnifi^ and applaud, in comparion whereof they do not
only sligh^ and dis-respect, but also mo^ desperately, if not maliciously
reproach and blaspheme even the blessed Spirit of Grace and Supplication; how
does the Lord reject and disown them? verse. (...) And when ye spread forth you
hands, I will hide mine eyes fr^ you. Yea when ye make man prayers, I will not
hear. Yo^ hands are full of blood; (...) (as the voice from Heaven to^ the
Grecian Tyrant) i. e. The (...) within, will certainly frustr^ and make void
all the extern^ services and devotions of su^ wicked hypocrites. In whom tha^
Scripture is perfectly fulfilled Prove. 28.9. He that turns (...) his ear
from hearing the Law, eve^ his prayer shall be abomination.

Secondly, This may inform us of the excellency and preciousness of true Faith;
The excellency and worth of things, is to be valued by their usefulness, and
the more useful and necessary a thing is, the more excellent and precious it
is: Bread-corn, is a more excellent and precious thing than Bullymong i.e
horsecorn.
, because more useful and necessary for the support of man's life. And Wisdom
is more excellent and precious than Rubies, because more useful for the
management of humane affairs. Grace is more excellent than Gifts, and Parts,
because more needful and necessary in order to the souls eternal welfare. A
man may be saved, be happy, and blessed for ever, without Gifts and Parts,
but a man cannot be saved without Grace, Joh. 3.3. So Faith is a most excellent
and preciou^ thing, because so abundantly, s^ indispensibly, so universally
useful and necessary for us, not only in this particular case of prayer, but
also, in all other Spiritual sacrifices and services, which we offer up unto
God through Christ.

In all which respects, tha^ Scripture holds most true, He^ 6.6. Without Faith
it is impossible to please God. We judge of the goodness and excellency of the
Tree, by the goodness of the fruit, and of the Cause, by the Effects: So the
excellency, a^ preciousness of Faith, is to (...) discerned by the excellent
(...) precious fruits and effects the^ of, in the hearts and lives of (...)
precious Saints.

Oh! the great and glorious things which the Saints and (...) vants of God have
been enabl^ and taught to do, by the strength and light of Faith. Heb. 11.33.
Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained Promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of
the sword, out of weakness was made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to
flight the Armies of the Aliens; women received their dead raised to life
again! And as the Saints and Servants of God have been enabled to do: So also
to suffer great and strange things by faith, verse. 35. And others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea
moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, etc.

Oh the invaluable and incomparable worth and excellency of Faith! which
brings forth such precious fruits in the hearts and lives of poor, weak, and
contemptible men and women! who are subject to the same passions, encompassed
with the same infirmities, liable to the same temptations common to man's
nature, and yet have been enabled to do and suffer such things as are above,
and against nature; requiring a supernatural and divine ability, and all this
by the light and strength of Faith; As verse. 39. All these obtained a good
report through Faith. Optima san^ arbor, quae tales habet fructus! Most
excellent doubtless is that Tree, which brings forth such fruits: I will show
thee my Faith by my works, says the holy man, James 2.18. Faith is a working
Grace, and it works like its self. Operari sequitur ad esse [i.e. the
operation and working of things is according to the nature and being of them]
is a true principle in nature, and it is as true also in grace; if therefore the
works of Faith be so excellent and glorious, oh how excellent then is the
nature, the life, and essence of this Faith! It was the saying of a Heathen
Philosopher, from the observation which he made of the excellent and admirable
works and fruits of moral virtue in the lives of some Heathens; that if the
face and image of virtue could be represented to the bodily eye, the beauty and
glory thereof would be so great, that it would even ravish the whole world; if
the Heathens were so much taken with the beauty of morality, because of the
excellent fruits and effects thereof in the lives of some Heathens? Oh how much
more should Christians be taken with the beauty of Faith and Grace, because of
the admirable and precious fruits it has brought forth in the lives of the
Saints! with which the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do so much
abound.

Thirdly, This may inform us whence it is, and how it comes to pass, that
oft-times the prayers even of godly and holy men, fall short of Heaven, and
prove not successful for themselves or others, as both Scripture and experience
does testify; even from hence it is, because they do not always pray in
Faith; a good man, a precious holy man, may have the grace of Faith in his
heart, and yet may want the exercise of it, in this or that particular case, in
this or that particular ordinance or duty.

Peter had the Grace of Faith in his heart, but wanted the active power and
exercise thereof in that particular case of confessing and owning Jesus Christ
before men, when he was in the High Priests Hall, Mat. 26.70, 72, 74. Moses and
Aaron had the grace of Faith, but wanted the energy and exercise thereof at the
water of Meribah, in that particular case of bringing forth water out of the
Rock, only by speaking to it. And their want of Faith did appear, in that they
smote the Rock twice, when they should have but spoke unto it, Numb. 20, 11,
12. verses compared with verse. 8. The Disciples had the grace of Faith in their
hearts, and the gift of the Faith of the miracles, but yet wanted the exercise
thereof in that particular case of the child possessed with a dumb spirit,
Mark 9.17, 18, 19. The two Disciples going to Emmaus, had the grace of Faith in
their hearts, but wanted the activity and comfort thereof in reference to the
death, sufferings, and resurrection of Christ from the dead, Luke 24.25, 26, 27.

In all which actions those holy men of God miscarried, and missed of their
wonted and usual success, because they did not believe, i.e. they did not
exercise Faith in those particular cases wherein the Lord did leave them to
themselves, to try and prove them, that they might more sensibly and
experimentally know their own weakness, and so keep a more constant dependence
upon divine assistance.

Now as the precious and holy Servants of God (who have nature as well as
grace, flesh as well as Spirit) may miscarry in other holy actions and duties;
so also in this duty of prayer, so far as to miss of that blessed fruit and
success therein, which at other times they find; and hence it is, because they
do not always pray in Faith, James 1, 5, 6, 7. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it
shall be given him: But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering; for he that
wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed; For let
not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. The holy man
James is now speaking unto Saints, unto such as he supposed to have the grace
of Faith, and yet putting them upon this great duty and work of prayer, and
that in a particular case for wisdom to manage their profession as they ought
to do, under those trials and temptations which were upon them, which being a
thing absolutely necessary for them, and according to the revealed will of God,
he gives them assurance to prevail in the very thing asked, verse. 5. Let him
ask of God, etc. And it shall be given him; but still with this proviso, and
upon this condition, that he ask in Faith, verse. 6. But let him ask in Faith,
etc.

Whence it is clear, and the Apostle takes it for granted, that such an one as
has true Faith, may yet fail in the exercise thereof, in this ordinance and
duty of prayer; therefore he says, But let him ask in Faith; intimating that
a godly man, a holy man may ask of God in prayer, and yet may not ask in Faith,
and thereby miscarry and lose all the comfort and fruit of his asking, verse. 7.
Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

This may be for caution and warning to all the people of God; Use Caution.
whether they be strong in Faith, or weak in Faith; whether their grace be
little or much, to beware and take heed that they neglect not to stir up, and
put in exercise, that grace which they have, as in all other holy duties, so
especially in this great duty and work of prayer.

The Exhortation of Paul to Timothy in reference to his Ministerial gift, may
be applied to every Christian in reference to his grace, 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore
I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift that is in thee, by
putting on of my hands. A man may have excellent gifts and parts, and yet the
Church of God be never the better for them, unless those gifts be stirred up,
and kept in exercise: Yea a man may in time lose his gifts by neglecting the
exercise and improvement of them, as Mat. 25.29. But unto him that has no^
(i.e. exercises and improvet^ not, as is clear by the scope o^ the Parable)
shall be taken a^^ even that which he has. So man may have true grace, and
(...) very great measure of it, and ye^ may in some particular cases, an^ under
the enjoyment of mo^^ precious Ordinances, and in the performance of most holy
duties be altogether fruitless and u^^ profitable, both to himself an^ others,
through not exercis^^ and stirring up the grace which he has: Yea he may
(thought not utterly lose) yet greath weaken and impoverish his grace Rev. Joh.
11.26 1 John 3.9. and 5.18.
3.2.

O Christian, know, that the life and comfort of thy soul under the most
precious ordinances and in the performance of holy duties, whether with thy
self, or with others, lies not so much in thy having of true grace, in thy
having of Faith, but in the activity of grace, and in the exercise of that
Faith which thou have. Oh therefore beware and take heed that thou neglectest
not to stir up, to keep in exercise thy grace, as ever thou desire that thy
soul should thrive and prosper under the holy ordinances of Jesus Christ, and
be filled with joy and peace in believing.

The life of Ordinances, the sweetness of the Word and Promises, the comfort
and fruit of holy duties is lost, when once the exercise of Faith is lost! take
away the exercise of Faith out of the heart of a Christian, and what are the
most pure and powerful ordinances, the most sweet and precious Promises, the
most holy and heavenly duties, when performed with the greatest external
excellency, but as so many empty Pipes, as so many broken Cisterns, which can
hold no water?

And therefore it is that the Devil does so industriously tempt the Saints of
God to spiritual slumber and security, that so hindering the exercise of their
grace, he may deprive them o^ the spiritual fruit and comfort o^ all Gods
Ordinances;
and there upon tempt them to doubt and question whether they be his ordinances
or no: and at length ((...) they be not sincere) prevaile^ with them to cast
off ordinance as fruitless and unprofitable, an^ to cast reproach and dirt upon
them, whereas indeed the fau^^ is in their own hearts, Mal. 3.14. Micah 2.7.
And hereupon hat^ the Devil taken advantage to for those cursed tares, and
corrupt opinions of Non-Ordinances, Ranters, Quakers, etc. all which, though
they differ among themselves, yet do agree in this, to cast all the dirt and
reproach they can upon the precious and heavenly ordinances of Jesus Christ:
And this has the Devil done whilst Professors were fallen asleep, and had lost
the life, exercise, and activity of their grace, as it is written, Mat. 13.25.
But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the Wheat.

The preaching of the Gospel, Act. 26.18 Ephesians. 4.12 Romans 1.16
it is a most precious and powerful Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for the
Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of the souls of men; but this Gospel may
be preached clearly, powerfully, and faithfully preached, and yet those unto
whom it is preached, have no fruit, no profit by it, for want of Faith, Heb.
4.2. But the Word preached, did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in
them that heard it. Oh therefore when thou go to hear the Word preached,
Christian, beware that thou stirrest up the grace that is in thee, and in
particular, this grace of Faith, without which the Word preached will not,
cannot profit thy soul, though the Apostles themselves, yea though an Angel
from Heaven should be the Preacher! The fruit and benefit of the Word preached,
does not depend so much upon the grace and gifts of the Minister, as upon the
Faith of the hearer!

So likewise prayer, it is a most precious and powerful ordinance of Jesus
Christ, for the obtaining of all things that we stand in need of at the hands
of God. The text it self speaks sufficiently unto this point, Mat. 21.22. And
all things whatsoever yeeshall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. And
upon this very consideration some have called prayer the Key of Heaven; but
Faith is the hand which turns this Key. Look therefore as the Key without the
hand to turn it is useless; so prayer without Faith is fruitless; thou may
therefore, Christian, pray, and be much in prayer, and yet lose all thy
labor, unless thou actest thy Faith in prayer; thou may bring thy Key of
prayer to the gate of Heaven, and yet find it fast locked against thee, unless
thou have a hand of Faith to turn this Key. Oh therefore beware and take heed
that thou neglectest not to stir up, and exercise thy Faith in prayer. Oh how
many praying-daies, and fasting-daies have been lost to the people of God, for
want of Faith? which only guides us aright in prayer, gives us a right frame
of heart, and right ends and aims in prayer, as has been already showed? It Is
a great Scripture which we have in Zechariah, to this purpose, Zech. 7.5. When
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy
years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? Here we have a praying
people, who were abundant and constant in this duty for seventy years together,
and that in the most solemn and strict manner, joining fasting with their
praying, and yet not accepted of God therein, nor at all profited thereby; and
the reason is hinted; they did not pray with a right frame of heart; they had
not right ends and aims in their prayers; Did ye fast at all unto me, even
unto me? and whence was it that they thus miscarried in prayer, and had not
true, spiritual, holy, and right ends and aims in prayer, but from hence, that
they prayed not in Faith; they wanted the light and life of Faith, and were not
guided by the Word in their fasting and praying, and so praying amiss, lost all
their labor, James 4.3.

Quest. But how does it appear that they prayed not in Faith?

Answ. They looked not unto the word spoken by the former Prophets, verse. 7.
therefore they prayed not in Faith; it is by Faith that we look unto the Word
of God, so as to make it our rule; now they obeyed not the Word, and therefore
prayed not in Faith.

Oh therefore Christian, beware thou failest not in this, in the exercise and
activity of thy Faith in prayer; thou had better fail in any thing than in
this; thou had better fail in the gift of prayer; thou had better fail of
words in prayer; thou had better fail of the wisdom and excellency of speech
in prayer; thou had better fail of affection in prayer, than to fail of Faith
in prayer; other defects and infirmities will be passed by and covered, Jam.
5.17. Heb. 11.6.
where Faith is active^ but all other accomplishments and seeming excellencies,
will be despised where Faith is wanting; it is better for a man to want
clothes, and all outward ornaments of the body, than to want life; life is the
glory and excellency of the creature; the poorest and most contemptible
creature which has life, is more excellent than the most glorious creature
that wants it; hence faith Solemon, A living Dog is better than a dead Lion.
Faith is the life of prayer, the glory, the excellency, the strength of Prayer;
Other things are but the Ornaments of Prayer: Oh Christian! look not so much to
the Ornaments, as to the Life of thy holy duties, lest God reject them as a
dead carcass.

Thirdly, Use Exhortation.
This may be profitable for Exhortation,

1 Unto Sinners.

If there be such a necessity of Faith in Prayer, that without it we cannot
Pray, either acceptably to God, or profitably to our selves or others, as has
been at large declared and proved; then does it nearly concern every soul yet
in the state of Nature, and shut up, or concluded under unbelief (as all
unregenerate persons are, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, Christians or
Heathens, Profane persons or Professors, Romans 11.32. chap. 3.9.) to get out of
that condition, and to labor for true saving Faith in Christ.

It Is true, Faith is a Heavenborn Grace, Joh. 5.40. Ephesians. 2.8
which grows not in Natures Garden, it is neither in the freedom of man's will to
desire, nor in the ability of his power, to work Grace, to produce and bring
forth a work of true Saving Faith in himself: but as the Apostle teaches,
Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure. Mat. 7.7. Joh. 6.27. Phil. 1.12.
Nevertheless, Sinner, it is thy duty to strive in the use of all holy means,
and to look up unto God, through Christ, both to incline thy will and to give
thee power from heaven, to do his will. The Miller cannot command a wind but
he can spread the Sails, and wait upon the Providence of God for a gale; The
wind blows where it lists, so is every o^^ that is born of the Spirit, Joh.
3.8. And if thou desire to be bo^^ again, thou must wait for those gales,
and thou must wait in the use of means: And there is a ^blessing promised to
them that do so, Prove. 8.34, 35. The Husbandman cannot command the Clouds, but
he may observe the season, prepare the Earth, and sow the precious feed, Jam.
5.7.
and then patiently wait for the early and the latter Rain, and he finds at
Harvest, his labor is not in vain.

There is a connection, though not of Causality, yet of Instrumentality, of the
end to the means, of mercy to duty, of privilege to practice, of the Harvest
to the Seed-time; of Glory to Grace, of Grace to the means of Grace; As ever
therefore thou would attain the end, which is Salvation, thou must use the
means: He that will ascend to the last, or highest staff of the Ladder must
begin at the first.

O therefore, gratify not the Devil, and thy own unregene^^ will, with such
cavilling, a^ shifting, but set upon the wo^^ in good earnest; up and be d^
ing, and the Lord shall be with thee. And assure thy self, thoug^ it may prove
difficult and ha^^ labor, yet it will not prove los^ labor, John 6.27. Labor
(...) for the meat which perishes, b^^ for that meat which endures un^^
everlasting life.

Object. But perhaps the Sinner will say, How shall I come by (...) How shall I
obtain it? What assurance have I, that if I labor f^ this meat, I shall have
any fruit of my labor?

Answ. O yes, there is a blessed promise joined to this command, he that bids
thee labor, does promise thee thy labor shall not be in vain; and therefore it
is added; Which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father
sealed. Oh sinner, know, that God the Father has sealed, i.e. ordained and
anointed Jesus Christ, and constituted him under the broad Seal of Heaven, to
be the Mediator of the everlasting Covenant, and to dispense and give out all
the spiritual and heavenly gifts and blessings therefore, unto all such as the
Father has given to him, and by virtue of that donation shall come to him,
Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him.

Object. But thou will say, how shall I know whether I be one of those whom
the Father has given to Jesus Christ? And that if I do ^ome unto him, I shall
be received? Oh I am afraid that Jesus Christ will not receive such a sinner as
am, such a wretch as I am; I^ so vile and wretched, that I (...) he will
rather reject and cast (...) out as a Reprobate, as a vessel (...) wrath, than
receive me unto gr^^^ and favor.

Answ. Thou shall know the thou art one of those, whom the Father has given to
Christ, (...) thy coming to him, and clos^ with him in the Word of (...)
Gospel; for none but such (...) possibly come to him, Joh. 6.44
so as to ^^ceive life from him; thou ca^ not know beforehand that the art
given by the Father to Je^^^ Christ, but thou must first co^^ unto Christ; and
then the may know that the Fath^^ has given thee to him, and (...) thou
come unto Jesus Christ he has assured thee in (...) Word, that he will not
reje^^ thee, he will not cast thee o^^ how vile or wretched soever thou be,
Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Oh it is a blessed word; [In no
wise, in no wise cast out] whatever thy cause or condition be, though never so
desperate in thine own eye, yet if thou come unto him, he will in no wise
cast thee out.

And thou have the blessed presidents and experiences of many great sinners,
who upon repentance, and coming unto Jesus Christ by Faith, have obtained
mercy, and are now glorified Saints in Heaven; witness Manasseh, who used
witchcraft and enchantments, who shed much innocent blood, and filled Jerusalem
with blood, and made a whole Nation to sin, and yet when in his affliction he
humbled himself greatly, and sought unto the Lord, he obtained mercy, and he
that had been before (...) wicked Necromancer, a Sorcerer, a Murderer, an
abominable Idolater, has now obtained mercy, becomes a New Creature old things
are passed away with him, and all things are beco^^ new, 2 Chronicles. 33.1, -- 20.
Mar^ Magdalen was a very great sinner, Mark 16.9 Luke 8.2
out of whom Christ had ca^^ seven Devils, and yet she obtained mercy, and
when she^ came unto Jesus Christ, he di^ not cast her out: So likewis^ Paul
was a great sinner before Conversion, a persecutor, a bl^sphemer, and
injurious, and ye^ he obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.^

And wherefore did the Lo^^ single out these great and chie^ sinners, and make
them object^ of his saving grace and favor (...) but that in them he might
exhibit a pattern of his glorio^^ grace, for the encouragement of other great
sinners (not to continue in sin, with a presumption of finding mercy at the
last) but to repent, and turn, and come in to his Son Jesus Christ, that they
may be saved; So 1 Timothy 1.16. Howbeit (says Paul) for this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering for a
pattern to them, which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

And this know, poor sinner, that Jesus Christ came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance; oh therefore be not discouraged, because thou art a
sinner, but hearken to the call of Christ, in the voice of the Gospel, and
know, that thou art called this day by this word of Exhortation; to labor for
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, that so thou may be in a capacity of
performing this holy duty of prayer, Heb. 11.6
and other holy duties, so as to please God in the doing of them, which without
Faith thou can not do.

Obj. But what shall I do in the mean time? shall I neglect prayer, because I
cannot in my natural and unbeleeving estate please God in what I do?

Answ. No, oh no, thou art commanded to pray, to call upon the Name of the
Lord; prayer is a natural duty, written upon every man's conscience; the
obligation whereof cannot be dispensed with, by any power, or under any
pretense whatsoever, thou must not therefore cast of prayer, that so thou
may continue in thy sin and unbeleef; but thou must cast off thy sin and
believe in Jesus Christ, that so thou may continue in prayer, which if thou
neglectest, thou art guilty of a threefold Robbery.

1. Thou robbest God of his glory.

2. Thy own soul, body and family of the mercy.

3. Thy Neighbor of the charity of thy prayers.

Simon Magus was in the gall of bitterness, and yet Peter bids him pray, Act.
22.23. But withal he bids him repent also: Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray to God. Therefore a wicked man, a man in the gall of
bitterness must pray. But withal he must repent of his wickedness, and
believe, that through Christ Jesus, remission and forgiveness of his sin, may
be obtained; and upon this ground of Repentance and Faith in Christ, the
Apostle bids him to pray: If peradventure, or perhaps the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee.

Secondly, Unto Saints.

Oh ye precious Saints of God, who have this precious Faith, this precious
seed of God bestowed upon you in Jesus Christ, to whom it is given to believe
in the name of Jesus; unto you does this word of exhortation speak, as unto
Sons and Daughters. Oh be not faithless, but believing, exert, and put forth
this Heaven-born principle and seed of Faith into exercise; let it not lie by
you as a dead drug, when there is such quick trading at the throne of Grace.
Great Merchants will empty their Ware houses, and bring forth their richest
commodity when they have a quick trade, when the wants and necessities of their
own or other Countries, do give them advantage to put off with greater profit;
they will use the utmost diligence and industry, and will lay out themselves to
the utmost; they will venture all their stock, engage all their credit, improve
all their interest in such a season: Shall men be so wise for earth, and shall
not the children of the Kingdom be as wise for Heaven?

O ye Saints of God, ye are the heavenly Merchants; who only have this trade
in your hands; ye have interest in the heavenly Country, and ye have a Factor
there, who is both able and faithful, who will not fail to put off your prayers
with the best advantage, and procure you returns in the richest and best things
of the Country, which shall best answer your interest and profit here on earth.
And now ye have a most precious season.

1. The wants and necessities of three great Nations (whereof your selves are a
part, and in the peace whereof your peace is bound up) do call aloud for the
help of your prayers, being under as great symptoms and tokens of divine
displeasure, and under as black a cloud of stormy wrath, as any Nation we read
of in all the Word of God; search the Scriptures, and take a catalogue of all
the characters and marks expressed there of a generation marked out for
vengeance; and try if they be not all found upon this generation, this one
excepted. That the Lord of Hosts has reserved unto himself a remnant. And can
you see all this and be silent? have ye not so much charity, so much bowels of
compassion for your native Country, Genesis 18.22
your children and posterity, as Abraham had for Sodom? as Lot for Zoar?

2. The desolations of Mount Zion, the captivity of Gods Ark, the afflictions
and troubles that are accomplished in your dear brethren, who are like sheep
appointed for the slaughter, do call aloud for your most fervent prayers, and
strong cries, to be sent up to Heaven incessantly, and that you give the Lord
no rest till he does arise, and have mercy upon Zion, and turn the captivity
of his people as streams in the South: Can ye be at ease in Zion, and not
regard the afflictions of Joseph? Can ye behold Zion in travel, yea crying
out, and in pangs, to be delivered, and not lend a helping hand?

3. The ruinous case and condition of thousands of precious souls, who are like
to perish for want of vision, to starve for want of the bread of life; who
wander from mountain to hill to seek the Word of the Lord, and cannot find it;
who cry out for bread, and behold stones are given them instead of bread, who
ask for fish, but are fed with Scorpions; who seek water, but find none, and
their tongue fails for thirst; do also in their deep misery and distress cry
out and call aloud to you; oh pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth laborers, and drive out loiterers; that he would raise up unto us a
soul-searching and a soulsaving Ministry, and take away from us the heavy
scourge and plague of a soul-murdering, blind and superstitious Clergy; for
where the blind lead the blind, both must fall into the ditch.

Oh ye Saints of God, who only know the worth of souls, who only can be truly
sensible of spiritual evils, and know both the worth and want of a true
Gospel Ministry; can ye be silent and see such merchandise made of the souls of
men, by the greedy Merchants of Babylon? Never was there a time, from the
foundation of the world, in which the Saints had more advantage of doing great
and eminent service by prayer for the poor Nations of the earth, and for their
dear brethren in sufferings, and for the souls of men! yea and for the whole
Creation, than at this day! In which the Nations of the earth are so greatly
distressed, the minds of men perplexed, and their hearts even failing them for
fear, and for looking after the things that are coming to pass on the earth;
yea the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain, desiring to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God. In which Zions consolation, and Babylons confusion greatly hasteneth;
the time of Babels Tyranny, and the Saints captivity, is so near fulfilled, and
the times of refreshing a coming from the presence of the Lord, and the time of
the restitution of all things: Oh ye Saints of God know that this is a precious
season; let but your prayers meet together in the Angels hand, who stands
before the Altar to offer them up with his own Incense, and then great and
mavelous things will be done in the earth, Rev. 8.3, 4, 5.

THE Efficacy of FAITH IN PRAYER.
Matthew 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing,
ye shall receive,


THe next thing observable in the Text, and proposed to be handled in this
Treatise, is The Efficacy of Faith in Prayer.

Faith is a plenipotentiary grace, it has a kind of omnipotency in it, it
comes with a full commission from Heaven, to the poor Disciples of Christ on
earth, by which they may do and obtain great things with God; yea all things
whatsoever they shall ask in prayer, they shall obtain by Faith. The great God
of Heaven will not, cannot deny any thing to his poor servants here on earth,
which they ask in Faith. He is faithful who has promised, and cannot deny
himself; the word is gone out of his mouth in righteousness, and he will not
repent, he will not call it in again. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

Oh here is a large commission indeed! All things! and all things whatsoever.
Here are no limits, no bounds set to Faith in prayer! Faith may ask what it
will, and have what it asks at the hand of God! Faith can but ask and have!
Faith does but speak the word on Earth, and it is done in Heaven! the truth is,
Faith is a modest grace, a prudent, wise and sober grace, that looks at the
will of God as her Rule, and the glory of God as her ultimate end and aim in
all things, and therefore will not, cannot desire or ask any thing contrary to
Gods most holy will, or cross to, and inconsistent with his glory; and
therefore Faith has the Key of Heaven committed to her, and may go to the heap
of mercy, and take even what she will, Mat. 15.28. O Woman great is thy Faith,
be it unto thee even as thou will.

The Efficacy of Faith in prayer, and the mighty prevailing power it has with
God, is sufficiently made manifest.

1. In the truth of Gods most holy Word and Promises.

2. In the Saints most precious and constant Experiences.

The truth of Gods most holy Word and Promises, The truth of Gods holy word and
promises.
do abundantly attest and bear witness to the mighty efficacy of Faith i^
prayer; great things are promised, yea all things are promised to the prayers
of Faith. So in the Text: And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing ye shall receive.

This is the Word of Christ, this is a gracious Promise of Jesus Christ to his
Disciples here on earth, and he will be as good as his word; he is the
faithful witness, and the truth it self, and therefore he cannot lie, he can
as well cease to be God, as cease to be true and faithful in his Word and
Promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him
Amen, [ i. e. truth and assurance, or most sure and stedfast] unto the glory of
God by us; So that God stands upon the truth of his Word and Promises, as a
great part of his glory, and he will have the glory of his truth, whatever
comes of it, he will appear to be true in his Word and Promises, yea in all
his Promises to a jot and tittle, there shall not the least jot or tittle
thereof fail, till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you, till
Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
Law, till all be fulfilled: As if the Lord had said, ye are apt to set light
by my Word, to question and doubt of the truth and certainty thereof; but I
assure you, I stand so much upon my Word, to have it fulfilled and made good to
the utmost, that if Heaven and Earth lay in one scale, and the least iota or
tittle of my Word in the other, I would rather suffer Heaven and Earth ( i. e.
the whole Creation) to perish and come to nothing, than that the least iota or
tittle of my Word should fail, till all be fulfilled. So wonderfully does the
God of Truth stand upon his glory in this respect; therefore all the Promises
of God in him ( i. e. in Christ) are yea, and i^ him amen, because this is for
the glory of God, to be as good as his word, and not to falsify, but to
fulfill all his Promises.

Now many exceeding great and precious promises has Go^ made in Christ unto
his people praying in Faith, or exercising Faith in prayer. We shall instance
in one or two, in liew of all the rest; which being added to this of the Text,
may be sufficient to give a full testimony to the truth in hand; that so in
the mouth of two or three witnesses, this word may be established.

The first that we shall instance in, is, that great Charter of heaven, or
promise made to the poor afflicted, tempted, and despised Saints, and Churches
of Christ here on earth, Mat. 18.19. Again, I say unto you, that if two of you
shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them of my Father which is in Heaven.

The number of true Disciples is in many places very small, it may be two of a
Family, and one of a Tribe; and the true Churches of Christ, are for the most
part but small, and few in number: especially compared with the false Church,
and Churches of Antichrist, the Whore that sits upon many Waters, Rev.
17.15. But O ye Saints and Churches of Jesus Christ, let not the paucity, and
smalness of your number discourage you, though the malice and rage of the
ungodly, may like the great water-floods, keep good Neighbors one from another,
so that ye cannot assemble and meet together in that solemn and public manner
as ye could desire: yet be not discouraged, do not think the Efficacy and
strength of Prayer, is thereby so diminished, or weakened, that ye cannot
prevail in Heaven: Col 25
You may be present in Spirit, when absent in body. Your Prayers may meet in
Heaven, when your persons cannot meet upon Earth. Rev. 8.3
You may be cast into Prisons, and Dungeons, you may be scattered, and wander
in the desert places, in the dens and caves of the earth, but here is your
comfort, Heaven is still open.

And let me tell you from this Scripture; ye may do and obtain great things
in Heaven (If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing they shall
ask. it shall be done for you in Heaven.) If two of you shall agree; it is not
meant in a way of worldly policy, and carnal contrivance, but in a way of
spiritual harmony and consent of soul arising from the unity of Faith, and the
anointing of the Spirit, Romans 8.26.27
teaching and guiding you in prayer, to ask those things which are according to
the will of God: let the thing be what it will, ask it in the Heaven above, or
in the Earth beneath; let it be never so hard and difficult, and in the eye of
fense and reason even impossible, yet it shall certainly be done for you, and
granted in Heaven. Oh what a blessed charter! what a glorious liberty is this,
granted to the children of God, that by Faith in prayer here on earth, they may
have any thing, even what they will, done for them in Heaven!

And this is the privilege of all those little ones, that believe in Christ,
Mat. 18.10. and 14. compared with verse. 19, 20. This is not the privilege of
old Fathers, and strong men only, but even of babes in Christ, such as are
little ones, little in the worlds account, and it may be little in the eye of
other Saints, but least of all in their own eye; yet these little ones that
believe in Christ, how contemptible, little and low soever they be on earth,
are honorable, great and high in Heaven, and may do such things by Faith in
prayer, as the greatest Monarchs and Princes upon Earth cannot do by their
greatest force and power: As will further appear in the second Scripture and
word of Promise, which for the proof the point, we shall also a little insist
upon.

Isaiah 45.11. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his Maker. Ask
me of things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands,
command ye me. Oh the admirable and infinite condescension of the great
Jehovah! who has created the Heavens, and formed the Earth, and commands all
the hosts of them! That he who commands Angels, and rules in the Armies of
Heaven; and in the Kingdoms of men, should suffer himself to be commanded by a
hand-full of poor praying-souls here on earth! and to have such power in
Heaven, as to command and dispose of the great works of providence; yea the
choicest and most admirable operations thereof, which for their rarity and
excellency are (by way of eminency) the works of Gods hands (as the Egyptian
Magicians said of that rare and admirable work of Gods singular power and
providence, in turning all the dust of the Land of Egypt into Lice at the word
of his servant Moses, which the Magicians could not do by their enchantments,
Exodus 8.19. This is the finger of God!) Yet so it is, that a hand-full of Gods
praying Israel, which come in Faith, to enquire and ask of God concerning his
Sons and Daughters, may even command what they will, may ask and have the
greatest mercies, the most signal deliverances, and the most wonderful
revolutions of providence that the hands, i. e. the infinite power of God is
able to produce, and bring to pass. As that was a most wonderful revolution of
providence, that caused even all the earth to stand amazed, even the sudden and
unexpected downfall of the mighty Kingdom of Babylon, in order to the
salvation and deliverance of Gods Church and people, who there were holden in
so strong captivity, Isa. 14. from the 3. v. to the 28.

Oh ye precious praying-souls, upon whom the Lord has poured out the spirit of
grace and supplication, Zech. 12.10, 11, 12
that ye may see him whom ye have pierced, and mourn and be in bitterness for
your own sins, and the sins of the Nation; mourning even every family apart,
the men apart, and their wives apart. Oh know, that if ye come with an humble
sense of your own, and the Nations sins, and with Faith in God through Jesus
Christ, to plead his precious promises, and ask of him things to come
concerning his Sons and Daughters, ye may even command what ye will (if it be
a work of Gods hands, which he has decreed in Heaven, and declared on Earth
to bring to pass in due time, Rev. 18.2
as he has the confusion of mystical Babylon, and salvation of his spiritual
Zion) I say, if it be a work of his hands, i.e. within the power of his
glorious arm, and infinite wisdom, to effect, as most certainly all things
prophesied and foretold in the Word of God are; then ye need not to stagger,
ye need not to hesitate about the matter, either because of your own
unworthiness, or the great amazing difficulties in the way of the promise; but
come boldly to the throne of grace, and ask in Faith, and there is nothing in
Heaven or Earth too good or too great for God to do for you; ask and spare not,
yea speak the word and it shall be done, command with an humble boldness, and
it shall be brought forth; ask it in the Heaven above, or in the earth beneath;
amongst all the glorious works and operations of Gods hands, choose where ye
will, ask what ye will, and it shall be done for you. Ask me things to come
concerning my Sons, and concerning the works of my hands, command ye me.

The most precious and constant experiences of the Saints and servants of God
in all ages and generations of the world do also abundantly declare the mighty
prevailing power and efficacy of Faith in prayer; In the Saints experiences.
by which

1. They have prevailed with God for the turning away of his fierce wrath and
anger from ungodly Nations, who had provoked him greatly, and yet perished not,
because some of Gods faithful servants stood up in the gap, and made
intercession for them.

Thus holy Moses prevails with God for Israel, when they provoked him to
wrath with their own inventions, and turned the glory of God into the
similitude of a Calf that eats Hay, Exodus 32.7. And the Lord said unto Moses,
Go get thee down, for the people which thou broughtest out of the Land of
Egypt, have corrupted themselves; they have turned aside quickly out of the way
which I commanded them; they have made them a molten Calf, and have worshipped
it, etc. And verse. 10. Now therefore, let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great
Nation.

Here is an ungodly and unthankful Nation, that have greatly provoked the Lord
by their Idolatry and Apostasy, after all those wonders of mercy, which he had
wrought for them in Egypt, and at the Red Sea, which was a great aggravation of
their wickedness, that they so quickly forgot God their Savior, and turned
aside to other Gods, and gave the glory of all their deliverances and
salvations, which Jehovah had wrought for them, unto a base, detestable Idol,
the Image of a Calf that eats Hay: So verse. 8. They have made a Molten Calf,
and worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy Gods,
O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

And here we have a jealous, offended and provoked God, appearing upon the
Mount to Moses as consuming fire, taking up thoughts of wrath and indignation
against Israel even to their utter destruction and confusion: Now therefore,
let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them, and I will make of thee a great Nation.

But withal, behold a wonder of infinite condescension, God stooping to man,
the great Jehovah courting and entreating a poor, weak, sinful man, to be
silent, and let him alone in the progress and execution of his anger against
Israel! Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them: As if Moses's
prayers did tie up the hands of God, so that he could not do any thing against
Israel, without Moses's leave!

Oh that a poor sinful man, as Moses was, should have such power with the great
and holy God! yet such is the efficacy of Faith in prayer, that God will not,
cannot do any thing against the prayers of his people, when they ask in Faith.

But now does Moses let God alone, and cease to pray, and make intercession for
Israel? is Moses content to accept the promised increase of his own private
family, with so great dishonor to the Name of God, and the universal ruin of
his Church and People? No verily: The Faith and Zeal of this holy man Moses,
like a mighty fire, being a little restrained, breaks forth into the greater
flames. And he sets upon the work of prayer and intercession for Israel with
the more Faith and fervent Zeal, verse. 12, 13. And Moses besought the Lord his
God, and said; Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy People, which thou
have brought forth out of the Land of Egypt, with great power, and with a
mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, for mischief did he
bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the
face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against
thy People. Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy servants, to whom th^^
swarest by thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your se^ as the
stars of Heaven, and all this Land that I have spoken of, will I give unto your
seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

Oh here is a prayer of Faith indeed! here is much Faith acted by Moses in this
prayer; looking to the Word and Promise of God made to Abraham, Isa^^ and
Jacob, as his rule in asking, and the glory of the Name of God, as his great
and ultimate end, and by good argument and strength of reason showing, that to
execute his fierce wrath in consuming his people, would neither consist with
his Covenant and Promise, nor with the glory of his own great Name, and
therefore prays the Lord to turn from his fierce wrath, and repent of this
evil against his people.

And by this prayer of Faith he prevails with God, and delivers Israel from
that consuming wrath and anger of God that was kindled against them, so that
they perished not in their iniquity, as verse. 14. And the Lord repented of the
evil which he thought to do unto his people.

Which famous prayer and intercession of Moses is recorded in the book of
Psalms, and mentioned as the only means of Isreal's preservation from the
consuming power of Jehovahs great wrath and fierce anger, Psalm. 106, 23.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them; had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the breach to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them.

Oh the prevailing power and efficacy of Faith in prayer! that by one prayer of
Faith, a whole Nation should be delivered from so great a ruin!

Lot by one prayer of Faith delivered Zoar from the common destruction and over
throw of Sodom and Gomorrah, that very morning when fire was ready to come down
from Heaven to destroy those Cities, Genesis 19.18. And Lot said unto them; oh not
so my Lord, Behold now thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou have
magnified thy mercy which thou have showed unto me in saving my life, and I
cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me and I dye. Behold now,
this City is near to flee unto, and it is a little one. O let me escape thither
(is it not a little one) and my soul shall live.

This prayer of Lot was not without some visible tincture of humane frailty,
and weakness of Faith, wherein he offended in that he accepted not the place
which the Lord had appointed, but chooses another, ascribing more to the place,
than to the power and good pleasure of God for his protection. Nevertheless it
being a prayer of Faith, in which there was a real exercise of Faith, in that
he believed God was able to spare Zoar, and to make it a means of his
preservation and more comfortable living than the desolate mountain, and
therefore prays that the Lord would not send him to the mountain, but rather
let him flee to Zoar. In which prayer holy Lot was questionless guided by the
Spirit of God, to ask the preservation of that City, which though visibly
threatened, and in danger to be destroyed with the rest, yet was in respect of
Gods secret will and purpose, to be preserved, and therefore the Lord did by
his holy Spirit put it into the heart of his righteous servant Lot, to ask that
City: In which request he is presently accepted, and the life of that City
granted at his petition, verse. 21. And he said unto him: see, I have accepted
thee concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this City for the which
thou have spoken: Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing till
thou be come thither; therefore the Name of that City was called Zoar.

Oh the infinite and admirable condescension of the great and holy God to the
weakness of a poor frail man! that Lot should not accept the mountain which the
Lord appointed him, and yet that the Lord should accept Lot, and spare Zoar
which he had spoken for! yet such is the holy indulgence of the heavenly Father
to his praying children, that when through humane frailty, they cannot come up
to his terms, he out of divine pity stoops and comes down to theirs! and such
is the efficacy and prevailing force of Faith in prayer, that God is even
overcome thereby to grant his poor praying servants even what they will! verse.
21. See I have accepted thee concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow
this City, for the which thou have spoken: Oh well was it for Zoar that Lot
spoke to God for it! The prayer of one just Lot delivers this wicked City from
the common calamity and destruction of their fellow-sinners!

2. The Saints and servants of God have prevailed by Faith in prayer for the
pulling down most speedy vengeance, and just judgments of God upon their
malicious and ungodly enemies.

Thus zealous Elijah by prayer brings down fire from Heaven upon the heads of
his proud and malicious enemies (two several Captains and their fifties) who in
the pride and heat of their spirits, came to do violence to the good Prophet, 2
King. 1.9, 10, 11, 12, until by these examples of Gods severity, the rest of
that wicked party were reduced to some submission and moderation toward his
faithful servant, who in prophesying the death of the King of Samaria, had not
offended, but done that which he was commanded, and allowed of God to do.

And the same holy man, Elijah by prayer prevails with God to shut the Heavens,
that it rained not for three years and six months, so that wicked Ahab,
Jezabel, and the ten Tribes were for their Idolatry, and persecution of Gods
faithful servants, justly plagued with a three years famine. 1 King. 17.1.
compared with James 5.16, 17. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six months.

Thus also the holy Prophet Elisha prevails with God by Faith in prayer for the
smiting of the King of Syria's Army with blindness, 2 King. 6.18. And when they
came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and said, Smite this people, I
pray thee, with blindness; And he smote them with blindness according to the
Word of Elisha.

Thus also the two faithful witnesses under the New Testament which the Lord
raises up to prophecy and bear witness against Antichrist 1260 days, that
is, all the time of the beasts reign and tyranny (for so long he is to
continue, Rev. 13.6.) have power to pull down vengeance upon their enemies, and
to open and shut Heaven, and smite the earth with plagues, as often as they will,
Rev. 11.5, 6. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies. And if any man will hurt them, he must in
this manner be killed. These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in
the days of their prophecy, and have power over waters to turn them to blood,
and to smite the earth with plagues, as often as they will.

See here what great power the Lord has given to his witness-bearing Saints
and servants under the New Testament! whom he raises up to bear witness for
Christ against Antichrist, to protest and prophecy against all the abominations
of the man of sin; though they have no worldly power, nor arm of flesh to
protect them, yet they are not left destitute, for they have power to shut
Heaven, and to smite the Earth with plagues, and to call for vengeance, and the
righteous judgments of God to be made manifest upon their enemies, for which
cause fire is said to proceed out of their mouth; not materially, but
virtually, i.e. they do by their prayers and prophecies which proceed out of
their mouth, procure vengeance from Heaven, and all the plagues and righteous
judgments of God to be poured forth of the vials of his wrath upon the
Antichristian party, who are their malicious and implacable enemies: by which
means they are preserved and protected in their witnessbearing-work, all the
time of their Prophecy, until the end and finishing thereof; at which time by
the determinate counsel of God, they are to be slain, and lie dead for a
season, in order to a glorious resurrection, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

3. The Saints and servants of God have obtained by Faith in prayer, great and
wonderful deliverances, when they have been in the greatest danger, yea even in
the very jaws of destruction.

Great and mavelous personal deliverances have been obtained by Faith in
prayer, Personal deliverances.
or by the faithful prayers of the righteous.

Thus that precious and faithful servant of God, Hezekiah, when he was sick
unto the death, and had received a peremptory sentence of death by the mouth of
the Prophet, Isa. 38.1. Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not
live: by Faith in prayer obtained the retersion of that sentence, and was
delivered in a most wonderful manner from the very jaws of death, verse. 5. Go
and say to Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have
heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold I will add unto thy days
fifteen years. Which deliverance was (all circumstances considered) so
mavelous and wonderful, that the fame thereof sounded as far as Babylon; the
King whereof sent his Ambassadors to congratulate the Kings recovery, and to
enquire of the wonder, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

Thus also the good Prophet Jonah (though an angry passionate man) when he
prayed to the Lord in the fishes belly, and when he was even swallowed up of
death, without all visible help or hope of deliverance, by Faith in prayer
obtained a wonderful deliverance at the hands of God, who spoke to the fish,
and it vomited up Jonah upon the dry Land, Jonah 2.10. of which prayer of his
in the fishes belly, and the great salvation obtained thereby, take his own
confession, Jonah 2.2, 5, 6, 7. And I cried by reason of mine affliction unto
the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried I, and th^^
heardest my voice: The waters compassed me about even to the soul; the depth
closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down to the
bottom of the mountains; the earth with her ^^rs was about me for ever: yet
have thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God. When my soul
fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto thee, into
thy holy Temple.

Thus the holy man Peter also being shut up in prison by Herod, and bound with
two chains, kept all night between two soldiers, the keepers also standing
before the door; being as a sheep fast bound and appointed for the flaughter
next morning; by the prayers of the Church at Jerusalem was wonderfully
delivered from death, and rescued out of the hand of his enemies by an Angel,
Act. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Great, National, National and public deliverances.
and public deliverances have also been obtained at the hands of God by the
faithful prayers of his people.

Thus was Jerusalem and the whole Church of God delivered from the cruel rage,
great power, and proud threatenings of the King of Assyria, by the prayer of
Hezekiah (an Army of a hundred fourscore and five thousand being slain by the
Angel of the Lord in one night) Isa. 37.21. Then Isaiah the Son of Amos sent
unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus says the Lord God of Israel; whereas thou have
prayed to me against Sennacherib King of Assyria. verse. 33. Therefore thus
says the Lord concerning the King of Assyria; He shall not come into this
City, nor shoot an Arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a
bank against it; by the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and
shall not come into this City, says the Lord: for I will defend this City to
save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. And verse. 36. Then
the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians a
hundred and four score and five thousand, and when they arose early in the
morning, behold they were all dead corpses.

Oh the admirable and wonderful strength of Faith in prayer! that one praying
faithful Saint of God should prevail more by one prayer of Faith, than the
greatest Conquerors in the world could ever do by force and power! a hundred
and fourscore and five thousand slain by the prayers of one man! one Hezekiah
prays, and the whole Church of God is delivered!

Thus also when proud Haman that wicked enemy of the people of God had
conspired the utter ruin and destruction of the Jews, in the days of the
captivity; and the design was laid so sure (the Kings Royal assent being
obtained, and the decree gone forth into all the Kings Provinces, and the day
set for the execution thereof) that it was impossible in the eye of reason,
that it should be disappointed, yet by the prayers of good Mordecai, and the
remnant of a poor despised people, a most glorious deliverance was obtained;
the Kings heart suddenly and wonderfully changed; the former decree and
sentence of death reversed; Mordecai highly honored and advanced, the Jews
every where encouraged; wonderfully preserved, and feared by their enemies; and
wicked Haman, their proud and implacable enemy, with all his family destroyed
and rooted out of the earth, Esther 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, chapters.

Thus also when the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount-Seir, had conspired the
utter ruin of the people of God, and joined together in a numerous and
multitudinous Host, and suddenly invaded Judah for that end, supposing
themselves to have been sure enough of their design, there being no strength
nor provision with Jehosaphat to withstand them. A most wonderful and glorious
victory and deliverance was obtained by the prayer of good Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
20.3. And Jehosaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, v. 6. And said,
O Lord God of our Fathers, art not thou God in Heaven? and rulest not thou over
all the Kingdoms of the Heathen? And in thine hand is there not power and
might, so that none is able to withstand thee? Art not thou our God, who did
drive out the inhabitants of this Land before thy people Israel, and gave it
to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever. And they dwelt therein, and have
built thee a Sanctuary therein for thy Name, saying, If when evil comes upon
us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence (for thy Name is in this house) and cry unto thee in
our affliction, then thou will hear and help. And now behold, the children of
Ammon, and Moab, and Mount-Seir, whom thou would not let Israel invade, when
they came out of the Land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed
them not. Behold (I say) how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou have given us to inherit: O our God, will thou not judge
them? for we have no might against this great company that comes against us:
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. And all Judah stood
before the Lord with their little ones, their wives and their children.

Oh here is a prayer of Faith indeed! there is much of the life of Faith, and
strength of argument in this prayer of good Jebosaphat.

1. By Faith he sees and pleads the near relation betwixt God and his people
Israel, the seed of Abraham his friend.

2. By Faith he presses God upon his Covenant and Promise made to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, by which he gave the Land of Canaan (which is therefore
called the Land of Promise) to Abraham and his seed for ever.

3. By Faith he acknowledges and improveth the sovereignty and ruling power
which God keeps in his own hand over all the Kingdoms of the world, yea over
the very Heathen, and those that are the enemies of his Church and People; and
therefore is able at all times to frustrate their deepest counsels, disappoint
their greatest designs, bridle their greatest rage and power, so as to deliver
his people, that put their trust in him.

4. By Faith he pleads the special Covenant and Promise of God made to Solomon
on the behalf of his people at the dedication of the Temple, and applies it to
the present case in hand.

5. By Faith he improves the various passages of providence, clearing up the
innocence and integrity of his people Israel, and the righteousness of their
cause, and on the contrary, declares the guiltiness, ingratitude, and
wickedness of these ungodly nations that were now combined together to seek the
ruin of Israel.

And upon the whole leaves the case with God, as a most righteous Judge, holy,
faithful, and able to plead the case of his poor people in this great distress.

And prevails so far with God by this prayer of Faith, that he has a gracious
answer, and a most glorious return in the wonderful Salvation of the Church and
People of God for whom he prayed, and in the utter destruction and overthrow
of their potent enemies, against whom he prayed: for verse. 14. Then, upon
Jahaziel, etc. came the Spirit of the Lord in the midst of the Congregation.
And he said, Thus says the Lord unto you, be not afraid nor dismayed by
reason of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but Gods. And ver.
17. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set your selves, stand ye
still and see the salvation of the Lord with you. And verse. 22. When they began
to sing and to praise: The Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon,
Moab, and Mount-Seir; which were come against Judah, and they were smitten, for
the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the Inhabitants of Mount-Seir,
utterly to slay and destroy them: And when they had made an end of the
Inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. And when Judah came
toward the watch tower in the wilderness they looked unto the multitude, and
behold they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped. And verse.
25. When Jehosaphat and his people came to take the spoil of them, they found
among them in abundance, both riches, with the dead bodies, and precious Jewels
(which they stripped off for themselves) more than they could carry away, and
they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much.

Oh what a wonderful deliverance and salvation was here obtained by one prayer
of Faith! Good Jehosaphat prays in Faith, and prevails by prayer with God; The
enemies are divided one against another, and utterly destroyed one by another;
Israel saved with a wonderful salvation, and greatly enriched with the spoil of
their enemies!

4. The Saints and Servants of God by Faith in prayer, have prevailed with God
for the stopping the course, and changing the very law of nature in his
government of the Creatures, so that they have at the command of God been
serviceable to his Church and People, not only beyond, but even against the
course and law of nature.

Joshua by Faith in prayer, commands the Sun and Moon to stand still, and stay
their course, until he had avenged the Lords people upon their enemies, Josh.
10.12. Then spoke Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the
Amorites before the children of Israel. And he said in the sight of Israel,
Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And
verse. 13. The Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the people had avenged
themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So
the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about a
whole day! And verse. 14. There was us day like that before it, or after it,
that the Lord hearkened to the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel.

On the wonderful force, and prevailing efficacy of Faith i^ prayer! that even
the course and law of nature (which no creature can resist or withstand) should
thereby be stayed! Job 38.31, 32, 33. 34, 35 Ezekiel. 1.17
and the Sun and the Moon (which by the ordinance of God are to be in
continual motion, and move with such wonderful speed, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
as to compass the world in the vast circumference of the Heavens in a few
hours) should at the word of a poor frail man, stand still, and stay their
course for the space of a whole day!

Moses prevails with the Lord by prayer, for the dividing the waters of the
Sea, even the Red Sea, so that (contrary to the law and course of nature) they
stood upon an heap, and were a wall to Israel on the right hand, and on the
left, Exodus 14.15, 16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto
me? Speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward. But lift up thou
thy Rod, and stretch out thine hand over the Sea, and divide it, and the
children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the Sea. And
verse. 22. The children of Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon the dry
ground, and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their
left.

Oh the admirable and mavelous strength and power of Faith in prayer! that by
it the waters of the Sea, the depths of the Sea should be divided, and made to
stand upon heaps, as a wall to Gods Israel! and yet so it is; Moses cries to
the Lord at the Sea, even the Red Sea, and the waters are divided, and become a
wall to Israel in their passage toward Canaan, on the right hand, and on the
left!

All which (with many other blessed experiences of the Saints which might be
instanced in) do amount to a sufficient testimony and witness to the truth in
hand; and do abundantly evince the truth of this blessed promise of the Lord
Jesus to his poor servants here on earth: And all things whatsoever ye shall
ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

The grounds and reasons of the point upon which this great truth is
established, and wherein the evidence and demonstrations thereof do yet more
fully appear, are briefly these three.

which they ask of God in prayer (when they ask in Faith) are not so much the
fruit of the inward breathings, and unfeigned desires of their own hearts and
spirits, as of the holy and blessed Spirit of grace breathing in them, and
teaching them to pray as they ought, which of themselves they neither know, nor
can do, Romans 8.26. Likewise, the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought: But the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered: And he that
searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.

So that the holy Spirit of God does not only help and assist the Saints in
the right manner of prayer, exciting their graces, quickening and drawing out
their affections, helping them to right ends and aims in prayer (all which are
also necessarily required) but does also suggest and teach them the very matter
of their prayers; how and what to pray for, and ask of God both for themselves
and others: The Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what to
pray for as we ought: But the Spirit it self, etc. So that the Saints are
taught from Heaven what to pray for as they ought; the Spirit of God from
Heaven does teach and assist them to pray here on earth according to the will
of God.

And how reproachfully and blasphemously soever wicked and ungodly men do speak
of the (so called) extemporary prayers of the Saints: yet they are no less than
heaven-born; the things which they are taught by the Spirit of God from Heaven
to ask of God in prayer. And let wicked men know, that in blaspheming the
reproaching the prayers of the Saints, they do blaspheme the Spirit it self:
[But the Spirit it self makes intercession, etc.] Wicked and ungodly men, who
are ignorant of the Spirit of prayer, do exceedingly magnify and cry up their
stinted forms, and book-prayers, because (as they imagine) composed and indicted
by holy and learned men, and that with the deepest judgment, and most serious
consideration had of the things meet to be asked of God in prayer: And do
condemn the prayers of Gods Saints, because (as they judge in the darkness of
their carnal mind, which is always enmity against God) extemporary, Romans 8.7
rash, and inconsiderate, without any deep consideration and matter prepared
beforehand: but let such know, that the best of their stinted Forms and
Book-prayers, are but indicted by men on earth; and on the other hand, the
prayers of Gods Saints and servants offered up in Faith (though extemporary)
are indicted by the Spirit of God in Heaven, and given in immediately by the
ministration of the holy Spirit, who knows better what is meet to be asked of
God in prayer (extemporary) than the greatest Bishops, Doctors, and learned men
upon earth can do, by their deepest consultation.

And let such resolve this question; whether are most agreeable to the will and
mind of God, those prayers, which are indicted by the Spirit of God in Heaven,
and given in from above, as all the prayers of the Saints are which they put up
in Faith: or those which are composed and imposed by the carnal wisdom, and
coercive power of men on earth, contrary to the Word of God?

And let me add this one word more; that the prayer of the poorest Saint,
though encompassed with utmost humane frailties and infirmities, yet being
breathed by the holy Spirit into his heart, and breathed out again in Faith by
the help of the same Spirit, has more of heavenly wisdom, and true spiritual
excellency in it, than the most magnified and admired. Form that ever was
composed by the greatest Doctors, and learned men in the world: For Joh. 3.6.
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: and that which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit. And again, verse. 31. He that is of the earth, is earthly,
and speaks of the earth; he that comes from Heaven is above all. As Jesus
Christ came from Heaven, and therefore was above all the Prophets and Apostles:
so also the Spirit of God comes from Heaven, and is above all the Doctors,
Bishops, and learned men in the world, in teaching as how and what to pray for
as we ought.

And hence it is, that true spiritual and heavenly prayer is distinguished from
all hypocritical shows, and pretenses of prayer by this character, Ephesians. 6.18.
Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit. True prayer
and supplication is always in the Spirit. And again, Jude 10. Praying in the
Holy Ghost.

The sum and close of the matter, is, prayers of Faith do come from God, and
therefore must needs prevail with God; prayers of Faith are heaven-born, and
therefore must needs find acceptance there.

that in so doing they must contradict the revealed will of God in their
petitions; and therefore such prayers must needs be very fruitless.

But the prayers of the sincere children of God, which are indeed prayers of
Faith, and the breathings of Gods own Spirit in them, do always concur, and
fall in with the will of God: And as he that searches the heart knows what
is the mind of the spirit, in the hearts of his children: so the Spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God, Romans 8.27. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11
Because he ( i.e. the holy Spirit of God) makes intercession for the Saints,
according to the will of God.

Faith looks at the will of God as her rule in asking; and in things about
which the will of God is revealed, Faith will be positive, and ask absolutely
without an if: but in things about which the will of God is yet secret and
unknown, Faith will ask with submission to the will of God. Not my will, but
thy will be done, is the language of Faith in such cases: And it is as
impossible for Faith to err in this particular, and to miss of the will of God
in asking, as it is for the Sun in the Firmament, to mistake his way in his
heavenly perambulation: or for the waters of the Rivers to mistake their way
into the Sea, that they should not come into, and coincidate with the Ocean.

Whatsoever therefore the Saints do ask in Faith, they do ask according to the
will of God, whether it be secret or revealed; For the rule which Faith looks
at, is an unerring rule, viz. the whole light of Scripture-revelation. And the
conduct and guide by which Faith is directed in asking, is an unerring guide,
even the holy Spirit of God, Romans 8.26. which perfectly knows and searches
what is the mind and will of God in all cases, whether secret or manifest.

And it is worthy observation, how the poor Saints of God are often times, by a
secret instinct and conduct of the Spirit guided in prayer, to ask those very
things of God, which he is about to do and bring to pass, beyond what is
revealed or made known.

As when Lot asked of God in Prayer, the preservation of the City Zoar, which
was threatened, and in visible danger of perishing in the common destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and yet was preserved by the prayer of righteous Lot, who
was questionless guided in his asking that City above any other, Genesis 16.19,
20, 21
by the secret instinct of the Spirit, who knew what was the secret will and
purpose of God in that matter, and therefore taught Lot to make intercession
for it according to the will of God.

Thus also that holy woman Hannah, when she prayed for a Son, and in the
pouring out of her spirit to the Lord in prayer, did beforehand dedicate and
devote him to the Lord all his days, was questionless guided by a secret and
special instinct of the spirit, to ask of God that very thing that was in the
heart and purpose of God concerning her and her Son, though as yet secret and
unknown, 1 Samuel 1.10, 11.

Thus also the last Martyrs that suffered in the Marian days, were taught from
Heaven by the secret conduct of the spirit, to ask of God in prayer that they
might be the last that should suffer in that manner, and that the Lord would
put an end to the afflictions of his people. And were in that petition
graciously heard and answered: for presently the life of that wicked Queen was
cut off by the hand of God: And though many others were condemned, and warrants
issued out for the burning of them, Fox Martiro. vol. 3. p. 893.
yet the tidings of the Queens death stayed the execution, and those precious
souls were, according to their petition, the last that suffered in that bloody
persecution.

Whatever therefore the Saints do ask of God in prayer, by the help of his holy
Spirit, and by Faith in the Name of Jesus Christ, they do ask according to his
will, and therefore must needs prevail in Heaven, and have such petitions
granted and fulfilled on earth, 1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. And if we know that he hears us. Whatsoever we ask, we know
that we have the petitions that we desired of him.

Heb. 4.14.16
that great High Priest over the House of God, who is entered into the Heavens,
even Jesus the Son of God, whose office it is to offer up the prayers of all
the Saints with the spiritual incense of his merits, whereby they do become
acceptable to God.

It pertained to the office, Exodus 30.6, 7 Levit. 16.12
and was the custom of the Priests under the Law to enter within the vail, and
offer up the sweet Incense with the prayers of the Congregation, who usually
were without the door of the Tabernacle praying at the time of Incense: Luke
1.8, 9, 10
And the time of the Priests offering up Incense was observed by the
Congregation as a special time and season for prayer: And all this was to
typifie and point out something of the Priestly and Mediatorial Office of Jesus
Christ, Heb 6.19, 20. and 9.24
who is now entered within the vail, into the holy of holies, i. e. the heavenly
places themselves, there to appear in the presence of God for us, as a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: to offer up all the spiritual
sacrifices and services of the Saints unto his Father, with the sprinkling of
his blood, and sweet perfume and incense of his precious merits upon them,
whereby their persons, though compassed with many sins and infirmities, and
their services, though weak and imperfect in themselves, are made infinitely
acceptable and well pleasing unto the Father through him.

1. Their persons.
Their persons are made acceptable unto the Father through him, Ephesians. 1.6. To
the praise of his glorious grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
beloved.

Oh ye precious Saints of God, know that the acceptance of your persons with
the Father, stands not in your own Saintship, and personal righteousness, but
in the imputed righteousness, precious blood, and merits of Jesus Christ, which
is made yours by Faith: So that by the blood of Jesus ye are now made Kings and
Priests unto his Father, and may come to the throne of grace with acceptance,
Rev. 1.5.6. Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood: And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father; therefore
ye may come boldly to the throne of grace, through the glorious intercession
of Jesus your great High Priest, Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that we have a great
High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. Verse. 16.
Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace. And again, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom
we have boldness and access by the Faith of him.

2. The services, Their services.
and spiritual sacrifices of the Saints which they offer up to God in Faith,
are acceptable to the Father through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as
lively stones are built up a spiritual-house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Where observe, that the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ, is the
procuring cause of all the Saints acceptance with God, both as to their
persons, and as to their services, which here are called spiritual sacrifice.
And ye Saints of God, know, that your sacrifices are not therefore acceptable
to God, because spiritual, but because offered to God through Jesus Christ,
because sprinkled with the blood of Christ.

Now it is the nature and property of Faith to lead us out of our selves for
acceptance, Romans 5.1
as well as for assistance, unto the blood, and righteousness, Isa. 45.24
and merits of Jesus Christ, and Faith seeks its acceptance with the Father
only, Gal. 2.19, 20
and wholly through the mediation of Jesus the Son of God.

And therefore all the prayers of the Saints, which are put up in Faith, do
come under the mediation, and glorious intercession of Jesus, and are offered
up to the Father by the hand of Christ, who is therefore called the Angel of
the Covenant, and said to stand before the Altar, i. e. the Incense Altar,
because he offers up continually the prayers of the Saints with his own
hand, perfumed with the Incense of his own merits unto the Father, Rev. 8.3, 4.
And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer. And
there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne: And the smoke
of the Incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before
God, out of the Angels hand.

Oh needs must the prayers of Faith, the believing prayers of all the Saints
ascend up before God, and prevail in Heaven, which are offered up by the hand
of this blessed Angel, even Jesus, who is before the throne, And is there
continually! so that it is always the time of Incense with the Congregation of
Gods praying people; for this blessed Angel is day and night before the Throne,
offering up their prayers with the pure Incense of his merits: Jesus the
Mediator and High Priest of our profession, is always within the vail, carrying
on this part of his Priestly office in Heaven, Heb. 7.25. Seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

them. It is easier to stand before the greatest Armies, before the combined
powers and policies of the greatest Monarchs and Princes in the world, than to
stand before the prayers of two or three poor Saints, who pray in Faith, and
cry day and night to God for help against their wicked persecutors.

It Is storied of the Champions, and Worthies of the Old Testament, amongst
other worthy deeds, and great things which they did by Faith: That by it they
put to flight the Armies of the Aliens, and subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.33. Who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenc head the
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword; out of weakness, were made
strong; waxed valiant in fight; turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. By
Faith, i. e. by prayers of Faith; for they cried unto the Lord in their
straits, and under the great oppressions and tyranny of their enemies, they
prayed to the Lord for help against them: And by Faith in prayer they obtained
help from God against their persecutors.

Their enemies were wonderfully brought under, mighty Kingdoms subdued, and
whole Armies strangely conquered, and shamefully put to flight.

Sometimes without means, Exodus 14.27, 28
as Pharaoh and all his Host at the Red Sea.

Sometimes by weak and contemptible means; Judges 4.21
as Sisera fell by the hand of a woman. And King Herod that bloody persecutor,
Act. 12.23
dyed by Worms or Lice. And the whole Army of the Midianites with the
Amalekites, and all the children of the East, who lay upon the ground like
Grasshoppers (so great was their multitude) were put to flight by the dream of a
Barley Cake tumbling into the Host of Midian. Judge. 5.12, 13, 14


Sometimes by contrary means, against the very Law of nature, friendship, and
natural affection. So proud and blasphemous Sennacherib fell by his own Sons,
Isa. 37.38
whilst he was worshipping in the house of Niseroth his God, who were
wonderfully overruled by the power and providence of God, even against the Law
of nature and religion, to execute the wrath of God; and avenge the cause of
his praying-people upon this proud and wicked persecutor. So also the children
of Moab, Ammon, and Mount-Seir, who were confederate against Judah, were by the
just judgment of God at the prayer of good Jehosaphat, given up to such a
spirit of division and hatred amongst themselves, 2 Chronicles. 20.23, 24
that they fully set themselves to destroy one another, and ceased not till
there was not one of them left.

Sometimes by preternatural and extraordinary means, where ordinary means have
failed. Josh. 10.10, 11
Thus the five Kings and their Armies that fought against Joshuah, were subdued
and destroyed chiefly by hailstones from Heaven. And thus the King of Assyria's
Army, consisting of an hundred and fourscore and five thousand, Isa. 27.36
were slain in one night by the hand of an Angel. Thus the mouths of those
greedy and roaring Lions were stopped by an Angel, that they could not so much
as touch Daniel. Dan. 1.6.22
And the burning destroying power of the fiery Furnace so quenched by the
glorious presence of the Son of God, that it had no power so much as to singe
the garments, Dan. 3.25, 26, 27
or hair of the heads of those three Worthies, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

So that the greatest Monarchs, Princes, Generals, Armies, and Kingdoms of the
world, have not been able to stand before the prayers of the Saints of God,
when they have prayed in Faith, and cried to the Lord for help against them!

Woe therefore be unto all those against whom the Elect of God do cry for
vengeance day and night! It Is not in the power of the greatest worldly force
and policy to secure them from the revenging hand of God: No, but such must
certainly fall before the prayers of Gods Elect, Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not
God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him; though he bear
long with them ( i. e. with the persecutors) I tell you that he will avenge
them speedily.

Oh that therefore the Kings and Princes, and Rulers of the Earth would be
wise and take heed how by persecuting and oppressing the People of God, they
constrain them to cry to Heaven against them: It Is blessed counsel which the
Spirit of God gives by the mouth of his servant David, Psalm. 2.10. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth: Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish in the way: When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.

by Faith in prayer prevail with him for any thing?

What a mercy was one praying Moses to the Nation of Israel, Psalm. 106.23
when they had provoked the Lord to jealousy by the golden Calf?

What a great mercy was one praying Lot to the City Zoar? Genesis 19.21
which should have been destroyed with Sodom and Gomorrah, had not Lot prayed
for it?

What a great blessing was holy Jacob (who was a great wrestler with God in
prayer, Genesis 32.24.28
and as a Prince, had power with God, and prevailed, and upon that account had
his name changed from Jacob to Israel) what a mercy I say was he to the whole
Family of his Uncle Laban, Genesis 30.27
whilst he sojourned there?

That speech of the Lord to King Abimelech, and his People, concerning Abraham
a poor traveller and stranger, who came but to sojourn in his Country for a
time, is very remarkable, Genesis 20.7. Now therefore restore the man his Wife;
for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. Wrath
was gone out from the Lord against King Abimelech and his People. And the
prayers of Abraham, a poor stranger, prevail in Heaven for the life of
Abimelech, who otherways was but a dead man, and for those in his house, whose
wombs were fast closed up, because of Sarah Abraham's Wife, Genesis 20.3.17, 18
whom Abimelech had sinfully taken to him. Their own sin (not Abraham's
sojourning) had procured wrath against them. And Abraham by prayer procures
sparing and healing mercy for them! A sinning Court, who daily provoke the Lord
against themselves and subjects,
had need of some praying souls daily to intercede for them!

How great therefore is the error of the wicked, who look upon the People of
God as the only troublers of their Israel? 1 King. 18.17
and attribute the cause of all their calamities and troubles to the Lords
faithful servants; which they procure unto themselves by their own wickedness?
Justly therefore may the Lords People answer such Ahabs, in the words of that
old nonconformist and good Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 18.18. We have not
troubled Israel, but thou, and thy Fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim! It Is not the zealous
and conscientious non conformist, that troubles the Court and Country, but the
Idolatrous and superstitious party, who cast off the Commandments of the Lord,
and set up their own inventions, Psalm. 106.29 Rev. 13.12, 15, 16
and as a greater aggravation of their wickedness, would compel others to sin
with them.

Oh that therefore the eyes of the Nations, of the Kings and Judges of the
earth were opened to discern aright, and to see who are the troublers of
Israel, and who are the chariots and horsemen thereof: Well! that blessed day
is a coming, wherein the Kings of the earth even shall hate that scarlet whore,
Rev. 17.16, 17
and tear her flesh, and burn her with fire, even so Amen. The good Lord hasten
it in his due time, and let all the Saints say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Well then! whatever wicked men say, whatever proud men say out of the
blindness, and hardness, and unbeleef of their hearts; yet the zealous and
conscientious non-conformists are not the troublers of Israel, 2 King. 2.12
Rev. 16.13, 14
but the Chariots and Horsemen thereof: Are not the Kings enemies but his and
their Countries best friends? Rev. 19.19, 20, 21
and wicked men will be found at last to be the worst subjects and enemies both
to their King and Country.

Let the Nations, Kings and Princes of the earth therefore know, that it is
their best interest to cherish, protect and encourage a praying and a holy
people, though they cannot in all things conform to their laws and customs in
the matters of Gods most holy worship, about which the holy God is so jealous,
Exodus 20.5 Dan. 3.17, 18. and 6.10
and his people so truly and tenderly conscientious. And the prayers of such a
people shall prevail more in Heaven for their King and Country, in order to
their defense and safety, than all the Chariots and Horsemen, Soldiers and
Armies, Power and Policy that the whole world can afford them.

Zion, that City of God, and for the confusion and destruction of mighty Babel,
that Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth, who has corrupted the
whole earth with her fornications, involved the whole Creation in such a woeful
bondage and thraldom, and made her self drunk with the blood of Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus. Heb. 4.16
Come boldly I say to the throne of Grace, Luke 18.7
and cry mightily to Heaven even day and night, Isa. 62.6, 7
and give the Lord no rest till he does arise, Psalm. 87.3
and make his Jerusalem a praise in the earth, and fulfill all those glorious
things which are spoken of that City of God, and execute all the judgments
written against Babylon to bind her Kings in chains, Psalm. 149.7, 8, 9
and her Nobles in links of Iron. This honor have all his Saints.

O ye Saints, this is an honor that the God of Heaven and earth has put upon
you (by virtue of the anointing and unction of the holy one that is upon you)
for that end to be the witnesses of Jesus Christ, Rev. 11.3, 4, 5, 6
and to open and shut Heaven by your prayers, and to smite the earth with
plagues as often as ye will, to pray down the mighty Kingdom of Babel, Rev.
11.15
which is Antichrist, and to pray up the glorious and everlasting Kingdom of
Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. 3.22, 13
to pray out these old Heavens, and old earth, wherein dwells wickedness, and
to pray in the new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness and
peace.

This is an honor, I say, which the God of Heaven and Earth has put upon you,
that ye should stand before the God of the whole earth, Zech. 4.14
and be instrumental and influential in and about these great things.

And this honor can no man take from you; this is a privilege and honor
given you from Heaven, and it is not in the power of all the devils in hell by
tempting, nor all the powers of earth by persecuting, to take it from you; they
may cast you into prisons, lay you in the darkest dungeons, drive you into
exile and banishment, but still wherever you are, whatever your outward
condition be; Heaven is open over your heads, and the spirit of grace is nigh
your hearts, ye may have access to the throne of grace, they cannot keep out
the Spirit from you, nor shut out your prayers from ascending before God; if
they will not suffer you to utter words, 1 Samuel 1.13, 15 Romans 8.26, 27
ye may pour out your spirits, and sigh and groan inwardly, and he who
searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the spirit. I say, ye may come
freely and boldly to the throne of grace, the way is open, and none can shut
it; it is a new and a living way, not of works, but of grace; not by the blood
of Bulls and of Goats, but by the blood of Jesus; neither your sins, nor your
enemies therefore can shut it; if it were an old Covenant way of access by
works, and man's righteousness, your sins might shut it, and you not be able to
enter into the holiest; or if it were a way of access by carnal and external
sacrifices, your enemies might shut it, and make the daily sacrifice to cease,
Dan. 8.11.
either by denying you liberty, or wherewithal to sacrifice.

But now seeing it is a new Covenant way of access, not by works, and man's
righteousness, but by free grace, and Gods righteousness imputed by Faith to
them that believe not by external sacrifice, but by the blood and spirit of
Jesus the Son of God; lift up your heads, and know that it is not in the power
of your sins, or enemies, to hinder your daily access to the throne of grace;
if you have Faith but as a grain of Mustard Seed, and come in the exercise of
that Faith by the blood of Jesus, ye may ask and have, prevail with God by
prayer for all things whatsoever; there is nothing too great, or too good for
God to bestow upon you; he has set you no bounds, but bids you ask what you
will: And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive. Let me therefore close up this exhortation with the words of the holy
Apostle, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; and having an
high Priest over the house of God: Let us draw near with a true heart, and in
full assurance of Faith: having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience.

Israel of God, who as Princes have power with him thus to prevail in Heaven,
that all things whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye are sure to receive;
give all the glory unto Jesus Christ, and cast your crowns down at his feet,
and give glory to the Lamb, through whom alone it is that ye thus overcome and
prevail by Faith against all the powers of Hell and Earth.

Oh learn that new song, Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof (not we are worthy, but thou art worthy) to have honor,
and glory, and blessing, and power: As verse. 12, 13. for verse. 10. Thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, tongue,
and people, and nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests.

Oh know, and freely confess before Angels and men, that it is not by your own
holiness, or righteousness, that ye do any of these great things, but by Faith
in the name, the blessed and holy name of Jesus; let the same mind be in you,
that was in the holy Apostles, Peter and John, who when they had done a great
work upon the impotent man (who was lame from his Mothers womb, which drew the
eye of the people with great admiration toward them) did humble and abase
themselves, that Christ alone might be magnified, and have all the glory of
what they had done, directing the eye, and expectation of the people from them
unto Jesus the Son of God, Act. 3.12. Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this?
Or why look ye so earnestly on us? as though by our own power or holiness we
had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of
our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up, etc. And verse.
16. His name, through Faith in his name has made this man strong, whom ye see
and know. Yea the Faith which is by him, has given him this perfect soundness
in the presence of you all.

Oh here is a choice and excellent spirit indeed! here is the life and glory of
Faith indeed! to do great things in the name and strength of Christ; and then
to give all the glory back again to him!

Oh ye Saints and Servants of God, know, that it is not by your own power and
holiness, by your own Saintship and worthiness, but by the power and holiness,
by the blood and righteousness, by the mediation and intercession of Jesus,
that ye do any of these great things by Faith in prayer.

Therefore I say again and again, give all the glory to Jesus Christ; let
nothing be given to faith, nothing be given to prayer; nothing be given or
ascribed to your own Saintship or holiness, but let all the glory be given to
God and to the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne, but the holy Angels, the
four beasts, and four and twenty Elders, with all the heavenly host, whose
number is ten thousand times ten thousand, are all about the throne, not
sharing the glory and honor with Jesus Christ, though they have been
ministerially instrumental in the hand of Christ to accomplish these great
works; but giving all the glory to him, and to him alone, Rev. 5.11.12, 13, 14.
And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round about the throne, and
the beasts and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten-thousand, and thousand of thousands. Saying with a loud voice, worthy is
the Lamb that was slain, to receive power and riches and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in Heaven, and
on earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And the four
Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives
for ever and ever. Even so Amen.

And let all the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints in Heaven and earth, and
all creatures, persons, and things be nothing, be less then nothing, be
overshadowed and dis-appear, that Jesus Christ the Lamb of God may be all in
all, and appear in his glory, and shine as the Sun of righteousness in the
highest heavens for ever and ever.

And let all the Saints and holy Angels, who are but stars, remember and know,
that they shine but with a borrowed light, and therefore must disappear at the
appearing of this glorious Sun, that all the world may behold his face in
Righteousness, and the whole earth be enlightened with his glory.

Let him be true, and every man a Liar, let him be holy, and every man a
sinner; he must increase, but we must decrease.

And let every Saint and servant of God say, let every friend of the Bridegroom
say, This my joy therefore is fulfilled: for this is the great end of the
Saints, access unto, and acceptance with the Father through Jesus Christ. Joh.
14.13. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in the Son. If God and Jesus Christ be hereby glorified, we
have our end, our all.

The sum, and scope, and perfection of all our faith, and hope of all our
praying, preaching, hearing, reading, doing, and suffering, is this, Isa. 61.3.
That he may be glorified.

In this therefore let us joy and rejoice, in this let our souls acquiesse, and
take up, as in our spiritual center and Heavenly rest? as in our Canaan, our
Heaven, our all, which is dearer and sweeter to us then our reputations,
estates, liberties, lives, yea then our very souls, then all our own
concernments. That Jesus Christ, and the Father in him is glorified and exalted
by the great things that he does and will do in Heaven, for his poor, sinful,
and unworthy, tempted, and afflicted Servants here on earth. Heb. 13.7, 8.
Considering the end of their conversation Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and
to day, and for ever.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle, page 2. line 6. for form read from, and page 4. line 11. read
those. In the Book, p. 59. l. 12. r. life, p. 75 l. 22. blot out the, p. 83. l.
2. r. Non-Ordinancers, p. 153, l. 13. r. Demonstration.


