A Discourse Grounded On PROVE. 12.5, The Thoughts of the Righteous are Right.
Proving Our state (Godward) to be as Our Thoughts are. Directing how to try
(...) and Our Selves by them. Propounding Schemes of Right Thoughts. With
Motives and Rules (...) keeping Thoughts Right. In Two Parts. By FAITHFUL TEAT.

For as a man THINKS in his Heart, So is He. PROVE. XXIII.VII. Let the
Unrighteous man forsake his Thoughts, ISAI. LV.VII. Does not He that Pondereth
(...) H^^^T, Consider? PROVE. XXIV.XII. DUBLIN Printed by Nath. Thompson Anno
Domini, 1666.

The Preface.
Little Book,
I Am very sensible that thine Entertainment in the World is likely to be the
same with His, on whose Errand Thou art sent, who is said to have endured,
(...), Hebr: 12, 1
the contradiction of Sinners against Himself. For to tell Men of making
Conscience of THOUGHTS, for Setting and Keeping them RIGHT, when the most do
even hate to be reclaimed from the most Outward Enormities in Words and
Actions, Psalm, 50, 17
is likely but to tickle the Spleen of too many Ishmaels to an Impious
scurrility, Genesis 27, ^ compar with Gal 4 28.^9
and profane Derision.

But (whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear) Go Thou and tell
the the wicked WITS that thou do meet with, Exek 2, 4, 5
That whilst they are Quaffing Themselves into a drunken merriment in the
Vessels of the Dan. 5.3.
Temple, Verse 25
(making sport of things Spiritual) there is a tremendous MEAN TEKEL upon the
Wall, Verse 27
Their wit is weighed in the Balances (of the Sanctuary) and found want^ng;
Ver^e 26.
Their Days are numbered, and themselves shortly to give up the Ghost, and a
sad account therewith to God that gave them their active Phansies for better
use.

And here I could tell thy Reader, that I have been lately an Eye witness of
some (taken for Wits of prime magnitude in the Orb of Profaneness) who upon
their Death beds, could allow no rest to themselves or those about them,
without procuring the Visits and Prayers of such as themselves had by a mimical
way of Praying, and Theatrical mock Preaching, been wont to expose to Derision
among their Companions; Unhappy partners in their profane LIFE, and again
unhappy in that they were not spectators of their penitent DEATHS!

Exodus 10, 16
When Gods Pl^gues are upon Egypt, Oh then call for Moses and Aaron in have,
cha. 8, 8, 28 and 9, 27
Oh Pray, pray, pray for us; Yet this Moses is the man, that at other times,
Hebr. 11.26
must bear the Reproach of Christ in Egypt, as the Apostle (to the Hebrews)
testifyeth For though the Hearts of the Sons of men are fully set in them to do
Evil, and Madness* in their Hearts whilst they Live (as Ecclesiastes observes)
yet, Eccles. 9, 3
says the Holy Ghost, Destruction, and DEATH say, Job 28, 21 compa. with Verse
28
We have heard the Fam^ of Wisdom with our Ears, that is, of the true fear of
the Lord, as the Text expounds it self. Now

It Is not that which first we Love, Mr. Waller quoted by Mr. R. Boil

But what Dying We approve.
Go thou therefore and tell the World that thine Author, 2 Cor. 5.12
knowing the Terror of the Lord, (and in the many years leisure he has had
for Thinking, finding no more Noble Theme than Thoughts) has sent thee forth
to persuade Men, to be so far from daring to adventure their Souls in naked and
open Profaneness, as not to rest under the fairest Fig Leaves of superficials,
or the best of OUTSIDES whatsoever; but to consider seriously, That there is a
Sanctify the LORD GOD in your HEART; and a Curse not the KING, 1 Pet 3, 15
Ecces. 10, 12 Hebr. 4, 22
no not in thy Thought; That the word of God is quick and powerful, (...).
a (critical) discerner of the thoughts of the Heart.

And therefore thou can be unfit for the Hands of none, for that all have
HEARTS. Discourses of other sorts may more particularly concern some one sort
of Readers, and some another, but that Counsel of Solomon's Be thou diligent to
know the state of thy FLOCKS, Prove. 27, 23
concerns every one if that of Holy Herbert be true,

Herbert in Temple.
My Soul's a Shepherd too, a Flock it feeds,

Of THOUGHTS, and Words, and Deeds.

Let all sorts therefore be diligent to know the state of their Thoughts.

As for the Poor in this world, they have the more need to be rich in (that
which our Savior calls) the good treasure of the Heart, Matt. 12, 33
t^^t is, (amongst other things) good THOVGHTS; and as for the Great st, go
thou and tell them, that as the Bereans were the More Noble for wearing the
precious Pearl of Gods Word at their Ear; Acts 17, 10 11
So, Thoughts regulated by that Word, are the best Jewel that can sparkle upon
the most Honorable Breasts, Mal. 3, 1^
to make them orient in his Eye, Verse 17
who has said of those only, who so THINK upon his Name, They shall be Mine,
in that day when I make up my JEWELS.

But if the sick of the Plague of the Heart (which Scripture speaks of as the
worst of Plagues and) whose Cure thou designest, will not receive thee, 1 Kin.
8, 38
because the Divine Patience does as yet suffer them to walk abroad free from
Outward and bodily Maladies; Then go thou, and visit my old Neighbors in
Doleful Colchester, and other such sad places, where the Plague in their
Houses, hindering their freedom of converse with others does the more oblige,
and may perhaps the more dispose them to turn in to Themselves, to stand in aw,
and not to sin, but to commune with their Own HEARTS; Psalm 4, 5
And the God of all Grace go along with thee, and succeed thee for the
effectual Turning of many Hearts from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God.

Chap. 1, Of Self discovery, its Nature and necessity.

C ^p. 2 (...) this Principle that Thoug^ts are Free; The less ^o in Gods ^^ye
because free from Man's. Evil Thoughts sin to us, Abomination to God, Damned in
the Old World, Exclude from Salvation, like Devils, and worse.

Chap. 3. Thoughts the Souls pulse. In Ch^rlishness, Liberality, Envy,
Goodness, Impatience, Patience, Uncleanness, Chastity, Covetousness, Pride,
Humility, Purity. Judge we Ourselves by what we would others (if we could)

Chap. 4. God chiefly ^yeth men's Thoughts, they have feet, tongues, and hands.
Thought-Adultery, Profaneness Presumption, etc. Evil and Good Charecterized from
their Thoughts: known to God afar off. Our Possessions, Companions, etc. 1 God
made us for Thinkin^. Gods Good will toward us, and Our^ to Him set out by
Thoughts, so Our Ill will by not thinking of Him, etc. 2. Grace first stirs in
Thoughts 3 Tboughts can reach further then our Deeds can, and God requires our
utmost. 4, Thoughts are the Hearts first born, Gods part Man's Heart a fountain,
Mint house, God eyes our hearts first setting out. 5 God judges (as Man
cannot) most by what is in-most. 6. Conscience (Gods deputy) judges us by our
Thoughts.

Chap. 5 Right Thoughts how to be known, not thoughts of, but In our selves.
Conscience the Lords candle to search

Trial 1: By their Original, not from Nature, but Grace. The occasion and
season of Gods first working them. A Scheme of a Converts first thoughts. agree
with natural motions in 1, Facility 2. Frequency, 3, Perpetuity,

Trial 2 By their Radication, when good thoughts are deepest. Rule explained,
Reason of the Rule, Instances in good and bad, Godly (at lowest) excel
Hypocrites at best. Bodily temperament how considerable in this trial.

Trial, 3 Right thoughts operative in a Right Conversation. Thoughts without
Works vain and dead. Right application of this Rule.

Trial, 4 Right Th ughts are Regular, Here 1, Think there is a Rule for
Thoughts 2, Have Right Thoughts of the Rule.

RIGHT THOUGHTS The Righteous man's EVIDENCE: A Discourse upon Proverbs 12.5.
The Thoughts of the Righteous are Right.
The I. Part.
Chap. I. Shows how Self Discovery is to be had and made: bewails
Self-Ignorance: Persuades to Self-studying and Self acquaintaince.
Sect. I.
COgito, ergo sum, Thinking th'evidenc^ of Being.
is a prime Conclusion with the modern and ingenious Philosopher. THINKING is
the surest proof of BEING. For since Operation does certainly suppose Essence,
Man does most certainly conclude his Being from that Operation that he is most
certain of. I cannot so surely conclude I am, because I walk, or talk, or eat,
or drink, ot see, or hear; for I may be deceived as to these Operations; senses
are not seldom deluded; Phantasy obtrudes, falsity; A man dreams and thinks he
eats (says the Prophet) and awakes and his soul is empty: Isa. 29.8
Man is not so sure he eats when he thinks he eats, as he certainly knows he
thinks, when he thinks he thinks; and if he be sure he thinks, he is sure he
Is, for Thinking is an Operation and flows from Being.

Right thoughts of a right Spirit Acts. 8.21 Psalm. 51.10
And as naked Thinking is the surest argument of mere Being, so is well-thinking
(if our Text be true) an Evidence of Well-Being, Right Thoughts (as this
Scripture calls them) of a Right Heart and a Right Spirit (as other Scriptures
call it,) for (says the Holy Ghost) As a man THINKS in his heart, Prove. 23 7
So is He.

Sect II.
NOw this Self-sight or Self-discerning, Self sight how to be had.
as it is only to be had and made in the Looking-glass of thine own Thoughts,
so only by the Eye of thine own soul, for what man knows (says the Apostle)
the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11
save the Spirit of man that is in him? Yet must that Light, that makes
manifest, Ephesians. 5 13
be held rightly to thee, even the word of God which is quick and powerful and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: so also must that
Spirit, Hebr. 4.12
that searches all things, 2 Cor. 2.10
give thee visive power, and help thee in the search, (as David says, Search
me, Ps. 193 23
O God, and know mine heart, try me, and know my thoughts.) For this is the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation (says the Apostle) not only in the knowledge
of God, Ephesians. 117 and 18
but also of our selves; that the eyes of our understandings being enlightened,
we may know not only what is the hope of his calling, but also what is his
working in us. Wherefore, Reader, though the Author know not what thy spiritual
state is, yet for the loves sake he bears thy soul which he knows to be
inestimably precious, most earnestly desirous he is to meet and help those
Self-discovering Thoughts of thine, by these few Thoughts of His, here
presented to thy view, and to thy value no farther than they carry the Evidence
of that Word which shall judge thee at the last day; Jo. 12.48
Praying that as thou read, thou may recieve an unction from the Holy
One, 1 John 2.20
that knowing all things, thou may not be ignorant of thy self.

Sect. III.
THe Scripture says, The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fools eyes
are in the ends of the earth. Eccles. 2.14 Pro 17.24
How many HOW DO YOU'S do many make (for which they will one day make but a
sad account) without bestowing one poor hour in a Month or year in a profitable
HOW DO YOU upon their own souls, which if thou thy self neglectest, though I
might say (with the Prophet) Who shall pity thee, who shall bemoan thee, Jerem
15 5
Who shall go aside to ask thee HOW THOU DO; yet (me thinks) it greatly
pityes me for the multitude of Our Wandering Jews (miscalled Christians) that
gad like Dinah, Gen 34.1
or rather flee from themselves, Genesis 4.12
and the presence of the Lord like Cain, whose feet abide not in the house,
their own he^rt, nay scarcely their own home; Pr v. 7 11
but their days are consumed in vanity (as the Psalmist speaks) betwixt making
and showing themselves fine and brave. Psalm. 78 33
But Oh have not such heard, have they not known that for wandering Stars
(though they glitter like them for a season) there is yet reserved a blackness
of darkness Jude 13
for ever; surely the Lord will say to such as now depart from themselves,
Matt. 7 23
depart from me; to such as know not themselves, I know you not.

O how diligent is the Tradesman in his Counting House? and the Countryman in
knowing the state of his Flocks? Pro 27.13
How anxious are Thousands about Titles, Evidences, Bills, Bonds, in matters of
dirty Mammon, yet prodigiously careless as to what Scripture calls precious;
Faith, (2 Pet. 1.1.) Promises, (2, Pet. 1.4.) Souls, (Psalm 49.8.) Christ, (1
Peter 2.7.) Never so much as asking themselves, or others, for any Evid^nces
for Heaven, or what they might do to be saved? like those that prepare a table
for a Troop, but forget Gods Holy Mountain; Our Thoughts are with Martha, Isaia
65.11 Luke 10 41 43.
cumbred about many things, But O when shall we make choice of Maryes part?
What looking amongst others of the natural face in a glass? Mean while Gods
glass thrown by; James 1.23
the Souls complexion never enquired after; Its state not searched into, even
though the most offensive excrements of nature are diligently examined for the
discovery of the vile bodies condition, Phil. 3 21
when threatened with the least hazarding distemper; and the Soul, the Soul of
man drudging at all this. Ah poor Soul who made thee the Keeper of all these
Vineyards, while thine own is unkept? Cant 1 6
What spending of time amongst others, Athenian like, Acts 17 2^
in hearing and telling some new thing? who, mean while, are never acquainted
with the Old Man, Ephesians 4.22
who has so long dwelt in their own bosoms. What looking (like the Mother of
Sisera) out of their windows (and like that cursed woman the wife of Ahab) yet
not in at their hearts? There, Judge. 5.28 hearts looking out, not looking in 2
King 39.^
are are open Casements; here, are brazen shuts, and Iron sinnews to keep all
close, Isaiah 48 4
even from their own eyes: What buisy inquiryes by unconcerned Idlers after
Alien and Foreign things, like his in the Gospel, And what must this Man do?
yet I hearkened and heard, John 21.21
but they spoke not aright, no man repented him saying, Jerem. 8.6
what have I done? or how shall I do? Intelligencers from abroad are gladly
received, those in men's own breasts are checked and choked. What will become
of such and such Interests? what will times come to? what will become of Trade?
such and the like are frequent Inquiryes. What will be the issue of this man's
Contest, and the other man's Law suit, Nay of this Cock-Fighting, or that
Horse-race, of this Game at Cards, or that Cast at Dice? But where shall I meet
the Man or Woman that seriously, that seasonably cries out, but what will
become of my own Soul, my immortal Soul to all eternity? Jer. 5.35
What will you do in the end? this is a Query of Gods putting to us, and
methinks (amidst all other our Inquisitiveness and Curiosity) we should not
neglect to put this to Our selves.

Alas! how deplorable and lamentable a thing it is, that Man that would be
wise, should be so vain? he greedily drinks in the knowledge of all about him,
Job 11 12
yet is willingly ignorant of himself. If man do but meet a Ghost (if his
mettle will serve him) he presently cries out, In the name of God what art
thou? yet carries a Spirit about him every day, whereunto he never moves that
Question. Miserable man that thou art! Is thy Conscience such a Fiend to thee,
and thine own Soul such a ghastly Ghost, that thou dare not stay to talk with
it? Put thy self to it: Temptation will put thee to it, Affliction will put
thee to it: death and Judgment will put thee to it, and ask thee plainly what
thou art? Ask thy self beforehand, that thou may know what to answer them
that ask thee.

Sect. IV.
Self knowledge necessary. 2 Cor. 13 5
SUrely that Ancient, Apostolic, may pass for a Catholic challenge (...) Know
you not your own selves? you know your conditions and outward concernments, do
you not know your spiritual state? you know your Heras, do you not know your
Hearts? you count your Coin, take you no account of your Consciences* you try
your Gold, do you not prove your Faith? nay more, you are acquainted abroad,
and know others know you not your own selves* Must that needs be true of you,
tha^ is said of the Witch in the Fable that she wore eyes when she went abroad
and still laid them by when she cam^ at home? you take upon you to judge one
another, to know the hearts, an^ fore know the ends and future state of others,
and know you not your own selves? surely God may say to that his Officer
(though a bribed one) that self-discerning power and faculty, that he placed in
man's breast, as sometimes he did in another case, who is blind as my servant,
or deaf as my Messenger, Isa. 42, 13 20
that I sent? seeing many things, but thou observest not the one thing that
more concerns thee than all other things. But God knows thee, though thou know
not thy self; and will tell thee what thou art (as Ahijah did Ieroboams wife)
whether thou make or take thy self to be another; 1 Kin. 14.5
And that Bribed Officer will (one day) do his office, and will make thee, too
late, to know thy self, when thou will not know what to do with thy self. Luke
16.24
Thy tormented tongue will then tell thee, what this little Treatise would fain
acquaint thee with, in a better season, and more to thy profit, yea and those
very thoughts of thine that thou will by no means put thy self upon the trouble
now to reflect upon, will turn upon thee, and fly in thy face, and gnaw at
thine heart as so many never dying worms, and roundly tell thee then, what
they might have told thee before, even before thou had come into that place
of torment. Those thoughts thar are now thy pulse, thou may try thy self by
them, will then be thy pain, thou will torture thy self with them. Son
remember, said Abraham to Dives, Verse 25
Oh thy Memory will then be thy Misery, and thy thoughts thy torment. Those
thoughts of thine that might now make a Jury whilst, if thou be cast, thou have
time before thee to sue cut thy pardon, if thou empannel them not for this
better service, they will then turn thy Executioners, when there will remain
neither help in thy self, nor hope in God, for thee. Oh then thou will think of
thy Soul, Pr. 5 11 12 Jer. 2 5 Psalm 50 21
thy Sin, thy Misery, means neglected, mercyes abused.

Reader, pause here, and think of what is past, before thou proceed (a whet's
no let) Thou can not endure to spend a little time now in the unpleasing work
of self-Reflection, Think no^ what thy eternal thoughts will be if thou
miscarry.
whilst self Reflection might do thee good; And can thine heart endure to spend
an Eternity in the same work to a worse end, save that Eternity can never be
spent? My heart is enlarged to thee, O Reader, fearing thine may be straightned
toward thy self, yet do but promise me that thou will well weigh this one
word, what the work of thy thoughts will be to all ETERNITY; (if thou should
miscarry) I say to ETERNITY; And I will leave the porch of my discourse (built
larger for thy sake then was intended) and so lead thee to its principal parts.

CHAP. II. Damneth this licentious principle that Thoughts are free.
Sect. I.
Thought's FREE a damned Principle.
ANd now that we might make a right Judgment of our selves by our thoughts, it
will be necessary that we first Judge aright of our Thoughts; and therefore we
must come in the first place to damn that hell-born Principle, to the place
from whence it came, THAT THOUGHTS ARE FREE: for hardly can I think any thing a
more evident token of a Reprobate mind (as the Apostle calls it) then for a man
to think of his thoughts as some will say of their words, Romans 1.28
Our lips are our own who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4
But I may say to all those that promise liberty to their thoughts, as the
Apostle speaks in another case, Whilst they promise them liberty, 2 Pet 2, 19
they themselves are the servants of Corruption; for as we shall find, the
first stirrings of grace are in thoughts, it is as ^rue that the first motions
of Corruption are there also; James 1, 15
for Lust conceives (says the Scripture) and then brings forth sin. Thought is
the Cockatrices Egg (as the Ptophet calls it) that Breaks forth into a Vi^er.
Isai 59.49
And thus are they miserably ^equited by their own thoughts being themselves
Enslaved by them, ^o whom they proclaim a liberty. Thought^ not right, except
we think aright of our thoughts in this point.


In this discourse we shall soon ^ee that Thoughts are the Test by which God
will try us, and we should try our selves; Now as Thoughts are reckoned amongst
^he highest acts of the mind, so Re^exive Thoughts are ranked in the ^ighest
order of Thoughts, and hence (...) will clearly follow, that thoughts ^re not
right in specification, that as to this Principle are not so in re^^plication,
that is to say, That God will approve the thoughts of no man that thinks He is
unaccountable to God for his thoughts, for if the Thoughts of the Righteous be
right (as our Text speaks) it follows that he that thinks not in this very
poin^ aright of his thoughts, is unrighteous. Isaiah ^5 7
And now let the unrighteou^ forsake his thoughts, even these unrighteous
thoughts of his thoughts* for as Scripture mentions a judgeing of unrighteous
thoughts, James 2 4
so this surely is an unrighteous judging of Thoughts, for any man to thin^
that his thoughts are Free. Evil thoughts are sin to us.
No, no but the very thought of foolishness i^ sin. Prove. 24 9
An heart that devises wicked imaginations, is one of the seven things that
the Lord hates, Prove. 6 18 Abomination to God
and it is placed by the wise man (as the Sun in the midst of the Planets) as
that which all the rest do derive, what they have from. Evil thoughts are
iniquity to Those that harbou^ them. They conceive mischief, Isaia, 53.7
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity (says the Prophet;) And as they are
iniquity to themselves, so the thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the
Lord, Pro. 15.26
as Solomon says. This was the Grand wickedness and great Condemnation of the
old World, Condemnation of the old world
God saw that the wickedness of man was Great, Gen, 6, 5
for the imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually,
and therefore it repented God that he made man, Verse 6
and it grieved him at his heart.

The evil thoughts of our hearts grieve God to his heart; and surely man has
great reason to repent of that, that made God to repent that he made man.

It Is a sad complaint that God makes by his Prophet, Break Gods Reart. Ezekiel, 6,
9
I am broken says God, with their whorish heart, (as the fountain of their
whorish practices.) Be not deceived, Jer, 4, 1^
Iniquity is bitter, Jer, 4, 14
when it reaches the heart, and so must our sorro^ for thought sin be, if, we
ever b^ saved. Pro, 30, 32
If thou have thought ev^ lay thine hand upon thy mouth, na^ upon thine heart.
Exclude from salvation,
Wash thy hea^ from wickedness that thou may (...) saved, how long shall
vain though^ lodge within thee? If a man man think himself to Hell by vai^
thoughts, what shall we think (...) ^vile thoughts? for even vai^ thoughts
lodged and allowed, ar^ plagued and punished by suc vile thoughts often times as
are abhorrent to nature, as it is said (...) the old Romans, To. 21.26
they became vai^ in their imaginations, and God gav^ them up to vile
affections.

Sect. II:
God knows thoughts
FOr the Truth is that which mo^^ likely induces Men to thir^ that their
thoughts are free, (viz that they seem, and in some sort are ^o in respect of
Men, does render them the less so in the sight of God, who understands all
the imagina^ions of the thoughts, 1 Cor, 28, 9
more infallibly then Men do words and actions. I know their works and their
thoughts (says God in Isaiah, Isa, 66, 1^
) We may know Men's works, but we know not what the thoughts were, that put them
upon those works, whether for the glory of God, or to be seen of men; But God
knows both.

What though man's eye cannot see, or his Law bind, And eyet^ them the rather
because less liable to outward inducements*
or outward weights and plumbets force the thoughts of men, (when threatenings
or rewards may make men act against their minds, or speak what they do not
think, yet all the world cannot make a man think what he does not think, God
that is himself an Independent Agent, does the rather judge of the conformity
of the minds of men to his own* by those Acts that have least dependency upon
outward Inducements, or Inforcements.

A man may seem to do many Acts for God, and speak many words for God, and yet
only make man his debtour, they do it (says Christ) to be seen of men, and
verily they have their reward,; Mat. 6, 5
But he that lays out his thoughts upon God, and for God, he trusts God without
a witness, and the Righteous God will place, what we thus lend to his own
Account, and will pay us again in our own Coin, but with infinite Interest,
Holy- David had had many thoughts for God, and says David, Many O Lord my God
are thy thoughts which are to us* Psalm, 40, 5
ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, If I would declare and
speak of them, they are more then can be numbered, so that whilst the outward
Actions, if they be no more then bare outward Actions, can look for no more
then an outward Reward, there is upon good thoughts, which are a spiritual
exercise, an Intail of spiritual blessings in heavenly places, for to be
spiritually minded is life and peace. Rom, 8, 6
Here is Use upon Use, for what thou lendest to the Lord; Life and Peace,
Salvation and Assurance, for what can be more an uncontrollable Evidence that
the man is Spiritual then that the mind is so, which Scripture calls, 1 Pet, 3.4
the hidden man of the heart.

A cudgel may make a dog to let go a Bone out of his mouth, From carnal fear,
when it does not go out of his mind; Laws of the Land, and shame of people,
(as we say) may keep a man from committting Adulte^y in the outward Act, but
all the world cannot keep him from committing Adultery in his heart. But the
fear of God in a Joseph's heart could make him afraid to look upon a woman to
lust after Gen, 39, ^0
her, to lie by her, says the Text, or to be with her; he dreaded all exterior
incentives to adulterous thoughts; and so also in a Jobs, why then (says he)
should I think upon a Maid? Job 31, 1


Self Love,
And again, Carnal self love, if thou be a Preacher, may raise thy tongue to the
high praises of Christ, and fill thy Pulpit with Hosannahs in the highest to
the son of David, but it is only love to Christ that can make thee take him to
bed and board with thee, to lay him all night between thy breasts, to remember
his love more than Wine, Cant, 1, 4, 13,
and that not so much for that thou art to Preach upon it the Lords Day, as
that thou art to Live upon it all the week, as St. Paul says, to me to live is
Christ; Phil, 1, 21
for it is one thing to prove our parts to men, and another thing to approve our
hearts to God: neither are we so much to desire to evidence to others a Proof
of Christ speaking in us (as the Apostle speaks) as to find a proof of Christ
living in our selves, 1 Cor, 13, 3
Chap, 9, 22
least while we preach to others, We our selves prove (...) that is, unapproved.

So then for a man to think that his Thoughts are Free, that is, that he is
unaccountable to God for his thoughts (according to which God especially
judges men) is to admit a contradiction, not only to all Scripture, but to
all Right Reason.

Sect. III.
LEt me freely tell thee O Reader (whosoever thou art) whose thoughts are not
right, Evil thoughts like Devils,
thine heart is but an hell, and thy thoughts are but as so many Devils, and
worse then Devils to thee, for First,

As Angels, In their original,
(the most Excellent of Gods Creatures) became odious Devils, by departing from
God, so that our Thoughts (that in their own nature, are the Offspring of the
noble and most excellent Mind of man) should become Iniquity to us, Isaia 59.7
and an abomination to God. Prove 1^.26 Hebr, 3, 12
This is from our evil heart of unb^lief, in departing from the living God.

Nature, spiritual wickedness* Ephesians. 6 12
And as Devils for their nature, are called spiritual wickednesses, can enter
into men ('it is said Satan entered into Judas, Luke 22 3
) and fill their hearts (as in Ananias his case) why has Satan filled thy
heart? Ezekiel 18, 10
so also Evil thoughts are said to come into men's minds, and fill their hearts;
Inwardly they are full of rottenness (says Christ. Mat, 25, 27
) And as Devils for their pride and power are called, spiritual wickednesses in
high places, In high places,
so also evil thoughts are said to be those high things that exalt themselves
against God, 2 Corin, 10 5,
and against Christ (Casting down Imaginations and every high thing, etc. and
bringing into captivity every thought of the heart, etc.

And as Devils for their number made the possessed man cry out, Number, Legions,
My name is Legion, for we are many; Mark 5, 9
so may Evil thoughts say, for these are called the abundance of the heart,
Luke 8, 30
Like the swarms of Flies in Egypt, Mat. 17 34
as if they were of Beelzebubs Army, who, by the Etymology of his name, is Lord
of the Flies, and by the account of the Pharasees, Prince of the Devils.

And as Devils for their agility, agility,
made answer to God (when he demanded, Satan, Job 1 7
whence come thou?) From going in the earth to and fro, and from walking up
and down in it; Just so may evil Thoughts say; for the wandering of the desire
is by the Thoughts; Eccl, 6, 9
they go where we cannot, Israelites in the Wilderness, Acts 7, 39
yet in heart went back to Egypt.

Vigilance
And as Devils for their Vigilance, 1 Pet, 1, 8
are said to walk about as roaring Lions, which are slirring when we are
sleeping, (as the Psalmist observes) Therefore says the Apostle, Psalm 104 20,
21
be vigilant, so the worldlings thoughts are at work while himself is asleep,
for as his days are sorrow, Eccles 2, 23
so his heart takes not rest in Night, for a dream comes through the multitude
of business; Chapt 5 8
And oh how often cause have we to be troubled, when we awake, for the Thoughts
of our sleep, as Nebuchadnezzar was with his Thoughts in his sleep? Daniel 4 5


Disturbing in Good
And as Devils for disturbing in good duties, are called the Fowls of the Air,
Matt 13 4
that steal away the word; such are evil thoughts, and so do they; 1 Samuel 1 13
As when Hannah was a Praying, Elie's thoughts were running upon that, that was
neither charitable nor true, (viz.) that she was drunk. And when Simon should
have been minding what Christ was a saying, Luke 3 37.
his Thoughts were wandering, He said within himself, if this man were a
Prophet, he would have known who and what manner of Woman this is that touches
him, for she is a sinner. Vain thoughts can dog us when and where vain company
cannot come at us, even in our closest places and performances.

And as Devils are signalized for disturbing us in what is good, Tempting to
evil,
so for tempting to evil, (therefore Satan is called (...) The Tempter, Matthew 4
3
) so every man is tempted (says the Apostle) when he is drawn away of his own
lust, and enticed; James 1 14
so that Evil Thoughts are our Tempters as much as He, and we should belie the
devil should we say otherwise: for they have made ready their heart like an
Oven, says the Prophet; Hosea 7 6
What though Satan bring the Fuel, yet men put it into the Oven, and stir it
about by their own Thoughts, in their own hearts, so that if He, like a cunning
Baker, seem to sleep all night, (as it is there expressed) yet he knows that
they will tend it, and so look to it, that in the morning it shall burn like a
flaming fire.

And then accusing
And as Devils, when they have been Tempters will be sure to be Accusers, (so
that, as many men are called by such a name, Alias such a name, so Satan is
called Tempter, Rev 12 10
alias the Accuser) so also are Evil Thoughts. Their thoughts mean while
accusing, etc. as the Apostle speaks. Rom 15 2


and tormenting, Matt 18 34
And as Devils are Tormenters as well as Tempters and Accusers, so also the
Thoughts of the damned shall be a principal part of their torment, Son,
rememb^r, etc. says Abraham to Dives, Luk 16 25
that is, bethink thy self, etc.

And thus have we seen that Evil Thoughts are as bad as Devils; Ye^ worse then
Devil^ to us
yea that they are worse then so, we shall now make appear in a few lines, and
so conclude this head, And that,

First in themselves, In themselves
(in some respect) Let me tell thee O Reader, that thy thoughts may be guilty
of such a sin, as Satan himself is not, nay cannot be guilty of, for says the
Psalmist. Psalm 14 ^
The Fool has said in his heart, that there is no God; whereas the Apostle
says expressly that the Devils believe and tremble. James 2 1^
And Oh that we could tell how to bewail it sufficiently, that there should be
more Atheism in one heart upon Earth, nay in one thought, than in all the
Devils of Hell. We pity others when possessed with Evil Spirits, how much more
should we lament bitterly over our own selves when possessed with Evil
thoughts, in some sort worse then the worst of spirits.

And to us
II. As to those whose Thoughts they are, For these are the Heifers wherewith
Satan Ploweth, whose Temptations could only disturb, not destroy us, If our
Thoughts did not take them in (as the Trojans in the Story, the deceiptful
Horse,) and make them ours; so that our Destruction is of our selves (as the
Prophet speaks, Hosea 13 9
) for if Satan cannot know our Thoughts (without us) much less can He force
them, But as Christ says in one place, You are of your Father the Devil, John
8 44
and his Lusts will ye do, so the Prophet says in many places, Jerem 7 24
that in and after the imaginations of their own hearts they do and will walk;
Chap 9 14
Chap 11 8
So that as Christ says, the Devil is the Father, the Apostle makes man's heart
to be the Mother, and 13 10
which receives the Temptation; and Thought the Womb that Conceives and
Hatcheth it, when he says, James 1 15
Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin, whereas were th ^e a Cordial
crying out, as by the forced Damosel in the Law, Deutero 22 24 25
or the Apostle in the Gospel, Oh wretched man that I am, Rom 7 24
who shall deliver me? God would lay the sin upon Satan, and not upon the Soul
disturbed by, and afflicted with it.

Now then since Evil Thoughts are as so many Devils, and worse then Devils to
us, let us dread them as we do the devil; resist them as we ought to do Him,
and Pray against them as we would against Him, and when they break into our
hearts (which are such unruly and untamed Evils,) let us serve them as the
People of a Country Village would a ravenous Wolf, or cruel Bear, that should
break into their Town, all the Town would be after them, either to kill them
in, or to force them out of it.

Pro 23 26
And since the Heart is the thing that God Pripcipally requires, and and that
out of it are the Issues of Life, Prove 4 23
Let us keep the Heart with all keeping; and be choice of our Thoughts as of
Gods Crown-Iewels. Mal 3 16 17


Phil 4 8
And now finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise. Think of these things.

CHAP. III. Shows the Thoughts of man to be the Souls Pulse, and that they
evidently discover his Inward estate,
Sect. I.
YOu see then where this wisdom is to be found, Thoughts the Souls pulse
and where is the place of self-understanding. Reader* Thou art before the
Lord, do thou unfeignedly desire to know thy self truly? then say not in
thine heart, who shall ascend, Romans 1^ 6 7.8
or who shall descend to tell thee, whether of the two, Heaven or Hell shall be
thy place and portion; As the words are nigh thee even in thy mouth, so the
Thoughts are nigh thee, even in thy mind; for what Christ says of thy words, I
may say of thy Thoughts, Mat. 12 37
By thy words (says the text) and by thy thoughts (says the reason of the
text) Thou shall be justified, Verse 34.
and thou shall be condemned. For out of the abundance of the heart does the
mouth speak, If then thy Thoughts be Right, Thou art Right. The thoughts of the
Righteous are Right. All the Righteous have Right Thoughts; and All, whose
Thoughts are Right, are Righteous.

Thoughts, our neighborhood.
It Is a Laudable fairness in our Law, that it puts All Trials for Life and
Death, upon God and the Country; that is, the Neighborhood. This little Book
allows thee the Birthright of thy Native Law in thy greatest trial, more
Important then for Life and Death. Trial by them fair.
It Is for Salvation or Damnation. Thy Thoughts are thy Neighborhood, they walk
and talk with thee, they know thy lying down, and thy rising up; Put thy Soul
trial upon God and them, and God send thee a good deliverance.

Sect. II.
ANabal^like Heart may seem sometimes to put forth a liberal hand, Instances of
chu^lish^es
1 Samuel 25 26 Isaiah 32 5
and make a Feast like a Prince, ye^ shall not a Churl be the more called
liberal, The liberal man devises liberal things. Isaiah 32 8
He only is the liberal man that has the liberal mind, Liberality
whose thoughts are free in a better sense, then the old saying has it; It Is
not the drawing of the Purse to the Poor (though that must be too where there
is a Purse, Isaia 58 10
) but the drawing out the Soul to the Hungry, that is true Charity. Mark 12 2^
Two Mites bestowed with one truly Generous and Liberal thought, is a righter
Almes-giving, then the giving of the two Hemispheres of the whole world, would
be without it.

Sect. III.
THe Envious may carry smooth, and speak fair, Envy Pro 26 25
yet never a whit the more to be trusted if there be seven Abominations in the
heart. Psalm 55 21
The Oil of smooth words may float at top, whilst Waters of strife are at
bottom, war in his Heart: His words kind, his thoughts Cruel; now He is what
his thoughts are. It Is not said as a man speaks with his tongue, but as a man
thinks in his heart so is He. Nay such are Evil whose thoughts are so, though
God turn the fruit of their Heart to good, to those to whom they intend evil,
as in Joseph's case, ( Ye thought Evil against me, Gen 50 20
says He, But God turned it to good), and to His own Glory, to whom they
intend dishonor; as in the Assyrians (howbeit He means not so, neither does
He think so, Isaiah 10 7
) He was what his thoughts were: on the other hand, Goodness
Joseph was a good Brother to them, that had been otherwise to him, though his
carriage were course, and his speaking rough, for He thought them good, and
meant them well. And thus God himself when He shows his People hard things,
Isaiah 60 3
and (it may be incurs their hard thoughts, yet then he approves himself to be
a me^ciful Father, and a tender friend by his gracious thoughts and tender
purposes, Jer 29 1^
I know the thoughts that I think toward you, thoughts of peace; And as He
thinks in His Heart ^o is he, (though they think hardly of him) his thoughts
are of Peace, Rom 15 33
and He is the God of Peace.

Sect IV.
THe Impatient are not always Cl^morous, Impatience.
but sometimes like froward Children that declare their doggedness by not
speaking at all, as well as by speaking doggedly. It Is said of the Hypocrites
in Heart, Job 36 19
they cry not when God binds them, Pro 23 35
He strikes them yet they will not be thought sick, and beats them, yet they
seem not to feel, they have not grieved, they make their faces harder then a
Rock, Jerem 5 3
yet are never the more quiet; never the more patient; for, mean while, their
minds fret, their thoughts boil within them, their Hearts are lifted up,
therefore they are not upright. Habak 2 4
Their thoughts are froward, and so are they, for as a man thinks in his
Heart so is he. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, Prove 19 3
and his Heart f^etteth against the Lord. He ^rets in Heart and thought, though
not in word.

Patience.
On the other hand, you have heard of the Patience of upright Job, yet how often
did His Impatience (like some Men's sickness) break out a^ his lips, when the
distemper had made no mortal seizure upon his heart; for search but his Heart
and his History to the bottom, and you shall find it full freight with thoughts
of Penitence, of Patience, of Piety, of Humility, full of God-exalting, self
abasing thoughts, thoughts of calmness and sweetness toward God, and only of
bitterness and Indignation against sinful self. Behold I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? and again, I know that no thought can be withholden from thee: Job
40 4 41 ^ and 42.2 3 6
who is he that hides Council without knowledge: I have uttered that I
understood not, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Sect. V.
Solomon's strange woman keeps a stir about wiping of her mouth, Uncleaness Pro
30 20
whilst she never regards the cleansing of her thoughts; Prove 7 14
She can talk of Peace Offerings, and of Her paying her vows in the day, and
think the same moment, of pleasing her brutish Lust all the night, Come let us
take our fill of loves till the morning. Verse 18
Her thoughts were unclean, and so was she. Whatever men's garbes and
pretensions are, how demure soever their deportments, how mortifyed soever
their appearances, they whose profoundest thoughts, are how to make provisi n
for the Lusts of the Flesh, Rom 13 14
are fleshly, and they that do mind the things of the Flesh are after the
Flesh; and 8 5
Chastity
On the contrary, Chaste Job will not only make a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31
1
but will not allow himself so much as to think upon a Maid. His thoughts were
Chaste and clean and so was He.

Sect VI.
THe Covetous walk not always in open and in naked view for every one to see,
Covetou^ness.
perhaps not for themselves; but often wear a Cloak (as the Apostle calls it) a
Cloak of zeal, and seeming sanctity, 1 These. 2
as Iehu, and others. Their thoughts boil, but the fervor of their spirits is,
for the serving of themselves, not the Lord Jesus Christ; Judas talks of the
poor, John 12 16
but he thinks of the purse, and of his Prey; yet he carried it so plausibly
that the Eleven suspected themselves more than Him. 2 Pet ^
Men's Hearts may be exercised with covetous practices, whilst their hands seem
not so, They come and sit before the Lord as his people, but their hearts run
after their covetousness; nay, Jer 23 31 Jer. 22 17
their hearts are not but for their covetousness, as the Prophet smartly
expresses it. They may talk of better things, but their thoughts are for no
other, their tongues may run of heavenly things, but their thoughts still run
after their covetousness. Their thoughts are for to morrow, Matt 6 31
what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and wherewith they shall be
clothed. Their Inward thoughts are that their Houses and Inheritances are to
them and their Heirs for ever. Psalm 49 11
Such are the thoughts that they drown their Souls in, and buiry themselves in
alive, working like Mo^es underground, and if they sometimes appear above
ground, they are not in their Element, Phil 3 19
till rooting in the earth again, they mind earthly things. The young man in
the Gospel, His tongue ran of Heaven, What must I do that I may inherit Eternal
life? Mar 10 17
but his thoughts ran after Earth, if I go with this Christ I must forgo my
Estate, if I cleave to Him, I must leave that: He went away sorrowful, for he
had large Possessions. ^ut says God to his People, Be^are there be not in thy
wicked heart (...) thought, etc. Deuteronomy 15 ^
which he there cau^ons in this case of Covetousness. ^ Covetous thought
reigning in the ^eart, Allowed, Loved, Liked, Maintained, customarily
enter^ained there, is the Evidence of a ^icked Heart, of a bad man, for as
(...) man thinks in Heart so is He.

Sect. VII.
THe Proud person may be tried by his Thoughts, Pride,
be he never ^o much in the disguise of his vo^^ntary humility. His thoughts do
^ell and rise high, whilst He cring^th low; Isaia 58 53
like those in Isaiah who ^ung down their heads like Bulrushes, ^et their
Hearts were lifted up in proud thoughts against God, as if He were in their
Debts for their formal devotions; where^ore have we fasted, say they, and thou
take no notice? The Pharise^ was the worse for his good thought of Himself;
God I thank thee, ^ am not as other men; Luke 18.11
Y^a, an^ thousands in the world have caus^ enough to think ill of themselves
if they had no more then their thinking too well of themselves God will punish
the fruit of men's stout hearts; Isai. 10.18 compared with the 12
now the fruit of the stout heart is in the same place* explained to be the
proud Thought* The Psalmist complains, the wicked through the pride of their
Countenances will not seek after God, Psalm. 18.4
God is not in all their thoughts. He fetches proof of their wicked pride f^^m
their Godless thoughts. Ezekiel. 28.26
The proud Prince of Tyrus did set his heart as the heart of God, in high
thoughts of Himself, as the Sequel there shows. Humility
But the best Men on the contrary are least and lowest in their own thoughts
Thus Abraham, Gen 18 27
but dust and ashes. and 23.10
Jacob, less than the least of Gods mercyes. David, Psalm. 22.6
a worm and no man. Asaph, a beast before thee. Agar, Psalm. 73.22 Prove 30 2
more brutish then any man. Isaiah, a man of unclean lips. Paul, Isaiah 6 5 1
Cor. 15.9
the very least of the Apostles, but the chiefest of Sinners. Put on humbleness
of mind, says the Apostle. Collo. 3.12
The Humble man is humble in mind, Mat. 11.29
and lowly in heart and thought as Christ was, for as a man thinks in his
heart ^o is He.

Sect. VIII.
BLessed are the pure in heart, Purity. Matthew. 5.^
says our Savior, they shall see God. Are thy thoughts holy? then thou art
happy. In a good man's heart there is a good treasure, Mat. 12 35 Ps. 193.17 and
10.4
and the Psalmist tells you what it is, How precious are thy thoughts, O God,
unto me? But for the wicked, Pro. 10, 20
God is not in all his thoughts, therefore the heart of ^he wicked is little
worth, and he, whose Heart is little worth, is wicked.

Sect. IX.
TO draw this Head toward ^ conclusion, let me persuade thee, O man, but to
judge of thy self, which thou can, by the same way, that thou would judge
thy Neighbor if thou could. I^ another thoughts lay as fair to thine eye,
as his words do sound to thy ears, thou would try his thoughts toward thee,
before thou would too much trust his words, for the wise man observes, these
two may be very wide each from other, Eat and Drink says h^ to thee, and yet
his heart is not with thee. Prove. 23 7
But God has purposely locked up thy Neighbors thoughts from thee, to correct
thy curiosity and over eager propension to Censoriousness abroad, and has
said, Judge not that ye be not Judged, but has made thee Turn-key to thy own,
Matthew. 7.1
because it is best for thee to turn often in at thine own door, for ^f we would
judge our selves we should not be judged. 1 Co. 11 31
Man's Law does what it can in the trial of those that are under Inquest, for
discove^y not only nor chiefly of the Act, ^ut the Men's rea, the Intent and
^hought of the Heart in the Act, whether a Traitorous, Malicious, Fe^onious
Intent, and of Malice forethought or no? When smooth-tongued Simon Magus came
with Honey in his mouth, and his well-tuned tongue had a fair freedom to make a
plausible profession, he was received and Baptized, but as soon as the Apostle
Peter came to discern his thought ( Repent and pray God, says he, Acts 8.13
Verse 22
if perhaps this thought of thine may be forgiven thee) he presently perceives
that his heart was not right, and that his state was naught, for he says not,
I perceive that the gall of bitterness ^s in thee only, Verse 23
but that thou art in ^t and in the bond of Iniquity.

Sect. X.
IN one word, as the Pu^se s^ the Thoughts derive immediately from the Heart,
both as to Temper and Distemper, the one in a physical the other in a moral
notion and respect, and were thou but as careful and skilful to observe thy
flowing thoughts, as thy Physician is to examine thy gliding pulse, thy
Thoughts would less often deceive thee, then thy Pulse him, and thou need
not be so much at a loss as the most are for the knowledge of thy spiritual and
everlasting state, having so fair an Index to Eternity so near at hand. Commune
then with thine own heart upon thy bed, Psalm. 4 4
and be still. It Is Scripture Council, and it will never hurt thee to take it.
Thy thoughts may talk with thee when none else will, when none else can, when
there is none but God, and thou, and they together. Thy faculty will be true to
thee, if thou be so to it, thy Thoughts will not flatter thee if thou do not
daub with them; but and if thou do, God will not. And so I pass to the next.

CHAP. IV. Proves that the Judgment that God passes upon Men is by their
Thoughts.
Sect. I.
Would thou then O Man, Try thy self by the same Measures that God will try
thee, and Judge of thy state, as He judges of thee, who judges not according
to the appearance, but judges righteous judgment? Let me tie thy thought^ and
thee together again. For the Lord searches the heart and tries the reins,
Jer. 17.10 and 11 20
those reins the Psa mist speak^ of, Psalm. 16.7
My reins instruct me in the nigh^ season, His solemn thoughts and s^rious
self-reflecti^ns. Those ar^ they that God tries, and thee by them. O Lord thou
have searched me and known me, Ps. 139 1 2
thou understandest my thoughts afar off; As Christ said to Nathaniel, I may
say to others in other cases, before tha^ Philip called thee, John 1, 48
I saw thee when thou wast under the Fig tree, so before others called thee to
the Alc^ Bench, or into the Whore House, he saw thee, he kn^w the propension^
of thy Thoughts, the motions in thy mind, the tendency of thine heart, He
understands thy thought^ afar off, and by these He dooms sent^nceth, and
judges thee though (to speak strictly) God judges of us or knows us by pure
and simple intuition, abstractly as well from Thoughts as from words and
actions, that is, He needs no more any thought or thing, then he does any man,
John 2.28
to testify of man, for He knows, as what is in man, so wh^t man is, by a more
perfect way than discursive inference, or argumentation. He knows all things in
their principles before they operate, Acts 15, 11
For known unto the Lord are all his works from the beginning.

Sect. II.
THo^ghts have feet, they have a tendency, Thoughts have feet*
be they good or evil. The thoughts of the diligent tend to plenteousness, Prove
21, 5
^he Lord t^kes notice of the tendency of thy thoughts, can go.
and counts thee gone the same way that they go. Ephesians. 4, 17
The Gentiles are said to walk not only after but in the vanity of their mind.
Jer. 7, 24
And the wicked Jews not only after but in the imaginations of their evil
Hearts. (...) Tongues
Thoughts can speak as well as go, Matthew 3, 9
Think not to say within your selves, etc. and God hears them, Lam. 3, 60
( Thou have heard all their imaginations against me, says the Church) when
the voice is not heard Hannah prayed in her Heart, can pray, 1 Samuel 1, 13 Verse
14
and her lips moved, But her voice was not heard. Old Eli that measured her by
the bare moving of her lips, misjudged her; but God had an eye to the Motion of
her Heart. Thoughts can Curse too, and curse, Ecc. 10, 20 19
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. The Heart of the wicked is said to
utter perverse things. The Holy Ghost heard Ananias thoughts tell the lie
before Peter and the rest heard his tongue do so, Pro, 23, 33 and lie, Acts
5.3, 4
Why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost? thou have not
lied unto men but unto God. and hands.
Thoughts have Hands too as well as Tongues and Feet in Gods account. Isaia.
22, 6 can work,
The Heart of the vile person is said to work Iniquity, and to practice
Hypocrisy. Therefore says God of the false witness, thou shall do to him as he
thought to do to his Brother. David thought to build God an house, Deuteronomy. 19 19
and thus God reckons, 1 Kin. 8, 18
thou did well in that it was in thine heart. When Esau thought to slay his
Brother if his Father were but once dead, (Esau said in his heart, the days of
mourning for my Father are at hand, Genesis 27, 41
then will I slay my Brother Jacob) God Books it down though he never did it.
How are the things of Esau searched out, Obadiah 6
how are his hid things sought up? and so shall all men's be, for the Lord
searches all hearts, 1 Chro. 28 ^
and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts.

Sect. III.
IF a man looking on a woman do but send after her an Impu^e thought, Thought,
Adultery.
God writes down Adultery committed already, Matt, 5 28
if he look, says Christ, to Lust after her. If thou do but think profanely,
he notes^t, Profaneness Psalm. 50, 21
thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy se^f, But I will reprove
thee; I say he observes it, and accordingly judges thee. It presumptuously,
Presumption,
he dooms it, and thee for it. If a man hearing the words of this curse,
Deuter. 29 1^, 20
bless himself in his heart (that is, in his own thoughts) saying, I shall have
Peace though I walk in the Imagination of mine heart: the Lord will not spare
him, Vanity
etc. If thy thought be vain and foolish, wicked and worldly, God will
pronounce thee such ^s he finds that. Luke 12 16 17, 19, 20.
The grounds of a certain rich man brought forth pl^nteously, and he thought
within himself what shall I do, etc. I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have
much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry;
But God said unto him, thou fool, etc. If thy thoughts be Viperous and
Venomous, Venime,
blasphemous and malicious against the Lord and His Christ, He will damn thee
for such as he finds them. Jesus knew their thoughts, Mat 12 25 compa^ed with
ver 34 Psalm. 2, 1, 5
and said O Generation of Vipers, etc. Why do the Heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? they take Council against the Lord and against his
Anointed, etc. The Lord shall speak to them in his wrath. etc. They Consult, He
condemns, they Think, and He Speaks, that is to say, speaks in judgment.

Sect. IV.
Evil men characterized by their thoughts,
THis was the Condemnation of the old world, as we have seen. Gods proof of man's
wickedness was from the Thoughts of his heart, Genes, 6, 5
and the punishment thereof was proportioned thereunto, an over flowing scourge
upon them for that superfinity of naughtiness that was in them. Yet were there
many amongst these that because of their profession were called the sons of
God. Genes, 6, 2
The sons of God saw the daughters of men, etc. It Is not what our professions
are, or what our Names are, but what our thoughts are that the Lord looks at,
and accounts of us by. It Is said of our Lord Jesus that though many believed on
his Name, John 2, 23 24, 25
when they saw the Miracles which he did, yet did not Jesus commit himself to
them, because he knew all men, and needed not that any man should testify of
man, for he knew what was in man. The Text says, he judges of Man, by what
was In Man: Our words proceed out of us, our professions are on us, but our
thoughts are in us; and these a^e they that the Lord Christ looks at, and was
himself set (amongst other ends) for the manifestation of, Luke 2, 5^ 35,
That the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed.

Sect. V.
ON the other hand, So the Godly.
those blessed Souls whom the Lord Crowns with so high a testimony, and so
Honorable a Character of being his, whom he will spare, Mal. 3, 15 17,
his Jewels which he will make up, for whom a Book of Remembrance was written
before him, they are briefly thus described, such as feared the Lord, and that
Thought upon his Name. 'Twas not the Name of God upon them, but the Name of God
in them, 'twas not the bare speaking of his Name, though (no d^ubt) they did
that too, (for they spoke often one to another,) but their thinking upon his
Name, that God Characterizeth them from, whereas be the wicked grossly such, or
Hypocrites, Psalm. 9, 17 Job 8, 13
they are stigmatized for such as forget God.

Sect. VI.
God is said to know thoughts afar off. Psalm. 13 8 6 and 139, 2
THere are two things that God is said to know afar off. The Pride of man, and
the Thoughts of man. He has it seems a severe eye upon each of these. I know
their Imaginations which they go about (says God of Israel) even now before I
have brought them into the Land which I swear: Eze 38 10
and of Gog, thus says the Lord, it shall also come to pass, that at the same
time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shall think an evil thought. God
minds our thoughts before they come into our minds; and knows what we are about
to think, before we think it; Then needs must he know what we think, when we
think; and what to think of us too whilst we are a thinking, before we speak or
act. Psalm. 94 11
The Lord knows the thoughts of m^n that they are vanity, says the Psalmist,
the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain, says the
Apostle. 2 Cor 3, 2^
The variation in the version speaks thus much, Amongst all the vain Children
of men there is not one wise enough to hide his thoughts from b^ing known to
God, and himself by them. Prove. 15 26 Yet abhors evil thoughts though at a
distance
The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: He cannot keep the
noisome stench of them from the Almighties nostrils; nor can God endure them
without declaring his abhorrence of them. Who smells them at a distance (afar
off and abhors them, so they that are of a froward heart are an abomination to
the Lord, Prove 11 20
It thy thoughts be froward, though thy words (through thy subtle or
hypocritical restraint of them) be not so; as appears by the Antithesis, but
such as are upright in their way are his delight. You see then how God reckons
men by their Thoughts.

Sect. VII.
We value men by their possessions, Our thoughts are so.
WE value men according to their Possessions, and God according to their
Thoughts. A man of mean parts, of low acquirements, of mean Possessions, we
reckon a mean person: A man of high Improvements, of large Acquisitions, of
great Possessions we reckon a Great man, a substantial person; now Men's
thoughts are their Possessions; and it is ob^ervable that one word in the He^ew
expresses both, therefore ^hen ^he Text in Job reads, Job 17, 1^
My ^urposes are br^ken off, even the ^houghts of my heart; The Mar^in
(according to the Hebrew) ^eads the possessions of my heart. It Is by patient
Thoughts that we ^ossess our Souls, under Affliction: Luke 21 19
^y Chaste and pure thoughts that very one should possess his vessel in
^anctification and Honor, 1 These. 4, 4
It Is by ^elieving thoughts, we possess the lord Jesus, put him on, dwell in
him, Romans 13.14 Col. 2, 6
^ulk in him having received him. On the other part; when Jobs ^houghts were
restless and unquiet, Job 7, 3, 4
^ossing and tumbling from morning ^o evening, from ^v^ning to morn^ng, from
week to week, from month to month, then it is said, God made him to possess
months of vanity. When God presented all ^is you the sins (as so many frightful
Ghosts) fresh to his Thoughts, then it is said God made him t^ possess the
iniquityes of his youth. Job 13, 26
So when the Heart is full of goo^ Thoughts, God calls that the goo^ treasure;
if of evil Thoughts, the evil treasure of the heart; Matt. 12, 35
and w^ value Men to be, as their treasures and possessions are.

Sect. VIII
We Judge men by their companions
WE Judge men by their constant Companions. Noscitu^ ex socio qui non
dignoscitur ex se Now our thoughts are our constan^ Company, Our thoughts are
so,
They are ever with u^ at Bed and Board. Company draw out answers from us
(sometimes when we have no great mind t^ speak,) so do our Thoughts Therefore
do my thoughts cause me t^ answer said Zophar. Job 20, 2
These are a^ Rhehoboams Councillors, 1 Kin 12, 8
that were brought up with him from his youth so the Imaginations of man's heart
a^ said to be; Genesis 9, 21
These are our Inmate and Intimates (be they good or ^vil, Jer. 4, 14
Divine or vain) They ^dge with us, nay within us; these ^rt guests that never
part with us, ^ll we bid adieu to our selves. It Is ^ot till that very day,
Psalm. 146, 4
that our ^houghts perish; no nor then neither (...) some sense, but they go
with (...) into another world, and there God will judge them, and us by them.
Pro, 13, 20
He that walks with the wise the word, Men, is not in the He^rew) shall be
wise. He that ^alks with God, who gives wisdom, and he that walks with the word
^f God which is able to make a man ^ise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3, 15
He that has that we^ing richly in him, and dwells upon it by wise and holy
Thoughts and Meditations (as the Psalmist ^aith, Psa 119, ^9
I have more understanding ^hen all my teachers, Good thoughts good company.
for thy testimo^ies are my meditation) as well as ^e that converseth with wise
and ^oly persons, shall be wise. It thou bind them continually upon this heart,
Pr. 6, 21, 22
when thou go it shall le^ thee, when thou sleep it shall ke^ thee, and
when thou awakest it sha^ talk with thee, that is, wisdom shall Under God thou
can not har^ better Company then good thoughts nay, Gods cannot be had with
out Theirs.
thou can not have His with out theirs. Thou may have hi^ Company when thou
can n^^ have good men's; but thou can no^ have His, except thou have good
thoughts. But the companion of fools (says another Proverb) shall be
destroyed; Prove. 24, 9
of foolish sinners without us, of foolish thoughts within us, (for even the
thought of foolishness is sin.) If we choose either for our Companions
especially the latter, they will undo us, and bring us under that doom of
Destruction^ This made holy David choice o^ his Company, but curious of his
Thoughts. I have not sat with vain persons, Psalm 26, 4
says he, but I hate vain thoughts, when his Company was had his thoughts were
good; Even while the wicked was before him, Psalm. 39.2
his heart was hot within him, while he was musing, the Fire burned: his
Thoughts inflame his affections with godly Zeal; and this Holy Fire, as by an
Anteperistasis, burnt so much the hotter for the Frost ^f cursed Contrariety
that was about it. When the careful Magistrates or Officers of a City ^preak
into a suspected house in the Night time, the great question is, what Company
have you here? Gods inquiry in man's heart What thoughts have you here? Luk, 24
38 James 2.4
so when God breaks in upon our ^ark hearts, the Inquiry is, what ^houghts have
you here? why do ^houghts arise in your Minds? Are ye ^ot become Judges of evil
thoughts?

Sect. IX.
FIrst, God made man to think of his maker Eccles. 12.1
God made Man to think of his Maker, Remember thy Creator, there is man's end
and duty sumd up in short. We value things as they suit their ends.
God gave man a mind higher then o her Animals, that he might mind higher than
they; a mind above other things, that he might mind things above; An Heathen
could say, Os homini sublime dedit, Caelumque tueri jussit. We chiefly estimate
things as they suit their Chief end, as Fuel by its burning, a Knife by its
Edge, an Horse by his good heels, etc. Otherwise though they look well, if they
do not burn well, or cut well, or go well, we like them not; So God will have
none of thy ( Naphthali like) goodly words without Godly thoughts. Genesis 49 21
We do not reckon Parrats or Mag pies men; because they are taught to talk; We
know they have not Thoughts like Men, though they have w^rd like Men; And is it
possible that for a little professions sake, God should have good thoughts of
thee, whose thoughts are not good? Let me tell thee once for all, He thinks
better of thy Ox or Ass that in its kind minds thee its Owner, then of thee
who mindest not Him whom thou call thy Lord and Maker, (and so perhaps often
swearest by him, when thou do not once think of Him.) It Is a dismal Charge
and Challenge that, Isaiah 1.3
But my people do not consider; They call themselves Mine, Deu. 32, 18 19
but they MIND not Me; Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and have
forgotten God that formed thee, And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them,
because of the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters. Alas how little do
Names, Titles, Privilidges, Professions stand for in Gods Account, where God
Himself is not minded? As she said, How say thou that thou love me, Jud.
16.35
seeing thy heart is not with me? how is it that thou pretendest to God, seeing
thy mind is not with him; God is not in all thy thoughts? Psalm. 10.4


Gods good will to us set out by his thoughts Ps. 115.12
As Gods good will toward men in Scripture is called his being mindful, his
remembering, his thinking upon them. He is ever mindful of his Covenant. Psalm.
111.5 Nehe. 5.19 and 13 22 Luke 23 41
Think upon me O my God: Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom! So
ours also to God ward. We have thought of thy loving kindness O God! Psalm. 48.9
We will remember thy love more then Wine. Cant. 1, 4
If we have forgotten thy Name, Psalm. 44.17 18, 20, 21
shall not God search this out? All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee; Isaiah 64.5
our heart is not turned back* Therefore it is said, thou meetest them that
remember thee. So ours to God.
A good God will be sure to be even with them; They remember him, and he minds
them. He is in their thoughts, and they are in his. But on the other hand,
Think not O man to be regarded by him that is forgotten by thee; And our evil
will by our not thinking of him.
or that God should have any good thoughts of thee, who never harbourest any
good thoughts in thee, or that God should mind thy good, who never mindest God
nor good? No, no, if God think upon thee it will be to destroy thee, for not
remembering him that made thee. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9 15
And all the Nations that forget God; and 50, 2^
Now Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces while
there is none to deliver you. Even such are the paths of all that forget God,
and the Hypocrites hope shall perish. Job 8, 13
In vain is hope in God harbored where thoughts of God cannot be.

Sect X.
Secondly,

GOd looks especially to man's thoughts, Grace first stirs in thoughts.
Because if there be any Grace, which is called the seed of God in Man, it
first stirs there. 1 John 3, 9
The newborn babe (as the Apostles expression is, 1 Pet, 2, 2 (...).
) it first breaths in Prayer, but it first-stir^ in thought, and its stirring
(as in Nature) is before its breathing Nay even that privation, which
(according to the Old Philosophy is as it were a kind of principle o^ this
Spiritual Generation, begins there. This is called a Casting down Imaginations,
2 Cor. 10.5
and a bringing of every thought of the heart into captivity to the obedience
of Christ Grace, I say, first stirs in the Thought. I thought on my ways, and
turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Ps. 123, 59
The Prodigal came to himself before he came to his Father First thought of his
Fathers house, Lu. 15.17 20
an^ then turned his feet thither-ward Solomon in his Prayer (a Type o^ Jesus
Christ our Lord in his Intercession) speaks thus, Deuteronomy. 30, 1
If they si^ against thee, 1 Kin 8.46 47, 48, 49, 50
etc. Yet if they sha^ bethink themselves, etc. and so return to thee, etc.
Then hear thou their Prayer, etc. and forgive thy People, etc. First, they
bethink themselves, and then return. Thus the Accomplishment of the new
Covenant in the work of Grace is called the putting of Gods Laws into men's
minds, Hebr. 8 10 (...)
and the writing them in or upon their hearts. The Greek word signifyes, I will
give them into their Thoughts, and write them upon their hearts. Thoughts are
the Gate and In let to all the affections. Grace first knocks at this door.
Therefore also the word of Grace, 1 Cor. 10, 5
which is the great Engine for the foresaid Privation, 1 Pet. 1.23
and the very Seed of Regeneration is called (...) a strict and curious
observer of the thoughts and intentions of the Heart. Hebr: 4, 12
And if Gods Word be such, sure God is so.

Sect. XI.
God principally requires the heart, Therefore especially looks to the
thoughts,
THirdly. God principally requires the Heart, and therefore especially looks at
the Thoughts. Thoughts to the Heart are as motion to the Watch, Sailing to the
Ship; and it is those that render these valuable. Pro: 23:26
My Son give me thy Heart. We must give God our Hand too, and our All, but our
Heart in All, and above All. Thus set your Hearts unto all the words, Deuteronomy:
32:46 47:
etc. for is it not a vain thing for you, because it is your life. We must lift
up our Hands too to Gods Commandments (says David) but especially our Hearts
and Thoughts, Ps: 119:41
and therefore he ads, and I will meditate in thy Statutes. Our Thoughts can
reach farther, Thoughts can reach farther than deeds can, and God requires our
most,
than our Deeds can, and God requires and looks for our utmost. The poor
Captivated Soldier when he cannot get to his party, ^e can think of his party.
Psalm 13^ 1:5.6
As the ^aptives in Babylon could think of ^ion, nay could not but think of ^t:
the Apostle captivated to the ^aw of sin by the Law in his Mem^ers, Rom: 7:23 25
did yet with his MIND serve ^he Law of God. And God minds ^arefully how your
minds stand, which way they serve, to the World or Heaven, Sin or Holi^ess,
Christ or Belial.

Sect. XII.
Fourthly,

THoughts are the primary productions of the Mind, Thoughts the Hearts primary
(...) productions
and Heart, therefore God principally ^yes these. Of old times the first ^orn,
Exodus: 13:1
were under Gods especial ^ye. The Hebrews call sparks, First born Gods part,
he Sons of the burning coal, as you ^ay see by comparing that Text ^n Job with
the Margin. Job 5 ^
The Thoughts are the sparklings of man's Mind, the very Issue of it, if (...)
be enkindled with Heavenly Fir^ that inward Baptism, Matt: 3.11
what numberless numbers of these Divine sparks are there daily flying upward;
if with Fire of Hell (as the Apostle James speaks of the Tongue, James 3 6
) thy very thoughts, a^ it were, stink of Brimstone, an^ look like Hell in Gods
eye; the^ are earthly, V: 14 15, 16
sensual, and Devilis^ there is confusion and every ev^^ work. Thoughts I say
are the proper Issue, nay the first born of the heart, Mat: 15:19
for out of the heart procee^ evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteri^ Fornications,
Thefts, Blasphemies Mark, First Evil thoughts, an^ then all the rest. Evil
Thought^ are the File-leaders, these stand i^ principal view. Evil Thought are
the hearts first begotten which no sooner are they born but the Heart
Incestuously beget on them again, Murders, Adul^eries, Thefts, Blasphemies,
what ^ot? Thoughts you see lie next ^he heart; and if we would judge ^f a
Fountain, we judge of it by ^he waters that flow next and immediately from the
spring head; Fountain to be judged by what flows most immediately from it,
go^ng farther, they may come to be ^ltered from their natural taste or ^ook.
The waters of a salt spring ^y being distreined and percolated through the
fresh earth may loose their brackishness. So that which ^s hatred in the heart,
and very Brine in the Thoughts may seem ^weet in the mouth through the
^ntermediation of the dissembling ^ongue of him, whose hatred is ^overed by
deceit: Pro: 26:24
he that hates dissembleth with his lips, makes his voice gracious, so the
Hebrew, Verse 26
Hail Master! may be in the mouth, while Blood and Treason are in the ^houghts,
and the very Devil and All in the Heart. Contrariwise, ^he waters of a pure and
wholesome Fountain may receive some other kind of tincture from the Chana^ they
pass through, and thus to often Holy thoughts springin^ from an Heavenly heart,
man seem lost as it were in the crowd o^ worldly occasions, temptat^ons and
perturbations. Ger: 24:63
Thu^ Isaac went out to MEDITATE i^ the Field in the evening tide, an^ behold
the Camels. It Is not sai^ he went out to meet the Camels and some good thought
dropped in, (a a good Thought may now an^ then fall in a wicked man's way as the
Angel in Balaams.) But h^ went out to meditate, and the Camels fell in. Verse 65
Rebeckah, she thought (as she said) he came t^ meet her; God eyes the hearts
first setting out:
but the Lord says h^ went out to meet God. God will take notice whether our
heart^ set rightly out with him, Jerem: 2:2
though^ after in the journey we may for some season loose our way. Thu^ says
the Lord, I remember thee ^e kindness of thy youth, the love (...) thine
Espousals, when thou went^st after me, etc. Psalm: 110:^
Christ has a ^ew of youth in a gracious heart, as ^ell as Holy Church, and
this Di^ine and pearly dew of precious ^houghts is fairest when freshest, as
from the Womb of the morning. Coin fairest out of the Mint-house
Gods Coin is brightest when it first comes out of the Mint-house ^f man's heart
(for such is man's Mind, a Mint house for thoughts) when it passes farther, it
comes ^o be discolored, to contract ^lackness, especially by lying for ^ome
time in the Earth, and so ^ometimes to grow suspicable to others, perhaps
hardly discernable ^o our selves, without much rub^ing, etc. Repentance and
Re^ormation; yet if it were right for metal and stamp at its first set^ing
out, when we our selves dare hardly trust it, yet God (that knows its Original)
will own it. It is said of the King of Asa tha^ his heart was perfect all his
days, 2 Chr: 15:17
perfect with the Lord, yet the poo^ man took many a wrong an^ wretched step, ^
Kin: 15:14
for a man of a righ^ heart; yea how was Gods stam^ sometimes, as it were,
worn off; little left of his Image or Super-scription to be seen: for beside
that the high places were not removed, which was a blot upon his Government; In
the business o^ Baasha, 2 Chronicles: 16: Ver: 8:19
he relied on the King of Syria, and relied not on the Lord his God; And when
he (that had eminent experience of God in the business of the Ethiopians and
Lubims) had done thus foolishly, Verse 10
and Hanani the Seer had reproved him faithfully, he was wroth, yea in a rage
with him, and put him in Prison: and oppressed some of the people at the same
time; nay in the very evening of his days, and toward his very Exit, Verse 13
it is said, that i^ his Disease he sought not to the lord, but to the
Physicians; yet here was something found at bot^om notwithstanding all this.
Contrariwise, 2 Cht, 25, 2
Amazia did that which was right in the sight of the lord, but (says God) not
with a ^erfect heart. Like some counter^eit pieces now abroad that being ^ased
or plated over with Silver, are ^bserved to have fewer cracks and laws in the
Edges, perhaps than the Kings own Coin, and yet they are ^ut Copper hearted.

The gracious soul is the Spouse of Christ, Cant: 6:8
who as she is attended with a number of Holy and Roy^l affections as so many
Queens, so ^lso with pure thoughts, as with Virgins without number; And our
Heavenly Solomon eyes them most that wait next and immediately, as ^t were, upon
his Queens person, ^ow our thoughts as you have ^eard, they lie next to our
hearts.

Sect XIII.
Fifthly,

God judges as man cannot, therefore by the thoughts:
IT cannot but be granted, the God judges as man cannot We look at each others
outside and oftentimes are not deceived for ordinarily the abundance of t^
heart will break out either som^time or other, Luke 6:45
by the tongu^ clinking what the heart thinks, (a the Proverb has it,) or some
way or other, so that the war observer may come to discern the Potsheard, Pro:
26:23
notwithstanding the covering of Silver dross: oft-time I say, 1 Samuel: 16:7
but not always, That Is God Prerogative; for the Lord sect not as man sees,
How then? for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on
the heart. We hear men's words, H^ sees their thoughts, Pro: 24:12
we weigh their Actions and Appearances, the Lord ponders their hearts, chap:
16, 2
and weighet^ their spirits (as the wise man speaks.

In the Levitical Law the Swan was pronounced unclean, Lev. 11.18 God judges
most by what is in-most
a Bird whose Feathers are exceeding white, but her Skin black. God judges
most by what is In-most. God can easily discern the transformed Devil, 2 Cor 11
14
under the Angel of Light; the rotteness within, through the whited Tomb, Mat.
23, 27.
and painted Sepulcher. We unto you Hypocrites, says Christ, Verse 25
for ye make clean tho outside of the Cup and of the Platter, Verse 28
but within they are full of Extortion and Excess; Even so ye also appear
outwardly righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.
Oh what horrid spectacles were ^he most of men, even of many that desire to
make a fair show in the ^lesh, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 6, 1^
if their Insides were but turned outside; But alas! They are all outside to
him that is All eye.

Sect. XIV.
Conscience Gods Deputy judges by our Thoughts Romans 2, 13
LAstly; That God sentenceeth and Dooms us by our Thoughts, is hereby evident,
in that Conscience, that is, God^ Vicegerent in man's breast, does so which show
the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience bearing witness,
and their Thoughts the mean while accusing, or excusing one another: Verse 16
it follows, In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel; God, and Christ, and the Gospel, they will judge men by
their consciences and their Consciences they will judge them by their Thoughts
i^ the great day; Judge we therefore our selves now, as then w^ must be judged.

CHAP. V. Discovers what those Right Thoughts are, that are the Righteous man's
Evidence: and how to be known.
Sect. I.
BUt alas! Objection
may some one say, Is not Man's heart a great deep, Psalm, 64, 6
and desperately wicked, Jer. 17, ^
and deceiptful above all things? I am afraid of Judging my self by my
Thoughts of my self, least I should Misjudge of my self, finding my self so apt
to think amiss; does not the Apostle speak of some that measuring themselves by
themselves are not, wise. 2 Co. 10, 12
There is so much Pride, Partiality, and Self-love, that almost every way of
man will seem clean and right in his own eyes, Prove. 16, 2
if his own Thoughts may but be his Judges. and 21, 2


Solution Not what Thoughts we have of our selves, but in our selves,
Why all this is true; yet all that has been said before true also, We never
said that every man's Case is, as his thoughts are of himself, but yet by his
thoughts that are In himself, he may come to discover his own state. For if a
man Think himself to be something, (says the Apostle) when he is nothing, Gal.
6 3.4
he deceives himself. But yet let every man prove his own works and then he
shall have rejoicing In himself alone, and not in another. This he speaks in
respect of Sincerity, not of Righteousness, or Justification in the fight of
God, for of the latter he says we rejoice only in Jesus, and have no other
Confidence; Philip. 3.3
But as to the former, 2 Cor. 2, 12
this is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. so also he that believes on the son of
God, has the witness In himself. 1 John 5, 10


Nay in as much as the Apostle condemns him for a self deceiver, who is in some
respect the worst kind of deceiver (as self Murder is the worst kind of
Murder, that thinks himself to be something when he is nothing; even this
makes it evident, that his high thoughts of himself were evidences against
himself, had he but rightly considered them.

Sect. II.
Whereas, Reader, Self suspicion a better sign than high thoughts of our selves
on the other hand if thou be but honest in what ^hou pretendest, and not
Hypo^ritically humble tongued, as many men are, when thou complainest ^f thy
self, and declarest thy jea^ous thoughts that thou have of thine own heart;
Here is something like a token for good; For even right jealousy falls much in
with that Carefulness, Indignation; Fear, Cor. 7, 1
etc. that were approved signs of goldy sincerity. But and if it be thus with
thee, right gladly will thou go along with me in the following particulers, and
say as David, Psalm 139 1, 2, 23
O Lord thou have searched me, and known me, and thou understandest my thoughts
afar off; and yet again, search me O God, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts; Search me, O search me, thou blessed word of God, that can not lie;
Thou Messenger of Christ that dare not flatter me, O try me and know my
Thoughts. Thou will receive God spies with peace (as Rahab did) yea wilt
willingly lend me the Candle of thine own Conscience to hold to thee, Hebr, 11,
31 Lend Gods servants the Lords candle.
whilst we are together searching the secrets of thy own soul; for the spirit
of man is the Candle of the Lord searching all the inward parts of the belly.
Pro: 20.27 Conscience to search thee by:
And the reason why so many Hearers and Readers of the most searching Books and
Sermons, are yet ignorant of, or mistaken in themselves, is because they deny
the Lords servants the Lords Candle to do his work by.

I. Trial of Right Thoughts.
Sect. I.
First,

THen let us begin with thy Thoughts in their Original, 1 Trial ofthoughts is
by their original. Good thoughts grow not in an evil heart:
and so judge the streams, as near as we can to the Fountain head. Would
thou approve thy thoughts to be right Thoughts, such as indeed are the
Righteous man's Evidence, let me ask thee plainly how thou came to thy
Thoughts? have they their Rise in thy self? Luke 24, 38
(why do Thoughts arise in your hearts?) then know they are but Carnal at best,
for all that is born of flesh is flesh. John 3, 6
The heart I know is a Vine that is always bearing, a Fountain that is ever
springing up: and Thoughts are called the Fruit of the heart, as we saw before,
Isaia. 10.12
and (as it were) the streams of the Heart, they proceed from it, Matt, 15.19
says Christ; but says he, Matthew 7.18
a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit, not a Fountain yield, James 3 12
says the Apostle James, salt water and fresh. Now every natural heart is a
corrupt tree, a Vine of Sodom, and therefore its Crowds of thoughts naturally
are but the Clusters of Gomorrah, Deu: 32 32
a troubled Spring or Sea rather, that cannot rest, but is ever casting up mire
and dirt. Isaia 57.20
Amongst all the Unbelievers in the world, there is not one pure mind,
therefore not one pure thought; Thus 1, 15
for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14 4
It Is a vain and ignorant boasting that I have observed in some, that have
thanked God that they were never troubled with evil thoughts in all their days:
say thou so? then I dare tell thee that thou never yet wast owner of one
good one, ^uch as God will own and accept for such: That they think no body any
hurt, who never truly ^hought themselves or others any good: surely there are
none greater strangers to good thoughts, than ^uch as brag most of their good
meanings, nay that can tell you ^hey hope to saved by them. And ^ow came they
by them? why, ^hey thank God* they have had them ever since they can remember,
God forbid else. They have as ^ood hearts to God, and think as well ^f Jesus
Christ as the best of them, though they cannot speak so well. Yet do but ask
these of the New Birth, and you are unto them as a Barbarian, and speak as it
were in an unknown tongue, (as our Savior to Nicodemus,) and shall only
receive a frump or a frown for your freedom; Jam, 3, 3, 4
what do you think they stand in need to be Catechized? if you do, they thank
you, they do not think so meanly of themselves, and this is one of their good
thoughts.

Sect. II.
No sufficiency in our selves, for one right thought,
BUt let me plead with thee, O man, thou that find good Thoughts, as free as
the Rode and as Common and easy as the highway: Art thou greater th^^ the
Apostle Paul, he says expre^^ly, that we are not sufficient of ou^ selves to
Think any thing of O^^ selves. Therefore we must b^ taken off of Our selves
before w^ can possibly Think one Rig^^ ^hought. But our sufficiency (says ^he
Text) is of God. As we cannot think at all Physically, not ex^rt one motion of
the Mind in Thought, but by a sufficiency of God, working by Nature: so much
less can we think Morally, 2 Cor, 3.5 Amongst all unbelievers not one pure
thought
Thoughts good in a spiritual notion, in the account of God, but by his own
sufficiency working by Grace. To the unbelieving, (says the same Apostle,)
there is nothing pure, but even their very Mind is defiled; And if their Mind
drop its uncleaness and defilement upon all about it, Titus 1.15
surely much more upon the thoughts, that lie next unto it Some men think their
thoughts are certainly good, Reason why their thoughts trouble them not.
because they never trouble them. They do not complain of blasphemous thoughts,
and horrid injections as many do; And alas! the only Reason why the thoughts,
the Treasures of their Hearts, their goods are in peace, Luke 11, 21
is because the strong Man Armed keeps the Palace, the Devil is Lord and Master
there. But if ever that stronger one than he, Verse 22
the Lord Jesus Christ, ( by the weapons of that warfare tha^ are spiritual and
mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10, 5
) had come and prevailed upon thee, it is strange if all would have continued so
quiet it thee; thou would likely have seen troubles, and heard amazing
noises in thy own Soul, for there would have been the pulling down of strong
holds, and this would have awakened thee sure to purpose, and raised Commotions
in thy Thoughts; for the very First motions of Grace, as I said before, and
stirs, would have appeared there. The casting down of some, the bringing in
others into captivity to the obedience of Christ, who is set as for the rising
and falling of many in Israel, Luke 2, 24
so in the soul; the ^houghts that thou were best ac^ainted and pleased with,
must ^ave come tumbling down; and ^e thoughts, whose faces thou ^ver saw
before, would have sen up in their room, own ^oughts must have been un^oughts,
Old thoughts amongst ^her things, must have past away, 2 Cor. 5.27
^d all things must have become new. ^t the unrighteous forsake his ^oughts,
His Thoughts, that is, Isaiah 55 7
^houghts growing in corrupt na^es Garden, for Regeneration is ^pecially
called, a Renewing in ^ spirit of the Mind. Ephesians. 4, 23
Search the ^^riptures, and if things be not ^s, then blame me, and think as ^l
as ever thou did of thy self, ^d as ill as ever thou can of the ^thor, for
giving thy calm and ^et thoughts any needless trou^; But alas Reader! be not
^eived, God is not mocked; Gal. 6, 7, 8
but if ^an think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. Let me tell thee, thy thinking well of thy own thoughts, will no more
make them good, than thy thinking thy self such, will make God to think thee
so. And ye^ believe it I beseech thee, O Reader, that my end and design in all
this is not to disturb but to direc^ thee. The Apostle delighted no^ in making
the Corinthians sorry but that they sorr^wed after a godl^ sort. 2 Cor. 7 9
It is no pleasure to me, to think that thy thoughts are wrong but desirous I
am to set them right and to help thee how to judg^ rightly of them, and of thy
self b^ them.

Sect. III.
Seeing grace first stirs in thoughts
SEeing then, Reader, that (...) are now at the very root of (...) matter, and
have told the once and again that the grace God first stirs in the Thoughts.
Give me leave to lay before thee plain Scheme and Map of such Thoughts as
Divine Grace, does ^sually work in true Penitents, of ^uch Right Thoughts, as
it does ^^rst give in to those whom it will ^ccept, and own as Righteous
persons. And herein that I may the ^ore distinctly proceed, I shall ^remise
something, (First,) Con^erning the Season and Occasion, and the Method,
(Secondly, Premssed a two things, occasion and method of Gods working them
) Of Gods working such Thoughts as ^hese in the Heart and Mind of ^an. In all
which if thou will ^o along with me, I trust thou ^ilt find both Scripture
Evidence and Christian Experience to bear ^hee Company.

Sect. IV.
Gods usual season to bring siners to Right thoughts (such as for mad men to
right minds)
FOr the Season that God take to bring Sinners to Righ^ Thoughts, it is such as
the Pa^sitian takes, to bring mad men t^ Right Minds, (for even this gre^ and
Inward Change in Scriptu^^ is called (...), a coming ^ our Right minds, Acts 3,
31 Repentance a coming to, Right minds.
so the word si^nifyes) when they have them under Chains, and in the dark. they
be held in Cords of Affliction and bound in fetters; THEN shows them their
work, etc. (...) opens their ear to Discipline, and For God speaks once,
Job 3 68
yea twice, y^ man perceives it not; But invision of the night, (when he is
ch^stened with pain upon his bed, Verse 9, 10
as there follows, Job 33.14 15
etc.) then he ope^eth the ears of men, and seals the instruction. Verse 19
In the day of adversi^ says God, Verse 16
Consider, when t^ ^atriarchs were reduced to a sore ^^rait, then they are
brought to ^hink seriously of their Sin against their Brother Joseph; Eccle. 7
^8
And 'twas ^e that brought them into it, for that very end; so does our
hea^enly Joseph, Jesus Christ, Genesis 42.81
often ^o for the very same purpose; ^e sends troubles often times on the
^utward, for the reducing of the ^ner man; and straitens the Gar^son, that he
may take it in. 1 Kin. 8 47.
^he Israelites by their Captivity ^ust be taught to Bethink them^^lves, Luke.
15.^7.
and so the Prodigal by his ^amine. Or however, when the ^ighty God takes the
weapons of ^e spiritual warfar into his own and, and hews men by his Prophets
^d slays them by the words of his ^outh, Hosea 6, 5
and his Judgments are as ^e light that came upon Saul (in ^s full earear) and
struck him the ground, Acts 9, 5
and a voice from ^eaven with it, that strikes him to the heart; Verse 4, 5
Soul, soul, what do thou mean by this hardening thy Heart against Heaven,
and setting thy self against God? Are thy heels harder than his pricks? can
thou dwell with everlasting burnings? Romans 7 9
The Commandment comes, Sin revives, the false conceited Righteous person is
struck dead ( I dyed, says Paul) knows not what to think, who art tho^ Lord?
nor what to do, Lord wha^ would thou have me to do? Acts 9, 5
such I say, is the season and occasion that God takes for reducing sinners to
Right Thoughts. Verse 6


Grace not to be limited,
I know indeed that Grace is a Sovereign agent, and works as i^ will: sometimes
It slips the Loc^ of the heart, Acts 16, 15
as Lydia's, with little noise, and so makes room for Right Thoughts there.
Sometimes slips the lock of the heart with little noise
It may may possibly steal into the heart if I may s y so, like Joseph's cup
into Benjamins sack, And he, tha^ h^th i^, wonders when, or how, I^ first came
thither. All women that do well too, have not the same troubles and pains in
Childbearing, that the most have; And so it is also in the new birth. And if
thou be one that can say indeed, that there is a Change in thee from what
thou wast by Nature, one thing thou know that whereas thou wast born blind,
now thou see, John 9 25
(as the man in the Gospel,) The grace of God has brought thee to thy right
sight, a Right mind, Right thoughts; but by what Sickness, Sermon, Can thou
say I was born blind but God has brought me to Right sight, mind, and thoughts
with less ado
Affliction, Conviction, it began with thee, thou can not say; which is the
case of some (especially some such that have been all their lives, much under
the power of the restraining Grace of God, Bless God for the thing Repine not
at the manner.
and of a strict and holy education) let me exhort thee rather to magnify that
Grace that has appeared to thee, and (taught thee to deny ungodliness, etc.)
then to repine because thou do not know, or by what means and gradations, the
work of God has grown up in thy heart, or to deny what God has done for thy
Soul. Genesis 44.13
But yet withal this I must add, that as it is observed that the coming of
the Cup into the Sack, in an unknown way, left them in the more trouble and
perturbations afterward, though it came from a friendly hand; And those women
that have less fore-pains, then others, have many times greater After-paines,
(as they call them) So they that have less signal Spiritual troubles preceding
their conversion, and have known least of the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor: 5, 11
are by so much the more full of Anxiety many times almost all their days, full
of doubtful thoughts whether they were ever savingly wrough^ upon, because not
wrought upon as such, and such; Haunted, many times with Hideous thoughts, and
Temptations to Atheism, Blasphemy. etc. which m^ke them even weary of life, and
afraid of death, and yet may be very precious in the sight of God, and dear to
Jesus Christ.

Sect. V.
ANd as Gods usual Season is the time of trouble, of spiritual trouble, to
bring men to Right Thoughts: To remember God, to Consider the days of old,
Psalm: 77, 2* ^ Verse 16
to commune with their own hearts, to make dilligent search into their own
spirits, to take notice of their Infirmities, to Remember the years of the
right hand of the most High; Verse 10
to Remember the works of the Lord, Verse 11
and to meditate of his doings, etc. (All which is Right-Thought-work, and
which the Psalmist was set upon in the day of his Trouble. Psalm: 77:2
) So the Method that God ordinarily uses, Gods ordinary method to bring to
right thoughts by setting home some particular sin.
Is, to bring to their thoughts some one particular S n, and to present it to
their Souls view in all its ugly shape and monstrous deformity, with its
heightening circumstances, and hellish horror, that, like the tail of a
Prodigious Comet, it draws after it; now as Ghosts are most terrible and
confounding when they appear in the Dark, so is Sin when it stares a man in the
face in his time of trouble. Thus the Patriarchs were struck with the apaling
thought of their savage cruelty to their innocent Brother when themselves were
in Distress; Genesis 42.21
no doubt, they had other Sins to trouble them, but this first flew in their
face. Saul, with the thought of his furious persecuting of Jesus. Acts 9 4
Thus some for telling a known Lie, others for some Theft, or known Fraud,
others for pro^haning the Lord's Day, others for some profane Oath, others for
Disobedience to Parents, And some, though few, like Mary Magdelene, for the
foul fin that brings a wound and a dishonor, Prove: 6.33
and a reproach that is hardly wiped away. So that as men ordinarily single out
some one special Sin to set their heart upon, though they entertain and
practice all the rest, so God singles out some special Sin to fix their
thoughts upon, Roma. 7 8 with 24,
and thereby to bring them in due time to sight and sense of the whole Body of
Death; nay sometimes when men (by a blameless appearance, and moral
conversation) have got the good thoughts of other men, and their own much more,
trusting (as Christ speaks) in themselves, Heb 3.1 Luke 18 6
that they are righteous, God suffers them to fall into some gross act of Sin,
God sometimes suffers civil men to fall into some foul act ^o disver to them
the Plague of the heart
perhaps Drunkeness, perhaps making a mock at Godliness to please vile company,
perhaps Perjury, or some other palpable act of wickedness, that by such a
rising in the flesh, he may bring them to know, and to bethink themselves of
the Plague of the heart that Scripture speaks of. 1 Kin. 8.38


Indeed I have sometimes observed, Sometimes thoughts ar in an uproar,
troubled, and distinctcaus not known:
some persons troubled with a strange unusual throng and crowd of Thoughts,
Sermons troubled them, and Sins troubled them, but their Thoughts were like
that confused concourse in the Acts, of which no distinct account could be
given, and the Assembly knew not why they were come together. Acts 19.32 Verse
40 Yet God sometimes out of this chaos draws a new Creation. As in Gen,
And as such a crowd of thoughts have been thus in an uproar for some space of
time, and they knew not distinctly why, so a little time has brought it to
they know not what, nothing for good has come of it. And yet sometimes the
Allwise and powerful grace of God, even out of such a Chaos of confusion,
Reduces thoughts to proper places and things to order.
is pleased to draw a New Creation, reducing things to their proper places, and
thoughts to their right order.

Sect. VI.
BUt Generally, Reve. 3.20:
when Grace first knocks at the door of the heart, Pro 18.14
and finds the Sinner in distress, Acts ^:37
wounded in Spirit that he cannot bear it, Psalm. 38.4
pricked at the very heart, (the pressing sense of Sin lies upon him, and goes
over him as a burden too heavy for him;) ^t brings him to speak within
himself; Or, the Scheme of a Converts first thought. Lamen. 3 1
(which is all one) to Think thus, or to this effect;

I am the man that have seen Affliction by the R^d of his anger; and now I
stand here a miserable Malefactor before the Lord, who perfectly knows all my
secrets, and infinitely hates all my Sins: My Conscience hales me to his Bar,
for my sin ha^^ found me out, Number* 32:23
Gen 42:21
And I am veri^ guilty concerning this thing should I then either hide my sin
or harden my self against God who ever did either of these, Pro: 28:3 Job 9.4
an^ prospered? This then is my proper station, though my feet l^ hurt with
fetters, and the Iro^ enters into my very Soul, thoug^ the chain of Gods
Indignation be heavy upon me, Isica^* 7, 9
yet I must bea^ it, because (it is my own chain^ I have sinned against him.
Excus^ my sin. Alas! I cannot; I kne^ my Masters will, and knew it t^ be Holy,
Luke 12:47 Romans 7.12 Malac, 1, 6
Just, and Good, and di^ it not; I called him Lord, ye^ feared him not; I knew
he for^ bad the thing I did, yet did it; I knew he looked on me and yet I did
it; I knew he would call me to an account for it, and yet I did it. Accuse my
Master, Alas! I dare not; No no, Ja. 1.13:14
He tempted me not, but I was drawn away of my own lust and enticed, my own
lust, I may call ^t so, as much as I may call my Heart my own; an Heart so
vile, but yet my own; such a Fountain of Poison, such a Cage of every unclean
and hateful Bird; an heart, nay an Hell; yea and worse to me then all the
Devils there, I should belly them, as bad as they be, should I say otherwise; an
heart so desperately wicked, Jerem: 17.9
that if all the men of the world had told me that I had had such a heart, or
should have done such a thing, I should with disdain have replied (with Hazael)
am I a dog? or a Devil? 2 Kin, 8:13
that I should do such a thing; Nay, when Gods own word told me, till this
cursed Sin told it me, could not have thought that carried such a heart about
m^ Is this the heart I so long trusted? that I so often excused that I so much
applauded? I this the honest, the good heart the heart full of good meanings
the heart that thought no harm O mystery of iniquity! O H^ of Hypocrisy! and
unsearchable depth of deceit! Well deep as thou art, God has no^ searched out
thy deep things, O m^ Soul! and now my Sin is eve^ before me, Psalm 51, 3
and my punishmen^ is following hard after me, S^lies at my door; My fatal
moment is set, Gen 4 7
that I cannot pass it and yet secret, Job 14, 5
that I cannon know it, whether in the evening, Mal. 24:42
or at midnight, or at coc^ crowing; Mar. 13 35
only this I know that after death (come it wh^ it will) comes Judgment;
Hebr. 9.27
Judgment unavoidable, before a Judge impa^tial and unexorable; The Crime
naked; Hebr: 4.13
The Prisoner speechless; The Sentence speedy, The Executi^n certain; The
Torment intole^able, Mat. 22.12
yet must be born; without any ease, yet without all end; through millions of
millions of ages; Mar, 18:13
nay without help or hope of help to all Eternity; And this not a Fantasy,
but a greater reality. ^hen what I see with my outward eyes; nor a foreign
con^ernment, but thy own case, O ^y own Soul!

Sect. VII.
Under such doleful thoughts as these, the pensive Sinners Life (for some part
of more or less, even as it pleases ^od) is spent with Grief; Psalm. 31.1^
as Da^s, yea sometimes whole years with sighing, so that his very strength
fails because of his Iniquity, and his very bones are consumed. But then the
working thoughts do not thus leave the spiritual mourner, But in such lik^ sort
as this they do proceed.

Alas then! What shall do? Shall I think of giving m^ overwhelmed Spirit, my
akin^ Heart some present ease b^ breaking away from Gods Ba^ But whither, O
whither shall I g^ shall I fly out again to my curse^ courses, and riotous
company? O^ these have been my Bane alre^dy, and me thinks I still see upon the
wall, Daniel 5, 5
over against the pl^^^ where I too lately sat among them, the Fingers of a
man's ha^^ writing and drawing up a bloo^^ Indictment against me, I remember the
Wormwood and the Ga^^ the Dart, ^am. 3, 19
that then and th^^ struck through my Liver, Prove, 7, 23
and the wound that has been festring ever since because of my foolishness.
Psalm, ^8, 5
Shall I turn me then to the harmless creatures, and beg of them some relief?
Alas! my Sins have engraven vanity there, with a pen of Iron, yea, Eccles. ^ 11
Vexation of Spirit, with the very point of a Diamond. Shall they ease my
Servitude and cruel Bondage, who have wearyed them with mine Iniquities, Isaia
^^.^^
and made them serve with my Sins, yea, and God in them? shall they help my
groaning, who have made them all groan under the bondage of my corruption? No,
no, Romans 8 21 and 22
If I say my bed shall comfort me, Job. 7.13, 14
or my Couch ease my complaint, then am I scarred with visions, and terrifyed
through dreams. Sometimes I forget, Psalm. 102, 4
sometimes I fear to eat my bread, least the Morsel should prove a Messenger of
Death to me, and hasten me away to the place from whence I shall not return.
Sometimes God holds mine ey waking that I cannot sleep; Psalm 77 4
and sometimes I dare not, least I should awake no more, till Fire and
Brimstone are about mine ears. In vain then do I think of running away from
God, for whither shall I flee from his presence? Psalm. 139 7
Shall I think then of fleeing to him, and of bowing the knee before him? Alas!
He is a consuming Fire, Heb. 12 29
and the Mountains smoke, and the Hills flow down at his presence. Isaia 63, 3
Yet have I heard that the God of Israel is a merciful God, I will put a Rope
upon my head, 1 Kin. 20.31
and make my Supplication to my Judge. But Alas! wherewithal shall I come
before him, Job 9 15
and bow my knee to the most High? Mic. 6, 6, 7
Shall I think of Pilgrimages or Penances, of coming before him with burnt
Offerings? to give him, If I had them, thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? or my first born for my transgression, or the fruit of my body
for the sin of my Soul? Psalm. 9 50
Will he take any Bullock out of my House, or He Goats out of my Fold? No, no,
Deuteronomy. 4.24
He is a Jealous God, and Iealously regards not any Ransom, Prove: 6.35
or many Gifts; He will by no means clear him that is guilty, Exodus 34 7
and I dare not plead Not Guilty, though I die for it. Shall I think then of
stretching out my hand in the way of some Legal Righteousness and self-wrought
Reformation, to take hold of the Tree of Life, Genesis 3:22 and 24
now that I have eaten of the forbidden Tree? Alas! behold Cherubims with a
Flaming Sword, blocking up the way of the Covenant of Works, Gal: 2:16
so that by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Alas! my Sighs
for Sin, are an Impure vapor; and my Tears for Sin, need washing! my
Righteousnesses are filthy rags, and like the clothes of a removed Woman;
Isaia, 64, 6
If I should justify my self, Job 9, 20
my own mouth would condemn me, and prove me perverse; And I have too long
already added this sin of perverse Rebellion to my other wretchedness, that I
have gone about to establish my own Righteousness, Rom, 10, 3
and have not submitted to the Righteousness of God.

But yet O thou pure God, have not thou said that there is Forgiveness with
thee, Psa. 130.4
that thou may be feared? Is there no Balm in thy Gilead? Jer. 8, 22
is there no Physician there? But this very day there was a Messenger of thine
with me, John 4.29
of a truth he was none but thine, for he told all that was in my heart, is not
this the Interpreter? Job 33 23
the one of a thousand? He told me withal from thy own mouth, that though I
could not, yet thou had found a Ransom, and given a Name, Job 33.24
though but One under Heaven whereby men might be saved; Acts 4.^2
Who came not to call the Righteous, Matt. 9.13 and 18, 11
but Sinners to Repentance; to seek and to save that which was lost; That help
was laid upon him, and that he is mighty, Psalm. 19, 19 Hebr. 7, 25
even able to save to the utmost. That therefore there was hope in Israel
concerning my soul, a possibility, nay a probability, nay a Certainty that if I
would agree quickly even while I am in the way, Matt. 5 25
acquaint now my self with God, I should be at peace: Job 22, 21
That thou art not only Reconcilable, but in Christ reconciling the world to
thy self; 2 Cor. 5, 19 Verse 20
And therefore as though thou were beseeching me by Him (thine Ambassador) He
did pray me in Christ's stead, that I would be reconciled to God; And O my Soul
was moved within me at that word; shall the Judge, thought I (as it were)
petition? and not I, the Offender entertain the motion? nay catch at the words
(as Benhadads servants, ^ Kin. 20.23
) and put my mouth in the aust ^f there may be hope. Lam. 3, 29


But then withal he told me, That Christ must be Lord as well as Jesus; Zach.
6.13
a Priest indeed, but a Priest upon his throne; Romans 3, 27
That Faith was not Libertinisme, but a Law, Mat 13 45 and 46 and 19.21
That all must be sold, and not a farthing would be abated, if I would buy the
Pearl of great price; chap 36, 24
That there was a dear self to be denied; A daily Cross to be taken up, A
Crucified leader to be followed, Hebr. 3, 15 and 10.30
a severe example to be imitated; No time to be delayed before I began, ( to
day if I would hear his voice, etc.) nor looking back (with Lots Wife) Luke 17
32
to be endured, after I had once begun. Wherefore he charged me in thy Name,
before I went farther, to sit down, Luke 19, 28
and consider the Cost.

But O the consternation that this new Thought breeds in my perplexed Spirit! I
had almost said in my heart, like Agag, Isa. 15 3^
the bitterness of death is over; Alas! my Sea sick soul would fain have been
at shore any way, though she ventured a drowning for it; But now I see there is
no remedy but I must out again into the tempestuous Ocean. But O the
unexpressible torment of a divided distracted mind! Alas the contrary
struglings in my poor soul, Genesis 2^.22
as if there were two Nations there! One throng of Thoughts breaks in
Impetuously, did not we tell thee from the very first, Isai. 57.10
silly soul, Luke 19 21
that there is no hope in God for thee? we knew that he was an austere Lord
whatever others might tell thee, that his sayings were hard, so that none could
bear them; And should thou set out, thou could never hold out, and so thy
last end would would be worse than thy beginning; John 6, 60 2 Pet. 2.20 21
And now thou may find our words true; Come, come, there is no hope, Jerem.
2.25
no: but we will throw up all, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we must die:
Isai. 22, 13
did not we tell thee that these Micajahs though, at first, they might seem to
sooth thee in some flattering hopes, 1 Kin. 22, 8
yet would never prophesy good concerning thee?

But let not thy heart say so, says a contrary thought, And so flies (with
indignation) in the face of the former, And behold a Troop comes after it,
which when it has forced them to give some ground, This new Troop seizes upon
mine heart, and speaks thus to it.

Sect. VIII.
Ungrateful sinner, Romans 5.8
is this thy kindness to thy friend (that herein commends his love to thee in
that whilst thou were an enemy he dyed for thee) that thou art still listening
to the cursed Offspring of that old and evil heart of unbelief that ever was,
Hebr. ^ 1.
and ever will be, for departing from the living God? who, had he had a mind to
destroy thee, might have done it, Judge. 13, 2.
and never had shown thee such things as these. He took upon himself the form
of a servant; And he still waits, Phil. 2, 7
that he may be gracious; Isai, 30, 18
He stretched forth his arms, to open thee a way to his Bosom love, upon the
Cross; Isaia. 65, ^
and he stretches out his hands again to thee, in the Preaching of the word.
It has been said Ask, and have; it is now, Take, Matt. 26, 26
and have; Take, eat, this is my body broken for thee: Rev. 3, 20
Salvation knocks, it is but thy opening and the work is done.

A work indeed, says the drooping soul; which before it be done, I am like for
all this to be undone; it is but taking! but opening? a sad BUT, God knows, for
me who am weak, and cannot: Vile, and dare not. Alas what have Dogs to do with
Childrens bread? should I presume, Mat: 25, 26
thinking to believe, and Blaspheme, thinking to pray; call Christ my Savior,
Revel: 2:9
and God my Father, and be rejected of both, O whither should I make my shame
to go? No, no, had I an Hand fit to receive such a Guest, gladly would I go
through Fire and Water to open the door to Jesus, and take him with ten
thousand welcomes into my Soul.

And is it such presumption, says a thought on the other hand, and such pride
to be dutiful and obedient (for this is Gods Commandment that thou believe on
Jesus Christ) what pride, 1 John 4:1^
what presumption then is it to be undutiful and disobedient? He that believes
not, the wrath of God abides on him. And will thou needs be damned, that thou
may have the credit of being modest, and going mannerly to Hell? Thou savest,
depart from me, for I am a sinful man! Why, Luke 5, 8
he is the Physician, Matt: 9, 12
what should he do with thee, if thou were not sick? chapt: 8, 8
Thou art not worthy Grace should come under thy Roof; neither would it be
Grace if thou were worthy, for if it were of works, (says the Apostle) it were
no more grace. Rom, 11, 6
But whilst thou speak thy Fears and dismal dread of presumption, did thou
never hear of such a Sin (...) as despair? presumption indeed, were it so,
might undo thee; but bold and blasphemous despair, (which thou think modest
and humble) labors to undo Jesus Christ. Other sins make work for Christ who
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; Matthew. 9, 13
but black desperation shuts him out of work, chap. 13, 58
as it is said, he did not many works there, and 17, 20
(that is, in his own Country) because of their unbelief. And do thou thus
requite the Lord? foolish sinner, and unwise! as to spill the Wine of his
precious blood, in thy proud humility and Impudent Modesty (like water upon the
ground,) and that for no other reason than this, that he offers it to thee that
have no money, Isaia: 55, 1
nor price: Job 15, 11
Must the Consolations of of God needs be small with thee, that thy modesty may
be great? Thou have no money, but have ^hou mind? thou have no desert, ^ut have
thou no desire? Christ ^ath a healing hem in his gar^ent for thee, Matt, 9, 20
and 14, 36
be thy Issue never ^o foul, so shameful, Mar: 5, 25 Verse 17
so invete^ate, If thy desires be creeping toward him, while that Issue of
mine continues Running; Zach. 9, 11 Mar. ^^ 27
Break ^en, O prisoner of hope, through ^he throng of all thy contradict^ng
Thoughts, and steal at the ^east one blessed touch, till thou ^ind virtue going
out of him. chapt: 9, 3^
Come, Come, The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come, and let him that
hears say come, And let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, Rev.
22, 17
let him take ^f the water of Life freely Now ^^e that thou refuse not him that
^peaks from Heaven. Heb. 12, 25


But Alas thinks my Soul, after all this, I sadly fear, that ^f Christ would
indeed accept me, I should never be able to accept Christ; I find now it is hard
thing to be a Christian; Acts 26, 38
thought I had been almost persuaded; Number: 13 28 ^5, ^^
but O the sons of Anak^ The walled Towns in the way (...) the Cross! the Yoke!
not a Lus^ not a Thought, not a Word, n^^ a Look, in all the remainder (...) my
life, but by Law? Alas who can bear it? I dread to beg^^ to draw, least I
should dra^ back, and better then I had nev^^ known the way of truth; Heb. 10 38
I kno^ thy Soul has no pleasure in such O Lord, Isai: 38, 4
I am now oppressed u^dertake for me! I would believ^ my God, but cannot, help
the my unbelief! I would take thy yo^^ upon me, Mark 9, 24
but I dare not; for have been a Bullock unaccustom^ to the Yoke, (...) ^1:18
But turn thou me a^^ I shall be turned, and thou shall (...) the Lord my God:
I see, Lord, I must have my yoke which way soever I turn m^ self; Sins and
Satan's I have too long born; And should I die under thine, I cannot bear the
thought of going back to theirs; For I am sure to die, under theirs. I am
indeed in a great straight; 2 Samuel ^ ^
let me now fall into the hand of the Lord for with the Lord there are mercyes,
Pro: 12, ^^
but as for Satan and Sin the mercyes of these are cruel.

Sect. IX.
CAst out then the She^e Anchor of thy hope O thou afflicted, tossed with
tempest, Isaia. 54, ^^
and not comforted; and cast ^t O my soul, ^s near as thou can, Heb, 22, 19
into that within the Veil; If thou venture not on Jesus Christ, thou
perish^st; And if thou do, thou can but perish; If he save thee alive, thou
shall live, 2 Kin: ^^
And if he kill thee, thou can but die;

There have been high and heinous and (in their own eyes) the very chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy: 1, 15
washed, just^fyed, ^ Cor. 6, 1^
sanctified, in the name o^ the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit (...) God, yea
that have been set fort^ even for a PATTERN to all th^^ should afterward
believe on him who not only ORDAINS pe^ for us, 1 Timothy 1, 16
Isai: 26:12
but also works all ou^ Works in us; Wherefore (...) thou blessed Jesus, with
fea^ and with trembling, I cast an^ roll my self upon thee, And (...) I perish,
Hest: 4 16
I will perish at those fea^ that were therefore pierced, tha^ whilst I put my
fingers into the print of the Nails, John 20.27
the wea^ hand of my Faith may have the better hold.

Sect. X.
LO here the Restless Mind o^ Man touched with the Loa^stone of Divine Grace,
trembling (...) wavering, seeking rest but finding ^one till the thoughts fix
upon the ^tar out of Jacob, Mum 24 17
the Lord Jesus christ! Lo here the Heavenly ^onduct of Divine light (newly
^risen in the mind of man) Matthew ^ ^
bring^^g his Thoughts from a far coun^^ey, and never leaving them till (...)
leave them in the very place ^here the Holy Child lies, Verse 9
The ^weet bosom of the Fathers love. ^o here the Celestial Call, Isaiah 4^ ^
raising (...) the Righteous man from the East ^is Native Country, or (if you
^ill) natural condition) And ^^inging him to Gods foot, Acts 11 23
with full ^^rpose, Heb 11 19
and fixed Thought of ^eart, (should opportunity of return^^g into the old
Country, The old ^^ate, The other Gods on the other ^^de of the Flood) serve
never so ^ir, yet) never by the Grace of ^od, to return unto them more; ^eaving
to Christ for fear of ^^ving of him, or being left by him, Leaning on its
beloved, the it may not be lost any more in the old Wilderness, Cant. 8 5
the perplexin^ maze of its old unbelieving tho^ghts; fastening it self upon
him that it may by no means be sh^ken off by him, with such me^tal speakings as
these.

Ruth 2 14
Entreat me not to leave thee, to return from following aft^^ thee; neither say
thou to m^ let me go; Ah my Jesus, I wi^^ let all go, rather then let thee g^
for I should let infinitely mo^^ than the Worlds All go, in lettin^ thee go,
Luke 9 25
I should loose my self loosing thee, and be cast awa^ and that too in the very
sight Harbor. No, no, my heart fixed, O Christ, my heart is fixe^ whither thou
go I will go; b^^ to thy Crown, Ruth 2 16 17
or to thy Cros^ and where thou lodgest I will lodg^ be it a Paradise or a
Prison: T^^ people shall be my people, (thoug^ the world hate them.) And thy
God shall be my God, (notwithstanding all the ungodliness that is in the world,
and the world of ungodliness that is in my heart, where thou dyest I will die,
Romans 6 ^
and there will I be buried; Verse 6
thy death shall mortify my members that are upon earth; My Lusts shall thy
Cross kill, and thy Grave bury; Nay, Col. 3, 3.
God forbid that death should part, but more closely, yea unseperably,
eternally unite thee and me, And so shall I ever be with the Lord.

And thus have you seen the returning Shulamite; Cant. 4:1^
and what will you see in the Shulamite, but as it were the company of two
Armies? On the one hand the struglings of unbelief, on the other, the work of
Faith with power, till at length the house of David grows stronger and
stronger, 2 These. 1:1^
and the house (...) Saul grows weaker and weaker, Old thoughts pass away,
Isai: 23 33
and new prevail, Genesis 32:2:28
the lame divides the spoil, the halting Jacob becomes a Prince with God, the
mourner is comforted, the warfare accomplished, Isai. 40 1.2
the sin pardoned, Chap: 42, 3
the bruised reed lifts up its hanging head, the smoking flax breaks out into
a flame; In one word, In the multitude of the thoughts within, Gods comforts
they delight the Soul. Psalm. 94 19


And thus the soul falling into a place where, all this while, two contrary
Seas have met, Acts 2:41
runs at length a ground on the land of uprightness: Psa. 143.10
where the forepart, the Thought that presses forward toward the Lord Jesus
Christ, sticks fast and remains unremoveable, while the hinder part is broken
with the violence of waves, O blessed Heartbreaking, O blessed storm, that
drives the tumbling Thoughts upon this shore! Ps^ 107, 30
well may thou be glad because thou art quiet, for God has brought thee to
thy desired Haven.

O sweet serenity, 1 Pet. 1.8 Phil. 4, 7
Joy unspeakable, peace passing all understanding, that now keeps the heart and
mind! yea the heart, by the MIND; flowing down like the precious ointment from
the head of Aaron to the skirts of his garment, Lu 2.29 3^
perfuming and embalming, by the thoughts of the mind, all the inferior powers
of the Soul and affections of the heart; That the former can now present unto
the latter, even a deaths head without horror, nay with amiableness in its
Aspect, whilst the Soul can think with Simeon, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, Psalm. 133, ^
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. So that hardly could the Convert now be
kept from impatient desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, but that he
THINKS withal^ of something to be done for Christ before he die, Psalm. 51.13
Luke 22, 32
of teaching transgressors Gods ways, that sinners may be converted: of
strengthening Brethren: 2 Cor. 1, 4
of comforting others with the same consolations, Phil, 1.23
and so he hasteneth to be doing, that he may also hasten to be dying.

Sect. XI
BUt Alas! These Thoughts cannot always hold without interruption. This brood
of Travailers dig up wells as they go, Psalm: 84.5
And the Philistines follow after as fast as they can, Gen, 2^, 5
to stop them up again with earth and stones: worldliness and earthliness,
deadness and dullness return and repossesses the Mind and Thoughts of the eager
Convert, and threaten to undo whatever Grace has been a doing. So that the
confident young Christian (who thought that if he had but once gotten the Red
Sea on his back, his Saviors blood betwixt him and his soul oppressors, there
would be but a few days direct and easy journey, through the Wilderness of the
World, to the L^nd of Canaan, Deuteronomy 8.15
) falling amongst many fiery Serpents, violent and virulent temptations and
lusts (not thought of at his first setting out) and being bitten by them, he
proceeds as more heavily so more humbly; And his After-thoughts are such as
these.

Now woe is me that I should ever put my hand unto Gods plough, Luke 9 62
and thus look back. O why was I not contented to have dwelt on the other side
of Jordan, Nay, Josua 7, 7
to have stayed by the flesh pots of Egypt, Exodus 16.2
rather than to die in this Wilderness? It had better sure for me not to have
known the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2, 3
then after I have known it, thus to turn from the holy Commandment. Gal. 4 15
Where is the^ the blessedness that I spoke of? The Scripture says indeed that
the righteous shall hold on in his way, Job 17, 9
But alas I have begun in the spirit, Gal. 3, 3 4
And after all must I foolishly end in the flesh? Have I suffered so many
things in vain, if so be that it be yet in vain? Have I sustained such
corrections, and received such Convictions, and brought forth such purposes and
resolutions with so great pain and difficulty, Hos, 10, 12
and to so little purpose? I cannot deny that the fallow ground of mine heart
has been indeed broken up, Isai. 28, 24
and Gods plowes have plowed all day to sow, and 'twas good seed that the
sowers did sow, when they sowed the word, But alas I now find, Mark 4.14
to my Woe, that it was not sown in a good and honest heart, Luke 8:15
for no sooner was the blade sprung up, but early temptation made it wither
away, Mat. 13, 16 21 Luke 8:14
so that it brought no fruit to perfection; the cares of the world, Mark 4 19
the deceiptfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, these coming in
have choked the word, and it has become unprofitable. And is this thy
confidence, O my soul, Job 4 6
the uprightness of thy ways; and thy hope? O think then that the word will
prove true to thee, though thou have not been so to it, Prove. 14 14
for it told thee that the backslider in heart should be filled with his own
ways, and I am sure thou have found it so. Thou art the ground that have drunk
in the rain that came often upon it, Hebr. 6.7.8
and have brought forth Thorns, and what can now be thy doom, but to be
rejected of God, to be nigh unto cursing, and thine end, but to be burned? Thou
art the House out of which the unclean Spirit went, Mat. 12, 33 44, 45.
and into which He returned, taking others with him, which though he found
empty, swept, and garnished, yet leaves the last state worse than the first.
Thou have wearyed thy self with lies, Ezekiel. 24, 12 13
and thy great scum wen^ not forth of thee, what remain^ but that thy scum
shall be in the fire? In thy filthiness is lewdness, because God has purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, therefore how can thou hope to be purged from
thy filthiness any more, the he have caused his Fury to rest upon thee? for if
after Men have escaped the pollutions of the World, ^ Pet. 2 20
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. Thou art that girdle marred by lying in the Babilonish waters of
worldly Lusts, Jer. 13, 7, 11
and now profitable for nothing, who did sometime seem to cleave so closely
to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man. Ah!
Jer, 6.28 29, 30
grievous Revolter! Reprobate sinner! the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
consumed in the Fre, the Founder has melted thee in vain, for the wicked are
not plucked away, thy wicked pride, and worldliness, and wantoness, etc. and
now what can thou think O my Soul, but that the Lord has rejected thee?
Jerem: 2.5
But what Iniquity have thou found in thy God, that thou art gone far from Him,
and that thou have walked after vanity and art become vain? Ah my Soul! What
has he done unto thee? Micha 6, 3
or wherein has he wearyed thee? testify against him. No, no, I am sure thou
can not, thou dare not reprove him, But thine own wickedness shall correct
thee, Jerem. 2, 19
and thy Backsldings shall reprove thee, know therefore and see that it is an
evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and
therefore surely his fear is not in thee. Rom, 6, 21
What fruit have thou then of this foul Apostasy whereof thou have so great
reason to be now ashamed? Galat. 5 7
Thou did run well who did hinder thee? Has a Nation changed their Gods,
which yet are no Gods, Jer: 2, 11, 12, 13
but thou have changed thy glory for that which does not profit; Be astonyed at
this, and be horribly afraid, yea, be very desolate, O mine heart, For thou
have committed two Evils, Thou have forsaken the Fountain of living waters, and
hewed thee broken Cisterns that can hold no water. O profane Heart, Heb. 12.16
17.
that for a morsel of meat have sold thy Birthright! How fain would thou now
inherit the blessing, could thou but find a place for repentance, though thou
should seek it never so carefully with tears? But alas for thy part, Ezekiel,
37, 11
thine hope is cut off, thine hope has God removed like a tree; Lam. 3, 18 Job
29.10 chap: 8.13
and indeed what else can be expected but that the Hypocrites hope should
perish? O false heart, and flattering hope! must I be thus deceived by you both
which I so much trusted? I said (with Moses) Exodus, 14, 13
of my strong corruptions, when I thought I saw them drowned in the Red Sea of
my Saviors Blood, I shall see them again no more for ever, and (wi^h David in
his prosperity, Psalm, 30, 6
) I shall never be moved; and must I now, like Capernaum, Luke 10, 15
after I have been thus lifted up to heaven, be thrown down to Hell? and so
everlastingly separated from the blessed presence of the dear Jesus, whom I
fondly thought I had loved better then my life, but now find I did love him
less than my laziness, and my lusts; Mat: 10 37
and indeed I am convinced that if any man loves any thing more than Christ, He
is not worthy of him.

But, ah my dear and blessed Jesus, must thou and I thus par? part Eternally?
Oh no! not for a World, no not for a World of Worlds. Psalm. 88, 14
Why then, O Lord, castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?
Yea rather, O Lord, why have thou made me to err from thy ways, Psalm. 63 14
and hardened my heart from thy fear? yet will I leave my complaint upon my
self, Job 10.1
and will speak in the bitterness of my soul, I know indeed that God cannot be
tempted with evil, Jam, 11 13 14
neither tempts he any man: But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust and enticed. Therefore, O my God, my Soul is cast down within me,
Psalm. 42, 6, 7
and deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts; Verse 4
thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. When I remember these things I
power out my soul in me; For I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to
the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise; Psalm. 7^, 6
I call also to remembrance my song in the night, and commune with mine own
heart, and my spirit makes diligent search, I was at ease but God has broken
me asunder; Job 16, 1^
He has also taken me by the neck, and shaken me in pieces, and set me up for
his mark. Job 29, 3, 4 5
Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me, when
his Candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness, when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, Psalm. 42, ^
and when the Almighty was yet with me But now alas my tears are my meat day
and night while my ret^rning Corruptions and prevailing Lusts say to me
continually where is thy God? Verse ^
As with a Sword in my bones do they reproach me while they say daily to me
where is thy God? But will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does his promise fail for evermore?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercyes?
2 Samuel 23, 5,
Surely this is my infirmity; but I will remember the years of the right hand
of the most High? Although my heart be not so with God, yet has he made with
me a Covenant, an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; I will
therefore say unto God, my rock, Psalm. 42.8, 9
why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the
Enemy? Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime, and in
the night his song shall be with me and my prayer unto the God of my Life,
Verse 11
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my Countenance,
and my God. O Lord though mine iniquities testify against me, do thou for thy
names sake, Jerem, 14, 7
for my backslidings are many, I have sinned against thee: Verse 20
But I acknowledge O Lord my wickedness, Do not abhor me, and 21
for thy names sake, Remember, break not thy Covenant with me. For truly my
Soul thirsts for God, Psalm. 42, 2
for the liveing God, Psalm 63, ^
to see his Power and his Glory, so as I have seen him in the Sanctuary.

Be watchful therefore, Rev. 3, 2
O mine heart, and strengthen the things that ^^main, and are ready to die,
for here is yet a Pillar of Fire before thee, Neh. 9.12 13
the token of a Divine presence with thee. Has not God said, Jer: 3:24
Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings? Behold I
come unto thee for thou art the Lord my God.

But surely if God will allow me to set mine hope on high, He will yet have me
to keep mine Heart low, for though he be still saying, Hosea 14 4
I will heal thy backsliding, and love thee freely, and again Turn, Jerem. 3 14
O backsliding Child, for (...) am married unto thee; yet he stil^ feeds me
like the Israe ites in the Wilderness, as it were, from han^ to mouth; The
water of hi^ Rock, 1 Cor: 10, 4
not my Cistern, must supply me, and I be undone if it d^ not follow me; I must
fetch m^ food by daily Faith, my Mann^ out of the Heaven of his Promise not by
Plowing, for it (...) in the earth of my self Righteousness and legal
performances; and m^ Medicine too (for all venimo^^ bitings by all sorts of
fiery Temptations) from him only, wh^ for that end was lifted up upon the
Cross, John 3^ 24
and still is on the p^^ of the Gospel, and still must (...) in the THOUGHTS of
my heart, as my only strength, my health, my life, my All; And if at any time
he allow me but a touch or a taste of the hoped for Clusters, Number. 13 23
it is to feed not my high, but my diligent Thoughts; and to mind me that I have
not already attained either am already perfect, Ph. 3, 12, 13
but that I press forward, forgetting the things that are behind, toward the
mark for the price of the high Calling of God which is in Christ Jesus. What
shall I then say to these things? The Lord has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it, I will go (with him, Isai. 38, 1^
though I go but) softly all my years, even in the bitterness of my Soul.

So then the Thoughts of the Righteous pick up encouragement, as the Good
Spies, from their very difficulties, They are Bread for us; Numb 14 ^
I will go with this man, says Rebeckah; I will go with this Jesus, says the
fixed Thought of heart; Though I must go sadly, yet I will go, I will go though
but softly in my souls bitterness all my years; But yet O Lord, by these
things man live, Isai 38 16
And in all these is the life of my spirit, so will thou recover me, and make
me to live (so says the gracious Heart.) And thus is the soul fed with Manna,
and led about many years, it may b^, in the Wilderness of Anxiety; And all this
to humble, to prove, to know what is in the heart, and to do it good in the
latter end. Deuter 8 2


The end of the dra^ght or scheme of Thoughts (...) wrought in conversion,
And thus have I given you as briefly as I could, though more largely then I
thought, a Scheme or draught, of such Thoughts in man as do ordinarily flow
from the Grace of God, as I have received from that sure Word, that is a
discerner of the Thoughts, and a discoverer as well as a discerner, and as I
have known, and perhaps felt in some small experience, And the Holy Ghost, that
knows all hearts, says expressly, As in water, face answers to face, Prove 27 19
so the heart of man to man.

Sect. XII.
NOw because as I have said, Regenerate man's thoughts flowing from a new nature
agree with orher natural motions in 3 things.
The Regenerate man's thoughts are sparks from a new Fire, fruits of a new
heart, stirrings of a new Nature, Therefore It must needs be, that they partake
with all natural motions in these Three points.

I. Facility. 1 Facility, Good thoughts delightful, if from a right principle
Natural Acts and motions, If Nature be not oppressed (as sometimes the New
nature seems to be) are facile, yea pleas^ng and delightful, as to eat, to
drink, to sleep, etc. So are right Thoughts to a Righteous person. When wisdom
enters into thy heart, Prove 2, ^^
and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, etc, A naughty heart is like a vicious
stomach, those very thoughts that are as an honey-combe, or as pleasant bread
to others, Prove 27 7
do make it turn, as it were, at the very sight of them; Go thy way Paul, for
this time, I have no stomach to think of Righteousness or Judgment to come;
Acts 24 25
No, no, Felix his Thoughts were another way, suitable to his Corruption; He
thought (says the text) there was money coming, Verse 26
and 'twas the thought of money that made music in his Mind; But says a David
of his God, not of his Mammon, My meditation of HIM shall be SVVEET, Psalm 124 34
I will be glad in the Lord. When the Miser^ receives his Mammon, Oh how it
glads him? nay he loves the Thought of it, when he cannon come at it; Nay, he
can Thin^ with delight of the Bills or Bonds he can lay them in his bosom that
do but Name it, Money is his God, and Worldliness his Nature: So does a
gracious heart with sweetness entertain the Thought of his God, Psalm 119 1^
nay hide his word in his very Heart; It goes down with him with delight, as
his food when he is most hungry; Thy words were found and I did eat them, Jer
15 16
and they were to me the joy and rejoicing of mine Heart, The Ear drinks in
words, but it is the heart that eats them, by setting the Thoughts to chew upon
them. And as it is with a man that is in health, if he want his set meals, so
is it with a good Heart, kept in good order, without many gripes and secret
gnawings, it cannot want its set MEDITATIONS, And surely it would be better
with most Christians then it is, were they but careful with Isaac, to set a
part some little time of the day for Meditation, who are so little able to say
with David, O how love I thy Law! Psalm 119 67
It is my MEDITATION all the day. And this leads me to the

Sect XIII.
Frequency David's thoughts good all the day.
II. And that is Frequencie. A good pulse strikes many a good stroke in a day,
and so does a good heart, as you may see in David, when he was in good state of
soul health; Psalm 119 97
you cannot think that he thought of nothing but Gods Law in the whole day,
when he says It was his Meditation all the day; his Crown was lined with cares,
How to be understood,
And his Head with Thoughts as other men's: But he would allow no Thought in the
day contrary to the Law; He would order all his Thoughts in conformity and
subordination thereto, And his Thoughts thereof were better pleasing to him
then all other other Thoughts, He was in his Element when in such Meditations;
and reckoned so much of the day lost, as wherein he was hurryed, by
Temptations, to any contrary cogitations: If a Bird fall into the water, it is
not her Element, she neither uses nor delights to be there; If a Mole get
above ground, he is not where he would be, or is wont be. Trial what thoughts
thy element
Ask thine heart seriously what Element it is that thy Thoughts most use, and
with most ease; Psalm 77 5
( My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness when I think upon
thee, when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate upon thee, etc.) And
thereby discern whether it be a Bird of Paradise, or a mere Mole, for to be
carnally minded is death, Romans 8 6.
but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. A bad man may have a Thought
of God now and then, and a Thought for God (or the most are very much mistaken)
But a David can say of his divine Thoughts, how great is the sum of them? Gods
Thoughts of him, and his Thoughts of God, and the reflection of his Thoughts
upon Gods Thoughts, Psalm 13, 17
for,

Sect. XIV.
3 perpetuity
III. There is Perpetuity as well as Facility and Frequency in Natural acts and
motions. The pulse beats not only all the day, but all a man's days: so do good
thoughts in a Godly mind. What a blessed frame was holy David in when he could
never awake, but he found his pulse beating Heavenward? when I awake I am
still with thee. Psa 139 18
The blessed man's delight is in the Law of the Lord, Psalm 1 12
and therein does he meditate day and night. O happy He whose Thoughts are holy
day and night, that is, continually.

I know Grace is liable to its languishings, as well as Nature, Grace may
languish, for pulse intermit, as the natural,

But good Thoughts never quite die,


and the souls pulse to its Intermissions, as the bodies is, whereof more
hereafter; only the Pulse of Nature may cease totally, nay it must, because
Nature it self must expire; But Grace is a Celestial, an Heaven-born
principle, an Immortal Fire, which can never be extinguished, but burns
brightest when Nature goes out, as in Jacob and Joseph when they lay a dying:
Psalm 146 ^
so good thoughts do usually most flourish in that very day when other Thoughts
perish, Heb 11, 21 22
the day of Death, and after Death especially. And thus much for the first
Trial of Thoughts, whether Right or no, from their Original.

II. Trial.
Sect. I.
2 Trial.

Thoughts are to be known to be Right or no by their root


Secondly,

THoughts are to be known to be right by their ROOT, as Plants are, especially
in winter-season: now this is as it were the winter-state of Grace.

We have seen in the first Trial that Right Thoughts are to be discerned by
their Soil, They grow not in the Wild, or common Field of corrupt Nature, but
in the Garden of Grace; so now, in this second Trial, by the occult and inward
manner of their growth, which I call their Radication. This I say then, if good
Thoughts be thy DEEP Thoughts, If good thoughts be our deep thoughts
if (as we say) the best be at bottom, thy thoughts are then Right, and thou
are Righteous: for as the deep Thoughts of Worldlings are worldly thoughts, and
the deep Thoughts of wicked men are wicked thoughts, so the deep thoughts of
good men are good Thoughts. It Is a notable observation of the Holy Ghosts
concerning worldly men, That their INWARD THOUGHT is that their Houses shall
continue for ever, Psalm 49 11
etc. Why? is there any Thought that is not an Inward Thought? No; But the
meaning is that though they have some floating Thoughts of their mortality,
and the vanity and transitoriness of all worldly things, swimming, as it were,
on the top; yet they do not suffer such Thoughts to sink into their Hearts, or
to go to the bottom, But the Thoughts that lodge there are such as His who is
said, by our Savior, Luke 12 17
to have thought within himself, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, Take, Verse 19
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. Note the phrase, he thought within
himself There are other kind of thoughts that sometimes knock at the door of
the worldlings Heart, Nay sometimes look in at his windows, as Paul's Sermon
began to press in upon Felix his Heart, Acts 24 25
and to set him a Trembling, but there are other Thoughts within, which if they
cannot keep good Thoughts quite out, they will keep them off from making any
due or deep impression upon the Heart. Now these Thoughts that nestle
themselves, as it were, at the very Heart-roots, to keep others out from
reaching thither, these deep thoughts are they which the Scriptures call the
inward thoughts, according to that of the Psalmist, the inward thoughts of
every one of them, Psalm 64 6
and the heart is deep. And so if thy inward Thoughts and deep Thoughts be good
thoughts, it is a good sign. Rom 2 19
Thus He is a Jew that is one inwardly. When God has put wisdom in the inward
parts, as it is in Jeremiah; Jer. 21 33 Psalm 5 9
as it is said of the wicked that their inward part is very wickedness, Luke 11
39
and that their inward part is full of Ravening and wickedness: Jerem 9 8
even when he speaks peaceably with his mouth, yet in Heart he lays his wait.

Now the Reason of this Rule is this, Reason of the Rule
because as corruption (like the Worm at Jona's Gourd) loves to lie at the Root
to wither all; so Grace (to work out Corruption) loves to lie at the very Heart
roots, as it were; and the work of Grace being to fix the Heart aright, (as
David says, Psalm 108 ^
My Heart is fixed O God, my Heart is fixed) like a wise Master Builder, Grace
goes to the bottom, and looks especially to that; the Foundation being that
that fixes all the building. The Latins do very elegantly express height and
depth by the same word, thus, altaes radices agere, is to take deep Root, Good
thoughts build high, therefore must be bottomed low.
and yet we call it the Altitude of a Star: He that will build high, must dig
his Foundation deep and low; Now Grace, where it comes, never aims lower then
the Raising of the Thoughts as high as Heaven, Sirs, what must I do to be saved
(says the Iayler. Acts 16 3^
) A Converts first thoughts are for no less than SALVATION; and therefore Grace
lays them in the very depth of the heart, Thus Gracious Thoughts are called
the good treasure, not of the Head (for a Toad, they say, may have a Pearl
there,) A wicked man may have excellent notions and speculations like Balaam,
Number 24 3 4
whose Heart is full of Poison.) But the good treasure of the Heart.

Our Savior, comparing Gods Word to Seed, Matht 13 4 Verse 5
Man's Heart to Soil, Thoughts and purposes to a springing up of that Seed in
the Soil, ^xpressly says of the stony ground ^n opposition to the good ground,
Luke 8 1^
that is, the good and honest Heart, ^s himself explains it) that therefor it
was that all came to nothing, because there was no depth (...) earth for the
Seed, Mat 13 56
and they that sprung up had no root, and therefore they withered away. Matthew
25 ^


And in the Parable of the Vir^ins, where he designedly puts ^he difference
between the sound ^eliever and the Hypocrite, He ^enyes not the foolish to have
^amps and Lights, and Oil in their ^amps, to keep them burning for season; but
denies them to have ^y Oil in their Vessels, as the Wise ^ad. The Lamps were
the Out^^de and shallow appearances of ^^lendid Notions and Professions, ^ut
the Vessels are the very inwards ^^d depths of the Heart, and there^^re its
said, Prove 13 ^
The light of the righte^^s rejoiceth, but the Lamp of the wicked shall be put
out. The Light of the Righteous (which may be understood of their good
Conversation, according to that, Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good wrok,) has a Vessel within full of Oil, to keep it burning
perpetually, and therefore it rejoiceth, but the Lamp o^ the wicked has not
so, and therefore time shall put it out.

And when he represents the Grace that he gives, by a Well of Water in a man
springing up to everlasting life; John 4 14 Good thoughts a well-^pring,
This Phrase is mos^ accurately to be attended to ou^ present purposes; We are
no^ in judgeing of a man so much t^ consider what may be put into man, or what
may for some tim^ float at top, nay flow from a man but what the SPRINGINGS U^
are that are IN A MAN. And (...) the Apostle James also puts the Trial upon
what the FOUNTAI^ James 3 11
yields, whether it be sweet water, Verse 14
or bitter, salt water or fresh; which expression he does enough explain when
he says If you have bitter envying, Verse 1^
or strife in your hearts, glory not and lie not against the truth; Mark that,
IN YOUR HEARTS, that is, when these bitter waters are the springings up of the
inward Fountain, glory not, and lie not: sweet words and pleassing professions,
shows and appear^nces will be no good Testimony ^or you when these BITTER
^pringings up within you bear wit^ess against you.

In Nature, there are springs or Wells of diverse sorts, the diligent
^bservation of which will much ^ear the scope of these Texts of ^cripture, and
the thing in hand; (...) shall only instance in such as I ^ave seen. There is
the salt spring (...) Nantwich, where the springings ^p are naturally salt, Now
let never so much fresh water be poured into it, though it may for the present
abate its saltness, and make its present waters the less brinish yet that which
springs up will it some time work out all the fres^ water, and will continue
(as before) perfectly salt. Again ther^ is the generous and famous sprin^
called the HOLY WELL in Wales that is perpetually boiling u^ with an admirable
activity, s^ that if never so much salt wate^ should be poured into it, thoug^
all the waters (for the present would taste salt or brackish, y^^ give it time
and it would certain^ work out all that Heterogeneo^ mixture, and retain its
sweetnes^ and (as I may say) its Native e^cellencie and purity.

This then is a grand Rule f^ the trial of Right Thoughts, (...) thy good
thoughts be such as con^^nually springing up, do work o^ evil thoughts which
sometimes do seem to defile and deprave thee, it is a good Scripture-Evidence
both of thy thoughts and state: for this is that which the Apostle calls a
clearing of our selves, which he says expressly that Godly sorrow works
where it works Repentance to salvation; 1 Cor 7 ^^ 11
this self same thing, says he, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, Behold
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, etc. Now
this Godly sorrow has its spring in the Thoughts, as the Evangelist says of
Peter, Mark 14 7^.
when he thought thereon he wept. As the Jews in their Captivity, wept when
they remembered Zion, Psalm. 137
so Peter in his spiritual captivity wept when he remembered Sin: But a little
before the floods of the ungodly had overwhelmed the good man and the waters of
bit^erness had come into his soul; And had we but tasted of his spirit, by what
came from him in the High Priests Hall, we should have been apt to have
concluded him in the gall of bitterness, when with swearing and cursing he
denied that ever he knew Jesus: and all this issuing from the Thoughts and
apprehensions of his imaginary danger, that his sorry sinful slavish fear
suggested to him in case He had held fast the profession of his Faith without
wavering; these were the Thoughts that were uppermost, and so nearest his
tongues end, to influence that under this surprise of Temptation; and little
doubt but at that very time his deep and bottom Thoughts were full of real real
kindness to his Lord and Master, which shortly after (by their springing up)
discover themselves; For these Thoughts work him to Godly sorrow (as the Text
affirms) and godly sorrow to a clearing of himself of that which had now so
sadly stained the Glory of his Profession, so that we read after of his dying
for Christ, but never more word of his denying him.

Sect. II.
AS this therefore is the grand trouble of many gracious Persons, Instances of
good tho^ghts deepest
that they find ma^y strong and boisterous and evil ^houghts, like rugged Esau
that ^resent themselves first to view, Genesis 25.25
and seem to be strongest and most ^mpetuous, yet this may be a ^omfort if they
can find good ^houghts, like another Jacob, Verse 26
^^king those other thoughts, as it ^ere, by the heel, and continually
^^bouring to supplant them; for in^^ance, (...) der Nabals provocation, you
find all the waters, as it were, turned into blood, and nothing meditated but
cruelty and Revenge; But when David's deep and bottom Thoughts are set on work,
How quickly do they work out all that cruelty? The waters return to their
proper nature and right color; and now all becomes goodness, meekness,
gentleness. And David said to Ab^gail, Verse 32 33
Blessed b^ the Lord God of Israel who sent the^ this day to me; and blessed be
thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming t^
shed blood, and from avenging m^ self with my own hand. So tha^ whereas there
was a Root of bitterness springing up, which would have brought trouble enough
upon himself and others there (...) And by the way, the Reader may remark that
they whose Thoughts are right and good, Note well.
are very apt to Think well of those that set them right, (as any prudent
serious Travailer that has been out of his way will be) O blessed Sermon,
sickness, person, providence, will such a one say, that has been an occasion
or eans to set me clear of such a Temptation, or from such or such wicked,
proud, or passionate or unclean, or worldly Thoughts that have so disturbed and
distempered me.

Take another instance in good King Hezekiah, Hezekiah
whom when God had raised up, the Text says, presently his Heart was lifted
up, 2 Chro: 3^ 25
so that there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem; His heart
swells with proud and haughty ^houghts; Notwithstanding, says ^he next Verse,
Verse 26
Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, so that the wrath of the
Lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah. (...) tom thoughts of all,
were lose thoughts, and his Root thoughts were rotten thoughts, for he thought
it better for him to displease God than the Multitude, and to offend his
Conscience rather than Caesar; for this was the hinge upon which the whole
matter turned, the Jews cried out, saying, if thou let this man go, Joh: 19 12,
13 2^
thou art not Caesar's friend; When Pilat^ therefore heard that saying, He
brought out Jesus, etc. and delivered him to them to be Crucified.

Agrippa
Thus Agrippa, no doubt, had many good Thoughts and motions in his mind, when he
cries out to S. Paul, Acts 26 28
Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. And many of Christ's followers
thought, Many followers of Christ
no question, to have continued longer with him, at their first coming to him,
and are therefore called his Disciples, from that time (says the Text) John 6,
66
Many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with him. Young man Mar. 10
1^
And so that rich young man that came running to him with so much eagerness,
and kneeled before him with so much Devotion, thought (without all
peradventure) that Christ was a most excelent person, and that is was a most
desirable thing to be saved; But then his ultimate Thoughts were, that if He
could not have Heaven and Earth too, it was best to venture the first, and to
hold to that which he had in his Hand, and these thoughts carried him, (as the
like Thoughts do thousands) away from Christ. And therefore the Antithesis to
the Text is remarkable, The thoughts of the Righteous are right, but the
Counsels of the wicked (that is, their Deep, Deliberate, Saints at worst of a
more excellent Spirit then Hypocrites at best
Bottom thoughts) are deceit.

So then by this Rule we may discern what an Excellent Spirit there is, Daniel
6 3
as 'twas said of Daniel, in the meanest Saint, take him at his very worst and
lowest, that is not to be found in the most flourishing Hypocrite in the world
when he is arrayed in all his Glory. A gracious heart, (like a faithful
soulater) be it never so oppressed and trodden down by its Enemy, yet its
bottom thoughts are still working at a Holy Revenge (as the Apostle says, 1
Cor, 7.11
yea what Revenge?) contriveing how it may cast off its Enemy, and having cast
it off, to cut it off; for it is to every upright person in the World that the
Holy Ghost applies that of the Prophet, thine heart shall MEDITATE TERROR;
Isai. 33 18
Thou shall be thinking how to kill this corruption, and how to Conquer that
Lust, How to mortify this uncleanness, that inordinate affection, this Evil
Concupisence, that Covetousness, how to be revenged of these uncircumcised
Phi^^stines for thy two eyes, Jude 16 28
for all that ^^ght of Holy Joy and Peace, they ^^ve deprived thee of. Where^^
on the other hand the best Hy^^crite, even whilst he seems to ^^ld out the
Garrison with great^^t Gallantry and Resolution for ^od and Christ, yet even
then ^s secret thoughts, his inward, ^eep, and bottom thoughts are ^r trucking
with the Enemy, to ^etray and yield up all, when He ^^yeth His season, and
pleasing ^dvantage; Thus Esau resolves (...) carry it most demurely during ^is
Fathers life, but his De p ^^oughts are all along, Genesis 27, 41
(Esau said his heart says the Text) the days of ^ourning for my Father are at
hand, ^^en will I slay my Brother. And ^h! How many are there that ^n palliate
a foul and rotten heart, ^ith the fairest pretenses and ap^earances, whilst
Godly Magi^^rates, Ministers, Parents, Guardians, Governors, continue with
them, that all the while have a months mind, as we say, to the license that
other debauched o^ vain persons take, and secretly please themselves with the
thought thereof, which they purpose to themselves, when the Awe o^ such, as at
present hinder them, shall be removed and taken away? A kin to these are those,
who (though they will not sell Whea^ on the Sabbath day, yet) are still
thinking when will the Sabbath b^ over? Amos 8 5
So then the test of our Spirits is our Deep thoughts.

And thus also we have a reason of a Following Rule in this, for it cannot but
be supposed that Righ^ thoughts must needs be (not idl^ or unactive but)
operative and abounding in fruit that are so happy in their Root, Isaia. 37 32
they take root downward, and therefore will bear fruit upward.

Sect. III.
NOw a grand Reason why I have desired to speak so fully and distinctly to
this, Thoughts are to be considered with special respect to the Temperament of
the body
is this, which I des re most heedfully may be observed, The THOUGHTS of men
(whereof the word of God is (as has been said) the great discerner, Hebr: 4, ^^
and to the touch whereof we have been bringing them in these trials) I say
THOUGHTS of men's minds which, in the manner of Exerting and putting forth their
operations, do much depend upon the various Temperaments of those bodies
wherein those operations are put forth, are to be considered with a special
respect thereunto; for most certain it is that neither Grace nor Corruption,
neither sin^erity nor Hypocrisy find all men's minds, be they good or bad, to
work alike, but according as their diverse workings are influenced by the
diversity of bodily constitution* Temperaments may help to more stabilitie of
thoughts in some then in others.
Now some temperatures (be it) naturally more heavy, lumpish and melancholic,
more easily di^pose their minds to greater measures of Resolution, stability
an^ fixation of thoughts, when onc^ the Thoughts are set, be the mind or
matters good or bad; In worldly nay wicked things some are of on^ mind, and who
can turn them? truly none, but God Omnipotent; who, if God come once to set
their Hearts aright, have a marvailous advantage in point of consistency, and
as to the stability of their good thoughts even from their Natural temper;
whereas some others in Constitution sanguine, and more symbolizing with the
Air, their minds seem commonly more volatile, and so their thoughts more fluid,
and less fixed, be the habit of their Minds, or Objects of their Thoughts, good
or evil: Difference of natural constitution may appear as in conversion,
Now this difference of Natural constitution, occasions many mistakes in the
spiritual judging of (...) Estates. A man may be very serious, yet not
Religious, though John Baptist was naturally it is probable) very austere, John
came (says Christ) Mat. ^^, 18
neither eating nor drinking: and another man may be very pleasant, and yet not
vain; and it would seem our Saviors Natural bodily temper was differ^ng from
the Baptists, and disposed him to a complaisant conversa^ion, Verse 29
The Son of Man came eating and drinking (for even in that sense his delights
were with the Sons ^f Men) Prove. 8, 3^
Rejoicing in the habitable ^arts of the Earth: The Hebrew word signifyes
sporting, and so ^he Margin reads it, and yet he was the pattern of all
perfection. And as in Conversation, So in thoughts.
so in Thoughts, the Natural temper may (if not attended) occasion dangerous
mistakes in judgeing the spiritual state. Take an instance in tw^ whom I take
to be Eminent Saints King Solomon, Instance in K. Solomon and S. Paul
and the Apostl^ Paul, concerning the latter nor doubt, nor dare I of the
former (who was Gods Iedidiah, from whom God says he will never tak^ his
mercy, A Penman of Holy Writ, and so numbered by the Apostle among the Holy men
of God a grand Type of Christ, and on^ of those Prophets of whom Christ says
expressly that all the Prophet are in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13 28
) yet suppose a vast difference in the Natural temper of these two exce^lent
men: Paul, no doubt, w^ of great natural resolution, and fixation, Acts 26 9
I verily thought (says I of himself before his conversio^ that I ought to do
many things against the Name of Jesus, Ver. 10, 11
whi^^ thing also I did in every Synagogue; He never alters his mind (as we
say,) never changes his thoughts, never turns, nor ever would, had not God
overturned him; but then when God called him by his Grace, and set the Watch
right, Oh! this Natural temper of His was an Excellent Balance, and kept the
mo^ion admirably right; Acts 21 13
What do ^ou mean (says he) to weep and ^reak mine heart? I am ready not ^nely
to be bound, but to Die for ^he Name of Jesus; 14
And when he ^ould not be persuaded (say they) ^e ceased, etc. You see He was
^ixed before Conversion, and fix^d after; for Grace rather uses ^hen alters
Nature, though it ^ure its corruption. But now ^olomon He was naturally (I
que^tion not) of a more Airy Consti^ution, (...) Luke 1^ 39
and so of a more doubtful mind (as our Saviors Phrase is which He borrows
from the Aerie Meteors, which are now here, and now there, and you can hardly
find them fixed any where,) and so His thoughts more fluid and volatile, flying
up and down from one thing to a contrary thing, from wisdom, Eccles. 2 2
to Wine, to Women, to Madness, to Folly, yea from one thing to a thousand
things, Even from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop upon the Wall; and being
naturally (like Reuben) unstable (as water) 1 Kin. 11 4
his Wives turned away his heart, and the Lord was angry with Solomon, because
his heart was turned away from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto
him twice; and yet there was a well of Water after all this, springing up in
Him to Everlasting Life; for you may see what was in the bottom of his heart
(what his deepest thoughts were) by what you find in the bottom of his Book of
Penitence and Recantation; Let us hear (says He) the CONCLUSION of the matter,
FEAR GOD, and keep his Commandments, Eccle. 12:13
etc. Now All is well (We say) that ends well.

Sect. IV:
THis then (to shut up this scrutiny) Conclusion of the Rule
is that which we are most accurately to observe amongst all that variety not
only of Temptations, but of Tempers and consequently of Thoughts, Purposes,
and Resolutions, if (as David says in another respect) Psalm 94 14 Several
instances of good thoughts at bottom, working out evil thoughts
In the multitude of our thoughts within us, We can find Divine and gracious
Thoughts to be deepest in our Soul. As to ^d to the instance forementioned,
when our slight Thoughts of God, and slavish fear of man, and thoughts of
sinful security as to our selves, are wrought out by our sanctifying the Lord
God in our hearts, Isaiah 8 13
and making him our FEAR, as the Prophet speaks,

When ones high thoughts of himself, who is ready to say in his heart, My power
and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth, Deuteronomy. 8 17
are removed by remembrance of the Lord God, Verse 18
and that it is he that gives power to get wealth.

When our self-justifying, self exalting thoughts are taken down and let fall
(as Job's plumes were) by his thoughts of his black feet, Job ^0 4
behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? etc.

When over-eager thoughts of the world are worn out by thinking on what He
says, who has charged us to take no thought for to morrow; Luke 12 22
and over-valuing thoughts of the World, Matthew 6 34
by thinking that the world was not Crucified for Us, cannot deliver, Prove. 11 4
or profit in the day of wrath, that laboring for the World, is but laboring
for the wind; Eccles. 5 16
whereof the more a man grasps (for the most part) the greater are the gripes,
that their end is Destruction that mind earthly things, but especially by
Thinking that the Lord has said, Love not the world, nor the things of the
world; 1 John 2 15
for if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

When Flesh-pleasing thoughts are supplanted by thinking that to be carnally
minded is death; Roman: 8 6
that living in pleasures upon the Earth, James ^ ^
and being wanton, is but the nourishing of the heart as in the day of
slaughter; that a S. Paul himself must (...), beat down his body, and bring it
in subjection, 2 Cor. 9.17
^east he himself should be a castaway; Philip. 3 8
or when thoughts of the Excellency ^f the knowledge of Christ come to make a
man think other things to ^e but dogs meat, or dung, that he ^ay win Christ;
when the thoughts of the Rivers of pleasures, that are at Gods Right hand for
evermore, do challenge the Heart, What have thou to do in the way of Egypt,
Jerem. 2 18
to drink the waters of Silioi? what have thou to do with the puddle pleasures
of Sin, Heb. 11, 25
that are but for a season?

When our wandering thoughts take Heaven for their home,
In a word, when the wandering Thoughts (like weary travailers,) take Heaven for
their Home, and though they fetch too many a compass, yet still they ultimately
are making thitherward: when they (like so many busy Bees have been flying
about all day perhaps, yet never rest till they have housed themselves in God,
as an Hive of sweetness, and there find satisfactory Repast, and sweet Repose,
Thou may well say Return to thy Rest O my Soul, Psalm. 116 7
and that the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; for this was it that the
Church comforted her self in the thoughts of, that the desire of her soul was
to the remembrance of Gods Name, Isai, 26 8 9
with her Soul she desired him in the night; Verse 13
even when other Lords had had dominion over her, etc. for though Temptations
(which are called) Ephe. 6, 16
the fiery Darts of Satan may sometimes make thee black, Cantic. 1 6
like the Spouse in the Canticles, and real mixtures of darkness may be found
in thee, in respect of which thou may fitly be compared to smoke, yet if thy
Thoughts, like hers, Cant. 3 6
be like Pillars of smoke, still winding and working upward, Thou art black
indeed, but yet beautiful in Christ's account. As in the Levitical Law the
creeping things going upon all four, were unclean, yet, Lev, 11 ^^ 21
if they had legs above their feet to leap withal, as the Locust, or
Grasshopper, they were clean in the Laws account.

III. Trial.
Sect. I:
3. Trial, Right thoughts have influence upon ordering the conversation aright.
Thirdly,

COme we then to the Third Trial of Thoughts, (viz) Right thoughts have a
natural Energy and influence unto the ordering of the Conversation aright, as
the Scripture speaks: Now the reason of this Rule is this, The Grace of God
which (as we have seen) Psalm 50 23
first stirs in Thoughts, is called in the Scripture the seed of God, ^ John 8.9
and therefore it is not possible that it should prove abortive: for if the evil
Spirit works effectually in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2 2
by working first upon their Thoughts ( why has Satan filled thine heart? Acts
5 3
etc. Satan's work begins there.) And if Lust when it has conceived in the
Thought, Isaiah 1 15
brings forth sin in the life, which is an Anomy or Transgression of the Law,
True Grace when it conceives in the Thought must accordingly bring forth
Newness in the Life, Rom, 6.^
(as Scripture speaks) which is a conformity to the Rule of the new Creature,
Gala. 6 16
the Law and the Terms of the new Covenant, Hebr. 8, 8
which first says I will put my spirit within them, and then they shall keep
my judgments and do them, Eze. 36.2^
which is to be understood of Evangelical obedience. First Grace works in us,
and then it sets us a working; for after that it pleased God, who called me by
his Grace, Ga. ^ 15, 16
to reveal his Son in me, immediately, says Paul, Acts 9 6
I conferred not with flesh and blood, etc. With whom then? why, Lord what
would thou have me to do? His thoughts were working in the verse before, and
they set him a work in the verse following.

Ephesians. 1 11
The works of God, which we cal^ Providence, are All pursuant to the thoughts
of God, which Scripture calls his Purpose. Jer. 23 20
Thus God i^ said to perform all the thoughts an^ intents of his heart. ^ Pet.
1, 4
Now Grace is called a partaking of the Divine nature, and therefore cannot
spen^ it self in bare thinking. In Nature the motions of the hands and feet
without the command or expres^ dictate of the Tongue, do readily pursue the
thoughts and motions o^ the mind, Prove 16, 9
and therefore it is said that a man's heart devises his way A man thinks to
go such a way and goes it; He thinks to do suc^ a thing, and does it. And it is
so in corrupt Nature, Isaiah 65, 2
they walk in (...) way that is not good, after their own hearts; And it is as
truly so i^ Grace. I thought on my ways, sait^ David, Psa, 119, 59
and turned my feet unto the ^estimonies. Right Thoughts indeed may we well
call them, Right thoughts are rectifying thoughts:
when ^hey are Rectifying thoughts, when ^hey make us to do Right; as, the
^postle says, He that does Righte^usness, is Righteous. 1 John 3 7
It Is said of ^he Wicked, They conceive mis^hief, and bring forth Iniquity.
Isaiah 59 4
and can We think it proper to ^race only to prove abortive? Woe to them, says
God, Micah 2 ^
that devise Ini^uity, and work evil upon their beds; ^hen the morning is light
they pra^^ice it, because it is in the power of ^^eir hand. This is the Case
and ^haracter of the wicked, He, first ^eviseth mischief upon his bed, Psalm 36
4
and ^hen sets himself in a way that is not ^^od; And thus the Sincere Con^eit,
what good he thinks to do, ^hen God holds him down on ^^e Bed of sorrows (as
Scripture ^hrase is) Revel. 2 ^
and in the Night of af^^ction, he will not therefore for^ar doing, because God
lifts up the light of his Countenance upon him, so far as it is in the power of
hi^ hand; but will rather say with David, Psalm: 66 11 12, 13
with a little vari tion, th^^ laidst affliction upon our Loins, bu^ thou
broughtest us out into a wealth^ place, I will pay thee my vows, which my Heart
has purposed, and m^ mouth spoken when I was in trouble It Is true indeed,
purpose often outgoes power,
that in both cases the purpose of the Heart does oftentimes outgo the power of
the hand; A wicked man thinks to do more mischief then he can possibly compass;
Thus Esau purposed to kill Jacob, Gen, 27 42
and Saul though^ to make David fall by the Philistine* ^ Sa. 18, 25 Neh. 6.2
It is said Sanballat and Geshem thought to do Nehemiah mischief yet they could
not do it: So Child of God perhaps purposet^ greater exactness, and more clos^
walking with God, (in a sickness under a Sermon, or at a Sacrament then he can
possibly attain unt^ ^fterwards, by reason of renew^ngs of Temptation, and
remain^^g corruption, and then (it may ^e) he is ready to cry out, Oh my
thoughts were never right, my purposes were never sincere, for if they had, I
had never fallen ^o short in performance; I thought ^n such a straight, if ever
God brought me out of it, I should never forget my self, and God, and it, as
(to my shame and confusion of face I may speak it) I I have since done; I
thought under such a trouble of mind if God would ever speak pardon to my sin,
and Peace to my soul, Job 15 ^^
the Consolations of God should never more be small with me, I would never
neglect my Evidences for Heaven, Ephesians, 4 30
never grieve the Comforter, as I (like a wretch) have since done; I would
never return to folly, never indulge corruption, Psalm 85 8
never dally with Temptation any more; I thought I should never have been so
slight in hol^ duties, in Closet or Family, never have past a day without some
soul-repast by sweet and solem^ meditations; never have restrained prayer from
the Almighty; Job 15 4
thought I should never ha^ spent so many Lords days so ^^^lesly, heard Sermons
so unprofitably, read Gods word so unattentively, as I have since done I
thought also I should have taug^^ Transgressors Gods way, Psalm, 51, 13
and the sinners should have been conver^^ unto him; that I should have
o^pressed more Zeal for the glory (...) God, Hebr: 5 2
more compassion on the i^norant, and on them that are o^^ of the way; more
Courage in i^proving Sin in others, and (...) in being exemplary unto other in
my own Conversation: B^^ alas! Job 17 11
How may I complain, (...) Job, that my purposes are brok^^ off, even the
thoughts of my heart; that I went out (like Naomi) Ruth 1 21
full full of purposes, but Returned empty of performances; I thought to have
gone forth victorious like Sampson, but found my strength upon trial, Judges 20
17 and 20
but like another man's; I thought like Peter, Mark 14 2^
that though all should have been offended in Christ, yet should not I; But,
alas, I have found slender temptations too hard for me, as the Damosel was for
him; Verse ^6
and truly now the thing that I feared is come upon me, I thought this Trial
would find me out, that my thoughts and purposes were never right, for they
have never reached their intended performance.

Sect. II.
Right application of the Rule.
BUt for the right application of this Rule, and that the bruised Reed may not
be broken, as the leaf that is driven to and fro, Isaiah 42 3
you must know that the right ordered Conversation before mentioned, Job 13 25
as the genuine issue of Right Thoughts, is not to be estimated by Legal but by
Evangelical measures; and so the Thoughts themselves, not so much by the
successfulness of attainment, as by the sincerity of endeavor, for (what the
Apostle says in another case, ^ Cor. 8 12
is true here) if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
what a man has, not according to what he has not: Now where this willing mind
is, there will be reality of endeavor to do what it can, though it cannot do
what it would, as the Apostle Paul says, Romans 7 1^
The good that i^ would do that I cannot; and again, not that I have already
attained, either were already perfect, Phil. 3 12
but one thing I do, I press forward, etc. there will, and there must be a
pressing forward. Grace is a Warfare rather, then a Triumph, and a Plowing
rather then a Reaping, Phil. 2^ ^
and therefore the Holy Ghost to right Thoughts ads diligence, and to that a
tending to plenteousness; if plenty do not presently attend them, yet they
intend it, and tend toward it, We say, He that will shoot high must aim at a
Star, though he cannot hit it He therefore that purposes Holiness, Good
purposes h^^^ seconded with Evangelical disobedience
as God is Holy, whose careful and real endeavors in all holy means and ways
are pursuant to his purposes; whose daily short comings are his daily burden
and bitterness, who, (unfeignedly bewailing them) humbly rowls his Penitent
Soul upon the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ (which was the case and
practice of the Apostle in the place before quoted) is a complete man in
Christ, Philip: 4 9
and a Conversation thus ordered is a Scripture Evidence that the Thoughts are
Right, and that the man is Righteous.

Psalm. 14^ 4 Thoughts without works dead thoughts:
But then on the other hand, what the Scripture speaks of the day of Death, is
fitly applicable to a state of spiritual Death, That all a man's Thoughts
perish; for as faith without works is a dead faith, James 2 17
so Thoughts without works may be said to be dead thoughts; Nay these are
sometimes the Evidence of one whom the Scripture calls twice dead, Jude 1 2
Twice dead how meant
plucked up by the roots, that is once dead as to his Natural sinful condition;
and then again dead in regard of the motions and stirrings of thoughts and
purposes which seemed to show some spiritual life, and yet after all come to
nothing. Therefore, says Solomon, 1 Kin. 8 47 48
if they bethink themselves and return, etc. For a man to bethink himself, and
not to return, is to ad an high aggravation to his former Impenitency; it is sin
enough to crucify the son of God afresh, and not to bethink ones self what one
is a doing; but to consider Jesus, and yet to trample his Blood under feet, (As
They said, Come this is the Heir, Mat 21 38
let us kill him) this leaves no room for that very Prayer of Christ, Father
forgive them, they know not that they do: For a man to bethink himself of
Heaven, as Esau of the Birthright, and yet to despise it, Genesis 25 32
or to bethink himself of Hell, and yet to rush into it as the Horse into ^he
Battle, This is as it were to deal cruely with Christ in cold blood, to bid
defyance to the God of Heaven upon Advice and set ^ouncel, which too many do
upon ^nadvertency and non-consideration; or at least, like the vile Gadarenes,
when Christ comes into our Thoughts, as he came into their Coasts, for our
Swines sake, our filthy Lusts sake, to beseech him to depart out of our
Country; nay, Luke 8 37
with the wicked Jews, when conviction puts it upon our Thoughts (as Pilate did
upon theirs, shall I crucify your King?) shall I Crucify the Lord Jesus, by
continued Impenitency, and unbelief? When Barabbas and Jesus lie both before
our Thoughts, deliberately to deny the Holy One, Acts ^ 14
and to choose a Murderer. And Oh! how sad will it be to perish without Christ,
under so many Thoughts of Christ? or to go to Hell with so many Thoughts and
fruitless purposes of going to Heaven.

Sect. III:
YEt alas, Folly of tru^ting to idle thoughts and purposes.
how many are the e that have many co^fi^ent Thoughts of Heaven, because they
have now and then a few co d, unact ve, unoperative though^s for Heaven; and
carry these con^ident Thoughts with them to their very Graves, as the foolish
Virgins, M ^ 25 11 12
that roundly knock at Christ's door with a Lord, Lord, Open unto us, but the
Answer is, I know you not. Foolish Ones, may I well say; for as in case where
prudence might foresee the Evil of Event, or Consequence, to a Th^ught or
purpose, we say, Stultum est dicere non putaram, it is a fool sh thing to say, I
never thought that this would have come of it, or else I would never have
engaged in it, so in ^ll cases where we have the Highest assurances from
Religion and Reason that the understanding of a man is capable of, that our
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58
stultum est dicere pu^a am, it is a foolish thing to say, I thought to have
repented, and I thought to have believed, and to stick there and go no farther.
What does it profit my Brethren, says the Apostle, James 2 14
If a man say he have faith, and has not works, can faith save him? So I may
say, if a man say he have Thoughts, and has not works, can Thoughts save him?
If a man think over night to be so far onwards of his journey by such an hour
in the morning, and sleep out the time he should go it in, can Thoughts carry
him? If a Prince command his Servant in the morning (on pain of Death) to do
such a thing, of most high importance to his Crown and Dignity, and that must
be done that day or not at all; and promise him withal a munificent Reward in
case of performance; suppose this servant goes forth of his Prince's Presence,
full of many buisy Thoughts, and present purposes of going about the business;
but by the way falls into evil Company, or into some other buisiness, trivial
and vain in respect of his Great Masters, but more pleasing to the wicked and
sloathful Servant; but returns at night, Mat. 25 26
and (with Confidence shall I say, or Impudence?) sues for his reward; shall
the Princes bounty reward this man's vain purpose? or his just severity punish
his inexcusable neg^ect of performance? Reader what think thou? Even so
says God, Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into ^tter darkness, Verse 3^
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; He says not the Servant that
never purposed, but the Servant that never did what he should have done, and so
never profited. And on the other hand, it is not said, well thought, or well
meant, or well purposed, or well intended, but WELL DONE thou good and faithful
servant, Verse 21
thus David describing the Blessed man, sai h not only that He meditates in
the Law day and night, but also brings forth his fruit in his season; Psa. 1.2,
3, 4
But, says he, the ungodly is not so.

Sect. IV.
thoughts no ways right when ways always grievous Psalm 10 5
THis then is a sure Rule. His Thoughts are no ways Right and Good, whose ways
are always grievous, as the Scripture speaks. There is no such thing as GOOD
MEANINGS, (a Delus ion that damns thousands) where there is no GOOD LIFE (as
before explained) saiah 32 8
The liberal says the Prophet, devises liberal things, and by the liberal
things he shall stand. It Is well when THOUGHTS and THINGS go together;
otherwise the very Thoughts of GOOD or of doing GOOD, or of becoming GOOD, are
not GOOD, because they are vain, and Scripture reckons all VAIN THOUGHTS to ^he
wickedness of heart, and such a One as the continuance whereof excludes from
Salvation; Wash ^hine Heart from wickedness, Jerem, 4 14
that Thou may be saved, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?
Thoughts not only vain when set upon vain objects but upon the best objects in
vain,
Now, Thoughts are VAIN, not ^nely when set upon vain objects, ^ut if they be
placed upon the ^est objects in vain, or to no pur^ose, as our Phrase is, when
a thing does not reach its real or ^ractical end, we say such a thing (...) to
no purpose: and so pur^oses themselves may be said to be ^o no purpose. How
purposes may be said to be to no purpose.
They say in Philo^ophy, Frustra fit potentia quae nun^uam producitur in Actum,
that ^ower is vain that is never produced Act; so may I say in Divinity, Those
Thoughts are vain that are never produced into Exercise or Operation, as the
Drunkard who often thinks of amendment, but still turns like a Dog to his
vomit, ^ Pet 2, 24
or the unclean Whoremonger, or Harlot in the Proverbs, that after her Vows and
her peace offerings, Prove. 7, 14
returns with the Swine that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, or as
those in Malachy of whom the Holy Ghost thus complains, Mal. 2.13
and against whom he thus witnesses, And this have ye DONE AGAIN, Covering the
Altar of the Lord with Tears, with weeping and with crying out, insomuch that
he regards not the offering any more, or receives it with good will at your
hands. Not that we are therefore not to purpose, much less to purpose against
purposing that which is good, but to take care to fulfill our purposes; for if
they perish that go so far as this Text mentions, what shall be the end of
those that come so far short of them, that come short of Heaven?

And so we come to

The IV. and Last Trial.
Would thou (Lastly) 4 Trial of Right thoughts by the Rule,
know whether thy Thoughts be Right, Remember that RIGHT is a Relative word,
and refers to proportion and Rule: As in THINGS so in THOUGHTS;

Est modus in rebus, sunt cert^ enique fines,
Quos ultra, citraque, nequit ^onsistere RECTUM.
THOUGHTS have their Measures, SHORT, or OVERLONG, cannot be RIGHT, but both
extremely WRONG.

Thy Thoughts are Right i^ Regular, and conformed to Right measures: And here
are two things to be presupposed to thy Right judgeing of thy Thoughts

Two things prerequired a Rule for Right thoughts.
First, that thou think there i^ a Rule for Thoughts; Secondly that thou have
Right Thoughts o^ the Rule.

Sect. I.
2. Right thoughts of the Rule.
AS to the First, It was a so^^ spiritual Plague and Iudg^ment, A black vail
upon t^^ heart, upon the Jewish Rabbin^ and Expounders of the Law, th^^ they
did not extend Its Rule (...) the Thoughts, but taught for Doctrine, what we
have in the Proverb, that Thoughts were FRE^ (even in that sense) Man's Thou^hts
from Gods Laws; Some of them are observed to have given that cursed gloss upon
that Text, ^f I regard Iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66, 1^
^od will not hear, God will not ^ear; that is, say they, Rabbi Kimchim loc.
If it go ^os^ there t^en my Thoughts, God ^ill not mind, he will take no ^otice
thereof, nor call to any ^ccount for it. And this made them think so w^ll of
themselves, ^e ar^se they thought no worse of ^^eir thoughts. Blessed Paul,
Acts 22, 3 Paul brought up at Gamaliels feet, Ignorant of thoghts.
^ough brought up at the feet of ^amaliel a Doctor of the Law, ^t was alive
once, without the Law, ^d gives this as the Reason, He ^d nor by all their
Doctrine, ^^w LUST; Rom, 7 9
He knew no that ^ought sins were such sins unti^l (...) Commandment come in
another ^^nner, Verse 9
and by another kind of ^ching then ever he had from ^^m. For this was our
Saviors great buisiness, till the Commandment came to him in Christ's own
teaching.

Christ's exposition of the Law spiritual teaching thoughts Matthew. 5 3


in that Incomparable Sermon upon the Mount, to vindicate the Spirituality of
the Law, from their carnal and corrupt Dotages; they put the great stres^ of
the Rule upon the outward man He puts it upon the Heart also Poverty in spirit,
he begins with that: He lays the breach of the Sixth and Seventh Commandments
in heart and though^ as well as outward Act, Verse 8 Verse 22, 28
He condemns carking cares, Anxiety of thoughts. Chap 6, 25, 28, 31
It Is strange indeed they should be so blinded, seeing the very last of Gods
Ten Words, Last Commandment
goe^ down to the very bottom of the mind and thought, Rom 7, 7
Thou shall no^ COVET, Against evil Thoughts
so that when the scale^ were but fallen from the Apostle^ eyes, He could
easily see, in the light of that Law, that THO^GHT was Sin; Romans 7.14
He knew LUS^ to be SIN then: He knows no^ that the Law is Spiritual, Ye^ and
thus he Schools others (...), 1 Cor. 4.^
That ye might learn not to think above what is written. Gods writeing is rule
for man's thinking.
Gods written WORD is the measure of man's Right THOUGHTS, yet even some
Heathens had some glimmerings of this, Deus est animus, therefore mente
colendus, God is a Spirit, and requires mental worship and conformity to his
will: And this is indeed (...), Reasonable sense, Romans 12, 1 what, Chap. 7, ^^
our reasonable Service, when the Internal (...), THOUGHT and mind serve the
Law of God.

Sect. I:
Secondly,

AS a man must have a Right Rule for his Thoughts so he must have Right
Thoughts of ^he Rule. Right thoughts of thy Rule:
The Apostle speaks of ^ome that Judge the Law, James 4, 11
Take we ^eed that we do not misjudge it. Therefore it is necessary that we
look on the Spiritual Law with a Spiritual eye. 1 Cor. 2, 14
To carnal Thoughts the Right ways of the Lord seem crooked and unequal, Gods
right Rule why seems crooked to men,
not that the Law is so, but because the medium is such through which it is
looked upon; as if a man put part of a strait staff into the water, it appears
crooked because of the inequality of the medium. All Gods Rule to David.
But now a Right heart has Right thoughts of the Rule, I esteem all thy
precepts, concerning all things, to be Right. So we Read it, Ps. 119, 128
but the Text is, I esteem all thy precepts to be all right, All right,
every one, and every way, Right. It Is true, There may be some kind of
approving the things that are excellent, Romans 2, 18 Some approve some excellent
things,
And yet the Hear^ not be Right; But if there be no^ an approving of excellent
thing the Heart cannot be Right; A bad Heart may think good of man^ good ways
as Herod, As Herod Mark 6 20
but a good hea^^ thinks good of every good way, (...) David. Then shall I not
be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. Psalm. 119 6 But David
all Gods Laws.

Universal respect fair evidence,


Men may have a fair respect to many of Gods Laws, yet have hard Thoughts of
some. But an universal respect is a fair Evidence of Sincerity. For ALL
SCRIPTURE is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, 1 Timothy 3.1^
for Instruction in Righteousness, etc.

THE Second Part.
Contents of the II. Part.
AN Introduction of particular Instances of Thoughts suited to their several
Subjects according to Scripture Rule. 1. In thinking of Scripture it self. 2.
Of Our Selves. 3 Of Others 4 Of Creature comforts. 5. Of Ordinances. 6. Of Sin.
7. Of Holines^ 8 Of Afflictions. 9. Of Temptation^ 10. Of Persecutions. 11. Of
the present Condition of Life. 12 Of the present Time of Life. 13 Of Death 14
Of Judgment, 15 Of Eternity 16. Of Angels, Evil, Good. 17 Abov^ all in
Thinking of GOD.

To have High Thoughts and Swee^ Thoughts, but in all points Regular and
Scriptural.

Of his Being, Highness, Holiness, Unchangeableness, Unity, (yet Trinity in
Unity,) Eternity, Omnipresence, Omniscience, Omnipotence, Invisibility,
Terribleness and just Severity, Truth and Verity, Loveliness and Goodness, not
only in his sparing Mercyes and means of Grace, but even in His Judgments and
Destruction of the ungodly; in the First Covenant, especially in the New;
Covenant of Grace richest Theme for Thoughts. CHRIST the Object of Gods
Eternal Thoughts, and of all good men's of Old, and of Angels, though Men
otherwise concerned in Him than They. Immanuel, God with us, makes All in God
Ours, Justice, Holiness, Highness, etc. Gods Love in Christ's Incarnation,
Suf^ering. The Necessity and Excellent Virtue of Christ's Death. Right Tho^ghts
of Christ's Righteousness Impu^ed. High Thoughts of Christ, sweet ^houghts of
Christ, Holy Thoughts ^f Christ as the great Enemy of Sin, though friend of
sinners Right thoughts ^f God the Holy Ghost, High Tho^ghts of God the Spirit,
in his Essence, (...) Subsistence, and Operations, Sweet Thoughts of Him and
our high Obligations to Him, The finishing work in man's Salvation the Spirits,
Holy Ghost the great Promise of the New Testament as Christ of the Old. Fruits
of the Spirit sweet.

Thoughts For God must be Scriptural as well as Of God.

Conclusion.
Exhorting to Self Reflection by and upon Our Thoughts.

Giving Motives and Rules for keeping Thoughts RIGHT.

THE Second Part. Which Contains an Induction of particular Instances of
Thoughts suited to their several Subjects according to Scripture-Rule, and
concludes with an Exhortation to self-Reflection, and Motives and Rules for
keeping Thoughts Right.
NOw then supposing a Man have a Right Rule for his Thoughts, and Right
Thoughts of the Rule; The great inquiry for the Trial of Thoughts is, whether
they be suited to their several Subjects according to that Rule.

As for Example,

Sect. I.
Right thoughts of Scripture.

Ador^ Scriptura plenitudinem, Tertul cont. Hermog. See B. Taylor's Dissuasive
from Popery 2 Timothy 3.15 16, 17 John 5.39


IN Thinking of SCRIPTURE, that it is (...), All divinely inspired, and a
sufficient Rule in all things pertaining to God and our Souls, Able to make the
man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, able to make wise
to Salvation, and therefore to be searched by every one that desires to be
Saved; Search the Scriptures (says our Savior) for in them ye think to have
Eternal Life, and they are They that testify of Me. Now to think otherwise of
Scripture then we are taught by it, is to think strangely of it, which is a
thing the great God takes strangely at their hands that do it, (a dishonor
done to our Spiritual MAGNA CHARTA, the great Charter of our Salvation:) I have
WRITTEN to Him (says God) the GREAT THINGS of my Law, Hosea 8.12
but they counted them as a strange thing. Great things, indeed must we needs
think them, being sent from the Great God, confirmed by Great Works and
Miracles, Many in Number, Exodus 8.19
Mighty ^n Nature, John 11.74
uncontrollable and infallible in their Evidence, witnes^ed by Friends,
confessed by Enemies, admired by All, in succes^ion of Ages attending the Holy
Penmen, and the Doctrine thereof.

And yet alas how strangely ^ave these things of HOLY WRIT been thought of
(even as ^he Holy men themselves) as Troublers of States, Acts 24, 5,
and movers ^f Sedition throughout all the World, and as Ringleaders of all
^ects and Schisms.) And therefor it is the wisdom and the piety ^f Popery to
take away this dan^erous Key of Knowledge from the Luke 11, 52
Common People, and to persuade that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, (they
mean sure their own Devotion,) but God calls Ignorance the Mother of
Destruction when he says My People are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Hosea
4.6


Scriptures must be searched by All.
But, thanks be to God, W^ have not so learned Christ, as (...) dare to think
that Book unfit for the study and reading of the meanest, which God has
ordaine^ for making wise the simple, Psalm. 119, 7
the cries to the simple turn in hither and declaredly puts it self (as may
say) Magistrates
into the Hands of a^^ sorts and sizes, conditions, age^ and sexes, Deuteronomy. 17, 19
The Prince must re^^ in it all the days of his Life, a^^ think it his safety
to take the T^stimonies thereof to be the M^^ of his Council. Psa. 119, 24
Ministers,
And the Office^ in Gods House must be rea^ Scribes in the Law of God, (as w^
said of Ezrah, Ezra 7, 6
) Yea, this is (...) Comfort of all the People of God to have this Word nigh
them, People.
Romans 10, 8
even in their mouths, and in their Hearts, for says the Apostle to Community
of the People, Let ^he word of Christ dwell in you richly, Col. 3, 16
that they through patience and comfort of the SCRIPTVRES might have hope; Yea,
Romans 15, 4
this is their wisdom (says Moses) in the sight of all Nations. Deuteronomy. 3 6
Here none may think themselves too old to learn, Old,
for David by this study came to understand more then the Ancients; Ps, 115, 100
Nor too young neither, Young,
for wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ^ay? Psalm. 119, 9
by taking heed thereto according to thy Word. Yea, Women, Children,
and Women and Children are commended in ^cripture, for their study and
^nowledge of it; 2 Timothy: 3.15
Thus Timothy (...) commended for this that from a ^hild he had known the Holy
Scri^tures, continue in the things that ^hou have learned and been assured of
(says S. Paul) Chap. 1.5
knowing o^ whom thou have learned them (viz,) of Lois his Grandmother and his
Mother, Acts 16.1
Eunice, which w^^ a Iewess and believed, but his Father was a Greek.

And the truth is, for any on^ to think that the Scripture is no^ to be read by
any but those tha^ understand it perfectly, is t^ think that it is to be read
by non^ till there will be no more need o^ Reading it, for here the Able^ and
most knowing do know but i^ part, Cor. 13.9
and do Prophesy but in part And therefore indeed it is that W^ have this sure
word of Prophecie^ whereunto (we are to think that^ ^ Pet. 1, 19
We do well to take heed as unto a ligh^ shining in a dark place, until the d^
of Glory dawn, and the Day. St^^ arise in our Hearts; the Interpret^tion and
Explication of which word of Prophecy we are taugh^ in the next Verses, Verse
20
not to seek (^ ^ome do) from our own private ^hansies, True meaning how to be
sought,
but by comparing the New Testament, with the Pro^hecies of the Old, Scripture
with ^cripture, 1 Cor. 2.13
Spiritual things with Spi^^tual, and in all our study and ^^ading most humbly
to implore, ^^d believingly to wait for the ^^idance of that Spirit that
in^^ted and gave it forth, for as was ^^e Genesis, so must be the Analysis, 1
Pet. 1, 2^
^^r it came not in old time by the will (...) Man, therefore may, by no ^eans,
be expounded by man's will, ^^t Holy men of God spoke as they ^re moved by the
Holy Ghost. Acts 17.11
And ^^erefore the Bereans are highly ^^mmended in that they received ^^e word
preached with all readiness (...) mind, and searched the Scriptures ^^ether
those things were so.

He therefore that thinks rightly (...) SCRIPTURE, esteems it his ^^arling, to
be laid in his Bosom, (...) be hid in his Heart (as the Psalmist speaks) the
Incorruptible seed, Psa 119 11
whereby he was born again from the miserable state of Corrupt Nature; 1 Pet
1.23
for the Law of the Lord, and the Testimonies of the Lord are they that convert
the soul, and make wise the simple; Psalm 1 17
the sincere milk, whereby he was nourished as soon as new born, and his strong
meat when is grown up to be a strong man, for man lives not by Bread only, He.
5, 13, 14
but by every word tha^ proceeds from the mouth of God* Ma th 4 4
Therefore when he finds these words, Jer. 15, 16
he eats them, as Jeremy Yea esteems them, as Job, more the^ his necessary
food; Job 23:12
And as his fo^^ when he is well, so his Physic^ when he is sick, 2 Timothy 1, 13
he holds fast the form of sound words, (...), of healing words, so the Greek;
for God sends his word a^^ heals, and delivers from destruc^^ons; his
Antidote against Inf^ction, Psalm 17, 4
for concerning the works ^^en (says David) by the word of thy ^^^ps I have
kept me from the paths (...) the Destroyer; his weapon, when (...) warreth, for
the Sword of the ^^irit is the word of God, Ephesians. 6:17
and this as it that our Savior foiled Sa^^n with, and kept him off at the
^oints end of, It is WRITTEN ^^aith Christ) thus and thus, Mat: 4, 4, ^, 10, 11
then ^^e Devil leaves Him; his light ^hen he walks or works by day, ^^d his
Lamp or Lantern to his feet (...) night, his best friends Will and ^estament,
Heb: 9, 16
confirmed by the Death (...) the Testator; He takes Gods Te^^^monies as an
Heritage for ever, Ps. 119, 111
^^d thinks it less pernicious to the ^orld to have the Sun plucked ^^t of the
Firmament, then the ^^ble taken away from the sight of ^^e Sons of Men.

Sect. II.
Of our selves

Romans 12, 3 Low thoughts of our selves.

2 Co, 11, 11 With high thoughts of the Grace of God in and toward us.


IN thinking of OUR SELVES for no man to think of Himself more highly then he
ought to think but to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man the measure
o^ Faith: not boasting beyond hi^ measure, nor yet denying the grace of God
that is given to him The great Apostle speaks thus o^ himself, 1 Cor. 15.10
in Nothing am I behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, thoug^ I be nothing.
He has high thoughts of the Grace of God, yet (...) thoughts of Himself; Not I
bu^ the Grace of God with me.

Self Performances.
And as we must think thus o^ what we are at the best, so also o^ the best that
we can do, We ar^ taught to say, and therefore t^ think, that when we have done
a^ we are unprofitable servants. Luke 17, 10


And if we must think thus of ^ur Regenerate self, Carnal self to be denied
what can we think of Carnal self, but that ^t is to be denied, Mat. 16.24
(if any man will ^e my Disciple, let him deny himself) denied in its Wisdom,
in its wisdom 1 Co. 1 10 and 2, 14
which is Foolishness, for the Natural Men ^eceiveth not the things of the
Spirit ^f God, neither can he know them; and therefore we must not think ^f
leaning to our own understandings: Prove. 3, 5
^n its Will, which is wickedness, Will. Galat. 5, 19
and perverse Rebellion, for the Flesh ^asteth against the Spirit, and these
^astings war against the Soul; 1 Pet. 2, 1^ Righteousnesses, Isaiah 64, 6
in its ^ighteousnesses, which are Rot^eness and filthy rags, for no Flesh ^an
be justified in the sight of God, and if we should say we are Righteous, Romans
3, 20
^ur own lips would prove us perverse, and our own clothes would abhor us; Job
10, 20 and ver. 3^ Strength
and finally in its strength, which (...) weakness, for whilst we were ^ngodly
(says the Apostle) at that ^^me we were without strength, Romans 5, 6
and we have already seen, if we will think rightly of our selves, we must
think that we are not sufficient, as of our selves, so much as to thin^ one
good thought. And therefore we are to think in all this How is the Gold become
Dross? Eccles. 7, 29
Man that was made upright, Romans 3, 12
Oh how is He come short of the Glory of God and altogether become unprofitable
His Destruction is of Himself, Verse 23
bu^ his help of the mere Mercy, Hosea 13, 9
and Free Grace of God, for it is not of him that wills, Rom, 9, 16
nor of him tha^ runs, but of God that shows Mercy.

Job 10, 3, 8
But yet we are to think of our selves, as to our Natural Beings, that we are
the works of Gods hands, though thus defiled and defaced by our sins; that Our
Bodies are yet capable, ^ Cor. 6, 19
by Grace, to be made Temples of the Holy Ghost, and therefore that we are to
possess these our Vessels in Honor and Sanctification; ^ These. 4, 4
And that our Souls are more worth then as many Worlds, Mat. 16.26
^or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul! That in neither are we our
own, But in both bought with a price, and therefore that we are to glorify God
both in our Bodies and in our Souls, for both are Gods. 1 Cor. 6, 19 20

Self love the standard of Love to others.




For certain it is there is a SELF that is to be tendered, as well as a Self
that is to be denied; nay the Love that we ow to It is made, both by Moses and
Christ, Lev. 19 1^
the Rule or Standard of our loving our Neighbor, which is called the second
great Commandment like unto the first, which is Love God,) Matt: 22 9
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy SELF; First GOD, and ^hen our SELF, and
then our Neighbor as our Self; For the Rule has a natural priority to ^he
thing Ruled; And therefore ye are to THINK thus of our ^elves, 1 Cor: 6 18
that for a man to sin against HIS OWN Body, (as the Apostle speaks) or to
wrong HIS OWN Soul (as it is in the Proverbs) Prove. 8 36
being against that LOVE which Scripture makes the Standard of our loving one
another, Sinning against our selves, greater then to sin aganst others
is by so much greater then our sinning against, or wronging others; for
Charity may and must begin at home, though it must not end there. And therefore
as we have already intimated that self deceit is the worst deceit, and self
Murder the worst kind of Murder, so I might add that in this (as in some other
Respects, as is largely observed by Mr. Capel in his choice and rare Treatise
of Temptations) SELF Pollution is a more heinous kind of pollution, then many
perhaps are aware of, and so in other cases:

And therefore we are to THINK All those SELF-Tormentings used by IDOLATERS of
an elder ^ Kin. 18, 28
Date (as was the manner of the Priests of Baal to cut themselves, till the
blood gushed upon them) or by others of a later Edition, yea and All those
SELF- Neglectings so much magnifyed by a new Sect of Self justitiaries sprung
up lately amongst us, whose Religion lies so much in Touch not, taste not, Co:
2:21:22
handle not, etc. after the Doctrines and Commandments of Men; Verse 20
as the Apostle concludes them to be unscriptural, when he calls them Worldly
Rudiments, Verse 23
though he confesses them to have a show of wisdom in Will Worship, and
humility and NEGLECTING the Body, (...)
(or not sparing the Body) not in any Honor to the satisfying of the Flesh; so
are we, I say (by the same Apostolical Authority) to think them UNNATURAL, for
he expressly says, Ephesians. 5, 28, 29
He that loves his Wife loves HIMSELF, for no man ever yet hated his OWN
Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. So that
we are to think these things so far from justifying us in the sight of God, as
that he condemns them, and will condemn all that trust unto them.

Sect. III:
Right thoughts of others,
IN Thinking of OTHERS, some are short in estimating some men, 1 Cor. 4, 1
Let a man therefore (says the Apostle) so account of us as of the Ministers
of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Some think too highly of some,
(therefore says he again, Not under what was written.
) Who then is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed? 1 Cor.
3:5
and this was spoken That they might learn in them not to think of Men above
what was written, nor above,
and not be puffed up for one against another. Chapter 4, 6
On both hands there are great Evils; Others better then our selves, Philip. 2,
3
We may think others better then our selves, but none better then the word
declares. It Is a great sin to cry up the Greatest, Acts 12, 22
as the people did Herod; And on the other hand to despise DOMINION, Jude 8
Eccl. 19, 20
or to Curse the KING in our very THOUGHT.

Sect. IV.
IN Thinking of CREATED COMFORTS, Of created comforts,
as the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4, 4 All good
every creature of God is good, etc. and of our selves in respect of them, as
Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercyes: Genesis 32, 10 Our selves
unworthy of the least, yet the greatest not enough, Psalm 4, 6 without Christ,
yet not to think them the chief good, or the best of them good enough for the
precious soul to sit down with. Many will say, who will show us any good? But
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance, etc. Yea doubtless, Phil, 3, 7,
^
and I account all things but loss, and do count them but (...), dogs meat,
(not man's meat.) All things of all sorts, civil advantages, Church privileges,
etc. as nothing for the Soul without Christ) that I may win Christ. Happiness
not in having, but in having sanctified,
These, I say, were his thoughts of the highest humane seize, of Outward
Church Privileges, of Creature Enjoyments in the World; And so not to think
Him happy that has them, but that has a sanctified title to them, 1 Timothy 4* 4
and sanctified use of them, If they be sanctified by the Word and Prayer. Job
31, 25 27
If I rejoiced because my Wealth was great, and because my Hand had gotten
much, and my Hand has been secretly enticed, or my Mouth kissed my hand; He
did not think himself to be the better or the happyer, for being the wealthyer;
'twas the gain of the heart, Heavenly (...) true
not the Gettings of the Hand that Job estimated to be true treasure. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, Job 23, 12
more then my appointed portion, so the Margin, then my necessary food, so the
Text. No doubt he accounted that good too, Psalm 49 85
but not the chief good, not a sufficient good for his Soul, for the Redemption
of the Soul is precious, It cease for ever. And (Alas! thinks a Man that
knows the worth of a Soul, whole world not worth a Soul, Mat: 16, 26
) what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and loose his own Soul?

Sect. V.
IN thinking of ORDINANCES, Right thoughts of Ordinances what:
as the good ways of God, to be gone in, not rested in: He thinks not so
greatly of the Gift, as of the Altar sanctifying the Gift; Mat: 23:^9
of his attendances upon them, as they are performances of his own, but as
appointments of God, for the Communication of Himself to the Soul. Good ways to
be gone not rested in
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to see the beauty of the
Lord, Psalm 27, 4
etc. not the beauty of the House (though that was very beautiful) and to
inquire in his Temple; not only the way to his Temple, but to the sight and
fruition of him in his Temple.

Sect. VI.
Right thoughts of sin, What: greatest evil
IN thinking of SIN, as the only contrary to the Supreme good: Therefore Jobs
Friends would have fastened it on him, as a Brand of insincerity, that he had
chosen Sin rather then affliction. Job 32, 21
The Inhabitants shall not say I am sick, Isai. 33, 24
for the people that dwell there shall be forgiven their Iniquity, They shall
think all well, when sin is done away. Sin, in a good man's Thoughts, is the
very Gall of bitterness, the very core of all ^roubles, the very sting of Death
^t self, and the very Hell of Hell. 1 Co: 15, 56
And as he thinks Sin the worst of Evils, Heart sin worst,
so Heart sin the worst of sins, that Root of bitterness, that Plague of the
Heart, Hebr, 12:15
that desperate^y wicked thing, that cannot cease ^o Sin, 1 Kin: 8, 38
that Law in the Members that wearyes them to commit I^i^uity, Jer: 17:9
yet it self is unweariable, and unsatiable as Death and Hell, Romans 7:23
and therefore called the body of Death) which never says it is enough. Ierem:
9:5 Habak: 2:5
It Is this evil that makes ^ood men cry out of themselves ^s of the chief of
Sinners! Rom: 7:24
For ^hatsoever they know of others, ^s to other Evils, they know ^ore of this
by themselves then ^y all the world. It Is this Evil ^at makes many a man
thought ^umble by others, cry O my pride! count mortifyed by others, cry O my
potent passion! Spiritual wickedness,
my strong corruption! my unruly Lusts! how many a man is there of unblemish^
life that is weary at heart of his own Heart, yea of his very Lif^ because of
the evil of his Heart (...) his spiritual pride, fithiness o^ Spirit, 1 Cor. 7 1
Earthly mindedness, Spirit^ lusting to envy, James 4 1
with the spiritua^ wickednesses abroad in the world as Hypocrisy, Heresy,
etc.

Yet no sin so great an Evil as Christ a good.
But yet though he think Si^ (Root and branch) to be the greatest Evil, yet not
so great an evi^ as Jesus Christ is a Good; nor so mighty (though mighty) to
destroy, Hebr 7 25
as He is (Almighty) ab^ to save, He thinks Sins demerit great, Christ's merits
greater, whereby he is not only secure (...) from Hell, but to be saved i^
Heaven. And therefore He man plead even the greatness of his sin as an argument
for his Pardon, Psalm. 25 11
because He thinks the great Salvation to be so much the greater, that it
triumphs most in the spoils of the proudest sins, in the thing wherein they
have dealt proudly to be still above them. When Sin grows up unto the
Heavens, Ezekiel: ^ 6
Gods mercy (in his Son) is above the Heavens; Psalm, 208 ^
As when the wicked one is great that is in the world, 1 John 4 ^
yet greater is he that is in the Saints than he that is in the world.

Sect. VII.
IN thinking of HOLINESS, Of holiness Isaiah 25 8 not only way to, but part of
happiness.
not only as the high way to (as the Prophet calls it,) but also (...)
principal part of Happiness; the Duties of Holiness, to be the Beau^ies
thereof; Its Practice, Psalm. 1
Privi^edge, Its Performances great re^ards: Its inchoation, Philip. 3 2^
an Heaven upon Earth; Its Consummation and perfection, 1 John 5 3
the very Heaven of Heaven: And therefore Its Commandments not grievous, Mat 11
30
Its Yoke easy, Its Burden light.

S^ct VIII.
of Affliction not so evil as sin.
IN thinking of AFFLICTIONS, though Evil, not so Evil as Sin, and therefore
their being Sanctified desirable, Good to the go d
rather and more the^ their removal: Evil in themselves yet good to the good,
and for the making of them Better; Psalm 119 67 71
Its goo^ for me that I have been afflicted before, I went astray, but now I
have learnt thy precepts: sharp and bitter twigs, Hebr 12 11
bearing sweet Fruit peaceable Fruits of Righteousness A Fathers Rod, Verse 10
profitable 1 Kin 17, 18 Monitors of our frowardness, but Fruits of Gods
Faithfulness and Love
not for his pleasure, but VERILY for our profit that we may be partakers of
his holiness: Remembrancers of ou^ Sin, yet not so much products o^ his
Justice, Power, and Sovereignty, as Fruits of his Faithfulness (I know O Lord
that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me) Psa. 119 75
Tokens of his Love (as many as I Love I chasten) Revel. 3 19
Payments of our Legacy left us by Our crucified Lord, a litt^e before his
Death (in the World you shall have tribulation) John 16 33
and confirm^d thereby ( For if they did so in ^he green tree, Christ Legacy,
Matt 10 25
If such things befall ^he Master, it is sufficient for the ^ervant to be as his
Master, and as ^is Lord) And all to make Man ^ore humble in himself, For many
good ends
more aw^ul of God, more careful to please ^m, more fearful to offend him, ^ore
conformable to Christ's suf^ings, more contemplative of his ^fferings, more
compassionate and ^ow feeling as to others, Sin ^ore bitter, Christ more sweet,
the ^orld more contemptible, Death ^ore desirable, Heaven more de^htful, and
glorious Grace more ^mirable in the Saints, thus trou^d on every side, yet not
distressed; 2 Cor 4 8 9
Cast down, but not destroyed; a burning Bush, yet not consumed; in fiery
Furnace, yet receiving n^ hurt; nay more that the very fier^ Chariot of
affliction should be pre^ for the service of carrying the^ to Heaven, their
very tribulation made the door for their entering i^ to the Kingdom of God. Acts
14 22
And therefore the Scripture counts the happy which endure, James 5 11 and 1 2
and teache^ us to count it all joy when we fall^ to diverse temptations.

Sect. IX.
Of Temptations 1 Pet. 4, 12
IN thinking of TEMPTATION not as strange (or as though so strange thing had
happened) but common to men, 1 Cor: 10:13
yea the best men, Heb. 11:37
They were tempted (says (...) Apostle) Best tempted:
yea the worst of the to him that was more then M^ who himself suffered being
temp^ Hebr: 3:18
(and that in all points as we ar^ that he might know how to succor them that
are tempted. chap. 4, 15 Christ himself in all points, Lust of the Flesh. Lust
of the Eye. Mat. 4.2 3 Verse 9 pride of life
In all points; To the Lusts of the Flesh, Thou art Hungry, Make these ^ones
Bread; To the lust of the Eyes, ^hou art poor, (Thou have not a ^ole where to
lay thy head) All these ^ill I give thee; To the Pride of ^ife, Thou pretendest
high, prove that thou pretendest; show thine ^uthority, Verse 3
Command Stones to be ^ade Bread; If thou be a King, ^t us see thy Court, Verse^
thy Heavenly ^uard, and that the Angels are deed but thy Ministers; If thou
the Son of God, do something (...) other, that ordinary men ei^er cannot, or at
least dare not do, ^ver fear to die like a man, Cast (...) self down, and let
us see whe^er Angels will bear thee up. Now ^ll that is in the world is the
Lust the Flesh, 1 John 2, 16
and of the Eye, and ^de of Life. And as the wind of ^mptation thus blew all
the points of the World, Compass, so also also all the points of highest and
most hideous aggravations; Christ tempted with temptations base and sordid,
most base and sordid, transgress for a morsel o^ Bread, sell thy Birthright
for a meal meat, break thy Faith with God, that thou may break thy Fas^ with
the Devil; Bloody and unnatural.
Most bloody and unnatural, if thou will not brea^ thy Fast, break thy Neck,
Cas^ thy self down; Most Hellish an^ Horrid, Hellish and blasfemous,
If thou will not, or cans^ not prove thy self to be the So^ of God, disown
God, and ow^ me for thy God, Fall down an^ Worship me; Matthew 4, 9
and is the Nature o^ Man capable of any rhought mo^ hideous, injections more
bla^ and blasphemous then such a^ these? Highly subtle and deceiptful.
And yet for all this, A^ points too of highest subtilty an^ hellish deceit
that spiritual wic^edness could possibly hatch (...) imagine: Profit and
pleasure.
This Hell of Tempt^tions must not only be covere^ over with a Paradise of
pleasures, Verse 8
the World and all the Glory of it, but also with an Heaven of
Scripture-warranty, Cast thy self down, wrested Scripture,
for It is written, etc. Verse 6
and so thou may show thy Faith, without hazard of thy Life; nay of most
High, Glorious, Good ends, Good ends pretended,
the Manifestation of his Divinity, the Credit of his Ministry, the Glory of
God in having such a Son, the Glory of Christ in having such a Father, (And all
this in a seasonable point of time when all this was challenged, and called
boldly in question by the great Goliath, that at the very first word, defyeth
the Living God, Verse 3, 6
) If thou be the Son of God, etc. which is as much as prove it if thou can.
Thus was Christ Tempted in all points, therefore well may the Tempted think
thus of his forest Temptations, These are thorns in my Flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7
but no other then what were platted together by Satan, and worn as a Crown by
my head and Savior; Saints tempted only if need be,
And now ordered by his hand that they cannot touch me sooner or longer then
need is for the Pricking of my puffing pride, 1 Pet. 1.6 1 Cor. 12.7
the trial of my Faith, the excercising of my Patience, 1 Pet. 1.7
and experiencing of me by it; the exciting of my watchfulness, Revel. 3.10
the spirit of Prayer in my self, and the Spirit of meekness in the restoring
of others (when they are overtaken in a fault, Romans 5:4
1 Pet. 5.8 2 Cor. 12.8
considering my self least I also be tempted,) Gal, 6 1
The teaching of me to know more thoroughly both my self and my Savior; and for
excellent ends
both where my weakness, and where my strength lies; That I am but a Reed
shaken with the wind, that Christ is the Rock, higher then I; yea higher then
the highest; that when the proudest Temptations dash against it, shall be
carried through all.
they are broken by it, that his Grace is only sufficient for me, 2 Cor. 12:9
and that his strength shall be made perfect in my weakness, and that God is
faithful who will not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able, 1 Co 10.13
but with the temptation will make a way to escape; For the Lord knows how to
deliver out of Temptations; 1 Pet: 2.9
And therefore, May triumph over all:
though now in my minority, I may think of the day when I shall be at Age, the
time appointed of the Father; Galat. 4, ^
Though now in my Apprentiship, that I shall be one day made Free from mine
infirmityes, and Temptations, and therefore I will even now Glory in mine
Infirmities that the power of Christ may rest upon me; 2 Cor: 12.9
for when am I weak then am I strong, nay, in these things, Verse 10:
I am more then Conqueror, through Christ strengthening me.

Sect. X.
Of Persecuti^n, our Patrimony,
In thinking of PERSECUTIONS for Christ, as part of a Christians Patrimony (Ye
shall receive an hundred fold in this life with persecutions.) Mark 10, 30
Honor,
An Honor to be counted worthy to suffer, a Gift to be able to suffer, Acts 5,
4^
as well as to believe, Phil. 1.29
(to you it is given.) And therefore he is so far from thinking that he merits
by it, Gods gift, therefore cannot merit:
as that he is but so much the more beholding to God and to Christ for it. He
thinks losses for Christ and the Gospel to be gain, Loss, gain,
the spoiling of his goods to be joyfully taken, Heb. 10, 34
A^ knowing in himself that he has in Heaven a better and more enduring
substance. Disgrace riches,
He esteems disgrace for Christ, the highest Honor i^ the world, Heb. 12.26
and the Reproach o^ Christ greater Riches then the Treasures of Egypt. Verse
24
He refuses to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness, to have his portion in this
life, Persecuted happy. Verse 25
He chooses rather to suffer Affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of Sin for a easson. Mal. 3, 15
Those whom men think to be the happy men, Prosperous miserable.
(who call the proud happy,) having ONLY their portion in this life, Those that
prosper in the world, that increase in Riches, Psalm. 73 12
that boast of their Wealth, Psalm 4 9, 6
that say they are rich and possessed with goods, Verse 18
etc. Such He thinks Poor, and Wretched, and Miserable, and Blind and Naked.
And those whom such men think the off scouring of the World, The despised
excellent,
He thinks the Excellent of the Earth; And whom they think unworthy to live in
the world, 1 Cor. 4.13
He thinks that the World is not worthy of them. Psalm. 16, 3
He thinks his Life not too much, Heb. 11.38
nor too dear for Christ, nay not enough if it want the sincerity of his Love,
Acts 20, 24
and therefore labors as much that his heart and love be found flaming toward
him, Persecution not enough without love 1 Cor. 13, 3
as (if he call for it) to give his body to be burnt for him.

Sect. IX.
Right thoughts of the outward condition of life.
IN thinking of his present CONDITION of Life, that his Lines are fallen in the
best place for him, that his own food is most convenient for him, Prove. 13.8
That Saul's Armor would not suit him, That another Condition would not fit
him; As fittest for us, 2 Samuel 15.4
not as Absalom, O that I were Judge in the Land. He thinks it is his duty to
be contented with such things as he has, Hebr. 13.5
without coveting another: And thinks it his Relief, Contentment, without
covetousness.
that the less money he has, he may go the more upon trust; The less he finds
in his purse, Thinking of the promise
seek the more in the promise of him that has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee; Psalm. 23.5
The Lord is his Shepherd, and he thinks he shall not want; And therefore he
will trust in the Lord and do good, For suply:
And he thinks verily that he shall be fed, psalm ^7 3
or Truth shall be his feeding; (as some read) so that he thinks no man can
take away his livelihood, unless he can first take away Gods truth.

Sect. XII.
IN thinking of his present TIME of life, Right thoughts of the present time of
life:
as the time of his sojourning here, and therefore to be passed in fear; in
fear, least he should come short, 1 Pet. 1.17
nay or seem to come short, at his going out of the World of that which he came
in^o it for, Hebr. 4.1
the working out of his ^wn Salvation, and the saving of others, pulling them
out of the Fire, To be past in fear that work may be done
and both with fear; with fear ^east his day be done, before his ^ork be done;
least his Glass be run, Phil. 2.12
before his race be run; least his accounts be required, Jude 23
before they be stated; with fear, and yet in hope, that though his time be
little, and his work great, 1 Cor. 9.24
yet if he be up and doing, the Lord will be with him; Luke 16.2
And therefore as he that plows, Before time done Time, for work.
plows in hope, so he when he prays, prays in hope, and repents in hope, etc.
For to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope. therefore be up and
doing 1 Chr. 22.16
So that his fear i^ a spur to his hope, and his hope a bridle to his fear;
That despair d^ not run away with him, A time for every work
and Cas^ him quite down, so want of hope Nor presumption make him loiter and
loose both his time, Eccles. 9, 4
and his sou^ for want of Fear. He thinks ther^ is a time for every purpose
under Heaven; Therefore hope while time no roo^ for despair,
And therefore thinks h^ can I find a time for Eating an^ Drinking, and
Sleeping, buy in and Selling, Eccles. 3.1
Building and Plan^ing, Marrying and giving in Ma^riage? and is there not a
time, time for best purposes, Romans 13.11 Hos. 10 12 2 Pet. 1.10
nay a high time to awake out of sleep? A time to seek the Lord, to make my
calling and election sure, etc. surely there is a time, therefore there is
hope; And no room for desperation; And but a time, But a time therefore no
place for presumption
therefore no place for Presumption. But a time, and therefore that time is
most precious, (God measuring ^t, to us only by moments, Time precious
measured by moments Ephesians. 5.16
as we do precious liquors by drops,) and therefore to be redeemed, and so
employed in looking out for a precious Christ, and in looking after the
precious Soul.

Sect. XIII.
IN thinking of DEATH, Right thoughts of death
to the Unbelievers and Hypocrites, as a King of Terrors, Job 18, 14
a grave of their hopes, which will then be as the giving up of the Ghost,
chap. 11.20
as the falling of the Tree (that must lie till judgment, as then it falls:
Eccl. 11.3
No work there, Luke 16.16
nor devise, no wisdom, no calling upon God with hope of help, or promise of
pardon; As the fixing of the gulf, (no passing, no returning, from a state of
torment, no means of Grace, no hope of Glory any more) as a cruel Jailor haling
the Soul to the dreadful Tribunal of God, and then to the Tormenter and
Executioner, even to him that has the power of Death, Hebr. 2, 14
the Devil: And alas, how many thousands of black, yea bloody self merthering
mouths shall then come to have their woeful wishes, before they thought of it,
when God shall damn them, and the Devil take them.

Prove. 14 32
But to the Righteous (that has hope in his death) a King of terrors too, To
the godly what
but with a broken Scepter; A Serpent, but without a sting; A ghastly
countenance with an open mouth, but without teeth; A sturdy Porter, yet
standing only to open them their Fathers door. The Saints Bed maker,
hard-handed, Isai 52 10
^et that makes their beds soft and ^asy: Hos: 13, 4
An Enemy frighted into a ^riend by him that is the very ^eath of Death, Col.
3, 41
but the believers ^ife. So that their dying is but (...) entering into peace, a
resting in ^^eir beds, and from their labors, Isaiah 57.2
(...) Sins, Sorrows, Cares, Fears, ^emptations, Afflictions, Perse^^tions,
Sicknesses, Pains, wants, ^eaknesses, wearinesses, doubts, ^^fficultyes; nay of
Duties, of ^^stings, watchings, tears, which ^^ll then be wiped away, and done
^^ay, as to the labor, not the ^^ward, Rev. 14, 13
for so their works follow ^^m.

Sect. XIII:
Of judgment, Psalm. 49 14
IN thinking of JUDGMENT* As that glorious morning wherein the upright shall
have Dominion, shall sit with Christ on Thrones, judging the World, Mat. 25 19,
being openly justified themselves, and se^ as Sheep on the right hand of God
and Proclaimed by Christ the Blessed of his Father; 2 Cor. 6, 2
As that glorious meeting of that spiritualize body with its blessed Soul, and
s^ with Christ, and with Abraham and Isaac, Mat. 2, 34 to the sheep
and Jacob, and all to Saints, to be dissolved, divorced divided, dissipated,
dispersed n^ more.

1 Cor. 15 44 Matthew. 8, 11
Mean while those Goats on t^ left hand, that burned with Lus^ shall burn with
horror inwardl^ shall be accused, Mat. 35, 33 and 41
accursed, se^tenced and condemned openl^ And, as they would not ind^ the Sheep
to live by them in the World, to the goats
they shall go by themselves, shall not come into the Congregation of the just,
and as they ^oved Cursing, It shall now come into their Souls, and like Oil
into their bones. And so their miserable ^odyes (made vessels of wrath, fitted
to Destruction, Rom 9.22
wide to re^eive it (without spilling,) strong ^o hold it (without breaking,)
be^g reunited to their tormented Souls; shall together be parta^rs of Misery
(as they formerly ^ad been of Sin) unto all Eterni^

Sect. XV.
^N thinking of ETERNITY, Of Eterni^y Right thoughts of it,
as that which is so shortly approaching, and nearly concerning every ^e, that
he thinks it strange that ^y one should almost think of ^y thing else, for
thinking of Eternity; But that he think again of that World of Atheism that is
in the World, never fully to be confuted, But by death and Judgment; and oh,
thinks he, Atheists in this world
what a sad thing it is that they are (...), we read without God in the World,
but the word is, Atheists in the World yea but as soon as ever they go ou^ of
the World, Ephesians. 2, 12 No Atheists to Eternity,
they continue Atheists no longer. Those tha^ would not believe that there wa^
a God, and a Christ, by his patience and providence, by his preserving them,
and proffering t^ save them, Shall see there is a God and Chr,
shall then see the there is a God, and a Christ to^ (every eye shall see him)
and fe^ that there is a God by his terrou^ taking hold upon them; Rev 1, 7
Mal 3, 19
Then she they return and discern (thou^ they would not see the Lord when (...)
hand was lifted up in his word a^ works in the World) they shall (...) and be
ashamed. Isai. 26, 11 Psalm. 58, 11
So that a man shall say verily there is a GOD. And those that would not
believe that ^here was a Devil, by their daily ^onversing with him, and his
in^luencing them, by his filling their ^earts, because they say they never saw
him, Feel there is a Devil,
shall then certainly ^now they are with him, as he ^nows now that he is with
them; ^or, In hell share stake with him,
as he shares stakes with them (...) sin, they have their part, and ^e has his
part; so shall they ^e forced to share stakes with him (...) Hell, Mat. 25, 91
for they shall have their ^rtion with the Devil and his An^ls. And Oh thinks
he, As he with them here in sin,
how ^ill the dainty Dives, and the ^eless and delicate Daughters, do (...)
spend that Eternity? That must ^ve so many devices and diver^ements, Plays and
Pastimes, ^h! Misery of the wicked
wretched word that thinks (...)) and all to wear out the te^usness of a little
time. To spend that Eternity, when the smoke of that bottomless pit, Rev. 14,
10 11
must be their only Air, to breath in Fire, their Food; Brimstone* their
Perfume, full Viols of Divine wrath, their Drink; Astonishment, their Wine;
Bitter weeping, and flowing Fountains, an^ ever Running Rivers of Tears, Mat.
22, 13
i^stead of their Rich Baths, and pleas^nt Springs, Luke 16, 28
and artificial Fountains; And wailing, yelling, and howling, their only
Music; And so other men's torments an accessio^ to their pains. Romans 1, 32
As they had taken pleasure in other men's sins (which made Dives so loath of
his Br^threns Company as we may we^ think.) The Books must be opened in stead
of their pleasing Pla^ Books, Rev. 20, 12
and Romances, Gods Book and the Book of their Conscience^ (that they never
could endure i^ all their lives to look into) mu^ now be pored upon by them, b^
the Fire of Hell, without intermission, recreation or other diversion; and the
wanton Eye, that buisy and unsatisfyed Gazer upon every thing (but the Bible)
Mat. 25, 30
must be (otherwise) imprisoned in utter darkness for ever; Psalm 12, 4
And the Lordly tongue that must needs be their own, shall be their own to
torment them; as formerly set on Fire of Hell with a world of wickedness, so
now of woes; James 3, ^
Red hot then with Rage against God, and revilings of his Saints, now burning
with flames, Luke 16, 24
and not receiving so much as one single drop of cold ^ater, that was wont to
swim in Wine, and for that bewitching ^nce of touch, its dalliances and
de^ghts, there shall only succed ^ose hideous gnashings of teeth, and ^awings
at Heart, in the woe ^at never cease, and by the worm ^at never dies. And
thus, Ah ^inks he, Josh. 8, 7, 16
as Joshua taught the men of Succoth with the Thorns and Briars in the
Wilderness,) The Hebrew is, He made them to know; to know who he was, and to
know what they had done, in despising his Messengers, in rejecting his motions,
etc.) so will Jesus teach the Atheistical World with tortures to Eternity, and
make them to know who He is, 2 Chr: 36, 16
whose Messengers they mocked, Psalm. 50, 17
whose Laws they cast behind their backs, Prove. 1, 3^
whose Councels they hated, and would none of his Reproofs.

eternal happiness of the Saints,
But thinks He on the other hand, of those in whose Hearts are the ways of them
that are the holy Pilgrims, the true Travailers, that declare plainly that they
seek a Country, (viz) an Heavenly, that can say of a good Sermon Lord evermore
give us of this Bread of a lively stirring Sacrament, John 6, 34
a Soul-humbling Confession an^ Prayer, an Heart raising Meditation, it is good
to be here; that think the present time too short, and their Hearts too narrow,
to hold enough of God and Christ; what a blessed state will they count that,
when the perfecting of their holiness, and so of their spirits, and the
changing of their vile bodies, Heb. 12, 23 Phil. 3, 21
and the fashioning them like unto Christ's Glorious Body, shall widen them as
much from the straits of their hearts, as Eternity shall do from the straits of
time, And so they shall have as much of God and Christ as their heads and
hearts can hold, and these shall hold as much as they can desire, without
interruption, or Change, ^or: 12, 7
or fear of Change for ever, ^ev 10, 12
for they shall EVER be with the Lord.

Sect. XVI
Right thoughts of Angels,
IN thinking of ANGELS, The EVIL as many in Number, (though for the undividednes
of their Kingdom) called the Devil and Satan; Evil, worlds God,
As the Worlds God, yet Gods Slave; having sinners in his chain, 1 Cor: 4.4
Sinners his Slaves 2 Timothy: 2:26 Works in their Will, Ephesians. 2, 2
Taken Captive by him at his will, yet cannot force their Will, though he work
effectually in their Will, it is with their Will (for his Lusts will they do,)
nay cannot so much as find out their Riddle, except he plow with their own
Heifer, nor know their actual thought, but with it,
(that is Gods Prerogative Royal I the Lord search the Reins, (...) 44
) but (as the cunning Angler does the nibling of the Fish at the Bait under
water, John 6, not (...),
by the motion of the Cork and Quill above water,) by some little outward
indication o^ the minds inward motion; as when Cains countenance was fallen,
Gen 4, 5 Genesis 3, 3
He knew he was very wroth, and so hurryeth him to Murder; and by Eve's
minceing the Threatening (least ye die,) when God had said ye shall surely die)
and by her eying the forbidden tree, Verse 6
He knew she had a months mind, as we say, to the Fruit. Thus when he sees the
eyes of the Adulterer full ((...)) of the Adulteress, 2 Pet: 2.14
he easily perceives how the Game goes; and so in other cases; yet that he is
Himself much more in Gods chain, Gods slave in his chain Jude 6
and reserved and kept therein (ever since he left his first estate) and shall
be to the Judgment of the great day; 2 Pet. 2, 4
And therefore though he vex and disquiet, buffet and tempt, 2 Cor: 12, 7
and accuse the Brethren before God night and day; Rev: 10, 12
and though he set his Cloven foot, the foot of his Pride, upon the greatest
part of the World, 1 John 5, 19
so that the whole World ^eth (as it were) (...) in the very Maw, not jaw
only, of that wicked one; yet shall he never be able to hinder Christ, or to
hurt the true Christian; but as a Lvon in the Grate, though his roaring be
terrible, 1 Pet. 5, 8
yet his reach is but short; Rev. 12, 12
and he knows it, therefore we may think it; Nay because he is but a Slave in
Gods Chain, therefore all his tugging at the Oar, shall but promote the
purposes of Gods grace for his own Glory, and the good of his chosen; and 2, 2
and ( as Jonah in the Whales belly was said to be as it were, in the belly of
Hell, yet was afterward cast up alive upon dry ground) the Devil shall be
forced to disgorge his Prey, and leave all Gods Elect safe upon the shore.
Shall the Prey be taken from the Mighty, Verse 10,
o^ the lawful Captive delivered? Bu^ thus says the Lord, Isai. 49, 24, 25
even the Captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the Prey of the
terribl^ shall be delivered, for I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee, and I will save thy Children. So that after longest and sorest
Temptations and Assaults of the great Red Dragon, the Old Serpent, Rev 12, 3, 9
the Deceiver of the World, the Liar and Murderer from the beginning, John 8, 4
with all his Policy and Power, Rage and Experience, James 4 7
He shall be forced to flee from those that resist him by Faith, as he left
Christ; Then the Devil leaves him, and the ANGELS, Matt. 4, 11 Good Angels,
(viz) the GOOD Angels, came and ministered unto him.

And such indeed even Ministering spirits, Hebr: 1, 14 ministering spirits to the
Saints, innumerable,
must we think them ^o be, even all of them sent forth for the good of those
that shall be Heirs of Salvation. So that all the ^nnumerable company of (Good)
Angels, that ten thousand times ten ^housand, and thousands of thousands, Chap.
12 12
are even all of them sent forth for the Good of them that are Good; to right
their wrongs, and to relieve their necessityes, Rev: 5, 11
to Guard and Protect their Persons while they live, 2 Chr: 32 21
to attend their Souls when they Die, 1 Kin, 19, 5 Acts 12, 7
and to gather their dust together at the day of Judgment, Ps 91, 11:12 Luke
16.22 Mat. 21, 31 a comfortable thought
and the Harvest of the end of the World. And therefore it may be a comfortable
though^ to Believers, that they have innumerable invisible friends, 2 Chr. 6,
17 Psalm. 103, 20
to oppose to their visible and invisibl^ Enemies, Angels of God excelling in
strength, Heb: 1, 6, 14 Rev. 19, 10
worshipers o^ Christ, not to be worshipped themselves; and Servants of the
Saints, and an awful thought,
therefore called their Angels; And an awful thought too, as one would not do
any thing uncomely in the sight of an Excellent person, Matt: 18, 10
so neither to admi^ any thing unseemly for Saints, though no man should see
them because of the Angels. 2 Cor: 11, 10


Sect. XVII.
ANd above all in thinking of GOD, to have High, Right thoughts of God
Holy Reverend, yet withal Delightful, Affectionate and Comfortable thoughts,
but in (all points) Regular and Scriptural. For thus says the Scripture, Let
him that gloryeth, glory in this, Ierem 5, 20
that he un^er stands and knows me, that I AM THE LORD which exercise
LOVING KINDNESS, JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Earth, for in these things I
DELIGHT, says the Lord. When ^he mind is thus intent upon this most glorious
Theme of Thoughts, the most Glorious LORD, ^n his Essence, (I am the Lord,) in
^is Atributes and Operations (which ^xercise Loving kindness, Psalm: 45, 13
Judgment and Righteousness) then is his Kings Daughter All glorious within, 2
Cor: 3, 18
for We All with open face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit of the Lord.

The Heavenly mind is an Heaven-like mind; Right thoughts of Him whose Name is
I AM, Exodus: 3, 14
and whose Title is THE LORD, must needs resemble Heaven in pureness and
clarity, Amos 4, 13
(for He declares to man what is his THOUGHT, and must be thought of by Man
just as He declares, Ps: 113, 4, 5
) yea rise above the Heavens in Celsitude and sublimity (for his Glory is above
the Heavens) and be dapled, (like Heaven, with Love and Holy Joy (because of
his loving kindness,) and with Reverence an^ Godly Fear (for his Judgment and
Righteousness,) and with deligh^ in all these, the Exercise of al^ which is his
Delight. For though^ the Lord be High, Psalm: 138, 6
yet has he respec^ unto the Lowly, and as He condescends to think of us, so
also (provided we do it regularly) to be thought of by Us.

To begin then at the beginning of all things, we are instructed by Scripture,
to think that GOD Is, High thoughts. God most HIGH
and that he is the MOST HIGH, and therefore to have high Thoughts of him as of
the Holy one that inhabiteth Eternity; Hebr. 11, 6
HE is higher then the Highest, Genesis 14 18
To whom there is none like, no equal, Isai. 57, 15
none to be compared, That cuts off the Spirit of Princes, Eccles: 5, 8 Isaia.
40, 18 25
That is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, That does whatsoever pleases him
in Heaven and in Earth, in Seas and all deep places; Psalm. 76, 12
That gives no account of any of his matters: Psalm. 135, 6
That is high above the the Earth, and exalted far above all Gods; High above
the Nations, Job 33, 13
yea His glory above the Heavens; High above our Services, Psalm 97, 9
for our Goodness extends not to him; Psalm. 113.4
high above our Praises, Psalm 16, 2
nay above Blessing and Praise (Men's or Angels, Neh: 9, 5
) And therefore that we can never think high enough of God, but in Thinking
that he is too high for our Thoughts. no^ thought of G od high enough
Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to
perfection? Job* 1, 7, 8, 9
It is high as Heaven, What can thou do? But that God is abov all thoughts
Deeper then Hell, What can thou know? The measure thereof is longer then the
Earth, and broader then the Sea. And yet they think amiss that think Him, as
some do, Yet minds the lowest and least things,
too high to mind the lowest matters (non vacat exiguis.) Some think it a
disparagement to his Highness that He should mind and order every minute
action, motion, inconsiderable worm o^ fly, the stirring of the hand, o^ moving
of the foot, etc. but al^ these must be left without particular providential
concourse, and all in respect (as they think) to his Highness, But Scripture
teaches us to think, that not only in him we live, but move, Acts 17, 28
as well as have our being; Nay that He preserves Man and Beast, Psalm 36, 6
that a Sparrow does not fall without him, Mat. 10, 29
That he takes away their breath when they die, Psalm. 104, 29
gives them their Food while they live; Nay that not only our members book'd
by Him, 147, 9: and
but even our Hairs, the very Hairs of our Head numbered, 139, 16
and all this no difficulty nor diminution to him whose understanding is
infinite. Matt 10, 30 Psalm: 147, 5


Sect. XVIII.
TO have Holy and Reverend Thoughts of Him, Right and Reverend Thoughts, Psalm.
111, 9
for HOLY and REVEREND is his same, and therefore to Sanctify ^e Lord God in
our HEARTS, Isaiah 8, 13
that (...) be our Fear, and that He be our ^ead, Gods eyes pure and pierceing,
as He was the FEAR of ^ack. To think Him a God of purer eyes then to behold
Evil, H^b: 1, 13
or that He can look upon Iniquity, (viz) without loathing; And yet to think
Him a God of such pierceing Eyes, as that he beholds the Evil and the good,
Job 24 21 22:
for his Eyes are upon the ways of Man, and He sees all his goings, there is
no da kness nor shadow of death where the workers of Iniquity may hide
themselves; Dan: 10 6
for his Eyes are as Flames or Lamps of Fire, Psa 139 12
and unto him the night shines as the day, Neither i^ there any Creature that
is not manifest in his sight: Hebr. 4 13
But all things a^ naked and open in his sight with whom We have to do.

Sect. XIX.
God unchangeable
TO think him God UNCHANGEABLE, without Passion Perturbation, Variableness or so
much as shadow of turning Though as a Vesture, Jam. 2, 17
he shall chang^ both the Foundations of the Earth, Ordering all changes
laid by himself of old, and the Heavens, the work of his hands, and they shall
be changed; Psa, 106, 20
and mean while orders all Changes under the Heavens and in the Earth; He
prevails against man for ever, Job 14, 2
and he cease; He changes his Countenance, and sends him away; chap. 23, 13
But as for Himself, He is of one mind, and who can turn him? Do Sinners
provoke me to anger? Jerem. 7, 9
^ith the Lord, Do they not pro^oke themselves to the Confusion of their own
faces? Job 35, 6
so that If thou sin^est, what do thou against him? (...) if thy
Transgressions be multi^yed, what do thou unto him? ^ough thy wickedness may
hurt a ^an as thou art, etc.

Yet withal to think him a God holy, Yet seems as moved with Sin,
hating sin so infinitely, at He is said to be angered, to be ^voked, to be
grieved, Psalm. 106, 32 and 43
to be ^xed, to be made to serve, Heb 3, 10
to be wearyed, Isaia. 63, 10
to be burdened, nay even to be broken by it. and 43, 24
I am broken (says God, Amos 2, 13
) (with their whorish heart; yea, a God so Gracious, as that He repents himself
for his Servants, Ezekiel. 6 9 Saints sufferings, Deuteronomy. 32, 36 Jer. 31, 20 Isaiah
62 9
His bowels are troubled for them, and in all their Afflictions he is Afflicted
with them.

Sect. XX.
TO Think Him the ONLY true GOD, Only God John 17, 3 2 Cor 16, 26
(and the Gods of the Heathen but vanity, Idols, and by Nature no Gods,) The
Only Wise God; Gal. 4.8 Romans 16 27 1 Timothy 6, 15 16
The hlessed and only Potentate, who only has Immortality, who Alone is
Holy, And there i^ none good but HE, And therefore no GOD hut HE; Levit 16, 4
Matt 19, 17 Deuteronomy. 6.4
Hear O Israel the Lord thy God is but ONE GOD

Unity yet TRINITY
That the Being is One, the Substance undivided, and yet the Subsistence
distinguished; Psalm 2.7
so the the Father is not the Son, but B^ gets him; The Son is not the Father,
but Begotten of him; Hebr. 1, 5
The Holy Ghost is neither the Father nor the Son, John 1, 14
but proceeds from both, chap. 15, 26
(The Spirit that proceeds from the Father, whom I will send, says Christ,)
yet these three are God, 1 John 5, 7.
and yet God is but One, for these three are One, without Division,
Composition, or Confusion. And O how High, and Holy, High thought.
and Reverend ought the Thought to be that receives this Mystery? And
therefore to help his weak Thoughts in this, The Believer perhaps fixes his
Thought on the Sun in the Firmament, Sun and Soul of man short shaddows of this
Mystery,
where he finds light, heat, and motion, yet but One Sun; or to come nearer
both to the Thing and Himself, He thinks perhaps of the Soul in his Body, where
he finds an Understanding, Will, and Memory, yet but One Soul. But alas,
thinks he, these are short shadows, and dark resemblances of so great and high
a Mystery, for that light is not the Sun, though it be Sunlight, etc. and that
Understanding is not the Soul, but the Souls understanding power or faculty;
But Jesus Christ is the LORD, and the Holy Spirit is GOD, and yet to us there
is but One God, 2 Cor. 8, 6
and One Lord. But this He thinks, That All that is IN God (Eternally, All in
God, GOD.
Imminently, Unchangeably) must needs be God, As verily He thinks that GOD Is.
And that God the Father has a perfect KNOWLEDGE of Himself in Himself, God
knows Himself
This also He cannot but Think; and that this Knowledge, WISDOM, Wisdom
or WORD is God, because it is IN the Father, who is God; Prove. 8, 22 23, 25
John 1:1 Word V. 30 Image of God:
And further, that He cannot but LOVE Himself, whom He thus Knows, and sees in
tha^ express Image of Himself, begotten in Himself; And this Imag^ o^ begotten
WORD being in God, Hebr. 1, 3 Loves Himself.
and therefore being God, cannot love God again; And this Infinite, Mutual
liking, Loving and good will Proceeding from Both, Fathers love to the Son
declared by the H Ghost
and being in Both, cannot but be, what Both are, (viz.) GOD Thus We see, when
there was a visible manifestation of the Divine complacencie (with a loud voice
from Heaven, saying, Verse 16,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am mell pleased.) The Word being now made
Flesh, It was made by the Descending of the Holy Ghost, like a Dove, from the
Father, and resting on the Son. But Alas, after all, thinks He of Himself,
Mystery exceeding thought,
who is he that hides Counsel without knowledge? Therefore have I thought that
I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. Yet is to be
thought, for God is able to do above thought.
God has indeed told me that THESE THREE are ONE, And ^f I cannot tell how to
think it, yet I will think it; Ephesians. 3.26
For seeing Scripture teaches me to Think that he is able to Do exceeding
abundantly above all that I can think, Therefore is above thought.
well may I Think that He Is above All that I can Think; T^inity one in
w^rking, yet each his peculiar work^
And therefore though it be above my thought it is the fitter (seeing He says
it) to be thought of him, that is so much above me. These three thus gloriously
but mysteriously, coequally, coessentially and coeternally One, must be thought
also to be One in Working as well as Being, John 5, 17 19, 20, 21 Phil. 1:19
compared with 4:19
and yet each one to have his own peculiar work. Thus Gods supplying by Jesus
Christ, is called the supply of the Spirit.

Sect. XXI.
God only properly Eternal.
THis God We must think a^ ETERNAL Being, and nothin^ properly Eternal but God;
Created Spirits, Angels, and Souls o^ men (and the bodies of these raised
Spiritual bodies at the last day) being Only Ever-lasting; Psa. 106, 48
Psalm 90:2
But from Everlasting to Everlasting thou art God; Art not thou from
Everlasting, O Lord my God? Hab. 1:12
And as if God were making answer to this Question, says He, Hearken O Jacob,
and Israel my Called, ^sa ah 48 12
I am He, I am the First, I also am the Last, I am the First, I am the Last,
chap. 44:6
and besides Me there is no God, Verse 8.
(and after says He,) Is there any? I know not any. There is no Eternal,
Jerem. 2 32.
no First and Last but God only: And therefore Our First Thoughts and Our Last
Thoughts, Hebr. 7.^
yea and all Our Thoughts should be of Him, and for Him. Thoughts should be
Lasting where the Theme is Everlasting. But O burning shame that We should
forget him days without number who has neither Beginning of Days, nor end of
Life, but is Eternal.

Sect. XXII:
Gods Immense omnipresence filling all things
THoughts also must be Holy and Reverend of the Infinite Immensity, as well as
Eternity of this one true God, His OMNIPRESENCE filling all things, Hell with
his glorious Justice and Severity, Heaven with the glory of his Grace, Psalm
33:5
Earth with his Goodness, Patience, and Providence; If I ascend up into heaven
thou art there, Ps. 139, 8, 9
If I make my Bed in hell behold thou art there; If I dwel^ in the utmost parts
of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me. Je^. 23:23 24
Am I a God at hand says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide
himself in secret places that I shall not see him? says the Lord, do (...) not
fill heaven and earth? says the Lord. And it is repeated so, that the Lord
says this, because vain men do so little think of this* Thus does he fill all
things, but is contained of none; contained of none:
But will God in very deed dwell with men on earth? behold heaven, and the
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. 2 Chr. 6:18
Alas! How should it? Can a Man be contained in his own Span, Isai: 48, 13
My right hand has spanned the heavens, says God. Alas how little can Our
very Hearts hold, or Our Thoughts contain, of this Great God! now the less we
can comprehend, the more and the greater should our Admiring Thoughts be.

Sect. XXIII.
HE is also to be Holily and Reverently remembered in the Immensity of his
Wisdom and OMNISCIENCE as well Omni-presence, God All-wise omniscient.
That He is All Wise, as well as Onely-Wise, that knows us, knows Us*
better then we know our own Hearts, 1 John 3.20
who is greater then our hearts, and KNOVVS all things He knows whereof we are
made, Our frame:
his eyes did see our substance heing yet imperfect, Psa. 103, 14 Psa. 139, 16
He books our members; He knows wherein we have sinned, Our Sins
he looks narrowly to al^ our paths; and sets a print upon the heels, Job 13 27
(or as the Hebrew, upon the Roots) of our feet; And as he books our Members,
so he bags ou^ Sins; chapter 14 16, 17
Thou numbrest my steps do thou not watch over my sin? my transgression is
sealed up in a bag (...) and thou sowest up mine Iniquity But then he knows
our Sorrow^ too as well as our Sins, Our sorrows
thou te^ lest my wanderings, Psalm 56:8
put thou my tear into thy Bottle. Thou see how have Sinned, observe how
(...) mourn; and indeed he does so^ I have heard Ephraim bemoanin^ himself.
Jer. 31.18
I saw him sinning, a^ I hear him groaning. He the has a Book for our Members,
Bag for our Sins, has a Bottle also for our tears. He knows our Soul in sin,
and he has (says David) known my Soul in adversity; Psalm. 31 Our nee^ (...)
Matthew. 6.8
So that he knows also whereof we have need, Our heavenly Father does so, even
before we ask, as he knows our sins before we confess. He knows the way that we
take, Job 23 10
and ^e knows what way to take with ^s, 2 Pet. 2 9
He knows how to deliver if we ^e Righteous, All Man.
And how to reserve ^he wicked to the day of Judgment ^o be punished. 1 Co^.
3.20
He knows the ^houghts of the wise, the way that ^hey take (yea though they dig
^eep to hide their Counsel from the lord, Isaia. 2 5 15) and knows too how to
^ke them in that way that they ^ke, so that the Wisdom of the ^orld is
foolishness with God, 1 Co. 3; 19
as it is ^itten, he takes the wise in their ^n craftiness,
Be they Men, knows how to being good out of sin.
or ^evils. We must think him a God ^holy as that he would never suffer Sin in
the World, and so Pitiful and Gracious that he would never suffer sorrows and
sufferings on his Saints, ufferings
but that he is a God so WISE that he knows how to bring Glory to himself* and
good to his Chosen, out o^ All, Psalm. 74 14
to break Leviathans heads, and to make it Food for his People As the
Apothecary would never suffer so many Poisons in his shop but that he knows one
way or other how to make them to conduce to the honor of his Art, An^ good of
his Patient; for known unt^ God are all his works from the beginning of the
World: Acts 15:18
And his way^ are higher then our ways, becau^ his Thoughts are also higher
the our Thoughts, as the heavens a^ high above the earth; ^aia. 15 18
So that the^ is no searching out of his understan^ing. Isaiah 55 9 chap. 40 28
James 1:5
And therefore think, If a^ man want wisdom, he is to ask it God; Would I know
my Sins Lord make me to know my Trans^ression and my Sin! Job 13.23
Would I know ^he measure of my days, how frail I ^m, Lord make me to knew my
end, Psalm 39 4
^o teach me to number my days as that I may apply my heart unto wis^om; Psalm
9.12
would I know thy Path of Life, Lord show it me; Psalm 16 11
In thy light shall see light; O send out there^re, thy light and thy truth,
Psalm 43, 3
let them lead me, and bring me to thy ^oly hill, O thou Father of lights,
James 1.5
(...) whom there is no darkness at all,

Seeing therefore that we are ^o light our Fire at this SUN, 1 John 1.5 All
wisdom to be sought of God, but only in means and measure prescribed,
his Parent of Lights, who affords ^s the Burning Glass of his Word ^or our
help herein, We are to ^ink thus, surely, of his Wisdom, (...) we will think of
it rightly, that as we are to be thankful for ^e Means, so contented with ^e
Measures of KNOVVING that ^e prescribes and allows, inas^uch as they are such
as are able to make us WISE to Salvation; 2 Timothy 3.15
for he has expressly cautioned us (...), Romans 12.3
Ne quis sapeat supra quam oportet, etc. (for so Beza, vulg. etc.) no^ to be
wise above what we ought, bu^ to be wise unto sobriety.

I know indeed that there is i^ corrupted man a Natural desire to KNOW, Romans
1.25
but it is to study the Creature more then the Creator, wh^ is blessed for
ever; to pursue the Science of other things, while^ the EXCELLENCY of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3 8
i^ neglected, All which Nature Knowledge should designedly b^ made subservient
to such a Spir^tual end as the holy Psalmist pu^sues in his ASTRONOMICAL
observations, Psalm. 8 3, 4
When I consider (sait^ he) THY heavens, the work of t^ fingers, the Moon and
Stars which thou have ordained, What is M^ that thou art mindful of him? etc.
^ut when Solomon himself who ^new more, 1 Kin. 4 29
in Naturals, Eccles. 2 12
then any ^eer Man, since Adam, casts up ^e total sum, he tells you that that
he did arrive at by all ^is knowledge was to know ^is, that the increase
thereof is ^e increase of sorrow, chap. 1.18
and most ^otorious it is that ever since, ^ho so comes nearest to him in ^at
point of knowledge, troublesomness and uncertainty of natural lawful knowledge.
does so ^kewise in that part of experience. ^las how long have some of us ^een
learning how ignorant we ^e? And how great is his Wis^om that has locked up
from us, (...) the intricate labyrinths of vexati^s uncertainty, the knowledge
of ^at which he finds so apt to draw (...) from him, who make so little ^ght
use of so much that is clear^ revealed, being sufficient in its and to draw us
to him? Deuteronomy, 29:2^
We know ^ere it is said that secret thing belong to God, but things that ar^
revealed belong to us, and to ou^ Children; Acts 1* 7
that it is not for US to KNOW the times and seasons the the Father has put
into his ow^ power; 2 Pet. 2.18
But grow in Grace, and i^ the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
John 17, 3
for this is life Eternal, etc.

Sinfulness of affecting to know by familiar spirits, Wizards
But besides a natural and lawfu^ (if duly moderated an^ ordered) Desire of
natural knowledge, there is a desire of knowin^ such things, and by such means
as we are to think sinful an^ Satanical, being no way approved in the Word or
the Wisdom of God; Isaiah 8.19
such is theirs, who s^ unto them that have familiar spirit and unto Wizards
that peep, a^ that mutter (as it is expressed (...) the Prophet Isaiah) or that
use ^vination, Ezekiel. 21, 21
that consult with Te^phim, that look into the liver, (the is, the intrals of
Birds or Beast ^s Ezekiel. speaks) to direct actions or ^oretel future events
thereby. Judicial Astrolog^.
So ^lso we find a severe and black ^r^nd fastened by the Scripture upon
ASTROLOGERS, Star gazers, Isa^. 47, ^^
^d Mon^hly Progn^ticators, and ^ch as are draw^ by them from their sole D
pendency^s upon God; for admit we forbear to ^y that here is Science f^lsly so
called, 1 Timothy 6, 2^
^s the Apostle speak^, whose ^rinciples and Co^clusions are ^ertainly
uncertain, Its unce^tainty
and deluso^y ^or the Conjunctions and Aspects ^f the STARS being the same when
^vers Children are c^nceived or ^rn in the same Place and instant ^f Time, (as
in some great and ^pulous Cities,) how come they (...) diverse and contrary
Fortu^e^, to use their own phrase) some (...) live longer, others under the ^me
Stars to die sooner, some to ^e and die in Wealth, H^no^, ^d Prosperity; Others
born ^n the same article of time, and und^ as auspitious and benigne^ H^n^ to a
^^fe of Misery, and a death (...) Shame; or to add, that undeny^ble experience
frequently confu^ the most positive Predictions from the most acurately erected
Sc^en^ and of the most confident Practi^ners and Masters in these curio^ Arts;
Pernitiousness
Curiosity of forbidden knowledge,
Admit, I say that some gratification might indeed be ^pected to the curiosity
and pri^ of Knowing mo^e then others, (...) then otherwise we could possib^
arrive unto, Our first Ruin,
say the Tree were to desired to make one WISE, Genesis 3 6
yet (...) thinks the Burnt Children of E^ should Dread that Five that G^ will
certainly make even of a (...) of KNOWLEDGE if a Forbid Tree; Verse 17
and certainly were (...) BOOK of GOD admitted in (...) ^owe^ into the hearts
and mi^ of Men, Acts 19 19
it would bring (...) BOOKS OF ^L^IOUS ARTS the prevailing Gospel sometimes
did, to be burned in the Fire, instead of the Authors, and such as trust to
them who are (except they repent) doomed to the same Condemnation by the same;
Isaia, 47, 13 14
Book of God, for of Astrologers, Stargazers, and monthly Prognosticators says
God by the Prophet, BEHOLD, they shall be as Stubble, the Fire shall burn them,
etc. read ^lso Deuteronomy. 8 to 16.

Sect. XXIV.
TO have High, Holy, omnipoten^
and Reverend Thoughts of Gods OMNIPOTENCE as well as Omnipresence, and
Omnisci^nce, Job 42, ^
He fills all things, and knows ^ll things, and says Job, I know, (...) Lord,
that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be ^itholden from thee;
or, (as it is ^ad in the Margin) no thought of thine can be hindered; mine
cannon be hid, thine cannot be hindered Seeing now, says God, that I even I am
he, and there is no Go^ with me: Deuteronomy. 32, 39
I kill, and I make alive I wound, and I heal: neither (...) there any that can
deliver out of min^ hand, (and thinks the Believin^ Soul further, neither is
there an^ that can hinder thy hand from del^vering. Isai 43, 10 11, 13
) Ye are my Witnesses, I, eve^ I, am the Lord, and besides me the^ is no
Savior, Yea before the day w^ I am he, and there is none that c^ deliver out
of my hand: I will (...) and who shall let it? He, and H^ only has power
after the body (...) killed, to cast the Body and Soul i^ hell, therefore we
should fear hi^ He also, Number
He only speaks in Righ^ousness, mighty to save, and the^fore we should trust
in him. S^ would hinder, the great guilt Sin, but says Faith, let the p^^ of
my Lord be great in pardon sin, Sin would hinder, the Dominion and prevailing
power of sin; and O thinks the Soul; it is impossible I should ever be rid of
such strong Lusts, that my proud heart should be made humble, my froward heart
be made patient and meek, my filthy heart made clean, my worldly heart made
H^a^enly; but thinks Faith* what things are impossible with men, Mat. 10, 26
^re possible with God, Romans 6, 14
who has said that Sin shall not have Dominion over us, and that He subdueth
our S^ns under us, Micah 7, 19 Jer. 32, 14
who has great power, and a stretch^d out Arm, and t^ere is nothing too hard
for him, Amos 5, 12
^o not an hard heart; In one word, it thinks Sin Mighty, but God Almighty;
Satan, Genesis 17, 1
a Prin^ipalitie and a Power, Ephesians. 6, 2^
but the God ^f Peace able to bruise Satan under ^e weak feet of the Saints,
Rom 16, 20
and to ^o it shortly; Antichrist Rampant, ^he Woman upon the scarlet Beast
Revel 23, 3
Triumphant, and 17:6
especially when All the World is wondering after the Beast, yea the Saints
wondering, though with abhorrencie; and yet even then He thinks that in one hour
he shall utterly fall, Revel. 18, 8
and be destroyed Everlastingly, because strong is the Lord GOD that judges
her. He has chosen the weak things of the World to confoun^ the Mighty, 1
Cor, 1, 26
He calls the things that are not, as though they were; can make a Worm to
thresh the Mountains, Isaia. 41, 14
is able of stones to raise up Children to Abraham, Mat. 15 39 Ezekiel. 37, 3
to make dry bones live, dead witnesses revive; Rev. 11, 11
yea for this cause usually suffers a sentence of Death, 1 Cor. 2:9
and so will he recover and make to live: for as the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, Isaia. 38, 16
so the weakness of God stronger then Men; 1 Cor. 1, 25
He can do what he will do, and by what means he will do, He can send a noise
and trouble, and a word and heal; ^ Kin: 19:7
Stars in their courses to fight against Sisera, 2 Kin. 19 7 Psa 107, 20
and the dust of the Earth to Plague Pharaoh; The Hornet to chase the Amorite,
Josh. 24.12.
and Raven to feed the P opheth; 1 Ki. 17, 4 6
can dry up the Sea, and make a path for his pe ple, 1 Co 10 1, 4
and strike the Rock into a River, and make it both flow for them, and follow
after them; 2 Pet. 2 16
He c^n reprove a Prophets madness by ^n Asses mouth; 1 Cor. ^ 22
and by the foolishness of Preaching convert a sinner, and save a Soul; He can
silence ^he Oracles by the crying of an Hebrew Child in a Manger; cessant
Orac^ia d^ ^hi^ Psalm 8* 2
and ^ut of the mou^hs of Babes and Suck^ings ordain strength to still the
Eue^y and Avenger; Hebr. 2^, 34
out of weakness ^e makes strong, y^a to them that ^ave no might he renews
fl^ength; He makes the little one like Dav d, Isaia: 40, 29
and David as the Angel of the Lord.

Then lift up thine eyes on high, Isaia. 40 ^^
O my Soul, and beh^ld wh^ has ^reated all these, that b^ingeth out their host
by number, He calls them all by their names, by the greatness of his might,
Psalm 8 5 (...)
for that he ^r^ng in pow r not one f^aleth. Speak thou al^, O my Soul, of the
glory ^f his Kingdom, and ta^k thou of his P^w^, to make he Sons of Men to know
his mighty acts, Psalm 29, 1
and the glorious Majesty of h^s Kingdom. And Give unto the Lord ye mighty,
give unto the Lord Glory and strength, Be w^se by the Wor^s that told him to
his face, Acts 22, 23
that he was (...) their Brother, and should i^stantly die like Man, whom the
shout of the people cried up for a God; and learn (O thou Man of Sin) who
opposest and exaltest thy self above all that is called God, ^ Th. 2.3, 4
^r that is worshipped, so that thou sit in the Temple of God, showing thy
self that thou art God, Even learn in him that was once in the Chair, ^ala^ ^,
18
that there needs but Gods hissing for a fl^e to stop thy mouth of Blasphemies.
B^hold he tak^s away, who can hinder him? Job 9 4
who will say unto h m what do thou? He is wise in heart and mighty in
strength; Verse 12 13
And if God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do st^op under him.
But alas, Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Psalm 106, 2
who can show f^rth all his praise? Indeed Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
feared, Psalm. 145* 3
but his greatness is unsearchab^^. Go on, O my Soul, to admire what thou can
not utter; and think this at least of what God is able to do, Ephesians. 3:^
that he is able to do above that thou can think.

Sect. XXV.
TO think also, God Invisible
but to think holily, and with awful Impressions upon our Hearts, ^f thy
INVISBLE Lord God, ^welling in light which no man can ^pproach unto, ^ Tim: 6.16
whom no man has seen, nor can see; No Image to be made of God
of whom they saw no similitude in Horeb; Therefore says God, take go^d heed
to your selves, D^^ (...) ^
least ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, or the similitude
of any figure, and 24, 24
etc. for the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire, even a jealous God. So that the
making of any shape of God, though men may pretend they do it to advance God in
their thoughts, Images no help to godly thoughts
or to help them in their thoughts of God, whether it be by Hand or Heart, W^rk
or Thought, IMAGE or IMAGINATION, does nothing conduce to the making man
Z^alous, but God jealous; nor to the stirring of the Fire of man's affection to
his Maker, but of Gods Indignation against his Creature; whom whilst vain man
presumes to measure by his vain mind, He denies him to be God, for he is not
God except he be greater then our hearts. And thus ^he old Romans changing the
glory of the incorruptible God into an Image, Romans 1, 23
are charged not to like to ^etain God in their knowledge; A (...) Text of
Scripture that cuts off every Dagon by the very stumps; for whilst this is
pretended as the great use of Images, Pictures, banish Gods knowledge*
shapes and Figures, to help the ignorant, to keep God in their minds, to be
Laymens Books, to help Devotion, to heighten Holy thoughts, The Text says
expressly that as these come in, God goes out; because when they knew God they
glorified him not as God, Verse 22 24
but became vain in their IMAGINATIONS, their foolish heart was darkened, and
that in this particular, professing themselves to be wise, Verse 22
they became fools: so the Ido^atrous Israelites, make us Gods that may go
before us, These be thy Gods, O Israel; Say they to the Golden Calf, Ex 32, 5, 4
and Aaron built an Altar before it, and made Proclaimation, and said to morrow
is a Feast to Jehovah. (A Ghostly device to keep God in peoples minds,) those
very Images that they made to be HELPS in Worship, Jehovah ^ooked at ^hro^gh
the ^iol.
(for we see there was an Eye, through the Image to Jehovah exclude God out of
their knowledge, and Conclude them to be such as liked not to retain God in It;
And seeing this comes in as a Charge upon Pagan Rome, ^gan, (...) ^ome ex^uded
from ^e know^dge of God (...) Images.
when they wanted the discoveryes of this invisible God, and Glorious Christ,
which they after received by this great Apostles Ministry, and other blessed
helps; for even before this, says God, you had better Books, then Pictures or
Images, to have read me by, for the invivisible things of God from the Creation
of the World are clearly seen, being unde^stood by the things that are made,
^rse 20
even his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse; I say,
After that Faith is come, (which is the Evidence of things not seen (that
spiritual Eye that sees him that is invisible) for Rome called Christian, Hebr.
11, 1
Verse 27
having received the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 4, 4
who is THE IMAGE of God, to return to dumb Pictures, Images, Rome Papal
censured,
Doctrines of Doemons, etc. may give us occasion sadly to think and say, 1 Timothy
4, 2
How is the faithful City become an harlot! come out of her ye People, Isaiah
1, ^^
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues;
Rev. 18, 24
for says the Holy Ghost, Confounded be all they that serve graven Images.
Psalm 97 7


But may a man Think, if I love my Friend, I love his Picture, True Pictures of
God what Living Pictures
yea and love to have his Picture; And shall I love the Father, the Son, the
Holy Gbost, and may I not have and love their Pictures? Yes, God forbid else;
But then can thou Think, if thou Think Rightly, Ephesians. 4, 24
Rationally, and Scripturally, Col. 3, 10
that the Living God will have any other but living Pictures? Grace in the
heart is a true not a lying, Grace
because not a dead but a living Picture of the Living and true God, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, have that and keep it:
Christ
Jesus Christ himself is an express or a lively (because he is a living) Image
of the Father, Hebr. 1, 3
have him, and hold him, and much good may it do your very Heart with him:
Saints,
The Saints, the Excellent Ones in the Earth, Psalm 16, 3
these also are Gods own Pictures, They bea^ the Image of the Heavenly; 1 Cor:
15, 44 50
love them, and like them, and admire God in them (for of these it may be said,
God is in you of (...) truth, 1 Cor. 14, 25
) make much of them, and learn as much as you can by them, for these are good
Books indeed, as well as Living Pictures, being but transcripts of Gods Book,
Living Epistles, 2 Cor. 3, ^
as well as living Pictures, known and read of all men. But alas, Th^se true
Pictures of the living and true G^d are as much befriended by ^he curious
Pictures, that blind Devotion and Superstition have drawn for God in all Ages,
as man's Native Fire is by the Fever, or the Natural heat of the Stom^ch by the
praeter-natural.

But may not Pictures be made of the Trinity, The Father, Whether Images of God
may be made for History or Ornament
The Holy Ghost, and of Christ especially (se^ing he took Flesh, and was seen
in humane sh^pe) for ORNAMENT, and help in the History, and such like ends, Bp.
Tailors Dissuasive from p^pery Ch 1 Sect 8 9 See page 58 The Historical use of
Images did quickly pass into Su^erstition.
though not for Worship? What says ^he Doctrine of the CHURCH of ENGLAND?

Hom^ly against the peril of Idolatry, 3^. part, page 41, ^di^ Land 1^40
Condemns (...) ^ictures ^f God (...), etc.
They be convict of foolishnes^ and wickedness in making Imag^ of God or the
Trinity; yea and on^ to desire an Im ge of God com^ of Infidelity, thinking not
God (...) be present, exc^pt the^ might s^ some sign or Image of him, as appea
e h by the Heb^ews in the W^de^ness, w lling Aaron to man them Gods whom they
might see g^ before them, etc.

Thus it goes on,

Ref^ges the g e t argument of descriptions in the Old Testament,
Where they object, that seeing i^ Esaias and Daniel be certain d^scriptions of
God, as sitting on (...) High seat, etc. Why may no^ Painter likewise, etc.
seeing the Scripture, or writing, and Pictu^ d ffer but a little? F rst, It is
to (...) answered, that things forbidden (...) Gods w^rd, as Painting of Imag^
of God, and things permitted (...) God, as such descriptions used of t^
Prophets, be not all one; nei^h^ ought, nor can, man's reason ((...) (Although
it show never so goodly) prevail any thing against Gods express Word and
Statute Law. Furthermore the Scripture, although it have certain descriptions
of God, yet if thou read ^n forth, Endanger the b^i^ging in ^he Heresy of the
Anth^opomorphites.
it expounds it self, declaring that God is a Spirit, Infinite, who
replenisheth Heaven and Earth, which the Picture does not, nor expounds it
se^f, but rather, when it has set forth God in a bodily similitude* leaves a
man there, and will easily bring a man into the Heresy of the
Anthropomorphites, thinking God to have Hands and feet, and to sit as a man
does, which they that do (says S. Augustine in his book de fi^ and Symbol^,
cap 7.) fall into that Sacri^edge, Sacril^gious wick^d^ess
which the Apostle detesteth in those who have changed the Glory of the
incorruptible God, into the simililitude of a corruptible man. For it is
wickedness for a Christian to erect such a one in his heart by believing it.
But to this they reply that this reason notwithstanding, Images of Christ may
be made for that he took upon him Flesh and became man, Argument from Christ
ta^ing flesh refused
etc. The answer is easy. For in Gods word, and Religion, it is not only
required whether (...) thing may be done or no, but whether it be lawful and
agreeable to Gods word to be done, Hom^ against peril of Idolatry 3. part
Images of Christ lying Images
etc. and ye^ it appears no Image of Christ can be made, but a lying Image (as
the Scripture peculiarly calls Image^ lies) for Christ is God and Man, seeing
therefore for the Godhead, which is the most excellent, no Image can be made,
It is falsely called the Imag^ of Christ; wherefore Images of Christ be not
only defects, but also lies, etc. wherefore as soon as an Imag^ of Christ is
made, by and by is a (...) made of him, etc. and now if (...) should he
admitted and grante^ that an Image of Christ could tru^ be made, Unlawful,
yet it is unlawful that (...) should be made.

And so it proceeds to urge the unavoidable danger of Idolatry, Unavoidable
danger of Idolatry page 43,
and the Judgment of Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Lactantius, Augustine, affirming
that they make the Soul more crooked, rather then teach it, crook the Soul*
And therefore it adds that as it is written, Sap. 14. page 44
that Images were not from the beginning, neither shall they continue to the
end: so were they not in the beginning of the Primitive Church, God Grant
(says the Homily) they may in the end be destroyed. And further, that, page 4^
Truth it is, that Jews and Turks, hinder conversion of Jews and Turks,
who abhor Images and Idols, as directly forbidden by Gods word, will never
come to the truth of our Religion, whilst the stumbling blocks of Images remain
amongst us and lie in their way. Thus the Homily. So then as Pictures in
windows do darken the light with a fine show, so such representations of Divine
things in the wisdom of Humane Imag^nation does hinder, I^st^^d of h^ping, our
sight of God and Christ; who in this (as in other respects) is called the SUN
of Righteousness, Mal. 4 2
because as that glorious luminary is only to b^ seen in its own light, God
and Christ only to be seen in their own l^g^t.
so will God and Christ manifest themselves only in that way of discovery,
which themselves have sanctified through the Holy Ghost. So that while the
World by wisdom knows not God, 1 Cor. 2, 11 chap 1, 21
In Gods own light the Saints of God do see light. And O that God would help
the blinded world to see the difference between fancy and faith, the Ones being
affected in a carnal manner, Psalm 36, 9 Difference between Faith and Fancy; 1
Cor. 2.14
and by carnal means, and the others being acted upon that which is only
spiritual^y discerned, by spiritual means, and in a spiritual manner; So that
whilst one man being gr^ss in his Imagination, and made the more s^ by ^is
Images, embraces a Crucifix for a Christ, a piece of Wood, Stone, Metal, or
painted Cloth, and Printed Paper for God, like him in the Fable embracing the
Cloud for the Goddess; Matthew. 5, ^
Another being pure in heart is blessed with a true sight of God, so far as
Faith can reach, and the present state bear: for no Man has seen God at any
time; the only begot^en Son which is in the bosom of the Father, John 1, 11
he has declared him; and this of him, that not the carnal mind, or by carnal
means, 1 Cor 2, 1^
not the gross-hearted, but the pure hearted, the sublimated soul, the
spiritualized mind, such and such only have the blessed sight of God here and
hereafter. Therefore let us not think of bringing God down to us, shaping his
invisible and incomprehensible Excellencyes by our foolish fantasies and vain
thoughts, but rather by Faith let us say with David, Psalm. ^5.6
unto thee O Lord do I lift up my Soul.

Sect. XXVI.
God terrible
TO think also, but with all awfulness, of the Lord our God as God of Gods, and
Lord of Lords, Deuteronomy. 10, 17
a great God, a Mighty and terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes
Rewards, Heb. 12, 29
for even our God is a consuming Fire, whose Name is DREADFUL among the very
Heathen; Mal 1.14
who makes even the ends, Psalm 65 8
or uttermost parts of the earth afraid at his Tokens; who is terrible to the
Kings thereof; Psalm 76, 12
who puts no trust in his Servants, Job 4, 18
and his Angels he charge with folly; who puts no trust in his Saints, Job
15, 15
ye^ the Heavens are not clean in his sight, Before whom the holy Seraphims do
cover both their feet and their faces, Isaiah 6, 2
(as coverings of old were used in token of Reverence and Subjection) They
cover their feet, Genesis 24* 65
in token perhaps of their utter unworthiness to be looked upon by him, to whom
it is a kind of humbling to behold even the things that are in Heaven; Psalm.
113, 6
and their faces as unable to look upon him; Angels stand ^aw of God
as the Stars in a morning do carry their Lights, as it were in dark Lanthorns,
upon the Suns appearing, Job 38 ^
So also do these Morning Stars (as Scripture styles them) though of excellent
glory themselves, Though terrible to men
and such as is terrifying to the Children of Men, to the best, as to
Zechariah, to the worst and most obdurate, as the Keepers of the Watch upon the
Sepulcher, Lu 1, 11* 12
who for fear of one Angel did shake and became as dead men; Mat. 28* 3, 4
And no wonder, for he makes his Angels Spirits, Hebr. 1, 7
and his Ministers a flaming Fire. So that one of them is able to turn 185000
armed Men to Isaiah 37, 36
ashes in a night. And yet as the very beams of the far distant Sun in the
Firmament do bafflle, as it were, and non plus the Fire that flames on your
hea^ths, (which, Oh how frightful is it to you, when it steals but a little out
of its place, and begins to reach the bones of your buildings, and ride
triumphantly on the tops of your houses?) so, and infinitely more then so, does
the Dreadful Majesty of GOD apale the Excelcellency of all Angelical glory. Job
15 15
And if he Heavens (that were never stained) thinks the serious Soul, chap. 26
1^
be not clean in his sight, but the pillars thereof tremble, and are astonished
at his reproof; If the Angels that never sinned are so afraid, Devils afraid
of God
How terrible is his presence to that wicked one that is such a terror to poor
miserable mankind that some Nations worship Him (as it is said of the Indians)
that he may do them no harm, whose very Apparition (though in a visible shape)
is so confounding to poor Man, that he becomes like Saul before the W^ch of
Endor, 1 Samuel 28.2^
or like Eliphaz when fear and trembling came upon him, which made all his
bones to shake, a Spir^t ^assed before his face, Job 4, 14, 15
and the hair of his flesh stood up. I is not needful to present purpose to
determine what sorts of Spirits those were. This is certain that who shall not
fear thee, O Lord? Rev. 15, 3 4
is an Heavenly Ode, as Scripture calls it; (...)
and as true, that as Saints and Angels do fear before him, so the Devils also
believe and tremble. And therefore when the Soul thinks O I dare not pray, for
the Devil tells me, that if I go alone, James ^, 19 Job 1^, 4
or retire my self to pray, he will appear to me and affright me; It thinks
again, O I dare less restrain Prayer from the Almighty, Job 33, 7
for then his Terribleness will make me afraid: And if his slave be so
terrible, how dreadful is he that has him in his chain? who can restrain him
if I go, God terrible to his Saints
and will sooner or later let him loose upon me for not going. Destruction from
God was a terror unto me (says Holy Job) and by reason of his Highness I
could not endure; Job 31, 23
Therefore I am troubled at his presence, when I consider, I am afraid of him,
cap. 23, 15, 16,
for God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me; When I CONSIDER,
etc. Oh what high and awful Thoughts had this Holy Person of God! Jerem: 10 7
And indeed who would not fear thee, O thou King of Nations? For to thee does
it appertain (...) as the Prophet speaks. Woulds^ thou then be made soft, O
mine heart, as Job's was under the awful impressions of the most High? Would
thou serve the Lord with fear, Psalm 2, 11
and converse before him with tremhling? Go but to his Waterworks, or Fire
works, for many hard things are made soft by Fire and Water; And think of them
a little seriously. God terrible in his Water works.
ASK of them of Old times, when the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up,
Ge^ 7, 11
and the Flood gates of Heaven opened in the same day, and let them tell thee
if God be not terrible. Or if that be too far off, let them that go down into
the Seas in Ships, Psalm 107, 23 25, 26
that do business in the great waters, declare unto thee, when he commands,
and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up ^he waves thereof, they mount up
to the Heaven, they go down again to ^he depths, their Soul is melted because
of trouble, 27
they reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and ^re at their wits
ends. Fireworks
Or let Sodom ^y if God be not terrible, Genesis 19, 24 26
and that Pillar of Salt that was set like (...) Hand in the Margin of that
Dreadful Text. Ask also of the trembling Israelites who saw the Mountain that
burned with Fire; Deuteronomy. 10 16 18
and so terrible was the sight, that Moses said I exceedingly fear and quake.
Heb. 12, 21
Sport thy self on the top of flaming AETNA, or lay thy hand upon the hole of
raging Vesu^i^* Bath thy self in the melted M^nerals that flow in the bowels o^
^he cold Earth; Cool thy skin with Cantharides, or with the cold leaves of that
Plant in which one may feel so much of him that cal^s himself a Consuming Fire,
that the touch thereof does blister the ski^, and burn the flesh: Harden also
thy Eye sight against the lightening and strengthen thine ears against the
voice of Gods Thunder. Thunder
Ask the Heathen why he ran under hi^ Bed, Psalm 29, 3
and that his Imperial Crow^ was not thought by him a sufficient security to
his Head. A^^ Lebanon what it ails to skip like ^, 8, 9
Calf, and Syrion like a young Unicorn? The Wilderness of Kadesh why ^t shakes,
and the Hindes why they ^ast their Calves b^f^re their time? or why men more
wild then the Wilderness, and Brui^ish then ^h Be sts, do tremble when the God
of glory Thundreth: ^specially wh^^ h^ makes his Fire works and ^ater works
meet in One, when ^e Lord is upon many waters, Psalm, 29, 3, 7
that (...), the Ocean, And there the voice (...) the Lord divides the flames
of ^ire, that is, the Lightenings; lightenings
which Seafaring men find to be ^ost terrible in Nocturnal Tem^sts. N^y ask Men
why they ^emble without Thunderings, ^he still voice of a poor despised (...)?
Na^ a Faelix, on the Bench, Faelix, Acts 24, 25
^ore a Pr^soner at the Bar? Nay Bold Belshazzar without any ^se or whisper to
affright him ^he midst of Merriment, Beishazzar
Daniel ^, ^
and ^dless security, and that upon the first appearing (not of an Hand with a
sword in it) but the Fingers of a Man's Hand silently inscribing a few words on
the wall? Pashur
Nay why so many are Magor Missabibs, Jerem 20:3
fear round about, without voice or vision, save what is within? Spira
Ask poor Spira what he ailed and why he refused to be comforted* And the many
of the present Ag^ that have been hung up in Chain of the Spirit of Bondage,
an^ made terrors to themselves, Verse 4 Others under the Spirit of bondage,
an^ spectacles to all about them, A^ one Dales Wife of Chelmesford i^ Essex,
that lived many years i^ perpetual horror to her self and those that saw her;
and o^ Maud a man that (through te^rours of Conscience) starved him self to
death, See also Mr. Brewers sermon on Mr. Vere of He^eningham.
being otherwise pr^vented in destroying himself b^ Hanging and Drowning which
(...) attempted, and in accusing hi^ self that he might have be^ dispatched out
of the way by the hand of public Justice, for an old Murder which he
pretended, but intended it as a plot upon his own Life, which not taking, he
never would admit any sustenance down his throat (though forced unto his mouth)
till utterly fam^shed; both recent instances and within little more then twenty
Miles each of other, and of both which I have been an eye witness; and other
like might be added.

And now ask such as these, Heb. 10.3^
if (...) be not a fearful thing to fall into ^he hands of the living God.
Terrible it praises
He in^eed is fearful in his very praises, and his Goodness to be feared: His
^race by no means to be turned into ^antoness, Exodus 15, ^^
but the forgiveness that (...) with him is that he may be feared. ^e that
spared not the Angels that ^oned, but cast them down into hell, Goodness
^at spared not the old World, Hosea 35 Forgiveness
bring^g in the Flond upon the World of the ungodly, Psalm 130, 4 S ar^d not
^ng^ls 2 (...) 2 4 Old ^orld Verse 5 Sodom V, 6 Natural branches
and turning the City^ of Sodom and Gomor^h^ into Ash^ condemning them with an
overthro^ making them an Example un^o thos^ that should live ungo^ly; that
spare^ not the Natural Branches, O tak^ heed least he also spare not thee.
(...) by terrible things in Righteousnes^ God will answer them to whom he is
God of Salvation; Romans 11.21
Surely his J^stice will be very terrible to the Sons of Perdition; If God
spare not his own Son, his own Son
but it ple^sed the Lord to bruise him, Isaia. 53, 10
and to put hi^ to grief who knew no sin, but had s^ only imputed to him;
Rejoicing in the destruction of the wicked. Isaaah 1, 24
O ho^ terrible, thinks the Soul, is G^ when he cries out Ah I will e^ me of
mine Adversaryes, and ^venge me of mine Enemies; I w^ rejoice over you to
destroy you, Deuteronomy 38, 63
a^ to bring you to naught; I will laug^ at your Calamity, P^ 1, 26, 27
and mock when your fear comes, when your fe^ comes as desolation, and your
D^struction comes as a Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you;
Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, Ezekiel. 5, 1^
and I will be comforted. And oh how awful a thought it is that it should be
both easing and pleasing to God to destroy sinners? 2 Cor. 1, 3
That the God of all comforts, as Scripture calls him, should be Comforted in
the Perdition of ungodly Men? and laugh at their fear, Job 6.14
who forsake the fear of the Almighty? And Oh how fearful is He in his
punishments, who is so in his praises? How terrible in his Righteousness, who
is to be feared for his Goodness? 1 Pet 1, 1^
If they that Call on the Father must pass their time in fear, because without
respect of persons, he judgeeth every one according to his works, Isaia. 33, 14
O how may the Sinners in Zion be afraid, what fearfulness may surprise the
Hypocrites? If they be unable to Contend with his burning Agues, God terrible
in present punishment,
Plagues and Fevers, How will they dwell with Everlasting burnings? Oh what
will they do in the swellings of Jordan? Jerem 12, 5
when the breath of the Lord as a River of Brimstone shall kindle upon them
those Eternal Flames that none shall be able to quench? Isaia 30, 33
for the Lord is jealous an^ Revengeth; chap. 66, 24
The Lord Revengeth and is furious; The Lord will take vengeance on his
Adversaryes, Nahum 1, 2
and he Reserveth wrath for his Enemy^s. Reserves of wrath terrible.
O those RESERVES of Wrath, how dreadful are they? That, when Millions of Ages
are expired, they remain unexhausted; There is still a certain fearful
expectation, and looking for, of Judgment and Fiery Indignation still, Hebr.
10, 27
still. Ah Lord! who knows the power of thine Anger? Psalm 90, 11
according to thy fear so is thy wrath. God corrects who^ he loves.
Thou Correctest whom thou love, what will thou do with them thou hate? If
Judgment must begin at the House of God, what, Hebr. 12, 6
O what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? 1 Pet: 17.18
and If the Righteous scarcely be saved, What the (...) shall be the end of the
wicked
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? thou gatherest a Rod for every Son
thou Receivest, nay the Holy Child Jesus was not excepted, nor exempted, who
though he were a Son, Zech, 13.7
thine Equal, a Man thy fellow, yet did thy Sword awake against him, Hebr, 5, 8
and He ^earnt obedience by the things that he suffered. Luke 23 32
And if these things were done in the Green Tree, O what shall become of the
Dry? What Scorpions are prepared to be scour^es for the wicked? Psalm ^ 23
surely God has prepared for him the instruments of death, and ordained his
Arr^ws against the persecutors. Upon the Wicked he shall Rain snares, Psalm 8^,
6
Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of
their Cu^* Wherefore, O God, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, Ps. 119, 120
and I am afraid of thy Judgments, for all the ways of the Lord are
Judgment, a God of Truth, Deuteronomy. 32, 4
and without Iniquity, just and Right is he; with Him is terrible Majesty, He
is excellent in power, Job 37.22 23, 24
and in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice, Men do therefore fear him, and
well they may. Be thou therefore in the fear of the Lord, Prove. 23, 14
Neh. 5, 15
O my Soul, all the day long; and however others may dare to presume upon him,
yet so do not thou, because of the fear of the Lord.

Sect. XXVII.
THe Lord thou hear, O my Soul! God of truth
is a God of TRUTH as well as Righteousness, O Tremble at his word as well as
works, Isaiah 66, 5
and be thou afraid of the Judgments of his mouth as well as of his Hands,
For the Lord confirms the word of his Servants, Isaiah 64, 26
and performs the Counsels of his Messengers, Matthew. 5 18
neither is there any Iota of his Threatenings any more then of his Promises,
that shall pass away until all be fulfilled; for the strength of Israel will
not lie nor Repent, 1 Samuel 15 29
Isaiah 11, 5
for he is not as Man that he should Repent. The truth is, Gods TRUTH is as the
Girdle of his Loins. What ever God is, In all He is
He is in TRUTH. As God is TRUE says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1, 18
Our word toward you was not yea and nay, The Lord is the true God, says
Jeremiah, Jerem 10 10
the God of TRUTH (says the Margin with the Hebrew) at his Wrath shall the
Earth tremble, etc. Whatever God says, He says in Truth, In all he says
Thy Word is true (says David) from the beginning, Ps^. 19, 160
and every one of thy Righteous Judgments endures for ever. Psalm 19 9
The Judgments of the Lord are truth (says the Hebrew) These are the true
sayings of God. Whatever God does. Revel: 19, 9
In all he does
He does it in Truth, All his work; are done in Truth, Psalm 33 4
The works of his hands are verity and Judgment, they stand fast for ever and
ever, Psa. 111 7, 8
and are done in truth and uprightness. Psalm. 80, 7, 8
Therefore God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to be
had in Revere^ce of all them that are about him, It follows, O Lord God of
Hosts who is like unto thee, or to thy FAITHFVLNES round about thee? So that as
the Girdle goes round about All, and encomp^sseth and encloseth All, so Gods
Truth and Faithfulness does surround all the rest of his Excellencyes, and
therefore if our Thoughts of God be Right, We shall have most awful and
Reverend Impressions on our Hearts, not only from the SEVERITY but from the
VERITY of God, not only from his Justice and Righteousness, but also from his
TRUTH and Faithfulness.

Sect. XXVIII.
BUT then again if our THOUGHTS of GOD be Right and Scriptural, Thoughts of God
must be
they must be CHEERFUL as well as FEARFUL, There must be a Rejoicing with our
Trembling; Psalm 2, 11
Divine Thoughts must be awful but delightful, as a Son thinks of his Father,
Cheerful as well as fearful:
not as a slave thinks of his Taskmaster, or a Condemned Prisoner of his
Executioner; for God is LOVE; and how can LOVE be Rightly thought of, unless it
be thought LOVELY? 1 John 4, 8.16
or how can this precious box of rich perfume the love of God be shed abroad in
the heart, Rom 5 5
and the thoughts thereof not be sweet-sented? our fear not a fear of torment,
and indeed the sweeter (as perfumes are) for being held to the Fire of holy
Fear; There is a Fear that has TORMENT, which Love labors to cast out; 1 John
4, 11
but again there is a Fear that gives temper to true LOVE of God, and strips it
self of its All, as it were, to the service of it (as Jonathan did by David)
even to its Sword, 1 Samuel 18, 4
and to its Girdle, and to its Bow Our God is a CONSUMING FIRE, Heb. 12, 29
Here is Trembling, and good cause why; but this God is OUR GOD (as the
Psalmist speaks) for ever and ever, Psalm 48, 14
He will be OUR GUIDE, even unto death, here is rejoicing with our trembling.
And O how amiable is this Chequer-Work of Man's thoughts in the sight of God?
surely things are not as they should be with us when we Remember God and are
troubled: Psalm 77, 3
what? Harbor hard thoughts of the Father of Mercyes? 2 Cor. 1, 3
Think evil of the Fountain of all Goodness? Good thoughts of God
ah wherein has God deserved this at man's hands? Ezekiel 18.32 and 33, 1^
Is it because he swears as he lives that he has no pleasure in the death of
him that dies, But that the wicked turn from his way and live, that is, but
rather that sinners should Repent and live? Is it because he cries out to you,
turn ye, c^p 33, 11
turn y^ from your evil ways* for why will ye die? or because he cries out of
you, John 5, 40
ye will not come to me that ye might h^ve life? or because he cries out ^ver
you, how shall I give thee up? how shall I make thee as Admah, and ^et thee as
Zebo^? Hosea 11, 8
O sinners what shall I do unto you? or because he ^ryes out for you, chap. 6,
4 Psalm 8^ 13 Isaia 48 18 Luke 19, 42
when it is too ^re, O that ye had hearkened unto ^y voice, that thou had
known at ^ast in this thy day the things that ^elong unto thy peace, but now
they ^re hid from thine eyes? Wretched Miscreant! Will thou go on to ^ate
Wisdom, and to love Death, Prove. 8.35
as ^deed thou do, and then think ^at God is an Enemy to mankind; ^d takes
delight in making Crea^res merely to destroy them? O spit out thy Gall and
Venim, and and clear thy Thought: of prejudice against thy faithful Creator,
and most merciful Preserver, and account his long-suffering to be Salvation; ^
Pet 3:15
that he, that reprieves thee, would pardon thee, did thou sue for his
pardon, as thou would beg for thy Life; for he is so Gracious that he waits
that he may be gracious, Isaia. 30, 18
Therefore turn the to thy God, Hosea 12, 6
and wait on thy G^ continually. Gods thoughts not to be measured by ours
And think not to measure his pardoning Mercyes by thine which are crueltyes,
no^ by thy frowardness and passions, nor by thy hard Thoughts and evil
surmises, Prove. 12, 10
as if God were altogether such a one as thy self, till thou can measure the
space betwixt the Heavens and the Earth (for so high are his thoughts above thy
thoughts) Isaiah 55, 7 8, 9
or till thou can find in thy hea^ to follow thine Enemy, momen^ by moment,
all the days of his life with thine unwearyed care for his safety, and
providence for his supply, and by that time that ^hou have done for thine Enemy
as God has taught thee by what he has done for thee, it is like that thou will
have better thoughts of thy God; Gods challe^ge to man
or if thou have not, come and testify against him, If thou dare, or if thou
can; for ^is a challenge of Gods own maing, O my people, Micah ^, 3
what have I done (...) thee? testify against me; and I as his Herald,
proclaim this his ^hallenge to thee.

But if thou keep silence, let ^he speak, and tell thee plainly what he has
done unto thee. He ^ade thee a Man, that might ^ave made thee a Brute, and gave
^ee a Soul endued with Reason, Jer. 38, 1^
^mproveable by Grace, and so ^pable of Salvation. Psalm 13^, 14, 15
He gave ^ee thy shape, that might have ^ade thee a Monster, and made thee
desirable to others, who might have made thee a burden to thy self, The Hand
of his Providence took thee out of thy Mothers womb, and has ever since
suffered thee to hang upon it, Psalm 22, 9
though thy teeth so deep in it that thy venomous biting has often gone, as it
were, to his very heart, and he, with more ease, might have shaken thee off
into the Fire of his wrath. Acts 28, 5
He kept thee from ten thousand Deaths and Dangers in thy fearless Infancy,
Psalm 71, 6
careless Childhood, hardy and adventrous youth, and troublesome Manhood to the
very moment that thou art reading this. Psalm 41, 3
He made thy Bed in thy last sickness, bare thee up in his Everlasting Arms
the last time that thou fellest from thy Horse, Psalm 36, 6
and saved both Man and Beast, Psa. 107, 50
brought thee safe to shore the las^ time that thou gave thy self for lost at
Sea. He gave thee thy Possess^ons, Thy Promotions, Thy comfortable Relations,
thy loving Wife, thy lovely Children, thy health, strength, limbs, liberty,
credit, Comforts of all sorts; even every good gift, James 1, 17
And if these had been too little, 2 Samuel 12, 8
as was said to David he would have given thee more and greater things then
these, had thou not been wanting to thy self. How often would he have
gathered thee as a Hen gathered her Chickens under her wings? Mat. 23, 3^
How often would he have convinced, converted, humbled thee, healed thee, given
thee his Son, and given thee his Spirit; Isaiah 5, ^
And now Judge, I pray thee, between God and thy own Soul, what could he have
done for thee more then that which he has done? Thou need a Christ, and all
the day long, Isaiah 65, ^
he stretches out his hand to tender his Christ unto thee; and why did he give
thee thy Reason but to lead thee to close with his goodness, for thy good?

But besides the Lord is GREAT as well as GOOD, God great as well as good.
else he were not GOD; And has done more then he owes thee in spreading a
table, Mat. 21, 34 37
wirhout compelling thy appetite, that is more then thou expectest from thy
best friend thou have, that is but thine equal. He has sent forth his
Servants, 1 Pet. 3, 19
and with them his Son, and in them his Spirit, Matthew. 22, 4
And all these say to thee Come, All things are ready, O taste then, Psalm 34, 8
and see how GOOD the LORD is. Away then for shame with all thy sour and harsh
thoughts of God, Genesis 3.4, 5
and purge out thy old Leaven whereby the old Serpent first soured the whole
lump of mankind with a hard opinion of God, as if he were not enough inclined
to man's good. Right thoughts of G^d must be sweet thoughts.
Ou^ thoughts of God if they be Right thoughts must be SVVEET Thoughts as
David's were; Bones of marrow, and not bags of Gall; our Souls must be satisfied
with them (as his was) as with marrow and with fatness. Psalm. 104 34
Yea even for them that were never yet brought into his banqueting house (to
taste of those dainties, Psalm. 65.5, 6
Cantic. 214 Psalm. 106, 5
which Scriptures call the good of his chosen, that hidden Man^a, the meat and
drink wbich the World knows not of, Revel. 2, 17
the sweet re^st of the hi^den ones) there is a Goodness, God good to all,
yea Riches of g^odness to ^e thought of by them, and not ^o be despised, Psalm.
83 3
but Improved by ^ff^ctionate meditation till it lead them to Repentance. Romans
2, 4
For he leaves ^ot himself without witness, Acts 14.17
even as ^o these, in that he does good, and ^ives them Rain from Heaven, and
^urtful seasons, f^lling their hearts ^ith food and gladness: And if he ^ave
not himself without witness, ^ke heed he leave not thee without ^xcuse. Think
with thy self therefore a little seriously O man, of this Riches both of the
goodness, and long suffering and forbearance of God. Have thou not found that
there are sparing Mercies, Sparing mercyes an evi^ence thereof,
and can thou not think that there are pardoning mercyes with the Lord? He
that has laid it upon thee to Regard the life of thy Beast, Prove, 12, 10
and has himself had so continual a regard to the life of thy body, (which
indeed is as thy Beast or brutish part) but styles himself the Father of our
Spirits, Hebr. 12, 9
whilst he calls others the Fathers of our Flesh, cans^ thou find in thy heart
to thin^ that he has no regard for the lif^ of thy Soul? Jer. 2, 31
Has God indee^ been a Barren Wilderness to thee that has given thee so many
fruitful seasons? or has he bee^ only so to thy Soul? surely what ever he is
to other Nations he has not been so to us: so the means of Grace.
mean of Grace have not been wanti^ to thee, nor would his Grace have been
wanting to thee in the humble and diligent use of those means: Thou have not
been straightened in the Lord surely, 2 Cor. 6, 12
whatever thou have been in thy own bowels, Has He been a Land of darkness to
thee, who has caused his Sun to arise upon thee, Matthew 5, 44
though thou art Evil? Or has he been only so to thy Soul? Mal: 24* 2
Have thou not also heard of a Sun of Righteousness that he makes to arise
with heal^ng in his wings upon those that ^elieve in him that justifyeth the
un^odly? Romans 4 5
And if all other thy un^odliness be no Bar, O why should thy unbelief or
hard thou^hts of this good God be so.

Objection
But some one may think, Micah 3, 6
is ^ere any evil in the City and the lord has not done it? nay does ^e not
own it? where is then the ^oodness you spoke of? God the author of evil,
Out of ^e mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good? Lam 3* 38
is not He said to frame Evil? Jerem. 18:21
to devise evil, to create Evil? And can this consist with so great Goodness?
But think again O Man that the Scripture says, Micah 2, 3
the Almighty will not afflict willingly, Isaiah 45:7
nor grieve the children of Men. Answer.
As a good Parent does not correct willingly, yet he were not a good Parent
should he not correct. Job 37:23
He has showed thee O Man, what is good, to do Justice, and to love Mercy;
Lam: 2, 33:
And cannot God be good though he do Justice, God good in correcting
whilst he loves Mercy? for Mercy pleases him, or he delights in Mercy, but
Judgment he calls his strange work. Micah 6:8 chap: 7:18 Isaia: 28:21
But go thou and first offer this to thy Governor, before thou presumest to
reply against God, Malac. 1:8
and tell thy Prince, if thou dare, Rom: 9:20
that His Government is not good, because He has Bethlehems for Mad Folks, and
punishing
and Houses of Correction for Rogues and Vagabonds, and places of Execution,
Punishment of the wicked good for the good
and instruments of Death for Traitors and Capital Malefactors But how should
the Government be good to the Good, if it should not restr^in and punish the
Evil? Nay surely the Lords goodness is never more orient in the eyes of his
people, So of their own sins Psalm: 99:8
then when he takes vengeance (not only of their Enemies but) of their
inventions, and yet pardons their sins, and saves their Souls. And oh how shall
he come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that believe, 2
These: 1:10
Even when the Lord Jesus shall show himse^f from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, Verse 8
rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and obey not his Gospel? So that
the Goodness of God is never the less conspicuous, but indeed so much the more
Glorious, being beheld (as the Apostle speaks) together with his Severity, Romans
11:22
as bright colors are the most resplendent when they are heightened from the
darkest shaddows; Behold, says He, the GOODNESS and the SEVERITY of God.
Goodness of God no less conspicuuous for his severity,
Lo here a Right Theme for Thoughts. Behold his Goodness, btt Remember his
Severity; Think of his Severitie but forget not his Goodness; That the Thought
of Severity without Goodness, may not make th^e desperate, nor of Goodness
without Severity make thee Malepart and wanton, but that both together may make
thee humble and hearty, and dutiful and diligent, fearful and yet cheerful in
all ways of Holiness and new Obedience.

But may thou think again, if the Lord be so Good, Objection
He might have made all Men's condition to be such? If God be so good why did he
not make all men's condition such?
It Is true indeed, He might do so, and He did so, And I may challenge thee yet
again in His Name, what Iniquity did thy first Father (and all his Posterity in
him) find in God, Jerem. 2:5
that he went far from him (and they with him) and walked after vanity, Answer,
God did so, Eccles. 7:31
and became vain? Did not God make man upright, and give Him a Right Law, Romans
7, 12
a Commandment that was Holy, Just and Good? was it not Just, Genesis 2:16
that He that gave man all the rest of the Trees of the Garden should keep One
to himself, and that, Verse 17
He that put all things under man's feet, Psalm 8 ^
should appoint him a test for his obedience to His Supreme Lord? And was it
not Good, Gods goodness in the first COVENANT,
that He gave Him a Law that He might keep, and a Principle and Power that
might keep it, if he would; that He forbad Him and forwarn'd Him what would
hurt Him; and promised Him Life in keeping a practicable Law, a Commandment
that was fair and that was facile, proper for Him, and profitable for all
mankind in Him. Must the great God to show his Goodness to p^or man, Genesis 1, to
26
first build a world as a well furnished House, Verse 26:27 chap. 2:17
before He brings in his Guest, and then call a Council as it were, in Heaven,
about molding a clod of Earth into an Excellent shape, and breathing therein a
living Spirit, and Imprint thereon a Divine similitude, and place Him as his
Viceroy upon Earth, and to hold all, as it were, but by (the payment of a
Pepper-Corn) the Forbearing of one Tree; And when miserable Man after all this,
has not made good his Allegiance, but broken Faith with his Maker, selling
Himself and his Posterity for an Apple, or some such like thing, to the evil
first of Sin, and so of Suffering, shall man's Impudent Posterity p esume in
their Hearts after all this to call in Question the Goodness of God, for no
other reason but his making his Word good, his Threatening good, and so his
Commandment good in the penal part of it, which was that part which he
undertook to make good, if Man failed to make good the other part of Obedience?
Ah how truly may it here be said, that the foolishness of man perverteth his
way, Prove. 19:^
and his Heart fretteth against the Lord? When He that transgresses a good
Law, judges that Law, and pronounces it Evil by His disobedience; How can He
that made that Law, vindicate that Law, or be good in his place, without making
of it good, by punishing the Transgressor; Think therefore (vain Man) what thou will, but know that the Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake, Isaia.
42, 21
and (if a man vilify) He will magnify his Law and make it honorable. Gods
goodn^ss in rewarding the least (...) good in the wicked,
Thou will grant him to be a good Master that rewards the Good though He
Punish the Evil Servant: produce therefore thy Cause, and bring forth thy
strong Reasons; If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? But and if thou do
evil, Is it Gods fault that Sin lies at thy door? Gen, 4.7
An Ahabs Humiliation (so good a Master is God, though the Man was but an
Hypocrite) shall have a temporal Reward; As far as he is capable
The Lord is so good that He will not set a Nebuchadnezzar a poor Heathen, 1
Kin 21 29
a work, but He shall have his wages. A cup of cold water given in his Name
shall not want its Reward. Ezekiel. 29, 18 20
If any one perform any Spiritual good, Rewards spiritual good,
the good God shall give him a spiritual Reward, Mat. 10.42
yea will take great notice even of the least good thing, (...) spiritual
ble^sing
as in the case of young Abi^^ in whom was sound some good thing toward the
Lord God of Isreal, 1 Kin 14 1^
in the wicked house of Jeroboam; and will renumerate the performances, of
outwardly good things, with compensations suitable to the persons and
performances, as the removal of outward Evils, and the Donation of outward
blessings: The Ninevites they Repent them of their S^ns (though it were but
after a fashion, Nah: 11. etc
as appears after by the Burden of Nineveh in Nahums Prophesy? And this good
God, Jon: 3, 10
He presently Repents him of the Evil that he had said he would do unto them,
and did it not, till they Repented them again of their Repentance. Potiphar and
Pharaoh make much of Gods Joseph, Genesis 39 ^
and God blesses their houses for Joseph's sake. And must God pervert Judgment,
and not punish the wicked, that he may have thy good word, Justice not
derogatory to goodness in a Judge
or be well thought of by thee? Is ^is Justice derogatory to his Goodness? Thou
can applaud the sen^ence of a Judge in Condemning ^he Injuries that have been
done unto thee; why can thou not as well say unto God with the Psalmist, Psalm
119, 39
thy Judgments are good? Yea with many, He is the best Man that will least
bear an Injury, but is most vindictive, and must not vengeance be the Lords,
and may not he repay, Hebr. 1^:30
without incurring thy evil thoughts?

A wrong thought of Gods goodness to think He will destroy none
It Is an evil Thought of Gods Goodness that some Ignorant Ones have, or at least
would fain have, that he that made them will never destroy them, nor indeed
ever would he had they continued what he made them; But this good God says
expressly, and He knows what he has to do, It is a People of no understanding,
Isaia. 27.11
therefore he that made them will have no mercy on them, and he that formed
them will show them no favor.

Sect. XXIX.
BUt and if thou think hardly of Gods Dealing with Men fallen under the
first Covenant, Gods goodness in the NEW COVENANT,
^he Covenant of Works, O buisy ^hy thoughts so much the more ^n the New
Covenant, and surely ^hou can not but cry, Grace, Hebr. 8:8 of GRACE
Grace unto it. O this is that where one are excluded, but self-exclu^ers, nor
counted unworthy, Zech: 4:7
but those that are unwilling; where ^he worst are invited, Matthew 22, 8
and the most ^eavy laden best welcomed: chap. 11, 28 1 Kin: 21:16
where ^inks of Sin (as Manasseh an Ido^ter and a Conjurer who filled Jeru^lem
with blood) are made vessels ^f mercy prepared unto glory: Verse 6
where ^ansion Houses of Devils (as Mary Magdalen) become Tem^es of the
Holy Ghost, Mark 16:9
Habitations God through the Spirit; Acts 9, 1^
where ^ersecutors (as Saul) become Preachers of Righteouness, Isaiah 11:6
and the Wolf dwells with the Lamb, and the Leopard lies down with the Kid, and
the Calf with the Lion, and the little Child does lead them, etc. Where cruel
Jews are saved by the Blood rhat they shed, Acts 2:23
and by putting forth an hand of Faith to take hold on him whom themselves had
taken before, 1 Co. 6.9, 10 11
and by wicked hands had Crucified and slain: And where Sinners of the
Gentiles, Fornicators Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate persons, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Raylers, Extortioners,
are washed, are sanctifytd, are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. Where blemishes are no bar to admission to the Marriage
Supper of the King, Luke 1^, 21 Verse 23
but the Poor and the the Maimed* and the Halt and the Blind are entertained,
yea the very Hedgerows are searched, and the very Vagabonds, and High way-men
are compelled to come in. Where the eyes of the Blind see out of obscurity,
Isaia, 35:5, 6 8
and the ears of the Deaf are opened, and the Lame Man leaps as an Heart, and
the tongue of the dumb does sing; Wh^re the wayfering Man though a fool does
not err; Isaia: 29.24
and they that erred in spirit come to understanding, and they that murmured to
learn Doctrine* Where God looks upon men, and if any say I have sinned, Job
33.27 28
and perverted that which was Right and it profited me not, He will deliver him
from going down into the pit, and his Life shall see the light. Luke 1 7^
Where Light is given to them that sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of
Death; Hebr, 8 12
and where Iniquity is forgiven, and Sin is Remembered no more. Free Grace
In the First Covenant God was good to Man's Righteousness; ^n this New Covenant
He is merciful to his unrighteousness; In that He from Eternity to Eternity;
Ephesians. 3, 11
and Height of Love, bearing sinners up from Hell to Heaven, 1 Cor. 15, 45 47
and to a more blessed and glorious state in the second Adam, than they fell
from in the first. And O what a Theme for Thoughts is here? Here is Height for
the Highest; Covenant of GRACE the amplest Theme for thoughts
Depth for the Profoundest. Breadth for the largest; Length for the longest
Thoughts Man can possibly have, and indeed Thoughts are the largest things in
the World.

Sect. XXX.
THis, this was that, tha^ took up Gods own Thought from all Eternity, Ephesians.
1, 9
this good pleasure of his goodness, with 3, 11
which H^ purposed in Himself. The Lord possessed me (says Christ) in the
beginning of his way, CHRIST
before his work of old, or ever the Depths or the Fountains, Prove. 8, 2^
or the Mountains or Hills were settled, or the Earth made, The object of Gods
Eternal Th^^ghts,
or the Clouds confirmed, or the Heavens prepared; Then was He with God as one
brought up with him, ^ejoycing always before him, and was daily his Delight,
even he whose Rejoicing is in the habitable parts of the Earth, Verse 30, 3^
and his delights are with the Children of men, that is to say, with Fallen
Man; or, as it is ^xpressed in the Psalmist, even ^he Rebellious, Psalm* 68, 1^
that God might dwell among them. The Lord possessed ^e, says Christ; Now the
^houghts as we have formerly ^id, are the possessions of the heart.

This, was that, that took up ^e Thoughts of all the best in the ^st Ages of
the World, And of good men the first of the
when ^ey had but a little hole to see day (...) when this Infant Covenant of
^ace was wrapped in the Swadling-^^ (...) short and single Pro^se (...) of the
Woman shall break the Serpents head; Genesis 3, 15
Wherefore when that Son was born, O^ whom Christ was to come, E^ calls him
Seth, Genesis 4^ 25
a FOUNDATION and how glad were they when God did but never so little fu^ther
open it, and make a way for their further Thoughts about i^ 'Twas a little
plainer to Abraham In thy seed shall all the Nations of t^^ world be blessed;
^^raham (...) 12, 3
And says Christ of Abraham, He saw my day an^ was glad. Joh 8, 56
How buisy was Hol^ Job about the Thoughts of his R^deemer, Job 19, 25, 26, 27
of his standing upon t^ Earth, and his seeing of him wi^^ those very eyes of
his at the last day And gracious Elihu; about the way of Gods dealing with
pen^tent Sinners on the account o^ Savior, ^
Deliver him from goi^^ down into the Pit, I have found RANSOM. 24 CHRIST
When Agur (...) discoursing with IN (...). V^ you may see where (...) were by
his Question, What is his Name, Prove. 30, 4
and what is his SONS Name if thou can tell.

And as for David to whom, Of David especially Psalms a little New Testament.
as to a special favorite, so large and glorious discoveryes were made, O how
enlarged and affectionate were his Meditations, So that David and the Book of
the Psalms is quoted by Christ himself as most clear and copious concerning
Him, Luke 24, 44
All things (says he) must be fulfilled that were written in the Law of Moses,
and the Prophets, and the PSALMS concerning ME; Acts 1, 16 and 20, 2 25 29.34
and 4, 21, etc. and 13, 33
And so in the Acts and elsewhere, as if the PSALMS were a little New Testament
in the middle of the Old.

How full were David's Thoughts of this great and glorious name the LORD JESUS
CHRIST. David's thoughts buisyed above Christ's name, (...) Psalm. (...) comp^
(...) with (...) 43
He calls him LORD in spirit, when he says, The Lord said unto my LORD sit
thou on my right hand, etc. He calls him Gods Anointed, Psalm 2, 2
which, in the Greek tongue, is CHRIST, Yea the Anointed of God above his
Fellows, Psalm 45, 7
which is as much as THE CHRIST (as she asked, ^ohn 4, 29
Is not this THE CHRIST* that is Christ above all Christ's for though there were
many Christ^ they were taught to expect ON^ Christ above All.) And he call^^
Him his Savior, 2 Samuel 22, 3
and his Salvation most frequently, which in the Hebrew tongue is JESUS. Psa
118, 14 and 21
So th^^ that saying of the Blessed Virgin My Spirit Rejoices in God M^
SAVIOR, Luke 1, 47
and that of the Apostle, Philip. 3, 3
We rejoice in JESUS, see^ clearly to be taken from that o^ David, Psalm 3^, 9
My Soul shall be joyful (...) the Lord, it shall Rejoice in his S^^vation, or
(as it may be read^ the letter in the Hebrew Text My Soul shall Rejoice in his
JESUS

Concerning his Person; (...) Thoughts were clear; He exho^^ ^he Kings of the
Earth to kiss the SON, Verse 7
and tells you plainly that he means the only BEGOTTEN of God, when he says
the LORD has said thou art MY SON, this day have I BEGOTTEN Thee; Psalm. 89, 26
compared with Hebr. 1, 5
and again, I will be to him a Father, and He shall be to me a Son.

So also concerning his distinct Natures, in one Subsistence, Natures
He calls him LORD in Spirit, because he knew him to be GOD, who she knew) was
to be his SON after the Flesh, as MAN, Psa. 4 5, 6 7
yet says expressly to him, Thy Throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever, etc. Thou
love Righteousness, etc. therefore GOD thy GOD has Anointed thee, etc. He
knew that Christ, the anointed of God, was GOD, for (says the Apostle) It is
unto the SON that he says thy Throne, O GOD is for ever and ever, etc. Yet H^
also distinctly and certainly knew that God had sworn that of the frui^ of his
Loins He would raise up Christ (as concerning the Flesh) to sit upon his Throne
(as the Apostle speaks* Acts 2, 30
So that he may be thought to mean this when he says Trut^ shall spring out of
the Earth, Psalm. 85, 1^
an^ Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. He might well call him TRUTH,
as he was the Promise^ Messiah, for in this respect h^ was to spring out of the
Earth, to be born of a Woman in the Citi^ of David; And he might c^l^ him
RIGHTEOUSNESS, who i^ called elsewhere (Jehovah Tzidkenu, Jer. 33, 16
) The LORD Our Righteousness, Malac. 4, 2
and the SUN of Righteousnes^ (as another Prophet calls h m) now it is proper
for the SUN t^ look down from Heaven.

Incarnation
Concerning his Incarnation and Birth, which he calls the budding of the Horn of
David, Psa. 142, 17 Luke 1, 69
o^ (which is all one) the raising up ^ mighty Salvation, or a Horn of
Salvation for his people in the house of his Servant David, he brings in Christ
plainly thus speaking, Sacrifice and Offering, Ps ^0.6, 7, 8 Hebr. 10, 5
and burnt Offerings thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me, So
the holy Ghost in the Hebrews renders that of the Psalmist, Mine ears have
thou opened, or pierced through, and applies it to Christ's Coming into the
World in the Flesh, Then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the Book it is
written of Me, I delight to do thy will, O my God, etc.

He had also most clear conceptions concerning Christ's bitter Sufferings.
Passion


By the Raging Combination of the Heathen (that is the Gentiles) and the
People, (that is the Jews) and Consultation of the Kings of the Earth, and the
Rulers (that is, Herod, and Pontius Pilate) against the Lord and his CHRIST, as
it is expounded in the Acts,

Psa 118, 22 1 Pet. 2, 7
By the Malice of the Priests and Elders (that should have been Builders of the
People in the Faith and acceptance of this Promised Messiah) Refusing that
stone which God has designed to be the Head of the Corner.

Psalm 41, 9 Jo. 13, 18, 21
By the Treason of Judas that did eat of his Bread, yet lifted up his heel
against him. By the scoffs of Spectators, and cruel mocking of passers by, Psalm
22, 7, 8 Mat. 27, 43
wagging their heads at him and saying, He trusted in the Lord let him deliver
him, if he will have him, and let him save him, seeing he delighted in him.

By the Faintheartedness of his Followers and Cowardice of his Friends, Psalm.
31, 11 Mat. 26, 56
I was a Reproach among mine Enemies, and a fear to mine acquaintance, they
that saw me without fled from me; All this was done (says the Evangelist) that
the Scriptures might be fulfilled, then all his Discipies forsook him and fled.

By the Cruelty of his Inhumane Persecutors, Psalm. 69, 21 Mat. 27, 48
that in his thirst gave him Vinegar to drink, and gall in his Meat.

By the Savage Soldiers that parted his Garments, Psa. 22, 16, 17, 18 Mat. 27,
2^
and cast lots upon his Vesture, and Bloody Executioners that pierced his Hands
and his Feet, and so distended his Body upon the cruel Cross that one might
tell all his bones.

And most of all by Divine Dereliction, Psalm. 22, ^
which made him to cry out, My God, Mat. 27, 46
my God why have thou forsaken me? And yet in all this not casting away his
Confidence, Psalm 31, ^ Luk: 23, 46
or loosing himself by Impatience, but committing himself and his Cause to God,
and crying out with a loud voice, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, and when
he had so said (says the Evangelist) He gave up the Ghost.

And as David was thus copious in the Thoughts of Christ's Passion, Resurrection
he leaves him not there, but pursues him with lively and comfortable
Meditations of his Resurrection, Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see
Corruption, Psalm. 16, 10
from which the Apostle undenyably concludes the Resurrection of Christ from
the Dead, Acts 2, 26
nay even from those words in the Second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, Psalm 2, 7
This God has fu^filled, Acts 13, 33
says the Apostle Paul, in that he raised up Jesus, etc. He shall drink of the
brook in the way, Psalm. 110.7
may be meant of his Passion (for Christ calls it a Drinking) the Cup which my
Father has put into mine hand (says he) shall I not drink? John 18, 11
and therefore shall he lift up the head, in his Resurrection.

And as his Thoughts ran of his Resurrection, so also of his Ascension,
Ascension
When he Ascended up on high, Psalm. 68, 18
and led Captivity Captive, he received gifts for men, yea even the (...),
Ephesians. 4.8
that God might dwell amongst them, expounded by the Apostle as meant of Christ
by the Psalmist.

So also of Christ's Session at the Right hand of God, Session and Intercession
and Intercession as an High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck;
Ps. 110, 1, 4
All expounded of in Christ in the Hebrews. Hebr. 7, 21


Of his Kingdom, Throne, Kingdom
and Scepter; Thy THRONE, O God, Psalm 45, 6
^s for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy KINGDOM is a Right SCEPTER.

Of his Prophetical Office in Declaring the Decree, prophetical Office,
in Instructing the Church, Psalm 2, 7 and 45, 10
Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ^ar, etc. And the
wonderful glorious success of his Gospel Ministers. Success of his Ministry
Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, Psalm 110.5
etc. and that not only as to the Election among the Jews, but also the
fullness of the Gentiles, Psalm 18, 4^
the Calling and Conversion of them by the Grace of the Gospel, I will confess
thee among the Gentiles. Rom, 15, 9
And again he says, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, Ps. 1^7, 1, 2
and laud him all ye People, etc, for great is his loving kindness toward us
(us Jews, Rom, 15, 11
and you Gentiles) therefore praise ye the Lord.

second coming to judgment
And finally his Powerful and certain second coming to Judgment for the
completing of the work of his Grace in bringing many Sons unto Glory, and in
gathering his people together, his Saints and his Covenanted ones, Psalm. 50, 1,
5
even from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof. And O how he
triumphs (and brings in other Creatures exulting as it were) at the thought
of this his coming, for he comes, Psalm 96
for he comes to judge the Earth: with Righteousness will he Judge the World,
and the People in his truth; (...), 12, 13
for in all this it is evident that his thoughts ran of Christ when he says He
has Remembered his Mercy and his Truth ^^wards the house of Israel, and all ^he
ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our God; Verse ^, 9
and then it ^ollows, let the Floods clap their hands, and the Mountains
rejoice together, before the Lord, for he ^ometh to Judge the Earth; with
Righteousness shall he Judge the world, and the people with Equity.

In a word, as blessed Maryes ^^ul did magnify the Lord, though ^he were his
Mother, so David's Spirit did rejoice in God his Savior, though as to the
Flesh, he were his Father; and O how precious was that thought unto David,
which is, as it were, the sum and quintessence of all the rest. Thou ^pokest in
a vision to thy holy one, Psalm. ^^, ^
^hou said I have laid help upon one that is mighty, that is to say (in New
Testament language) He is ^ble to save to the uttermost, Hebr. ^.^
all that ^^me unto God by him.

It Is proved that David understood and thought of Christ in all thi^. Act.
^.30, 31
But some one may say, was David indeed so well studied in a Covenant of Grace,
and did he think of a Christ in all this? The Apostle Peter says he did,
because he was a Prophet and knew what God had sworn, that of the fruit of his
loins he would raise up Christ concerning the Flesh, to sit upon his Throne,
and that knowing this before, he spoke of his Resurrection, etc: So that David
did not Prophes^ (like wicked Caiphas the High Priest) of he knew not what,
John 11, 50 ^^.
but understood what he Prophesyed, and thought of what he Prophesyed, and was
in this respect a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13, 14
because his heart was so much upon wha^ Gods heart was upon, the Mystery of
Grace in the Lord Jesus Christ so that as Christ says that he wa^ always
before God, Prove. 8, 30
so David sait^ of Christ, I foresaw the Lord alway^ before my face, (...) 2, 25
Christ was everi^ his eye. But O how great is the advantage that our Thoughts
may have of his? His was but a foreseeing and a fore-knowing ((...)) and
therefore but a fore-thinking of a Christ that was to come, Verse 31
but ours is a seeing (before whose eyes Jesus Christ is evidently set forth,
Galat. 3, ^
even as if he were Crucified amongst us) and a knowing and a thinking of that
which is already, and fulfilled to a tittle in all that he forespake, and
forethought even eight and twenty Generations before it was accomplished; for
from David, Mat. 1, 25
until they were carried away into Babylon, w fourteen Generations; and from
the Captivity to Christ were fourteen Generations.

What shall I say now? the time would be too short (as the Apostle speaks) to
tell you of Moses, Hebr. 1, 32
and all the rest of the Prophets, of the Apostles, and parti^^larly of S.
Paul, whose heart was so full of a Christ, and his thoughts so big of him, that
they deliver themselves almost in every other Verse, of his very Name, and
crowd it in many times as if it were an ease to that Abundance that was in his
heart, to have his mouth speaking, or his pen dropping that sweet smelling Name
of THE LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Sect. XXXI.
1 Pet. 1, 12. Christ the Theme of Angelical Thoughts
THis, this is also that, which the Angels desire to pry into, for you may know
what all their Thoughts run on, by what their Tongues run of, when they take to
them tongues (says the Evangelist) there was with the Angels a multitude of
the Heavenly Host, Luke 1, 13 14
Praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, on earth PEACE, and
GOOD WILL toward men. On Earth Peace, no Peace for Hell; Goodwill toward Men,
but not Devils; Yet Christ Is for fallen men, not Angels Hebr. 2, 16
for Christ took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. O
this is that, the thought whereof is such matter of Admiration to the good
Angels, and such horror and Confusion to the fallen Angels, whose eye toward
us is so much the more Evil, because Gods has been so good. And shall not all
this procute God thy good Thought of him? Why, were there no more but this,
that Salvation is Possible for Thee but not so for Them, this were something to
be thought of; But now that Salvation is Proffered and laid in thy very way,
that thou can not, if thou would, step toward Hell, without trampling
upon Gods bowels (of Mercy,) and treading under foot the Son of God, Heb. 10, 2^
and blood of the Covenant; where all is Free to Thee, how ever dear to Christ,
and the Yoke easy, the Covenant being GRACE, Covenant of Grace gives what it
requires
Requiring only what it has to give, and giving what it requires; saying,
Wash you, and make you clean, Isaiah 1:16
etc and again, I will power clean water upon you, Eze 35, 25
and you shall be clean, and from all your filthiness will I cleanse you, and
18 31
etc. Saying, make you a new Heart and a new Spirit, with 13:26
etc. and again, a new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give
you a heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you and cause you to walk
in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them, Slighting of
Gospel Graece a sin of Men not Devil:
etc. Having such Grace, I say, proffered us as the Devil never had, let us
think what will become of us, if we sin such a SIN as the Devil never did, who
never had a pardon tendered him to fling it back into Gods face; who never had
a Christ, or a Covenant of Grace preached unto him, but was forced to speak
truth in that (though he be a liar) that he has nothing to do with Jesus,
except it be to his Torment. Matthew. 8, 29
But, says the Scripture, Isaiah 9, ^
To us is the Child born, to us is the Son given; It says not to Ang^ls, but
to us; Though we may well think that Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5, 21
as the Apostle calls them, are so in Him; but if Christ be their Head, yet not
so as he is Ours. Men otherwise concerned in Christ then Angels
A head of Confirmation to them, of Re^emption to us; and so born to us; And
shall He be so much thought of by Angels, and not thought of by us? Nay it is
our Concernment, 1 Pet: 1, 12
that the Apostle says, the Angels do so much desire to pry into; and They
are advantaged herein by the Church (as the Angel Gabriel by Daniels prayer)
Dan: 9, 23
To the intent (says the Apostle) that now unto the Principalityes Ephesians: 3, 1^
and Powers in Heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom
of God.

Sect. XXXII.
our concern
COncernment is wont to be the greatest Conducement to thoughts; Men will mind
their own Buisiness, when another shall be out of their Thoughts,) and this is
our great, nay our only Concernment, Luke 11, 42
for there is but One thing needful: for thus we may think, Christ Our
if Christ be not Ours, there is nothing Ours, for Christ is Heir of all
things, Hebr. 1, 12
nay We have lost our selves, Luke 9:25
and are cast away; But if Christ be Ours, All is (...), for h^ Name is
Immanuel, Matthew: 1, 23 Immanuel
which is, by interpretation, God with us; God with us
and if God be with us, well may our Thoughts be with God; and surely they
cannot but be well, make all ours.
if they be with God. Gods Greatness is amazing, Greatness
but when his Goodness has made it Ours, how comforting? I go, says Christ,
John 20, 17.
to my Father and your Father, and to My God, and Your God.

Gods JUSTICE is terrible, Justice
but his Justice paid off, satisfied, attoned, reconciled, Justice befriending,
how amiable? God is Faithful and JUST to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1, ^
and to cleanse us from unrighteousness, if we confess our sins, what a word is
there? If we burden our selves with them, as the matter is ordere in the
Covenant of Grace, Justice it self will befriend us by discharging us of them;
if we be but so honest and candid as to own them, and to own him that has
owned them, and paid for them (who is mentioned there by the Apostle but a
verse or two before) God is so Just as to pardon them, Deliver him, 1 John 1:^
says God, I have found a Ransom, Job 33, 24.
Justice disclaims a double payment.

Holines^:
The Holiness of God, what a dreadful thought is it? and how may it make a poor
sinful man to cry out as the men of Beth shemesh Who is able to stand before
this Holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6, 20
Romans 8, 3
B^t then to think again that this Holy God is become Man, and in the likeness
of sinful Flesh, and for Sin, that he might condemn Sin in the Flesh, and that
He is made unto us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30
not only Righteousness, but Sanctification, this may make us to give thank^
at the Remembrance of his Holiness, Psalm 30:4
as it is in the Psalmist.

Highness
Gods HIGHNESS, what an awf^l thought is it to Us, that are at such an infinite
distance from Him? But to think withal, that though the Lord be High, yet He
has respect to the lowly, Psalm: 138 6 and 136.23
and regard to our low estate, and has so far humbled himself, as to embrace
our dunghill, to cloth himself with our Flesh, to lodge in a Womb without
abhorrence, in a Manger, in a Grave, nay by his Spirit in a Sinners Heart, so
that We may say with the Psalmist, Psalm 113 5, 6, 7
Who is like unto our God, who dwells on high, ^et HUMBLES himself, to raise
up the Poor out of the Dust, and the needy out of the dunghill; for Christ's
HUMILIATION and Condescension is our Ex^ltation, O what cause is here to
Rejoice in his Highness, as the Prophet speaks? And if Greatness, Isaiah ^3:2
and Ho^iness, and Justice, are made such Repast, by a Covenant of Gr^c^, to
our Thoughts; well may We Remember his LOVE more then Wine. Here, O here, Cant.
1:3
We should muster up our Thoughts, and bring them into a Full Body, and lay
Gods commands upon them to stand to their colors, for the BANNER over us is
LOVE. Cant. 2:4


Sect. XXXIII.
ANd here let me charge thee, O Reader, LOVE
to think seriously of this, if the Apostle cry out, 1 John 3, 1
as he does, Beloved what manner of Love is this that the Father has bestowed
upon us, that We should be called The Sons of God? O think then what manner of
love is this, In Christ's Incarnation
that GOD should be called The Son of Man? Nay bec^me Man? for the WORD was
with GOD, John 1, 1 and Verse 14
and the WORD was GOD, and the WORD was made FLESH: For to think that Christ
was only (...) a Divine Man, and not GOD-MAN, is a thought both beneath a
Christ, and below a Christian. John 5, 20
But (thanks be to God) We know that the Son of God is come, Christ true God.
and He has given us understanding, that We may know him that is True, and We
are in Him that is True, even in his Son Jesus Christ, This is the True GOD,
and the Life Eternal.

This is He of whom it was said of Old, To us a Child is born, Isaiah 9, 6
and yet his Name shall be called The MIGHTY GOD. By whom, Hebrew 1, 2
says the Apostle, God made the World, and he that built all things is GOD;
chap 3, 3, 4.
and to him it is expressly said, Thou Lord in the beginning have established
the Earth, Hebr. 1, 10
Verse 3
and the Heavens are the works of thine Hands. He was in the World, John 1, 10
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not. And that He
upholdeth all things by the word of his power, who by himself purged our Sins,
and sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Christ suffering was
God satisfying himself,
So that CHRIST Suffering, was but GOD Satifying Himself, and therefore He
cannot choose but have full payment, for the Purchase Blood was the Blood of
GOD, Feed the Church of GOD, Acts 20, 2^
says the Apostle) which He purchased with his Own Blood. And God did Suffer,
though He could not Suffer As GOD, the Nature assuming, adding infinite value
and virtue to the Nature assumed, both being one Person; ^ Tim. 3, 16
for God manifested in the Flesh; must needs be justified in the Spirit, (viz.)
that Eternal Spirit, or Godhead of Christ, Hebr 9, 14
through which, or upon which, as the Altar, this (...), this middle Person (as
the Apostle calls him) betwixt God and Man (God-Man) as Priest, offers up
himself Suffering (as true Man) to Himself, 1 Timothy 2, 5
as One true God with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

1 Timothy 3, 16
This is that great Mystery looked into by the Angels, Preached to the
Gentiles, Believed in the World, Lord I believe it, help thou mine unbelief.

Sect. XXIV.
BUt though I dare not but Think with Scripture that the blood of Christ (that
is, Mistake to think one drop of Christ blood sufficient,
the Death of Christ, for so the Scripture is to be understood when it speaks
of his blood) is of Infinite ^^lue and virtue, Acts 20, 28.
being Gods own blood, yet dare I not think with those who (without Scripture)
affirm that One drop of Christ's blood was sufficient to save the World, The
Death of Christ necessary:
for the Apostle says expressly, that He is Mediator of the New Testament
through DEATH, Hebr. 9, 15
(...), Verse 16,
to Redemption (no Redemption without Death) for where a Testament is (says
He) there Must be the Death of Him that made the Testament. as Testato^^
And He proves it by the killing of the Sacrifices in the Law, Verse 22, 23
That without shedding of blood (he means dying) there is no Remission; And
that it was Necessary Christ should enter by his own Blood, that is, (for so he
explains it) by the Sacrifice (not of a drop or few drops but) of Himself, and
that no otherwise than by Death; Verse 26 Verse 27, 28
for as it was appointed unto Men once to die, So Christ must be Once offered.
Surety
For the Debt that We ow to the Covenant of Works is Death, In the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall Die: Genesis 2, 17
This Debt must Our Surety under the New Covenant pay, Hebr. 7, 22
though a Covenant of Graee, Romans 5, 21
for GRACE must reign by Righteousness; for Christ was not only for Our Good,
Ch is it suffered in our stead,
but in our stead, (like the Ram in the stead or room of Isaac) for the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon Him. Genesis 22, 13
And therefore (not one drop of his Blood only but) his Soul must be made the
Offering for Sin, Ias. 53, 5, 10
Verse 12.
and He must power out his Soul to the Death, verse 4
for He was to bear Our Sorrows, which were the sorrows of Death, as you have
seen: which Text though a learned ^an, Grot. in lo^^
who sometimes had written worthily for Christ's satisfaction, falling afterward
off by Temptation, would fain distort, by expounding it of the Prophet
Jeremiah, yet two great Apostles, Philip and Peter, Act 8, 34, 35
do understand and expound it of Christ and no other, by whose alone stripes we
are healed. So Christ himself also, who knew what would serve the ^urn, tells
his Disciples plainly, ^ha^ there was no way but one, He must go away, He must
depart, John 16, 7
yet he had long before this even ^t eight days old, lost more than a drop of
blood for them in his Circumcision, but still for all that, Luke 2, 2^
the Son of man must go to Jerusalem, Mat. 16, 2^
and must suffer many things* and be killed: and it was His Life and no less
that He must give for a Ransom for many. chap. 20, ^^


It Is true indeed, this One Life of His was worth Thousands of Ours, The
precio^sness of Christ's Death: Acts 2, 24
as David's Men said of David's, and his Suffering Death (though it were not
possible He should be held of it,) 2 Samuel 18, 3
gave Infinite Justice that Satisfaction and full Payment, because He that
Suffered was an Infinite Person, that Millions of D^mned ones, (Men and Angels)
in Hell cannot give or make in Millions of Ages, Christ fully Satisfied, wa^
lawfuly discharged,
but the subjects of the Sufffering being Finite, the duration or Term of the
Suffering must be in some sort Infinite, that is to say, without End; But now
God sends His Angel, Matt. 28, 2
as a public Minister, to roll away the Stone from Christ's Sepulcher (not that
Christ needed an Angels help to further his Resurrection, for He that had power
to take up his life again, John 10, 18
could not want strength like another Sampson, Ju 16, 9, 12
to shake off those sorry shackles of his Sepulcher, but) I say the Key must be
turned by Gods own ^fficer, and the Prison door set ^pen, to declare to All the
world that Our Debt, by His Death, was fully paid, in that Our Surety did not
Break Prison, but was ^et at Liberty, which the damned shall never be, because
they can ^ever pay the uttermost Farthing.

But still We must take heed while We pretend High Thoughts ^f Christ, We must
not pretend ^igh Thoughts of Christ to harbor hard thoughts of God
that we harbor not ^ard thoughts of God, as if He would exact of Our Surety
more ^han was due, or were indeed pro^^se or prodigal of the Blood of his ^on;
No, no, God counted it as ^recious sure as thou can do for ^hine Heart, and
if Men be loath ^o be lavish of corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1, ^^
^uch as Silver and Gold, sure God ^ould never have been so of the ^recious
blood of Christ, 19,
as a Lamb without spot,; for if a drop would have done it, Circumcision might
have excused the Passion, and the Propathia, or Bloody Sweat in the Garden, the
Bloody Death upon the CROSS: and so Christ have dyed in vain, Galat. 2, 21
a thought which the Apostle so much abhors; for as He there reasons concerning
the Law, I may argue in this present case, if Righteousness could have been by
a drop of his Blood, then Christ dyed (...), as one would say, Gratis, in a
complement, and for a mere flourish of his kindness, which the Apostle will by
no means admit. No, no, The Temple of his body must be destroyed, Joh. 2, 19, 21
which the loss of a Drop of his blood would not do; He must be made SIN for
Us; now the wages of Sin (for he knew no sin, Romans 6, 23
as to the work of Sin, but He must be made Sin, as to the wages of Sin which)
is Death; That W^ might be made the Righteousness of 2 Cor 5, 21
God in Him. And that He might Redeem us from the Curse of the L^w, He must be
made a Curse for Us, that is, He must hang upon the Tree till he be dead, for
in that sense it is that the Apostle quotes that in the Law of Moses where it
is written, Deuteronomy. 21, 22 23
Cursed is He that hangs upon a Tree.

And the truth is, Scripture thoughts of Christ our only right and high
Thoughts. Luke 24, 25 26
as our Scriptural Thoughts of Christ are our only Right Thoughts, (O fools
and slow of heart, ought not Christ to have suffered these things? etc) so are
they also our High Thoughts; for herein God commended his Love to us (not that
Christ was Circumcised for us, though that were Love, Romans 5, 8 Not Christ
bleeding, but his dying the grand commendation of his Love.
to loose a few drops of his precious Blood for Us, but this is the high
commendation of his Love) that He Dyed for Us; for many there are that would
wllingly enough loose a little Blood for a Friend, that would not die for their
Friend, ^ut this was Love, that though We were Enemies, He not only Bled for
Us, but Dyed for Us. For suppose you had been ear-witnesses of the great
Council of Peace between the Father and the Son, Hebr: 10, 3 4, 5
(whereof we have such plain Intimations in Scripture) says God, Loyonder are
a multitude of Sinners, and a multitude of Sacrifices, but I can have no
pleasure in the One or the Other, but if Thou, my Son, wilt but come in the
Room of both, I shall be satisfied, Mat. 3, 17
In whom, as well as with whom, I shall be well pleased; But know then, that
there must be Dying; Hebr. 9, 12
or there can be no Doing; for the Sinners should Die; and the Sacrifices they
do Die, and thou must Die, or else my Wrath can not be appeased, the Sinner can
not be acquitted; and then that you had heard Christ thus making answer, If it
must be so, Heb. 10, 5, 7
Lo I come, Lord, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of Me, even to do
this thy Will O God; Verse 5
if this be the way, Let it be so; a Body have thou prepared me, Isaia. 50, 5, 6
and mine Ears have thou opened, and I was not Rebellious, neither turned I
away back, Lo here is my Back to the smiters, and my cheeks for them that pull
off the hair, and my Face for shame and spitting; And if all this be not
sufficient, here is my Soul too for a Sacrifice, Isaia: 53, 10
for an Offering for Sin, and if Thou be but satisfied, I am Satisfied, for as
never had Mother sorrow in her Birth-pangs for a Son; like my Sorrow, so never
was Mother satisfied in a Son as I am in my Seed. When thou shall make his Soul
an Offering for Sin, Isaia. 53:1^
He shall see his Seed, and the Pleasure of the Lord prosper in his hand: Verse
1^
He shall see of the Travail of his Soul and be Satisfied. And therefore well
may Thou be satisfied, O my Soul, as with Marrow and with Fatness, to think
of all this. If it pleased the Lord to bruise him, Vere 10
that He might spare thee, and if the Son were satisfied to be so served to
justify thee, and to bear thine Iniquities; Verse 11
shall this Thought not be pleasing to thee? That He should not only be Cut
(as in his Circumcision) but Cut off out of the Land of the Living (as in his
Passion) even Messiah the Prince, Verse 8
be cut off for thee, to finish thy Transgression, Dan. 5, 24, 25
to make an end of Sin, to make Reconciliation for the Transgression, and to
bring in Everlasting Righteousness That He should be delivered for thine
Offenses, Rom, 4, 25
an^ raised again for thy Justification, without thy desert or desire, o^ thy
care or thy Thought before all this was done for thee; does it not deserve now
thy Love, and thy joy, and thy Care, and thy Thoughts, Jer. 23, 6
to be laid out upon it* nay to be taken up with it? Tha^ The Lord should be
Thy Righteousness; Isaiah 32, 2
and this Man thine hiding place, and thy Peace, and that by Blood only, so
making Peace; That thine Acceptance should be in Him, Ep^ 2, 13, 15
and thy Redemption through his Blood, Ephesians 1, 6, 7,
and neither the One nor the other by Doing, nor by thy Dying, but thy
Reconciliation by His Death, Romans 5:10
and thy Salvation by His Life; Oh how dear should the Thought of this Dying
Rising Lord be to thee, who once suffered for Sins, 1 Pet. 3, 1^
the JUST for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God, put to Death in the
Flesh, or Manhood, but quickened in, or through the Spirit, that is, the
Godhead*

Sect. XXXVI.
High thoughts ^f imputed R^ghteousness
ANd how Highly Reputed should that Imputed Righteousness be by Thee, which the
Apostle counts a Gain, for which He willingly Suffered the les^ of All, Rom, 4,
24
nay for the working out of which Christ Himself became poor, that We by his
poverty might b^ made rich. Phil. 3, 8 9
'Twas this Righteousness that was looked at in the Sacrifices, 2 Cor, 8, 9
and through the Sprinklings of the Law, for says the Holy Ghost, If the Blood
of Bul^ and Goats, He. 9, 14, 15
and the sprinkling th^^ that are unclean, Sanctify as to the purifying of the
Flesh, how mu^^ more shall the Blood of Christ, and^ purge your Conscience?
etc. A^ that the Thoughts of the Old T^stament-Believers ran so much upon,
David's especially, his ver^ Dying Thoughts ran of this (...) ^ Sam. 23, 1
appears by his last words, Although mine House be not so with God, yet God
has made a Covenant with me, Ordered in all things and sure, Verse 5
this is All my Salvation and All my desire, etc. Blessed be God what ever is
out of Order, the Covenant of Grace is Ordered in All things and sure; my help
and my hope is not in my self, or in any thing of my own, it is laid up
elsewhere in better keeping, One shall say, IN the Lord I have strength, Isaia.
45, 24
and I have Righteousness: and IN the Lord, Verse 25
the whole House of Israel (that is all that ever shall have Peace) shall he
Justified and shall Glory; thus Isaiah; So Jeremy speaking of the Church, Jere.
33, 16
He that shall call her is The Lord Our Righteousness; So Daniel, Dan. 9, 17
Now therefore, O our God, hear the Prayer of thy Servant, etc. and cause thy
face to shine, etc. Eze. 14, 14
for the Lords Sake. You see Daniel, who is reckoned by the Holy Ghost with
Noah and Job, one of the best men that ever was, has not a Thought of any
Acceptance or Audience from any Righteousness or Works of his Own; but only
for Christ's sake, 2 Co. 12, 12
Lord do it says he for the Lords sake. Nay S. Paul that came behind no Man,
and Labored more abundantly than All, 1 Co. 15, 10
that exercised himself always to have a Conscience void of Offense, Acts 24.16
both toward God and toward all Men, that Beat down his Body to bring it in
Subjection, 1 Cor. 9, 27
etc, In a word, Whereinsoever any might seem to have any thing to boast, 2
Cor. 11, 22 to the end
He had more, yet you find no man more triumphing in an Imputed Righteousness,
Romans 4 cha. Romans 5 cha.
by FAITH, GRACE, FREE GIFT; No man more abasing, nay abhorring the very
Thought of all self-wrought Righteousness ( not of Works says He, Ephesians. 2, 9
least any man should boast) but sweeping down, throughout his writeings
(especially the Epistles to the Romans, Ga^atians, Rom ^^ap. 5 and 6
Ephesians) the Spiders Web, as the Holy Ghost calls all that Hope and
Confidence which Man Spins, Gala chap: 2 a^^ 3
as it were, out of his own Bowels; Eph^ ^^ap, 2 Job 8* 14
nay disclaiming all compoundings and blendings in the business of
Justification, He will have nothing there but a Christ apprehended and received
through Faith, Ephesians 2 8.
and that too not of our selves but the Gift of God; for says He, Romans 11.6
If it be of Grace it is no more of Works, or else Grace were no more Grace;
but if it be of Works it is no more of Grace, else Work were no more Work.

And how plain, and indeed terrible is that Text? Rom 9 30
What shall We say then? that the Gentiles which followed not Righteousness,
have at^tained unto Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is of Faith:
Ver 31, 32
But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to
the Law of Righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not By Faith, but
as it were, by the works of the Law, for they have stumbled at the stumbling
stone, Verse 33 ^
as it written, Behold I will lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a Rock of
Offense; And every one that Believes in Him shall not be ashamed. Let Papists
then mock on, and call this Imputed Righteousness a Putative (or an imaginary)
Righteousness, yet what is to them Foolishness, 1 Pet. 2, 6
and to many a stumbling stone, let it be to thee, Philip. 3, 3
O my Soul, a Foundation; Rejoice thou in Jesus, and have thou no Confidence in
the Flesh.

Sect. XXXVII.
Phi 2 6, 7, 8 High thoughts of Christ
But then as God has Highly exalted Him that was Humbled, being equal with God,
yet in shape of a Man, even to the Death of the Cross: so think, that if ever
thou hope for benefit by Him, thy Life and thy Lips must exalt Him, and thine
Heart and thy Thoughts above all, not that thou can add to, but must own his
Greatness and his Glory, nay though thou had known Christ after the Flesh,
yet henceforth know him so no more- 2 Cor. 5, 16
Away with low Thoughts, carnal conceptions of Jesus Christ, who though He were
Crucified through weakness, yet is raised in Power, 1 Cor. 14 4
yea in the greatness of his strength became weak, Isaia. 63, 1
that out of weakness thou might be made strong: Hebr. 11, 34
for if the Christian can say by believing in Christ, when I am weak then am I
strong, and can Glory in his Infirmities, 2 Corin. 12 9, 10
that the power of Christ may rest upon him, well may he Glory in Christ, whose
Glory, in the very days of his infirmity, they that saw him, beheld as the
Glory of the only begotten Son of God, John 1, 4^
for whilst he dwelt among Men in the body of his Flesh, The Fullness of the God
head dwelt in him bodily. Colos. 2, 9
And O how awful and stupendous a thought it is, Roman 9, 5
that Gods Benjamin should be this Ben-oni, Nay the Blessed God himself. This
man of Sorrows; The Eternal Father, the Son of his Hand maid, Isaia. 53, 3
made of a Woman; and 9 6
The Mighty God, a Child born, Galat. 4, 4
so says Scripture, but who shall declare his Generation? The Lawmakers,
Isaia. 53, 8
made under the Law that He might make satisfaction to the Law, Galat: 4.4
and Fulfill all Righteousness, both by Doing and by Dying, Matthew. 3, 15
by Serving and Suffering; Rev. 19, 16
The Lord of Lords come to Minister, And He that gives Life to All, to give his
Life a Ransom for many. Mat. 20, 29
Stupendous Thought may I well call it, that my GOD should become GOEL, my
near Kinsman, by Incarnation, and gain Right of Redemption as to those in whom
he had a Right of Creation, for which Cause He is not ashamed to call them
Brethren; Hebr. 2, 1^
That the the Infinite should be Confined; and Content in the Womb, though not
Contained in the World;

( Pellibus exiguis Ingens arctatur JESUS.)

That a strait low-roof'd Virgin-Cell.

Should lodge the Incomprehensible;

That the Eternal God should be Born, Isaiah 9, 6 Matthew 28, 6 Luke 2, 7.
and the Immortal God buried, after a Life of Sorrow, and a Death of Shame;
That the Majesty of God should take up with a Stable, for a Presence Chamber,
and a Manger for a Throne, where Wisemen must come and Worship Him, Matt 2, 11
and 27, 29 Verse ^
a wreath of Thorns for a Crown, a Cross for a Scepter, and for a Royal-Robe,
the only Crimson of a Bloody Passion lined with the Ermine of white Innocence,
but spotted with the Contradiction of Sinners. Hebr. 11:3
That the Ancient of days should become an Infant, The thundering God a Crying
Babe; Heb. 11:2
The Heir of All things be born to Banishment as soon as Born, Matthew. 2, 13
and He that fills Heaven to be, as it were, a Fugitive in the Earth at his
first coming into it; That God Our Refuge should be forced to Flee, John 12, 46
yea to Run for his Life before he could Go, and to hide his Head in EGYPT,
who was the Light of the World; John 6:41
That the Bread of Heaven should be laid amongst Oats and Hay for the food of
Man, Psalm. 49:12
that was now become (by his Sin) Like the Beasts that perish; Acts 3:15
That the Prince of Life should begin to Die from his very beginning to Live,
Luke 21 24
and the early shedding of his Precious Blood from the first weeks sucking of
his Mothers Milk; That He should be reputed the Carpenters Son, John 1:3
by whom all things were made; That He before whom the Devils tremble, Matthew.
4:^
should be lead into the Wilderness to be Tempted of the Devil; That the Living
Bread should fuffer Hunger, and the Fountain thirst; Verse ^
That He that gives Rest to Our Souls should Himself suffer Weariness, John
19:28
and He that gives us all things richly to enjoy, John 4:6 Luke 9:5^
not have a hole himself where to lay his head; That He that Iustifyes the
ungodly, Isaia. 53, 12
should himself be Numbered among the Transgressors; That God the Judge of All
should be tried for his Life at Man's Bar, And He that did All things Well
should himself suffer among Malefactors; That the WAY should be Forsaken, John
14:6
as He was by his Friends and Followers; Matt. 26:5^
That the TRUTH should be Betrayed, as He was by Judas; Luke 22, 2^
That the LIFE should be Killed as He was by the Jews; That the Great God
should be Sold, to Redeem Man; Acts 3 15
And the Living God die, that dead Man might Live; And be shut up in the Grave,
to set Man at Liberty; In a word, That the most High God should humble himself
to so sad a Life, and the Lord of Glory to so base a death, spending and ending
his Doleful days betwixt Perils and Pains, L^ke 22 28
and Temptations, Heb^ew 4, 7
and Persecutions, and Wants, and Wearyness, and Fears, and Tears, Luke 22.44
and Sweat, and Blood, till at length his tender body was extended to the
utmost torture that a cruel Cross could stretch it, and his meek and Innocent
Soul stretched to the utmost extremity of sorrow that it could possibly be
extended to, and all for poor Man that never deserved it, that never desired
it, that never one^ Thought of it, before he heard of it, ready rather to cry
out with Nicodemus? John 3:9
How can these things be? (so slow of heart to believe it, Luke 24, 25 chap.
6.5 8
having heard of it) crying out with the Jews, How can this man give us his
Flesh to eat? But oh the Folly of man's Wit, and the unreasonableness of their
reasonings that have not Faith? 2 These. 3:^
for why should it be thought an incredible thing that the Condescension of
Divine Grace should surmount all Humane Comprehension, Philip. 4:7 1 Timothy 3:16
the Effect of which Grace is peace that passes all Understanding? that the
Mystery of Godliness should be GREAT, The first Principle whereof is GOD
manifest in the FLESH! Isaiah 9.^
or that He should be an object of our admiring thoughts in all his Story, the
very first letter of whose Name is WONDERFVL? Rom^ 3:^
But thanks be to God that the unbelief of man cannot make the Faith of God
without Effect.

Sect. XXXVII.
ANd Oh how Joyful as well as Awful, Delightful thoughts of Christ:
and truly Amiable as well as highly Admirable a Thought it is, that it was
TRUE MAN as well as very GOD that was engaged in all this; 'Twas the Star
proceeding out of Jacob that was ushered into the world by that Star in the
East, Number. 24:17
Matthew 2, 2
'twas the Seed of Abraham that was waited upon by the Multitude of the
Heavenly host, Hebr. 2 16
and to whom it was said at his bringing into the World, Let all the Angels of
God Worship him; Rom: 8, 5
for of the Fathers concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all God
blessed for ever, Amen. For since man had Fallen, by aspiring to be like God,
there was no way for his rising again, but by Gods Cond^scending to become like
one of Us. O comfortable thought to poor Man! that it was MAN that fulfilled
all Righteousness, Math 3:15
that wrought Miracles, that overcame the World, that satisfied Justice, John
16, 33
that appeased wrath, that subdued Sin, that destroyed Death, and him that had
the power of it, that is the Devil, Hebr. 2, 14
And having spoiled Principalityes and Powers, triumphed over them, Collos 3, 15
and having risen from the dead in that very Body wherein he suffered, Acts 31,
^
and showed himself alive after his Passion by many infallible proofs, being
seen on Earth for the space of 40 days, He afterward in open sight ascended
into Heaven, and sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, Hebr. 1, ^
from thenceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool. O this is
Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh; chap. 10:13
this is our beloved, and this is our friend; Cant. 5:16
This is the Man that is Gods fellow; the Man whom God has appointed to judge
the World, Zech: 13:7
Acts 17:3^
and happy We whose Surety is to be Our Judge; this is the High Priest taken
from among Men to bring us to God, Hebrew. 5, 1
the Ladder reaching Heaven, and touching Earth, that he might gather together
in one All things that are in Heaven, Ephesians 1:10
and that are on Earth; This is Our Forerunner that is for us entered, Hebr:
^:20
and has taken possession in that very Nature wherein He paid the Price, and
made the purchase, who entered first into our Sorrow, Matthew 25, 3
and acquainted himself with our Griefs, that We might enter into the Joy of
our Lord, John 17, 24
and be where he is, that We might behold his Glory.

And Oh methinks the Divine Thought of this Immanuel the Incarnate GOD,
notwithstanding All the Magic that the World can use to bewitch our
affections, or to Ch^rm our Thoughts to the things below, Exodus 7.12
should be like the Rod of Aaron among the Rods of the Magicians, even a
Thought swallowing up every other thought! A Thought so Great and so good, so
admirable and so acceptable, even worthy of all acceptance; A Thought so
dearly engaging us; and so nearly concerning us; a Thought without which All
other Thoughts can be but a mere Chaos of Confusion, and will prove in the
Issue a very Hell of Horror; and a Thought with which the thought of Death is
without a Sting, 1 Cor: 15 55
and the very Thought of Iudgment^ does lift up the head and fill the heart
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. L^ke 21:28
1 Peter 1, 8
In a word, a Thought that by mutual entercourses between Love on Gods part,
and Faith on Man's part, does bring Heaven down to Us, and will, if We follow it
home, raise Us up to Heaven, for whilst We with open face behold (as in a
Glass) the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3 ^8
We are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, For as Gods ways are above our ways, as high as his Thoughts are
above our Thoughts, so our ways will be above other men's ways, Isaia, 55* 8
above the Corrupt way of Nature, the brutish way of sense and Carnal Reason,
as high as our thoughts are above their thoughts; for whilst their God is their
belly, and they glory in their shame, Phi. 3:19, 20
who mind Earthly things; Our Conversation shall be in Heaven, from whence we
look for the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

Christ deserves
O welcome then the dear and precious Thoughts of the blessed Jesus! who thought
of thee, O my Soul, Psat 136, 23
in thy low estate, and therefore deserves thy Thoughts; and puts himself
purposely in thy way, which way soever thou turnest thy self, and desires our
thoughts, Luke 22, 44
and therefore sure desires thy thoughts; for as there was never a pore in his
Body but He did sweat out his Blood at it for thee, and thy Good, so is there
never a door even of thine Exterior senses but He knocks at it to be let in to
thy Thoughts; Knock: at the do^r of every sense,
Can thou hear, or see, or feel? why, that which We have seen and heard, 1
John 1 1
says the Apostle, declare we unto you, and our hands have handled the word of
life. Or can thou taste? and ve^ 3
and have thou not tasted that the Lord is gracious? 1 Pet. 2:3 Cantic. 2, 1
or is the Rose of Sharon the only Flower that cannot please thy smell? The
bundle of Myrrh, the Cluster of Camphire, chap. 1.13 Verse 14 And puts himself
in the way of o^^ thoughts by every good thing about us,
etc. are there no sweets in All these? Methinks my Savior d^es even court my
Thoughts, meeting them and me at every turn, in every thing that is excellent
and obvious. If I shut my eyes He is my Rest, and this Rest is Glorious; If I
open them, He is my Light, Isaia. 11 10
and truly this Light is pleasant; Eccles. 6.11
If Night fall, He is the bright and fixed Star; Rev. 22:16 Malac. 4, 3
If Day dawn, it is writ with a Sunbeam upon my wall that He is my Sun of
Righteousness: when I get up, can I forget my Clothes, to put on the Lord
Jesus? Romans 13, 14
Can I go forth, and not think of Him that is the Way? or come in again, John
14, 6
and not think of Him that is the Door? chap. 10:9
Can I sit down to Eat, and forget Him that is the Bread of Life? and take a
turn in my Garden among all my pleasant Plants, and forget the Tree of Life?
Revel: 22:2
or refresh my sweating brow amongst Rivers, Shades and Fountains, and not mind
him that is the River of Life, Verse 1
the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land, Isaiah. 32:2
the Fountain set open for Sin, Zecha. 13:1
and for uncleanness? Can I gaze upon Gold or Silver the Mammon of
unrighteousness, and forget him whose very Reproach is greater Riches then the
Treasures of Egypt? or please mine Eye with the Brisk and ^prightly Diamond,
or beautiful Emerauld, and not call to mind that Pearl of great Price, for the
sake of which the wise Merchant sells all he has to buy the Field in which He
finds it? Matt 13, 46
Do I see the welcome Officer bringing a discharge to his weary Prisoner, and
forget him that has the Key of David, Revel. 3:7
who opens and no man can shut, and shuts and none can open? do I see the
Mariner drop his Anchor, and forget Him in whom alone Hope, H^. 6, 18:1^
(which is the Anchor of the Soul) is sure and steadfast? Do I see the Soldier
run to his Colors, chapt. 2:10
and forget the Captain of my Salvation? Do I see the watchful Shepherd ^^pose
himself (as Jacob) to Sun (...) Shour, Gen: 31:40
to wind and weather, and forget him that laid down his Life for his Sheep?
John 10:11
Or the painful Harvest-Man, and forget him that is the Lord of the Harvest?
Matthew. 5:33
Or the careful Father settling his Estate by Will, and lear^ing it to his
little ones that h^ leaves behind him, and can I fo^bear to call to mind my
Saviou^ Testament confirmed by the Death^ the Testator? Hebr. 9 16
Do I see the Virgi^ preparing to receive the Bridegroom or the Country going
out to m^ the Judge of Assize, Matt. 25.31
and not (...) Thoughts run out to meet my S^viour. 1 These 4:17
In a word, can I think o^ any thing and not think of Christ who is every good
thing; If I b^ well, Psalm: 42:11
it is He that is the health o^ my countenance; and if I be sick He is my
Physician; Matthew. 9 12
and if I live Christ is my Life; Philip. 1:21
and if I die, H^ is the Resurrestion as well as Life So that as there is a
strange diseas^ that takes some in their Head^ who live many years, John 11.25
but so strangely loose their Memory, tha^ they forget their own Name, it is
much more a monstrous disease that takes Us in our Heart^, that makes us forget
the Name of Christ; that We should be so strange, and ^o sottish, and so stupid
to the ^houghts of Christ which of all ^he things in the World, ought in ^uty,
and might in Reason, be ^ost ready, frequent, and fami^iar to Us, since God
has made ^very good thing about us, a plain ^rompter to our weak memoryes, ^
spelling out the Name of his Son and our Savior Jesus Christ. We ^eed no sorry
Crucifixes, dumb ^ictures, or dead Images to be ^ur Remembrancers (blessed be
our God) to put us in mind of Him, especially by the Lords Supper insttuted for
his Remembrance. 1 Cor. 11, 26
^ho has drunk to us in his own ^ood, and commanded us to ^edge Him at His
Table, and as ^ften as we do it, to do it in Remem^^ance of Him: O there do
thou ^use O my Soul, till the Fire burn! ^ there let thine Eye, and thy ^ouch,
and thy Taste affect thy Thoughts, and let thy Thought inflame thy Affections,
that the more thou think of Christ, tho^ may love him better; and the better
thou love him, thou may think of Him more; for ther^ the Bread of life is
broken, that i^ may be Eaten; and this Eat^^ Bread is never to be forgotten;
the^ the Blood of Christ is broach^^ that it may be drunk, and being drunk that
his love may be remembered more then Wine; Cant. 1, 4
for the^^ is Christ before mine eyes evident^^ set forth, Galat. 3:1
even as if He were Cruc^fyed among us. There the Kin^ both sits at his Table,
Cant: 1:12
and is s^ upon the Table; for Christ is bot^ the Master of the Feast, and the
Matter of the Feast; both my E^tertainer* and Entertainment; an^ whilst I thus
see him, and feel him and taste him, How can I but thin^ of him? and whilst the
Bread the strengthens mine heart, strengthens also my Faith, and so Christ
^^eals into my Soul, as it were, by ^y Sense, and becomes the very ^ourishment
thereof, as the Outward Elements (Bread and Wine) ^re of the Outward man, How
can ^ forget my Savior, whilst I Remember my self? or shut him out of the
thoughts of mine Heart, Psalm. 73.26
who ^s the strength of mine heart? John 6, 5^
whose Flesh is my meat indeed, and whose blood is my drink indeed: whose Death
is my life and my Reconcili^tion, and whose life is my Glory and my Salvation;
who, by his ^ontinual Intercession, Hebr. 9, 28
ever bears ^ne upon his heart, before his Father in Heaven (even as Aaron was
to bear the Names of the Tribes ^f Israel upon his Breast Plate into ^he most
holy place) till He appear ^he second time unto Salvation, Exodus 28:2^
and ^ome again to take me to himself, John 12, 26
that where my Lord is, there may also his Servant be.

Sect. XXXVIII.
ANd as we must away wit^ all sour thoughts of Christ and All low thoughts of
Christ so much more with all unsavo^^ and loose thoughts of Christ. Holy
Thoughts of Christ
O^ Thoughts of Him must be Holy as well as High; and Fearful, a^ well as
Cheerful; Rom: 6, 1, 2
The Apostl^ puts an absit upon the least Thought as if the coming of Grace
were for the countenancing of Sin^ What says Moses concernin^ Christ? Exo:
23:21
Beware of him and ob^^ his voice, provoke him not, for (...) will not pardon
your Transgressions for my Name is in Him. What sait^ David? Psalm 2:12
Kiss the SON least he b^ angry, and ye perish from the way when his wrath is
kindled but a little. The Prophet Isaiah tells u^ that he comes to give Law (a^
well as Liberty) the Isles shall wa^ for his Law, Isai. 42 4
the Prophecy of ou^ Conversion, who are Island^rs in the Sea) and that this
Branch out of the Root of Jesse shall ^mite the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, Isai. 11, 1, ^
and with the breath of his ^ips he shall slay the wicked. The Angel says of
Christ, that his Name should be called JESUS, Malac. 1, 21
because He was to save his People (not ^N their Sins, but) FROM their ^ins.
Christ, Acts 2, 2^
when he was a Child, was the Holy Child JESUS; Mal. 5:1^
and when he was a Man, He tells ^s that He came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it; And as John ^aptist told the People, that his ^an was in his hand,
Mat. 3, 12
and he would ^hroughly purge his Floor, they ^ound it so, for He went into the
Temple, chap 21, 21
and scourged out the Buy^rs and Sellers, etc. in token that ^o unclean or
profane thing must ^xpect admittance by Him into ^he Kingdom of God. No, no,
^he Baptism of Christ is a Baptism Mat, 3, 11
with Fire, and ^he Spir^t of Christ is a Reprover of Sin, John 16:8
the example of Christ a pattern of Obedience, Hebr, 10, 2
and the Doctrine of Christ is a Doctrine of Self denial, Mat. 16 24
the Truth of Christ a Sanctifying Truth, John 17, 17
and the Faith of Christ an^ heart-purifying Faith, Act^ 25 9
and the Peace of Christ is a War with Sin, for it keeps the heart, Phi ip, 4, 7
and rules i^ the heart, Col. 3 27 Galat: 6, 16
and it is only unto them that walk according to Rule that the Gospel of Christ
says Peace b^ upon them; but Tribulation an^ Anguish, Romans 2, 8, 9
Indignation and Wrat^ upon every Soul of Man that do^^ evil, of the Jew first,
and also o^ the Gentile.

Take We heed then of thinking basely of Christ, Matt 11, 19
as the frien^ of Sinners in their vile sense, wh^ indeed thought him to be
altoghe^^ such a one as themselves; Psalm 50, 21
but D^vids* Psalm, 45, 7
Thoughts were otherwise thou love Righteousness and hate Iniquity, therefore
God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy
fellows. A Friend indeed of Sinners, for He Dyed to save them, 1 Timothy ^.15
yea the chief of them, but yet an Enemy to Sin, for He came to make an end of
Sin (says the Apostle St. John) 1 John 3, ^
to Redeem us from our vain Conversation (says S. Peter) 1 Pet 1, 18
and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Titus 2, 14
to sanctify and cleanse us with the washing of water, by the Word, that we
might be holy and without blemish (says S. Paul. Ep. 5.26, 27
)

And now tell me, O Reader, is there any shelter for Sin, or license for Lust
in all this? O be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6, 7, 8
for whatsoever a Man Sows, that shall he also Reap, for he that sows to
his Flesh shall of the Flesh reap Corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit
shall of the Spirit reap life Everlasting. 2 Tit. 11, 12
For the GRACE of God that has appeared bringing SALVATION, teaches to deny
ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, etc. For Christ is KING as well as PRIEST,
Psalm 45, 6
and LORD as well as JESUS, and the Scepter of his Kingdom is a RIGHT SCEPTER,
and We cannot THINK RIGHTLY of it, except we think it so. And O how terrible is
this THOUGHT, that if We slight this way, neglecting so great Salvationi, Hebr.
2, 3^
by Sining wilfully against this Sacrifice, there remains no (other) SACRIFICE
for Sin, chap. 10, 26
Acts 4 12
for there is no other Name given but the Name JESV^ And if He that sinned
against Moses 's Law dyed without Mercy, Heb. 10, 28.29
how much sorer must his punishment be, that trampleth under foot the SON of
GOD?

Then think this of Christ, that if He be not thy Foundation-Stone, 1 Pet. 2, 6
Mat. 21, 14
Elect and precious to thee, if thou be not built upon Him, He will fall upon
thee, and grind thee to powder; Rev. 5 5, 6
for the Lamb of God is a LION too, John 5, 22
and God has committed all Judgment to the SON, and the WRATH of the LAMB
shall one day be found intolerable to the proudest of Men, when the Kings of
the Earth, Revel 6, 15 16* 17
and the great men, and the Rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
Men, and every Bond man, and every Free man shall call to the Rocks and the
Mountains to fall on them, to hide them from the face of Him that sits upon
the Throne, and from the WRATH of the LAMB, for when the great day of his Wrath
is come, O who shall be able to stand?

O think of this ye Loose, Licentious, Caution to loose Christians Romans 2, 24
(Sacrilegiously so called) CHRISTIANS, through whom the Sacred Name of Christ
is blasphemed among the Gentiles, what thanks will He give you that a TURK
should say (as they (...) ordinarily observed to do) What? do you think I am a
CHRISTIAN that I should break my Oath, or falsify my Faith? etc. Or that an
HEATHEN should say, as that Indian Prince did to the Spaniards, who being about
to put him cruelly to death, but in (Ghostly Charity) persuaded him to turn
Christian before his death; He asked them, what he should get by that? they
told him he should go to Heaven with the Christians, He demanded whither went
Indians, when they dyed? They said, to Hell; He shortly replied, He would die
as he was; for he had rather go to the Indians Hell, then to the cruel
Spaniards Heaven? 'Twas severely said by one, Aut hic non est Christus, --
pudet haec opprobria nobl^ and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
aut hi non sunt Christiani; Either He, (whom you profess) is not the CHRIST,
or You are not the CHRISTIANS. Men and Brethren, let me freely speak to you, if
CHRIST'S coming into the World be signalized by Bacchanalian Rites and
Revellings, what shall a Jew or Infidel think either of Christ, or else of Us?
'Twas truly said peccatis nostris fortes sunt Barbari. Christians sins make
Barbarians more barbarous, Turks more Turkish, Homil. against the peril of
Idolatry 3 p. page: 45
Jews more Jewish, as our Homily has observed that Popish Idolatry gives the
great fixation to Turkish and Jewish Infidelity.

But as of old God sent the old Jews to Shilo, where He first set his Name, to
see what he did to it, Jerem: 7, 12
for the wickedness of his people Israel, so may I send the now Christan World
to the once seven flourishing Churches of Asia, Revel. 1, 11
for if Christ be not glorified by Us, He will glorify Himself upon us, and
therefore let every one that thinks of a Christ, think of this, Let Every One
that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. 2 Timothy: 2:1^


Sect. XXXIX.
ANd as our Thoughts of the Father and the Son are only Right when Regulated
by Scripture, Right thoughts of God the Holy Ghost.
so also of the Blessed SPIRIT; For as the Sun is not to be seen (as we have
said) but in its own light, (which yet is but a finite Created Emanation from
God the Father of lights) much less can we conceive aright of the Holy Ghost,
must be Scriptural.
but by Conceits congruous and harmonious to that Word which holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy-Ghos^* 2 Pet: 1, 21
For if the Natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2, 14
He cannot surely conceive aright of the Spirit himself without both a
spiritual light to discover, Thoughts of the H. Ghost strange to the carnal
mind.
and eye to discern him; Otherwise He must needs be both out of his sight and
out of mind; For Scripture says that such a man's very Mind is carnal, 1 Cor.
2, 12
and speaks of the Spirit of this World as directly opposite to the Spirit
which is of God, we are great strangers to our own Spirits.
Alas what strangers are We to our own Spirits? (How little is our knowledge,
and how few are our Thoughts of them?) How strange then must the Knowledge and
Thoughts of the Holy Spirit of God be unto Us? John 14
This is that Spirit whom the World cannot recause it sees him not, neither
knows him. Thoughts of God the Father
The Thoughts of God the Father do more easily occur to the natural mind, for
Heathen Poets, and even the light of Nature teach us that We are All his
Offspring, A rat. (...)
as the Apostle speaks out of the Poet, and so to seek the Lord, if happily we
may feel after him, and find him, Acts 17, 128
(though the light that Adams Fall has left in us is little less then
Darkness, so our searching after God our Father is called a Feeling as blind
men use, Verse 27
a Gropeing as they that have much darkness and but little light,) and of God,
The Son more obvious then of God the H. Ghost.
And as God the Father is not very far from every one of us (as it is there
said) so the Thoughts of God the Son are the more obvicus to us, because by his
Incarnation he is come so near us, and there is a true Humane Nature in his
Blessed Person for humane Thoughts to employ themselves upon; ^ Cor. 12, 3
And yet it is said that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, (that is, make
any right acknowledgement of the Son) but by the Holy Ghost; How then can any
man have any Right Knowledge or Thoughts of the Spirit, Right thoughts of the
H. Ghost,
but by the Spirit, who speaks by the Scriptures? And here as before, we are
taught to Rejoice with trembling, Acts 9, 31
walking in the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy Ghost. are
Reverend
For who can but Rejoice in the Thoughts of Him whom the Scriptures call the
COMFORTER? John 16.7
and who can but tremble before the SPIRIT? The Holy Ghost GOD
who as He is One with the Father and the Son, (for there are three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, 1 John 5, 7
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One) so is He to be considered and
Thought upon with one and the same Joyful Reverence, and awful Rejoicing. As to
his Essence, A SPIRIT in his Essence,
the Scriptures declare Him to be a Spirit in declaring Him to be God (for God
is a Spirit) and declare ^im to be God, in declaring themselves to be the Word
of God; John 4:24
^or whilst one Text says, that All Scripture (or the whole Scri^ture* 2 Timothy
3, 17.
(...)) is ^iven by Inspiration of God, 2 Pet. 1, 21
(or God ^nspired) and another, that Holy ^en of God spoke as they were moved
(...) the Holy Ghost, the Natural Conclusion from the premises is this,
Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Isaiah 62, 2
And if we ought to tremble at the Word, how much more before him that inspired
and gave it forth? Agreeable hereunto it is that when the Prophet Esaias in
that tremendous Text describes the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted
up, Isaia* 6.1, 2 3, 5, 8, 9
and Seraphims crying one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of
Hosts; which made the Holy Man cry out Woe is me, I am undone because I am a man
of unclean lips, etc. and mine eyes have seen the King, The Lord of Hosts; The
Apostle Paul expressly says that this Holy Lord God was God the Holy Ghost; I
heard the voice of the Lord, says the Prophet, and he said go and tell this
people* hear ye indeed but understand not, etc. now says the Apostle, Acts 28,
25 26, 27
well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, unto our Fathers saying, Go
unto this people and say, hearing ye shall hear and not understand, etc. So one
while it is said the Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David; Another while it is
said Lord thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth, Acts 1, 16 cha 4, 24,
25
and the Sa, and all that is in them, who by the mouth of thy Servant David
have said, etc. and so Ananias his lying to the Holy Ghost is called a lying
unto God; Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Acts 5.3, ^
Again Scripture (and Reason says) that He that built all things is God. Hebr
3, 4
Now the Spirit of God has made me says Elihu, and if he made man, Job 33, 9
the Master piece, Man, the Microcosme, well may it be said that by him were
the Heavens garnished, Job 26, 13
and by the sending forth of Him All things else were Created; which Text by
the after clause of renewing the Face of the Earth refers to works of
Providence. Psa. 104, 30
Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. And as He made All things, 1 Cor. 2, 10
He knows All things; The Spirit searches All things, yea the deep things of
God, Isaia, 40, 13
for who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has
taught him? And as He is Omniscient, he is Omnipresent; Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit? says David, Psalm: 139, 7
or whither shall I flee from thy presence? In a word, He that prepared Christ
a Body at his coming into the World is God, for says Christ, a Body have THOU
prepared me, then said I Lo, Hebr. 10, 5
I come to do thy will, O GOD. But says the Angel to the blessed Virgin, The
HOLY GHOST shall come upon thee, Verse 7
and the power of the highest shall overshaddow thee; Therefore also (the
Inference is most full to our purpose) That Holy thing that shall be born of
thee, Luke 1, 35
shall be called the SON OF GOD. Therefore the Holy Ghost is God.

Sect. XL.
ANd as the Holy Ghost is a SPIRIT in respect of his Essence, The Holy Ghost
called the SPIRIT as to his subsistence. Jo. 4, 23, 24
being One glorious God with the Father and the Son; (for as God the Father is
said to be a Spirit, the Father secketh such to worship him as may do it in
Spirit. (and then it follows, Hebr. 1, 3
God is a Spirit) and God the Son (who is expressly said to be the express
Image of his Fathers Person,) Heb. 9, 14
through the Eternal Spirit, (that is to say) his Godhead) offered up
himself;) So the Holy Ghost is The Spirit in ^espect of his wonderful
Subsistence ^n the blessed Trinity by way of ^neffable Spiration between the
Father and the Son, Mat. 316, 17
betwixt whom He carries and re-carryeth the mutual and Eternal expressions of
Divine delight and complacency which the Father and the Son (...) have
naturally, necessarily, and unchangeably each in other; Galat. 4, 6
who therefore said both to proceed from the Father, Job 33, 4
and yet to be the Spirit of his Son, and called in the Old Testament, Romans 8, 9
the Breath of the Almighty, and in the New, the Spirit of Christ; His
Mysterious Subsistence being most nearly shaddowed out to our weak
apprehensions by our breathing, which is the Going and Coming, Efflux and
Reflux of our Breath, John 3, 8
(and so he is compared to the three fluid and moving Elements of Air, Mat. 3,
11
Fire, and Water, Isaiah 44, 3
but never to the dull fixed Element of Earth) for as the personal property of
the Father, is to Beget; of the Son to be Begotten; John 15, 26
so of the Holy Ghost, to Proceed. And now how awful should the Thoughts of Him
be unto us who is a SPIRIT in his ESSENCE, THE SPIIRT in his SUBSISTENCE; in
both, Uncreated, Infinite, and Eternal; who dictated and Indicted the Word,
built the Wo^ld, garnisheth Heaven, furnishes and renews the Face of the
Earth, made Man, Knows all things, Col. 2, 2^
fills all Places, and is every where present at all times; whose peculiar and
stupendous Work it was to Sanctify the Womb, Mat. 28, ^^
the Fruit whereof was to be the Savior of the World, and prepare him a Body
in whom the fullness of the Godhead was to dwell bodily; in whose Name, 2 Cor:
15, ^^
together with the Fathers and the Sons we are Baptized, and whose Communion,
together with the Grace of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, we do
Implore; Hebr: 7, ^
Of whom therefore I may say (as the Apostle of Melchisedec, Now Consider how
great this man was) Consider how great this Spirit is.

Sect. XLI.
ANd yet Woe is Us! What slight, The high Reverence we ow to the Holy Spirit
and low, and mean Thoughts are the Carnal Minds of Men apt to have of the holy
Spirit of God, which the Scripture foreseeing in Deep wisdom (as in Parental
Relation, the Mothers fear to be most easily and usually neglected and
forgotten by Children; It sets a special Guard upon it, saying, Ye shall fear
every Man his Mother and his Father, though her Order be Last, Levit. 19, 3
because the Fear of the Mother is ordinarily too much the least) so in the
case of the Third Person, whose Order of Subsisting is after the Father and the
Son, though in Honor he be Coequal, and in Essence Coeternal, Sin-against
the H. Ghost
I say, It (sets a most dreadful Guard upon that Awe and holy Fear that We owe
to the (...) Holy Spirit, when it says All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men, Mat. 12, 31 32
but THE BLASPHEMY against the HOLY GHOST shall NOT be forgiven unto Men, And
whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him,
But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, neither in the World to come; which last words are no
Indication that there is any Forgiveness of any Sin in another world that is
not pardoned in this, But a vehement assertion that there is no forgiveness for
this Sin in any World, Luke 12, 10
Therefore where S. Luke says plainly It shall not be Forgiven, Mark 3, 29
S. Mark explains this Phrase of S. Matthews, saying, It has never
Forgiveness; And so in the mouths of 3 Evangelists you have this dreadful Word
established, and this Guard set (like that terrible Cherubim and Flaming Sword)
to preserve that High Reverence that Mortals owe to the Holy Ghost. All other
Blasphemies (says Christ) wherewithsoever they shall Blaspheme shall be
Forgiven, Mark ^3, 28
and indeed have been so; 1 Timothy: 1, 13
I was a Blasphemer, says S. Paul, But I obtained mercy; But whosoever shall
(wittingly, wilfully and maliciously (Reproath the Holy Ghost (as the Pharisees
here did, Mark 3, 30
they said (of Jesus) He has an unclean Spirit, whose works did testify of
him, That he cast out Devils by the SPIRIT of GOD, Luke 11, 47
and that the Kingdom of God was come unto them (as himself speaks) Ten
Thousand Woes shall be the Portion of such an One. Matt. 8, 12


Sect. XLII.
Caution against Reviling the Spirit
ANd here once for ever let me caution this Impious Age of coming near unto any
thing that looks like, or comes near the Sin that is unto Death, Number. 26, 16
even as Moses charged the Congregation of Israel concerning Corah and his
Accomplices, that they should come near those wicked persons, 1 John 5.16
Let me charge thee, O Man, whosoever thou art, in the fear of God, that thou
entertain not a Contemtuous thought much less utter a word against the written
Word of God, in Scripture
for it is (as you have seen) the Dictate of the Holy Ghost. And here I cannot
but make an Honorable mention of that Honorable Person who has made Himself
truly so by that most serious and ingenious complaint of his of the Prodigious
fol^y of the Times whose only wit seems to lie in a Profane and scurrilous
abuse of Holy Scriptures. Mr. R. Boil in his late piece of Scripture style
But it may be observed as of Our Saviors, so of these Scripture-scoffers,
that as they were part of our Saviors proof that He was the Prophesied
Messiah, for even those scoffs, as we have seen, were part of what was fore
spoken concerning him Eight and twenty Generations before he was born; so are
these part of the accomplishment of the Prophecies of that Book which told the
World of these Men ( sixteen hundred years almost) before they came unto it, Be
mindful (says the Apostle) of the Words which were spoken before by the Holy
Prophets and of the Commandment of Us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior: 2
Pet 3, 2, 3
knowing this first, that there shall Come in the Last days Scoffers. Wherefore
We revere in our Thoughts what they revile with their tongues, and so much the
more Because They do so. Matthew. 18, 7
But as Our Lord says Offenses must needs come, yet they bring their Woe with
them, so let me say to these Men in the Prophets words, Isaia, 28, 22
Be not Mockers lest your Bands be made strong.

Further, Take we heed that our THOUGHTS despise not any of the Operations of
this Holy Spirit, 2 Samuel 6.16
as profane Michal did holy David in her heart: In Prayer Jude 20
S. Jude speaks of Praying in the HOLY GHOST; and S. Paul of Praying always
with all Prayer and supplication in the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.16
Zech 12, 10
The Old Testament speaks of a spirit of supplication, and the New of a spirit
of Adoption, Rom, 8 15
crying or whereby we cry Abba, Galat. 4, 6
Father. The spirit helps our Infirmities, Rom: 8, 26
for We know not what to pray for (there is matter) as we ought (there is the
manner) but the spirit it self makes Intercession for us with Groanings which
cannot be uttered: Verse 27,
And he that searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the spirit, etc.

Preaching Rom* 12, 6
So likewise says the Apostle, having gifts differing according to the Grace
that is given us, whether Prophecy, Verse 7, 8
let us Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith, or Ministry, let us
wait on Our Ministering, or he that teaches, on teaching, or he that exhorts
on exhortation; Now the manifestation of the Spirit (says he) is given to
every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12, 7
so that where there is no manifestation of the Spirit in the Preacher, there
can be no profit to the Hearer, Verse 8^
for to One is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom to apply, to another the
word of knowledge to explain, (some excel in one thing some in another: but
all) by the same Spirit, And (says he) I give You to understand, Verse 3
that no man speaking by the spirit calls Jesus accursed: Now there are
diversities of gifts but the same spirit. It Is the Spirit when we meditate,
Verse ^
John 15, 26
that must take of Christ's and show it unto us; and* 16 14
And when we speak it is the Spirit that must give us utterance, Acts 2, 4
and Preaching must be not in the enticing words of Man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2, 4
but in the demonstration of the Spirit.

Sanctification, moreover, Sanctification, 1 Pet: 1, 2 Romans 8, 9 Every true
Christian is a Saint.
is a peculiar work of the Spirit in every true Christian; For if any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. The Corinthians were made
Saints, when they were Converted and made Christians. 1 Cor. 1, 2
To the Church of God which is at Corinth, etc called to be Saints; And such
were some of You (says the Apostle to them) but now you are Sanctified by the
Spirit of our God, 2 Cor. 1, 1 chap 6, 11
Ephesians. 1, 1, 15
so the Apostle salutes the Saints in Achaia, Rome, Ephesus, Romans 1 7. mock
Saints
etc. We have known indeed the Blasphemy of too many who have said they are
Saints and are not, Revel: 2, 9 and 3 9 No ground for reviling the True
but do lie, but are of the Synagogue of Satan (like those Brethren in
Iniquity, who troubled Israel, Genesis 34, 30
and made him stink among the Inhabitants of the Land,) who shall bear their
own judgment, yet this shall no more excuse those Ishmaels, Galat. 4, 29
who persecute those that are truly born after the Spirit, Dan* 7
and Revile the very Saints of the most High (as the Prophet calls them) then
it does the Indignityes done to the True Christ, Matt. 24, 24
because (as was Prophesyed) False Christ's do arise.

all the godly have Gods Spirit, Romans 8, 15
The Scripture says expressly That the Children of God, are led by the Spirit,
do mind the things of the Spirit, are after the Spirit, Verse 5, 9
do walk after the Spirit, are in the Spirit, Ga. 5, 16, 25
must walk in the Spirit, and 6, 18
do sow the Spirit, do reap the Spirit, have received the Spirit, who is in
them, Romans 18, 15
whom they have of God as Fruit-bearer, 1 Cor: 6, 19
Law giver, yet a Liberty giver and Life-giver, as a Builder, Galat. 5, 22 Romans
8, 2 Ephesians. 21 22
and as an In-dweller, to mortify and to quicken, to Convince and to Comfort,
to teach and to bring to remembrance, 1 Co^. 3, 16
to guide into the way, to uphold in the way, To. 8, 9 11 13 John 16.7, 8 and
14.26 and 16, 13 Psalm ^1:18 and 143, 10 Ep. 1, 13, 16
and lead to the end, to be the earnest of their Inheritance, and the Witness
of their Son ship, the seal and the sealer, wherewith and whereby they are
sealed unto the day of Redemption, by whom they have an access to the Father,
Romans 8, 14
who are also an habitation of God through the spirit. Ephesians 4, 3 and 2, 18, 22
Such are the undoubted Operations of the Spirit in those that shall be saved,
for hereby We know that We dwell in Him, and He in us, 1 John 4, 13
because He has given us his Spirit.

And therefore take heed, good Reader, of reviling any of these workings, or of
scoffing at the words (for surely we cannot but think that the Holy Ghost knows
best how to express his own workings) O think of this, Hebr. 10:62
that despite done to the SPIRIT of Grace supposes a Trampling under foot the
Son of God; And truly one would think one might say in this Case as Ahasuerus
did in another, Who is He, and where is He that durst presume in his heart to
do so? Hester 7, 5
O Tremble, good Christian at the very Thought of such a thing, that the Holy
Spirit of God should be grieved or vexed by the sons of Men, Ephesians. 4, 30
Isaia. 63, 10
but especially that any should presume to Blaspheme him. And let this serious
thought dwell with thee, That it is the Sin against the Spirit of Grace that
excludes from Grace to Repent of SIN: Thou therefore that bowest the knee at
Our Father, and at the Name Jesus, Remember that there is a Third, who together
with the Father and the son, is to be Worshipped and Glorified.

Sect. XLIII.
TO proceed, He that has Right Thoughts of the Spirit thinks himself alike
beholding to the spirit, High thoughts of our Obligati ns to the Spirit
as to the Father and the Son, in the buisiness of his salvation, for to the
working of the Father and the Son, both which are Great and Glorious in man's
salvation, there must be added the supply of the spirit, For God has chosen us
to salvation, Phil. 1, 19
as well through sanctification of the spirit, 2 These. 1, 13:
as through the Belief of the Truth. And therefore (says Christ) I will pray
the Father, John 14.16
and he shall give you another Comforter that He may abide with you for ever,
even the spirit of Truth, etc. And again, It is expedient for you that I go
away that I may send Him to you. and 16.7


It is Expedient; that is a great word, He says not only, it will be as well
for you if He come to you, as if I had stayed with you; but it is expedient for
you that I go, that He may come; As in works that must pass through more hands
then one, it is Expedient that the First hand be taken off, that the Finishing
hand may come. And therefore the Finishing Work is the Spirits work. the
finishing work in man's Salvation the Spirits work
The Father (by his Mercy,) The Son (by his Merit and Mediation) and the Spirit
(of the Father and the Son) by his In-dwelling,) as these Three are One in
themselves, so in Man's salvation, 1 John 5, 11
which (Scripture says) is in the son, given us by the Father, but sent us
home by the spirit. When the Comforter is come (says Christ) whom I will send
to you from the Father, John ^3, 16
John 15:21
even the spirit of Truth, He shall testify of Me. The Grace of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 13, 14
and the Love of God is brought home to us, and We to it, by the Communion of
the Holy Ghost. The Son by his Incarnation (which was the Work which his Father
gave him to do) brought Heaven Down to us, John 17, ^
and the spirit in our Regeneration (wherein we are said to be Born of the
spirit) makes us his Temples and Gods Habitations, John 3, ^
Ep. 2, 21, 22
and builds as up to Heaven. Hebr. 9, 14
The Son Offers up Himself, and makes us acceptable to a Just God, Ephesians. 1, 6
through his comeliness, that is to say, his Righteousness, put upon us; And
there is also an Offering up of us, a making of us amiable to an Holy God by
the Holy Spirit, That the Offering up of the Gentiles (says the Apostle) might
be Acceptable being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Rom 15.16
The Maker of the New Covenant is the Father, 2 Cor, 6:8
Hebr. 8, 6
The Mediator of it is the Son; And the great Matter of it is the Spirit, for
this is the sum of All, Exek. 36, 22
I will put my spirit within You, who is therefore called the Holy spirit of
Promise. Ephesians. 1:13 Holy Spirit the great New Testament promise. Luke 2, 25
For as the Coming of the Messiah was the Great Hope and Expectation of the
Fathers of the Old Testament, which is therefore called a waiting for the
Consolation of Israel, so the coming of the Holy Ghost in the New, and
therefore called a waiting for the Promise of the Father; Acts 1, 4^
And therefore when the Primitive Disciples were curiously inquisitive, and
desirous of the Knowledge of the Times and seasons, Verse 7, 8
Our Gracious Savior who best knew what was best for them, confines them to
and comforts them with this Expectation that the Holy Ghost should come upon
them. And Oh that many whose vehement Desires run out that way, (viz.) after
knowledge of times and seasons, would endeavor more for the sweet Influences
and Incomes of the Holy Ghost, Fruits of the Spirit
whose Fruits (says the Apostle) are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Galat. 5, 22 23
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against which there is no Law.

Sect. XLIV.
O Blessed Fruit of the thrice-Blessed Spirit (for this was the Blessing of
Abraham come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Blessed fruit
Galat: 3:14
even that We might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith. The Fruit
that undid us was Forbidden Fruit, Gen: 3:17
Fruit against Law, but against such there is no Law: chap. 2:17
Man Eating of that Fruit was to die the Death, Romans 8:2
but this Spirit of Life makes us free from the Law of Death, and 6, 22*
so that now We have our Fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life.

Sweet Fruit, may I well say, Sweet Fruit
2 Cor. 3:17,
if Life be sweet or Liberty (for where the Spirit of the Lord is there is
Liberty) or if Peace be sweet, or Love lovely, or Joy joyous: Or if these be
not enough, here is Temperance, Meekness, Faith, Goodness, etc. We may say here
(as it is said in the Canticles) at our good are all manner of pleasant fruits
Here, Cantic. 7, 13
I am sure, I may say, and not beguile my Reader, are fruits pleasant to the
Eye, Genesis 3:6
and good for Food (for the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Rom^ 14:17
but Righteousness, 1 Cor. 2:11
and Peace, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost) and truly to be desired to
make one Wise, for the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God, now
we have received not the Spirit of this World, Verse 12:13
but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know the things that are freely
given to Us of God, which things also we speak not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teacheeth, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual; and therefore He is called the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
Ep. 1, 17, 18
that We might know the Hope of his Calling, and the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints:

The Fruit forementioned was of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Genes.
2 ^^
Ephesians: 5.^
but the Fruit of the Spirit is in all GOODNESS, Righteousness, In all goodness
and truth
and TRVTH. Here is ALL Good and No Guile. So then if Goodness it self be Good,
if Righteousness be Desirable (for We through the Spirit wait for the hope of
Righteousn^ss by Faith,) Galat. ^ ^
if Truth be amiable, for He is also called the Spirit of Truth, John 15:6 and
16.13
and said to guide into All Truth.) In a word, if according to the Riches of
the Glory of God, E^hes. 3 6
We are strengthened with might in the inner man by the Spirit, 2 Cor: 3^ ^^
changed into the same Image from Glory to glory by the same Spirit; If there
be any Consolation in Christ* Philip. 2:^
or comfort of Love joined with the fellowship of the Spirit; If God be a good
Guest, (for Ye are the Temple of God if the Spirit of God dwell in you,) 1 Cor:
3, 16
Or if Heaven be worth having, or that it be good for us that dwell in this
Tabernacle, to be clothed upon, 2 Cor. ^5:4
that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life, the Earnest where f is the
Spirit, Surely well may the Fruit of the Spirit be said to be in All Goodness.
Verse 5
As Money answers All things, Eccl. 1^, 19 Spirit answers all good things
in temporal Respe^ts, so where one Evangelist says, how much more shall your
Father give good Things, etc. The other reads, How much more shall he give the
ho y Spirit to them that ask Him, Mar. 7* 11 Luke 11, 13
so that the Holy Spirit answers All good Things.

Drunkards qu nch this Spirit Isaiah 28.1
And here I cannot but lamen^ the Drunkeness of our Ephraim who by abusing good
things, si^ away the Best Thing, quenchin^ the Spirit with strong Drink which
as it takes away man's heart so it keeps away Gods Spirit, 2 The, 5, 19
H sea 4, 11
a Scripture says, Ephe: 5* 18
be not drunk wit^ Wine, wherein inexcess, but be filled with the Spirit, for
that clean Spirit can not dwell in an Heart (especially) overcharged with
surfeiting, drunkeness, and odious excess. Luke 21.38


Sect. XLV.
Wherefore, good Reader, say as David, Thy Spirit is good, Pray for the Spirit
and Pray as David, O take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psa. 143.10. and 51,
11, 12
but uphold me with thy free Spirit, Pray and wait for the Spirit having put
the Promises in suit by Prayer. Acts 1, 4
Survey his daily workings, Survey his Workings
and work thou with him, for the Word himself uses as to his helping our
Infir^yes (...) is a Me^aphor taken from two that lift together one over
against another at ^he same stone or piece of timber ^o lay it in the Building.
Romans 8, 24


Moreover, prize his Evidence, Prize his Witnessings
^or as he works, Verse 16, 17
so he witnesses with our Spirit that We are the children of God, Act^ ^^^,
and if Children, then He rs, etc. wa k in the comfort of the Holy Ghost (as
Scripture speaks) even of his Evidence who is both Earnest, Seal, and Witness.

Listen to the Spirit, who never bids us to our hurt, Listens to his motion.
the spirit sai h come, take of the water of Life freely* Rev: 22, ^0
His Charmings are Wise, his Reproofs an excellent Oil, his Convictions,
Kindness; and all his motions, James 3 17 Rev: 2 7, 2, ^9
dictates and Counsels are first pure, and then peaceable, He that has an Ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, ch^ 3, 6.13 ^2
it is 6 time over in 2 Chapters; it seems We are dull of hearing when Our best
friend is spe^king* We could hear the S^^pents first l ssi^g, listen to Satan
when he does but whisper to us, but when the Spirit spe^ks so loud that Al^
should hear, even to the Churches He finds deaf ears growing upon o^r Hearts;
and when h^ (...) ^^so us by his sweet insin^ation we tr^^t this Heavenly
Messenger, as Hanun did King David's, cutting of his motions in the middle, 2 Samuel ^^, 4
and so we send him grieved back, to the high provocation of God that sends
him. But the Spirit is (as his Finit is) Long suff ring, or else He would not
so long strive with Man, with frow^^d and stubborn m^n, but yet think He will
not always do it, as God roundly told the Old World. But Woe, Woe unto thee if
thou Sin away the Spirit, for casting away from Gods presence is inseperably
annexed so the taking away his holy Spirit,, Psalm. 5^.^^
(as it is in the Psalmist) and those Spirits are sad proofs of it, to whom God
went and Preached by this Spirit in the days of Noah, 1 Pet. 3 18 ^9, 20
for being then disobedient, there are now in Prison; And sure We cannot but
think ^t just and reasonable that we carefully hearken to him, whenever he
comes on Gods errand to us, Who (if ever we would speed) must go on Our Errand
to God, and make Intercession for us. Romans 8.26


Grieve not the Spirit.
And oh how disingenuous and injurious must we needs think it, on the other
hand, to grieve him that Comforts us, which the Apostle says we do, when we
put not off, Ephesians. 4, 22 to 25, 26
concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man which is corrupt according to
deceiptful Lusts, and put not on the new Man, How that may be
etc. when we put not away lying, corrupt Communication, By Commissions,
undue courses for a Livelihood (instead of diligence in our lawful Calling,)
anger, bitterness, Evil speaking, and all Malice; even by All such undue
Affections, Words and Actions; Nay that We should Vex, yea Resist him, Isaia,
63, 10
as the uncircumcised in Heart and Ears; Acts 7, 51
nay quench the Spirit, with excess of Wine, etc. as is said before, put him
quite out (as Saul said, ^ Sa. 28, 15
God is departed from me and answers me no more) now Fire is put out as
effectually by not putting on of Fuel, Omissions
as by putting on of Water, and the holy Spirit quenched by Sins of Omission as
of Commission, by Contempt and wilful neglecting of holy Duties, Means and
Ordinances; and therefore Pray without ceasing, give thanks in every thing is
put into the front, and Despise not Prophesyings comes up in the rear, 1 These.
5, 17 18, 19
of that Apostolical grant Caveat Quench not the Spirit. Rather let us (as made
by Christ Priests unto God) keep always burning upon our Hearts this holy
Fire; Revel 5, 10
and stir it up by meditation, How to cherish the Spirit Psalm 39:3
while I was musing says David, the Fire burned; and blow it up by Prayer,
Teach me to do thy will, O God, Psa. 143, 10
thy Spirit is good, etc. Especially let us Pray and watch and wait (as the
Primitive Disciples) for the Lords Spirit on the Lords day; Revel. 1.10
And let us add the Fuel of diligent and industrious Observation to all his
fervent motions, when we hear the sound of his goi^gs then let us besti^ our
selves; ^^am 5:24
When the Holy Ghost says to day if ye will hear his voice, Hebr 3, 8
let us not harden our hearts, nor put him off till to morrow, for the Spirit
(is as the Wind that) blows where and when he lists; John 3 ^
when the Spirit says Come let the Bride sa^ Come, Rev 22, 17
and let him that hears say Come. Let us not harbor any Ca^nal Low, Harbor
no base thought of the Spirit. Act. 8.19, 20
base Thoughts of this glorious Spirit, this was Simon Magus his sin.
Especially let us not by close Hypocrisy or secret dissimulation agree to lie
to the Holy Ghost. and so to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, Acts 5* ^
this was Ananias and Saphira's sin, and it cost them dear, and they are
peculiarly said to tempt the Spirit, because it is his peculiar work to search
All things, ^ Cor. ^^ 10


Sect. XLVI.
ANd now to shut up all, what Holy Fe r and Love of this Holy Spirit may at
once fill Our THOUGHTS when we consider that alth^ugh HOLINESS* The wonderful
condescension of the Holy spirit in e work of salvation,
be the peculiar Attribute of the Spirit, from which he receives his
Denomination (even as Greatness is peculiarly ascribed to the Father (who is
therefore said to be in Heaven, and Kingd m, Power, Mat. 6.9 3
Romans 16 24
and Glory to be his) and Grace to be the Son) in respect of which special
property of the Spirit, 1 Co. 16 23
Gala, 6, 13
All sin agai st God is said, Phil. 4 ^3
na special manner, to ^ex the Spirit, 2 These 3, ^^
yet such is the rich Me cy of this Holy Spirit in Cond^^cention to poor man's
Salvation, that He undertakes it (as his p^culiar Office and work) to come into
man's H art unfitted, and unfurnished, when Zijm, Ochim, and I^m have dwelt
there, when vain Thought, have lodged there, into a very sink of sin, a house
without windows, a heap without order, a very Hell of cursed Confusion and of
every hateful and hurtful lust, and that when there was none to go before him,
or to prepare for him, Whereas though herein God commended his love to us in
that while We were Enemies Christ dyed for us, yet would not the Son be born to
die, or lodge in a Womb, or come into the world, till this Spirit went before
him, to prepare a p^^ce for him, and to fit a Body to him, Hebr. 10, 5 Avi^ the
Marg^
for so may the word be rendered, a Body have thou prepared me, or a Body have
thou fitted me.

O sweet Spirit! what tongue can praise, or heart prize thee according to thy
glorious Grace to poor sinners? When God first breathed into man the breath of
Life, Genesis 2, 7
He was a lump of inn^cent Clay; but when thou come to breath the breath of
New Life into sinful man, thou breathest into a noisome Carkase, 1 Kin. 8, 28
an heart full of Rotteness, and take up thy Dwelling in that very part where
his Plague sore runs. 2 Chro. 6, 29
And now seeing Thou do not shun those that have the Plague of the Heart,
come in, thou blessed of the Lord, to this Heart of mine, Thou art a Fire that
can purge my Dross, Mat: 3, 11 Isaia: 44, 3
and not be impaired; a Water that can wash away all my filth, and not be
defiled; Now to thee, Blessed Spirit, with the Father and the Son, be Glory for
ever. Amen

Sect. XLVII.
FINALLY, Thoughts for God must be by scripture rule
As our Thoughts of God, so our Thoughts For God are only Right when agreeable
to Scripture Rules, For as the second Commandment forbids all IMAGES, ^ee Bp.
Andrews on the second Commandment
so also ^ll IMAGINATIONS in the things of God that are not warrantable by the
word of God. Imago and Imaginatio, ^ C gaa^^^
The Hebrews express both by one word, ^or Thoughts are the Images of things in
our minds. What the Apostle calls Will Worship, Col. ^ 23
Our Savior c^lls Vain Worship, Mat. 25.9 S^e Bishop Tailors Diff^^^ive, p. 48
I. 2^, 3 ^4
though the things may have a show of wisdom and humility, w^^re the fear
toward God is taught (as in Popery) by the Precepts of Men.

When David took up thoughts of Building God an Horse, ^ Sam. 7, 2
h^ consulted Nathan the Prophet, which when Solomon was allowed to accomplish,
it is said, Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the
Buildi^g of the House of God; 2 Chro. 3, 3
and 29, 25
which when Hezekiah did restore, it is said also, he set the Levites in the
house of the Lord with Cymbals, with Psalteryes, and with Ha^ps according to
the Commandment of David, and of Gad the Kings S^er, and of Nathan the Prophet,
for so was the COMMANDMENT of the LORD by his Prophets.

Zeal without Knowledge is Heat without Light, Romans 10, ^
which is so like Hell that it c nnot be pleasing to the God of H^aven; for
Hell is a Fire that never goes out, and yet Outer Darkness. Wherefore, Reader,
Mark 9, 4^ Mat. 25, ^0
whenever thou think to do any thing for God, Ask his Word first, whether it
will be w ll taken. How lamentable is it to think how perniciously Our Thoughts
for God may mi^carry for want of this. Some kill Gods Saints, yet think they do
God good service, and s^ith Paul, John 16, 2 Acts 26, 7
I verily thought with my self that I ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus of N zareth. Poor Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6, 6, 7
no doubt, thought to do God a good piece of service when He put forth his hand
to stay the Ark, Pp. Tailors Preface to his Dissuasive, The Roman Church can
never justify her self from Idolatry, yet if it were but suspicious, God is
jealous and will not endure any causes of suspicion or motives of jealo s^.
Things like Idolatry can no ways be excused, Bp^ Tailors Dissuasive from Popery
page 57 Levit, 20, ^
when the Oxen shook it, but God smote him for his Error that he dyed; A
severe punishment, may some man think, and a slender error, especially
considering that the Man meant well; But when we consider that of all the
Decalogue, the mention of Gods jealousy is only annexed to the second
Commandment, (now jealousy has a sharp Eye not only upon the down right Act,
but also upon every thing that comes near it, or leads to it, or looks like
it,) We cannot wonder at the formidable instances of Gods severity recorded in
Scripture, such as Vzzah here, and Nadab and Abihu were, who offered ('it is not
said Forbidden Fire, but) strange Fire before the Lord, which he commanded them
not, and there went out a Fire from the Lord and devoured them. Only just in
the Verse before there was Holy Fire upon the Altar, chapt: 9.24
which God sent down from Heaven in the sight of the People, and God would have
this Fire preserved, Lev. 6, 13, 5
and (it seems) only made use of in the case of holy Offerings. I shall shut
up this head with that remarkable Text of Scripture, Show them (says God to
the Prophet Ezekiel.) Ezekiel. 43, ^^
the form of the House and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and
the comings In thereof, and, all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof; and write it in
their sight, that they may keep the whole form and all the Ordinances theoref,
and do them.

THE CONCLUSION Of the Whole, With Motives and Rules for the keeping of
Thoughts RIGHT.
S^ct. I.
Exhort^^ ^^to self re^^^^ion by and upon our Thoughts
ANd thus having given Rules for the Trial or ^houghts, and certain Schewes of
such Thoughts as are according to Rule; Let me earnestly Exhort Thee, O Reader,
to think seriously of thy Thought, That Thou may know what to think of thy
Self, and what God thinks of Th^e.

For as man Excel^s not other Creatures in seeing, hearing, For, No^ Aper
Auditu, Sphynx visu, fimia gustu, etc. Pro. 12, 26 Verse 5
tasting, etc. but in Thinking; So therefore is the Righteous said to be more
Excellent then his Neighbor, in this same Chapter where the Thoughts of the
Righteous are said to be Right; for ^herein a Good man excells Another, more
then another excells a Beast, For even man th t is in honor and considers
not, is like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49, 29
says the Psalmist. Therefore says he to God Consider my Meditation, and if
God consider our Thoughts, Psalm 2, ^
it concerns us sure to Consider them; And therefore says also of Himself, The
Meditation of my Heart shall be consideration, Psalm. 49, 2
or Anim-adversion (for so the word signifies as well as understanding) and so
may refer to the Reflex Acts of the mind upon it self, ab eadem Rad.
as well as its direct Acts upon other Things.

Sect. II.
ANd yet alas such is the Corruption of man's Mind by Nature, that few can be
found free to think of their Thoughts, except it be corruptly to think them
FREE:

But yet They that are Partakers (...) of a Divine Nature, (to speak with
Scripture) will bear some Resemblance of the Divine Mind which begets in it
self the express Image of it self (as the Apostle speaks) by self-Reflexion. 2
Pet 1 4
Hebr: 1 3
And as the Internal begotten WORD was the Eternal Delight of the DIVINE MIND,
Prove. 8:30
( I was daily his DELIGHT.) So if Thou make it thy Daily Business
conscientiously to converse with the hidden man of thine Heart, 1 Pet. 3, 4
in this Excellent way of self Reflection; Levit. 11, 3
This will be not only as the Chewing of the Cua in the Levitical Law, a sign
unto thee of a clean Heart, but will also embalm thy Soul, as it were, with a
certain Divine delight, a Caelestial serenity and satisfaction.

Sure I am that the best Christians do find themselves shortest fed with
Spiritual Joy, when through Sin, Sloth, or Dissuetude they are least Wont or
willing to turn in to themselves by this self-R flexion.

The hidden Manna is meat for the hidden Man, Revel. 2 1^
and thou must turn in there if thou would taste of Gods Daintyes. Christ
will not sup with Thee, except He find thee at home, Revel: 3.20
I will come in to Him (says Christ) and sup with him; And therefore if Thou
would sup with Christ, Thou must also turn in to Thy self. The stranger (to
God and the stranger to himself) does not intermeddle with this Joy. Prove. 14,
1^


And now hopeing, good Reader, that this little Treatise will find thee thus at
home, and All well there; I shall only add a few helps for the keeping
Thoughts Right, (for it is not enough that the Watch be well set, but it must
be well kept.)

1. In some moving Notional Considerations.

2. In some practical Rules.

Of each of these very briefly, and so we shall shut up all.

I. Motive to Right Thoughts.
1. Motive to Right Thoughts Psalm. 146 3
COnsider that as thy Pulse so thy Thoughts will be always Stirring to thy Dying
D^y. Now what is always in Motion had need be well Ordered. Thought^ will be
always stiring
If thy Thoughts boil not up with a good matter, Psalm 57, 21
as the Psalmists did, they will be as the Raging Sea that cannot rest, Isaia.
57, 20
but is still ^asting up Mire and Dirt. Isaia 57 20
Though Thou can not always (...) waking, yet thou can Sin sleeping,
because thou can Think sleeping, and we have seen that the very thought of
foolishness is sin. As in the Law, Prove: 24, 9
a Man might be unclean by that which happened in the Night, Deuteronomy. 23:10
so our Thoughts may drop defilement upon our Consciences when we are asleep in
our beds: And Oh let this Consideration awaken us to Repentance even for
Thought-sins of our sleep!

It Is the Policy of Princes to keep working HEADS well employed, and so must
we deal with our working HEARTS.

II. Motive.
NExt Consider what a Clorious Theme for thy Thoughts, 2. Motiv^ Gl^rious Theme
for thy Thoughts
God has provided (even All GOOD in One) in that short and sweet Rule, Heb:
12, 2, 3
CONSIDER JESUS ( in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
Colos. 2, 3


Astronomy does but survey a Dung-hil, for Stars are but Dirty Clods in
comparison of that Glory that lies within Reach of the ASTROLABE of thy
Thoughts if thou do but Rightly consider JESUS.

Truth is, it is a wonder a Christian can much think of any thing for thinking
of his Christ, but that we are so much Corruption, and so little Christian.
Saint Paul could hardly do it; perhaps He forgot his Cloak at Troas, when he
left it behind him; yet he had not, good man, much else to think of but the
Clothes to his back. But however, we are sure that we find him wrapping himself
up, almost every other line, in the warm Thoughts of a JESUS. Blessed Soul!
strip him to the Back, or rip up his Bosom, Gal. 6, 17
there you still find the marks of the Lord JESUS. And here methinks I could
even forget my self, As it is said Cal^is might have been read in Qu. Ma^yes
heart if it had it been ripped up
and run along in my Thoughts with this sweet Apostle, but that I must not
forget my Reader, for it is time to be hastening toward a Conclusion.

III: Motive.
AGain* Consider that to keep thy Thoughts Right, 3 Motive Ke^p Right Th^ugh^^s
and they will keep thee right:
is the way to keep Thee so. My Life for thine, He that keeps his Thoughts
Right, shall never die Traitor to God or the King. Not to the King; for Curse
not the King no not in thy Thought, says the Rule of Righteousness. Not to
God, for Right Thoughts will yield the Fruits of Righteousness. Fruits of the
Lips, My Heart is Inditing a good matter, Psalm. 45, 1
I will speak of the things I have made touching the King, my Tongue is the Pen
of a ready Writer, Psa: 119, 15
so says the Psalmist. And the Fruit of good living; I will meditate (says
He* in thy Precepts, and have Respect unto thy Ways. and again, I have
remembered thy Name, Verse 55,
and have kept thy Law.

IIII. Motive.
4. Motive Right Thoughts will yield peaceable Fruit
ANd lastly Consider, That Right Thoughts will yield as the Fruits, so the
Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. For these are thy fair Evidences that thou
art in Gods Books (as we say proverbially of One highly favored) that Thou art
one of his Jewels; Mal. 3, 16
for a Book of Remembrance was written before him for them that Thought upon
his Name; And they shall be mine, Verse 17
says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewel^. And how should
We count and ke^p that as Our peculiar Treasure, in respect of which God counts
Us so.

And therefore in the II. place to Direct thee.

I. Practical Rule.
THe First Practical Rule for the Keeping of Right Thoughts, 1. Practical Rule.
is Diligent and daily R^pentance of Evil Thoughts, Repent of evil Thoughts,
what says the Apostle? Repent and pray God if perhaps the Tho^ghts of thine
heart may be forgiven Thee, Acts 8, 22
And O what cause of deep Humiliation for our Thought sins is here, that the
very Thought of a man's Heart may bring a Man to a peradventure or a Perhaps
whether ever He may be forgiven.

What says John Baptist? Bring forth therefore Fruits meet for Repentance,
Matthew. 3, 8
and think not to say within your selves, etc. Hence thus much is Evident, that
where Fruits mee^ for Repentance are brought forth, Evil Thoughts are expelled
and cast forth. Now as nothing can banish Darkness but Light, so can nothing
expel Evil Thoughts but Good Thoughts.

And as the Ablaqucation and laying of the Roots bare in the time of year, is
the way to make Trees bring forth Fruit well in their season; so the laying Our
Hearts bare in the sight of God by Confession, Compunction, Contrition, deep
Humiliation for our Evil Thoughts is one way to be fruitful and abounding in
Good ones.

II. Practical Rule:
2 Practical Rule 2 Sa. 13, 20

Make the evil of thine heart subservient to thy good thoughts


NExt, as the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every man his
Share, and his Colter, and his Axe, and his Mattock, because they would not
suffer a Smith in Israel; So deal with the Corruption of thy Nature, that would
not suffer One goo Thought in thy Soul. Whet thy Thoughts for good by that very
Contrariety that is in thee to good, For instance.

Thou complainest that such is the corruption of thy Nature, that thou can
not of thy self think one Good Thought; Why, Think then of the Corruption of
thy Nature, and even this Thought well followed, shall be a Good Thought in
Thee, and a Good Thought for thee.

Thou complainest that thou can not think of Heaven for the thoughts of
Earth, and of things below; why, think of these things, only think of them
aright (viz;) as Gods Word, and thy Reason and thy Sense tell thee, Psalm 8, 6
as what God has placed under thy fe^t (as the Psalmist speaks) Let me tell
thee that Right Thoughts of Earth, and of things below, may help not hinder thy
thoughts of Heaven.

In Nature, the ambient Winter-cold makes Springs in the Bowels of the Earth,
(they say) the hotter. Man's Heart is a Spring, and Thoughts are its flowings,
and thus David (we have seen) waxed hot with musing, Psa. 39, 1, 3
while the wicked were before him. God can make Corruption of Nature
subservient to Grace; as Joshua said of the Canaanites, they are Bread for us,
Number: 14, 9
God can make the very Evil of our Hearts to be Food and Fuel to our Good
Thoughts.

III: Practical Rule.
NExt, 3 Practical Rule

Heave at thine heart Number. 15, 20


Heave daily at thine Heart, for our Thoughts are our Heave Offerings. Lift at
thine Heart as they do at a great Stone or piece of Timber which is, by
raising, to be laid into the Buildi^^ Unto thee O Lord, do I lift (...) Soul
says holy David.) Psalm. 25, 5


But then still Remember that of thy self thou art not sufficient to think any
thing (aright) as of thy self Therefore Pray in aid of the Spirit, But not in
thine own strength,
pray for the Spirit to help thee to right Thoughts
whose work it is (as in Prayer so) in Meditation (...) to lift with us, and to
help us to lift. And Pray in Faith of that Promise, the Holy Ghost, John 14 2^
whom the Father will send in my Name, shall bring All things to your
Remembrance, that is, Good Thoughts to your minds. And here let me desire thee
carefully to Remember this, That, if Gods Spirit do not, Acts 5 3
Satan will be filling thine Heart.

The very First Petition in the Lords Prayer teaches us to pray for Right
Thoughts, for by these we sanctify the Lord God in our Hearts. Isaia. 8.13 1
Pet. 3:15
And therein also to pray for the Sanctifying Spirit, whom God has promised to
give to them that ask him. Lu^e 11, 13


be thankful for right thoughts
And further, be sure to be thankful to God, when he helps thee to be thoughtful
of that which is Good; in this sense, Give thanks at the Remembrance of his
Holiness, Psalm 30, 4
even when he helps thee to Remember it. Humble thankfulness for what we have
is a cleanly way of begging for more.

And that thou may always be full of good thoughts, Labo^r for holy a
fections
Implore Gods Grace to fill thee with those sanctified Affections that carry
the Key, and command of the Thoughts, (viz.) Holy Fear and Love.

For the First of these, Fear
even slavish Fear can carry the thoughts before it (the Mariners in a storm
can easily think of their Danger) And shall not an holy and Filial fea^? they
feared the Lord, Jonah 1, 5
Malac. 3, 16
and (says the Text) they thought upon his Name.

And as for Love, and Love
as the Holy Fire under the Frying pan made the Oil of the Oblation to bubble
and boil up, Levit 2.7 Cacabus a Rad. Hebr. ebullivit,
(which is the Psalmists very word) Holy Love is this Fire that makes Thoughts
boil up, for the very first word of that Psalm which is entitled a Song of
Love, Psalm 45, ^
is this, My heart boileth up with a good matter.

Experience tells us that the affectionate and tender Mother can leave her
thoughts behind her at home with her sucking Child when she goes abroad. Animus
est non ubi animat, sed ubi amat.
Thus worldly Love will have worldly thoughts, and Gracious Love will have
Gracious thoughts. Oh how I love thy Law! Ps ^.19, 97
it is my Meditation all the day. And it is a sign Holy Love is but weak and
feeble, when holy thoughts are but faint and few. Deut^^. 6, 5


And here let the Reader most carefully observe, that where Moses lays down
the First and great Commandment, thou shall Love the Lord thy God, only in
three words, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might
(or strength.) Our Savior (repeating the Law) ads a Fourth, Mat 22, 37 Mark 17
30 Luke 10, 27
(viz.) (...), ex omni Cogitatione (so Bez. and vulg. etc.) with all thy
Thought or Mind, plainly enough suggesting unto us, that the Strength of the
Heart cannot be reckoned as engaged to the Love of God, where the Thoughts of
the Heart are not drawn Out by it.

And therefore labor to ascertain and to clear up thine Interest in God, and
Christ, Mark 12.30
and Heavenly things daily more, and more, for Christ says not where Another,
but where your treasure is, there will your heart be also, Luke 10. ^7
for as Interest raises Love, Love has power to leavy Thoughts, and to keep
them in readiness for its use and service, Luke 12, 34
so that if thy Treasure be in Heaven, there will thine heart be also.

IIII. Last Practical Rule,
Lastly, 4 Practical Rule,

Begin thy Days and Weeks with Right thoughts Exodus 12, 1


As the Israelites were to reckon their Beginning of Months from the time of
their Deliverance, so let the Thoughts of thy DELIVERER still begin both thy
Weeks and thy Days; John 20 ^
for it was both upon the First of the Week, and of the Day, that our Blessed
Lord Rose again from the Dead, and We must imp ^our Thoughts, if we would help
their flight, Collos. 3, 1
upon the wing of Our Saviors Resurrection.

Revel. 1, 10
S. John was in the Spirit on the LORD'S DAY, that is, on the First of the Week,
for it is generally confessed that the First day of the Week was as well known,
by the Primitive Christians in the Apostolical Age, by the Name of the
Lord's Day, as any other day was or is, by Jews or Gentiles, known and
distinguished by any other Name.

Thus did the dear Disciple begin the Week, and thus did Holy David still begin
the day, whose constant course was to take his flight for Heaven on the wings
of the Morning, (when I was awake (says he to God) I am still with thee.) Psa.
139, 18
And thus should the First-^ings of the flock of our Thoughts before God still,
Genes 4, 4
still; First seek the Kingdom of God, that is, not only above All, but also
every Week, Matthew 6, 33
and every Day, first of All.

Of all the Ten there is but One Commandment that begins with a REMEMBER, O
forget not that. Exodus 20.8
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. This is the standing Law, commanding
one Day, or Seventh part of the Week, (blessed of God above all the rest) to
be set a part for God, for so also the Commandment ends, the Lord Blessed the
Sabbath Day, Verse 11
and hallowed it. The Perpetual obligatoriness of which Law is strongly
asserted by the Learned Hooker, Hookers ecclesi^st^^al Policy*
and declaredly owned by the Church of England, there being subjoyned to the
public reading of this fourth Commandment, as well as of the rest, See also
the Hom. of ^^e Place and Time, etc.
a Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our Hearts to keep this Law. And if in
Words we confess this Law, O let not our Works deny it. Titus 1, 16


Now as the SON of God, being Maker both of the First Creation and Sabbath, for
by Him were All things made, John 1, 3
and without Him was nothing made that was made, (as we have already seen)
First Blessed that Day wherein He first Rested, for the Commemoration of that
First and Glorious work of his; So after that He became the SON of MAN, being
still LORD of the SABBATH, Mark 2, 28
He has dignifyed the First Day of the Week with the glorious Title of the
LORD'S DAY, having Rested therein from a greater work (viz.) the Suffering and
state of Death, which was the last and Finishing Work of his state of
Humiliation, and therein blessed and hallowed it for our Commemoration of the
more glorious work of Redemption. For as the glory of the latter Temple, Mag^
2, 9
was greater then that of the former, because Christ was more manifestly to
appear in it, it may be (as truly and for the same reason) said of Gods
Wormanship, Ephe^: 2, 10
created in CHRIST JESUS unto good works, that the glory of the New Creature
excells that of the Old, for the more manifestation of Christ, still the more
Glory, till at last He shall come to be perfectly glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all them that believe; 2 These, 1, ^0
For herein has he obsignated, and given an undubitable pledge of that REST or
SABBATISM, Hebr: 4, 9
that remains for the People of God, when (upon the general Resurrection of
their Bodies) they shall Eternally rest from Sin and Death, for Christ is Risen
as the First Fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor 15, 20
and therefore (says He) thy Dead Men shall live, Isaia. 26, 19
together with my Dead Body shall they arise, for because I LIVE, John 14, 10
Ye shall live also.

To allude then to that Word of our Savior, John 12, 32
When I am lifted up, I will draw all men to me (and indeed when the King is up
and gone, it is not for the Courtiers to loyter and lag behind) O methinks this
Resurrection of Christ should DRAVV All our Hearts and thoughts to him. Colos.
3, 1
If we then be Risen with Christ (says the Apostle) Let us seek those things
that are above, Psalm 24, 7
and then especially when He arose Then Lift up your heads, O ye gates, Psalm.
110, 7
and be ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, for this day did your dearest Lord
lift up that head from the Conquered Grave, John 19.30
which He bowed before upon that bitter Cross, that as his Death was the Death
of our Sins, so his Resurrection might be the life of our Souls. This, this is
the day that Our Lord has made, Psalm 118, 24
We will Rejoice and be glad in it; Every other Sunrising can make another
Day, ^^lac. 4, 1
but it is only the Rising of the Sun of Righteousness, with healing in his
wings, that made the Day we style the LORDS DAY, and therefore when the Burden
of the Week (for sufficient to every day is the Evil thereof) has made our
sh^ulders sh^ink, Mala 16, 3
and galled our back, this blessed Day takes off the Burden, and lays on the
Balm, heals the aching Heart, Relieves the weary Thoughts, and (in a word) it
brings Heaven half down to us, and takes us half up to Heaven.

Wherefore, good Reader, let thine Early Thoughts and Spicie Meditations begin
every morning of this blessed Day (as the good Women in the Gospel) with a
gracious and holy visit of thy Saviors Sepulcher, Luke 24.1, 6
till the Heavenly Ordinances of that Day proclaim to thee, as the Angels to
them, He is not here, but is risen, John 14, ^
and is gone before thee, to prepare a place for thee, that he may come again
and receive thee, that where He is, there may thou he also.

And as the First day of each Week thus employed will sanctify unto thee the
rest of the Week, so will the First of each day, the rest of the Day; When by a
Sunbeam thou can climb to God, We bert in Temple,
as Divine Herbert most sweetly expresses it.

And now having found thee with Him and Holy David in the Morning, Close thy
days with good thoughts
I would choose to leave thee with Isaak in the Evening, who was wont at that
time to go out to MEDITATE, That as God is Alpha and Omega of all things, He
may be the Beginning and the End of thy Thoughts, for with Him it is that this
little Book both designs and desires to leave Thee.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

