THE SECOND PART OF THE THEATER OF GODS IVDGMENTS. Collected out of the
writings of sundry Ancient and Modern Authors,

By the late Reverend Divine Dr THOMAS TAILOR, sometime Pastor of Aldermanbury
in London.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Herne. An. Dom. 1642.

THE SECOND PART OF THE THEATER OF GOD'S JUDGMENTS.
CHAP. I. Gods Remarkable Judgments against Pride.
AS in the two former learned Tractates, bearing Title of The Theater of Gods
Judgments inflicted upon the several breaches of the Ten Commandments; so
now, to these we add a third Tract, Of his most remarkable punishments of the
seven deadly sins; and these illustrated by sundry notable Examples, as well
Domestic as Foreign. And because Pride was the first, which began in the
Angels, and has since infected all mankind, from our Protoplasti (our first
Parents) Adam and Eve, and has continued through all generations hitherto; and
shall in their posterity, even to the last dissolution: I derive my first
Discourse from that.

There be four sorts of Pride, by which every insolent and arrogant man Four
Species of Pride.
discovers himself: For instance, when those good parts (if he have any) of
which he is possessed, he apprehends merely to spring from himself; or when
those which he acknowledges to be conferred from above, he attributes to his
own merit; or when he boasts to have, what indeed he has not; or when
despising others, he covets to be singular in himself. This sin was borne in
Heaven, but so suddenly precipitated thence, that it could never since find
the way back again thither: all other vices are only at war with these
particular virtues, by which they are overcome; as Inchastity, Chastity;
Bounty, Avarice; Wrath, Patience; and so of the rest: Pride is not with that
contented, as to oppose Humility and Obedience, but it rages against all the
virtues of the mind, and like a general pestiferous disease, striveth to
putrify and infect them all: For Pride in riches makes men the more covetous:
In idleness, scorning labor; in wrath, more outrageous; in gluttony, more
intemperate; in envy, more malicious: neither is there any mortiferous sin,
in which Pride is not a supreme agent; The signs thereof are boldness in
language; sullenness in silence; arrogance in mirth; murmuring in melancholy;
and despising all others, doting upon himself.

Aesop being asked by Chian, What he thought Jupiter was at that time doing?
made answer, He is now dejecting the proud, and exalting the humble. And the
famous Philosopher Aristotle, spying a rich young man (but altogether
unlearned) strutting along the streets, with a proud affected gate; and his
eyes so elevated toward Heaven, as if he despised the earth, whereon he
troad; came to him, and said, friend, Such as thou think thy self to be, I
wish I were; but to be such as thou art, I wish only to mine enemy. This also
Socrates with great modesty reproved in Alcibiades, who finding himself
suddenly puffed up with his extraordinary abundance in riches, and much to glory
in his many spoils and victories, he drew him into a private Gallery; and
showing him a Cosmographicall Table of the World, bid him look in what part of
the Map he could spy all his great Trophies and Triumphs? And when he answered
him, They were not there to be seen; Socrates replied, Cur igitur ob illa
superbis, quae circa nullam terrae partem existunt? that is, Why then art thou
so proud of these things which are not visible in any part of the earth?

Neither was the Church it self free from this sin in the days of learned
Saint Bernard, who in one of his Sermons thus complains. Thou shall see many
in the Church, who from obscure parentage being ennobled, and from poverty made
rich with pride, so suddenly tumor'd and tympanized, that forgetting from
whence they came, have contemned their parents, and blushed at their own
births: Thou shall see also some pernicious persons aspire unto Ecclesiastical
honors, and then pretend to themselves a seeming sanctity, by changing of
their vestures, not their vices; and their manner of habit, not their minds;
esteeming themselves to deserve that dignity which they have insidiated by
deceit, and which (I scarce dare say) have attributed that to their merit,
which they have bought with their money.

But as the smoke, which of its own nature is black and obscure, yet covets
to ascend from a light and bright flame; but in the midst of its violent
reluctation, resolves it self into air; and so vanishing, loses both nature
and name: So the proud and ambitious, howsoever coursly and obscurely parted,
yet will elevate and advance himself above others; yet in his striving to
stand high, is often precipitated, and loses both his place and memory; Behold
(says the Prophet) He that lifts up himself, Habbak. 2. 4.
his mind is not upright; but the Just shall live by his faith. Yea, indeed,
The proud man is as he that transgresses by Wine, therefore shall he not
endure, because he has enlarged his desire as the Hell, and is as death, and
cannot be satisfied; but gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth unto him
all people: shall not all these take up a Parable against him? and a taunting
Proverb, and say, Ho, he that increases that which is not his! how long? and
be that ladeth himself with thick clay? Shall they not rise up suddenly that
shall bite thee? and awake that shall stir thee? and thou shall be their
prey; Because etc.

How Pride has been severely punished by the Almighty, we find frequent
examples in the holy Text: It was punished in our first Parents by their Exile
out of Paradise. In the Builders of Babel, (who said, Come let us build us a
City and a Tower, whose top may reach up to the Heaven, that we may get us a
name, etc.) In their scattering over the face of the earth, and the confusion
of their Languages: In Sodom and Gomorrah, by raining down fire and brimstone
upon their Cities and people: In Miriam the sister of Moses, by Leaprosie: In
Korah, Dathan, and Abir^m, for their pride, and rebellion against Moses; the
ground clave asunder that was under them, and the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed them up, with their families; and all the men that were with Korah,
and all their goods; so they and all that they had went down alive unto the
pit, and the earth covered them, and they perished from amongst the
Congregation: In Goliath the Philistime, slain by the hands of David: In Sheba
the son of Bicri, who lift up his hand against the King; by having his head
cut off, and cast over the walls to Ioah, Captain of the host: In Absalom,
who took such pride in his hair, that it after became his halter: In
destroying of David's people, for his pride in numbering them: In Adoniah, who
for demanding Abishag the Shunamite to wife, (who had layen in his fathers
bosom) was slain at the commandment of Solomon, by the hand of Benaiah the
son of Iehojadah: In Benhadad King of Aram, Rabsakeh and Zenacharib: In
Olofernes the great Captain of the Assyrian host, slain by Judith at the siege
of Bethulia: In Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, whom the great King
Ahashuerosh exalted, and set his seat above all the Princes that were under
him; whose pride growing up with his promotion, at length advanced him to a
Gibbet fifty foot high, upon which in the glory of his ambition he was
strangled: In Nabuchadnezar, and Balthassar King of the Chaldeans: In the great
King Antiochus, who went up toward Judea and Jerusalem, with a mighty people,
and entered proudly into the Sanctuary, and took away the golden Altar, and the
Candlestick for the light, and all the instruments belonging thereto; and the
Table of the Shewbread, and the pouring vessels, and the Bowls, and the golden
Basins, and the Veil, and the Crowns, and the golden apparel which was
before the Temple, and brake all in pieces: He brake also the Silver and Gold,
and the precious Jewels, with the secret treasures that he found, and then
departed away into his own Land. But the same proud Prince coming after with
great dishonor from Persia, the God Almighty stroke him with an invisible and
an incurable plague, by a pain in his bowels, which was remediless, and which
grievously tormented him in the inner parts; for so he had tormented other men's
bowels with diverse cruel and strange torments; yet would not he cease from
his arrogance, but swelled the more with pride, against Gods own people to
destroy them; and commanded to haste his journey for that purpose: but so it
was, that he fell down from the Chari^t that ran swiftly, and all the parts
and members of his body were bruised. Thus he who but a day before thought he
might command the Floods, (such was his Luciferian pride, beyond the condition
of man) and to weigh the high mountains in the balance, was cast on the earth
and carried in an horse-litter; declaring unto all the world the manifest power
of God: so that the worms came out of his body in abundance, and his flesh
dropped from his bones with pain and torment, and all his Army was grieved at
his smell: No man could now endure him because of his stink, who but a little
before, thought with his hands he might reach the stars of Heaven: And then
(though too late) he began to abate his haughty and peremptory insolence; when
being plagued, he came to the knowledge of himself by the just scourge' of
God; and by his inward torments which every moment increased upon him: and when
he himself could not abide his own favor, he said, It is meet for man to be
subject to God, and that he who is but mortal should not oppose himself
against his Maker.

The like punishment we read of in the person of Nicanor, who came Nicanor.
unto Mount Sion, whom the Priests and the Elders of the people went forth of
the Sanctuary to salute peaceably, and to show him the daily burnt offerings
for the King; but he laughed at them and derided their devotion, accounting
them merely profane, and spoke proudly, and swear in his wrath, If Judas and
his Host be not delivered into mine hands; If ever I shall return in safety,
I will burn up this house, etc. and so departed thence in great fury: but
observe the event of his so great ostentation and insolence. Judas after some
few days (though against infinite odds) having slain Nicanor in battle,
and routed his whole Army, he caused his head to be struck off, and that arm
and hand which he had so proudly lifted up against the Temple of the God of
Israel, and brought them to Jerusalem, and there caused them to be hanged up,
as a remarkable judgment.

But not to dwell on those, frequent in the holy Text: I come now to the like
examples gathered from Ethnic and Moral remembrancers, and out of them give
you only a taste to prevent surfeit, till I fall upon those more familiar and
modern. Alexander the Great, in his height of potency, and Alexander the Great.
supereminent fortune, contemning the remembrance of his father Philip, would
be called God, and commanded himself to be styled the son of Jupiter Hamon;
who notwithstanding in the sufferance of many heats and colds, his subjection
to humors and passions, his enduring of smarts and wounds, and all other
infirmities belonging to man, would not be sensible of his mortality; till in
the very Apex of his sublimity he was treacherously poisoned, and so most
miserably expired.

And Nero, the Arch-tyrant since Adam, after he had filled the Earth Nero Casar.
with many insolences, and Rome (the theu Worlds Metropolis) with infinite
Rapes, Murders, and Massacres, not sparing his near Kinsman Germanicum, his
corrivall in the Empire, nor his great grave and learned Tutor and Master
Seneca; to make himself unparalleld in all kind of parricidy, He caused the
womb of his own natural mother Agrippina to be ripped up before his face,
only in an ambition to discover the place of his first conception;
notwithstanding which inhumanities, he was so inflamed with an ardent desire
of future memory, that by a public Edict he proclaimed that the month April
should lose its ancient name, and be called after his own appellation, Nero;
and the City of Rome, Neropolis: Yet this proud man in the end, being quite
abandoned and forsaken of all his Sycophants and oily flatterers, was glad to
fly from his Royal Court to seek refuge in a rustic Cottage; and with
greater terror to his own conscience, then before he had used tyranny upon
the carcasses of others; he was compelled to fall upon his sword, his body
being after, most contemptibly dragged through the streets of the City, with
more bitter execrations and curses, then before he had lived hours or minutes.

Another, called Varus Pergaus, was so infected with the adulatory assentations
of his Flatterers, Buffoones, and Trencher-flyes; That he was Varus Pergaus.
brought to persuade himself to be of all fair men, the most beautiful; of
all able men, the most sinnowie and strong; of all understanding men; the most
prudent and wise; and that in all kinds of music and melody, he could
out-play and out-sing even the Muses themselves: But this poor effascinated
wretched creature, when he had long fooled and spent the prime and best of his
age, in this vain and idle false conceit; he grew toward his end to be
strangely disfigured and deformed in visage, feebled and disabled in his vigor
and strength; idioted and besotted in his understanding and sense; and so far
from song or Harmony, that his unlamented death was accompanied with his own
shreeking, and howling.

We further read of one Menecrates, a rare Physician, who in his practice
Menecrates the Physitia^.
had done many extraordinary cures upon several Patients, insomuch that he was
held in a general admiration; especially amongst those to whom he was best
known: who having gathered to himself a competent estate, or rather a
surplusage of means, that he presumed no casualty or adverse fortune was any
way able to decline him to necessity or want; he then in a proud and insolent
ostentation, puffed up with the vanity of his own fancy, admitted all sickly
and diseased persons to have free access unto him: for whose cures he demanded
no other satisfaction or reward, but that they should acknowledge him their new
Creator, not contented to be called by the name of Apollo, or Aesculapius, the
two Imaginary gods of Physic, and Surgery, but his ambition was to be
called Jupiter himself: yet soon after being quite abandoned by his own Art,
and forsaken by his fellow Physicians, he suddenly died of an incurable
Impostume.

Neither have Emperors, Kings, and Princes, with other Sages and Pride in all
states, conditions, and sexes.
seeming wise men, been only tainted with this superarrogant haughtiness and
ambition; but this miscellane sin, which has intruded it self into all
delinquencies and malefactions whatsoever, claims a predominance over all
estates, qualities, functions, manufactures, sexes, and ages; whether in Court,
City, Camp, or Country: from the scarlet to the russet, from the Scepter to
the sheep-hooke, the Tetrarch to the Tradesman. For instance, The rural Girl
being a little flattered, shall be easily persuaded to be a rare courtly
Gentlewoman: nay, even kitchen-maides have held competitorship with Court
Madams; no less proud, though perhaps less painted; and the very course
Coridon will scarce give precedence to the complementall Courtier, thinking
himself as well accommodated in his rustic russet, as the other in his
richest raiment. In the like manner I could go through all qualities, and A
minimo ad maximum, from the least to the greatest, which for brevities sake I
omit; desiring rather to satisfy the judicious Reader with matter then manner;
the substance, and not shadow of discourse.

And yet to look a little further into the nature of this deadly sin, The
nature of Pride.
which has all the other, its concomitants and attendants. Plato says, he
that knows himself best, esteems himself least; and husbandmen better
value those ears of grain which bow down their heads from the stalk, and
wax crooked, then those that erect themselves and stand upright; because they
presume to find more corn in the first than in the last. Pride (says Saint
Augastine) is the mother of Envy, and he that knows how to suppress the
mother, may easily find the way to bridle the daughter. Lewis the eleventh
King of France, was wont to say, That whenever Pride sat in the saddle,
mischief and shame rid upon the cropper: One compares S. Augustine.
it to a ship without a pilot, still tossed up and down upon the Seas by the
winds and tempests; another to a vapor, which striveth to ascend high,
Plutarch.
and then vanishes into smoke first, and after returns to nothing. In
brief, Pride eats gold and drinks blood, and climeth so high by other men's
heads, that in the end it breaks its own neck. I cannot stand to divide it
into several branches or heads, but proceed directly on to History.

Let all such, prided in their own selfe-conceited knowledge and wisdom, be
attentive to a story extracted from a learned and grave Spanish An excellent
Spanish History against pride in knowledge.
Chronologer; by him to this purpose related. Alphonsus King of Spain, being a
very wise, learned, and discreet Prince, was wont to devise many dark and
difficult problems, proposing them to his Lords and Peers; to show his own
excellent wisdom, and to task their ignorance, who had spent their time in
more loose and idle studies: amongst others there was a Knight in the Court
called Don Pedro, one who was very confident in his own wisdom, and would
undertake to make solution of what difficulty soever the King at any time
propounded; of which he so insolently boasted, that coming to the Kings ear,
he was much incensed thereat; and to let him know what distance his weakness
had from essential wisdom, he caused him to be sent for; and when he,
according to his summons made appearance before him, the King at the first, to
humor his self-conceit, began much to applaud his witty and ready answers,
which not a little pleased him, but at the length concluded somewhat more
sharply, telling him that he would propose three Problems; of the
interpretations of which, if he could not within one and twenty days give him
a true and plenall account, both his life and goods were immediately forfeit to
the crown; and this sentence notwithstanding any means or mediation, no way
to be altered. The three Questions were these, which he delivered unto him in
writing:

The first,

What has man's labor most increast, The 3. Questions propounded.

Yet of it self desires it least.
The second,

What has to man most honor gained,
And yet with least lust is maintained.
The third,

What thing is it men soonest rue,
Yet they with greatest charge pursue.
These he no sooner received, but the King with a contracted brow departed, and
so left him; by which he might easily conjecture in what a dangerous straight
he was now environed: and returning very sad home, and having long ruminated
upon these riddles, but wanting an Oedipus to unfold them, he grew into a deep
melancholy, insomuch that he abstained both from meat and sleep: which
observed by his daughter Petronella, a fair and beautiful virgin, of some
sixteen years of age, or thereabout, she so far insinuated into her fathers
discontents, and to know the cause thereof; that at length upon her great
importunity he unfolded the whole matter unto her: who after some pawse, began
greatly to comfort him, and told him she would interpose her self betwixt him
and all danger; who though he had little hope to be relieved by her, yet out of
his indulgence toward her, not willing to cross her, especially in so
desperate a case, he told her he would be swayed according to her direction;
which was, that upon the day prefixed she might go with him to appear before
the King, and that to her he would commit the solution of these questions;
which was agreed upon betwixt them.

Imagine the day come, and the King attended by his Lords and Peers, seated in
his Throne, to expect Don Pedroes answer; who presenting himself before his
Majesty, attended with his daughter; (who was very sumptuously attyred)
besought his Majesty, that whilst he himself was silent, he would vouchsafe
to hear what his daughter could say concerning these problems before
propounded.

The King much taken on the sudden with her beauty and modest behavior, and in
a great expectation whether she were able to deliver her self in language
answerable to the former, gave her free liberty of speech; when bowing her face
to the earth, and after settling her self upon her knees, she began as
follows: Wonder you may my Royal Liege, that so grave and experienced a
Knight as my father here present, should lay all his fortunes both of life and
livelihood, upon so weak and infirm an apprehension, which cannot be better
expected from my tender years, and immature knowledge; yet since his
confidence is so far built on me, and your high Majesty so gracious to
accept of me, I make bold thus further to proceed.

Touching the first Question,

What has man's labor most increast,
Yet of it self desires it least.
In my weak understanding, I take it to be the Earth, the mother of all The
Earth.
creatures, rational or irrational, sensitive or vegetative; which though men
daily dig and delve, plow or furrow, mine and undermine, trenching her sides
and wounding her intrayles, not suffering her to have the least cessation of
rest in any of the four seasons; yet she in her own fertility and annual
vicissitude without these injuries, is able of her self to yield herbs and
flowers, grass and hay, plants and trees, with food and sustenance in
abundance to all creatures bred upon her (still teeming) womb; who, as she
delivers them into the world, not only fosters and cherishes them, but when
their Date is run, and their time expired, receives them again into her own
breast, from whence they had their first being.

Touching the second, I take it to be Humility; which teaches a man Humility.
how to rule his affections, and to keep a mediocrity in all his actions. The
high Creator dwells in Heaven, and if we arrogantly lift up our selves unto
him, he will fly from us; but if we humbly bow our selves before him, he will
descend down upon us. Humilitas animi, sublimitas Christiani; In Humility is a
Christian man's minds sublimity: It stirs up affection, augmenteth good will,
supports equity, and preserves a common weal in safety; It is apt to
repentance, hungring after righteousness, and conversant in deeds of mercy: It
has brought these good things to pass, which no other reason or virtue could
effect: And whosoever shall desire to ascend where the Father is, much first
put on that humility which the Son teaches; and most happy is the man whose
calling is high, and his spirit humble; of which virtue I may truly conclude
with your Question,

Man has by that most honor gained,
And yet with least loss is maintained.
The third the most basely vile, and yet the highest valued; the most cursed to
manage, yet the most costly to maintain; in my ignorant conceptions I hold to
be Pride: which being first hatched in heaven, in an instant, precipitated
Pride.
Lucifer and his Angels headlong into hell: which perceiving Humility to be
honorable, desires often to be covered with the cloak thereof; least
appearing always in its own likeness, it might thereby be the less
regarded. I shall not need much to amplify the vice, nor to aggravate the
sin; a spice whereof (may I speak it with pardon) has been discovered even
in this my best beloved parent: and to avoid prolixitie,

It is that thing men soonest rue,
And yet with greatest charge pursue.
With which answer so modestly delivered, and in a kind of matron-like
gravity, (rarely to be found in one of her tender and young years) the King
was so highly raptured, that he not only received her father into former
grace, but spoke openly, (being then a Batchelour) that had she been borne of
noble blood, he would have made her his Queen and Royal Consort; and taking
her from the earth, caused her to stand before him: when instantly news was
brought him that an Earldom was then fallen unto the Crown, which he
presently for her sake conferred upon Don Pedro her father: of which she taking
advantage, fell down again upon her knees, Advantage well taken.
to give the King thanks for so great an honor bestowed upon him; for which
she prostrated unto him in all humble manner her life and service, adding
withal some words to this purpose: My Royal Liege, excuse my over-boldnesse,
if I challenge your Majesty of your Kingly word and promise past unto me
before all this presence; who demanding of her wherein he was any way engaged?
she made reply, But late great Sir, you said that were I noble, you would
accept of my unworthy self as your royal Bride and Spouse: Then pardon my
presumption if I thus far prompt your memory, to put your Highness in mind
that I am now not only (by your Grace) ennobled, but an Earls daughter; at
which word covering her face with her hand, she concluded in a bashful and
modest blush: All which so highly pleased the King, that making good his
Princely word, he gave order for the present celebration of their nuptial.
Their marriage.


This History though it have a comicall conclusion, yet is pertinent to the
discourse now in agitation; for Don Pedroes pride of knowledge was sentene't
with death, and his life, (howsoever redeemed by his fair and virtuous
daughter) was immediately forfeit by the doom of the King; and therefore the
judgment in Justice, howsoever not in execution, remarkable.

We read in the French Chronicle of one Iordaine of Lisle, by Nation a Gascon,
and Nephew to Pope John the two and twentieth of that name, a man of a most
high and insolent spirit, daring any thing though never so facinorous, cruel,
inhumane, or bloody, building all his heinous and horrid acts upon the
greatness of his Uncle; who after he had been pardoned for eighteen capital
crimes, still grew more impious and shameless, (former mercy making him still
the more presumptuous) at the last being apprehended and brought to Paris, he
was arraigned, convicted, and condemned by Charles the fourth, (surnamed the
Fair) King of France; where notwithstanding his great allies, he suffered like
a common felon and murderer on the Gallows.

It is credibly reported also of a proud Italian Gentleman, borne in Genoa, who
in a single duel having the better of his Antagonist in the field, insomuch
that he disarmed him of his weapon; and the other now standing at his mercy, he
fell to parle with him upon these terms, that there was no way for him to
escape immediate death, but by abjuring his Christianity and renouncing his
Savior, to which the other through base timerousnesse assented; of which the
Victor taking divelish advantage, even in the midst of his most impious
Apostasy, he stabbed him to the heart and slew him, uttering these (more then
heathenish) words: before I had been only revenged upon thy body, but now I
have sent both thy body and soul to the Devil, and that is a revenge which
deserves a chronicle: But what became of this firebrand of Hell, and limb of
the Devil? being apprehended for the murder, and his diabolical proceedings
in the act being related to the Judges; as a terror to others he was first
committed to the rack, and after many other insufferable tortures, despairing
of all mercy from God, having showed no compassion toward man, he most
miserably ended his life.

One Herebert, Earl of Vermendoys in France, was of that haughty and insolent
spirit, that he durst lay hands upon his Sovereign, Charles, King of France
(surnamed the Simple) who caused him to be imprisoned, and under whose custody
he shortly after died at Peroune; which seemed for a time to be smothered, and
he still subsisted in his former eminency: but where man seems most to
forget, God does remarkably remember; nor does he suffer deeds of such horrid
nature to pass unpunished in this world, what vengeance soever he (without
true repentance) reserveth for them in the world to come; as it is observable
in this present History: for Lewis the fourth, the thirty third King of France,
by lineall descent, coming to the Crown, (being the son to the before-named
Charles the simple) and loath that so gross a treason committed against his
father, should be smothered without some notable revenge; (being very
ingenious) he bethought himself how with the least danger or effusion of
blood, in regard of the others greatness and alliance, how to bring it about;
and therefore he devised this plot following. He caused a letter to be writ,
which he himself did dictate, and hired an Englishman who came disguised like
a Post to bring it unto him as from the King his Master, at such a time when
many of his Peers were present; and amongst the rest this Herebert was amongst
them: this suborned Post delivers the letter to the Kings hands, he gives
it to his principal Secretary, who read it privately unto him; who presently
smiling, said openly, Most sure the Englishmen are not so wise as I esteemed
them to be: for our Brother of England has signified unto me by these letters,
that in his Country a labouring-man having invited his Lord and Master to dine
with him at his house, and he vouchsafing to grace his Cottage with his
presence; in the base requital of so noble a courtesy, he caused him to be
most treacherously slain: and now my Brother of England desires my counsel,
to know what punishment this fellow has deserved? In which I desire to be
instructed by you my Lords, that hearing your censures, I may return him the
more satisfactory answer.

The King having ended his Speech, the Lords were at first silent, till at
length Theobant Earl of Bloyes was the first that spoke, and said, that he
was worthy first to be tortured, and after to be hanged on a Gibbet; which A
just censure.
sentence all the Lords there present confirmed: and some of them amongst the
rest, much aggravating the punishment, which also Herebert Earl of Vermendoys
did approve and allow of: whereupon the Kings Officers, who by his Majesty's
appointment then waited in a withdrawing room of purpose, seized upon him
with an armed guard: at which sudden surprise he being much amazed, the King
raising himself from his seat, said, Thou Hebert art that wicked and
treacherous labourer, who did most traitorously His own tongue condemned him.
insidiate the life of my father, thy Lord and Master; of which felonious act
thine own sentence has condemned thee, and die thou shall, as thou have well
deserved: whereupon he was hanged on a Gibbet on the top of a Mountain called
Lodan, which since his execution is called Mount Hebert to this day.

Bajazet the great Emperor of the Turks, who in his mighty pride thought with
his numerous Army to drink rivers dry, and to weight the mountains in a
balance; who had made spoil of many Nations, and with tyranny persecuted the
Christians, dispersed through his vast dominions: who compared the world to a
Ship, and himself to the Pilot: who commanded the sails, and secured the
helm: yet afterward being met in battle by Scythian Tamberlaine, and his
Army being quite routed, his person also taken prisoner in the field, the
Conqueror put this untamed beast into an iron cage, and caused him to be fed
from the very fragments and scraps from his table; and carried along with him
whither soever he marched, and only then released him from his imprisonment,
when he was forced to stoop and humble his body as a block to tread upon,
whilst Tamberlaine mounted upon his steed: but here ended not Gods visible
Judgments against this Usurper, Persecutor, and Tyrant; who in despair
railing upon his Prophet Mahomet, in whom he had in vain trusted, against the
Iron grate in which he was enclosed, beat out his own brains, and wretchedly
expired. Infinite are the examples to the like purpose, but I will leave those
Foreign to come to our Domestic, extracted out of our own Chronologers, and
first of King Bladud.

Who was the son of Lud Hurdribras, and after the death of his father,
Histories out of our own Chronicles, in which the sin of pride has been most
severely punished.
was called from Rome, where he had studied dark and hidden Arts, and was
made Governor in this Isle of Britain, in the year of the world four
thousand three hundred and eighteen, (For so testifies Gualfride
Polichronicon, and other ancient remembrancers. This Bladud was altogether
devoted to the study of Magic and Necromancy, and very expert in Judicial
Astrology, by which he is said to make the hot Baths in the Town then called
Caerbadon, but now Bath; which City he is said to have erected. This King
caused the Art of Magic to be taught through his Realm, and ordained Schools
and School masters to that purpose, in which he took such pride and
presumption, as that he thought by it all things were possible to be done: so
much the Devil, the first master and founder of that Art had deluded him so
far, that at the length having called a great confluence of his people about
him, he made an attempt to fly in the arre, but fell upon the Temple of his
god Apollo, where he brake his neck, his body being torn and bruised after he
had reigned twenty years; leaving a son called Leire to succeed him, and
continue his posterity.

Goodwin, Earl of west Saxon, in the time of Edward the son of Egelredus,
was of that insufferable ambition, by reason of his great revenues, and
numerous issue, (for he had five sons and one daughter) that he swayed the
whole Kingdom, and almost compulsively compelled the King his Sovereign, to
take his daughter Edith to wife: After rebelling against the King, and forced
with his sons to depart the Land, yet after he made such means, that he
mediated his peace, and was reconciled to him (...) but amongst all his other
insolences he was accessory to the death of the Kings brother, or at least
much suspected to be so, which was the first breach betwixt his Sovereign and
him: But so it happened in the thirteenth year of the reign of this King
Edward, Earl Goodwin upon an Easter Monday sitting with diverse other Lords
and Peers of the Kingdom, at the Kings table in the Castle of Windsor, it
happened one of the Kings Cup ^ea^^^s to stumble, and yet well to recover
himself without falling; and not spilling any of the wine: which Earl Goodwin
observing, laughed aloud and said, There one brother helped the other, (thereby
intimating that the one leg or foot had well supported the other from falling.)
To which words the King instantly replied, and so might my brother Alphred have
bin still living to have helped and supported me, had not Earl Goodwin
supplanted him by death: At which words being startled as conceiving that the
King suspected him of his brothers murder, thinking to excuse himself of that
horrible act; he said to the King, Sir, I perceive by your speeches late
uttered, that some who are no well-wishers of mine, but rather seek to poison
my reputation with your Majesty, have possessed you that I have been accessory
to the death of your brother; and proceeded further (having then a piece of
bread in his hand, ready to put into his mouth) but so may I safely swallow
this morsel, as I am altogether innocent and guiltless of the act: which
streyning to eat, he was therewith immediately choked at the table; which the
King seeing, and observing the strange Judgment inflicted upon his perjury, he
commanded his body to be dragged from thence, and conveyed to Winchester, and
there buried.

But Marianus and some others write, that he was not choked with bread, but
upon his former false protestation, dining with the King upon an Easter Monday
at Winchester, he was suddenly struck with a dead palsy, and died the third
day after. Neither did Gods Judgments upon him end here, but after his death
all his Lands in Kent (which were very spacious and great, were eaten up and
swallowed by the Sea, and turned into dangerous quick sands, on which many a
goodly vessel has since been shipwrackt, and they bear the name of Goodwins
sands even to this day.

Harold the second son of Earl Goodwin, after the death of his elder brother
Swanus, as well heir to his fathers insolent and aspiring spirit, as to his
Earldom and Lands: in the twentieth year of the reign of the before-named
Edward the Confessor, he sailed into Normandy to visit some of his friends; but
by adverse winds, and a sudden tempest at Sea, he was driven upon the Province
of Pountiffe, where he was took prisoner, and sent to Duke William of
Normandy, who enforced him to swear, that he should marry with his daughter
when she came to mature age; and farther, that after the death of King Edward,
he should keep the Crown of England to his behoof, according to the will of
the Confessor: to both which Articles having solemnly sworn, he was dismissed
from the bastard Duke, and with great and rich gifts sent back to England.

But after the death of Edward, in the year of the Incarnation, one thousand
threescore and six, Harold forgetting his former oath and promise made to Duke
William, he caused himself to be crowned King of the Land; who was no sooner
warm in his Throne, but Harold Harfoot son to Canutus, with a puissant host
of Danes invaded the Realm, whom Harold of England met in a set battle, slew
him hand to hand, and discomfited his whole Army; for he was of an invincible
hardiness and valor: which victory was no sooner obtained, but news was
brought him that William of Normandy was landed with a potent Army, to claim
his right and interest he had in the Crown of England, by the last Testament
of Edward the Confessor; with these tidings being thoroughly heated, he marched
with all speed from the North, scarce suffering his Army to rest by the way, to
give the Normans battle, betwixt whom was a dreadful and bloody conflict:
But when the victory rather hovered over the English then the other, Harold
after many deep and dangerous wounds, was shot into the eye with an arrow and
slain. In whose death may be observed Gods heavy Judgments against price and
perjury.

Of my first sin, namely Pride, none has ever been by our English
Chronologers more justly taxed then that French Gerson, Pierre Gavestone, the
great misleader and seducer of Edward the second; whom though his Royal Father
King Edward the first, surnamed Long-shanks, upon his deathbed caused to be
banished; yet the son was no sooner inaugurated and admitted to the
government of the Realm, but contrary to the wills of all his Lords and Peers,
he caused his Exile to be repealed, sent for him over, and advanced him to
great honor: in which he demeaned himself like a proud upstart, or as our
English Proverb goes, Like a beggar set on horseback, who is ready to ride
post to the Devil: for whose sake the King committed William Lancton Bishop
of Chester (in the second year of his reign) to the Tower, because he had
persuaded the King against his Minion, for which the Barons of the Realm, and
especially Sir Henry Lacy, Sir Guy, and Sir Aymery de Valence, Earl of
Lincoln, of Warwick and Pembroke, to whom the late King had given charge for
his exile upon his deathbed, wrought so far by their power, that contrary to
the Kings will, he was avoided the Land, and banished into Ireland for that
year, whither his Majesty sent many secret messengers with rich gifts to
comfort him, and made him chief Ruler of that Country.

But in the third year of his reign, diverse grudges and discontents began to
arise betwixt the King and his Nobles, insomuch, that for quietness sake, and
in hope of his amendment, he was again repealed, but more and more increased
in his insufferable insolence, insomuch, that having charge of all the Kings
Jewels and Treasure, he went to Westminster, and out of the Kings Jewell-house
took a Table and a pair of trestles all of pure gold, and conveyed them (with
other precious gems) out of the Land, to the great exhausting and impoverishing
of the same: by whose wanton effoeminacies, and loose conditions, he drew the
King to many vicious courses, as adulteries, and the like: which mischiefs the
Lords seeing daily to increase, they took counsel again at Lincoln, and
notwithstanding the Kings main opposer, he was a second time confined into
Flanders, but in his fifth year was again sent for over, when not able to
contain himself from his immoderate luxury, as he demeaned himself far more
arrogantly than before, insomuch that he disdained and had in contempt all the
Peers of the Land, giving them much opprobrious and despightfull language,
wherefore seeing there was no hope of his amendment, with an unanimous consent
they vowed to rid the Land of such a Caterpiller, and soon after besieged him
in the Castle of Scarborrow, and taking the Fort they surprised him, and
brought him to Gaversed besides Warwick, and the nine and twentieth day of
^une smote off his head. Thus was Gods just doom against his pride, luxury, and
avarice.

But there succeeded him both in ambition and the Kings favor, of our own
Natives, the two Spencers, the father and the son, his great minions and
favorites, who both in wealth, power, and pride, overtopt all the Nobles of the
Land, commanding their Sovereign, and confounding the Subjects, of whom you
may read in the Records of the Tower, that in the fourteenth year of this
Edward the second, Hugh Spencer the elder, for his riots and extortions being
condemned by the Commonalty, and expelled the Land, an Inventory of his estate
being taken, it was found by inquisition that the said Spencer had in sundry
Shires fifty nine Mannours, and in his possession of his own goods and
chattels, twenty eight thousand sheep, one thousand oxen and steeres, twelve
hundred beeves with their calves, forty mares with their coltes, one hundred
and threescore drawing horses for the teame, two thousand hogs, three hundred
bullockes, in his cellar forty tonnes of wine, he had moreover six hundred
bacons, and fourscore carcases of Martinmasse beeves, six hundred muttons in
larder, ten tonnes of sider, besides his provision of ale, (for beer in these
days was not known) thirty six sackes of wool, with a fair library of books,
and other rich and costly utensils; his armor, plate, jewels, and ready money,
amounting to more than an hundred thousand pounds; but what in the end became
of all this mag^zine? This Spencer being after called home by the King, and
restored to all his former estate, mauger the Queen and the chief Peers of the
Realm, she with an Army pursued the King, with these his proud favorites; the
father she surprised in Bristow, (which Town the King had fortified and left
unto his charge) himself for his better safeguard flying with his son into
Wales, whither she pursued them, and se^sed upon them both, bringing Sir Hugh
the elder, and Sir Hugh the younger to Hereford, where upon the morrow
following the Feast of Simon and Jude, at Bristow Sir Hugh Spencer the father
upon a public scaffold lost his head, and his body was after buried at
Winchester; and upon Saint Hugh's day following being the eighteenth of
November was Sir Hugh his son drawn, hanged, and quartered at Hereford and his
head sent to London, and was set upon a pole amongst other Traitors, of whom a
Poet of those times made this short Epitaph.

Funis cum lignis a te miser ensis and ignis,
Hugo securis equus, abstulit omne decus.
And thus paraphrased or interpreted in old English, suiting these times.

With ropes were thou bound, and on the gallows hunge,
And from thy body thine head with sword was kit,
Thy bowels in the fire were thrown, and burned long,
Thy body in four parts eke with axe was slit,
With horse before drawn, few men pitying it,
Thus with these torments for thy sins sake,
From thee wretched Hugh, all worldly wealth was take.
And these were remarkable judgments of such as being raised from humble and
mean fortunes to high and eminent posture through pride and vainglory,
attributed that to their own merit which is only due to their Maker.

I come next to Sir Roger Mortimer, who being highly puffed up with the favor
that he had from Queen Isabel, who in the minority of her young son Edward
swayed all, during the imprisonment of her husband Edward the second, whether
by the Queens consent or no, I dare not say, but of most assured truth it is,
that this Roger caused the King to be removed from Kenelworth Castle to the
Castle of Barkley, where by his direction and command he was most bloodily and
inhumanely murdered. After which Edward his son (the third of that name) at the
age of fifteen years was crowned King, but for a time kept in a kind of
pupillage under the Queen and Mortimer, betwixt whom there was suspected to
have been too much familiarity, in whose power was all the management of State,
and many things past by them to the great dishonor of the Kingdom. This
Mortimer was by the King made Earl of March, who imitated King Arthur by
keeping so many Knights of the Round Table, to whom he allowed both meat and
means, and bore himself in that high strain, that he had in contempt the
greatest Peers in the Land, but in process of time he was surprised in
Votengham Castle, and from thence sent prisoner to the Tower of London, when a
Parliament being called in the fourth year of the King, He was convicted of
five Articles: first, of the murder of the King; next, that he had dealt
perfidiously betwixt our Nation and the Scots; thirdly, that he received
certain sums of money from Sir Thomas Duglas, and caused to be delivered unto
them the Church called Rugium, to their great advantage and Englands prejudice;
fourthly, that he had got unlawfully into his possession much of the Kings
treasure, and wastfully misspent it; and lastly, that he was more private with
the Queen than was to Gods pleasure or the Kings honor: of all which being
convicted by the said Parliament; upon Saint Andrews day, next following he was
drawn upon an hurdle to the common place of execution (since called Tiburne)
and there like a Fellon and Traitor upon the Gallows hanged, such is the end
of greatness when it abandons goodness and honor, and opposes it self
against humility.

Great also were the arrogancies and insolences of Sir William Scroop Earl of
Wiltshire, and Treasurer of England, Sir John Bushey, Sir Henry Green, and
others, in the time of Richard the second, who by him greatly animated and
encouraged, greatly vexed and oppressed the people, men advanced from the
cottage to the Court, and from baseness to honor, who through their great
pride forgetting from whence they came; in their surplus of wealth, and height
of ambition, were surprised in Bristow by Henry Duke of Lancaster (as cankers
and caterpillars of the Commonwealth) the son of John of Gaunt, who then laid
claim to the Crown, and by him caused to be executed on a public scaffold.
Infinite are Gods threatening judgments to this purpose, of which there be
infinite examples, but being loath to tire the Reader with too much prolixity,
I will conclude this Tract against pride with one notable president as much (if
not more remarkable) than any of the former.

In the time of King Henry the eighth, Thomas Wolsey Archbishop of York and
Cardinal, had in his hall daily three Tables or Boards, managed by three
principal Officers; a Steward, who was always a Priest; a Treasurer, no less
degreed than a Knight; and a Controwler, who was by Place an Esquire; he had
also a Cofferer, who was a Doctor of Divinity; three Marshals, three Yeomen
Ushers in the Hall, besides two Grooms, and Almners: in his Kitchen belonging
to the Hall, two Clerks of the Kitchen, a Clerk Controller, a Surveyour of
the Dresser, a Clerk of the Spicery, (and these kept a continual mess in the
Hall) two master-cookes, and of other Cooks Laborers and Children of the
Kitchen twelve persons, four Yeomen of the ordinary Scullery, four Yeomen of
the silver Scullery, two Yeomen of the Pastry, with two or three Pastulers
under the Yeomen.

In his Privy Kitchen he had a Master-cook who wore always Satin and Velvet
with a great chain of gold about his neck, with two other Yeomen and a Groom,
in the Scalding-house a Yeoman and two Grooms, in the Pantry two Yeomen; in
the Buttery two Yeomen, two Grooms, and two Pages; in the Chandry, two Yeomen;
in the Wafery, two Yeomen; in the Wardrobe of Beds, the Master of the
Wardrobe, and ten other persons attending; in the Laundry, a Yeoman, and a
Groom, thirty Pages, two Yeomen-purveyours, and one Groom; in the Bake-house, a
Yeoman and two Grooms; in the Wood-yard, a Yoman and a Groom; in the Barn
one; in the Garden, a Yeoman and two Grooms; a Yeoman of his Bardge, a Master
of his Horse, a Clerk of the Stable, and a Yeoman, a Sadler, a Farrier, a
Yeoman of his Chariot, a Sumptur-man, a Yeoman of his Stirrup, a Muleter, and
sixteen Grooms of his Stable, every one keeping four Geldings; Porters at his
Gate, two Yeomen and two Grooms; in the Almnery, a Yeoman and a Groom.

In his Chapel he had a Dean, who was a great Divine, and a man of excellent
learning; a Subdean, a Repeater of the Quier, a Gospeller, an Epistoler, ten
singing Priests, a Master of the Children-quiristers, twelve Seculars being
singing men of the Chapel, ten singing boys with a servant to attend upon
them; in the Revestry, a Yeoman and two Grooms, besides diverse retainers who
repaired to his Palace at principal feasts.

The rich Furniture of his Chapel almost exceeded apprehension, for jewels
and sumptuous ornaments continually there used, where have been seen in a
Procession about the Hall four and forty rich Copes all of one suit, with
Crosses, and Candlestickes, and other furniture of great value; he had moreover
two Crosse-bearers, and two Pillar-bearers in his Great-chamber; and in his
Privy-chamber, a Chamberlain and a Vicechamberlain, twelve Gentlemen-ushers,
besides one continually in his Privy-chamber, and six Gentlemen-waiters, he had
ten Lords to attend him, and every one had two Gentlemen to attend upon them,
only the Earl of Derby had five allowed him; he had of Gentlemen,
Cup-bearers, Carvers, Sewers, and the like, to the number of forty persons,
six Yeomenushers, eight Grooms, and Yeomen that daily waited in his Chamber
forty five.

Sixteen Doctors and Chaplains besides those of his Chapel continually
waited at his Trencher, with the Clerk of the Closet, two Secretaries, two
Clerks of the Signet, and four Counselors learned in the Laws, and for as
much as it was necessary, for diverse Officers of the Chancery to attend him;
namely, the Clerk of the Crown, a riding Clerk, a Clerk of the Hamper, a
Clerk of the Wax, and a Clerk of Check; he gave means and allowance to them
all; he had also four Footmen clothed in rich Coats with his Arms
imbroidered upon them; an Herald at Arms, a Sergeant at Arms, a Physician, an
Apothecary, four chief Musicians with their Consort, a Keeper of his Tents, an
Armourer, an Instructor of his Wards, two Yeomen of his Wardrobe of Robes, and
a Keeper of his Chamber continually in the Court; he had moreover in his House
the Surveyour of York, a Clerk of the Greencloath, and all these were with
him uprising and down-lying, and dieted at his charge; he kept in his
Great-chamber a continual Table for the Chamberers and Gentlemen-Officers,
with a Mess of young Lords, and another of young Gentlemen; nor was there any
Officers Gentlemen or other persons of account, but were allowed some one, some
two, some three servants to attend them, which no question grew to a mighty
number, besides Officers extraordinary, retainers and suitors who might come
freely and dine in the Hall without any to contradict them: and thus far out of
his Check role, whereby we see his exceeding greatness, but of which grew
such pride, that he blushed not to prefer himself before his Sovereign, in
these words, Ego and Rex meus, I and my King. But to conclude with him, this
potent prelate falling after into a praemunire, forfeited his whole estate to
the Crown, and then (though late) confessing, That if he had sought so much to
honor God as he had strived to honor his King, he might still have continued
in his revenew eminently: and being deprived of all his power and pomp, riches
and substance, and brought almost to the extremest indigence and penury, being
sent for from York to London, (as some have supposed to answer for his life)
he fell sick by the way, and in a poor Friery ended his wretched days not
without suspicion of poison; and such have been Gods judgments from the
beginning against this first and capital of the seven mortal sins called
Pride, of which I cease to write further, and proceed to the second.

CHAP. II. Of Gods just Judgments inflicted upon envious persons.
ENvy is defined to be a grievance and sorrow for the thriving and prosperity
of others, who in his heart would kill the happiness of his Neighbor, and
before God is held no better than an Homicide, the Hebrews call it Kineah and
Kanno, which is Emulation or Envy, in which we are said four ways to offend;
first, when we grieve at the good estate or fortune of another man, as fearing
because of his ability, he may be also willing to endamage us or others.
Secondly, when we repine at another man's felicity, because we have not what he
has, nor abound with the like abundance and riches, and this the Philosopher
cales Zelus, and the first may be in some kind held laudable, If we emulate a
man for his virtues and goodness seeking by imitating to exceed them, but if
it be for temporal goods it may be brought within the compass of sin. The
third is, when we malign another man, because he injoyes these temporal
blessings which he does not deserve, and such vexation, because it is
concerning riches and honor, which happen both to the worthy and unworthy
alike, by the Philosopher it is called Nemesis, which though Aristotle
approves, yet our Christian Religion will not allow. The fourth is, when we are
sad and troubled at our neighbors increase in wealth and substance, because he
exceeds us, and we are not so rich nor so well possessed as he; and this is
plain Envy in her own natural and absolute colors, and is always evil, and
is a mortiferous sin, because we grieve at that at which we ought to rejoice;
namely, the prosperity of our neighbor, and this the Schoolmen distinguish
into three branches, mortal, venial, capital.

That is called mortal, when it is hatched and premeditated, nay prosecuted by
the consent of reason, because it directly opposes the Charity due from us to
our neighbor. That which is called venial, is an emulation bred merely in
sensuality or wantonness, when there was no preceding of the consent of
reason: and as they are the first motions, so they are held to be idle and
imperfect. The third is called capital, because from it arises susurratio,
that is, a muttering or murmuring behind ones back, striving to darken or
ecclypse the reputation or good name of another in secret. Next Detraction,
when openly we scandal or revile any man to lessen his worth, or darken his
glory. Then Exultation, when we triumph or rejoice in the disastre or distress
of our neighbor. Next Affliction, when we are grieved and discontented at his
prosperity. And lastly, Od^um, or hate, by which we are not only sadded and
molested at his happiness, but withal we insidiate his estate, or
malevolently desire his ruin.

Frequent are the Texts in the holy Scripture, against this sin of Envy, and
sundry examples to show it has been even from the beginning, and so continued
through all succeeding Ages: it was betwixt the two first Brothers, for we
read Genesis 4. 5. Because God accepted Abels offering, and despised that of
Cain, He was exceeding wroth, and his countenance fell down: (among strangers)
Because Isaac had flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, and a mighty
household, Therefore the Philistims had envy at him, insomuch that they stopped
and filled up with earth all the wells which his fathers servants dug in his
father Abraham's time, etc. Betwixt Sisters, When Raechel saw that she bare
Iaacob no children, she envyed her Sister, and said unto her husband, Give me
children or I die. In Joseph's brethren, who when they saw that their father
Jacob loved him more then them, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably
unto him; and when he dreamed a dream and told it his brethren, the Text
says, they hated him the more: Against which you shall read, Levit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Thou shall not avenge, nor be
mindful of wrong against the children of thy people, but shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: I am the Lord.

We find in the twelfth of Numbers, that when Aaron and Miriam murmured
against Moses, because he had married a woman of Ethiopia, the Lord was
therefore angry with them, and immediately Miriam was struck with a Leprosy
white as snow. Saul envyed David, because the Virgins in their songs and
dances, gave to him but the honor of killing thousands, and to David ten
thousands. In Eliab the brother of David, who when he spoke unto the men that
stood with him, and said, What shall be done to him that kills this
Philistime, (meaning Goliath) and takes away the shame from Israel, etc. Eliab
this hearing was very angry with David, and said, Why came thou down hither?
and with whom whom have thou left those few sheep in the Wilderness? I know
the pride and the malice of thine heart, that thou art come down to see the
battle: in Sanballat and Tobias, who envyed and hindered the building of the
Temple, as you may read in Nehemiah. In the Princes and Officers of Darius,
Dan. 6. 4. who sought an occasion against him concerning the Kingdom, but they
could find no fault; for he was so faithful, that no blame could be found in
him.

Come to the New Testament, or Gospel: In the Pharisees, Mat 9. 11. Examples
in the Gospel.
who said to the Disciples of Jesus, Why eats your Master with Publicans and
Sinners? Again, Luke 19. 39. Then some of the Pharisees said unto him, Master,
rebuke thy Disciples. In the Disciples of John, Mat. 9. 14. Then came the
Disciples of John to him, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but
thy Disciples fast not? In the chief Priests and Scribes, Matthew. 21. 15. Who
when they saw the marvels that he did, and the children crying in the Temple,
Hosanna to the son of David, they disdained. In the Jews; who when they were
gathered together, and Pilat said unto them, Whether will you that I let loose
unto you, Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ? They said Barabbas. In the
brother of the Prodigal, Luke 15. 25. Now the elder brother was in the field,
and when he came near unto the house and heard music and dancing, he called
to one of his servants and asked what these things meant? and he said unto
him, thy brother is come, and thy father has killed the fat Calfe, because he
has received him safe and sound: then he was angry and would not go in;
therefore came his father out and entreated him, etc. In the High Priests and
Pharisees, John 11. 47. who gathered a Counsel and said, What shall we do,
for this man does many miracles? if we let him thus alone, all men will believe
in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and the Nation.
Then Caiphas the High Priest stood up and said, Ye perceive nothing at all; nor
do you consider that it is expedient for us that one man die for the people,
and the rest perish not. In the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, Acts 5. 17. Then
the chief Priest rose up, and all that were with him (which was the sect of
the Sadduces) and were full of indignation, and laid hands on the Apostles, and
put them in the common prison, etc. And thus you see how envy has been in all
ages: and most fitting it is that I first show you the nature and condition of
the sin, before I come to the judgments inflicted upon it.

This Envy shoots at others, and wounds her self: Lions are known by
their claws, Ravens by their feathers, Cocks by their spu^res, and envious Men
by their manners; who (like Syrian dogs) bark at the stars, and spurn at
what they cannot reach; and is like lightning, which in the duskiest mist, or
darkest fogge, will plainliest appear. Envy is the daughter of pride, the
mother of slaughter and strage, the innovator of sedition, and the perpetual
tormentor of virtue: She is moreover the slime and impostume of the soul, a
daily corrasive to him in whom she abides; a venom, a poison, a Mercury or
quicksilver, which consumes the flesh, and dryes up the bones: and of vices it
is said, Envy to be the most general, Pride the greatest, and Lust the
foulest. The envyed man does many times forget, but the envious man does never
spare to prosecute; and as grief or pain is a disease of the body, so malice
is the malady of the soul. It is a mere slave to its own affections, and is
found always to wait at Virtues elbow.

Alanus de Plancta naturae with great elegancy says thus: To the envious man
another prosperity is his adversity, their adversity his prosperity: At their
mirth they are sad, and in their sorrow they rejoice: They imagine their own
riches to subsist in other men's poverty, and their poverty to be in other men's
riches. The serenity of their neighbors fame they endeavor either by
detraction to eclipse, or by silence to conceal. Inglorious Envy striveth to
deface the glory of wisdom; then which, no monster more monstrous, no damage
more dammageous, no torment more torturous, no sin more contagious; of
blindness it is the abyss, the spur to contention, the sting of corruption,
the motions whereof are adversaries to humane tranquillity, of mundane
temptations the instigators and inciters; of a laboring mind the vigilant
enemies, and of common peace and amity the combustuous disturbers.

We read Proverb. 17. A seditious person seeks only evil, and a cruel
messenger shall be sent against him. He that rewards evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house. The froward heart finds no good, and he that
has a naughty tongue falls into evil. And Prove. 28. A man with a wicked or
envious eye hastes to riches, and knows not that poverty shall come upon him
Wisdom. 1. 9. Inquisition shall be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and
the sound of the words shall come unto God for the correction of his
iniquities: Therefore beware of murmuring which profits nothing, and refrain
thy tongue from slander; for there is no word so secret that shall go for
naught, and the mouth that speaks lies slays the soul. It is the counsel
of the Wise man: Eat not the bread of him that is envious, or has an evil
eye, neither desire his d(...) meats; for (as though he thought it in his
heart) be will say, Eat and drink, but his heart is not with thee: thou
sh(...)t vomit the ^arsel^ that thou have (...), and thou shall lose thy sweet
words, etc. The book of Wisdom (...) us that through Envy of the Devil came
death into the world, and they that hold of his side prove it: therefore let us
be advised by Saint Peter, who in the second chapter of his first Epistle
says, Wherefore laying aside all malitiousnesse, and all guile, and
dissimulation, and envy; and evil speaking as newborn babes, desire that
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby etc. But from the
discovery of the foulness of the sin, I come now to show what several
judgments have been inflicted upon it.

And first to search foreign Histories before we come to fearful and
tragical Examples, modern and domestic of our own, (that the one may the
better illustrate and set off the other. I begin with that incestuous brood of
Thebes, the two brothers Eteocles and Polynices, whose father Oedipus, ignorant
of his own natural parents, and having first most unfortunately slain his
own father, and after retyring himself to Thebes, by the solution of Sphinxes
riddle, married with his own mother Iocasta (neither of them knowing their
proximity in blood) and by that match swayed the Kingdom: together with those
two before-named sons, and two daughters, Antigone and Ismene, which he had
by her. But at length having knowledge of that incestuous match made with his
mother, he in grief thereof with his nails pulled out his own eyes, and she
in despair strangled her self: after which the Kingdom falling to the two
brothers; They first agreed to reign monthly, and then yearly by turns; but
soon after there grew such malicious envy betwixt them, that whatsoever the
one did in his regency, the other when the power came into his hands, utterly
abrogated and disanull'd, making new laws, to the former quite contrary; which
also lasted but a month: for then the succeeder paid the resigner in his own
coin. Upon this grew faction, and diverse partisans on either side; some
favoring the one, and some affecting the other; in the end from threatenings
and braves, it came to battle and blows; in which the two brothers
encountering hand to hand, in a single duel they interchangably slew one
another; whose envy in life was so irreconcilable and invererate, that it
appeared after their deaths: for their two bodies being brought to be burnt in
one funeral pile, the very flame was seen to divide it self, and burn in
two parts, suting to their opposite souls and contrary conditions.

Another Example of Gods Judgments against Envy, Greece affords us. Perseus
the son of Philip, King of Macedon: (but not that Philip who was father to
Alexander the Great) he had an elder brother whose name was Demetrius, a man
of most approved honesty, and imitable condition; whose known virtues his
younger brother, of a malevolent and cumbred spirit much envying, framed a most
scandalous and detracting indictment against him; pretending that he had
privately insidiated his fathers life and Kingdom, and sold them both unto his
enemies the Romans; of which by suborned witnesses, he had made such proof,
(and bribing to that purpose) prevailed so far, that he was convented,
convicted, and condemned, and most innocently suffered the rigout of the Law,
by having his head struck off: But the King having had notice of these
barbarous and injust proceedings, surprised with excess of grief, died not
long after; and this malicious fratricide succeeded in the Kingdom: who now
having all things answerable to his own desires, thinking Macedonia too narrow
a limit for his unbounded ambition; he in great presumption not only opposed,
but invaded the Roman Empire, whose envy and detraction against his brother God
thus punished: He drew him with all his puissant Army near unto the river of
Danubius; where being encountered by the Roman Consul Aemilius, he and his whole
host were cut to pieces, and utterly ruined; insomuch, that the power of the
Macedonians being utterly confounded, it became after subject and tributary to
the Roman Empire: and thus his defamatory destruction conspired against
another, fell upon his own head; and is still registered to his perpetual
shame and inflamy.

It is reported of the Roman Emperor Caligula, who was a man of infinite
vices, that he never spared man in his rage, not woman in his lust, to whom
sisters and strangers were alike; he was so infected with this vice of envy,
that in contempt of the most noble families in Rome, from the Torquati he
took the honor of wearing golden chains; from the Cin^innats, (so called for
their crisped and curled looks) he took their hair, and caused them to be
shorn to the skull; and so of others: besides, from (...) Pompe^^s he caused
the denomination of Great to be taken away; and Aesius Proculeus a very
beautiful young man, because he was for feature and favor preferred before
him, he caused to be murdered: for which and other like vices he was deposed
from the Imperial purple, and put to a most base, wretched, and ignoble death.

Antoninus and Geta were the two sons of the Emperor Severus, betwixt whom
he divided the Empire after his death. To Antoninus was all Europe allotted,
and whole Asia was the possession and patrimony of Geta. Bizantium kept a great
Garrison of Soldiers for Antoninus, and Caloedon a City of Bythinia was the
place of strength, to which Geta trusted; besides, the two great Cities of
Antioch and Alexandria were the Royal and Kingly feats for Geta, and
Mauritania and Numidia for Antoninus; who was of a dangerous and divelish
nature; but Geta of a very courteous and affable temperature: for which he was
the more envyed by the Elder, and his attrocities and inhumanities as much
disaffected by the younger. By which mutual enmity those glorious victories
which Sever^s achieved, and after by concord and peace enjoyed, to the great
advancement of the Empire; were now almost wholly ruined.

The Empress their mother foreseeing some great and eminent disaster, gave
them often very matron and pious admonitions, exhorting them to unity and
concord; but her indulgent and wholesome counsel nothing prevailed with them,
for daily their discord, hatred, and bloody practices increased, and the one
was so jealous of the other, that they durst not eat nor drink together for
fear of poison. In this mutual fear they continued, till at the length
Antoninus grew so sick of his brothers general love and welfare, that his
ambition is now to be the sole possessour of the whole Empire; and therefore in
the dead of night, with other of his assasinates, One brother murdereth the
other.
he violently broke open his brothers chamber, and basely murdered him, even in
the sight and presence of their mother; not thinking he was thoroughly dead,
till he had cut the head from the body: This done, he excused the fact to the
Soldiers, and with large donatives so insinuated into their favors, that
never was found who so much as repined at what was done; nor was he sooner well
seated in the Throne Imperial, but he caused all the friends, well-wishers,
and acquaintance of Geta to be most cruelly put to death, sparing neither
degree, age, nor sex, so that not one remained alive in the Commonweal of
Rome: most of the rich Senators he caused to be slain, and their forfeited
wealth he distributed amongst his Soldiers, who supported him in all his
villainies; he slew his own wife the daughter of Plantianus, and the son of
Pertinax: and such was his hatred to Geta being dead, that he destroyed all the
Praefects, Proconsuls, Governors, and Officers throughout Asia, who had by him
been promoted to honor. But after all his rapes, incests, and ryots, murders
and massacres, as possessed with all the horrid and abominable vices that have
any name: As his life was detestable, so was his death remarkable; being in the
midst of his sins, without any repertance was most wretchedly slain by his
Soldiers, at the instigation of Macrinus after Emperor.

Supplantation is one of the branches of Envy, concerning which I have read an
History to this purpose. A Roman Emperor in those days, before The History of
a Roman Prince.
any Christianity was professed amongst them, living in peace and tranquillity,
and no sedition or insurrection being made in any of his dominions, so that the
practice of Arms was quite left off, and almost forgot: This Emperor had a
noble Prince to his son, naturally inclined to prowess and manhood, and
wholly addicted to martial exercises. But finding no employment at home, he
had a great desire to know what mil^tary exercises were abroad: wherefore
making choice of one Gentleman to be his friend and companion, whom he valued
as a second self, furnished with gold and treasure sufficient, unknown to any,
betook themselves to sea; and after much perilous navigation they landed in
Persia, at such time as the Sultan had wars with the Caliph of Egypt. The
Prince with his companion (concealing his birth and Country) put himself
under the Soldans service, in which he so bravely demeaned himself, that he
grew remarkable through the Army, and none in all the host was able to compare
with him in daring or doing, he so far transcended them all: insomuch, that
by his valor the Sultan had many brave victories; and having but one only
daughter, a Lady of incomparable beauty, he had a secret purpose to take an
advantage to bestow her upon him, with all the Royalties of Scepter, Sword,
Crown, and Dominion after his decease. In process it so happened, that in a
dreadful battle fought betwixt the Persians and Egyptians, the Sultan was
mortally wounded in the eye with an arrow; yet his body he yet living, was
safely brought to his Tent by this Roman Prince, who before his death drew out
a ring of great value, and gave it unto him, saying, my only daughter upon my
paternall benediction has vowed and sworn, that whosoever shall deliver this
ring from me to her, she will without any scruple or evasion, accept him for
her husband: and this I The Soldans great love to the Prince.
freely bestow on thee, and with these last words he expired. Whose funeral
being performed, and by his death the wars ended, the Prince with this ring
retires himself with his companion toward Grand Kayre, and by the way
revealed unto his friend all that had past betwixt him and the Sultan,
concerning the Princess, and withal showed him the ring; who most
perfidiously watching his opportunity in the night, whilst the Prince was fast
sleeping, he stole away the ring: and poasting to the Court, presented it to
the Lady, who accepting both of it and him, the false Imposter had her to wife,
and was crowned King of Persia. For which affront, not able to right himself,
his great spirit was so afflicted, that he grew into a dangerous and deadly
fever; yet before his death he writ a Letter, and sent it to his Father and
the Senate, in which he discovered the whole passage of the business as is
before related, and then died: who by Ambassadors informing the Queen and the
State of Persia, the truth of all which was confirmed by the dying Princes
Letter. The Impostor at length confessed all, but because he had been their
King, the State would not put him to death or torture, but delivered him to the
Roman Ambassadors to dispose of him at their pleasure: who carrying him to Rome
with the body of the dead Prince, he was doomed to be shut alive into the
Princes Sepulcher, where the traiterous wretch most miserably finished his
days.

A second to the like purpose we read in the History of the Popes: which
tells us that Pope Nicholas being dead, one Celestine, a man of a sincere and
innocuous life and conversation, was by a common suffrage advanced to the
Papacy, who bore himself with all humility and piety; whose godly life one of
the proud Cardinals envying, and aiming to supplant him, he preferred a young
kinsman of his to wait in his chamber; who growing in favor with his
Holiness, the Cardinal gave him a long trunk of brass, through which he
whispered in the Popes ear diverse times when he was slumbering, that it was
Gods will, and for his souls safety, to resign the Father-hood over to some
others, and himself to lead a private religious life; which being often done,
took in him such impression, as in a public Consistory he told them what
revelation he had from Heaven: humbly desiring, that with their good love and
leave he might resign his great charge, and betake himself to a private and
monastic life; which motion this Cardinal seconded, and by bribery and gifts
(having many friends) and partisans on his side, by his voluntary resignement
was elected Pope in his steed by the name of Boniface.

Who now attaining to the height of his wishes, and being feised of the tripple
Diadem, was not ashamed openly to boast how fraudulently he came to that high
Ecclesiastical honor, growing therewith more proud, haughty, and insolent,
insomuch, that he pick^ a quarrel with Lewis King of France; and would have
forced his personal appearance to acknowledge him for his supreme Father and
Master; which because the King denied, he excommunicated his Clergy, and
interdicted his Realm, curfing him and his Subjects with Bell, Book, and
Candle: But at length the King, troubled and tired with his so many
contumacies, sent a Knight called Sir Guillam de Langaret with a troop of
Soldiers, who so well awaited their opportunity, that as the Pope was riding
from Avignon to one of his Castles in Provence called Poursorge, he surprised
him, and brought him prisoner into France, then put him into a strong Tower,
where for want of food he was forced to eat the flesh from his arms, and so
died^ of whom the story gives this Character, That he estred into the Papacy
like a Fox, that he ruled like a Lion, and in the end died like a Dog.

Nero Caesar who had all the seven deadly sins predominant in him, even in
his minority and first coming to the Empire, was in a high measure worthily
as^^^st and branded with this horrid and abominable vice of Envy; who when
Caesar Germanicus, a Prince of great hope and expectation, on whom all the eyes
of Rome were fixed, was made competitor with him in the Empite, (...) ^ligning
his greatness and goodness though his near kinsman: he with his own hands
tempered a strong and mo^^^serous poison, and most (...)ously inviting him to a
feast, in the height of all their (...) and (...), he caused that deadly
draught to be minist^ed unto him: which he had no sooner tasted, but
immediately he sunk from his seat, and fell down dead at the Table; at which
all the guests being startled and amazed; Nero the master of the feast put it
off with this slight saying only, remove the body into some withdrawing
room, and let it be buried according to the custom of Romans: but how God
revenged this and other his inhumanities, you may read in his wretched and
unlamented death, in the former Tractate expressed.

Macrinus who had murdered Antoninus the brother of Geta, attaining to the
Empire, when he had reigned one year, his head was cut off in Calcedon a City
of Bythinia, with his son Diadumenus, whom in his lifetime he had made
competitor with him in the Empire.

Bassianus, otherwise called Heliogabalus, the son of Semiamira, succeeded in
the Empire; He was first a Priest of the sun, and after by means of his
grandmother Mesa (a rich and potent woman) was made Emperor; who though a
young man of an extraordinary aspect and feature, able to attract the loves and
affections of all men, yet was he inwardly infected with the contagion of all
the vices that could be named: Insomuch, that in all his actions he rather
appeared a monster then a man, so that he grew not only despised, but
hateful to the people. Which the wise Lady Mesa seeing, and fearing his fall,
and in his, her own ruin; as far as she could she excused his grossest
crimes, laying the fault upon the tenderness of his youth; and wrought so,
that by his consent Alexianus who was the son of Mammea, her daughter was
admitted companion with him in the Empire, which Alexianus after called
Alexander Severus, was a wise and prudent Prince, whose virtue had gained him
the general love of the Senate and people; for which Heliogabalus so envied
him (for vice and virtue are still in opposition) that he made many attempts to
poison him, which by the care of Mesa and Mammea, were prevented. But how was
this envy punished? The people seized upon Heliogabalus, with his mother
Semiamira, and dragging their bodies through the chief streets of Rome, having
after torn them piece-meale; would not afford them the honor of burial, but
cast their quarters into the common jakes, that stood upon the river Tiber.

Neither have women been free from this rankorous sin of Envy, as Envy in
Women.
appears by the story following; and shall be made more apparent hereafter.
This Prince Alexander Severus aforementioned, all the time that his grandmother
Mesa lived, who suffered none but grave and wise men to be about him; (insomuch
that no Emperor before or after him could be said to exceed him in all these
attributes that belong to an Imperial Monarch) was both beloved and feared:
But she being dead, his mother Mammea grew to that height of pride,
covetousness, and envy, that his indulgent sufferance of her ambition was a
great, and the sole blemish of his government, who coming to maturity, and the
Empire now settled in his own hands, he took to wife a daughter of one of the
most noblest Senators of Rome, which was also by his mothers consent: but when
this Lady came to take upon her the state of an Empress, Mammea, who
challenged that title solely to her self, maliciously envying her estate;
wrought so, that first the father Murder the fruits of Envy.
of the new Empress was put to death: and so terrible was her commandment,
and her Majesty so much dreaded, that she banished both from the Court and the
bed of the Emperor the innocent Empress, unto the uttermost coasts of Africa.
Thus was Alexander out of a mild and gentle nature, swayed and overruled by
his mother, which was the occasion of both their ruins: for Maximi^us a
Thracian, borne of base parentage, his father being a shepherd, and preferred
by Alexander to eminent place in the wars; taking the advantage of the
murmuring of the people and soldiers, and the covetousness and envy of the
mother, most treacherously conspired against his Lord and Master, the same
barbarously and cruelly flew them both, and by their death aspired unto the
Imperial purple.

The French Chronicles speak of one Prince Cranne, the son of Clotharius,
who having reigned forty five years at Soissons, now called the Belgic Gant,
upon the decease of his elder brother Childebert, who died without issue male,
was proclaimed the seventh King of France. This Cranne (on whom that may be
truly construed of the Poet, Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos,)
was sick of his fathers life, envying and grieving that he kept him so long
from the Crown: but wanting means to make him away privately by poison, or
the like, because his servants about him were faithful, and not to be
corrupted; he therefore opposed him by public hostility, incensing his Uncle
Childebert against him, who supported him in all his insolences against his
father. But Childebert being dead, and he now wanting his great support, was
forced to mediate his peace with his father, who upon his submission took him
to grace, and gave him his free pardon: But his former heart burning envy still
boiling in his breast, he fell into a second rebellion; yet finding the
success of his bad attempts to grow still worse and worse, as his last refuge,
he fled to the Prince or Duke of the Brittons, (whom some call Conobee, others
Canubo,) who undertook to secure him from the pursuit of his father: Whereupon
Clotharius with his Army invaded that Country, and joined battle with the
Prince and his son, in which the Brittons lost the day; their Army was
routed, the Prince slain and Cranne taken prisoner, of whom his father having
seized, he caused him to be shut up in an house, and with his wife and
children to be burnt to death; a just judgment from heaven, but a cruel
sentence from a father; who that very day twelve-moneth after died, being the
one and fiftyeth year of his reign.

I come now to our Modern Histories. Ferrex and Porrex jointly succeeded their
father Gorboduc in the government of this Land of Britain, in the year of
the World four thousand seven hundred and eleven; and continued in love and
amity for a season: but in the end, Envy the mother of all misorder and
mischief so far prevailed with them, that the one began to malign the
others estate; insomuch, that they both studied and devised to supplant each
other, thereby to gain the entire supremacy, which first brake out in Porrex,
who gathering an Army unknown to his brother, thought suddenly to surprise and
kill him: of which he having notice, and yet not able for the present to
provide for opposition, he was forced to fly into France; where craving aid,
he was supplied with a sufficient Host of Galls: with which, landing in
England, he gave his brother Porrex battle, defeated his Army, and slew him
in the field: Ferrex proud of his victory retired himself to his Tent, whither
his mother Midan came by night, with some of her women; and being freely
admitted to the place where he lay sleeping, she with the rest most cruelly
murdered him, and after cut his body into small pieces, causing them to be
scattered in the field: and in these two brothers ended the line of Brute. Thus
you see a most dreadful judgment against Envy, as well in the vanquished as
the victor; but the greatest in the last: to be so cruelly murdered, rather by
a monster then a mother.

Morindus was the bastard son of Flavius King of Britain, by his Concubine
Fanguestela; and was inaugurated in the year of the World one thousand eight
hundred fourscore and ten, and made Governor of the Land: The Chronicle
reports him to have been of a comely and beautiful personage, of liberal
gifts, having an active body, and a most daring spirit, and strength withal
above any Peer or Subject in the Land; but as a grievous stain and blemish to
all these good parts and endowments, he was of an envious condition, and
cruel disposition, for he grew jealous of all such as either were great in
wealth, or gracious in the Court for any noble virtue: for the first, he had a
way to confiscate their estate; and the latter he so suppressed, that they
never came into favor, or grew to preferment: being further so subject to
wrath, that whosoever crossed or vexed him, he would suddenly slay with his own
hands. Afterward his Land being invaded by a Prince of Mauritania, he met him
in battle, and chased him to the Sea, taking many prisoners: whom, to
satisfy this cruelty and tyranny, he caused to be put to death in his presence
and sight, with several sorts of torments; by heading, killing, hanging,
burning, drowning, and other kinds of execution: but at the length (as
testifies Guido de Columna and others) this Morindus whom our English
Chronicles call Morwith, walking by the Sea side, and spying a dreadful
monster upon the shore, he out of his bold and Kingly prowess, assaying to
kill the beast, after a long fight was devoured and swallowed by the monster,
when he had eight years governed the Land; which was a most strange and
remarkable Judgment.

Envy and dissension was the first bondaging of this our free and noble Nation,
in becoming tributary to the Romans: King Lud of famous memory being dead,
during the minority of his two sons, Androgeus and Tenantius; Cassibelan the
brother to Lud was made King in the year of the World, five thousand one
hundred forty two, who was a Prince, noble, bountiful, just, and valorous:
when the young Princes came to years of discretion, he gave to Androgeus the
elder the City of London, with the Earldom of Kent; and to Tenantius the
younger, the Dukedom of Cornwall. In this season Julius Caesar being in the
wars of France, and beholding the white cliffes and rocks by Dover, demanded
of the Gauls whether it were inhabited or no? or by whom? being satisfied of
his demand, he first exhorted the Britains by writing, to pay tribute to the
Romans: to whom Cassibelan returned a short and sharp answer; with which
Caesar much incensed, makes ready his Navy and people: but when they should
have landed, they found long and sharp stakes pitched by the Brittons, which
put them to great trouble and danger; yet at length gaining the shore,
Cassibelan with a strong Army of Brittans gave them battle, and beat them to
their ships.

Notwithstanding, Caesar soon after made a second Invasion, with a greater
power, and had the like brave repulse, to his great dishonor. For which double
victory Cassibelan having first given great thanks to the gods, assembled his
Lords and Peers to feast them; and held sundry triumphs and sports: amongst
which, two young Knights, one Nephew to the King, called Herilda; and the other
Euelinus, allied to Androgeus; made a challenge for wrestling: in the
performing of which exercise they grew to words, and from words to blows, so
that parties were made, and in this tumult Herilda was slain; whose death the
King took heinously, and sent to his Nephew Androgeus, that Euelinus might be
delivered up, to know how he could acquit himself of the murder; which
Androgeus denying, the King gave him to understand, that it was in his power to
chastise his presumption; which the other fearing, sent to Julius Caesar, not
only letters, but thirty hostages, (to assure him of his fidelity) that if he
would make a third attempt for Britain, he would aid him with a puissant
Army: of which Caesar gladly accepting, with a strong host landed, and
encamped himself near unto Canterbury; of which when Cassibelan had notice,
he marched toward him, and betwixt them was fought a strong and bloody
battle, where many were slain on either side, and the day likely to incline
to the Brittons, when on the sudden Androgeus came in with fresh forces, by
which the wearied Soldiers were compelled to forsake the field, and gave place
to the Romans, who slew them without mercy; so that Cassibelan, with those few
that were left, retired himself to places of safety. Whose valor Caesar
admiring, would not prosecute his victory any further for the present, but
offered him peace, conditionally that he should pay a yearly tribute of three
thousand pounds to the Romans; which conditions Cassibelan accepted, and still
continued King; and Androgeus who had so basely betrayed his Country, not
daring to trust his own Nation, whom in so high a nature he had injured,
abandoned the Realm, and went with Caesar. Now if any shall ask me where were
Gods dreadful Judgments in all this? I answer, what greater, then for a free
Nation to lose their immunities, and become tributary and vassals to strangers;
from which they were not freed many hundred years after.

Long after this Constantine was made King, and left three sons behind him:
Constantine the eldest (because he was of a very mild and gentle temper, and
no way addicted to any martial exercise) he put into a religious house,
called Saint Swithens Abbey, and made him a Monk: his two other sons were
Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter, surnamed Pendragon. But Constantine the father
being traitorously murdered, one Vortiger, who then was the most potent Peer
in the Land; took Constantine the eldest son out of the Monastery, and made
him King only in name, for he himself swayed the government of the Kingdom,
with all the power that belonged to a Crown and Scepter. Yet not with that
contented, he envied the state of the innocent King; and though he had all the
power, yet he could not content himself without the title; and therefore
placed a guard of an hundred Picts and Scots about the Kings person, and having
engrossed into his hands the greatest part of the Kings Treasury, he was so
bountiful to those strangers, that they feared not to say openly that be
better deserved to be King then Constantine; and waiting their best
advantageous opportunity, murdered him: Whose head being presented to Vortiger,
then at London, he made much seeming sorrow for his death; and to acquit
himself of the act, caused all those hundred Knights to be beheaded: by which
the people holding him innocent, crowned him King, when the other had reigned
about five years: and this his coronation caused those that had the keeping of
the two younger brothers, Aurelius and Vter, to fly with them into little
Britain, where they remained long after: but as a just reward of this
traiterous supplantation, he was never after in any peace or quietness, his
Land being always in combustion and trouble; his Peers suspecting him of the
death of the King, made insurrection against him; insomuch that he was forced
to solicit aid of the Saxons: who though they helped him for the present;
after, of his friends they grew to be his enemies, and were too mighty for him:
so that when he had reigned in great molestation and trouble sixteen years, the
Britains deprived him of all Kingly dignity, and crowned his eldest son
Vor^imerus in his stead. Who when he had in many battles overcome the Saxons,
and had almost quite expulsed them the Land, he was poisoned by his stepmother
R^waine, when he had gloriously and victoriously seven years governed the
Land, and his father Vortimer was again made King, who was after twice taking
prisoner by Hengest King of the Saxons, and his Peers and Nobles cruelly
butchered in his presence. At length the two younger brothers of Constantine
invaded the Land, being aided by the distressed Britains, and pursued him into
Wales, where he and diverse of his accomplices fortified themselves in a strong
Castle; which Castle the two brothers with their Army besieged, and after many
vain assaults, (it being valiantly defended) with wilde-fire they burned and
consumed the Fort, together with Vortiger, and all his soldiers and servants.

Worthy it is to observe by how many several kind of Judgments this sin of
Envy has been punished, as in the former examples is made apparent: namely, by
the single sword, by battle, by poisoning, strangling, heading, torturing, by
murdering and cutting to pieces, by being swallowed up of monsters; the living
to be buried with the dead, by famishing in prison, by being torn piece-meale,
and the bleeding limbs cast into common privies: some burnt with ordinary
fire, others with wilde-fire; the brother murdering the brother, and the mother
the son; the bondage and vassalling of Nations, etc. which sin, though for
the commonnesse and familiarity it has amongst us, is scarce minded, or
thought upon; (because many who are envious may so hide it, that they may
appear honest withal;) yet is this hypocrisy no excuse, for you see how
hateful it is in the eyes of the Creator, by so many visible punishments
thereof. But I proceed.

After many dreadful battles fought (and not without great effusion of
blood) betwixt Edmund, surnamed for his strength and valor Iron-side, the
son of Ethelstane, and Canutus the son of Swanus, during this war betwixt
those martial Princes, to the great desolation of the Realm, and mortality of
the people; It was agreed betwixt the two Generals to conclude the difference
in a single duel: The place where this should be performed was in an I Will
called Olney, near unto Gloucester, incompast with the water of the Severne: In
which place at the day appointed both the Champions met, without any company or
assistance; and both the hoasts stood as spectators without the Isle, there
awaiting the fortune of the battle: where the Princes first proved one
another with sharp spears, and they being broken, with keen cutting swords;
where after a long fierce combat, both being almost tired, by giving and
receiving of hard and ponderous blows, at length (the first motion coming
from Canutus) they began to parle; and lastly to accord, friendly kissing and
embracing each other: and soon after, by the advice of both their Counsels,
they made an equal partition of the Land betwixt them; and during their
natural lives lived together, and loved as brothers. But there was one E^ri^us
Duke of Mercia, of whom my Author gives this character: A man of base and low
birth, but raised by favor to wealth and honor; subtle of wi^, but false of
turning; eloquent of speech, but perfidious both in thought and promise; who in
all his actions complied with the Danes, to the damage of his own Country
men; and yet with smooth language, protestations, and false oaths, could
fashion his excuse at his pleasure. This false Traitor, in whose heart the
serpent of envy and base conspiracy ever burned, ^t length breaking out into
flame against his own Prince Iron-side, (for what cause is not known) and
thinking to get the grace and favor of Canutus, he so awaited his opportunity,
that he most treacherously slew his King and Master Iron-side. Which done,
thinking thereby to be greatly exalted, he poasted in all haste to Canutus,
showing him what he had done for his love; and saluted him by the style of sole
King of England: which, when the Prince of Danes had well understood, and
pondering what from his own mouth he had confessed, like a just and wise Prince,
he answered him after this manner; Since Ed^^c^s thou have (for the love thou
say thou bear unto me) slain thy natural Lord and King, whom I most
loved, I shall in requital exalt thy head above all the Lords (thy fellow
Peers) of England, and forthwith commanded A just Judgment upon an envious
Traitor.
him to be taken, and his head to be struck off and pitched upon a spears head,
and set upon the highest gate of London: a just judgment inflicted upon Envy,
which has always been the hatcher of most ab^ominable treason.

Unparalleld was that piece of Envy in Fostius, one of the sons of Earl
Goodwin, and brother to Harold, after King; he in the two and twentieth year
of the reign of Edward the Confessor, upon some discontent betwixt him and his
brother Harold, came with a company of Ruffins and rude Pellowes, and rid down
to Hereford in the marches of Wales, where at that time his brothers servants
were very busy to make provision for the entertainment of the King, invited
thither by Harold: who, when he was thither come, most cruelly and inhumanely
he fell upon the innocent servants, and ^lew them all; and after, cut them into
pieces and gobbets, which he put into sowce and salt, pickling and powdering
their limbs; and afterward sent messengers to the King and his brother, to
give them to understand, that if they brought fresh meat along with them, he
had provided them of powdered meat, as much as they could desire. Which
barbarous act being bruited abroad, it made him so hateful to all men, that
his own tenants and people, (men of Northumberland) the Province of which he
was then Lord, rose up in Arms against him, seizing all the Lands and Goods of
which he was possessed; and chased him into Flanders, with no more then one or
two Envy pursued by many disasters.
servants to attend him; where he remained with his wife and children, during
the Kings life. But when his brother Harold (after the decease of K. Edward)
had usurped the Crown, Fostius envying his brothers Sovereignty, having
purchased to himself a Navy of threescore small ships, sailed about the Isle
of Wight, and the coast of Kent, where he robbed and took preyes, and from
thence went into Lindsee, where he did much harm by fire and sword; but was
chased thence by Edwin and Malearus, the Earls of Mercia and Northumberland:
Then he sailed into Scotland, where he stayed till the Summer after. And when
Harold Harfager the son of Canutus, King of Denmark and Norway, invaded the
Realm, Fostius took part with him against his brother Harold, and in a
dreadful battle fought near Stemisford Bridge; he with all his accomplices
and adherents were miserably cut to pieces: A just Judgment suting with his
former envy, butchery, and tyranny.

But leaving many Histories and Examples with strange inflictions imposed upon
this sin. I come to the later times, as low as to the reign of Edward the
sixth: over whom, by his fathers last Will, for the time of his minority, his
two Unkles the brothers Seymors being made chief Guardians; it happened that
the two great Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, Dudley and Gray, much
murmured and maligned that they should bear such sway in the Kingdom: The one
being Lord Protector, the other Lord high Admiral; one having great power by
Land, the other by Sea, by which their glories seemed to be much ecclipsed: and
finding no way how to supplant them by their servants, they took a newer
course, and practiced it by their wives, to draw their ruins out of their own
bosoms; and thus it happened.

Sir Thomas Seymor the younger brother being Admiral, and having married King
Henry's Queen Dowager, (whose good fortune it was of all the rest to survive
her husband) she was suggested to contest with her sister in law, for priority
in place, to which the other (for both were privately encouraged by the two
Dukes) would no way assent: the one claiming precedence as she had been
Queen, the other challenging it as she was now the Protectors wife. The wives
set their husbands at odds by taking their parts; insomuch, that there grew
envy and heart-burning betwixt them, so that in the third year of the young
King, the Admiral was questioned about his Office; and by the consent of his
brother, condemned in Parliament to have his head struck off, the Protector
with his own hand signing the Warrant for his death.

The one brother being thus removed, there was now the less difficulty to
supplant the other: for in the same month of February in which his brother
lost his head, was the Protector by the Lords of the Counsel committed to the
Tower; but about a year after, by intercession of the King, and his submission
to the Lords of the Counsel, upon the sixth of February he was released and set
at liberty: yet this proved but a lightning before a clap of thunder. For the
two Dukes, his great and potent adversaries, still prosecuted their malice;
insomuch, that not long after, calling him to a second account, when he had
nobly acquitted himself of all Treasons whatsoever, that could be alleged
against him; He was in a trial at Guild Hall (not having a Jewry of his
Peers) convicted of Felony; and in the first year of the King, upon the two
and twentieth day of January the great Duke of Sommerset (the Kings Uncle and
Lord Protector) was beheaded upon the Tower Hill. But this envy in the two
Dukes escaped not without Gods heavy Judgments; for after the Kings death
Northumberland having a large commission from the Lords, signed with the great
Seal of England, to raise an Army to suppress the Lady Mary: afterward
repenting thereof, sent a countermand after him, and when he thought himself
in most security, the Nobility forsaking him, and the Commons abandoning him,
he with his sons and some few servants in Cambridge were left alone; where
notwithstanding in the open Marketplace he proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen;
yet in Kings College he was arrested of high Treason, and thence brought to
the Tower of London, and on a scaffold upon the Hill, the twelfth day of August
next following, lost his head.

The Duke of Suffolk being likewise proclaimed Traitor, had a servant called
Underwood, whom he had raised to a fair estate, and therefore to his trust he
committed his person; who for some months concealed him in an hollow tree, and
morning and evening brought him his food; with millions of oaths engaged for
his truth and fidelity: but being corrupted with a small quantity of gold, and
some large promises, he betrayed him, and delivered him up to the noble Earl
of Huntington, under whose conduct the Duke with a strong guard of speare-men,
was conveyed through London to the Tower, and the seventh day after his
surprisall he was arraigned and convicted of Treason in the great Hall at
Westminster; and upon the twenty fourth day on the Tower Hill beheaded.

In this relation it is worthy to be observed in those two great Dukes of
Sommerset and Northumberland, that though the whole Kingdom could scarce
satiate their ambitions, yet now a small piece of earth contents them: for they
lie buried together before the Altar in Saint Peter's Church in the Tower
betwixt two Queens, the wives of King Henry the eight, Queen Anne and Queen
Katharine, they being also both beheaded.

CHAP. III. Gods dreadful Judgments against Wrath.
DIverse are the divisions and branches of this sin of Wrath, which some
reduce to these four heads; Mortal, Venial, Capital, General: It is then
called Mortal, when it has a desire to punish, not to satisfy the Justice of
the Law, but its spleen; or when through the vehemence of anger, it divides
from the love of God, and our neighbor; or when it seeks a severe and cruel
revenge for trifling delinquencies: It is called Venial, when the motion of
ire does prevent the judgment of reason, but the consent follows not; when
we are too spleenfull and chollerick within: or when the signs of our outward
indignation too manifestly appears outwardly. That which is called Capital,
arises either from the heart, the mouth, or the act; that from the heart is
rather called indignation, when him whom we suppose to have injured us, we hold
base and unworthy; and upon that we animate and encourage our revenge, or
Tumor ment^^, the pride and haughtiness of the mind, by which he that is
incensed, is still devising several ways how to be avenged, by which his
fancies are molested, and his thoughts much troubled: That which arises from
the mouth is either clamor, when by confused and inordinate speeches, without
a modest restraint of the tongue, we openly express our spleen and envy: or
blasphemy, when being vehemently incensed, we break into words which tend to
Gods dishonor: or contumely, when being angry with our neighbor, we use
slanderous and despightfull language against him. In Act, that is called R^xa,
which is railing and scoulding: In which are understood all the nocuments and
damages, which through wrath we can possibly do to our neighbor. Of the
fourth called General, there be three species; Acuta, which is that anger
which arises upon small or no occasion at all; Amara, or bitter, when for an
injury done we keep it long in remembrance; and style a fit opportunity for
revenge: Gravis or Difficilis, when we never remit an injury, till we satisfy
our rage by punishment.

Against all these there be Texts in the Holy Scripture, Genesis 27. 21. Texts
in the holy Scripture by which wrath is condemned.
Therefore Esau hated his brother Jacob, because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him: and Esau thought in his mind, the days of mourning will
come, and then will I slay my brother Jacob. Prove. 22. 29. Make no friendship
with an angry man, neither go with the furious man, least thou learn his
ways, and leave destruction to thy soul, 29. 22. An angry man stirs up
strife, and a furious man abounds in transgression. Eccles. 6. 11. Be not
thou of an hasty spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
Matthew. 5. 22. But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, shall be culpable of Judgment, etc. Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all
bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying and evil speaking, be put away from
you, with all maliciousness. Coloss. 3. 8. But now put ye away all these
things, wrath, anger, malitiousnesse, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of
your mouths. Tim. 1. 2. 8. I will therefore that the men pray everywhere,
lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting. Tit. 1. 7. For a Bishop must
be unreproveable, as Gods steward; not froward, not angry, not given to wine,
no striker, not given to filthy lucre. We read in the fourth of Luke, that
when Jesus came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and as his custom
was, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read; at
which divine Sermon it is said, Verse. 28. Then all that were in the Synagogue
when they heard it, were filled with wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of
the City, and led him unto the edge of the hill on which their City was built,
to cast him down headlong; but he passed through the midst of them and went
his way. Many other Texts are to this purpose, to reprove and condemn wrath
and anger; the fruits and effects whereof are for the most part manslaughter,
murder, and the like; of which by reason of their consanguinity and alliance, I
am tied to speak something, though briefly.

Of Homicides, these amongst others are named in the Scriptures; Cain, Simeon
and Levi, Abimelech, Doeg the Edomite, Ioab, Baanah and Rechab, Noted murderers
in the holy Text.
who slew Ishboseth the son of Saul, who looking for a reward, David
commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and feet,
and hanged them up over the poole in Hebron, etc. In King David himself, who
wrote thus in his letter, Put you Vriah in the forefront of the strength of
the battle, and recoile ye back from him, that he may be smitten and die.
Absalom in killing his brother Ammon. Athalias the servants of Ioash King of
Judah, who slew him in the house of Millo, with infinite others; who as they
were inhumane in their practices, so were their ends miserable and abortive,
even all of them who have not truly repented.

But I come now to Ethnic Histories; and first of them most foreign: In
handling of which, I will give you to begin with a Catalogue of such as have
been most cruel. Ptolomaeus Pisco one of the Kings of Egypt, caused his own
son Memphites (whom he had begot of his wife and sister Cleopatra) to be
slain, and then commanded his head, hands, and feet, to be cut off, and to be
shut in a curious casket made for the purpose, and sent them unto her as a
present on his birthday; and then after, when he perceived that by his
barbarous tyranny he was grown odious unto all his subjects, that he might the
better oppose the danger, he caused a School (where most of the Nobilities
children, with others, were doctrinated) to be beset and round environed with
swords and fire, and so suddenly assaulted them; that some by steel, others by
the flame, were all destroyed, not one of them escaping: But that which he
thought to be his refuge, proved his ruin. For the people were so much incenst
with this barbarous and bloody Act, that with an unanimous consent they fell
upon him, and tore him in pieces.

The like (if not greater cruelty) was practiced by a woman, one Cycenis the
daughter of Diogerides, King of Thrace, who greatly delighted to behold living
men cut in the middle, and invite parents to feast with their own murdered
children, cookt and dressed several ways; but she was after deposed from her
principality, and none of her former subjects relieving her, (so hateful were
her inhumanities) she was famisht to death, and died of hunger.

Thus Artaxerxes caused her who was his wife and mother in law, (for his
marriage was incestuous) to have her head parted from her shoulders, though
nothing worthy death could be alleged against her; nor did his tyranny end
there, for after his father had resigned the Kingdom to his charge, like an
unnatural paracide, he caused him, with an hundred of his children, Nephews
and Kinsmen, to be cruelly murdered: nor did he escape unpunished, for the
Kingdom tired with his insolences, and the World weary with his horrible
murders, made him in his death remarkable; for as some write, he died by the
stroke of lightening.

Vitoldus, Prince of Lituania, studied diverse sorts of tortures and torments
for men, upon any slight cause condemned to death, one of which, was, he would
command them to be sewed in Bears skins, and then made it his sport to
behold them torn in pieces with fierce Mastiffes: Moreover in all his warlike
expeditions, he had always a steel bow ready bent, and what soldier soever
but stepped out of his rank, he instantly struck him dead with an arrow,
glorying to himself that he was so good a marks-man: But after these, and
infinite other cruelties, he that delighted to see men die like Bears, was
himself in the end torn in pieces with wild Wolfes, being paid in the like
(though not in the same coin) which he lent to others.

Suiting to which is that story of Perillus, who hearing that Phalaris the
Tyrant over the Agrigentines, was much delighted in the several ways of
tormenting men, and presuming that nothing could better comply with his
cruelty, then to present him with some rare and unheard of machine to that
purpose, he devised and forged by his Art a brazen Bull, to open on the one
side, and shut again at pleasure; which being brought to Phalaris, he demanded
of him the use for which it was made? who answered him again, he had forged it
to punish offenders of high nature; for (says he) let the naked body be put in
at this door, and then an hot fire made under it, the person tormented will
not utter the voice of a man, to put a telenting commiseration upon you, but
the sound will appear like the bellowing of a Bull, to make it the less
terrible; which Phallaris hearing and grieving in his ambitions evil, that any
should offer to out-doe him in his cruelty: He told the workman that he
accepted of his gift, but commanded withal that he should make proof of his
own work, which was instantly done; and he most miserably tormented in his
own engine: for who more fit to taste of tortures, then they that have the
inhumanity to devise them? and they by Gods Justice meritedly suffer themselves
what they devise for others: of which O^id speaks thus. Ipse Perillaeo
Phalaris permisit in are,
Edere mugitus, and bovis ore queri.


The purpose this.

All that the Workman by his Art did gain,
He in his own brass bellowed out his pain.
Amongst these bloody minded men let me give you a taste of some no less
cruel women: Parisatis the mother of Cyrus Junior, not content with inflicting
ordinary and common torments upon the bodies of men, devised with her self a
new and unheard of way, how to put men to a lingering death, by putting worms
unto them being alive, and so to be^d evoured. And Irene the Empress and wife
of Leo the fourth, caused her own son Constantinus Sextus, first to be cast
in prison, next to have his eyes torn out of his head, and lastly to die in a
dungeon. Fulvia the wife of Antony, one of the Triumuirat, after her husband
had caused the head of Marcus Cicero to be cut off, he commanded it to be
brought home to him, and placed upon his Table; and when he had for a whole day
glutted his revengefull eyes with the sight thereof, he sent it to his wife
Fulvia; who no sooner saw it, but (as if it had still enjoyed the sense of
hearing) railed upon it with many bitter and despightfull words; and having
tired her self with maledictions and womanish taunts, she took the head into
her lap, and calling for a knife, she with her own cruel hands cut out the
tongue, (once the pride and glory of Eloquence) and with the pinnes from the
tire of her head, pricked it full of holes, as if it had still been sensible of
pain, till she had fully ^^ted her spleen and cruelty.

Tomyris Queen of the Scythians, after she had taken Cyrus King of Persia in
battle, when he was brought unto her presence, she first caused a great and
large Tomb to be filled with the blood of his slain subjects, and then
commanded his head to be cut off and cast there in; which done, she tauntingly
said, Now Cyrus drink blood enough in thy death, which in thy life time thou
have so much thirsted after.

Dirce a Theban woman, when she understood that her husband Lyc^s was inamored
of Antiope the daughter of Nict^^s; in her pestilent jealousy she caused the
Virgin to be surprised, and being in her power, she commanded her to be first
bound unto the head of a wild Bull, and then made fire to be fastened to his
horns; by which he being the more enraged, ran madly through woods, and over
rocks, until her body was miserably torn in pieces.

Alike (if not more bloody minded) was Amos(...) the wife of (...), (...)
jealous of the wife of Masista; president over the Ba^^rians, in his absence
most cruelly butchered her; causing first both her breasts to be cut off,
which she cast to the dogs to be eaten; then her nose, ears, lips, and
tongue to be thrown into the fire: and all these torments she endured being
yet alive.

Progne the daughter of Pandion King of Athens, having by her husband Terenus
King of Thrace, a sweet young Prince called Itis, because her husband had
ravished her sister Philomel, and cut out her tongue because she should not
reveal the incestious Act: of this having notice, she in an unworthy revenge
slew her son, whom the King much loved; and having cookt his limbs with
sundry sawces, she set them before his father, who eat thereof: and after,
because he should be sensible of what he had done, in the last course she
served in his head.

Tullia the wife of Tarquinus, surnamed Superbus, the proud, and daughter to
Servius, then King of the Romans, when her father was by her consent slain in
the Capitol, and his body thrown in the streets; she riding that way in her
Chariot, when the horses stopped their course, and the driver stood amazed, she
compelled him to drive over her fathers body, with whose blood and brains her
coach-wheeles were stained: yet was she so far from being daunted, that she
was said to rejoice highly in the Act. Yet for this accident, so hateful it
showed to all the multitude, that the very street where this was done is called
Vicus sceleratus, the impious or wicked street, even to this day.

Now if any shall tax my promise in the title of this work, and say, True it
is, that these were very bloody and cruel women, and their horrid Acts worthy
both to be condemned, and hated of all people whatsoever; but where are the
Judgments, or what were the punishments inflicted upon them? I answer: It is
not to be doubted but all, or most of these, suffered by the heavy hand of God
in this life, and that remarkably: howsoever, the ancient Remembrancers and
Chronologers of those times forgot to leave the manner and particular
circumstances of their ends, in that to give the World a more full
satisfaction. But howsoever, of this I am assured, that no greater Judgment
can be imposed upon any manslayer or murderer, than to have his, or her name,
branded to all posterity. Their actions, as they were prodigious, so their very
memories are to be made hateful, and abhorrid of all.

Caligula the Roman Emperor, when his Grandmother Antonia was dead, and her
much lamented body being brought to the funeral pile, he would not so much as
grace it with his presence; but all the time of the Ceremony, was sporting with
his Jesters and Buffoons in a summer Parlor: He slew his brother Tiberius, and
used his wives father with all contempt and contumelies: He stuprated all his
sisters; and which is worse, (if worse might be) he after made them
prostitutes to his Ruffians and Villains. Ptolomaeus the son of Iuba, his
near Kinsman, and Macro and Euma his Coadjutors in the Empire, for their good
and faithful service he caused to be put to death: He commanded a Questor in
Rome (because his name was given up in a Conjuration) to be stripped naked and
openly scourged. Many of worthy birth and condition (for crimes devised, not
proved against them) to branded with hot irons, or otherwise marked and maimed:
Some he confined to the mending of highways; others, to labor and dig in
mines; and others he imprisoned like bruit beasts in Grates and Cages: some he
caused to be sawed in pieces in the middle, and that for a small fault, or
none. When he punished the sons or the daughters, he usually sent for the
parents to be spectators of the torment; and when a father upon a time would
have excused himself by the messenger, that he was grievously sick and could
not come; he sent a bed to his house, and had him brought thereon. Because a
Comic Poet used in his Scene one doubtful versicle, which by a double
construction might be wrested to trench upon the Emperors person; he
commanded him to be burnt upon the very stage on which the Dramma was acted.
When he had sentenc't a Roman Knight to be torn by wild beasts, because the
condemned person proclaimed his innocence, he first commanded his tongue to be
cut out, and then sent him presently to be devoured. Having called a Nobleman
from Exile, when after his return he came into his presence, the Emperor
demanded of him, What he and the rest did all the time of their banishment? who
thinking to flatter with him, and insinuate into his favor; made answer, We
continually prayed that your brother Tiberius might die, and your sacred self
survive and reign long over us: at which words, a sudden fancy took him,
that all these which remained in Exile, desired his death; and therefore he
sent in all haste to have them suddenly dispatched out of their lives: Besides
his facinorous works, he used words, fierce, hasty, and favoring of all
inhumanity; among others this phrase was often in his mouth, All things against
all men are to me lawful. When certain Gauls and Grecians were together put
to death, he boasted openly, as of a great conquest, saying, He had conquered
Gallogracia. Those whom he tortured by degree, still as they fainted he would
have them comforted with hot drinks, to make them longer endure their pain;
giving always a charge to the tormentors in these words, Have ye a care to
make them sensible that they must die. He would also often brag of that
sentence of the Tragical Poet, Oderunt dum metuunt; They hate whilst they
fear. He often wished that all the people of Rome had but one neck, that at one
blow with an axe he might cut it asunder. He would often grieve and complain
of those times wherein he lived, because they were not made notorious by some
great affliction and dire calamity or other, wishing the slaughter of Armies,
famine, pestilence, combustions in the Empire, swallowing of Cities by
earthquakes; and whatsoever all good men desired of the gods might not chance,
but be removed from them: all these mischiefs and miseries he wished might be
inflicted on them, not excepting the security of his own person. Being at
Putcoli at a solemn annual dedication made to the Sea, where a multitude of
people were assembled; he called and beckoned a great company of men, women,
and children, to come to that part of the shore where he was seated; which
having done, he commanded the soldiers of his guard to precipitate them into
the water; and those who caught hold of any thing to save themselves from
drowning, they with their spears and javelins pusht from all safety, so that
they all perished together. At a public banquet, because a servant that waited
mistook the taking away of a plate trencher, he presently delivered him to the
Hangman to have his hands cut off, and then the plate to be hanged about his
neck, and to rest upon his bosom: then a scroule in large letters to be pasted
thereon, where was inscribed his fault and cause of punishment; and in that
manner to be led as a spectacle to all the Feasters. He contracted a combat
with a valiant and strong man, who stooping to his mercy, (as was before agreed
betwixt them) he took the advantage, fell upon him and slew him. I am tired
with the recicall of his many tyrannies, these being but part of them, on which
I have dwelt the longer, because in the subsequent examples, I purpose to be
more compen^ious, and end him with his death and lasting ignomi^y, who was
(...) by a Tribune coming from the Theater, his wife after him, and his
daughter crushed to death against a wall.

Avidius Cassius a barbarous and bloody fellow, the Romans called a second
Cateline, because he was so covetous and thirsty after blood, for besides many
public slaughters and private murders, striving to imitate Peri^^s, he
invented an engine of torture never heard, or I think, scarce heard of before,
for he caused a beam or pole (betwixt fourscoure and an hundred foot in
length) to be fixed in the earth, to which from the top to the bottom thereof
he caused the living Bodies of men to be fastened, and a fire of we^ ^illets
and (...) (...) and straw to be put under them, till some with the flame
consumed, others with the smoke suffocated, all perished to other, with which
manner of torture (borrowed from his president) in the ten Persecutions was
used upon the Christians; but he escaped not a notorious judgment, dying (as
some have reported) a strange and remarkable death, for, sitting at dinner when
an extrordinary feast was served, whilst his hand was in the dish, and the
meat between his fingers, one hired to that purpose, (standing or waiting
behind him) with his sword at one blow struck off his head; and thus he
perished without any remorse or penitence in himself, or any commiseration or
pity from others.

Though I have spoken of Domitius Nero, and withal the judgment in his death,
yet hear but megive ye a brief relation of his inimitable butcheries, and
execrable murders, with actions every way as prodigious. He was the son of
Domitius Aenobarbus and Agrippina, who slew his mother. He first married
Octaviae, and then Sabina Poppaea, first commanding their husbands to be slain,
and was the cause of both their deaths after, for after in his implacable fury
he had killed Poppaea (being at that time big with child) with a spurn upon
her womb, by which she perished with her infant, because Antonia the daughter
of Claudius (fearing the like) refused to marry with him, he commanded her to
be put to death. He persecuted the Church, and under his Tyranny, Saint Peter
and Saint Paul both suffered Martyrdom. Aulus Plancius a beautiful young
Roman, after he had violently and against his will stuprated, he put to death
(...) Crispinus his step son by the marriage of Poppaea, a beardlesse youth, in
rage he made to be drowned. Many freed men when they came to the estate of
riches he cut off by the sword. He pulled out the eyes of Cassius Longinus an
excellent Lawyer or Orator, and never made known the cause of his offense. To
P^li^hagus, by Nation an Egyptian, who was accustomed to eat raw flesh, he
gave living men to be devoured: these are but a part of his barbarous
inhumanities, who not thoroughly sated with the blood of men, sought to exercise
his hate upon Rome his own City, by setting a great part of it on fire, his
excuse being the deformity thereof, which incendiary he beheld from the
Mece^^tian Tower, glorying in the flames thereof, being so far from commanding
the fire to be extinguished, that he suffered not any man to enter into his own
house to save any part of his Goods; and yet how merciful was God in his
judgment, to punish this Tyrant with one miserable death, who had indeed
deserved more than a thousand.

Creon a Tyrant of Thebes, besides many other cruelties, in which he expressed a
most bestiall and unmercifull nature, denied Burial to all the dead Bodies of
his Enemies slain in Battle with others of his own Subjects who had any way
offended him, whom Theseus after slew in a conflict, and served him with the
same sauce, forbidding his dead carcass to be inhumed or sepulcred, but thrown
out in the fields, for the brute beasts to feed, and the fowls of the air to
prey on.

Anton^^^ Commodus one of the Roman Emperors, had so troubled the Empire with
gladiatory slaughters, that the people in contempt gave him the denomination of
Gladiator or Fencer. He (as Lampridius witnesses) when he saw any man weak or
unserviceable by reason of some disease in his feet, would shoot him with
arrows to death, having a strong steel Bow made for that purpose. The brains
of others he used to beat out of their heads with clubs, and boasted that
therein he imitated Hercules, to that purpose putting on a Lions skin. He was
also so irriligious and such a contemner of the gods, that offerings and
sacrifice at the altars he would mingle with the blood and flesh of men, and if
any man showed either a smiling or supercilious brow at what he did, (both were
alike) him he commanded to be cast to the Lions and other wild beasts to be
devoured. One of his servants being commanded to read unto him the tyrannous
Reign of Caligula, with the manner of his death, as it was set down in
S^etoniu^ Tranquillus, because it displeased him as somewhat reflecting on his
person, he commanded to be cast to the Lions. If any man in his own hearing or
by the information of other, said he must die, he was precipitated from a
rock, or some other high place, and his body crushed to pieces: he delighted
to see the bellies of fat men ripped up, and how suddenly their guts and entrals
would tumble to the ground. But the people after so great sufferings, now at
length tired with his inhumanities, in the very height of his insolences, when
he least dreamed of any such disaster, caused him to be flain; which though a
violent death, yet in all men's judgments may appear somewhat too mild for his
merit, but the great Judge of all, sometime mitigates the punishments of such
grand malefactors here, to make their torments more great and perdurable in
the world to come.

The next I present to your view is Caius Marius the Roman, who as he was of
great power and potency in Rome, so his pride was boundless and unmeasured,
but his inhumanity far exceeding them both, for after his exile, when he had
again emptied the City of all those whom he suspected to have but the least
finger in his confinement, by the assistance of Cinna Carbo and Sertorius he
presently fell upon the slaughters of the Princes and Senators, which was so
violent that the channels overflowed with the blood of the slain Nobility. He
took away the head from Octavius the Consul, and caused that of Octavius a
consular Senator to be brought and set upon his table, taunting and deriding
him even after death. Casar and Fimbria two of the most eminent in the City he
commanded to be murdered in their own houses, breaking them violently open in
the night, and killing them in their beds: the two Crassi the father and the
son he flew one in the sight of the other (the more to aggravate their sorrow
in their alternate indulgence.) Bebius and Numitorius he commanded to be
dragged through the Forum by the common hangmans clutches, but Catulus
Lactutius by swallowing fire ended his life, and escaped his greater cruelty.
Archarius and Flamen Dialis a priest, whose office was sacred and in great
reverence amongst the Romans, he commanded to be through pierced with swords.
All which examples of Tyranny he committed from the Kalends of January, to the
Ides of the same month, but what heavy judgments God laid upon him, you shall
next hear in the relation upon Sylla.

Which Lucius Sylla made a deluge and over^^ux of blood through Rome and all
Italy: four legions of the contrary faction of Marius being surprised and
imploring his mercy he commanded instantly to be cut in pieces: the Prestines
who had received and entertained Marius junior into their City, after they had
yielded themselves unto his mercy, he put them out of the City, commanding
Putilius Cethegus to kill them every man without the walls, and their bodies to
be left in open fields without burial, in which inhumanity perished at once
five thousand men; four thousand and 700 slain by strength of his bloody Edict
of proscription, he caused their names to be registered in the public tables,
lest the memory of that facinorous act might be buried in oblivion: and not
sating himself with the strage of men, his tyranny usurped upon women, not
sparing matron or virgin, but he commanded their heads (being cut off) to be
brought unto him, that he might thereby the better glut his savage indignation,
and implacable fury. Marcus Marius the Praetor he deprived not of his life
before his eyes were pulled out of his head, and after caused all the bones in
his body to be broken. Marcus Pletori^s because being sent to kill his enemy
Caius Marius, he was daunted at his brave aspect and honorable presence, and
therefore left the fatal act unperformed, he commanded him instantly to be
slain. Nor did his malicious rankor and hate end in the death of Marius, for
commanding his body to be burnt, he sprinkled and threw his ashes into the
river Anien: after all which and many more his bloody executions he was struck
by the hand of God with the lousy disease, so that his living body crawled
with vermin, in so much that before his death his household servants were almost
stifled with the stench of his carcass: such or the like are the terrible
judgments of God, against these proud Nimrods, mighty Giants and great hunters
of the earth, to day in their pride and pontificalibus, glorying in their
oppressions and persecutions, and to morrow worse than any carrion of beast
stinking in the grave, their memories being as hateful to the hearing, as
their corrupt putrefaction to the smell.

I have hitherto spoken of cruel and bloody Tyrants, let me treat a little of
Ire or Wrath it self, for they are sinonima's, since all these are but siens
growing from that stock. Anger and power meeting in one breast are more
violent than any thunderbolt: wrath and revenge take from man the mercy of God,
destroying and quenching that Grace which he has beforetime given. Anger
consists in habit and disposition, but Ire and Wrath indeed and effect. Hasty
and froward speeches beget Anger, Anger being kindled, begets Wrath, Wrath
seeks greedily after Revenge, and Revenge is never satisfied without blood,
which blood is never shed without just vengeance from Heaven, as may be made
apparent by many pregnant examples.

For instance, Cl^tarius smothering in his breast the seeds of ranker and
malice for the space of ten years against Galterus Rhothomanges, when that
most holy day called the Parasceve, in which our blessed Savior suffered death
for all mankind, slew him as he was at his devotion upon his knees in an holy
Chapel in Paris, (for so the French Chronicles report) who for that horrid
act was after fearfully punished in himself and his issue. The like has often
happened in the Temples of Italy, betwixt that imbestuous faction of the Guelfs
and the Gibbelines, who made no conscience of person or place, but in the time
of divine Service have pistolled one another in their pewes, as they were
kneeling at their prayers, when the Church has been full of drawn swords, to
the disturbing of the whole Congregation, making no more reverence of the place
than a slaughterhouse or shambles; upon whose but cheries God inflicted such
vengeance, that the one party quite destroyed the other, till they were
mutually cut off, and utterly extinguished. Such is the irreligious boldness
of some, that I heard a Scotishman of note (soon after King James came into the
Land) speak in the company of prime Gentlemen after this manner, Such a one
killed my brother, and I could not meet him in seven years after, but at
length espying him in the Church on a Sabbath Day, my fury could not contain it
self, but even where he sat I shot him with my pistol and slew him, and the
arrant puritans (says he) would have excomunicated me for nothing else but for
killing him who had before killed my brother. But though men make slite of
these atheistical and sacrilegious butcheries, that God who made man after his
own Image, and all men of one and the selfsame earth and clay, will not let
them escape his fearful and terrible judgments.

Neither have the holy Fathers the Popes been altogether free of this sin of
Ire and implacability, for we read in their own Chronicles, that upon the day
when the Sacra Cineritia were celebrated, that was upon Ash Wednesday, in which
is used great solemnity, when the great Presbiters and Cardinals according to
the custom came to kneel to Pope Boniface, to receive the ashes, he took the
ashes and vessel in which they were contained, and in great rage flung them in
the face of Prochetus Archbishop of Genoa, with whom he was at odds, and hated
him exceedingly, and changing his words of exhortation and benediction, he
violently brake out into this language, Remember O thou man that thou art of
the faction of the Gebelines, and with those Gibelines thou shall die; for he
was of that party, and enemy to the Guelfs, whom the Pope favored. Stephanus
Sextus because Formosus upon his deathbed would not set his hand to his
election, (who was Pope before him) when he came to be instated in the Papacy,
he commanded him to be plucked out of his sepulcher, and buried in the
Churchyard, causing his fingers first to be cut off, and so basely dismembered
him being dead, for refusing to subscribe for him being alive. With the like
malevolent hatred also did Sergius the third prosecute the same Formosus, who
again commanded his body to be taken out of the second Grave, and brought it
into the Forum or public Rialto, when the head was cut from the body, and cast
into the river Tiber, and this he did to insinuate into the favor of Lotharius
King of France, to whom Formosus living was in great opposition. Diverse other
examples of the like malicious nature I could extract out of their Annals, and
those remembrancers who have writ the lives of the Popes, which for brevity
sake I omit, but am confident withal, that these evil presidents from the
Clergy (whose light should shine to others) have been a great encouragement to
the Laity to offend in the like, who for the most part pattern their actions,
be they good or evil, by their teachers and instructers.

Mahometes Otomanus the Grand Seignior missing but two Cucumers out of his
Garden in his return home, (after solacing himself abroad) he in his rage
slew two of his Catamites with his own hands, being young boys of choice
feature and beauty. And Commodus was of that fiery indignation, that when he
came into the Bath to wash himself, and found it somewhat more hot than
usual, he commanded the Bath-keeper to be thrown into the furnace, and there
burnt to ashes. And Quintus Metellus was of such a testy and choleric
disposition, that having lived some years as Consul, and Proconsull in Spain,
when he heard by the decree of the Senate of Rome, Pompeius whom he much hated
was to succeed him in his command and sovereignty, his anger grew so violent
that he diminished his army, and made all the Magazine of Grain and provision
of victual a spoil and prey to the soldiers, he caused all the Bows and
Arrows in the Army to be broken and knapt asunder, forbidding the Horses and
Elephants to have their ordinary and customed food and fare, not leaving him at
his arrival any one thing of any moment wherewith he might succor or relieve
either himself or his Army. Pr^merus a domesticke servant of Archelaus King of
Macedonia, with such an intestine hatred persecuted Euripides, that one night
he watched him when he came late from supper with the King, and in the way let
loose fierce Mastiffes upon him, by which he was most miserably torn to
pieces. Such also was the grounded and inveterate hare of the unanimous people
of Rome to Heliogabolus, that being dead they cast his martyred body into the
common jakes of the City with his mother Semile, and after flung them into the
river Tiber, making also an Edict, that his statues before erected should be
demolished, and his very name to be raced out of all the monuments of the City,
willing (if it had been possible) quite to have extirped his memory. They
likewise when the Emperor Michael Paleologus was dead, denied unto his body
any place for Burial. Marti^s Sabinus much troubled and in^enced that
Hostilius was by the sufferage of the people preferred unto the Crown and
Kingdom, to which he had before aspired, when he saw his malice could not vent
it self against his competitor, not able to suppress his implacable
indignation, and not knowing any means to embrew his hands in the blood of his
adversary, he could not contain himself but shed his own, and falling upon his
sword desperately slew himself.

Full of cruelty, (and savouring no humanity at all) was that wrath and fury of
Septimus Severus, who having overcome Clodius Sabinus in battle, and utterly
defeated his Army, himself being taken prisoner, he commanded that he should
be transpierced with a sword and slain: but not content with this, he caused
his wounded body to be stripped naked, and laid before his Palace as a public
spectacle to all men, so that himself might take a full view thereof from the
prospect of his window: yet could not all this satisfy his malicious cruelty,
but further he commanded a wild and untamed jennet to be brought forth, to
trample and tread upon his face, breast, belly, and the other parts of his
body, until all his bones were bruised and broken in his skin, and he
disfigured all over. Nor ended his fury here, for he would not suffer his body
(thus mangled and martyred) to be taken thence, till the stench thereof grew so
noisome to the place that it could be endured no longer; and then lastly, as a
close to the rest, he gave leave that it should be cast into the river. This
and the like prove the old adage to be true, Homo homini lupus, one man is a
wolf to another: but I think such fire-hearted and pouder-brained men are
worse, for no brute beast will prey upon its like, the Lion will not tyrannize
over the Lion, the Bear fall upon the Bear, nor the Wolf on the Wolf, only
Man who is sensible and endowed with reason, will not spare his own similitude
and likeness.

I have read in Solinus an approved Author, of a strange foul or bird bodied
like a Gryphin, and equal to it in bigness, only bearing the face of a man;
this ravenous Harpy (for no more proper appellation I can bestow upon it) above
all other Creatures desires to make his prey upon humane flesh, and when he
has slain any man and glutted himself with his dead carcass, his use is to go
to drink at the next river, in which he no sooner spies his own face, but
presently a telenting and repentance comes upon him, sorrowing to have been
the death of a Creature of his own aspect and countenance, which takes in him
such a sensible and deep impression, that after that time he will never taste
the least food or sustenance, punishing his unnatural act with one the most
terriblest deaths that can be invented, Famine. If these roysters, cutters, and
swashbucklers, those bloody minded Canibals (for they are no better in their
brutish condition) would but make this Bird their Emblem, and consider with
themselves what sorrow and repentance with a remorse of conscience waits at
the heels of every slaughter and murder committed, they would not be so
forward to give the lie, strike, stab, nor (that which in seeming of all those
Foul ones appears to the outward view the fairest) be so ready to send or
entertain challenges, or meetings in single combats and duels, not before
considering, that he who falls by the others sword in his rage, (and therefore
without charity) there is great doubt of his salvation, and the conqueror must
dearly answer for his lost soul. Besides, if he escape the justice of the Law,
the worm of conscience shall never leave him, but continue him in perdurable
torment.

And now to such murders arising from wrath, their strange discovery and
judgment. In the Reign of Christierne the second King of Denmark, when some
twelve of his prime Courtiers were making merry in a parlor, and amongst them
one who was Postmaster to the King, it happened that dissension falling
amongst them, upon the sudden all the lights (in the tumult) were put out, and
one amongst them slain with a poniard, but lights at length brought in, and the
Body found murdered and breathless, the King desired to have account for his
dead subject, the Nobles lay all the guilt upon this Postmaster, but the King
with whom he was then gracious, thought it to be done of malice, and persuaded
himself that he was innocent of the act: they on the contrary allege that he
was the cause of that meeting, that there had been a former grudge and malice
betwixt them, and moreover, that when the lights were brought in he was found
next to the dead Body, so that they desired the Body to be laid upon a table,
and every one singly to lay his hand upon the naked breast of the person
murdered, with a deep protestation, that they were innocent of the act, which
was done in the Kings presence, and they came all by course according to the
manner proposed, but in the Body was found no change or alteration at all: at
last came the Cursor or Postmaster, and first embracing his feet, and with many
tears kissed them, thinking by that means, if it were possible, to pacific
his just incensed spirit, and at length coming to lay his hand upon the breast
of the dead body, a double flux of blood issued from his wounds and nostrils,
and that in great abundance; by which finding himself convicted, he confessed
his malicious act, and by the King was committed to the common Executioner.
This story the Lord Henricus Ranzovius, Vicar general to the King of Denmark,
in all his Dukedomes a man illustrious in Nobility and Learning, relates in his
Responsory to the Consulatory of David Chitraus.

Another suiting to this I find related by Doctor Oath Melander, in his
Iocoserni; who speaks of a man, who through rankor and hatred had watched his
neighbor till he had found means by meeting him in the thickets and woods, (a
place convenient for such a mischief) to lay violent hands upon him, and
murder him; and after escaped without the least suspicion of the fact: but the
body being after brought to the Iizehohensian Senate, they gave command that
one of the hands should be cut off, and hanged up over the dining-table in the
common Jayle or Prison. It happened that the malefactor being some ten years
after committed upon some delinquency, (of no great matter or moment) that he
was brought into the same room, and by accident when he sat down to meat,
placed just under the hand, which though it had been withered and dried for so
many years, bled freshly, and dropped upon his trencher; at which all being
amazed, the Jailer went straight to inform the Senate, who sent to examine
him, and he being convinced in conscience by that divine prodigy, soon
acknowledged himself guilty; for which he was committed to the charge of the
Executioner, and according to the custom of those Countries, broken upon the
wheel.

In the Diocese of one of the Dukedomes of Saxony, commonly called
Gerstenauta, there lived in one Village a Shepherd and a Rustic or
Husbandman, who were of that antipathy in condition, that above all measure
they hated one another; and though neighbors and friends on both sides had
appointed sundry meetings, to mitigate and reconcile this inveterate malice,
yet they found it unpossible to be done, and so left them to their giddy and
haire-brain'd fury; which gave them now the more scope and liberty to insidiate
one another, yet neither of them durst attempt their worst of indignation, as
fearing the danger of the Law: Yet they ceased not backbiting, slandering,
railing, calumniating openly, besides private whispering and murmuring,
(insomuch as in them lay) to take away each others reputation and good fame:
and moreover, to devise and seek out by what means they might damage one
another in their goods, chattels, or any other part of their estate, which grew
to such unsufferable height, that neither of them able to endure their mutual
encumbrances and detriments, secretly agreed together to make an end of all in
single fight; for which they both prepared themselves against the day
appointed: The Husband man provides himself of a good forest bill, with some
other shorter weapons, as a poniard or a dagger, to speed his enemy if they
should happen to close in the encounter: The other causes a sheephooke to be
made of a strong ashen plant, in the bottom a pike of three inches long,
sharpened like the point of a needle, and to skrew in and out at pleasure: the
head thereof (though fashioned like a hook) was of massy steel, yet made with
the like skrew; and being taken off, there was another pike of six or seven
inches long, insomuch that the Smith who had the charge of forging the
materials, greatly wondered for what use it was: Before the day of combat
came, news was brought to the other of this dreadful weapon, which ^ut him
into a great affright, as doubting the success of the conflict; but though his
courage failed him, yet the canker of his malice still continued, and fearing
open hostility, he began to fly to stratagems, and so devilishly ordered the
matter, that in the silence of the night, when the other was fast sleeping, he
broke into his Cottage and murdered him in his bed; which done, providing him
at home of such things as were necessary, he betook him to his heels, and
fled into the Province of Hessia: The body being found, his sudden flight
might easily (without contradiction) confirm who was the Homicide, and
therefore the Country left off farther inquiry. He now concealeth himself in
a private house, unsuspected of any, thinking himself secured both from
pursuit and punishment; but Gods Judgments are nearest when malefactors (in
that heinous kind) think them to be farthest off, as shall appear by the
subsequence: for soon tired with the closeness of the house, (as being still
used to the fields, and liberty of the fresh air) he one day walking abroad,
happened to come within the Toils, where the Illustrious Prince of Hesse,
Philip the first of that name, was hunting the wild Boar; and when the beast
(who was of an extraordinary magnitude) was in the hottest of the chase, most
fiercely pusued by the dogs, he ran directly against this Homicide, and
goaring him with his tusks, gave him sundry mortiserous and deadly wounds, and
so left him as dead in the place: presently the Prince came in, and though not
knowing the party, in his great commiseration commanded his body (yet
breathing) to be borne to Hirifeldia, the nearest Town, and all means
possible to be provided for his cure: but all was in vain, within two days he
died. In which time he confessed all the manner of his former murder to those
that were his visitants; withal affirming, that he saw not the shape of any
Boar, but in him the right figure of the Shepherd, who with his dreadful
shoep-hooke gave him these lacerating and tormenting wounds: which misprision
of his is worthy your observation, and his History is verified by the
forenamed Author, Doctor Oth^ Melander.

You may read in the Turkish History, in the time of Sir Thomas Glovers being
there Ambassador, that the same noble Gentleman entertained into his family an
Englishman, and made him one of his Domestic servants, who was not one whom
he brought over out of England, but found there as a stranger and traveller;
whom at his earnest suit, (what for charity, and what for Countrey-sake) he
admitted into his house, employing him in sundry affairs, in all which he
diligently and carefully demeaned himself: But it so happened, that the
Ambassadors servants being abroad recreating themselves, a company of the rude
and barbarous Turks gave them some affront; in conclusion, from words they
grew to blows, and so unto hurliburly, in which, by the hurling of an
unfortunate stone, one of the Turks being hit under the ear, died of the
blow: The Englishmen retire within their privilege, and the Turks threaten to
pull down the house, and to make spoil of all that was therein; for blood
(they said) ask't blood, and therefore they would have no satisfaction till the
offender were delivered into their hands: now this servant late entertained was
not in the company, nor out of his Lords doors all that day: briefly, because
they said they knew the man, he was fore't to cause every servant of the house
to show themselves; they with an unanimous voice clamor That is he, That is
he: who was the man that kept house the day of the tumult. His Lord to acquit
his innocence, made pretes^^tion of the same, but all to no purpose; that was
the man marked for their vengeance, and none else they would have; and so
hurried him away to prison to be executed the next day: but the same night the
Lord Ambassadors Chaplain came to comfort him with godly instructions for his
souls health, and the rather because of his known innocence. But to cut off
circumstance, the prisoner freely confessed unto him that he had slain a man
in England, no^ (...) his own defense, but maliciously, and fled for the
murder; where a(...) traveling div^re Countries, he at length came into
Turkey, where he had ^o^^d to have ^etled himself. Then penetently
acknowledging how God in his just Judgment had found him out in that remote
place, where he thought to have (...) orne his vengeance. The day after he was
the subject of the Infid^^^ me^^ilesse cruelty, who hanged him at the
Ambassadors gate.

(...) (...) anu^, and Johannes Budeus report a strange discourse of a
malicious servant, whom the Devil had possessed with his own diabolical
inhumanity: who taking a virulent spleen from some rough usage by his master,
watched his opportunity when he was absent, and shut and barricadoed all the
doors about the house; then he broke open a chamber upon his Mistress, and
when he had contemptuously and despightfully demeaned himself toward her, he
after bound her hand and foot, and so left her grovelling upon the floor: then
he took three young children (the eldest not seven years old) and carried
them up to the battlements, and when he espied his master coming home, he
called to him, and in his sight first precipitated one child, and then
another, from the top to the pavement, where their bodies were miserably dashed
and shattered to pieces, and hold up the other in his arms to do the like to
him; at which the wretched father extremely stupefied, (for who can imagine
less) fell upon his knees, and humbly besought the villain to spare the life
of the third, and he would pardon him for the deaths of the former: to which
the barbarous homicide replied, that there was but one way in the world for him
to redeem his life; the indulgent father with tears and entreaties desired to
know what that way was? who presently replied, that he should with his knife
instantly cut off his nose, for there was no other ransom for him: The
passionate father who dearly tendered the safety of his child, having now no
other left, agrees to the condition, and disfigured and dishonored his face,
according to the covenant made betwixt them; which was no sooner done, but the
inhumane butcher framed a loud and scornful laughter; at which, whilst the
other stood amazed, the child which he still held in his arms, he ^^ung to
the rest, and then most desperately cast himself after, preventing a worse
death by torment: and such was the end of this Arch-limbe of his father the
Devil, and the fruits of Ire, Anger, Indignation, and Malice.

CHAP. IV. Gods Judgments against Sloth.
Solomon says of Sloth, Proverbs 19. Verse. 15. Sloathfulnesse causes to fall
asleep, and a deceitful person shall be affamished. And 28. Verse. 19. He that
tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread, but he that follows the Idle
shall be filled with poverty. Again, Proverb. 6. 6. Go to the Pismire, O
sluggard, behold her ways, and be wise, for she having no guide, governor,
nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in
harvest. How long will thou sleep O sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy
sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little foulding the hands to
sleep: Therefore thy poverty comes as one that travelleth by the way, and
thy necessity like an armed man. This being a sin generally rather of
omission then commission; Examples and the punishments thereof are not so
frequent in the holy Text; nor other Ethnic Authors as those actual and in
continual agitation, yet as far as Authentic authority will give me leave,
I will strive to delineate and express it to the full; that being (howsoever
slighted and unminded) mortiferous and deadly, and therefore subject to
judgment and condemnation, it may be the more carefully abandoned and avoided.

Pride, fullness of bread, and idleness, which is a neglect of that duty which
belongs to God, and a cessation of that consociety and converse which is
requisite amongst men, were part of those sins which caused God to rain down
fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, whose laziness and sloth begot
incest, adultery, and that most preposterous and abominable sin, since
called (from the place) Sodometry. But I desire first to annalyse and
distinguish of the vice, before I proceed to further president.

This fourth head of the beast of Hell, called Accidia or Desidia, has a bad
root, and spreads into many evil branches; for it keeps from beginning
well, and hinders from ending well. It hinders good beginnings by six
sundry sins: The first may be called Faintness, which is, when a man's love,
which ought to be zealous and servent toward his Creator and Redeemer, is
cold, faint, and weak, and therefore made unapt either for Devotion, or
Prayer; and this commonly happens when he is backward and averse to
enterprise any good work of piety or charity. The second may be titled
Tenderness, which is the very couch and day-bed on which the Devil rests
and reposeth himself, still prompting to the man or woman; Thou have been
ever tenderly and indulgently brought up, not borne to trouble thy self with
any toylesome vocation: thou art moreover of a weak constitution, not able to
endure pain or labor, much less fasting, or any needful chastising of thy
body; that sighing for thy sins were hurtful for thine health, and weeping
for thy transgressions would in time spoil thine eyesight, with the like
malevolent suggestions; which aptly comply with a sentence of one of the
Fathers, Iustum est cum Deo, ut moriens obliviscatur sui, qui vivus, oblitus
est Dei: Most just it is with God, that such men should forget him in their
death, who would not remember him in their lives. The third branch is
Idleness, from whence many evils arise, as witnesses the holy Text: for when
the old adversary of mankind finds a man idle in his duty toward his Maker,
he then finds him employment in his own wicked works: first putting him in
mind to think of evil, and then to act it; addicting himself wholly to
villainy, ribaldry, luxury; to neglect time and opportunity, wherein he might
do much good, and make his way toward Heaven: Where on the contrary, doing
much evil, he prepares his passage to Hell and eternal damnation. The fourth
bears the title of Dullness or Heaviness, when we solely incline our selves
to drowsinesse and sleep; and then are the adversary and his ministers vigilant
and waking, to insidiate us in all our senses: and the less apt he finds us
to the service of God, the more plyant and flexible he makes us for the works
of Satan; and such are they, who for one hours sleep will neglect coming to
divine Service, to hear the word of God preached, or to be present at the
administration of the holy Sacraments: The first is Refrectory perverseness,
that is, when we lie and snort in sin, and are sensible and apprehensive of
the temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, yet we neither lift up
our heads nor hearts to God by way of contrition, nor implore unto him devoutly
by confession, nor list up our hands unto him, as promising repentance: like
that obstinate and wilful prisoner, who had rather lie rotting in a stinking
and noisome dungeon, then take the pains to walk up the stairs where the
doors stand wide open, to gain himself his franchise and liberty. The sixth
may be styled Pus^llanimity; that is, when we dare not enterprise any pious act
(after a good motion) in a diffidence, that God will not assist us in the
performance thereof; and this is a foolish dread that some apprehend from their
vain dreams, and may be resembled to such as dare not venture to walk in
such a path, because there the snaile puts forth his horns; or young
children, that shun their way for the hissing and gagling of Geefe.

These are the six impediments that hinder to begin well; there are six other
quite averse from ending well. The first is Delay: for when God puts into
the heart of man to have an appetite, or purpose to do any good work, or to
repent him of his old sins, and prepare himself to newness of life: Then
comes the old Tempter and wispers in his ear; What needs this early and too
forward beginning? thou art yet in thy prime and strength, take the benefit and
pleasures of thy youth: it is yet too soon: Age will come on, and then thou
shall have leisure, for when the delights of youth forsake thee, thou shall in
thy decrepit estate have little else or nothing to do: thus dallying and
dandling a wretched soul to it is eternal destruction. Most true it is that
God says, At what time soever a sinner repents himself of his wickedness,
he will blot out all his offenses; but he that made that promise, has not
promised to give the sinner a time of repentance. After Delay comes Negligence,
for whosoever makes doubts and demurres to turn to God, it is no wonder if he
do it feignedly, superficially, and negligently; and this is a vice general
and avoided by few: for alas, how many are to be sound that use care and
diligence in performing their bounden duty to God, and executing that charity
in which we are obliged toward our neighbor. The third is Oblivion and
Forgetfulness, and consequent it is, that whosoever is negligent, must needs
be forgetful; and both these hinder us from a devout confession of our sins to
God; for by casting a neglect upon our transgressions and offenses, they soon
slip out of our thoughts; and when we have occasion to acknowledge them, and be
sorry for them, they are quite out of our remembrance, by which the soul
incurres great danger of Judgment. Then follows Fear or Dread, which is a
faintness of the heart bred by evil custom, which makes us to grow in a
distrust of Gods mercy, and by that means to incur the fearful sin of
Desperation: of which, not only former ^ges, but even the times present
afford too many dreadful examples. And then there is a lazy Supini, which
breeds a diminution and abatement of all devotion; and is a disease to the
soul, as a Consumption to the body; when in the stead of going on, we rather
stand still, or draw back; and this recreance and defiling, if not taken in
time, may turn to Infidelity and Apostasy; sins of that attrocity and
diabolical nature, scarce amongst Christians to be named. Sixely and lastly,
there is a Fond Zeal, or foolish servour, by which men weaken their bodies,
and disable their spirits by superstitious Vigils and Fasts, by which they
think to merit Heaven, but in the interim fall into such langor, malady,
sickness, and disease, that they make themselves disabled, either for the
service of God, or following their own vocation and calling; but of such I
presume there be not many.

Sloth is no better then the pillow or bo^ster of the Devil, the original
Examples of Sloth out of the Scriptures.
of many dreadful sins, and grievous calamities: of Murmuring, a branch
whereof we have example out of the Holy Scriptures, Numb. 11. 4. And a number
of people that was amongst them fell a ^u^^ing, and turned away, and the
children of Israel also wept, I and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat? We
remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt for naught, the cucumbers, and
the pepons, and the ^eekes, and the onions, and the garleek; but now our soul
is dried away, we can see nothing but this Man. Again, Cap. 21. Verse. 4. After,
they departed from the Mount Hor by the way of the red Sea, to compass the
land of Edom; and the people were sore grieved because of the way: And they
spoke against God, and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have ye brought us out
of Egypt to die in the Wilderness? for here is neither Bread nor water, and
our soul loatheth this light bread: Wherefore the Lord sent fiery serpents
amongst the people, which stung them, so that many of the people of Israel
died. We read further in the first of Haggat, Verse. 2. Thus speaks the Lord
of Hosts, saying, The people say the time is not yet come that the Lords house
should be builded: Then came the word of the Lord by the ministry of the
Prophet Haggai, saying, Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seiled
houses, and this house lie waste? Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Consider your own ways in your hearts; ye have sown much, and bring in
little ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled: ye
cloth ye, but you are not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the wages
into a broken bag, etc. Come to the Gospel, Matthew 25. Verse 26. And his
Master answered to him and said, Thou evil servant and floathfull, thou
knew that I reapt where I sowed not, and gathered where I strawed not: thou
ought therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers, and then at my
coming should I have received mine own with advantage: Take therefore the
talent from him, and give it to him that has ten talents; for unto every one
that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance: and from him that
has not, even that he has shall be taken away; Cast therefore that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. This drowsinesse is also blamed by our Savior Christ in his
Apostles, Mark 14. 37. Then he came and found them sleeping, and said to
Peter, Simon, sleep thou? could thou not watch one hour? watch ye and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

From Divine, I come to Ethnic Examples: Capitolinus has left remembered unto
us, that Authonius Pius being Emperor, caused the roofes and coverings of all
such houses to be taken away, as were known to receive any idle people;
affirming that nothing was more uncomly or absurd to be suffered, then such
idle caterpillars and slow-wormes, to have their food and nourishment from that
commonweal; in the maintenance of which there was no supply from their
industry and labor. Notorious was the laziness and sloth of Honorius the
Emperor, for where, as it is the custom of all Princes whatsoever, not to set
their hand or seal to any Brief, Grant, or Warrant, before they had
diligently perused the contents, lest perchance they might do something
against their honor and dignity; yet he was of that idle condition, that he
had neither the patience to peruse himself, or to hear read any thing (of
what import soever) he was to subscribe: which his sister Placida observing,
and willing as far as she durst, modestly to reprove and tax this strange
sloathfulnes in him; she devised an instrument or writing, in which the
Emperor had contracted her his only sister to a most vile, sordid, and
contemptible fellow, who used about the Court, and was generally known to all;
which done, she caused that paper to be shuffled in amongst many others upon
the sealing day, to which the Emperor set his hand and signet: and the next
morrow she came and prostrated her self to him, weeping, and complaining to
him of her infelicity and strange disastrous fortune; at which the Emperor
wondering, demanded the cause of her so great sorrow and heaviness? to whom she
showed the writing, and his hand and seal to confirm it: at which being more
amazed, he made a great protestation, that he never had any such thought or
purpose; of which the wise and discreet Lady taking advantage, she told him the
whole circumstance how every thing came about, and that it was her own Act;
withal beseeching him (under pardon) to avoid the like or greater
inconvenience, which might trench upon the honor and discretion of his sacred
Majesty: which was delivered in such passionate and affectionate language, that
the Emperor received it from her gratefully, and reformed that error in
himself for ever after.

This drowsy and snorting sin, howsoever in outward appearance it seems
innocuous and harmless, neither dammaging the party infected therewith, nor
others, yet has many virulent and bitter impendencies, which always hang over
it, as may appear by History; tyrannizing over the strong, and insulting over
the mighty: For example, the invincible Hercules, whom neither Giants, Savage
Beasts, Serpents, nor Monsters, could withstand; after all his active and
immutable labors, when he gave but the least way to sloth and idleness, it
brought him to his utter ruin and destruction; who casting off his Lions
skin, and laying aside his mortiferous club, with his fatal shafts and bow,
betook himself unto all effeminacie: insomuch, that changing his masculine
habit, he put on the loose garments belonging to women, that he might the more
freely insinuate into the good grace and favor of O^phale Queen of the
Lydians, of whom he was perditly inamoured: At whose command he fashioned those
his stubborn and rude fingers (before employed in quelling Tyrants, and
subduing Monsters) to spinne, card, and draw a corse and untoward thread from
the distaffe; but what was the end of this sloathfull effeminacie? His chaste
wife Dianeyra hearing how strangely he had lost himself, both in his person
and reputation of the world; thinking to recall him from this dull and sleepy
Lethargy, sent him a shirt for a present, (but ignorant that it was poisoned)
which he had no sooner put on, but it instantly putrified and infected his
body all over, cleaving so fast to his skin, that in striving to pluck away
the linen, he tore the flesh from the bones; so that overcome with the anguish
and insufferable torture of the poison, he built a huge pile of wood which he
had torn from the trees that grew upon Mount Oeta, to which having put fire,
it no sooner grew into a violent flame, but first having cast in his club, and
then his Lions spoils, he afterward threw himself, where he was burnt to
ashes.

The like we read of the great Assyrian Monarch Sardanapalus, whose brave
Predecessors from many discents, employed themselves in warlike expeditions and
martial affairs, all of them great undertakers, and some mighty Conquerours,
insomuch that the Nation was dreaded throughout the world; but this last and
worst abandoning all masculine virtue, gave himself only to sloathfull
delicacy, luxury, and base metriculosity, in that abject and sordid manner that
laying aside all that sublimity and excellence which belongs to regal
Majesty, he forsook his virill habit and ornaments, willing if it had been
possible to have altered his noble sex by putting on female habit, and
sequestring himself from his martial Nobility, and Counselors of State,
converst, and had consociety only with Whores, Bawdes, Panders, Eunuchs, and
Catamites, insomuch that he made his Royal Palace worse then any Burdeile, or
common Brothelhouse: which his Nobles and Peers impatient to endure, when
neither humble entreaty, persuasion, counsel, nor menaces could divert him
from his sloth and idleness, they made an insurrection against him: And under
Arbactes the General, having first seized all the Castles, and places of
strength, belonging to the Empire, they besieged him in his Palace, profering
him even then, if he would change his loathed sensuality, they would likewise
alter their purpose of deposing him; but this desperate Devil, constant in his
ruin, despising their indulgent proffers, and preferring his beastly and
abominable lusts before life or honor, whilst they were yet in parley, or
before returned them any answer, gathered together all his Gems, Jewels, and
Treasure, even his whole Magazine, which amounted to an infinite: Then all his
Prostitutes and Concubines, with the whole brood of Brothelry, and setting fire
on the whole Seragl^a at once, leapt in himself amongst them; than which
incendiary, no more acceptable sacrifice could have been made to the Devil.

Moreover, what greater Conqueror then Julius Caesar, eternized through all
Ages for his magnanimity and valor, of whose brave and heroicke Acts to give a
full expression, would ask a voluminous Chronicle, who more wakefull,
provident, active, adventurous, laborious, industrious? and never out of
agitation, till he had attained unto that height of supremacy at which he
aimed, which was no less then to be the sole Monarch of the world, but after
when he came to submit himself to the affect of peace, and ease, and was no
longer in action, he fell into many monstrous sins, and horrible and hateful
adulteries: for thus Suetoninus reports of him, He vitiated and corrupted many
illustrious Matrons; (I say not all, after he came to be perpetual Dictator,
which in effect was Emperor) but these are remembered amongst others; He
stuprated Posthumia the wife of Servius Sisipitius, Lollia the wife of Aul^s
Gabinus, Tertullia the wife of Marcus Crassus and M^^a, of C^eius Pompeius:
divorcing himself from his own wife, he was said above all others to be most
inamored of Servilia the mother of Marcus Brutus, whose love he bought with a
Jewel valued at six hundred sexterti^, he vitiated also Iumia Tertia, the
daughter of Servilia, and wife of Marcus Crassus. He was said also to devote
himself to the love of diverse Queens, as Euria Maura, the wife of King
Bogades, and Cleopatra most amorously above the rest, with whom he banquetted
and rioted night and day, from the Suns uprising to his set, and from the
twilght to the dawning of the day, and in the same ship and bed accompanied her
through Egypt, almost to the Confines of Aethiopia, by whom he had a young
son called Caesaria: He is also reckoned amongst the Cinaedi, and to be a
Pederastes, that is, one abused against nature; of which, with Mamuria Termanus
he is taxt by Catullus: which aspertion Suetonius labors to acquit him of, in
these words, Caesar's great familiarity and bed-fellowship, with Nicomedes King
of Bithynia, (which was he with whom he was suspected) does no way hurt or
blemish the modesty of Caesar: of whose bloody butchery in the Capitol who
has not heard? Thus you see even in the greatest and most active, when they
fall into this Mollicies, and pillowy sluggishnesse, what effects it works
upon them, and what fearful judgments it brings upon them; for doubtless
there is scarce a whoredom acted, or adultery committed, no incestuous
congression, or pathick preposterous luxury, in which this Socordia, this
snaylie and sluggish vice has not a predominant hand. Of the last, modesty
will scarce suffer me to speak, or almost to name, being more then brutish and
altogether abominable: And before I enter on the former, give me leave to
remember unto you some few of these soft, idle, and effeminate fellows, which
merit rather the names of Musk-cats, then men. Augustus Caesar in sundry of his
Epistles written to Mecoenas, expresses his tenderness, softness, and
delicacy; but especially in that where he delivers himself to this purpose:
Farewell Mecoenas, the Honey of Nations, the Ivory of Etruria, the Laser of
Aretinum, the Margarite of Tibur, the Smarage of the Gilneans, the Jasper,
Berill and Carbuncle, etc. strange Mellite and oily Gnatonicall language,
(being seriously intended) to a subject from so great and wise an Emperor: yet
the learned and grave Seneca calls him Mecoenatem discimitum mollicima ejus
delicias, and portentosum orationem: His dissolute or unguerded Mecoenas, his
most effeminate delicacy, and portentous speech: who says farther of him, that
he was able to give an excellent example of the Roman Eloquence, if too much
felicity and worldly prosperity, mixed with ease and idleness, had not
mollified and enerved his spirits. So also Macrobius and Crinitus both report
of him. Cai^ Duellius after he had triumphed over the Carthaginians, and
returned thence a glorious Conqueror, grew unto that voluptuousness and
laziness, that he gave himself over to all the intemperances of lust and
riot; for if he went at any time by invitation to banquet or feast abroad, he
had a Trumpet or a Coronet to sound him to the place; and when the meeting
dissolved, to usher him back to his own house.

The Mass^^tenses were with this lazy luxury so contaminated and infected,
that they imitated women in their habit and vesture, perfuming their hair with
precious unguents, and then bound up their locks with laces and ribbands:
hence grew a proverb to their lasting disgrace, if any man was seen to sp^uce
up himself too curiously, they would say unto him, E Massi^ia ^enisti, Thou
came but now from Massilla. And of this unmasculin'd condition, were Abram,
Artemon, Clistine, Lysicrates, Argyri^^ B(...)us, N^arus, Aristodamus,
Andramites King of Lydia, with infinite others; perpetually and unto all
posterity made notorious for their sloth, and branded for their idleness.

How apt is plenty and fullness of bread to alter even the best natures, and of
men to make monsters! Augustus Caesar was a wise, discreet, and well governed
Prince, and celebrated for many rare virtues: yet it is related of him by
Suetonius, Sextus Aurelius, and others, that he was accustomed to lodge nightly
with twelve he Catamites of the one side, and as many she Prostitutes of the
other; who rejecting his wife Scribonia, contracted himself to Livia, who was
glad to hasten the nuptials, lest her great belly should be discovered: and
though he were a bondslave to lust, he used to punish it in others with all
severity; (for so the former Authors report of him) at a Feast where was a
great assembly of the Patricians, and Senators with their wives; in the middle
of the service, betwixt the second and third course, (not able to contain
himself any longer) he took by the arm one of the beautifull'st Matrons,
(whose husband was present as a guest) and led her into a withdrawing room;
where after some stay he brought her back to her seat, with her linen ruffled
and out of order, and a great flushing in her face, which was palpable to all
there present. He is also said to have stuprated Tertullia, Terentilla,
Drusilla, Salvia, Citiscenia, and others.

But more prodigious were the lusts of his Successor Tiberius, who according to
Tranquillus, devised a seller or vault, which was as a school of Venery; and
where all libidinous acts were practiced in his own presence. In the woods
also he built venereall Groves, where prostitution was daily practiced; with
some things fearful to be named. And as there were many prodigious examples
of Neroes cruelty, so there are also of his incontinence and luxury; all which
add to his hateful and abominable life, to make it the more infamous, who
most irreligiously committed a rape upon Rubria, one of the vestall Virgins,
to whom it was held worse then sacrilege to offer the least violence. He
caused from the beautiful child Sporus; his virill parts to be cut away,
endeavoring to have made him a woman, (if Art could have done it;) and then to
have married him, and so he did: from whence grew a saying, made common in the
mouths of all, Happy had it been for Rome and the Empire, if Neroes mother
had been such a wife as Sporus. Many of his actions are too obscene for
modesty to utter; He had natural congresse and consociety with his natural
mother Agrippina; He caused also one Doriph^^ a freed man to be cut like
Sporus, and married him also. Thus far of him Tranquillus, but much more
Cornelius Tacitus.

Caligula incested his own sisters, and prostituted them to his slaves and
vassals, that in the cause of Aemilius they might be condemned as adultresses,
or vitiated persons, which otherwise had gone against him. Livia Horestilla the
wife of Caius Piso he violently took from him, and made her his Empress, but
within two years being tired with his new Peer, he turned her off to grazing;
and then he took from Caius Memmius his wife Lolliae Pa^lina, and in a short
time repudiated her also; consining them both from marriage, or to have
consociety with any man whatsoever. He was much inamoured of one Cesonia a
beautiful Damsel, and his custom was to his private friends often to show her
naked. He was said much to love Marcus Lepidus, and Marcus Nestor the
Pantomine, (which is a Buffoone or common Jester) for no other cause, but only
for the commerse of mutual and alternate brothelry; of these and many other
his brutish ribauldries witnesses Suctonius.

The Emperor Commodus in like manner constuperated his own natural sisters,
in the sight of his other Paramores and Prostitutes, and then offered them to
his friends, such libidinous wretches as himself, to have the like congresse
with them: being a young man he was a scandal to all those whom he made his
companions, and they reciprocally were scandalized by being in his company:
These with infinite others of his licentious irregularities are recorded by
Lampridius. He had also (as the same Author testates) three hundred Concubines
of selected form and feature; chosen out of the families of the Senators and
Patritians; and as many choice young men of sweet aspect and undespised
proportion, taken out of the best of the Nobility; and with these he did
continually riot, drink, and wanton in his Palace, where were used all
immodest postures, and uncomely gestures, that the very Genius of lust could
devise: so that his Court showed rather a common stews, then the royal
dwelling house and mansion of a Prince.

Gordianus Junior, who wore the Imperial purple with his father, absenting
himself from all warlike employment, lived in laziness and ease, giving
himself solely to voluptuousness and carnal concupiscence, having at once
two and twenty Concubines, and by every one of them three or four children at
the least; for which by some he was called the Priamus of his age: but by
others (in scorn) the Priapus. And Proculus the Emperor in one expedition,
(besides many other spoils) took captive an hundred Sarmatian Virgins; all
which he boasted not only to have vitiated and deflowred, but to have
perpetrated, or more plainly got with child, within fifteen days, for so
Flavius Vopiscus reports of him; as also Sabellicus, in Exemplis. Heliogabalus
that Monster of nature, gathered together Bawdes, Whores, Catamites, Pimps,
Panders, Rounsevalls, and Stallions, (the very pest and poison of a Nation or
People) even till they grew to a great multitude: to which he added all the
long-nos'd vagabonds, and sturdy beggars he could find; for these they say
have the greatest inclination to libidinou filthiness, and these he kept
together and maintained at his great charge, only to satisfy his brutish
humor: Therefore Lampridius writing to the Emperor concerning his prodigious
Venery, uses these words; Who can endure a Prince who commits lust in all
the hollowes of his body, when Rooms, Cages, and Grates, the receptacle and
dens of wild beasts cannot amongst them all show a beast like him. He also
kept cursors and messengers, who had no other employment, but to ride abroad,
and seek out for these Masuti, and to bring them to Court, that he might
pollute and defile himself amongst them: But these whose dissolute and
floath-infected lives have grown to such an execrable height of impudence,
have not escaped Gods terrible Judgments by miserable and tragic ends; as you
may read in the premises, where I have had occasion to speak of the same
persons, though to other purpose.

I will prosecute this further by example, wherein the effects of this dull and
drowsy vice of idleness and sloth, shall be better illustrated, and in none
more proper then that of ^Egistus and Clitemuestra: for Agamemnon King of
Mycena, (and brother to Menelaus King of Sparta, the husband of Helena, ravished
thence by Paris, one of the sons of King Priam) being chosen. General of the
Grecian Army, in that great expedition against Troy, for the rape of that
Spartan Queen: In his absence he left Aegistus to govern his family, and
manage his Domesticke affairs, who lulled in ease, and loytring in idleness,
and she a lusty Lady, and lying in a widdowed and forsaken bed, such
familiarity grew betwixt them, that at length it came into flat adultery; of
whom the Poet thus ingenuously writes:

Quaeritur Aegistus, quare sit factus adulter?
In prompt^ causa est, Desidiosus erat, etc.
Ask any why Aegistus did
Fair Clitemnestra woe,
It Is answered: he was idle, and
Had nothing else to do.
Now this Egistus was before espoused to a young Lady the daughter of Phocas
Duke of Creophen, whose bed he repudiated, and sent back to her father. For
the love of this Queen of Micena, of whom he begot a daughter called Egiona;
and in the absence of his Lord and Master (supported by the Queen) took upon
him all regal authority, and was obeyed as King. Now Agamemnon had a young
son called Orestes, who was then under the tuition or guardianship of a
worthy Knight called Fultibius, who fearing lest the adulterer and the
adulteress might insidiate his life, he conveyed him out of the Land, and
brought him to Idomeneus King of Creet, a pious and just Prince, who undertook
to bring him up, educate, and instruct him like the son of such a father; and
protect him against all his enemies whatsoever.

Imagine now the ten years wars ended, Troy sacked and spoiled, raked to the
earth, and quite demolished; and Agamemnon at his return the very first night
of his lodging in the Palace, cruelly murdered in his bed by Egistus and the
Queen. By this time Orestes being of the years able to bear Arms, and
having intelligence how basely his father was butchered, and by whom, he made a
solemn vow to avenge his death upon the Authors thereof, and to that end
besought aid of the King Idomeneus his foster father and protector, who first
made him Knight, and furnished him with a competent Army. To assist whom came
Fultibius his first Guardian, with all the forces he could levy; as also
Phocas, whose daughter Egistus had before forsaken: These sped themselves so
well, that in few days they entered the Land, and after laid siege to the
chief City called Micene, where the Queen then lay (for Aegistus was at that
time abroad to solicit and against invasion, which he much feared) but finding
the gates shut, and the walls manned, and all entrance denied, they made a
fierce assault; and though it was very courageously and valiantly defended; yet
at length the City was taken, and the Queen surprised in the Palace, who being
brought unto the presence of her son, all filial duty set apart, and
forgetting the name of mother, he saluted her only by the title of
Adulteress, and Murderesse, and when he had thundered into her ears the
horridness and trocity of her crime, having his sword drawn in his hand, he
suddenly transpie^^'d her body, and left her dead upon the pavement, as an
expla^ion or bloody sacrifice to appease the soul of his dead farher. Some
would aggravate the fact, and say, that he caused her breasts to be torn off,
(she being yet alive) and cast to the dogs to be eaten, but that had been a
cruelty beyond nature, for a son to exercise upon a mother; now whilst these
things were in ag^^ation, Aegistus had gathered an Army for the raising of the
^^ege, and reclaiming the City, of which Orestes having intelligence, ambu^hed
him in his way, and had such good success, that having encompassed him in, he
set upon his Forces, both before and behind, routed them, and took Aegistus
prisoner, whom after he had put to the greatest tortures that humane
apprehension could invent or devise, he commanded his body to be hanged in
chains upon a gibbet without the City, the place where malefactors were
executed; there to remain till it dropped thence limb from limb: all this
coming to the ear of the adulterate brood Esyone, (who was said to have been
accessory to the death of Agame^non) she in extreme sorrow for the disaster
happened to her father and mother, despairing, strangled her self, and Orestes
after he had more considerately pondered his cruelty toward his mother, which
(how soever just) had better to have come from any man's hand than his own, and
further, that in the mouths of all men he was held no better than a matricide,
(a name hateful both to God and man) he upon this grew into a great
melancholy, and from melancholy to madness, never being able to recover his
senses after. It being worthy observation, what murders, revenges, adulteries,
diverse selfe-killings, and what not? arise from this (seeming harmless)
drowsy, and sleepy sin of i(...)enesse; of which I will present you further
with a strange and most lamentable story.

Dom. Ioannes Gygas postilla suae, part secunda, page 200. A noble and
virtuous A strange story of a sloathfull Chambermaid.
Lady who had a lasie and drowsy Chambermaid, and as one bad quality seldom or
never goes without another, she was of a testy disposition, and of a snappish
and cursed tongue; it happened that her mistress upon a time chiding her for
her neglect and sloth, she began to mander and murmur, and in the end to give
her Lady very cross and untoward language, at which being much incenst, she
gave her a box on the ear, at which she fell down upon the floor, as if she had
been half slain, and multiplying many bitter and despightfull words, told her
Lady that blow should never be forgot nor forgiven. Who somewhat sorry, as
fearing she had struck her too hard, left her mumbling the devils Pater noster,
as we say, and minded her no farther. But the devil would not let slip this
occasion, putting her in mind, to accuse her Lady of Adultery, and day nor
night she could be in quiet, till she had so done: at length attending a fit
opportunity when she found her Lord in private, the subtle shrew interupted him
after this manner; Noble Sir, (with pardon craved for my boldness) I have a
strange secret to acquaint you with, were I assured of your silence, but I am
afraid that my zeal and tender care I have of your honor may be misprised, and
that punishment which belongs to others may redound upon my self to mine own
ruin; at which the Crocodile wept, and her Lord longing to know what the
matter was, protested secrecy, and bid her say on: when she thus proceeded, I
know (Sir) that you are confident of the modesty, purity, and conjugall
chastity of your Lady, as wholly devoted to your love, having no other rival
or competitor in her affection; but to my great sorrow I speak it, she violates
her matrimonial tie, and adulterates your sheets in your absence, not with a
Gentleman of any of fashion, or quality, but with one of the Grooms of your
stable, which I most humbly beg of your honor that you will keep private to
your self, till I make you eyewitness of what I speak, and bring you to the
place where this ungodly congresse is frequently used betwixt them. And here
she broke off abruptly as if tears constrained by sorrow had stopped her in
her further relation.

At this discourse the Nobleman was stupefied, and though he ever found her
indulgent and affectionate toward him, and could never tax her of the least
lascivious glance or incontinent gesture, yet he remembered that when his
custom was to rise early to hunt, or hawk, or to survey his Parkes and
grounds, he found her scarce up or ready when he came back to break fast, and
then his jealousy began to suggest him that in that interim this wickedness
might be committed; and so growing full of thoughts, he left her (the devils
agent) to attend the event, who let slip no occasion to prosecute the mischief
that she had begun, but finding him coming early one morning (after his
sports) and knowing her Lady was then in bed, ran presently to the stable and
called one of the Grooms in haste, and told him he must run suddenly to her
Lady in her chamber, for she had a serious business in which to employ him,
which she did with such servency, that the Groom ran to the chamber as if it
had been for life and death, (and so indeed it proved) and finding his Ladies
door open, entered: in which time she calls her Lord, and hastens him to the
place, but before he came thither, the Lady spying the Groom to rush so
suddenly into the chamber, called him bold and saucy varlet, and (ignorant of
the deceit) flung bed-staves at his head, and not having the patience to hear
what he had to say for himself, bad him get him thence with a vengeance, whom
his master met just at the door, and with his sword ran him through, so that
without speaking he fell dead in the place, and there in the heat of fury, ere
she had the leisure to ask what the matter was, he as she lay in her bed and
without any question or answer expected transpierc'd her to the heart, whose
chaste soul (no doubt) mounted unto that blessed place of rest to which her
piety, devotion, and charity in her life time chiefly aimed; now as he stood
leaning upon his sword so lately imbrued in the blood of these two innocents,
having a thousand chimera's in his brain, and her flinty and obdurare heart
mean time relenting at the horridness of the strage committed, she could keep
her own devilish counsel no longer, but presently burst out into this
language; Alas my Lord, what have I done? Never was Lady more chaste or
constant to the bed and embraces of her husband than she who here lies
weltering in her innocent blood, whatsoever I spoke of her was false and
untrue, as merely suggested by the devil, and this I maliciously devised in
revenge of a blow she gave meto correct my (...) and slo(...)fullness, which
not able in my ill disposition to digest; I, am only I am sole author of
their commiserated and much to be lamented deaths, which has happened more
difastrous than I expected. This being so feelingly and passionately delivered,
struck such a deep impression into him, that sometimes casting his eye upon
his honest and faithful servant, and then upon his virtuous and untainted
Wife, being possessed with a world of distractions at once, which swayed him
above the strength of nature, he first dispatched her of life, and after fell
upon his own sword; making up the fourth in the Tragedy.

If you expect to hear further judgments inflicted upon this sin, every
Sessions and Assizes through the Kingdom can afford presidents sufficient, how
many children are brought to the execution place, who complain of their parents
for their idle and slothful bringing up; who being neither set to school, nor
put to manufacture or trade, whereby to get their livings, have been found to
filch, pillage, steal, and break houses, which brings them at length to the
Gallows: what fills the Bridewels and Correctionhouses with so many rogues and
vagabonde; but idleness? what makes so many maunders and highway beggars, so
many brothers of the broomesta^^e, who not able to compass a sword or pistol,
will adventure to set upon men and rob them, with staves, bats, and cudgels?
what makes so many pimps, panders, apple-squires, bawdes, prostitutes and
whores (the very cankers and impostumes of a Commonweal) but sloth and
idleness? and what are the fruits of their ribaldries and (...)ries, but
aches, and it ches, ^^rpegues, fluxes, rheumes, catarrhes, and a thousand other
diseases? who though they escape the rope (which is the presentest and
sudde^nest cure for them all yet the best houses they can hope to purchase, are
lame spittles; and hospitals. I need not aggravate these any further, as not
being things private, rare, or scarce happening in an age, but as common as
Noverint univers^, for scarce a monthly Sessions passes here in the City,
without hanging and carting.

To prevent which, and to avoid the manifold mischiefs incident, nay impending
over this sin of floath and idleness, let every man and woman in the fear of
God apply themselves to their several vocations and callings, to supply (as
far as in them lies) the necessities belonging to this life, and to become
industrious and laborious members of the Church and Commonweal; and for the
life to come, to take the counsel of our Saviou(...), Matthew. 24. 22. Watch
therefore, for you know not at what hour your Master will come: of this be
sure, That if the good man of the house knew at what watch the thief would
come, he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through.
This condemns sleepy floath and ^rowfie negligence; neither is doing good
only commanded, but the negligence and omitting of doing good is damnable and
subject to everlasting torment, as you may read Matthew. 5. 41. Then he shall
say to them on the left hand, depart from me ye ^ursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels, for I was an hungered and ye
gave me no m^^^, I thirsted and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger and ye
took me not in unto ye, I was (...) and ye clothed me not, I was in prison and
ye visited me not, and these are me sins of omission. Their judgment is not
for taking away the bread from the hungry, and drink from the thirsty, but for
not supplying them with such necessities when they stood in want thereof (for
this is spoken of the poor members of Christ.) I conclude with this sin of
Idleness thus, most sure we shall Reddere rationem, that is, answer for every
idle act, when we shall render an account for every idle word.

CHAP. V. Gods Judgments against Covetousness.
THis Vice is defined to be a dishonest and insatiable desire of having, which
is superabundant in desiring, acquiring, and keeping, but altogether deficient
in parting with, or giving: this inordinate desire of riches is quite opposite
to Liberality, and to Justice, which ought to distribute suum cuique, and may
be divided into these four Heads, Mortal, Venial, Capital, and General. It
is called mortal, when a man takes or reteines that which belongs to
another man unjustly; and then it is either Theft, Rapine, Usury, or Deceit in
buying or selling, or else when we prefer the inordinate love of riches before
our love to God and our neighbor. And then called venial, when though we love
wealth, we use no indirect course to get it, nor hinder others by our
illiberality or gripplenesse to keep it, and may be called good husbandry. It
is capital, and so called, because it is the head of many other sins, and
exceeds either in retaining, from whence ariserh obduration against pity,
which is also called inhumanity, or the unquietness of the mind, which begets
superfluous solicitude and care: or violence, when we take from others injustly
and by force: or fallacy, when we equivocate in our bargains: or perjury, when
we use an oath to confirm it: or fraud, when for gain we stick not to
deceive: or prodition, and that was the sin of Judas, who for a price betrayed
his Master. It is called general, because of it there be many species, one
specially consists either in the defect of giving, or the excess in the desire
of having; of the first in giving, he is called Parcus who gives little, Tenax
who gives nothing, (...) who parts with that he gives with great difficulty.
Excess in acquiring consists in gaining filthily, or injustly; filthily, by
illiberall acts, as striving to enrich ones selves by base, vile, and sordid
means, in which is included all meretricall gain got by prostitution or
panderisme, with the like: and amongst these injustly avaritious, are numbered,
Usurers guilty of oppression and extortion, Thieves who rob either openly or
privately, spoilers of the dead, false Executours, etc. and Dicers, who covet
to prey on the goods of their friends living.

And this grand vice with all the several branches thereof is condemned in the
holy Scriptures, Genesis 18. 21. Moreover, provide thou amongst all the people,
men of courage, fearing God; men dealing truly, hating covetousness, etc. It
is the tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet thy neigbours house, neither
shall thou covet thy neighbors wife. And Levit. 19. 11. Ye shall not steal,
neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another, thou shall not do thy
neighbor wrong, nor rob him. Deuteronomy. 23. 20. Thou shall not lend upon usury to
thy brother, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou set
thine hand to, in the land whether thou go to possess it. Job 20. 15. He
has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of
his belly. And 27. 8. For what hope has the hypocrite when he has heaped up
riches, if God take away his soul. Psalm. 62. 10. Trust not in oppression nor in
robbery, be not vain, if riches increase set not thine heart upon them. Prove.
1. 19. Such are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, he would take
away the life of the owners thereof. Ier. 8. 10. Therefore will I give their
wives unto others, and their fields unto them that shall possess them, for
every one from the least unto the greatest is given unto covetousness, and
from the Prophet unto the Priest every one deals falsely. Ezech. 18. 7. He
that has not oppressed any, but has restored the pledge to his debtour, he
that has spoiled none by violence, but has given his bread to the hungry, and
has covered the naked with a garment, and has not given forth upon usury,
neither has taken any increase, but has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, and
has executed true judgment betwixt man and man, and has walked in my
statutes, and has kept my judgments, to deal truly, he is just, and shall
surely live, says the Lord. Matthew. 6. 24. No man can serve two masters, for
either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else he shall lean to the
one and despise the other, ye cannot serve God and riches. Luke 12. 15.
Wherefore he said nnto them, take heed and beware of covetousness, for though
a man have abundance, his life stands not in his riches. John 12. 4. Then
said one of his Disciples, even Judas Iscariot Simons son which should betray
him, Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence and given to the
poor? now he said this not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a
thief and had the bag, and bare that was given. It is Radix omnium malorum. 1 Timothy 6. 10. For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which whilst
some lusted after they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows, for they that will be rich fall into many temptations and
snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition
and destruction. Covetous men are contemners of Gods Word, Matthew. 13. 22. And
he that received the seed amongst thorns is he that hears the Word, but the
cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and he is
made unfruitful. It is no better than idolatry, Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore
your members which are on earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate
affections, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry. They are
miserable and vain, Job 20. 19. He has undone many, he has forsaken the poor,
and has spoiled houses which he builded not, surely he shall feel no
quietness in his body, neither shall he reserve of that which he desired,
there shall none of his meat be left, therefore none shall hope for his goods,
when he shall be filled with his abundance, he shall be in pain, and the hand
of the wicked shall assail him, he shall be about to fill his belly, but God
shall send upon him his fierce wrath, and shall cause to rain upon him, even
upon his meat, etc. They are not capable of everlasting life, Col. 6. 10. Nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Many more Texts there are to the like purpose, but
I come nearer to show you examples of Covetousness, and the punishments
thereof out of the sacred Scriptures.

We read Josh. 7. 20. And Achan answered Joshua, and said, I have sinned
against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus I have done, I saw amongst
the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and
a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, and I covered them, and behold, they
lie hid in the earth, in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it. It
follows, Verse 24. Then Joshua took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver,
and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and
his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tents, and all that he had, and
all Israel with him brought them to the valley of Achor: and Joshua said, in
as much as thou have troubled us, the Lord shall trouble thee this day; and all
Israel threw stones at him, and burnt them with fire and stoned them with
stones, etc. It was also punished in Nabal, 1 Samuel 1. 25. who was churlish,
gripple, and covetous, and ungrateful to David and his servants, for which the
Text says, Verse 36. And about ten days after the Lord smote Nabal that he
died: who not only lost his life, hut had his wife Abigail given unto David,
whom he before despised. Ahab King of Israel for coveting of Naboths vineyard,
and by the means of his wife Iezebel putting him to death, that her husband
might take possession thereof: hear his terrible judgment that followed, 1
Kings 21. 17. The Word of the Lord came to Eliah the Tishbite, saying, Arise,
go down to meet Ahab King of Israel which is in Samaria, lo, he is in the
vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to take possession of it: therefore
shall thou say unto him, thus says the Lord, have thou killed, and also gotten
possession: and thou shall speak unto him saying, thus says the Lord, in the
place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick even thy blood
also, behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity,
and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, as well him that
is shut up, as him that is left in Israel: and I will make thy house like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah, for the provocation whereby thou have provoked and made Israel to sin:
and of Iezebel spoke the Lord, saying, the dogs shall eat Iezebel by the walls
of Iezreel; the dogs shall eat him of Ahabs stock that dies in the City, and
him that dies in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat, etc. Now what
more fearful judgment could have been pronounced against them? all which
punctually happened unto them according to the Prophets saying.

Further, we read Esaias 1. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the widows cause come before them, therefore
says the Lord God of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will case me of
my adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Ier. 22. 17. Thine eyes and
thine heart are but only for thy covetousness, and to shed innocent blood,
and for oppression, and for destruction, even to do this; Therefore thus says
the Lord against Iehoiakim the son of Josiah King of Judah, they shall not
lament him, saying, ah my brother, and ah my sister; neither shall they mourn
for him saying, ah Lord, or ah his glory, he shall be buried as an ass is
buried, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem. Ezech. 22. 27. Her
Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves, ravening the prey to shed blood,
and to destroy souls for their own covetous lucre. In thee have they taken
gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury, and the increase, and thou have
defrauded thy neighbor by extortion, and have fogotten me, says the Lord God,
behold therefore I have smitten mine hands upon thy covetousness that thou
have used, and upon the blood which has been in the midst of thee: I will
scatter thee amongst the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, etc. Amos
4. 1. Hear this word ye kine of Baashan, that are in the mountains of Samaria,
which oppress the poor, and destroy the needy, etc. The Lord God has sworn
by his holiness, that lo, the days shall come upon you, that he will take
you away with thorns, and your posterity with fish-hookes. Micah 2. 2. And
they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away,
so they oppress a man and his house, even man and his heritage, therefore thus
says the Lord. Behold, against this family have I devised a plague, whereout
ye shall not pluck your necks, and you sh all not go so proudly; for this
time is evil. Again, 3. 11. The heads thereof judge for rewards, and the
priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof prophecy for money,
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no (...)
can come upon us: therefore shall Sion for your sakes he plowed as (...) field,
and Jerusalem shall be an hea^, and the mountain of the house as the high
places of the forest. Hab. 2 9. Ho, he that coveteth an evil covetousness to
his house, that he may set his nest on high, to escape from the power of evil.
Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, by destroying many people, and
have sinned against thine own soul, for the stone shall(...) out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, We unto him that builds a
town with blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity. 2 Match. 10. 20. Now they that
were with Simon being led with covetousness, were entreated for money (through
certain of those that were in the castle) and took seventy thousand drac(...),
(...) (...) some of them escape, but when it was told Machubeus what was done,
he called the governors of the people together, and accused those men, that
they had sold their brethren for money, and let their enemies go, so he slew
them when they (...) convict of treason, and won the two castles. Eccles. 4. 8.
There is one alone, and there a not a second, which has neither son nor
brother, yet is there no end of all his travel, neither can his eye be
satisfied with riches, neither does he think, for whom do I travel, and
defraud my soul of pleasure? this also is vanity, and this is an evil travel.
Again 5. 9. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, and he
that loves riches shall not enjoy the fruits thereof, where goods increase
they are increased that eat them, and what goods comes to the owners but the
beholding thereof with their eyes? the sleep of him that travelleth is sweet,
whether he eat little or much, but the satiety of the rich will not suffer him
(...) sleep. There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the sun, to wit
riches reserv^^ to the owners thereof for their evil, and their riches vanish
by evil travel, (...) he begets a son and in his hand is nothing. I
conclude with that of Zephan. 1. 18. Neither their silver nor their gold shall
be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land shall
be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall make a speedy riddance
even of all them that dwell in the land.

And thus far the Scriptures against this horrid vice of Covetousness. I come
to the Fathers: Saint Augustine, De verbo Domins, uses these words, What is
this avidity of concupiscence without measure? when even beasts themselves
observe a mediocrity; they only prey when they are an hungered, but cease to
spoil when they are satisfied, only the avarice of the rich is insatiable, it
always rages, and is never sated, it neither fears God, nor reverenceth man;
it spares not the father, nor acknowledges the mother; it regards nor
brother, nor child, but breaks covenant with a friend, it oppresses the
widow, invadeth the orphant, distresseth the poor, and is prone to bring false
witnesses, and what a madness is it to desire death for life? and in seeking
to find gold, to lose Heaven?

And Saint Ambrose in his Sermons thus: It is all one for him that has, to
take from him that wants, and when thou have, and can, to deny relief to the
indigent and needy; it is the bread of the hungry that thou deteinest, the
clothing of the naked that thou keep back, the money that thou hidest in
the earth is the redemption of the captive, and know, thou robbest so many of
those goods as it is in thy power to confer upon the miserable, when thou
denyest to succor them: Those fortunes and those riches are not a man's own,
which he cannot carry with him, only mercy and charity forsake not a man in
his death.

Saint Hierome says, To a covetous man that is as much wanting which he has,
as what he has not, because he rather desires to have what he wants, or is
still in fear to lose what he has; who, whilst in adversity he hopes for
prosperity, in prosperity he fears adversity. And in another place. The
covetous man burns here with the heat of concupiscence, and shall burn after
in the fire of Gehenna. If he see one more potent then himself, he suspects
an oppressor: If one inferior, he fears a thief: and such are most unhappy,
who really suffer whatsoever they shall but fear to suffer.

Huge lib. de Clar. uses these words: There be four things in the possessing
of goods and riches to be observed; namely, that lawful things we do not
acquire injustly; or being injustly acquired, we do not strive to enjoy them
unlawfully: that we strive not to possess much, though lawfully; nor things
justly got, defend unlawfully; for either evilly to acquire, or badly to use
what is acquired, what is lawful makes unlawful: for, to possess much has
some alliance to avarice, and commonly it happens, what is too much loved, is
ill defended. I conclude with Gregory in one of his Homilies, Every avaritious
man from drink does multiply thirst; because when he has once enjoyed what he
before coveted, he is not therewith satisfied, but has the greater inclination
to cover more.

But from the Fathers I come to Ethnic History, and first I will give you the
appellation of some rich men: Cacilius Camidius was of that infinite estate,
that though he had lost a great part of his riches in the civil wars of
Rome, yet at his death he left four thousand domestic servants and retainers;
in his stables he had an hundred and threescore horses, three thousand and six
hundred oxen, and of other head of cattle two hundred fifty and seven
thousand, and pecuniis numeratis, that is in ready coin six hundred thousand
pound weight, who also gave to be expended upon his Funeral eleven thousand
Sestertii. Marcus Crassus would not allow any man to be called a rich man, who
was not able out of his private coffers to maintain a Legion of Soldiers for
a year; the annual revenue of his fields and grounds arrable and pasture,
amounted to fifty hundred thousand crowns of gold: Neither did this suffice
him (says Pliny) but he was ambitious to win and possess all the gold of
the Parthians. The greatest part of his wealth he purchased out of the civil
garboyles, seditions, and combustions, converting the public calamities to his
private use and benefit; for when he had left him three hundred Talents only
from his fathers Inheritance, before he enterprised any expedition against the
Parthians, he had gathered together into one Magazine seven thousand and one
hundred Talents, though he had before consecrated the Tenths and Tithes of his
whole estate to the Temple of Hercules. He moreover made a public Banquet,
in which he feasted the whole people of Rome, and gave to every one of his
guests three pounds in silver: He kept moreover as his servants that had
dependence of him, five hundred Smiths and Carpenters, skillful in
Architecture; whom he not only employed in his own sumptuous Buildings and
Aedisices; but to any noble Citizen who had a will and desire to build, he not
only lent them freely, but paid them at his own charge: yet this man overcome
with covetousness of the Parthian gold, was by them taken prisoner in
battle, who knowing his great avarice, caused molten gold to be powered down
his throat, deriding his insaciety in these terms; For gold thou thirstest in
thy life, and now take thy fill of it in thy death.

And yet Pallas the freed man of Claudius Caesar was held to be twenty times
richer then Crassus: Plinius the Praetor speaks of this Pallas, as also of
Calistus and Narcissus, possessed of innumerable wealth, during the principality
of Claudius, insomuch that the plenty of Narcissus grew to a proverb, for if
they had to speak of any man who was possese of superabundant wealth, they
would say he was as rich as Narcissus: of this Pallas Iuvenall speaks in his
first Satyr, who with Narcissus were the freed men of Claudius; and by the
general suffrage of the Senate, had not only mighty Donatives conferred upon
them, but they were admitted unto prime Magistrates, and underwent the most
honorable offices in the City: More over the Emperor (as Tacitus writes)
bestowed upon Pallas the Praetorian Ensigns, with great sums of money, being
yearly possessed (besides his domestic wealth) of three thousand Sestertii; but
what happiness had he by the enjoying of such abundance? the same Author
relates, that Ner^ Caesar grieving that he had lived so long, (for he was
grown aged) caused him to be poisoned; and by that means consiscated his
goods to his own use.

Antiochus the great King of Syria did so abound in riches, that purposing to
make war upon the Romans, he gathered a puissant and numerous Army, who were
accommodated in all the bravery that could be possible; their Helmets being
richly plumed, and the heads of their Spears and Shields shining with silver
and gold; who after with great esteem, showing the glory of his Soldiers, and
pride of his Host to Hanniball, he asked him whether he thought that these were
not able to conquer the Roman? who after some small pause made him answer: I
cannot presume that they are able to vanquish them, but of this I am most
assured, they are able to satisfy them, if the Romans be covetous; and so it
after proved to his great dishonor.

Pythius Bythinius a Persian, gave to Dari(...) a plain tree and a Vine all of
gold; he also feasted Xerxes Army, (in his expedition toward Greece) which
consisted of seven hundred fourscore and eight thousand men, and allowed unto
them five months provision of corn, victual, and pay; and only because that
of five sons he had, Xerxes would leave one of them at home with him to
comfort him image. Herodotus and Pliny both testify of him, that being
demanded of the King of what possession (...) was? he made answer. That he had
in his Coffer ten thousand Talents of silver, and four hundred Mirlads of
gold, besides of the coin of the Daricans, which amounted to seven thousand
pound weight in gold, all which when he had prostrated to the Kings service and
free dispose, he wondering at his extraordinary liberality, took to supply his
present use the four hundred Miriads of gold, and left him the rest:
notwithstanding which, in his return from Greece, whence he was basely beaten
and baffled, he caused that young man the son of so bountiful a father,
before his face to be cut in pieces. And thus we see there is no trust in
riches: for even King David and his son, who had wealth above account, and
gold and treasure beyond numbe^, the one (...) into Murder and Adultery, the
other into Lust and Idolatry.

From those which were rich, I come to the covetous: Constat, Manasses,
Annaltum page 94. relates that Chaganus King of the Septentrionall Scythians,
when he had invaded many of the Roman Forts and Cittadels, even those most
strongly manned and defenc't, in his first violent assaults took in many
walled Cities, and all the Region bordering upon Ister, quite depopulutated;
insomuch that the whole River was sanguin'd with the blood of the Natives. And
having surprised many Captives, to the number of twelve thousand men, he sent
to the Emperor Mauricius to know if he would redeem them being Christians,
and his subjects: but neither the extreme rage of the Scythian cruelty, nor
the barbarous Kings inhumanity, neither the cries and ejaculations of the
miserable and distressed prisoners, could move the mind of this obdure and
flinty-hearted Emperor, who was wholly given over the base and sordid avarice.
Again, Chaganus sent unto him. Ambassadors with more moderate and reasonable
conditions, with a great part of the first price deducted; to which the
covetous Emperor would not lend any ear at all: which Chaganus hearing, he
raged like a Tiger, and caused them all to be hewed to pieces; the whole Region
to be covered with their carcasses; the fields to be stained with their blood;
and their bodies to be piled in an heap almost to the height of a Pine Tree:
which cruel act of the Emperor my Author thus aggravates. O gold and love of
gold, more cruel then a Tyrant! of men the persecutor, the Fort of mischief,
the Castle of destruction, the eversion of Towers, the depopulation of Cities,
the demolishing of Walls and Gates, the fall of Houses, the ruin of Families:
O with what mischiefs do, thou afflict us mortals! no earthly thing can
compare with thee in cruelty: Thou softnest the hard, indurat'st the soft; thou
give speech to the silent, and make mute the free speaker: In roving, thou
make the swift slow pac't, and put wings to the feet of the lazy: Thou
kickest against Law and Justice, expellest bashfulnesse and modesty, violat'st
Sepulchers, diggest through; there is nothing which thou will not sell, nothing
which thou will not betray.

Now let us look upon the dreadful Judgment of God, which fell upon this
gripple minded Prince, who was so hated amongst the Christians, that upon
Christmas day, as he was entering into the Temple, was like to have been stoned
to death: After which he grew jealous even of his own brother, and all the
best friends about him, lest they should supplant him from the Imperial
dignity; of which he grew the more timorous, in regard of diverse ominous
dreams: for there appeared unto him in his slumbers a blazing-starre like a
sword, and a Monk running with a sword drawn to the Emperors Statue, enraged
and crying out aloud, Imperatorem ferr^ periturum: (i^) That the Emperor shall
perish by steel. He dreamed also, That he was given to be murdered to one
Phocas; upon which he sent for one Philippicus out of prison, a man whom he
much trusted, and asked him, Qualis sit Phocas? What kind of man is that
Phocas? To whom Philippicus answered, Centurio ambitiosus, sed timidus: To whom
the Emperor again replied, If he be a coward, he is then a murderer. In
conclusion, he grew into such a great contempt of the Army, that they sought to
depose him; and the Legions and men of War about Istrus chose Phocas a
barbarous and bloody Thracian to be Emperor, who made all the haste possible
to Constantinople, where he was crowned in the Suburbs by Cyprian the
Patriarch. Mauricius in this interim was with his wife and children at
Chalcedon, where through grief and trouble of mind he fell sick: thither
Phocas sped him with all expedition, who first caused his two youngest Sons to
be slain in his sight, and then his three daughters; and next their mother
Constantina, the daughter of Tiberius the second, the next Emperor before
Mauricius; who beheld the deaths of his sons and daughters with great
patience: but when he saw his wife in the hand of the tormentor, he burst forth
into these words, (acknowledging his faults) O Lord God, thou art just, and and
thy Judgments are right. Lastly, Phocas commanded his head to be cut off,
whose body, with his wives and children, were cast upon the shore, to be a
public spectacle for all the people; where they lay upon the ground till one
of the enemies which had belonged to Mauricius, caused them to be interted.

Achaeus a King of the Lydians, was much branded with this vice of
covetousness, who when he had accumulated much riches, and that too by
sinister means, not therewith contented, he proceeded further, and put new
and unheard of taxes and exactions upon his subjects; when they knew his
Treasury abounded with all fullness and plenty: In hate of whose extreme
avarice they conspired together, and made an insurrection against him; and
having surprised him in his Palace, they haled him thence, and hanged him on a
Gibbet with his heels upward, and his head drowned in the waters of Pactolus;
whose streams (as sundry Authors write) are of the color of gold, and has
name amongst the golden rivers; an Emblem of his avarice. Thus you see this
deadly sin seldom or never escapes without Judgment.

Neither did Iustinianus the second, the son of Constantinus Barbatus, escape
the aspersion of this horrid vice, he was the last of the stock of Heraclius,
a man covetous, unquiet, cruel, and unfortunate: He had two Sycophants who
furnished his coffers, and for that were graced by him with all Imperial power
and authority; the one Theodosuis, a Monk, the other Stephanus the Emperors
Chaplain: who was in such credit with his Master, that he durst beat the old
Empress. These two not only exercised extortion and oppression amongst the
Subjects, but great cruelty upon the Princes, Dukes, and Captains, keeping one
of them called Leontius two years in prison; who after escaping by the help
of the Patriarch, was made Emperor, and cut off the nostrils of Justinian, and
sent him as an Exile to Chersonesus. Which Leontius being after surprised by
Tiberius Apsimarus, he cut off his nostrils and sent him into a Monastery.
After Justinian returned, being aided by the Bulgarians, and suprising both
Leontius and Apsimarus, he caused them to be led bound through the
Marketplace; and having first trod upon their necks, cut off their heads: then
he pulled out the eyes of Callinious the Patriarch, and hanged up Heraclius
the brother of Apsimarus. But at what time he sent his Army against Chirson,
the Host made Philippicus Bardanes Emperor, who made all speed to
Constantinople; and taking Justinian and his son Tiberius from the Sanctuary,
commanded them most miserably to be slain.

Nay, even your greatest Prelates, and in the primest places of Episcopal
dignity, have not been excluded from this general sin of Avarice. Martinus
Papa was of that gripple and penurious condition, that he commanded the ends of
wax-candles left after Mass, and the other Service, to be brought him home to
his Palace, to save him light in the nights for his household and family. And
Pontanus writes of one Agolastus, a Priest and Cardinal, who though he allowed
liberally meat for his horses, after repenting him of the charge, would in the
night steal privately into the stable, and take the provender out of their
mangers; which he used so long, that being watched by the master of his horse,
and knowing him, beat him soundly, as if he had been a common thief.

But contrary to these, Alexander the first, Pope, was of that bounty and
munificence, that scarce any meriting man but tasted freely of his liberality;
who used to say unto his friends in sport, I will tell you all my fortunes: I
was a rich Bishop, I was a poor Cardinal, and am at this present a beggarly
Pope.

A great example of this vice of desiring to get and have, was that of Alcmaeon
the son of Megaclus, who when he had entertained some of the chief Nobility of
Croesus King of Lidia in their way to Delphos, with great humanity and
courtesy, the King loath to remain indebted to him, or at least, not some way to
correspond with his bounty, invited him to his Palace, and having abundantly
feasted him for some days, when he was ready to depart and take his leave of
the King, Nay (says he) you shall not part thus empty-handed from me before
you have seen my Treasury, and take from thence as much gold as you are able to
carry, who being of the craving and having condition, presently provided
himself of large garmenrs, and wide clothes, with deep and spacious pockets,
and thought not all sufficient, for coming to the Magazine, having taken
thence as much as it was possible for him to dispose of in any place about him,
he then filled his mouth, and crammed it to the very teeth, and had conveyances
in hair, and so swearing under this burden, disguised like a man distracted and
quite out of his senses, he appeared before the King, who when he saw him so
estranged from himself, burst into a loud laughter, and in contempt of his
covetousness, with great scorn and derision let him depart. Thus far
Herodotus.

Neither has the Feminine sex been altogether free from the same aspersions,
but most justly taxed; for when Brennus our Countriman (and brother to Belinus
King of this Land) being then Captain of the Gauls, besieged Ephesus with his
Army, a great Lady of the City, called Dominica sent to parle with him, and
made a covenant, for a mighty great sum of money to betray it into his hands,
which Brennus according to the composition entered, and after sacked and
spoiled, and standing at one of the great gates to receive the reward, he
willing to keep his promise, and yet in his heart detesting the avarice of the
woman, caused so much gold and treasure to be thrown upon her, till under the
huge mass she was buried alive.

Near allied to the former is the story of Tarpeia, one of the vestall virgins
in Rome, who having covenanted with Sabine the enemies to the Romans, to betray
unto them the Capital for the bracelets they wore on their left arm, which
were very rich and costly, they when they were entered and had possession of the
place, in stead of their bracelets and carcanets threw upon her their shields
and targets worn of their left arms, and so sti^^ed, smothered and pressed
her to death: in memory of whose soul and traitorous act grounded on
Covetousness the Hill where she was buried is called, The Tarpeian Mountain,
even to this day, and this happened in the year of the world 2305.

Europhites was likewise the wife of Amphi^rus, who for a carcanet of gold
given her by P^linyces, betrayed her husband, and discovered him in the place
where he had hid himself, because he would not go to the The(...) wars,
because it was told him by the Oracle, that there he should assuredly die, for
which he left a strict charge with his son Alema^^, that he should no sooner
hear of his death, but he should instantly kill his mother, which Orestes-like
he performed, and proved a Ma^^icide to perform the will of his deceased
father. Thus you see not one of these three escaped a fearful judgment.

Of contrary disposition to these was the virgin Placidia daughter to the
Emperor Valentintanut and Eudosia, who neglecting all her fathers riches and
honors, abandoned the vanities of the world, and betook her self to a devout
and sequestered life. As the like did Elburga, daughter to Edward King of
England, (a Saxon) and had the surname of Seignior, or the elder Edward. And if
we look no further than to this City London the Metropolis of the Kingdom, how
many pious and devout matrons has it yielded even from antiquity to this
present, who have contributed largely to the erecting and repairing of Temples,
building of Almes-houses and Hospitals, erecting schools for learning,
maintaining poor Ministers in preaching, in giving liberally toward Halls,
leaving stocks to set up young beginners, and bequeathing legacies for poor
maids marriages, and these not for the present, but to the end of the world.
For which God be praised, and daily increase their number: but this is directly
averse to the argument now in agitation, which is Covetousness.

If it be dangerous to be rich even to him that knows how to use his wealth,
how much more fearfully perilous then for him that has abundance of all
worldly fortunes, and knows only how to abuse them. Caesar being in Spain,
extorted great sums of money most injustly from the Proconsul there, and
certain Cities of the Lusitanians, though they neither offended him, nor
violated any covenant with them, yet when they friendly set open their gates to
receive him as their patton and defender, he spoiled their houses, made seizure
of their goods, and even the Temples of the gods he sacrilegiously robbed, it
being his custom to rifle Cities, not for any fault committed, but for the
certain prey expected. In the first year of his Consulship he stole (for no
better attribute my Author gives it) (...) thousand pound weight of gold out
of the Capitol; he moreover sold societies, liberties, and immunities, nay even
Crowns, Scepters, and Kingdoms for gold; he also defrauded King P^olomeus of
six thousand talents at one time, in his own name and Pompeys, before they were
at distance.

Eutropius writes that Flavius Vespatianas was wretchedly corrupted with this
vice, and evermore gaping after gold, who at his coming to the Empire called
in all those debts and impositions which were remitted or forgotten by his
predecessor Galba, to which he added new taxes more grievous and burdensome
than the former, he increased all the tributes in the Provinces, and in some
doubled them, and for the avidity of money would sit upon all trivial and
common causes, such with which a private man would have been ashamed to have
troubled himself; to the ^anditates (...) fold honors, and to the guilty of
any notorious act, pardon^; his custom was to raise procurators (such as were
the most ^apacious) to great and gainful Offices, for no other cause, but that
(...) they were ^^ll, he like a sponge might squeeze them, by forfeiting their
whole ill-gotten estate into his own hands, neither was he ashamed to raise
money out of urine, (for so says Suetonius.) Thus we see what a monster money
can make of the most mighty and potent men.

Sergius Galba who was Emperor in the year of our Redemption, 71. Those Cities
of Spain and France, who were most constant to the Roman Empire, upon them he
imposed the most grievous exactions and tributes; he robbed the stat^e of
Jupiter of his crown of fifteen pound weight in gold; the soldiers who desired
the Roman Eagle and military Ensigns he decim^ted and tythed, dismissing, nine
parts; and (to save charges) reserved the tenth only; the German Cohorts,
appointed by the Caesar's to be the Guard of their bodies, as most entrusted
next their persons, he quite dissolved, and sent them empty handed into their
Countries without any reward at all; he was moreover of that parsimony, that if
at any time he had at his table more fare than ordinary, he would horribly
repine at it (forgetting the state of an Emperor) and say, that it was money
expended in waste he said openly, for his own part he could content himself
with a dish of pulse or pease, as sufficient to content nature.

Of the like penurious disposition was Didius Iulianus Emperor, who made a Law
called Did(...)x, to restrain the excess in banqueting, who for his Imperial
table would make a pig, or an hare, to serve him for three several suppers,
when his dinner was nothing else but a few olives and herbs. Which abstinence
had been very commendable, had it been for continence sake, and not the
avaritious desire to save money.

And Aelius Pertinax was of that frugality that he would set before his guests
only an half sallad, of lettice and thistles, two sops and a few apples, or
if he would exceed at any time in his diet, he would feast them with a leg or a
wing of a hen. And these two last Emperors may compare with the former, who
notwithstanding all his mass of wealth wrestingly and injuriously purchased,
was wretchedly murdered by his soldiers in the sixty third year of his age,
after he had reigned only seven months and seven days.

Many others are for this sin alike branded, as Tiberius Caesar successor to
Augustus in the Empire. Candaulus a domesticke servant to Mausolus Queen of
Caria. Ochus King of Persia, Cornelius Ruffinus, Valerius Bastius, Aulus
Posthumous Albinus, Pigmalion King of Tire, Polymnestor King of Thrace: neither
of this greedy appetite of having, could Cato Vticensis, or Seneca the grave
and learned Philosopher acquit themseves.

Of a quite opposite condition, and merely antipathide to these earthwormes
were Cimon the Athenian, who all the spoils and treasures gained from the
enemy, freely distributed amongst his sellow Citizens, reserving no part or
portion for his private use or benefit, who kept open-house, and entertainment
for all comers, strangers or others, where they were daily feasted and
entertained; and whenever he saw any indigent and needy persons, who labored
to their utmost power to sustain themselves, and their families, but could not
do it, he sent his domesticke servants privately to relieve them with meat and
money; he caused moreover all the hedges, ditches, and fences, to be taken from
his fields, orchyards and gardens, that the people might freely taste the
fruits of them without any contradiction. Which extraordinary liberality, (not
guilty of the sin of prodigality) Plutarch and Lactantius much commend in him.

And Scipio surnamed Africanus (who by his warlike prowess first made Africa
subjugate to Rome) was never known at any time to depart from the forum, before
by his bounty and benevolence, he had added some one or more to the number of
his friends, who though he conquered Carthage, and had all the rich spoils
thereof, yet at his death, when his coffers were searched, there were found in
them but thirty three pounds in money, and two in gold, so great was his
munificence.

And the Emperor Nerva for the relief and sustentation of the needy and
decayed Citizens, disbursed at one time sixty hundred thousand pieces of
silver, and made choice of diverse of the prime and most trusty Senators to buy
and purchase such fields as were vendible, and to divide them amongst the poor,
according to their present necessities, as with clothes, dishes, and vessels
to the furnishing of their houses, and the rest to be given them in money; nay,
he made sale of lands and houses of his own to make good to the utmost his
charitable purposes, (for so Dion Cassius reports of him) further, what fine,
forfeit, or penalty soever came under the name of Tribute he remitted, all the
Cities under his Dominions afflicted with plague or famine he relieved, girls
and boys borne of poor and needy parents he gave order to be kept and educated
at the public charge, and this he caused to be punctually performed through
all the Cities of Italy. All this and much more Aurelius Victor testifies of
him: and these only amongst many other I have presented to your view, as a
beauty and splendour to make the opposite vice show the more deformed and ugly;
adding only this, thateven one Nation can afford plenteous presidents of the
like bounty and liberality.

But I come now to show you what dreadful murders have been committed through
this grand sin of Covetousness, their strange discovery, and the fearful
judgments that have fallen upon the malefactors: in the relating of which,
Heu lacrymae, I am not able to vindicate our own Nation, for in the time of
Queen Elizabeth (of blessed memory) there dwelt in the lower end of Cheap Side
in a place called Honey-lane, an old man and woman, the least of them
threescore and ten years of age, who lived privately and kept no servant, and
because they had some means coming in yearly, and lived sparingly upon it,
were imagined by the neighbors to have good store of money, and rather because
the furniture of their house was very neat and handsome, and fit to entertain
any reasonable guests, (though they seldom invited any) and whether this by
prating gossips were talked of at the conduit, and so overheard by some idle
raskals, who have no other trade or means to live, but robbing, stealing,
burglary, and the like; it is not certain, but most true it is that in the dead
of night, their house by a false key (or some other pick-locke engine) was
entered, the two old people fast sleeping, murdered in their beds, their chests
broke open, and rifled, and whatsoever was portable, and of any value carried
away, and the doors fast shut upon the dead bodies: the next day they were not
seen by their neighbors, who wondered they appeared not as they customably were
wont, yet suspected little, but the second day when they found their door to
continue shut, no noise at in all the house, nor any news of them, they knocked
and rapt at the door, but received no answer: in the end they sent for an
Officer, who with his assistants, forced open the doors, and found in the
first room all things out of order, and walking up the stairs they might see
the chests and trunkes wide open, but looking further toward the bed, they
might easily discover the good man and his wife miserably murdered: upon which,
warrants were made for a privy search, and diverse taken in suspicion, but no
witness or evidence could be brought against them: at length one vagabond-like
sellow was laid hold on, who being brought before one of the City Justices, and
examined, could give no account of his life, and by reason he had been by some
observed to hanker two or three days before thereabout, he was upon that
presumption sent to Newgate, and the next Sessions arraigned and by some error
or default found in his answer, condemned and hanged, but innocently for that
crime (heaven knows;) for the malefactor after the murder done, with his rich
prise escaped into the Low Countries, where he set up a trade, made good use of
his stock, and proved a very thrifty and thriving man, in so much that he grew
into the knowledge and familiarity of the Burgers, and was of good credit and
countenance amongst them, and so he might have continued, but after some twelve
years abode there, being grown out of all knowledge and remembrance here in
his own Country, he could not rest in his bed, nor sleep quietly, but he must
needs see England, and made a voyage hither to that purpose, having no other
business but to buy a piece of plate in Cheap Side, to carry over back with
him into the Low Countries: to a Goldsmith he comes, and in some few shops
above the Standard he cheapens a bowl, and whilst he was bargaining about the
price, it happened at the same time a Gentleman was arrested just over against
Bow-Church, who presently drawing his sword, made an escape from the Sergeants,
and ran up toward the Cross, the Sergeants and the people cried, stop him,
and all their faces were bent that way; which the murderer hearing and seeing,
and not knowing the cause of their noise and tumult, he apprehends that he is
discovered, and that this is done in his pursuit, and so begins to take his
heels. The people seeing him run, they ran after him, (all not knowing the
original of this uprore) they stop him and demand the cause of his flight, who
in his great affright and terror of conscience said, He was the man. They
asked what man? he answered, the same man that committed such a bloody murder
so many years since: upon which he was apprehended and committed to Newgate,
arraigned by his own confession, condemned, and hanged first on a gibbet, and
after at Mile-end in chains. Thus we see how the devil never leaves his
ministers and servants, especially in this horrid case of murder, without shame
and judgment.

Another strange but most true story I shall relate of a young Gentleman of
good means and parentage brought up in Cambridge, (whose name for his
worshipful kinreds sake, I am desirous to conceal) he being of a bold spirit,
and very able body, and much given unto riot and expense, could not contain
himself within his exhibition; but being a fellowcommoner, lavisht much beyond
his allowance: to help which, and to keep his credit in the Town, he kept a
good horse in the stable, and oftentimes would fly out and take a purse by the
highway; and thus he continued a year, or thereabouts, without the jealousy
or suspicion of any: At length his quarterly means not being come up from his
father, and he wanting money to supply his ordinary riots, he put himself
into a disguise, took horse, and crossing New Market Heath he discovered a
purchase, a serving-man with a cloak-bag behind him; and spying him to travel
singly and alone, he made toward him, and bid him stand and deliver; the other
unacquainted with that language, answered him, that he had but little money,
and what he had he was loath to part with; Then, said the Gentleman thief,
thou must fight for it; Content, says the other; and withal both alight, and
drew, and fell stoutly to their business; in this conflict the honest
serving-man was infortunately slain: which done, the other but slightly
wounded, took away his cloak-bagge, and binding it behind his own horse, up
and fled toward the University; and having set up his horse in the Town, and
carried the cloak-bagge or Portmantuan to his chamber; he no sooner opened it,
but he found a Letter directed to him from his father: the contents whereof
were, That he had sent him his quarterly or halfeyeares allowance by his own
man a faithful servant, (commended unto him by a dear friend) whom he had
lately entertained; willing his son to use the man kindly for his sake: which
Letter when he had read, and found the money told to a penny, and considering
he had killed his own fathers man, whom he had entreated to be used courteously
at his hands, and only to take away his own by force abroad, which he might
have had peaceably and quietly brought home to his chamber; he grew to be
strangely altered, changing all his former mirth into a deep melancholy. In
brief, the robbery and murder were found and known, and the Lord chief
Justice Popham then riding that Circuit, (whose near kinsman he was) he was
arraigned and condemned at Cambridge Assizes, though great means were made for
his pardon, yet none could prevail; the Judge forgetting all alliance, would
neither commiserate his youth, nor want of discretion, but caused him (without
respect of person) to be hanged up amongst the ordinary and common malefactors.

Doctor Otho Melander reports this horrible parricide to be committed The
Parents murder their own natural son for the luere of money.
in the year of Grace 1568. within the Saxon confines. At a place called
Albidos, near unto the Lion Tower, which has been an ancient seat of the
Dukes of that Country: There (says he) lived a father who had two sons, the
one he brought up to husbandry, the other in merchandise, both very obedient
and dutiful, and given to thrift and good husbandry: the Merchant traded in
Lubeck, where in few years he got a very fair estate, and falling sick
(even in his prime trading) he made his Will, in which he bequeathed to his
brother about the sum of five hundred pounds, and his father ten, and died
some few hours after he had settled his estate: But before his death he sent to
his brother to come in person and receive those Legacies; the father not
knowing how he had disposed of his means, dispatched his other son with all
speed possible to Lubeck; more avaritious after what his son the Merchant had
left him, then sorrowing for his death, though he were a young man of great
expectation, and of a most hopeful fortune. The surviving son who was the
younger arriveth at the City, and having first deplored the death of his
brother, (as nature bound him, and glad to hear of him so great and good a
report, he takes out a copy of the Will, and after receives his money to a
farthing; and with this new stock (seeing what was past) he joyfully returns
into his own Country, who at his first arrival was as gladly welcomed by
his father and mother, who were over-joyed to look upon the bags that he
had brought; but when by reading of the Will they saw how partially the money
was disposed, in that so little fell to their share, they first began bitterly
to curse the dead son; and after, barbarously to rail on the living;
out-facing him that he had changed the Will, by altering the old and forging a
new: which the innocent youth denying, and excusing himself by telling them
that the original was upon record, and by that they might be fully satisfied;
yet all would give them no satisfaction, till very weariness made them give
over their heavy execrations: then the son offered them whatsoever was his to
dispose of at their pleasure, which they very churlishly refused, and bad him
take all, and the Devil give him good with it: which drew tears from the
sons passionate eyes; who after his blessing craved (but denied) very
dolefully left them: and was no sooner departed from them, but to compass this
money they began to devise and consult about his death, which they concluded to
be performed that night; and when he was sleeping in his bed, they both set
violently and tygerly upon him, forcing daggers into his breast; so that
enforced with the agony of the wounds, he opened his eyes, and spying both his
parents with their hands imbrued in his blood, he with a loud ejaculation
clamoured out these words, or to the same sense: Quae non Aurum hominem cogis?
quae non mala suades?
In Natos etiam stringere ferra Iubes?
That is, O Gold! to what do thou not compel man? to what evils do thou
not persuade? are not these sufficient, but must thou cause parents to sheath
their weapons in their own bowels their children? which words were uttered
with such a loud and shrill shreeke, that it was heard by the neighbors; who
starting out of their beds, and breaking open the doors, found them in the
very act before the body was cold, for which they were apprehended and laid in
prison, fettered with heavy chains; and after being condemned, the morning
before the execution the father strangled himself, and the mother was carried
by the Devil both out of the Tower and Dungeon, and her body found dead in a
muddy ditch, with her neck broken asunder.

Sorry I am that I can parallel this inhumanity (arising from the insatiate
desire of Gold) out of our own Country; thus it happened: An Innekeeper in a
known City of this Kingdom, whose wife was living, and they having betwixt
them lost one only son, and a sole daughter; the son he made means to be
put to an East India Merchant, who imploye him to Sea, and to trade and
traffic in that Country, where he stayed long, (some ten years or
thereabout) insomuch that there was great doubt of his life; and to his parents
and friends it was credibly reported that he was dead, and therefore they gave
over the care for him dead, to provide for the daughter living; and at
convenient age provided her of an husband, and gave her a competent portion, so
that the young couple lived well and thriftily together in the Country, some
two miles distant from their fathers house: In this interim the Climate had
much changed the young man's complexion, who being but a beardlesse stripling
when he went his voyage, after ten years was grown hairy and a full man, and
might be easily out of knowledge; who returning into England with a good
stock, as having the best part of a thousand marks in his purse, after he had
dispatched his business here about the Town, he had a great mind to travel
down into the Country, to see how the good old folk his father and mother
did; and having trust up his money in a port mantuan, he provided himself of a
good Nag, and fastening it safe behind him, and being well accommodated for his
journey, he set forward, and in few days sped him so well, that he came within
some six or seven miles of his fathers; but all the way as he was traveling
alone, he was meditating with himself, that his father and his mother were
grown aged, and he was now as willing as able to furnish them in any
necessities whatsoever; or if his sister were living and unmarried, he had
wherewithal to give her a sufficient portion, to see her well bestowed: and
these were his true filial and fraternall conceptions, to depart liberally of
what he had unto them. He further apprehended, that because every body tells me,
that knew me in my minority, I am so altered and grown out of knowledge, I
will conceal my self at the first; that when after I shall open and discover
my self to them, I shall find the more kind and loving welcome at their
hands. By this time coming to the next thorowfare Town, in the way to the
City he alighted, and called for wine, and the host to keep him company; of
whom he demanded earnestly if such a man were in health? and how his wife
fared? who answered, they were passing well, and able to live in very good and
fashionable manner: Then demanded he of their daughter, and what was become of
her? who replied, that she was honestly married to a thrifty and careful
husband, and that she lived in the next village just in his way to the City;
of all which being exceedingly joyful, he took horse again, and found the
house where his sister lived; whose husband being from home, after some
discourse past betwixt them, and she ingeniously confessing to him that he was
a stranger, and no way known to her, he at length told her what he was, (her
brother) whom they supposed to be dead; withal the success of his fortunes
(...)at which, when by circumstance she found true, she was extremely
extasied, and first would have him to alight and stay till her husband came
home, which he would not by any means do; then she would have accompanied him
to her fathers: but he would yield to neither, telling her his conceit; how he
meant to carry himself to the two old people, entreating her of all loves, to
conceal his coming for a day or two, and then to come and ask for him at
their fathers, where she should find what welcome he would give her: to which
(though unwilling) she assented, and he rid forward, and an hour before
sunne-set, came to his fathers Inn, and calling to the hostler, bad him to
take off his port-mantuan, and after to walk his horse well, and then put him
into the stable; and then he called for mine host, who presently appeared like
a joviall old lad; he called then for his hostess, and gave her the
port-mantuan, saying to her, good hostess, lay this up till I call for it, for
here is that which I hope will make us all merry: then he desired to have the
best chamber in the house, and bespake supper, telling them he was alone, and
desired them both to keep him company; yet all this while they not so much as
suspected what he was: and whilst he was gone into the stable to see his
horse, the woman feeling what weight the port-mantuan had, told her husband,
and the Devil presently put it into their minds to murder the stranger for
his money: supper-time came, and they accompanied him, much discourse at
random past amongst them, but covetousness and the Devil so blinded their
eyes, that all this while they knew him not: After supper they took their
leaves, to plot what they before had apprehended: To bed he went, and in the
dead of night they both entered his chamber, and murdered him sleeping; then
they conveyed his body into a back place and buried it, his horse they took
out of the stable, washed the blood out the chamber, and shifted a new bed in
the place, so that all things were handsome, as if nothing had been. In the
morning when they thought the worst had been past, comes the sister with her
husband, she asks for such a stranger, they stiffly deny that any such lodged
there; which they did so constantly, that she entreated them not to keep her
own brother and their son from her, who was come out of the Indies with such
a sum of money, to relieve all their necessities: at first they are both
struck silent, but questioning her further, when by all circumstances
whatsoever she said, they found it to be true, not able longer to contain
themselves, they fell into a loud exclamation, weeping, and wringing their
hands. Briefly, for this they were both publicly executed, and the
strangeness of the accident by all that heard it, admired.

I have read strange reports concerning the death of grating Usurers, who
though by their broking exactions, and corroding oppressions, do not visibly
imbrue their hands in the blood of the indigent and needy; yet by their
horrible extortions have put them to more lingering and torturing deaths, as to
starve, famish, and perish, not beggering private persons who are compelled to
come within their griping clutches only, but annihilating and undoing of whole
families and households at once: I have heard of one of those earthwormes, who
dying of a sudden appoplex, his Executors with his wife, desired to have his
body dissected and opened, that they might know certainly of what disease he
died; one giving out one cause, a second another; and to satisfy that doubt,
when the Surgeon came to use his Art, and had searched him thoroughly, he found
all his entrayles in good order, only his heart was wanting, at which all the
spectators were amazed, and almost stupefied, as holding it to be prodigious;
till at length one of the neighbors (pleasantly conceited) and being well
acquainted with his having disposition, you had best (said he) to look for his
heart in his great barred chest, for there it was ever in his life, and why not
now in his death; which though jestingly spoke, the Executors took in earnest,
and causing the chest to be opened, they found it panting upon his treasure.
This (whether true or no) yet sure I am that it is a just taxation conferred
upon Extortioners and Usurers.

Doctor Melander puts me in mind of another of the like, (if not worse
condition) who being borne toward his grave, was interposed by a devout man,
who by reason of his cruel and abominable extortions, denied him the right of
Christian burial: which seeing they could not obtain, as of custom and
president, they (I mean his wife and friends) offered a large sum of money
to have him buried, if it were but in any corner of the Churchyard, but the
Pastor would be neither moved by prayers or bribes, but alleging that he who
lived his whole lifetime worse then any Turk, Heathen, or Infidel, ought not
in death to have those solemn rights belonging to a Christian; and therefore
stopped his ears to whatsoever they could allege in his behalf: at length,
after long debating the matter, it was concluded betwixt the two parties, that
a Cart and two Oxen should be provided, and the Coffin to be put into the Cart,
and to what place soever the Beasts should carry him (without guide) there
should his place of burial be: well, the Oxen were put into the Cart, and the
body in it, who went their way of their own accord out at the Towns end, and
then forward, just to the common execution place, where they made a stand, and
could not by any violence been compelled any further, and there his grave was
dug and he buried; a place due to all that generation of vipers. Sic Deus
eventu mirando ostendit in orb
Vsurae quantum, sit scelus atque nephas.


God by the event, thus shows them what to trust,
What base use is; how perjured and unjust.
I will only add a third from the before-named Author, who (if possible)
exceeding the other in his foenatory exactions, fell into an extreme agony of
sickness, which grew desperate and mortal; so that there was no help to be
expected from Physicians or others, but that needs he must die: which his wife
perceiving, came weeping unto him, and humbly besought him to make his Will;
and as to provide a place for his soul in Heaven, so withal to settle his
estate upon earth: to which he seemed very unwilling; but upon her great
importunity he called for pen, ink, and pape, and writ with his own hand as
follows: Imprimis, I bequeath my soul to the Devil, who as in life he ever
had it in keeping, so in death it is fit that he, and he only, should take it
to his charge: which his wife hearing, she grew greatly astonished, and
besought him, that since he had no care of himself, that he would have some
respect of her, by knowing what she should trust to after his death: when
straitway he writ farther; And thou wife also shall go with me to Hell, who
have been conscious of all my fraudulencies, crafts, and cozenages, being
partly to maintain thy pride and gay clothes, and have made me rob the
Orphant of his coat, and the Widow of her garment, to help thy superfluity.
Then she thinking him distracted, and quite out of his senses, sent presently
to the Parson of the Parish to give him some ghostly instructions for his
souls health; adding in the conclusion, that he hoped he would not forget him
in his Will: at which words he took pen, and writ again as follows. Item,
and thou O Parson shall bear us company to the infernal torments below; for
knowing of all my wicked and injust proceedings, thou wast so far from
reproving them, that thou did rather smooth me up in my sins, and connive
at my delinquencies, only to be welcome at my house, and eat fat bits at my
table; for such are the just judgments denounced against us. His moritur
dictis, subito Vir, Pastor, and Vxor
Abrepti, ardentes ad Phlegetontis aquas.


Thus Englished.

This said, the Man, the Parson, Wife, all three
Died, and were borne to Hell immediately.
Solomon says, Prove. 11. 3. The uprightness of the Just shall guide them, but
the frowardness of the Transgressors shall destroy them. Riches avail not in
the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death. And of the
hatefulness and contemptible estimation of usury amongst good men, we may
read Cato Major in the Proem to his book De re Rustica, thus: Majores nostri
fic habuere, and it a in Legibus posuert. Furem dupli condemnari, Faenerat^^em
quadrupli: Our Ancestors held this position, and put it amongst their Laws,
that the mulct or penalty imposed on a Thief should be double, but of an
Usurer four fold. And Cicero Offic. lib. 2. has these words: When it was
demanded of Cato Major, what was most conducent and necessary in a private
family? he answered, To feed well: being asked what was the second? he said, To
feed well, and enough: being asked what was the third? he replied, To be well
clothed: being asked the fourth, he returned answer, To plow and till the
earth: lastly, being asked what it was to be an Usurer? he replied, Even so much
as to be a Murderer. They that will be further satisfied concerning this
Argument, I refer them to Mart. Schipperus in speculo vitae anlicae, ad Tomum
Germanicum sextum D. Lutheri, D. Musculum in Psalm. 15. Benedict. Aretius in
Problem. Johannes Fulgent. Baptist. in Psalm. 15. And Gorhardus, Lorichius,
Hadumarius, in Institutione Catholiea, etc.

CHAP. VI. Gods Judgments against Lust.
THis sin is by some defined to be a lascivious petulancy, an inordinate use
of pleasures and delights, or an over-doing prosusenesse, either in curiosity
of apparel or superfluity in feasting: others call it a concupiscence of
proving unlawful pleasures, a desire of copulation above measure, or against
reason; it is also a solution or dissolving into voluptuousness, and by the
Law of God is condemned: as Mark 7. 21. For from within, even out of the heart
of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetousness, wickedness deceit, uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbiting,
pride foolishness, all these evils come from within, and defile a man, etc.
Romans 13. 12. The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast
away the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light, so that we
walk honestly as in the day; not in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in
chambering and wantonness, etc. Corinth. 2. 12. 21. I fear least when I come
again my God shall abase me amongst you, and I shall bewail many of them
which have sinned already, and have not repented them of the uncleanness, and
fornication, and wantonness which they have committed. Ephesians. 4. 19. Which
being past feeling have given themselves unto wantonness, and to work all
uncleanness. 2 Peter 2. 18. For in speaking swelling words of vanity, they
beguile with wantonness through the lusts of the flesh, them that were clean
escaped from those which were wrapped in error; promising them liberty, and
are themselves the servants of corruption. And again, 1 Peter, 4. 3. For it is
sufficient that we have spent the time past of our life after the lusts of the
Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lust, drunkenness; in gluttony, drinking,
and abominable Idolatry: wherein it seems to them strange, that you run
not with them into the same excess of riot; therefore speak they evil of
you, etc.

There is also Fornicatio, differing in some kind from the former, and this
includes all unlawful copulation, or illicite congression, in any tie of
wedlock, consanguinity, affinity, order, religion, or vow: and this is
twofould, spiritual and corporal, or carnal; that spiritual is mere
Idolatry, so hateful to God, and so often forbid in the holy Text, which is
attended by infidelity, and every hurtful superstition: It includes also the
lust of the eye, with the consent of the mind, according to that Text,
Whosoever shall look upon a woman and lust after her, etc. All unclean
pollution is called carnal fornication, and that which is called simplex, or
simple, is Soluti, cum soluta, and a most mortal sin, and provokes the
wrath of the Lord: Deuteronomy. 22. 23. If a maid be betrothed to an husband, and a
man find her in the Town and lie with her, then you shall bring them both out
unto the gates of the same City, and shall stone them with stones to death:
the maid because she cried not, being in the City; and the man, because he
humbled his neighbors wife: so thou shall put away evil from among you,
Eccles. 19. 2. Wine and women lead wise men out of the way, and put men of
understanding to reproof; and he that accompanies adulterers shall become
impotent: rottenness and worms shall have him to heritage, and he that is
bold shall be taken away and be made an example. Jerem. 6. and 7. How should I
spare thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are
no gods. Though I fed them full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by companies in the harlots houses: they rose up in the morning like
fed horses, for every one neighed after his neighbors wife; shall I not visit
for these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? Hosea 4. 10. For they shall eat and not have enough, they
shall commit adultery and shall not increase, because they have left off to
take heed of the Lord: wheredome, and wine, and new wine, take away thine
heart. Again, Verse. 14. I will not visit your daughters when they are harlots,
nor their spouses when they are whores, for they themselves are separated with
harlots, and sacrifice with whores, therefore the people that does not
understand shall fall. 1 Cor. 6. The fornicatour shall not inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven. Hebr. 3. Nor the fornicatours and adulterers.

Adulterium, or Adultery the Greeks call (...). The Hebrews Ninph; and it is
twofold, Spiritual and Carnal: that which is called spiritual is
metaphorical, including every sin committed by a Christian man, because every
Christian soul is contracted to Christ the Husband. That which is called
carnal, is either simple or single, when but the one party is married; or
double, when both are in the matrimonial or conjugall tie: and all of these
are condemned in the holy Text, Genesis 20. 3. God came to Abimelech in a dream by
night, and said unto him, Behold, thou art but dead, because of the woman
(Sarah) whom thou have taken; for she is a man's wife. Now then deliver the man
his wife again, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, that thou
may live: but if thou deliver her not again, be sure that thou shall die the
death, even thou and all that thou have. Lev. 20. 10. And the man that
commits adultery with another man's wife, because he has committed adultery
with another man's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall die the death.
Lev. 5. 20. But if thou have turned from thine husband, and so art defiled, and
some man has lien with thee besides thine husband, then the Priest shall
charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the Priest shall say unto the
woman, The Lord make thee to be accursed and detestable for the oath among the
people, and the Lord cause thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell. Verse 28.
When ye have made her drink the water (if she be defiled, and have
transgressed against her husband) then shall the cursedwater (turned into
bitterness) enter into her, and her belly shall swell, and herthigh shall rot,
and the woman shall be accursed amongst the people. Prove. and. 32. He that
commits adultery with a woman is destitute of understanding, he that does it
destroys his own soul, he shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach
shall never be put away. Again, 30. 18. There be three things hid from me; yea,
four that I know not: The way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon
a stone, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a
maid. Such is the way also of an adulterous woman, she eats and wipeth her
mouth, and says, I have not committed iniquity. Eccles. 23. 22. And thus shall
it go with every wife that leaves her husband, and gets inheritance by
another: for first, she has disobeyed the law of the most High: and secondly,
she has trespassed against her own husband: and thirdly, she has played the
where in adultery, and gotten her children by another man, she shall be brought
into the congregation, and examination shall be made of her children, her
children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring no fruit, a
shameful reproach shall she leave, and her reproach shall not be put out, etc.
Wisd. 3. 16. The children of adulterers shall not be partakers of the holy
things, and the seed of the wicked shall be rooted out, and though they live
long, yet shall they be nothing regarded, and their last age shall be without
honor, if they die hastily they have no help, neither comfort in the day of
trial; for horrible is the end of the wicked generation. Again 4. 3. The
multitude of the ungodly which abound in children, is unprofitable, and the
bastard plants shall take no deep roots, nor lay any fast foundation: for
though they bud forth in the branches for a time, yet they shall be shaken with
the wind, for they stand not fast, and through the vehemence of the wind
they shall be rooted out, for the imperfect branches shall be broken, and their
fruit shall be unprofitable, and sower to eat, and meet for nothing, for all
the children that are borne of the wicked bed shall be witness of the
wickedness against the parents when they be asked. And what more terrible
judgments than these can be threatened against the Adulterers.

Let us now hear the Fathers: this is Saint Austins counsel, De verbo Dom.
tract. 48. If you will marry wives, keep your selves unto them, and let them
find you the same you desire to find them? What is he desirous to marry, and
would not be coupled to a chaste wife? Or if a virgin, one that is untoucht? Be
thou also chaste and untoucht. Do thou desire one to be constant and pure to
thee? Be constant and pure to her; for can she prove so to thee, and not thou
also to her? Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 3. As that Pilot which suffers his ship to
be wracked in a port or harbor is inexcusable, so he that to qualify the
lusts of the flesh shall lawfully take a spouse to live withal for better and
for worse, and shall after insidiate the bed of his neigbour; neither can that
man whose wanton eyes and petulant fancies wander after every loose prostitute
or strumpet, either acquit himself to men, or excuse himself toward God,
although he shall ten thousand times allege his natural inclination to
pleasure: or how can that properly be called pleasure, which is waited on by
fear, diffidence, danger, and where there is expectation of so many evils:
accusation the seat or the tribunal of justice, and the ire and wrath of the
Judge, he stands in dread of all things, shadows, walls, stones, graves,
neighbors, adversaries, nay even his dearrest friends. But be it granted, that
their guilt be private, and known only to the delinquents, they are not
therefore safe, here shall they bear a conscience even reproving, and
suggesting bitter and fearful things against them? and the conscience to be
always about them. For as no man can fly him, so none can evade or avoid the
sentence of that private Court, for this judicatory sense is not with gold to
be corrupted, with flattery mitigated, not by friends mediated, in regard it is
a thing divine, and by God himself placed and appointed to have residence in
our hearts. Saint Ambrose de Patriarchis, in speaking of the Patriarchs,
Abraham and Jacob, and of their multiplicity of wives, he in excuse of them
says, that Abraham was before either the Law or the Gospel, and in his time
Big(...)y was rot forbidden. Now the punishment of a fault grew from the time
of the Law, for it was not a crime before it was inhibited and forbid; so (...)
had four wives, which whilst it was a custom was no crime, who as they married
not merely for concupiscence, and to fulfill the lust full desires of the
flesh, but rather instigated by providence to the propagation of issue;
therefore let no man flatter himself by making them their president, for all
adultery is damnable, etc.

Ioses the son of Iehochanan in that Book which the Hebrews style Capi(...) vel
apothegmata, has this saying, the time which a man spends in multiplying words
with a woman, he loses to his great damage; for at length with her petulancy
she will bring him to perdition. And Rabbi A^^ba says, Laughter, and the light
and unconstant moving of the head, easily convince a man of loosnesse and
effeminacy. And Habbiben Syra says, For the sake of beautiful women the
strongest have fallen, and many have perished; therefore hide thine eyes from
the allurements of a fair woman, lest she catch thee in her snare, and thou
become her captive, to thy des^^^ction. Dionysius the elder (though otherwise a
Tyrant) when he by complaint made had understood his son to whose charge he had
committed the government of a Province, to have stuprated the wife of a noble
young Gentleman, he sent for him, and being exceeding angry, demanded of him,
if he had seen any such president in his father. To whom he replied, Many, for
he had not a King to his father. Nor thou, said Diony(...)s, art likely to have
a King to thy son, if thou followest these lewd and luxurious courses. The
Tyrant holding Adultery a crime worthy to disinherit him from all regal
Authority, which is now made no more than a sport and pastime amongst great
ones: for Sylla surnamed Faustus, the freed man of Sylla the great competitour
against Marius, hearing that his natural filler had entertained two Adulterers
into her service at once, which were Fulvius Fullo and Pomponius whose surname
was Macula, he put it off with a jest upon their names, Miror (inquit) sororem
meam maculam habere cum fullonem habet: that is, I wonder my sister should have
a macula, or wear any spot or stain, when she has a fullo, a fuller, that
washes and takes out stains still so near her.

There is also scortation, of Scortum a whore, which the Greeks call (...) and
(...), is Scortari, the Hebrews Zonach. To this capital head of lust likewise
belongs incest, which is a venereall abuse in Affinity and consanguity, which
for these reasons may be said justly to be prohibited, because man naturally
acknowledges an honor to his parents, and so by consequence a more than
common respect to those of his near blood and alliance. Secondly, because it is
necessitous, that persons arising from one root and stem be mutually
conversant. Thirdly, it hinders the increase of friends, which are lost by
not marrying into other stocks and families. Lastly, when a man naturally
loves his sister or cousin-germine, being so near to him in blood, if that
venereall ardor which comes from commixtion were added, love would break out
into raging lust, which is altogether repugnant to all modesty and chastity.
There is also Sodomia, Turpitudo in masculum facta, contranaturam: of which to
speak I will be very sparing. Thus you see the sixth of the seven heads as the
Beast, dissected and anatomised: But I come now to History and Example.

Cateline that firebrand of Rome, and pestilent incendiary of all sedition, to
add to all his other criminal and capital malefactions, which were indeed
beyond president, or since his time, by any of the most notorious ruffians,
that the later ages have bred, if imitated, yet scarce equalled, and therefore
much less exceeded: this Arch yillain (I say) to all his other wicked acts
added also these of Adultery and Incest: he was infamous for his many
stuprations with a noble virgin of Rome; he raped also one of the Vestal^ or
priests of Vesta; and further, to enjoy the embraces of Aurelia Arestilla, he
took away her son by poison, because being grown to maturity and years of
discretion, he opposed his mothers second nuptials, which was in those days
held to be immodesty amongst the noblest matrons of Rome; and thus Salustius
and Valerius report of him. Calius cap. 30. lib. 8. reports that Bagoas the
Eunuch was much indeated to Alexander the great, for no other cause but that
there was some brutish and unnatural congresse betwixt them; therefore when
Orsines a noble Persian came to see Alexander, and presented to him, and to
them of his choice and intimate friends, many great and rich gifts, but gave to
Bagoas not so much as the least honor or respect, being asked the reason
thereof, he made answer, I owe unto Alexander and his friends all the duty and
reverence that can be expectect from a true loyal and faithful heart, but to
a whore or strumpet such as Bagoas is, to him I acknowledge not so much as the
least notice to be taken that such a wretched fellow lives.

Of the lusts and intemperances of Augustus, Julius, Tiberius, Heliogabalus,
Caligula, Commodus, Domitian, Proculus, and others, I have sufficiently spoken
before: which showed, as the Roman Emperors exceeded in state, power and
majesty, so most of them maculated and poluted their high and sacred calling
with the most base effeminacies and sordidst luxuries that the heart could
conceive, or the fancy of man apprehend. Neither have they alone been guilty of
these notorious crimes and vices, but all Nations have been tainted with the
like impurities, which has been the depopulation of famous Cities, the ruins
of Kingdoms, the removing of Monarchies, from one people and language to
another, when seldom any Conqueror from any Nation brought home their victory
without their vices, of which there be frequent examples. The Babylonians were
the first that usurped the name of a Monarchy; the Medes and Persians wrested
it from them; the Grecians wan it from the former; and lastly the Romans from
the Grecians, who as they learned of them Graecari, to drink hard, so Mechari,
to stuprate and adulterate; and as they used their Dominion, and tyranny,
governing them by substitutes, and praefects, and proconsuls, and the like; so
with their power they brought in their prodigalities, riots, feastings, rapes,
adulteries, stuprations, scortations, fornications, even to abominations above
nature, too immodest to speak, then by consequent, too devilish to act. But
from generalities I come to particulars.

Gemelius Tribunitius, though he were one of the Patricians family, and a
Nobleman of Rome, yet was so degenerate in his condition, that of his own house
he made a Brothell or Stews, where amongst others were vitiated Mutia and
Fulvia, two illustrious women, and of especial remarke in the City, with a
noble youth called Saturninus; who was polluted and defiled against nature: but
as some report of the master of the family, his house was after accidentally
set on fire, and he himself added part of the fuel to the flame. And in this
kind of punishment lust may be said, (and not altogether unproperly) to be
quenched with fire. Calius reports of Dionysius junior, that coming into the
City of Locris, where he had the entertainment belonging to a Prince of his
estate and quality, but the Town abounding with fair and beautiful virgins, he
could not bridle his exorbitant appetite, but some he courted with fair words,
others bribed with rich gifts, and such as he could win to his insatiate
desires by neither, he committed violence upon their persons, insomuch that
diverse of the noblest maidens were by him vitiated and corrupted, which they
not having patience to endure) made an insurrection against him, and having
first dispatched his Guard, to whom he most trusted, they seized upon his
person, and put him so great maceration and torment: for, binding him to a
stake, they thrust sharp needles betwixt the nails and flesh of his toes and
fingers, and when he had endured as well the taunts of their tongues, as the
exquisite tortures of their engines, they put him to death, and after having
dried his bones, pouned them to dust in a mortar: and such was the reward of
his brutish and beastly luxury: to whom I will add Lusius the nephew to Marius
by the sisters side, who for offering a preposterous carriage of lust to
Treboninus a young man of an excellent aspect and feature, and withal of a
civil and modest carriage, (by profession a Soldier) was slain by him in his
tent, notwithstanding the greatness of his alliance and kindred, of which he
prefumed so far, that even the most abominable evils by them countenanced,
might be held lawful. And by the like encouragement, namely the impurity of
the times, Sotodes the obscene Iambicke writer composed his verses in that
strain, as savouring nothing but Pathicke and Cinedicke venery; abhorred by all
modest and chaste ears and eyes; insomuch that of them grew a proverb, If any
man's works tasted of ribaldry or obscenity, it was called Sotadicum poema: and
of him Politianus speaks in his Natricia.

The Corinthians were extremely taxed with this incontinence, for it is said of
them, that they prostituted their wives and daughters for gain, and hence grew
a proverb, Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum; It is not for every
man to go to Corinth, they pay so dear for their pleasure. The Babylonians,
Tyrrhenians, and Massagelans were also greatly contaminated with this vice,
abusing their bodies in that monstrous sort, that they were said, rather to
live like beasts than men. It is a sin which compels men neither to have
care of their own good names, nor of their posterity which shall come after
them; and therefore Draco the famous Lawgiver writ so bitterly against this
concupiscence, that he is said, rather than to have drawn them in ink, to have
inscribed them in blood: and no wonder if he were so austere and supercilious
against it; when it inforceth us to covet above our power, to act beyond our
strength, and to die before our time. One defines it thus, an enemy to the
purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the mind, a corrasive to the
conscience, a weakner of the wit, a besotter of the sense, and a mortal enemy
to the whole body; it sweetneth with pleasure to the path of perdition, and is
the loadstone leading and guiding to ruth and ruin, (so far Pliny.) Demonax
terms it, a pleasure bought with pain, a delight hatched with unquiet, a
contentment accompanied with fear, and a sin finished with sorrow, by
continuance it grows to impudence, and shame, and infamy continually waits at
the heels thereof.

For further instance, one Hostius a Prince who lived in the time of Augustus
Caesar, was a man of a most perdit obscenenesse, practiced in that superlative
degree of filthiness, that scarce any age could produce a prodegy to parallel
him, modesty will not suffer me to give them name. And Tegillinus (according to
Tacitus lib. 17.) was a man of a most corrupted life, who soothed and humoured
Nero in all his ribaldries, his surname was Othonius, by whose flattery and
calumny many a noble Roman was put to death: and when Otho who succeeded Nero,
came to wear the Imperial purple, and to be instated Emperor, he sent
(amongst other malefactors) for him, to suffer as a putrified and corrupt
member of the State, and when the executioner with other lictors and officers
came to surprise him in his house, they found him drinking and rioting amongst
his catamites and harlots, where without limiting any time either to settle his
estate, or to take leave of any of his friends, he was instantly slain, and his
wounded body cast into the open streets. Crassus the richest of the Roman
fathers, after the death of one of his brothers, married his wife, by whom he
had many children. And Surinus the wealthiest and most potent of the Parthians
next to the King, had in his tents two hundred concubines at one time. And
Xerxes King of Persia was so given over to all licentiousness and luxury, that
he hired pursuivants, and kept Cursors and messengers in pay to inquire and
find out men who could devise new ways of voluptuousness, and to them gave
great rewards, for so Valerius Maximus reports of him. And Volateranus
remembers us of one Vgutius a Florentine Prince, who was slain of his Citizens
and Subjects for stuprating their wives, and vitiating their virgins. Thus
seldom we see this vice to go unpunished.

Nor is it particular to the masculine sex, as the sole provocatours hereof,
but women have been equally and alike guilty. We read in Genesis of Potiphars
wife, who solicited Joseph to her adulterate embraces, who because he refused
to commit such villainy, and to offend both God and his master, she accused him
to his Lord, that he would have done to her violence, for which he lay two
years in prison. But from profane Histories we have many examples. For Iulia
Agrippina the mother of Nero was said to have unlawful congresse with
Domitian, for so Iuvenal says: nay more, after feasting and banqueting, in the
heat of her cups, when she with her son were together topt with wine, they
commonly used incestuous consociety: the conclusion of which impious lust was,
that the son in the end having caused his mother to be slain, commanded her
body to be dissected, and ripped open before his face, as longing to see the bed
wherein he lay when he was an unborne infant. She was the daughter to
Germanicus, sister to Caligula, the wife first of Domitius, after of Clodius
whom she poisoned, for no other cause but to make Nero her son Emperor: and
you hear how well he requited her. A chicken of the same brood was Messalina
the daughter of Messala, and the wife and Empress of Claudius Caesar, a woman
of a most insatiate lust, whose custom was to disguise her self like a
private Gentlewoman, so that she might not be known, and with her pandor
ushering her, to walk unto common stews and brothell-houses, and there
prostitute her self to all comers whosoever, nay, she was not ashamed to
contend with the ablest and strongest Harlot in the City for masterie, whence
also she returned rather tired then satisfied; nay more, she selected out of
the noblest Wives and Virgins to be eye witnesses and companions in her
filthiness, whither men also were not denied access, as spectators, against
all womenly shame and modesty: and if any noble Gentleman of whom she seemed to
be enamoured, refused or despised her proffered embraces, she would feign and
devise some crime or other to be revenged on him, and his whole family. Pliu.
lib. 29 tells us, That one Vectius Valius a notable Physician was nobilitated
merely for pandthering to her luxuries. Fabia the Wife of Fabrius Fabricanus
grew greatly besotted on the love of a fair Fabia.
young Gentleman called Petroninus Valentinus, who the more freely to enjoy in
her petulant embraces caused her husband to be traitorously murdered. But being
(in regard of the high measure of the fault) complained upon by her husbands
Kindred and Friends, she was convicted by the Julian Law, and suffered
according to the penalty thereof. Martial reckons up as notorious Strumpets
and Adulteresses, Leviana, Paula, Proculina, Zectoria, Gallia, as Catullus
remembers us of Austelina, and Iuvenall of Hyppia. Zoe one of the Roman
Empresses caused her husband Arginopilus to be slain to adulterate her self
with Michael Paleologus: but who shall Zoe the Empress.
read of both their ends shall find that they were most wretched and miserable.

As these for Scortation and Adultery, so others have been notoriously Women
branded for Incest.
infamous for Incest: Giddica the Wife of Pomminius Laurentinus grew into such
an extreme dotage of her son in law Comminius, that not able to compass her
unchaste desires, and her Incestuous love being discovered to her husband, she
dispairingly strangled her self; of which death also Phoedra alike besotted on
her husbands son Hippolitus perished. Papinius the son of Papinius Volucris
had a beautiful Sister whose name was Canusia: Papinius and Canusia.
These two spending their childhood together, as their years, so their
natural affection increased, insomuch that the one thought nothing to deer for
the other, their love being mutual and alternate, not guilty of the least
Impious thought or immodest apprehension, but when they came to maturity, new
thoughts began to grow, and fresh temptations to arise, to which in their
minority they were altogether unacquainted, and now they could not sollace
themselves without sighing, nor frame any mirth, but mixed with melancholy;
both were sick and of one disease, but neither had the boldness to discover
the nature of their malady, and thus they continued for a season; In the mean
time the Father had found out a noble match for his Son, but he put it off
with evasions, and could not be won to lend a willing ear to the motion:
The Mother also had sought an Husband for her daughter, to which she was quite
averse, alleging her youth and unripenesse of years, and so both the motions
had a cessation for a time without any suspicion, in which interim the
incestuous fire burst out into a flame, which in the end consumed them both;
for the Sister was found to be great with Child by the Brother, which a length
coming to the knowledge of the Father, he grew enraged beyond all patience,
neither could his wrath be mitigated or appeased by the tears of the Mother,
or mediation of any friend, but his constant resolution was, they both should
die: yet not willing to imbrue his own hands in their blood, he devised another
course, causing two swords to be made, the own he sent to his son Papinius, the
other to his daughter, with no other message then this, you must not live,
which the wretched creatures understanding, and knowing the austeritie of their
Father, and his constancy in his resolutions, he fell upon the one, and she
on the other, and so miserably ended their lives.

Iulia was the Stepmother of Antonius Caracalla Emperor of the Romans, who
having cast many wanton glances toward her, and she reciprocally Julia the
Empress and Antonia Coracalla.
answering them, at length when they were in familiar discourse together, he
brake forth into these words, vellem si liceret, I would if it were lawful:
whose meaning she soon apprehending suddenly answered again, and without
pause, si lubet licet, leges dat Imperator non accipit, if you like it is
lawful, Emperors make Laws but are tide to none; with which words being
emboldned, he first contracted, and then publicly married her, notwithstanding
some few days beforehe had caused her own son Geta to be put to death, and
this is related by Sextus Aurelius, and by Aeli^^ Spartanus. Amongst these
Incestuous is listed Capronia the vestall Virgin, Semiramis.
who for her offenc^ was strangled. Semiramis was the wife of Ninus King of
Assyria, who after she had caused her husbands death, and fearing lest so great
and warlike a people would not be governed by one of her Sex, she took upon
her the masculine shape of her Son, whom she had altogether brought up in
delicacie and effeminacy, and in his name she reigned for the space of forty
two years, conquering the most part of Asia, and erecting many famous Cities:
But Babylon she made her chief place of residence, who also hedged or walled
in the vast River Euphrates, turning the channel, and compelling it to run
through the great City, yet according to Diodorus, lib. tertio, she grew to
be of that venerious and libidinous disposition, she did not only admit but
hire and enforce diverse of the youngest and ablest Soldiers to her lascivious
and incontinent embraces, and further as Trogus Pompeius, lib. 2. has left
remembered, she labored to have Carnal congression with her son Ninus,
(whom she concealed in her Palace,) and whose shape she adulterated: for which
setting all Filial respect and obedience aside he slew her with his own
hands, and after reigned in her stead.

A young Spanish Maid having prostituted her self to a Gentleman upon A
Spanish Maid.
promise of marriage, she being of mean parentage, he married another, which
coming to her ear, she vowed his death, and the better to effect it,
preswaded him by flattering Letters to come again and see her; which he did,
and although at first she received him with tears and cornplaints, yet seeming
at last to be satisfied with some reasons he alleged, she permitted him to use
the same privitie with her as before, and so to bed they went together, but
when he was asleep she cruelly murdered him, having first bound him so fast
with a Cord that he could not make any resistance; using also diverse cruelties
against the dead body before the heat of her rage could be extinguished. For
the which she also suffered death, having first voluntarily accused her self.

A Gentleman of Millan a Widower, tho of 60 years of age, fell in A Gentleman
of Millan.
love with a young Wench Daughter to a Farmer his Tenant, whom he bought for
ready money of the wretched Father to serve his Lust. This Strumpet growing
impudent, after a while fell in love with the eldest son of this Gentleman,
being about twenty years old, and in the presence of a Cousin of hers who was
her Baud, she discovers her whole heart to him, seeking by tears and sighs to
draw him to commit Incest: But the Gentleman having more grace, sharply
reprehended and threatened both her and her Companion. Wherefore to excuse this
her shamelessness, as soon as the Father returned she complains to him,
saying, That his son had sought three or four times to corrupt her; which he
believing, and meeting his son at the stairs head, ran furiously at him
with his sword drawn; and the son to shun that danger, leapt backward down
the stairs and brake his neck. The Father following, and finding him dead,
after cries of fury and despair, in detestation of his former wicked life,
fell upon his own sword and so dyed. The Strumpet hearing by the fearful
cries of the servant what had happened, pursued by the just judgment of God, she
runs toward a Well near the house, into which she threw her self and was
drowned. The she Baud being apprehended and racked, confesses the whole plot,
and was therefore justly executed, her body and the young Strumpets, being
hanged in the open air, as a prey for ravenous Birds.

Nicholas Prince of Opolia, was so monstrously given to corrupt wives The
Prince of Opolia.
and maids, that none were safe that came near him: for which God punished him
in this manner. Being at Nice in an assembly of the States of Silesia, called
by Cassimer Prince of that Country, it happened that one in his presence brought
a packet of Letters to Prince Cassimer, which being opened, he delivered to the
Bishop of Nice to read: Which Nicholas seeing, and his former beastly
wickedness causing him to imagine it was some party made against him to seize
upon his life, suddenly drew his Dagger, and desperately runs against
Cassimer and the Bishop, whom he wounded, tho but lightly, for that being in
open Court, many Nobles and Gentlemen defended them. Nicholas failing of his
purpose, saves himself in the Sanctuary, from which he was drawn by the
Bishops command, and brought back into the assembly by whom he was justly
condemned for this and many other notorious Crimes, and the next day was
publicly beheaded, and his naked body as a reproach of his former wickedness,
exposed to the view of all men.

A Burgess of Ulmes, finding his wife wantonly given, did often advise A
Burgess of Ulmes.
her to carry her self in a more modest and civil sort. But she not regarding
his admonitions, and he more and more suspecting her dis-honesty, on a time he
made a show to go into the Country, but suddenly slipped back into his house
without discovery, and privately hid himself; yet so, that he saw his servants
busied in preparing a feast, and the Adulterer and his wife embracing each
other: Yet he retained himself till after supper, when seeing them enter the
chamber to go to bed together, using filthy speeches, the witnesses of their
wickedness, he suddenly stepping out, first killed the Adulterer, and then his
wife; and having justified his proceedings before the criminal Judges, he
obtained pardon for the same.

An Advocate of Constance, having had the carnal knowledge of an An Advoc(...)
of Consta(...).
Atturnies wife of the same City; which the Attorney suspecting, pretends a
journey into the Country, but returning at night, he heard they were together
in a Hot-house in an old woman's house that dwelt by him; whereupon he goes
thither with three of his friends, which he left in the street to hinder any
that should come to help them; then entering the house with a strong
Curry-combe in his hand made for the purpose, and so rudely curried the
Advocates naked body, that he drew his eyes out, tore off his stones, and
almost all the skin of his body. The like he did to his wife, though she were
with child. The Advocate dyed within three days after in great torment. The
Attorney transported himself to another place; and his wife with much ado
recovering her rubbing, spent the rest of her days there, confounded with
shame and infamy.

A Nobleman of Piedmont, having married a Maid of mean parentage,
notwithstanding the honor she received by him, she shamelesly abused A
Nobleman of Piedmont.
her Lords bed by continual Adulteries with a Gentleman his neighbor. Which
he knowing, and purposing to take them in the act of u^cleannesse, caused a
packet of Letters to be brought him as from his Prince, calling him to Court,
with an intent to send him in Embassage to a Foreign State. Having imparted
these Letters to his wife, and providing all things necessary for his journey,
he departed with all his train; but at night stays at a Castle of his, to the
Governor whereof he discovers his misfortune and design; and being followed
only by him and a Groom of his chamber, all well armed, in a dark night they
came to the Castle, where his Adulterate wife was in bed with her Amorist. The
Castellane told the Porter, he had Letters from his Lord which he must
presently deliver to his Lady. The Porter opens the Gate, and they suddenly all
enter. The Lord forbids the Porter to make any noise, but commanding him to
light a Torch, he presently goes to his Ladies chamber, where the Castellane
knocking, tolled an old woman her Baud, that he had Letters from his Lord,
which his Lady must answer speedily. This Lady drunk with her Lust, commanded
the old woman to open the door, and receive the Letters. Then the Lord with
the other two rushed in, and suddenly seized on the two Adulterers naked
together: And after some furious words uttered, he commanded his Lady, with the
help of her Baud, to bind her Adulterate friend hand and foot, and afterward
to hang him up upon a great Hook fastened into a Beam for that purpose: Then
he caused the bed to be burnt, commanding all the other movables to be carried
away, he left only a little straw for this Whore and Baud to lie on,
appointing that the dead body should remain there until the stink of it had
choked them: So having past some few days in that miserable plight, they
wretchedly ended their lives together.

Plutarch reckons this out of Dosythaus lib. 3. rerum saecularum, Cyanippus
Cyanip. Syrac.
the Syracusian being foxt with Wine, meeting with his daughter Cyane in a
dark corner, by force comprest her; but she not knowing the party by whom she
was deflowred, plucked off a Ring from his finger, and gave it to her Nurse to
keep, which her Father after missing, and she finding by that, assuredly that
he was the man by whom she was vitiated, she found an opportunity to
transpierce him with a sword, by which wound he died, and then she her self
fell on the same weapon and perished also.

The like Arisidas Italic. lib. 3. relates of one Armutius, who all the time of
his youth lived a very continent and abstemious life, but upon a Armuti^s.
time having drunk above measure, he also in the night stuprated his daughter
Medullinus, who also knowing the ravisher by his Ring, then taken from his
Finger, slew him without any respect of Filial duty.

Fabinus Fabricanus, the Cousin of Maximus, having subdued Fuxia the chief
City of the Samnites; in which interim his Wife Fabia falling into the wanton
embraces of her near kinsman Petronius Valentinus, at his home return they
conspired to murder him; which having done, they made a match together and
were married: But she fearing that her new Husband might insiduate the life of
her young Son Fabricianus, who was then but a Child, she conveyed him
thence to be liberally educated and instructed abroad: who when he grew to be
a man, and understood how treacherously and perfidiously his Father had been
murdered, and by whom, he came disguised to Rome, and having waited his
opportunity, slew both the Adulterer and the Adulteress; and for that act was
acquit by the Senate.

One Story I connot forget, remembered by Platine, who writ the lives of the
Popes, though it be a mighty shame, and a most ignominious aspersion, not to
exceed those in virtue, whom we antecell in place and dignity; yet this nothing
moved Pope John the twelfth of that name, but that all honesty set apart, and
modesty quite banished, he kept at his own charge a whole Seraglia of
Prostitutes and Strumpets, with whom night and day he revelled and rioted,
which wickedness escaped not without a most remarkable Judgment: For he was
after miserably slain in the very act of Adultery.

Childebert the second, and seventeenth King of France, anno 692. grew
Childebert K. of France, and Plectrude.
in an utter detestation of his lawful Wife and Queen Plectrude, who was a
Lady of a chaste and untainted life, and divorced her from his Bed and Table;
in whose stead he received into his bosom one Alpayde, a Gentlewoman of
excellent Beauty and Feature, but of a cruel and bloody condition: For when
Lambert Bishop of Vtrecht, a man of a strict life, and austere conversation,
undertook boldly to lay his sin before him, and tell him the danger thereof
(notwithstanding he had before restored him to his Episcopal See, of which he
had been before deprived:) she having notice thereof, could not rest in quiet
till she had caused her Brother Dodon to kill this good Bishop, which was done
by the Kings consent: For which neither of them escaped vengeance; for Dodon
died despairing and mad, and the King was struck after the acting of this
murder with a disease of Worms, the stench whereof he not being able to endure,
threw himself headlong into the River of Mentz. A strange and heavy Judgment,
for Worms to eat his living flesh, so that corruption did not altogether
follow after death; but contrary to nature he rotted and his body, putrified
before death, till the Worm of Conscience attended his soul: a more miserable
Death still attending a bad Life.

Philip the second, surnamed Augustus, upon discontents repudiated Philip the
second, and Gelberge his Q.
his Queen Gelberge: For which the King of Denmark made complaint to the Pope
of this injury done unto his Sister; and the rather, because neither Crime, nor
Delinquency, nor the suspicion of any could be proved against her: But this
public aspersion being cast upon her (howsoever innocent) must needs call her
Honor into question, which cannot be but greatly to her harm and prejudice.
These things with other being alleged, a day of hearing was appointed before
the Popes Legate, in the Bishops Hall at Paris, where the Kings Cause was
strongly maintained by the venters and Advocates; but no one appeared in the
poor Queens defense; insomuch that Sentence was ready to be pronounced
against her, and speedy order and direction given for a Bill of Divorce to be
drawn betwixt them. When on the sudden (as the Court was ready to rise)
stepped out of the Press a fair and beautiful young man, of a sweet and
amiable aspect, and not known to any in the Company, who after a Congy made,
demanded audience; and having delivered the truth in every particular
circumstance, pleaded sharply in the Queens behalf against the King,
convincing the opposite party with such irreproveable arguments, that he made
the Case clear on her side; and having ended his Speech, Congying to the King
and the rest, and returning into the throng, was never more A miraculous
deliverie.
seen after. Which took such an impression in the Court, (but the King
especially) that the amazed Judges committed the Cause to the Kings Counsel,
who judged the Queen guiltless of whatsoever had injustly and injuriously been
laid against her. Then King Philip took horse, and road presently to Boys de
Vinennes, to which place the Queen was confined; where having lovingly embraced
her, and received her into his former true conjugall affection, there was never
the least distaste known to be betwixt them after. Nor let this Story seem
altogether impertinent to the argument now in agitation, which is to show the
Judgments impending in Adultery, and Spouse-breach; it is fit also that we
should know how God in his great mercy and goodness favors and protecteth
virtue and Innocents: For his holy Angels are always the Guardians of the just
and faithful.

Common is this sin of Concupiscence; and howsoever damnable in the eyes of
God, and detestable in the sight of good men; yet those most A needful
observation.
conscious of the sin are cunning'st to excuse it: The young man will plead
for himself and say, I am in my youth and prime, and do but what suits with
my youth, and complyes with my condition: The middle aged man will allege, I
am now in my strength, my bones are full of marrow, and my breasts of Milk;
shall I not take occasion by the fore-top, and make use of the opportunity when
it offers it self? the time will come when, being old my ability will not
answer to my desire, and then it will be too late, etc. The old man will say, I
am now grown cold and weak, the fire of youth is quite extinct in me, and will
you not allow me a warm bedfellow to help my decayed heat, and cherish those
few sparks which lie hid in the cold embers and ashes of mine age? But these
are but like his vain excuses, who robbed the Statue of Jupiter of his
precious Ring, his rich Mantle, and his golden beard; and being apprehended
and questioned about the Sacrilege, he began thus to apologize for himself:
It Is truth (says he) I took away his Ring that compast his forefinger, which
was stretched forthright, which to my seeming he offered unto me: and what could
I do less then to accept of his bounty? which may be rather imputed to his
courtesy, then any Felony in me: For his Mantle being of mass^e gold, I
considered with my self that it was too ponderous to wear in Summer, and too
cold for Winter; and therefore I thought it convenient to ease him of that
charge: And for his long golden Beard, I remembered my self that Apollo was
imbarbis, ever young, and without a Beard; and that I took away because it was
neither comely for his face, nor suiting with his person. These his excuses
were heard, but did rather then mitigate aggravate the crime; for Sacrilege
could be no other then Sacrilege, and of that he was condemned: So though the
young man may plead his youth, the grown man his strength, and the decrepit
man his imbicility of age, yet maugre all evasion or excuse, Adultery,
Scortation, Fornication, and all kinds of unlawful prostitution, in the day
of account, when there must reddere ratione velle rationis suae, they will be
found to be the same gross, grievous, capitol and mortal sins: For which
those that continue therein, without true and hearty repentance shall dearly
answer.

But amongst the vexations, molestations, and incombrances belonging A
lamentable History.
to Wedlock, and the Nuptial Tie, I have not yet spoken at all of that Fury
which commonly haunteth it, namely Jealousy, of which I will deliver unto you
a true, but most lamentable example, Historified by D. Otho Melanders.

A Noble Gentleman lived very conjugally and lovingly with his Lady; she had a
Chambermaid of a very sweet aspect and feature, not any way Jealousy.
to be taxed for the least wantonness or loose carriage; but if the Lady
thought her guilty of the least immodesty, she needed no other Jury, for she
was both Jurer and Judge, and condemned her by her own verdict and sentence.
It happened that the Nobleman having some occasion to detain himself some
few days abroad, in his absence she pretended a quarrel with her maid; the
color was for letting a young child slip out of her Arms; which though it
had little or no hurt, yet she made of it as if it were lamed beyond all
recovery; upon which her anger grew implacable, and she would commit her to
prison: but unto what prison? not into any ordinary light, or tolerable; but
into a deep, obscure, and A fearful Prison, or Dungeon.
desolate Dungeon in the bottom of the Castle, for many years shut up with an
Iron gate, and abounding with Toads, Snakes, Adders, and other Serpents: Into
which no Sacrilegious person, Thief, Pyrat, Witch, Paracide, Traitor, or the
greatest Malefactor whatsoever within the memory of man had been committed;
and into this noisome, stinking, and most horrible place she was forced to
enter, and the doors fast shut upon her: but from all the corners of the Vault
the venomous vextiles came in heaps, with fearful hissing, and seized upon
those parts of her body that were in their reach, which with loud ejulation and
shrikes, she strived with her hands to beat off, but all in vain: At noone
one of the servants, a young man (who it seems had some affection to this maid,
but how soever humanity could not have suffered him to do less) hearing those
her most pitiful vocifirations, and understanding the cause, came to his
Lady, and humbly besought her as she was a Christian to commiserate the
wretched estate of her poor afflicted prisoner: but all to no purpose, she was
inexorable, reviled him with his boldness and sauciness, and sent him away
with blows to boot. But evening came, and still her lamentable clamours
continued, able to have sostned flint, or mollifi'd Ma^ble, when the young man,
notwithstanding he had before been so evilly entreated, went again to his Lady,
and falling upon his knees was more importunate with her then before; the more
he strived to pacify her rage, the more she grew incensed A cruel Lady.
with fury, and kicked him out of her presence. After supper to bed the household
went, and at midnight the young man could not contain himself, but he must
go listen at the Dungeon door. But now hearing no no noise, not so much as a
sigh or groan, he began to imagine that she was dead, (and so indeed it
proved) he then more incivilly then before rapt at his Ladies chamber-doore,
and wakned her, telling her, that she had now the event of her bloody and
cruel desires: for by reason that there was a still silence in the Dungeon,
he perceived the poor Virgin had expired her life. At which words being
startled, and strangely moved, she rose from her bed, and calling for store of
lights, caused the Dungeon door to be opened, where they might behold a most
ruthful and samentable A fearful sight.
spectacle; the maid thrown upon her back, and four great Snakes wrapped about
her, one of an extraordinary bigness wound about her neck, another had twinde
it self encompassing both her legs, a third like a girdle embraced her
waste, or middle, a fourth stuck upon her jaws, stretching its self to its
utmost length, which no sooner taken thence, but was found dead, having so
ingorg'd it self with her blood, that it swelled, and burst asunder: At
whichsight the Lady struck with the horror thereof, from a sudden melancholy
grew into a mere madness, and in a raging fit soon after died.

Strange were that act abroad, which cannot in some sort be paralleled with us
at home. At Gainsborough in Lincolnshire, it happened that a The former
paralleled with a modern Story.
Gentleman of the Town had occasion to ride up to London about his Term
business; and as the custom is in the Country, the night before a man takes
his journey his neighbors and friends will send in their meat, and sup with
him, and drink to the hope of his safe return: and so they did to him. Now
this Gentleman had in his house a young gentlewoman sent thither to be
tuter'd, and withal to learn good huswifrie, and was about the age of
fourteen or fifteen years at the most. The next morning before he took
horse, when he called for water, this maid brought him the Towell and Basin,
and held it till he had washed; only in rubbing of his hands he sprinkled a
little water on her face, which his wife observed: after Breakfast the
Gentleman road on his journey; and the woman in whom this slight accident,
struck a deep impression of devilish Jealousy, soon after called to the
maid to deliver her an account of her linen used the night before (which was
her charge) she having hid a Napkin or two out of the way of purpose to pick a
quarrel with her. The Girl sought in every room and could not find them:
then she bid her look in the next Chamber; but she was no sooner up stairs,
but after follows the Mistress, like an incensed Virago, and shut the doors
fast upon her, then casts her upon the Bed, and threw another Feather-bed upon
her, and spying a Scotch Pocket-Dagger hanging by the Walls, she took out one
of the knives, and casting her self upon the upper bed, turned up the bottom,
where she fell most unwoman-like to work with her maid, making her quite
incapable of future marriage; and this was done withinin memory (for to the
woman's great ignominy and shame, in the same Town I An unwomanly Act.
have heard it reported, and been shown the very house where the deed was
done: The horridness of which Act makes me that I cannot conceal her name;
she was called Mistress Brig house.) In this intrim, a Serving-man coming in,
and hearing his Mistress was in great displeasure and distemperature gone up
with her maid, and knowing her froward and hasty disposition, he went to the
door and knocked; but hearing none but one as it were miserably forcing breath
for life: he looked in either at some chinke, or the keyhole, where he saw his
Mistress in the same posture I before described, with a knife in her hand, and
one pitifully bleeding under her: He broke open the door, being Wainscot, and
casting her off from the Bed to the floor, took up the Maid, nigh stifled,
and carried her to a neighbors house, where Chyrurgeons were sent for, and she
in time recovered of life, though she had made her utterly unable of
Conception. But what gained she by this her uncivil cruelty? she was after
abhorred by all good and modest women, ashamed to look out of her own doors;
neither would any of fashion converse with her, but held it a scandal to be
but seen in her company.

But now to return to the Judgments inflicted upon adultery, and to show
Locring, Estrild, and Sabrina.
what our own country relates, as those perpetrated and committed in this
Land. King Locrine, who succeeded his Father Brute in the Kingdom, took to
his Bride Guendolina, daughter to Corinaus Duke of Cornwall, who lived in great
conjugall love together, having a young Prince to their issue called Madan: but
after the King having rest and ease in his age, with which his youth was scarce
acquainted with, he was greatly enamoured of a delicate fair Lady whose name
was Estrild, the daughter of one Homber a Dane, who with a great power invading
the Land, the King gave him battle, and having routed their whole Army, they
were forced to take that great River which parts Lincolnshire and Holdernes,
and runs up to Hull; in which he with his people being drowned, left to the
same River his name unto this day. To return to the matter, Locrine had by
this Lady Estrild, a daughter called Sabrina; but this close packing could not
be long concealed, but by some who thought to insinuate into the favor of the
Queen (who was of a haughty and masculine spirit) all was told her; for which
being mightily incensed, no mediation could appease her implacability; but she
first incensed her Father, and then all her own particular friends, whom by
her bounty or favor she had before obliged to make War upon her Husband;
and prevailing in her purpose, she gave the King Battle, in which his party
was discomfited, and he himself slain in field. This revenge to any of reason
might seem sufficient; but here her anger rested not, but she caused the
fair Estrild and her Daughter Sabrina to be brought unto her Tent, where
having reviled them both, one with the name of Whore, the other of Bastard,
she in her heat of blood, and height of rage, commanded them both to be
thrown into the River near unto the place where the Battle was late fought,
where they were both drowned, the River upon that accident losing the name; and
after the Daughter Sabrina has been called Severne even to this day.

Brithricus, the first King of the West Saxons, began his Reign in the
Ethelburge, a notorious Adult(...).
year of our Lord, seven hundred threescore and eighteen, and the tenth of
Charles the Great, then King of France, who took to Wife Ethelburge, one of the
Daughters of Off a King of Mercia; he was a valiant Prince, and renowned for
many Warlike exploits; but especially for beating the Danes, and compelling
them to avoid the Land. But what can Valor or Prowess avail against a wicked
and cursed woman, who the more freely to enjoy the moecall embraces of her
libidinous companion, plotted diverse ways to take away her husbands life, which
at length she affected, by poisoning him, and diverse of his family; which
having done, and fearing to be questioned about the Fact, she trussed up her
Jewels, and the best things about her, and fled into France, unto the Court of
Charles the Great, with whom she so temporized and qualified her own impious
Cause, and being withal a Lady of extraordinary aspect and presence, that she
grew highly into his grace and favor.

But when after he was informed of her unstable condition, he thought to make
some trial of her; and being at that time a Widdower, one day when he was in
some private conference with her at a window. he said openly; Now Lady I put
it to your free election, whether you will take me for your wedded Lord and
Husband, or this my Son here standing in presence? To which Question, she
without the least pause gave this An unadvised Woman.
sudden Answer; Then I make choice of the Son, and refuse the Father; which
the King taking as an affront, and being therewith somewhat moved, he as
suddenly replied; I protest woman, if thou had made choice of me, I would
have given thee to my Son, if he would have accepted of thee; but for that
thou have slighted and for saken me; thou shall now have neither of us; and so
presently commanded her as a Recluse to be shut up into a Nunnery. But this
place, though never so strict, could not contain her within the bounds of
Modesty or Chastity; For by the means of some Libertines, her old companions
and acquaintance, she made an escape out of the Cloister; and having quitted
that place, she wandered up and down, till having consumed all that she could
make, she fell into necessitous poverty, in which she miserably died, none
commiserating her in her greatest extremity. In memory of which her
misdemeanors, mixed with the murder of her natural Lord and Husband, the Kings
of the West Saxons made a Decree, that thence-forward none of their Wives
should be called Queens, nor sit by them at any Feast, or in any place of
State or Honor: And this was observed amongst them for a long time after.

Now to show how the Creator of all, who instituted chaste Matrimony in
Paradise, as he hates those contaminated with all impurity, so of the
contrary, he is a Guardian and Potector to those of clean and undefiled life,
as may appear by this subsequent story. In the time of Edward, the son of
King Edgar, by his first wife Egelfleda, who began his reign The fury of
Elphaida.
in the year of Grace nine hundred threescore and nineteen, though he was
opposed by his stepmother Elphaida, who got into her confederacy Alphred, Duke
of Mercia, a potent man in those days, to have instated her son Egelredus, a
child of seven years old in the Regal Dignity: yet she was opposed by Bishop
Dunstan with the rest of the Clergy, who were also supported by the Earl of
East- Ingland, now called Essex; who against the Queens mind, and her
Confederates, Crowned the said Edw. at Kingstowne; but the forenamed Alphred,
who altogether adhered to the proceedings of the Dowager Queen, (being
suspected to have too much private familiarity with her) they agreed to put the
strict Religious Cloysterers out of the College of Winchester, where K. Edgar
had before there placed, and put into their rooms so many wanton and
lascivious Clerks, every one of them having his Concubine about him: which
Controversy had been like to have ended in blood: But there was an assembly of
the Bishops and Lords, the Prelates and Peers of both parties, in which
Dunstan maintaining Chastity, was much despised by the Adversary; but still he
upheld his opinion, being grounded upon Justice and Virtue. Now the place of
their meeting was in a fair and large upper ^^om? and in this great division
and argument it being doubtful which side would carry it, suddenly the joysts
of the Loft failed, and the floor tumbled A miraculous accident.
down, being a great distance from the ground, in which ruin, the greatest
part of those adverse to the Bishop and Clergy, were either slain outright, or
very dangerously hurt, even to lamenesse: but of all those that stood with
Dunstan in the defense of chastity, not one perished, neither was any heard to
complain of the least hurt felt or found about them: by which miraculous
accident, the Bishop compassed his pious and religious ends.

This King Edward upon a time being hunting in the Forest, and having lost his
Train, and finding none of his servants near him, he bethought himself that
his Mother-in-law Elphaida, with her Son Egelredus, lived at a place called
Corfe-Castle (which is in the West-Countrey) and thought it no better a time
then now to give her a visit: but the malicious woman looking out of her
window, and knowing him a far off, called to one of her servants (of her own
breeding) and told him what he had to do; for she perceived he was alone, and
none of his Peers, or Attendants about him. By this time the King was come to
the Castle gate, whither she descended, and offered him all the Courtesy of
entertainment that any Siren (who only flatters to destruction) could have
done: for with courteous words she besought him to alight, and to lodge in the
Castle that night; both which he with great affability and gentleness refused,
saying he would only taste a Cup of her Beer, and then ride to find out some
of his Company: but the Cup being brought, he had no sooner moved it toward
his mouth, but this Barbarous Villain, Traitor, and Regicide, A bloody
Regitide.
struck him with a long Dagger, edged on both sid(...) which entering behind,
the point appeared to have fore'd way through his breast: at which mortal
wound received, he put spurs to his horse, making speed toward the Forest,
in hope to have met with some of his servants; but by the extremity of
bleeding, fainting by the way he felt from his horse with one foot entangled in
the stirrup; then he was dragged cross highways, and a thwart plowde lands,
till his horse staid at a Town called Covisgate, where he was found; but not
being known for the King, he was unworthily buried at a Town called Warham,
where his body remained for the term of three years after, at which time it
was discovered, and the dissembling and murderous woman thinking to clearer her
self of the fact to the world, thought at the first to visit him in the way of
Pilgrimage; but to make the cause evident against her, the Horse on which she
rode could not be compelled to come near unto the place by a miles distance,
neither by fair usage, nor sore beating, or any course that man could devise:
after whose death her son Egelredas was Crowned King; in the first year of
whos^ Reign the Land grew barren, and scarce bore any fruit; there happened
moreover a Plague, which took away the men, and a Murraine, which destroyed
the Beasts and Cattaile. He proved likewise a great enemy to the Church; being
ungracious in the beginning, wretched in the middle of his life, and hateful
in the end thereof.

Neither could some Churchmen clear themselves of those Capital Crimes which
they very bitterly reproved in others: For Sigandus made Bishop of Shirburne,
about the twelfth year of Edward, surnamed the Confessor, shortly after
usurped the Bishopric of Winchester by strength, Sigandus Bish. of Sherburne
and Winchester.
who was a lewd and unlearned man (as most of the Prelates of England were in
those days, and wholly devoted to Avarice, Lust, and Vainglory, who could not
contain himself within the Lists of keeping variety of Concubines, which in
those days was held but a venial or quotidian sin, but he employed his
Panders to corrupt married women to his lustful embraces, thinking no
wickedness could be truly committed, till he had ascended the highest branch
thereof: and when it was openly spoken, that he was unworthy the name of a
Priest, who made such boast of the pomp of the World, the use of
Voluptuousness, Gluttony, and Luxury, whilst in the interim there was no care
of instructing men's souls in the way toward Heaven. He had learned from some
one of his Chaplains (a better Scholar then himself) this poor and slight
Answer to evade it; Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores.
Now the times are changed, and we have learnt to suit our Manners and
Conditions to the present; (a notorious Church-temporizer in those days.) But
though he reigned long in great pomp and prosperity, he was in the time of
William the Conqueror deprived of all his Ecclesiastical honors, and
confined to Winchester, and there kept prisoner till he dyed; who in that
extreme dejection, when he should only have repented him of his former
Avarice, and studied newness of life, would usually swear he was a very poor
man, and not worth one penny, and that he was free from all Concupiscence of
Lust; both which were proved untrue: For after his death a (...) (...) found
about his neck, by which in diverse places of the earth was discovered much
Treasure; and those Women that ministered unto him were no other then
Prostitutes and Concubines.

Henry the second was a potent and most victorious Prince; But after he had
fallen into the libidinous embraces of the Lady Rosamond, Daughter Henry the
second.
to the Lord Fitzwaters; he was never quiet, but continually afflicted with
Wars both foreign and domestic; insomuch, that both his Queen and Sons
rebelled against him, and put the whole Realm into great combustion; and for
her part she did not escape a due scourge for her offense: for though the King
provided all means possible for her security and safety, by building the
intricate Labyrinth at Woodstock, and gave her in charge to a most trusty
Guardian; yet the Queen at length by her Spies found her out, and with more
then a womanish chastisement, which should ever savor of some mercy, tore off
those delicate locks with which the King had been so much entangled, and forced
her to drink a draught of deadly poison, by which her life was compelled out
of her body: and thus Lust ever carries her rod at her own girdle.

To descend unto these latter times, how many strange and bloody murders have
been committed through Lust? I will give them but a mere nomination, because
most of them have been Staged, Book'd, and Balleted, and dispersed abroad
through the Kingdom: As Master Arden of Mr. Arden of ^eversham.
^eversham slain by his wife and her adulterous Companion Cosby; the act it
self being committed in his own house, by a barbarous and inhumane villain,
most commonly known by the name of Black Will, who after the deed done, and
his reward received, fled into the Low Countries, where he thought himself
secure: But Gods hand reached him even thither; where for some other deed of
the same nature, he was burnt on a Stage in Flushing; and she her self, with
Cosby and his Sister, together with a Gentleman Master Green, who had carried
Letters betwixt the two Adulterers: (though he took it upon his death, he knew
not the intents of them) were all publicly executed at the Gallows.

The like murder was committed on the person of one Master Page of Plymouth, by
his young wife; and one Master George Strangwidge, who Master Page of Plymouth.
as the common voice went, were privately contracted together before her
enforced Marriage: But howsoever as they were convicted of the murder, so for
the same they were condemned, and publicly executed.

And but of late days, those two bloody Ministers of the Devil, most Country
Tom and Cambury Besse.
commonly known by the names of Country Tom, and Cambury Besse, who made a
trade to have her his Whore walk in the evening into the Fields; and where she
saw any Gentleman or other likely to have money about him, or good clothes on
his back, she would insinuate into his Company, and with her libidinous
allurements offer her self to his prostitution; which if he accepted of, that
arch-limbe of the Devil (who hid himself privately for that purpose, and
stealing upon them with a Bastinado hooped and plated with Iron) beat out his
Brains, even in the very act of Lust, neither having pity of body or soul:
Then rifled they their Pockets, and stripped them of their clothes, of which
they made profitable chaffer, being vendible at the Brokers; for the last of
which, being committed upon a young Gentleman of good quality, by his clothes
they were discovered and apprehended, he being executed near unto the place
where the last Fact was committed: and after being thence removed to a more
remote place, his body hangs in chains upon a Gibbet even to this day; and
she was hanged in Clerken-well fields, over against Islington.

If any would have further inspection into the cursed fruits of Lust, let him
but enquire after the monthly Sessions at Newgate, where scarce one passes
without those that go for Maidservants, either strangling their
Bastard-Issue, or putting them down into privities, not caring to save their
small credit in this world, to hazard everlasting perdition in the world to
come: yet notwithstanding all their close packings, they are in the end found
out, and brought to the Gallows. I am loath to be more tedious in this then
the rest; therefore I conclude with this Distick, as a general Caveat unto all
libidinously addicted: Quid facies, facies, veneris cum veneris ante,
Non Sedeas, sedeas, ne pereus pereus.
What will thou do, when thou before
Loose Venus shall appear,
Stay not, but take thine heels, lest her
Allurements cost thee dear.


CHAP. VII. Gods Judgments against the Sin of Gluttony.
TThis Sin of Gluttony took its original in our great The symptoms of
Gluttony.
Grandam Eve, as we read Genesis 2. 16. And the Lord God commanded the man
saying, thou shall eat freely of every Tree of the Garden, but of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye the death. Again 3. 6. So the Woman
seeing that the Tree was good for meat, and that it was pleasant to the eyes,
and a Tree to be desired to get Knowledge, took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also to her husband From the Old Testament.
with her, and he did eat: For which they were most grievously punished, and
all mankind for their sakes: For Verse 16. Unto the Woman God said, I will
greatly increase thy sorrows and thy conception: In sorrow shall thou bring
forth children; and thy defire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee. Also to Adam he said, Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten of the Treewhereof I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall
not eat of it: Cursed is the earth for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thy life: Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth
unto thee; and thou shall eat the herb of the field: in the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the earth; for out of it wast thou
taken, because thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return.

We read Numb. 11. 32. then the people arose all that day, and all that night,
and all the next day, and gathered the Quails: he that gathered the least,
gathered ten Homers full; and they spread them abroad for their use round about
the Host: whilst the flesh was yet in their teeth, before it was chewed the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people
with an exceeding great plague: There they buried the people that fell a
lusting, Deuteronomy. 6. When thou shall eat and be satisfied, beware diligently that
thou forgettest not the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and the house of bondage. Again, 21. 20. The Parents shall say to the
Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and disobedient, and will not
obey our commandment, but is a Rioter and a Drunkard. Then all the men of the
City shall stone him with stones unto death, so shall thou take away evil from
amongst you, that all Israel may hear it and fear, Ecclesiasticus 31. 12. If
thou sit at a costly Table, open not thy mouth wide upon it, and say not,
behold much meat: Remember that an evil eye is a shame; and what thing created
is worse then a wicked eye; for it weepeth for every cause: Stretch not thine
hand wheresoever it looks, and thrust it not with it into the Dish. Eat
modestly that which is set before thee; and devour not, lest thou be hated.
Leave then off first for nurtures sake; and be not insatiable, lest thou
offend. When thou sit amongst many, reach not thy hand out first of all:
How little is sufficient for a man well taught? and thereby he belcheth not in
his Chamber, nor feels any pain. A wholesome sleep comes of a temprate
Belly; he rises up in the morning, and is well at ease with himself; but
pain is watching and choler, like diseases and pangs of the belly are
insatiable men. If thou be enforced to eat, arise, go forth, and empty thy
stomach, and then take thy rest; so shall thou bring no sickness unto thine
house. Show not thy valiantness in Wine, for wine has destroyed many; the
Furnace proves the edge of the tempering, so does Wine the hearts of the proud
by drunkenness. Wine soberly drunk is profitable for the life of man: what is
life that is overcome with Wine? Wine was made from the beginning to make man
glad, and not for drunkenness: Wine measurably taken and in time, brings
gladness, and cheerfulness of the mind; but drink with excess makes
bitterness of mind, brawlings, and scoldings. Drunkenness increases the
rage of a Fool, till he offend; it diminishes his strength, and makes
wounds, etc. Again 37. 28. be not greedy in all delights, and be not too
hasty of all meats: for excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony
comes with choleric Diseases. By surfeit have many perished, and he that
dyeteth himself prolongeth his life.

Thus far the old Testament; let us now hear what the Gospel says Texts out
of the New Testament.
Luke 6. 24. Woe be to you that are rich, for ye have received your
consolation: Woe be to you that are full; for ye shall be hungry: Woe be unto
you that now laugh; for ye shall wail and weep. Again 21. 34. Take heed,
lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, lest that day come upon you unawares: For as a snare shall
it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch therefore
and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these
things that shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the Son of Man.
Romans 13. 12. The night is past, and the day is at hand; let us therefore cast
away the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor of light: so that we
walk honestly as in the day, not in drunkenness or gluttony, nor in
chambering or wantonness, nor in strife or envying: but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. And
Luke 17. In the days of Noe they eat and drank, they married Wives, and were
given in marriage, even until the day that Noe entered into the Arc, and the
flood came and destroyed them all.

Thus far the Scriptures: I come now to the Fathers, St. Ambrose The Fathers
of Gluttony.
in one of his Sermons says, That ill Ministers wait upon the Throat, which
always covets, but is never satisfied; for what is more insatiable then the
belly? to day it receives, to morrow it requires; being full, it commends
abstinence; being empty, it cannot endure the name of any such virtue. Hunger
is a friend to chastity, an enemy to wantonness: But saturity betrayeth
modesty, and corrupts good manners. It is not the meat, but the immoderate
appetite that is condemned: For as St. Augustine says, It was not for a Quail
or a Phesant that Eve longed for, but for an Apple; and thereby brought a curse
unto all mankind. It was not for a Kid, or a Lamb of the flock that Esau
hungered, but for a mess of Broth; for which he sold his birthright. Elias was
fed with flesh; but John the Baptist with Locusts and wild Honey: and David
thirsted not for wine, but water; for which he reprehended himself: neither
was our Savior in the Wilderness tempted by the Devil with flesh, but bread:
and as Gregory in his Moralls says, It is not the meat, but the lust after it
that is in fault; for we oft-times may eat of dainty Cates without offense,
and yet upon course and common fare may sin by surfeit: And in another place,
where Gluttony is predominant, all those honors that men win are lost; and
whilst the belly is not bridled, all virtues run to havocke; but when that is
curbed and kept in moderation, many vices with it are awed and restrained. In
vain it is for us to enter into any spiritual Conflict against the Devil,
our common adversary and his agents, unless we first suppress the enemy that
is within us: which is voracity and lust after eating and drinking, because if
those enemies that are so near us be not subdued, in vain we shall strive to
have the victory over those remote and afar off: To small purpose it were to
fight against the enemies without the Walls, when there is nothing but tumults,
mutiny, and sedition within the City: after full feeding, when the stomach is
supplied even unto belching, so that it must needs say it has enough; yet is
not the curiosity of the appetite satisfied, for the eye is delighted with the
color, and the palate pleased with the taste, when the poor suffering
stomach (best pleased with a mediocrity and temperature) which neither sees the
colors, nor relisheth the pleasantness of the Taste, is rather ruined then
refreshed, and confounded then comforted. Innocentius lib de Vil. Condit.
Human. uses words to this purpose: Gluttony shut up Paradise, sold the
Birthright, hanged the Baker, beheaded the Baptist; Nebuzandan the Prince of
Cooleus, burnt the Temple, destroyed Jerusalem; and Baltazer sitting at his
great Feast saw the handwriting upon the Wall, and that night was slain by
the Caldeans.

Hugo in Claus. says, That there be some who sit down to a feast with an
unquiet agitation of the members, expressing the insatiate intemperance of
their minds, they shake their heads, shrug the shoulders, they expand their
hands, and not without great uncomlinesse, and unseemly gesture, as if they
were rowzing and preparing themselves to ingorge and swallow the whole banquet.
Other unmannerly postures and carriages at Table they use; for sitting in one
place, with their eyes they greedily survey every dish that is served in; their
hands ready to reach to the full length of their arms, removing this further
off, and pulling that nearer; then they break the Bread, pour wine into the
Cups and Glasses, besieging themselves round with the best dishes; then they
pant, swell, and breath short, through the vehemence and extremity of feeding,
so that you would think them seeking for some wide passage to tumble in their
fat bits, to satisfy their craving and crooking bellies, as if the narrowness
of their chaps and jaws could not supply their voracious stomach with that
superabundance which it expects: Thus sits he like one besieging a City,
doubting in what place first to begin his assault, and therefore would make
irruption upon all places, and at once; and such is this Gastrimargia, or
Cormorantedulitie. They were wont of old to build Temples to the gods, erect
Altars, appoint Flammins and Priests to serve, kill beasts for the Sacrifice,
burn Incense: and so the carnal and voluptuous men in these days, they make
their Kitchen their Temple, their Table their Altar, their Cooks their
Priests, their Veales, Lambs, Capons, etc. provided for their Dyets; the Beasts
for imitation, and the fumes and steame of their sawe'd Dishes, Censary
Incense. Indeed over superstitious is the industry and care they have in
setting forth the services and several courses at their great and solemn
Feasts and Banquets. Infinite are the varieties and multiplicity of their
decoctions, Rostings, Bakings, Fryings, Stewings, and the like; with new
devised Sawces, composed of several ingredients, now soft, then hard, now
cold, then hot; some tempered with Pepper, others with Onions and Garlic, then
with Cinnamon, then with Salt; men's guts longing as Women with great Bellies.
Then arises a disputation amongst these Helnoes, whether such a Dish tastes
better boiled or roasted, baked or broyl'd, carbinado'd, or otherwise: insomuch
that after a dozen dishes of solid meat devovr'd, there is no impediment or
let, but that the last course of more curious and dainty Cates, is as soon
swallowed: and when the stomach by often belching, and eructations shall say it
has enough; yet are not their boundless and unlimited appetites satisfied:
such are they who make their bellies their God: and thus far Hugo.

Augustus Caesar hearing one Erotes a Procurator of Egypt had bought a Bird
which in fighting was never conquered, but had the victory of all Erotes.
with which she contended, and that he in an humor had wrung her neck
asunder, and eat her to breakfast; he caused the man to be sent for, and after
the cause was discussed, and he had confessed the act, he commanded his body to
be nayl'd to the Mast of the Ship, judging him to be unworthy life, who for a
little voluptuousness and itching desire of the throat, would not spare a
poor Bird, who might have given delight to many in her single Duells; and
which moreover, by her undaunted Spirit, yielded an happy Omen to Caesar of his
perpetual prosperity in his war. This Plutarch reports of him in his Roman
Apothegmes; The vice of the Belly not only debilitates the body, but shortens
the days of man; surfeit of meats devoures more then the sword; and the
intemperance in wine devoures more then the sea.

The Devil by Wine works miracles; but all quite averse and opposite The
Devils miracles.
to those which our Savior did when he was upon the earth; who made the lame
to walk, the dumb to speak, the blind to see, the deaf to hear.

The mere contrary to these he practices against Gluttons and Drunkards; for
let them with never so constant and steady steps walk to the Tavern, they
often return from thence indenturing and reeling this way and that way; their
knees being made unserviceable; and their legs so debilitated, that they are
scarce able to support them from falling to the earth.

Let the Drunkards eyes be never so perfect and clear at his going in, at his
coming back he shall find them so waterish, filmy and blear'd with the fumes
of Wine, that he shall scarcely see to find his way to his own dwelling: Be
his speech never so voluble and distinct, he shall find a great change and
alteration in his tongue; for it will falter in his mouth, he shall lispe and
clip his English, and be scarce able to utter any one intelligible word: And be
his hearing never so aggragate and quick, excess and superfluity of Wine shall
so dull and stupifie that sense, that he shall seem to be appoplex'd all over,
that till the charm be over, and the Wine have left working, he shall not
have power to awake, or the strength to hold up his head, though a Drum should
beat by him, or a Cannon be shot off by his care. Moreover, our Savior
restored the mad and lunatic to their senses; but the devil (by Wine abused)
takes from the sober all sense, and from the apprehension all understanding;
the moderate spirit it makes mad, and the low-minded Lunatic; and these are
the Anti-maskes with which he fools and deludes his servants, dandling, and
cockering them to their utter ruin and destruction. I come now to History.

One Albidinus, a young man of a most perdit and debaucht course of Albidinus.
life, when he had consumed all his Lands, Goods and Jewels, and exhausted all
his estate even to one house, he with his own hands set that on fire, and
despairing of any future fortune, left the City, and betaking himself to the
sollitude of the woods and groves, he in a short space after hanged himself.

Lucullus a noble Roman, in his Praetorship governed Africa two several
Lucullus.
times; he moreover overthrew and defeated the whole forces of King
Mithrid^t^s, and rescued his Colleague Cotta, who was besieged in Calcedon, and
was very fortunate in all his expeditions; but after his greatness growing an
eyesore to the Commonweal, he retired himself from all public Offices or
Employments, to his own private Fields, where he builded sumptuously, sparing
for no charge to compass any rarity that could be heard of; and had in his
house he made a very rich Library, and plentifully furnished with Books of all
sorts. And when he had in all things accomodated his house, suiting with his
own wishes and desires, forgetting all Martial Discipline before exercised,
he wholly betook himself to riotous Commessations, and gluttonous Feasts;
having gotten so much spoil and treasure in the Wars, that it was the
greatest part of his study how most profusely to spend it in peace.

It is reported of him, that Pompey and Cicero one night stealing upon him with
a self-invitation to supper, he caused on the sudden a Feast to be made
ready, the cost whereof amounted to fifty thousand pieces of silver; the state
of the place, the plenty of meat, the change and variety of Dishes, the costly
sawces, the finenesse and neatness of the Services, driving the guests into
extraordinary admiration. Briefly, having given himself wholly to a sensual
life, his high-feeding, and deep quaffing brought him to such a weakness, that
he grew apoplex'd in all his senses; and as one insufficient to govern either
himself or his estate, he was committed to the keeping of M. Lucullus his
near Kinseman, dying soon after.

Caesar the son of Pope Alexander, was one of those who much doted Caesar the
Son of Pope Alexander.
on his belley, and wholly devoted himself to all kind of intemperance, who
in daily Breakfasts, Dinners, afternoon sittings, Suppers, and new Banquets,
spent five hundred Crowns of the same, not reckoning Feasts and extraordinary
Invitations. For Parasites, Buffoones, and Jesters, he allowed yearly two
thousand suits of Clothes from his Wardrobe: He maintained also a continual
army of eight thousand soldiers about him; and all this he exhausted from his
Fathers Coffers.

And Galentius, the son of John Galentius, the first Duke of Imsubria,
Galentius.
was ranked amongst these great Rioters, who cared not at what expense he was,
so he might see the Tressells of his Tables ready to bend under the weighty and
gluttonous dishes that were placed upon them: who at one Feast made at the
Celebration of his Daughters marriage (at which Petrarch the learned Italian
Poet was present) spent an hundred thousand Pieces of money, which might be
rated to the value of a Spanish Piece of Eight, or a Dutch Ricks Doller. One
Peter a Priest, and Cardinal in the time when Syxtus was Pope, in the space of
two years was known to lavish and waste three hundred thousand Double-Duckets
(rated at twelve shillings English the piece) upon vanities and unnecessary
disbursements, the greatest part of which was consumed in his Kitchen and
Seller, the rest in sundry kinds of excess and prodigality.

I read also of one Belflorius by Nation a Sicilian; at first of very mean
Belflorius a Sycilian.
and low Fortunes, but after by parsimony (being a Banker and an Usurer)
attaining to an infinite, and almost incredible estate, he did not take the
common course of your avaritious money-masters, to imprison it in strong and
Iron-barr'd Chests, but clean contrary he built him a fair and goodly house,
and when it grew up somewhat above the Sellerage and Foundation, in stead of
Stone or Brick, his Materials were Plates and pieces of Silver, which amounted
to a mighty sum; and having finished this argent Structure, there he spent
the rest of his days in all voluptuous feeding: so that one would have thought
Epicurus himself to have survived in him: So what he got lewdly, having spent
lavishly, he dyed like to a Foul which we have in England called a Knott,
which never eats in season till it dye of Fatness. He began in Poverty,
continued in Prodigality ended in surfeit. At first a Camelion, after a
Cormorant, and lastly a Swine or Boar fatted for slaughter.

Let us therefore bethink our selves, that whenever we sitdowne to Good
admonitions against Gluttony.
eat and drink, we have two guests to entertain, and those are the body and
the soul: whatsoever the body receives departs away quickly into the draught,
and is seen no more; but that on which the foul feeds, lasts and abides
for ever; For then is the mind most apt to apprehend reason, and ghostly
instruction, where the free operations of the ^raine are not dulled and
molested by such vapors as the excess of feeding distempers it withal.

Salust says, nothing can appear more abject and mis-becomming man, who is
the Image of the Creator, then to live as a slave to the mouth and belly. But
how hard a matter is it (faith Cato) to preach Abstinence to the Belly which
has no Ears, and yet is importunate, whether the hand have wherewith to
supply it or no.

Socrates inviting certain of his friends to a Scholars pittance, or a spare
Supper, when he was taxed by one of his Guests for too slender provisions, made
answer; If these whom I invited be virtuous, they will say here is enough; but
if they be otherwise, then I say here is too much: Intemperancy is a root that
has hand in every disease that belongs unto man's body: and it is a Proverb
common amongst us; Much meat, much malady.

Origin tells us, that Vessels more fully fraught then they are able to carry,
are forced to sink; and the stomach and belly surcharged with too much meat
and drink causes bodies to surfeit, which is the readiest means to prepare
sickness, and sickness is the immediate pathway to death.

One Gorgius, a very temperate and abstemious man, being demanded how he came
to arrive to the number of an hundred and eight years, and in all that time
was not visited with any grievous sickness? made Answer, I never eat but when
I was hungry, nor never drunk but when I was thirsty, and then both
moderately. And King Cyrus being asked by one of his great Captains, named
Artabazus, in a long and heavy March, what he would have provided for his
Supper? He answered, Bread; for Drink (says he) we shall find in every
Current or Fountain by the way: To order our lives well and frugally, is to
live temperately, and avoid high and voluptuous feeding; for there is a great
difference betwixt living well, and living sumptuously: Because the first
proceeds from Discipline, Temperance, Frugality, and moderation of the soul,
contented with her own Riches: The other of Waste, Excess, Luxurious Riot,
and contempt of all order and mediocrity; but in the Catastrophe or Conclusion,
the one is attended with shame and dishonor, the other with applause and
glory: They be the very words of Plato; Therefore let us suffice nature, but
surfeit not, supply the bodies necessities, but offend it not: For who so shall
endeavor the contrary, let him be forewarned by the subsequent examples.

Maximinus, a Groom of base and sordid condition, borne of needy Maximinus a
great Glutton.
Parents, his Father being a poor shepherd; and he being of a strong and
able body, betook himself to be a common Soldier, in which practice he
showed presidents of unexampled courage; insomuch, that he was promoted by the
good Emperor Alexander Severus his Lord and Master, to eminent place and
Office, and grew of great remarke in the Camp: But such was his ambition, and
ingratitude withal, that he conspired the death of his Prince, and caused him
with his Mother Mammaea to be slain, leaving not one that was friend or
favorite to his virtuous predecessor alive: Which done, he usurped the
Imperial Purple; who as he was a Barbarous Thracian by birth, so he was by
nature covetous after Bloodshed, removing all without any mercy, whom he
either feared or hated; or if neither, so he knew him to be rich, to possess
himself of his estate. I will not stand to make a particular Relation of all
his Insolences, Rapines, Extortions, Massacres, and Murders, but come unto
that which is now in agitation, his Gluttony; which was in such Excess, that
every day for his own particular allowance, he had forty pounds of Flesh, and
Bread answerable to the quantity of Meat, and five Gallons of Wine for his
Drink; and so much he constantly devoured, besides Sallets, made Dishes, and
other Junkets and Kickshawes that came by the bye; For though his maine repast
was sollid Food, on which he laid his foundation, yet was he lickerish also
after any other rarity that was served into his Table: And yet for all this,
could not (his God) his Belly save him, but after three years Usurpation, in
whose Imperial Command he had demeaned himself with all brutish Tyranny,
returning from the siege of Aquilaea, which he was compelled to leave to his
great dishonor, he was at Rome with one Balbitinus miserably cut to pieces
amongst his Soldiers.

The Emperor Bonosus was also such another. Vopiscus reports of him, The
Emperor Bonosus.
that as he used to eat voraciously, so he drank incessantly; insomuch,
that no man was able to contend with him in his great draughts, and Elbow-deep
Healths: insomuch, that the Emperor Aurelianus said of him; that fellow was
only borne to drink, not to live. Upon a time when the Ambassadors of the
Babarians were to appear before him, and to deliver themselves from the King
their Master, in stead of hearing their Embassy, he caused great store of
Wine to be brought, and pretending their liberal and free welcome and
entertainment, he so plied them with healths, that they were not able to
express themselves for what cause they were sent thither; but cunningly
withal proposed unto them such questions, that in their lavish cups they
uttered unto him the very secrets of their hearts, being much more then they
would have otherwise revealed: and when he had understood what he would, he
tauntingly dismissed them, and would never afford them further audience. So much
as he drunk so much he could evacuate at pleasure, so that his body was never
surcharged neither in all his day-riots, or nights commessations could it be
perceived either by the faltering of his tongue, or failing of his legs, that
he was any way distempered, he was of such an able constitution: but all that
could not secure his life, or add to his days; for after being overcome by
Probus (who succeeded him in his Empire) he caused him to dye a most unworthy
death, no way beseeming his former State and Dignity, but rather suiting his
vicious incontinency; namely to be hanged by the neck in an Hempen Halter, like
a common Fellon: From whence a Jest grew amongst the Soldiers; Amphorum
pendere non hominem;
That it was no man that hung there, but a Tun or Hogshead.


The same Author Vopiscus speaks of one called Phago, an insatiable Devourer,
who had no other pride nor practice; in so much, that he Phago Edax.
grew as famous for that abominable vice, as if he had been possessed with
some extraordinary virtue: His name and ^ame spread so far, that it came to
the ears of the Emperor Aurelianus; who for novelties sake, willing to see if
he were able to do what was reported of him, admitted him to his Table, and
for whose diet provision was made accordingly; and diverse spectators to behold
the Prodegy, there at one supper he devoured an hundred leaves of Bread, a fat
Wether, and an Hog of a year old, and drank to them according to the rate of
eight Gallons of Wine: insomuch, that all left eating to see him feed; and
wondered the rather, because he seemed no way moved or distempered: for which
the Emperor at the entreaty of those who brought him thither, dismissed him with
a reward. But he shortly after dyed miserably, choked in the midst of his so
gluttonous feeding.

A certain Noble General being told that one of his Soldiers could at once
eat such an huge quantity of provant and victual, that it seemed to him
incredible, he sent for him, and finding his other abilities no way exceeding
others, he presently commanded him to be hanged, saying, that he and an
hundred more such as himself, were in one months space able to starve him and
his whole Army.

Clodius Albinus, whose Guts were as a sink or common Shore to entertain
Clodius Albinus.
what trash or garbage, was conveyed into it, yet withal loved to feed with
all delicacy, he is said at one Supper to have devoured five hundred Figs, an
hundred Persick Apples, ten Melons of Ostea, twenty pound weight of Libican
grapes, an hundred Ficedulae, which are Birds that feed upon the Vines, much
like a Nightingale, and forty Oysters.

It is spoke of one called Heterognathus, that through hasty eating, he
Heterognathus.
devoured the flesh from his own Jaws and Cheeks, and sent it down packing
with the rest.

Heraclides Pictas was such an Helno, that scarce any of his time could
parallel him: some he would invite to Breakfast, some others to Dinner, a
third company to Supper, and feed heartily with them all, (sit as long as they
would) and eat and drink with them without Intermission, or Cessation, and at
night see all the Tables clear, that nothing were left for morning.

King Mithridatus also may truly be called an insatiate eater, who would give
rewards to such as would feed highest, and drink deepest, making Mithredates
K. of Pontus.
it his greatest glory that he was never exceeded in either; yet was desirous
to have others companions with him in his Gluttony; setting which aside, he
was a man of admirable parts, and had so exquisite a memory, that he was able
to speak two and twenty several Languages, and call all the Soldiers in his
Army by their names: Besides, for his Valor he was feared of all; yet he was
overthrown in Battle first by Syllus, next by Lucullus, and lastly by Pompey
quite defeated: He used to eat Poison; and in his last great overthrow would
have poisoned himself, but it had not the strength to work upon him. Being in
prison, such was the Majesty of his Countenance, that when an Executioner was
sent to put him to death, he frighted him with his very look, and loath to
have any other deaths-man but himself, he was found slain by his own hand,
piercing those Bowels that had been the receptacle of so much unnecessary
diet. With whom may be numbered Eresicthon, who after he had consumed his whole
Revenue, sold his Daughter Metra for money, by p(...)ng her body to every
stranger, and having devoured all, he after eat the flesh off from his own
Arms, and in the end died of hunger.

Eusebius reports of one Domitius Affer, who receiving more meat at Domitius
Affer
Supper, then his stomach could well digest, or his belly contain, dyed
suddenly sitting at the Table.

Philoxenes was of that nasty and beastly greediness, that being invited to
any Table, without respect to the honor of him who made the Philoxenes.
Feast, if he perceived any to fall upon that Dish which he had a mind to,
he would most unmannerly blow his Nose upon the meat, that they refraining it,
he might ingrosse it wholly and solely to himself; He was moreover heard to
wish to have the neck of a Crane, that he might take the more delight in the
going down of his Meat and Drink.

The Emperor Galba who succeeded Nero in the Imperial Purple, Galba and
Vitellius.
reigned seven Months and seven days; and notwithstanding he was threescore
and three years of age, yet he had an appetite betimes in the morning, before
the rising of the Lark: He was no sooner up, but he called for his Breakfast,
which sometimes (if other occasions called him not) he would continue till
Noone, and dine never the worse; and so make Dinner and Supper meet even till
bed time. Vitellius also, (I would put their deaths together, because the
manner of their lives were so alike) He was Emperor, and was so covetous, that
he pillaged and robbed the very Churches and Temples, and taking away the
golden Vessels and Plates, made those of Brass to serve in their stead. But
his gluttony was incomparable, for he had served into one Supper, two thousand
several sorts of Fishes, and seven thousand several kinds of Fowls; and
more he would have had, if more could have been compassed: Moreover, when he
lay near unto the Sea he would suffer no Fish to come to his Table; but when
he kept Court far up within the Land, he would feed upon nothing else,
because without extraordinary charges it could not be conveyed unto him;
esteeming that which was dear only dainty. But to come to their Deaths; These
two Charibdes and ingurgitating Quicksands, when they saw that they were ready
to be slain by the hands of their own Soldiers; they both (though happening
at several times) desired to be made drunk before their executions, which
was granted them, so that when the Soldiers Swords pierced their Bowels, the
Wine mixed with blood issued out of their wounds; and thus as they were in
their Lives monstrous, so they were in their deaths everlastingly miserable.

I have hitherto spoke of Eaters, I come now to Drinkers; the first only
hastening their own ruins, but the latter having been the destruction of
themselves and others.

Concerning this Sin of Bibacity and Vinosity, Infinite are the Drunkards
amongst the Grecians.
Examples that Antiquity has left to posterity; of which I remember unto you
some few.

Amongst the Grecians, Proteus the Macedonian had the name of an Alexander the
Great.
Invincible Tosse-Pot; to whom Alexander the Great having drank a Bowl of
twelve Sextaries, which is of our Measure two ^ottles and a Quart, he quickly
played it of^, and after some small pause, caused it the second time to be
brim'd, and drank to him again. But Alexanders strength failed in the Pledge,
and the Bowl slipped through his Fingers.

He grew to such intemperance, that after excess of Drinking, he was forced
to keep his bed two days and two nights together, without being seeene
abroad: In his Wine he would cause his best friends to be slain, and then
grievovsly lament them being sober. He was called by his own Soldiers the
Cup-Conquerer: and whosoever could pour most Wine down his Throat, they would
say of him; yea marry, this is a fellow that may drink with Alexander; who
when twenty have been in company together, he has drunk to every one of
them round, and then pledged them again severally; which horrible vice was a
mighty Eclipse to all his other Virtues. Calostiphenus the Sophist coming to
him into the Symposian, the King offered him a deep Draught, which he refused
with this Answer, I desire not, O Alexander, to receive such a Pledge from
thee; by taking of which, I must be enforced to enquire for a Physician. But
this great Captain and Commander, who was Lord of the whole earth, who made
his body no better then a Seller or Stowage for Wine, which he took in
voluntarily: At the same passage against his will he received poison, which
ended both his life and the hope of all his future Victories. And no wonder
when men come to glory in a sin, and make it their pride; for Cares Mitelenus
reports of him, that when he came to the Tomb of Calanus, the Indian
Philosopher, he celebrated to his honor and memory three prizes; for Music,
Wrestling, and Drinking; in which who excelled in the first, had a Talent; in
the second, three hundred pieces of silver, in the last ten: and in that thirty
Indians contending for mastery, drunk themselves dead in the place, and six
more expired some few hours after.

Antiochus was so besotted with Wine, that scarce a day passed him Antiochus
the Illustrious.
without dissemper; and yet notwithstanding surnamed the Illustrious:
Possedippus speaks of one Antiochus, to whom they gave the the name of Bibax,
who fought a great battle against Arbaces in Media; but being slain in the
conflict, and his body brought before the Conqueror, he taunted him in these
words; Thy Wine and thy boldness has much deceived thee, O Antiochus, who in
thy deep and lavish Cups did promise to thy self to have drunk up the
Empire of Arbaces.

Polybius speaks of one Agrones, King of the Illirians, who by often Agrones.
and immoderate surfeits, died of an extreme pain in the belly. Dionisius
junior drunk out his eyes; and Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, stabbed himself
with his knife when he was extremely cup-shot. Elpenor, having drunk hard,
would needs climb a Ladder; but his head having taken the wind, (as his body
had received the Wine) his hands and feet both failing, he fell down and
brake his neck. The like happened to one Philostratus coming from the
Sinuesanian Baths; and Cleomenes King of Sparta, in striving to imitate the
Scithian Vinoleuch, grew frantic, and so died. Lacides the Philosopher by too
much Compotation fell into the Disease called Paralysus, and died of it*
Armitus and Cyannippus, both of Syracusa, in their drunkenness ravished their
daughter; and in their sobriety were after slain by their own children whom
they had vitiated.

It is further read of Alexander, that he was of a wondrous temperate and
abstemious continence, till he had subdued the Persians, who lived the most
deliciously of any nation under the Sun: but as he Conquered them, so their
vices Captived him, and made him a mere slave to all sensuality and pleasure.
So the Romans were a people of civil demeanor, and of a most thrifty and
temperate Diet; but having won the Monarchy from the Grecians, as they could
teach the other to fight, so they could quickly learn of them to drink and
health it after their lavish and riotous manner: Briefly, you shall scarcely
read of any brave and victorious Nation, who brought any foreign people under
subjection; but though the spoils he took thence were of never so great value,
there came with him the greatest part of their vices, were they never so vile.
I need not press this much farther, the late Examples from the Roman Emperors
and others, may sufficiently illustrate it.

I come now to the most bitter fruits that grow upon this cursed Tree of The
bitter fruits of Gormundizing and Gluttony.
Gluttony, and the Parricidal and bloody effects thereof Doctor Selreccerus in
Pad. page 211. has this History: In the same City (says he) where St.
Augustine was borne, dwelt a very rich man, both of great power and substance
who had one only Son, the sole heir to his means and fortunes, who taking
very debaucht, and riotous courses, notwithstanding his Fathers daily
admonishments; yet still he persisted in his former course of life. The Father
out of his greater indulgence, as having but one, had allowed him large
exhibition; and the mother too of her natural love had still supplied his
riotous expenses, both using him with gentle and courteous language, hoping by
that fair course to draw him to some regularity: But finding that it nothing
prevailed, but that every day he grew worse then other, he began then to change
his Copy, his Brow was more austere, and his look more supercilious, and his
tongue (before altogether inured to advise and gently persuade) grew now to
another tone, sharply to reprove and reprehend him: But that which touched the
Son nearest, was, he took away all his means from him, leaving him to the wide
world, thinking (if any thing) want and necessity might make him look into
himself, and in time reduce him to some goodness: but alas his hopes were all
in vain; for the young man grew so stupid and besotted in drunkenness, that
he grew like one senseless, at least incapable of any good and wholesome
counsel. It happened some months after he had this neglect from his Father,
and his scores abroad grew so high, that neither Tavern nor Alehouse (knowing
him to be in his Fathers displeasure) would give him any further credit: He
came home to the house (whence he had been four weeks absent) and being full
of Wine, entered at the gate, whom his father meeting, and seeing him in that
distemperature, he began to chide him after the old manner; which the other
impatient to hear, caught him by the throat, and having uttered many execrable
oaths, called him old Dotard, and said, Money he wanted, and money he would
have ere he departed: The Father seeing violence offered, called out for help;
at which the Son drew his Dagger, and stabbed him into the Shoulder, most of
the Servants were absent abroad; but the mother hearing her husbands An
unmatchable villain^.
voice, comes down, and seeing him bleed, and her sons Dagger bloody in one
hand, and with the other grasping his throat, she fell down upon her knees,
and humbly besought him to spare his life; but the devil had got such power
over him, that he was deaf to all entreaties, and solely ben^ on the most
horrid mischief that could be devised: For breaking suddenly from his father,
he at an instant whipped out his sword, and ran him clean through the body; and
then turning toward his Mother, who filled the place with many a lamentable
outcry, he dispatched her of life also; and as he was about to enter the house,
purposing to rifle their Coffers, and so to be gone, in came some of the
servants, and finding their Master and Mistress weltering in their bloods, they
stood confounded and amazed, and not knowing what Murderers were in the House,
or how strong they were, they shut fast to the Doors, and Barricado'd them,
till they had called in help sufficient: Officers were sent for that opened
the doors, and searching the House, found the Paracide with his bloody weapons
in his hands, and his Pockets well stuffed with gold, who was presently
apprehended, and sent to Prison, and there laden with as many Irons as he was
able to bear: There needed no great examination, the fact being so apparent
was soon confessed, and he condemned to suffer only one death, who had
deserved a thousand.

I could almost parallel this Story, even here in our Country, with a Almost
the like done in England.
young Gentleman, that dwelt with his Mother not far from Salisburie, whose
Father being dead, his mother continued a grave and religious Matron. This
young man seldom coming sober home, she had often dissuaded gently from such
debaucht courses, but found in him no amendment: One night he staying abroad
very late, she resolved not to go to rest till he came in, and if he were any
way intoxicated, or overcome with Wine, to chide him soundly, which happened
according to her fear; for that night he was extraordinarily in drink, which
she by his uncertain steps, and justling the walls perceiving, intercepted
him in his way to his Chamber, and began to chide and rate him soundly, which
he not having the patience to endure, the devil so wrought with the Wine, that
he drew his Rapier and run her through the body: and this happened within these
few years, whose name I conceal as loath to offend his Worshipful friends
and kindred yet living, who might think the fact being so horrid, (howsoever
themselves be innocent thereof) a blemish to their name and posterity: and in
consideration of the premises, I leave to all Parents, who are too cockering
and indulgent over their children, in bringing them up, this Counsel from
Solomon, Withold not correction from the child, if thou smite him with the
rod he shall not dye; thou shall smite him with the rod, and shall deliver his
soul from hell.

Notwithstanding these fearful judgments, how many may we meet in the
daytime come either led, or else reeling from the Tavernes, but The effects of
too much wine
especially in the night, where some have been almost stifled by falling into
kennells, others found sleeping upon Dung-hills, on which stumbling, have not
been able to rise, but there have took up their lodging for all night; some
that have been conducted home, yet in going up stairs to bed, have fallen
backward and broke their necks. But of all miraculous escapes that I have heard
of; I my self knew two Gallants come from the Tavern, so strangely overtaken
with Wine, that when they came into the street, they were scarce able to stand,
or go, or move one foot before another; the night was dark, and loath they
were to take the benefit of a light, because their indenturing should not be
observed: and because they would both take one fortune, they caught fast hold
one of the other, and on they went; it happened in the way that a Seller door
being left open, down they both fell into a Vault: but here is the wonder, one
of their Rapiers slipped out of the scabbard, and fell with the pummill A
miraculous escape.
downwards, and the point up-right; these tumbled after it, and it ran one of
them through the Breeches at the knee, up to the waste, and thence through the
body of the Dublet up to the shoulder, where the point appeared an handful
bare at his neck, and yet in the whole passage not so much as once razed any
part of his skin. The noise of the fall suddenly commanded a light; but when
they saw the Rapier so strangely scabbarded, and by search found that the party
had no hurt, they were all amazed, and the two Drunkards with the apprehension
thereof made almost sober: This was one of Gods miraculous deliverances; but
let none presume to make that a president for his security: for doubtless, he
has less wit then an Idiot, who being in his best sobriety, would hazard the
like danger.

But it has not happened so to others; for a Butcher who was observed A
drunken Bu(...).
for a common Drunkard, being Pot-shot, and in his Cups, was got into a Car^ to
receive some hides, or such like commodity to lade it with, and stooping his
body to take something in, his Head was too heavy for his Legs that should
have supported him, and down ^ee fell upon a Forke which stood by the Cart
side with the pikes upward, he pitched his breast upon it, which pierced him to
the heart, so that he dyed immediately without calling to God for mercy: and
this is known not long since to have happened.

In Norfolk three men coming drunk out of an Ale house, late in the A
judgment upon three drunkards.
night, amongst many other profane and blaspemous speeches, they began to jest
at Hell, and withal to swear, that in the most obscure place of it, it could
not be so dark as that night was; at length they were to take leave and part
every man to his home; and after a drunken farewell, the one of their ways
lying over a Bridge, his feet failing he slipped into the water, and was drowned:
The two other were Horsemen, one of which, by the stumbling of his horse, was
cast upon the ground, where he was after found dead, with his neck broken;
neither did the third escape without a most remarkable Judgment; for his horse
was found grazing in one place, and he dead in another, but without any wound;
for some conjectured that he perished with the extremity of cold, it being a
bitter frosty night, and snow falling withal.

A Glasier in Chancery lane, not long since so overcharged his stomach A
Glasier.
with wine, that coming home he fell a vomiting in that extreme and
extraordinary fashion, that breaking a vein within him he dyed within two
days after: and a Barber in Drewry-lane coming from the Tavern in the like
distemper, his wife with much ado got him to bed, A Barber.
where he fell into a sound and dead sleep; for that night being very
tempestuous, and a mighty wind stirring, and they lodging in an upper room or
Garret, the Chimney was blown down and he killed in his bed, his wife that
lay close by his side, having no hurt at all: To reckon up all the known
judgments in this kind would make this Tractate voluminous: these therefore
for the present I hope may satisfy the indifferent reader, who if he shall but
enquire from man to man of the disasters happening in that kind, shall hear
from their own motion, Stories too many of all good Christians to be
charitably commiserated, and lamentably deplored.

These have been examples of such as we call downright Drunkards, One that
drank himself to death.
and like selfe-murderers have been not only accessaries, but the Agents of
their own deaths: of which nature one accident of which my self was
eyewitness, comes fresh in my remembrance, and happened some seven or eight
years since at the most: Five young men coming from Islington upon a Sunday,
where they had been drinking good store of Ale, in their way home came to the
Nags-head Tavern upon Clerken-well hill, where they called for Wine, (what
quaintity they drank I am not certain) but in the amidst of their
carrowsing, one of them (being a young man a Barber in Ivy-lane, and lately
married) grew to to be drowsy, and at length dropped under the Table; which the
rest not minding, put it off with a jest, and said, he did but counterfeit
sleep till the reckoning was paid; another said, he had known him do the
like before; and thus they past the time till they were ready to part; when
calling for a reckoning, they also called for their drowsy Companion to rise,
and to go along with them: but hearing that he made no answer, they pusht him
and jogged him, yet all in vain; till at length by the help of the Master of
the House, they lifted up his body, and set him on one of the Benches; but his
head fell down into his bosom, for there was no life in him: at which they
grew all amazed; neither can I blame them, who for every Glass of Wine they
enforced him to drink beyond his strength, might as well to have given him a
stabbe in the breast with a Puniard: The next day came his weeping Wife, and
some of his sorrowful kindred, and conveyed his body from the Tavern to the
Church to be buried.

I come now to that from which I late deviated, as to those who through excess
of Gusling (for manners sake called good fellowship) destroy not themselves
with sudden Deaths, but rather Consumptions and lingering Maladies, which also
by degrees brings on an assured and untimely end, one of the branches thereof
is luxurious Prodigality, mixed with intemperate Vinocity, of which I will give
you but one President.

A rich Citizens son, and well allied amongst the Aldermen, being a
personable and proper young man, daring, and valiant, of a wondrous A true
relation of a Prodigal Citizen.
active body, acute wit, and a seeming sollid apprehension; his Father dying,
left him (what estate in land I know not) thirty thousand pound in ready Cash,
besides Plate, Jewels, and houses furnished with rich hangings, with all
Utensills suitable to the state of Aldermen. Now this man who was no Gamster to
lavish his means that way, yet spent all his whole and entire estate within
the space of three years: Would any man believe how this could be possible?
Well, I will tell you how; he kept two or three tall fellows in Skarlet
Liveries, daubed with gold lace; and for his own particular would shift his
Clothes twice a day, wearing one suit in the morning, another after dinner:
his most frequented Tavern, was the Kings Head in new Fish-street, where he
usually dined and supt in the long Room, at the long Table, where though he
were but himself and his friends, he would have the Board thronged with
variety of Dishes, from the top to the bottom; and as his meat was beyond
rule, so many times his drink was beyond reason: and though he could not be
without flatterers or Sycophants about him, yet could they never fool him out
of any bounty: His Table was free for them, but his Pockets shut, keeping
always a brace of principal good Geldings; his delight was to ride them off
from their legs, and when they were foundred, or past present service, give
them to one of his Grooms.

He had a great longing to please all his five senses at once; nor could he be
at peace within himself till he had accomplished it; and allowed to A strange
and unheard of prodigal.
the delight of every sense a several hundred pound, for which he bespoke a
curious fair room, hung with the richest Arras that could be hired, and
furnished with all the most exquisite Pictures that might be bought or
borrowed, to please the eye.

He then had all the choicest Music that could be heard of, and how far
off soever to be sent for, with all the varieties or rarities that could be
raised from any Instrument, to give him content to the ear. Then he had all
the Aromaticks, and Odoriferous Perfumes to delight his sent in smelling: Next
all the Candies, Preserves, all the Junkets, even to the stretching of the
Apotecaries, or Confectionaries Art to palliate his taste: and lastly a
beautiful and fair strumpet lodged with him in a (...)e compassed, to
accommo(...) (...)ore then ever Sardanapalus did) (...)

To tell of his mea(...) (...), (...) these (though they were great in
themselves) yet in the relation would appear nothing, and therefore I omit
them: Briefly, as he grew in an instant to wealth, so he fell as suddenly to
want; and then those who had been his greatest sycophants, would shun the way
of him: He drew to all the debauchtnesse that could be named, being a brother
of the Broom-staffe, not worth a cloak, though never so threadbare, being
forced most shamefully to beg of his acquaintance, and those he had known; he
was after pressed for a common soldier, and for running away from his Captain
should have been hanged (but for his Worshipful kindred, for whose sake I also
forbear to name him) the matter was put off: But now follows the wonder,
after all this contempt, misery, and penury, two or three Gentlemen called him
up into a Tavern, of purpose to have some discourse with him; and one amongst
them desired him to resolve him faithfully of one question he would ask him,
who protested unto him that he would unfaignedly do it: He then said to him,
you have been a Gentleman well bred, and have spent a very fair Fortune, you
are now cast down to the lowest disgrace that can be, as having tasted of all
miseries whatsoever; and you know them both, plenty and poverty, in a full
measure; now my demand of you is, (the premises considered) if you had all
your former estate in your hands entire (knowing what you now know) would you
not be a very good Husband? To whom he made answer, and bound it with a great
oath; if I had, said he, all the estate I before enjoyed, and ten times a
greater, I would spend it all to liveone week like a God, though I were sure to
be damned to hell the next day after: which struck the Gentlemen into such
astonishment, and anger withal, that instead of giving him money, which was
their purpose, they thrust him out of the room as a profane and blasphemous
wretch, and would never look upon him after.

Who that shall look upon all the Prodigalls and spend-thrifts that have had
great fortune, and have wasted them to nothing; or consider how many young
Shopkeepers that have had good and sufficient stock to set up with, and
through Drinking and Company-keeping, (neglecting their home-affaires) have
suddenly proved Trade-falne; and what has been the end? but to fill Gaoles,
and furnish prisons; or if they escape with Liberty, to fall into dissolute and
desperate courses, which bring them into certain disgrace, but most commonly
unto untimely end. Besides, how many young heirs in the Country, borne to
fair Revenues, and possessed of great estates, who having lived formerly in the
Country, and after come to see the fashions of the City, what by Tavernes,
Ordinaries, Gamehouses, Brothell-houses, and the like, have been so besotted
and stupefied, that they have suddenly run themselves out of all their
fortunes; and then growing desperate, having spent their own, forced from
others, and taking purses by the highway side, have come at length to disgrace
their gentry by their infamous deaths at the Gallows. And these and the like
are the remarkable judgments continually exercised upon gluttons and drunkards:
from which sin of Gurmandizing, as from all the rest, God of his infinite
mercy, even for the merits of his Son Christ Jesus deliver us all.

Amen.
FINIS.
A Table of the several Chapters contained in the two first parts of this Book.
Chapt. 1. TOuching the corruption and perversity of this World, how great it
is. Page 1 2. What is the cause of the great overflow of vice in this Age. 3 3.
That great men, which will not abide to be admonished of their faults, cannot
escape punishment by the hand of God. 4 4. How the justice of God is more
evidently declared upon the mighty ones of this world, then upon any other, and
the cause why. 5 5. How all men both by the Law of God and Nature are
inexcusable in their sins. 7 6. How the greatest Monarchs in the World ought
to be subject to the Law of God; and consequently to the Laws of Men and
Nature. 9 7. Of the punishments that seized upon Pharaoh King of Egypt, for
resisting God, and transgressing the first Commandment of the Law. 13 8. More
examples like unto the former. 17 9. Of those that persecuted the Son of God
and his Church. 20 10. More examples like unto the former. 25 11. Of the Jews
that persecuted Christ. 29 12. Of those that in our age have persecuted the
Gospel in the person of the faithful. 32 13. Other examples of the same
subject. 36 14. A Hymn of the persecution of Gods Church, and the deliverance
of the same. 43 15. Of Apostata's and Back-sliders, that through infirmity and
fear have fallen away. 45 16. Of those that have willingly fallen away. 49 17.
Of the third and worst sort of Apostates, those that through Malice forsake the
Truth. 51 18. More examples like unto the former. 55 19. Of Heretics. 61 20.
Of Hypocrites. 67 21. Of Conjurers, and Inchanters. 71 22. Of those that
through pride and vain glory, strove to usurp the honor due to God. 79 23.
Of Epicures and Atheists. 87 24. Touching the Transgressors of the 2.
Commandment by Idolatry. 94 25. Of many evils that have come upon
Christendom for Idolatry. 96 26. Of those that at any time corrupted and
mingled Gods Religion with humane Inventions, or went about to change or
disquiet the Discipline of the Church. 99 27. Of Perjurers. 101 28. More
examples of the like subject. 116 29. Of Blasphemers. 130 30. Of those that by
cursing, and denying God give themselves to the Devil. 134 31. More examples
of Gods judgment upon Cursers. 136 32. Punishments for the contempt of the
Word and Sacraments, and abuse of holy things. 140 33. Those that profane the
Sabbathday. 147
Judgments in the second Book.
Chap. 1. Of rebellious and stubborn Children toward their Parents. 151 2. Of
those that rebel against their Superiors. 158 3. More examples of the same
subject. 163 4. Of such as have murdered their Rulers and Princes. 168 5. Of
such as rebelled against their Superiors, because of Subsidies and ^^^es
imposed upon them. 171 6. Of Mu(...) (...) ^74 7. A suit of examples like unto
the former. 177 8. Other examples like unto the former. 193 9. Other memorable
examples of the like subject. 197 10. Of diverse other Murderers, and their
several punishments. 201 11. Of the admirable discovery of murders. 203 12.
Of such as have murdered themselves. 214 13. Of Paracides, or Parent
murderers. 221 14. Of Subject-murtherers. 226 15. Of those that are both
cruel and disloyal. 231 16. Of Queens that were murderers. 234 17. Of such
as without necessity, upon every light occasion move war. 236 18. Of such as
please themselves overmuch in seeing cruelties. 239 19. Of such as exercise too
much rigor and severity. 241 20. Of Adulteries. 244 21. Of Rapes. 245 22. Other
Examples of Gods Judgments upon Adulterers. 251 23. Showing that Stews ought
not to be suffered amongst Christians. 254 24. Of Whoredoms committed under
color of marriage. 256 25. Of unlawful marriages and their Issues. 257 26
Touching incestuous marriages. 259 27. Of Adultery. 261 28. Other Examples
like unto the former. 264 29. Other Examples like unto the former. 268 30. More
Examples of the same Argument. 272 31. Of such as are Divorced without cause.
275 32. Of those that either cause, or authorize unlawful Divorcements. 277
33. Of Insestuous persons. 278 34. Of effeminate persons, Sodomites, (...)
^onsters. 280 35. Of the wonderful evil that arises from the greedines of
Lust. 282 36. Of unlawful Gestures, Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
^ancing, and other such like dissolutenes. 283 37. Of Thieves and Robbers. 292
38. Of the excessive burdening of the Commonalty. 297 39. Of those that have
used too much cruelty toward their subjects in taxes and exactions. 299 40.
More examples of the same subject. 302 41. Of such as by force of Arms have
either taken away, or would have taken away the goods, and land^ of other men.
304 42. Of Usurers, and their Theft. 373 43. Of Dicers, Card-players, and their
Theft. 376 44. Of such as have been notorious in all kind of sin. 379 45. More
examples of the same argument. 385 46. Of Calumniation and false witness. 393
47. That Kings and Princes ought to look to the execution of justice, for the
punishment of naughty and corrupt manners. 40^ 48 Of such Princes as have made
no reckoning of punishing vice, nor regarded the estate of their people. 402
49. How rare and geason good Princes have been at all times. 40^ 50. That the
greatest and mightiest Cities are not exempt from punishment of their
iniquities. 408 51. Of such punishments as are common to all men in regard of
their iniquities. 409 52. That the greatest punishments are reserved and laid
up for the wicked in the world to come. 410 53. How the afflictions of the
godly, and punishments of the wicked differ. 411
A brief Summary of more examples annexed to the form^ (...) ^^e same Author.
Chap: 1. Of such as have persecuted the Church of Christ. 414 2. Of Perjury.
414 3. Of Epicures and Atheists. ibid. 4. Of Idolatry. 418 5. Of Blasphemy. 418
6. Of Conjurers, Magitians, and Witches. ibid. 7. Of the profanation of the
Sabbath. 419 8. Of Drunkenness. 420 9. Of rebellious and disobedient children
to parents. 426 10. Of murderers. ibid. 11. Of Adultery. 428 12. Of Thieves
and Robbers. 429 13. Of (...) 431 14. Of the molestation of evil spirits, and
their execution of Gods judgments upon men. ibid. 15. The Conclusion,
concerning the protection of holy Angels, over such as fear God. 437
A Table of the most remarkable judgments contained in the last part of this
Book, never before imprinted.
DEvoured by Worms. page 3 Poisoned. 4 Self-murder. ibid. ^^postume. 5 A
Spanish History against pride in knowledge. (...), etc. The Popes Nephew
hanged. 8 An Italian rack^ (...) death 9 Herbert Earl of Vermendois. 10
Bajazet beats out his own brainis. ibid. B^adaas neck broke by a fall. ib.
Earl Goodwin choked at the table. 11 Earl Harold shot in the eye. 11, 12
Pierce Gaveston beheaded. 13 Sir Hugh Spencer beheaded, and his son hanged
and quartered. 13 Earl Mortimer hanged. 14 Sundry others executed. 15 A brief
relation of the life and death of Cardinal Wolsey. 15, 16 Envious persons
punished sundry ways. 17. One Brother murthereth another. 21 A remarkable
history of a Roman Prince 22 Pope Boniface his miserable death. 23 The death of
Caesar Germanicus. ib. Matrinus head cut off. 24 Bassianus and his mother torn
in pieces and thrown into a ^akes. 24 Alexander Severus miserably slain. ib.
Prince Cranne, with his Wife and Children burnt to death. 25 One brother
kills another, and the mother murdereth her own Son. 25, 26 Prince Morwith
devoured by a Sea monster. Sundry other remarkable judgments upon envious
persons. 27 The unfortunate deaths of Edw. 6. his two Uncles. 30, 31 Ptolomeus
Pisco torn in pieces. 33 Cirenes famished to death. ibid. One destroyed by
Lightning. ibid. Of another torn in pieces by Wolves. ibid The story of
Philaris brazen Bull. 33, 34 Sundry relations of bloody women. 34, 35
Remarkable observations upon the Emperor Caligula, together with his death. 35
Avidius Cassius his bloody acts and miserable death. 37 Sundry murders
strangely discovered. 42 Sundry judgments against the sin of sloth 46 A strange
story of a slothful Chambermaid. 55 Covetousness defined. 58 The infinite
riches of some men. 62 The monstrous covetousness of Mauritius the Emperor,
together with his death. 64 Sundry judgments against covetousnes. 66 A strange
Murder committed in Honeylane, and as strangely discovered. 69 A Scholar
murdereth his Fathers Servant. 70 Parents murder their own children. 71
Judgments inflicted upon Usurers. 74 Lust learnedly defined. 76, etc. Gods
judgments against Gluttony. 96, etc.
FINIS.

