Mr. Holk chief Agent in the Uprore


A Seasonable Lecture, OR A most learned Oration: Disburthened from Henry
Walker, a most judicious Quondam Iron-monger, a late Pamphleteere and now (too
late or too soon) a double diligent Preacher.

As it might be delivered in Hatcham Barn the thirtieth day of March last,
Stylo Novo.

Taken in short writing by Thorny Ailo; and now printed in words at length, and
not in figures.

And Toby went forth, etc


Printed at London for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and T. Banks. 1642.

A Seasonable Lecture: OR A most learned Oration, Disburthened from Henry
Walker, a most judicious Quondam Iron-monger, a late Pamphleteere, and now (too
late, or too soon) a double d^ligent Preacher.
Men and Women, Male or Female, Old and Young, Boys and Girls, Lads and
Lasses, Babes and Children, Omnium gatherum; attend to my Text, as you shall
find it written in the fifth Chapter of the Book of Tobias, and part of the
sixteenth verse.

So they went forth both and departed, and the dog of the young man went with
them.

BEfore I enter upon my Text, Beloved, it is correspondent, meet, necessary
and convenient, that I do unveile, lay open, describe, discover, and manifest
unto you, some reasons why, wherefore, upon what causes, grounds, or reasons,
this Dog is mentioned in my Text.

This portion that I shall administer unto you at this time, I have divided
into six parts; first, the time when this Dog lived; secondly, whose Dog he
was; thirdly, whither he went; fourthly, what fashioned or kind of Dog he was;
fifthly, his demeanor and carriage; and lastly, his name: Of all these in
order, as 3 hours short time, and your long patience will permit.

First, the time that this Dog lived, was about the death of Zenacherib, that
blasphemous King of Assyria, as it is in the first of Tobit, and the one and
twentieth verse, where is mention made, that after he was slain, Sarchedonus
his son reigned after him. It was then a wicked time, full of oppression,
cruelty, and idolatry: and at this time lived honest, old, hospitable Tobias,
who being oppressed by tyranny, went into Media, and left ten Tallents of
silver in safe custody with his kinsman Gabael, who dwelt in a city called
Rages in Media, as you shall find it in the first Chapter and fourteenth verse.
Beloved, Toby was of the Tribe of Nepthalim, who were idolatrous, and offered
to an Heifer they called Ball, Chap. 1. 5. in Galilee, and dwelt in a city
called Thisbe there, from whence he was carried captive into Assyria by
Salmanazer, as you shall have it in the first and second verses. Now it
follows that Toby, after much trouble went home again, Chap. 2. and verse. 1.
This was the time wherein this Dog lived. I will presently proceed, and go
forward, or speak further, as your patience may permit.

About this time old Tobias wasstricken blind, and in some want of his ten
Tallents of silver, which he left so far off in Media with Gabael, for which
he determined to send his son (young Tobias) but he was in great care to have a
Guide with him in so long a journey, and to help him to bring so great a charge
as ten Tallents back with him (which is, I Will warrant you, 40 pounds of our
money, or thereabouts) and in the third Chapter and the nineteenth verse, the
Angel Raphael came in the shape of a man, whom old Tobiab hired for a groat a
day to go with his son out and home as it is in the 5 of Tobit and 14 verse.
And thus much shall suffice for the time when the Dog lived.

So they went forth both, and departed, and the dog of the young man went with
them.

Some simple observations might be gathered out of the first word of my Text,
So; but it is a matter of So, so, and therefore I will pass it over so; yet
(Beloved) as we are men all made of one mold, one proportion and shape, our
senses all alike, So it is not lawful that one man should have any power or
authority over another so as they have; but every man ought to be a rule and
guide to himself, So that he should not need to be ruled so, and guided so by
other men; for many men desire soveraigntie, superiority, dignity, promotion,
advancement, pre-eminence, domination, sway (or call it what you please) but
the truth is (my Brethren) that as we are all made alike, So we should equally
rule alike, and live in such a community, that all things should be in common,
So that mine is thine, and thine is mine, be it what it will, either wife,
children, goods, or lands, etc. So that none shall command, nor any one obey:
and so much shall suffice to be spoken of the word So. So they went forth.

They, what They? The word is not in the singular number, He or she went forth,
but They, which argues the pluralitic of They that went forth; now who where
this they This they were no other than the Angel Raphael, who was hired for a
groat a day by old Tobit (as is before specified in the first leaf and
seventeenth page) and the other who was one of the same they (without whom they
could not have been they) was young Tobias the son of old Tobias, who having
taken leave of his father, went to fetch the ten Tallents of silver from Gabael
at Rages in Media. So they went forth and departed, and the dog of the young
man went with them. So they went.

It is to be noted, that if they had not been sent, they would not have went:
Beloved, this is an instruction of reproof to such as will do nothing but what
they are bidden, nor go any whither except they be sent or commanded; but those
that are industrious will always be busy in some thing, though they have no
thanks for their pains, it is no matter for that, So they went, they were sent
in a lawful errand, but that is no rule to us, that we should stay till we be
sent; for when should I have been sent to preach? I think never. Therefore as
many zealous Tradesmen before me, went and thrust themselves into this holy
Calling, without being sent; so I having tried trade after trade, hard Iron and
Steel, and soft Books and Ballads, have now fallen upon the only common trade
of trades to preach, and indeed my zeal was so hot that I had no leisure to
stay till I was sent forth: but I as they (the rest of my brethren) so went
forth. So they went forth both.

Both does signify two, twain, a couple, a pair, a duplicitie, or the
Plural Number, They went forth both. The Dog is not yet specified, for then it
might have been said, that three went forth both at once; but they went forth
and departed. This word and standing betwixt forth and departed, has a
mystical sense, that a man may go forth and not depart, that he may also
depart and not go forth, And that he may both go forth and depart, and
likewise he may neither depart or go forth. I went forth and departed from one
calling to another, I went forth and departed from an Iron-monger to be a
Bookseller, and I thank the whole Company of Stationers they took my kind
intrusion into their Society with more respect than it becomes me to make
boast of; but lately I went forth and departed from that Function, and am
Theologically qualified, and if that do not thrive with me, I can return to
the Booksellers trade again, with as much leave and love as I had before. And
thus much shall suffice, satisfy, or be enough, or sufficient for the
explanation, manifestation, or declaration, for your edification of this part
of my Text, So they went forth both and departed.

And the dog of the young man went with them.

This word And (Beloved) I have somewhat spoken of before, yet there is
observation worthy to be noted, which is, that this (And) is never placed in
the end, last word, or period of a speech; and for your further instruction
when you see this word ( And) in the beginning of any speech or s^ntence you
must expect that some other thing is mentioned afterward, as it is in my Text,
And the Dog of the young man went with them.

The Dog (my Brethren) was the Dog of the young man, which by interpretation
was the young man's dog, now the young man was young Tobias, and old Tobias
being his father, (out of question) young Tobias was his son, and the lawful
owner and master of the Dog. There is not any mention made, that this Dog was
commanded, or called to go with his Master; no sure, he was a loving and a
willing Dog, to attend without compulsion: he was not like Coals dog, that
would neither go to Church, nor tarry at home, such a Cur would be hanged
Brethren. I do not find at what time of the year it was when this Dog went,
but it may be it was in the Dog-dayes, for then the days be long, the ways
fair, and most fit for a long journey: and the proverb says, A dog has a
day, etc. This Dog was a Dog of extraordinary note, for he is mentioned for his
diligent attendance again in the eleventh Chapter and fourth verse, in these
words, And the Dog followed them.

In my Text it is said that the Dog went with them, and here it is said that
the Dog followed them; in both places there is much duty expressed: In the first
here is to be noted Toby, Tobies Dog, and Tobies Dogs tail: In the second, he
went with them when they went from home: and in the latter, he followed them at
their return back. It is said he followed, he went not saucily before his
Master. I will not question what age this Dog was of, or whether he was
whelp'd in the Dogs days, or out of the Dogs days, or in the Cats nights; for
there is no Dogs nights, though the learned write of the beginning of the
Dog-dayes, and of the ending of them also: but surely this was a wise Dog, not
a wag wanton, or a foolish Puppie-dog, but he was a sage and a wise Dog, and my
reason is, because he followed them, attended upon them, waited upon them, and
did not stir out of the house till they went forth: I cannot say, or any way
prove or find, that he was gelt or libb'd, as I may term it, which made this
Dog the more observant and dutiful; but whether he was or no, I am confident
he was a very mannerly Dog, for he did not run before and yelp, and baule,
Waw, waw, waw, no, he went forth with them mildly, gently, meekly; he was not
to look for abroad, or up and down the house, or under, or upon the beds, or
in some corner or hole of the house did this honest Dog obscure himself. This
shows he had no bad actions or crimes laid to his change, either by the
Kitchin-maid, or the Chambermaid: but this Dog was of the true kind, mannerly,
good conditioned, and well-favoured, which serves for an exhortation or
document for such unmannerly Serving men and Foot-boyes, that are so forward,
that they will be in their roast meat before their Masters are out of their
boiled. They are called their Masters followers, and ought to be so in all
lawful things (s^ving their Mistresses.)

There are diverse opinions amongst the Learned concerning this Dog; Quabo the
American in his third Book, fol. 900 of his Dogmatists; and Nimpshag the
Gymnosophist, both these do agree, that this Dog was no Bob-tail'd Tyke,
Trun^le-tail'd Tyke, We Tyke, or Muckle Tyke (as you call Dogs in Scotland.)
Surely my opinion is, that he was no Hound (though all Dogs are called Hounds
in Germany, and for one man to call another Hounds-foot, it is dangerous to be
spoken.) Tobias was no Hunter, therefore it cannot be gathered that it was a
Buck-hound, Bloud-hound, Otterhound, Goose-hound, Greyhound, Fox-hound, or any
kind of H^und. Nor was his Master addicted to the game of Hawking or Ducking,
so that it may be conjectured that the Dog was neither Land, or Water Spaniell;
neither was he a C^nny-catching Tumbler, for no such Shark was to have
entertainment under Tobias his ^oofe. He was not a ^oysting Hound, for Tobias
the elder was old and blind, and his wife Anna was stricken in years, and
therefore they had no delight to play with Whelps or Puppies (my Brothers) of
that or the like Litter; nor was it a Shogh from Ireland, or an Island Cur; for
those are Dogs of small delight to ancient people, and young Tobias was
unmarried, therefore he had no wife to play with a Dog. I cannot think this
Dog to be a Mungrell, because he was not variable, but kind and constant to his
Master. Nor was it a Mastiffe, a Bull dog, or a Bearedog, for such sports are
for such as can see, for young people, for Beare-wards, Butchers, and such
grave Athenians, and not for old blind folks. In sum, this Dog is manifestly
and authentiquely supposed to be a Whippet, or pretty handsome house dog, such
as will stay at home with their Masters, and go abroad with their Masters,
that are watchful in the night, to bark and give warning, if the house be in
danger of Thieves to break it open, or of any other noise or peril, this Dog
would give warning and bark before he bit. From which virtues of this
Apocryphal Dog, many worthy instructions might be gleaned and gathered: but
(Beloved) the present time being past, and the time to come calls us to dinner,
I will trouble your patience no further, but leave these my former sayings to
your over-ripe considerations. Vale.

FINIS.

