JOHN TAILORS Wandering, to see the Wonders of the WEST.

How he traveled near 600. Miles, from London to the Mount in Cornwall, and
beyond the Mount, to the Lands end, and home again.

Dedicated to all his loving Friends, and free minded Benefactors.

In these dangerous days for Rich men, and miserable times for the Poor
Servants of the late King, (whereof I was one, 45. years to his Royal Father
and Himself) I thought it needful to take some course to make use of some
friends, and devise a painful way for my subsistence; which was the Journey I
have past, and this Book here present; for which purpose I gave out many of
these following Bills, to which near 3^00. Gentlemen and others, have kindly
subscribed, to give me a reasonable reward.

Printed in the Year 1649.

TAILORS Western Voyage to the Mount.
It Is a mad world (my masters) and in sadness
I travailed madly in these days of madness:
Eight years a frenzy did this Land molest,
The ninth year seemed to be much like the rest,
My self (with age, grief, wrongs, and wants oppressed,
With troubles more then patience could digest)
Amongst those Isles, I chose the least and best,
Which was to take this journey to the West:
And sure it is an Argument most fit,
That he who has a portion of small wit
As I have, and good store of friends, 'twere sloth
And foolery, not to make use of both.
My wit was worn thread bare, half naked, poor.
And I, with it, went wool-gath'ring for more.
This long walk (first and last) I undertook
On purpose to get money by my Book:
My friends (I know) will pay me for my pain.
And I will never trouble them again.
Six hundred miles, I (very near) have footed,
And all that time was neither should or booted;
But in light buskins I performed this traveli
Over hill and dale, through dust dirt, flint, and gravel.
And now no more words I in vain will scatter,
But come unto the marrow of the matter.
My Reader must not her suppose that I
Will write a treatise of Geography:
Or that I mean to make ex^ct Relations
Of Cities, Towns, or Countries scituations;
Such men as those I turn them over to read
The learned Cambden, or the painful Speed.
And now (good Reader) I my muse do tune,
I London left, the twenty one of June:
To Brainford, Colebrooke, Maidenhead and Henly,
I past (the weather fair, the high ways cleanely)
To Abington. where four days I remained,
By friends and kinsfolks kindly entertained:
Thanks to my Nephew John, with all the rest,
To whom that time I was a costly Guest.
AND now me thinks a little Proof may be relished amongst friends; I left
Abington on Wednesday the 27. of June, and (for the case of my purse) I gave
2s. 6d. for the hire of the Skelliton or Anatomy of a Beast to carry me ten
miles to Farington; the thing I was mounted on was neither Horse, Mine, or
Gelding, it was all spirit, with very little (or no flesh.) It was none of your
pursy foggy Jades, and amongst Horsemen it might have past for a Light Horse,
too much work, and too little meat, made him as gaunt as a Greyhound: Thus
(mounted like Don Quixot) I entered Farington, but worse Guests then I had been
there since these troubles; for the Kings Party burnt one part of the Town,
and the Parliaments fired the rest, so that between them there was a good
hansome Market Town turned into Ashes and Rubbidge: It begins to bud and
spring out again, for here and there a pretty house peepes up: so that it
will in short time be rebuilt, and Phaenix like (out of it is own cinders) be
revived and reneued to a more pleasing and beautiful prospect.

From Farington I footed it four miles to Hiworth, (a Market Town) and from
thence to Purton seven miles more, where I lodged, there was nothing
remarkable in all that days travels; but that in the morning a Church at a
Village called Kingston, (five miles from Abington having no steeple; but the
Church at Purton (where I lay all night) had two steeples: but I was certified
that the Minister that had two steeples, had but one Benefice, and he that had
none, had two, by which means the reckoning was even betwixt them, for what
the one had, the other had not.

The 28. of June, I betook me to my feet an house and half before the Sun
could show his face in Somersetshire, and for one shilling I hired an old
drunkard to guide me eight long miles to the Town of Malmsbury, where all
worthy remembrance was, that I found an Ancient Town, an old Castle, and new
Ale; from thence I hired a Horse for 25. seven miles, and footed it seven
miles more that day to the famous, renowned, ancient, little pretty City of
Bathe, I lodged in the Mayors house: But his Worship was as ignorant as my
self, for he being a Baker, had let half his house to a Victualler: so he
sold bread without, and I bought drink within: The next day I had notice where
I was, wherefore I went to his stall or shop window, and told him what I was,
and that I was he who came nine years ago from London, to that City with a
small Scullers Boat; Mr. Mayor was pleased to entertain me most kindly (with
both his hands in his pocket) and like a man of few words, forbore to say
welcome to Town; so we parting dryly I left him in his shop, Lord Baron of
the Brown Loaves, and Master of the Rolls (in that place:) but there is no
doubt but the man may live a fair age, and dye in his bed, if be escape the
unfortunate destiny of Pharoahs Baker.

Friday 29. of June, I had the luck twice to have not one dry thread about me,
(being wet to the very skin) and yet my clothes were as dry as a bone: the
reason is, that I was in the Bathe, and my clothes out.

June 30. I traveled fifteen miles to the Town of Wells, where I stayed but
little, and found as little matter of observation, but that these holy,
profane days, and blessed execrable Times of troublesome tranquillity, have
spoiled and defaced one of the goodliest and magnificent Cathedral Churches in
the Christian world: But such pious works as polution and abusing of Churches,
we need not go amongst Turks for proofs; for though Peter's at Westminster
has escaped reasonable cleanely, yet Paul's in London has layen out of order,
in ord^^e a battenning.

The same day I went four miles further to the ancient Town of Glastonbury,
there I saw the Ruins of an Abbey, which was one of the statelyest and most
sumptuous structures in England or Europe: there ^^^^aines yet the ruined walls
of a Chapel built in memory of Joseph of Arimathea (who as it is recorded by
Authentic Historians) did first convert this Land from Paganism to
Christianity: And we have great need of another good Joseph to come amongst
us, to do as much for us now. But there is no memorial of any place where
that good old man was buried: the Abbey was walled more then a mile about, with
a wall of freestone, as fair as London wall; it is very probable that King
Arthur (our English Worthy) was there sepulchred: for there I saw some stones
of Marble, of which I placed the broken pieces together; I read these words in
Latin, Hic jacet Guineverus Regins, Vxores, etc.

Queen Guinever was Wife to the great Arthur, and she being buried there, it
is to be conjectured that his bones were not laid far from her.

Mr. Camden, does quote the Ancient Historian, William of Malmsbury, to write
these words following concerning Glastenbury.

That it was the first Land of God in England, the first Land of Saints in
England, the beginning and fountain of all Religion in England, the Tomb of
Saints, the Mother of Saints, the Church founded and built by the Lords
Disciples.

I saw a branch or slip of the Hawthorne Tree that did bear. Blossoms every
year (when all other Trees were frost-bitten, and seemed dead:) this Tree
only, on Christmas day, the day of our blessed Saviors Birth; this Tree did
(in its kind) snew its joy in comemoration of the Nativity of the Redeemer of
unkind mankind: There are all the Inhabitants in the Town will verify it,
and thousands in England and other Countries will affirm that it is no Fable:
The Soldiers being over zealous did cut it down in pure devotion; but a
Vintner dwelling in the Town did save a great ship or branch of it, and placed
or set it in his Garden, and he with others did tell me that the same does
likewise Bloome on the 25. day of December, yearly; I saw the said branch, and
it was ten foot high, green, and flourishing; I did take a dead Sprigge from
it, wherewith I made two or three Tobacco stoppers, which I brought to London;
my humble thanks to Mr. Brook, with (his good Sister) for they entertained me
freely; so that the Town of Glastonbury was not one penny the richer for any
expenses of mine.

Monday the second of July, I went to Bridgewater ten miles, where all that was
worthy of note was, that near the Town, at a style I had a great disaster;
for a shagge or splinter of the style took hold of my one and only breeches,
and tore them in that extreme unmercifull, unmannerly manner, that for shame
and modesties sake I was feign to put them off, and go breechlesse into the
Town, where I found a botching threepenny Tailor, who did patch me up with
such reparations as made me not ashamed to put my breeches on again, and trot
five miles further to a ragged Market Town called Neather-St^y, where extreme
weary, I took up my lodging, at a sign and no sign, which formerly was the
Rose and Crown; but Roses are withered, and Crowns are obscured, as the sign
was.

Surely that day was a mad, sad, glad, auspicious, unlucky day to me, worse
then an Ominous, Childermas, or a dogged biting dog-day; for the Hostess was
out of Town, mine Host was very sufficiently drunk, the house most delicately
decked with exquisite artificial, and natural sluttery, the room be
sprinkled and strewed with the excrements of Pigs and Children; the wall and
sielings were adorned and hanged with rare Spiders Tapistry, or cobweb Lawne;
the smoke was so palpable and perspicuous, that I could scarce see any thing
else, and yet I could scarce see that, it so blinded me with Rheum a sign of
weeping; besides all this, the odorifferous and contagious perfume of that
house was able to outvie all the Millainers in Christendom or Somersetshire.

I being thus embellished, or encompassed with these most unmatchable
varieties; but to comfort me completely, mine Host swing'd off half a pot to
me, bad me be merry, and asked me if I would have any powdered Beef and Carrets
to supper; I told him yes, with all my heart; but I being weary of the house, I
went and sat three hours in the street, where mine Host often did visit me
with most delightful and hydropicall nonsense; at last, 7 of the clock was
struck, and I went into the house to see if supper were ready; but I found
small comfort there, for the fire was out, no Beef to be boiled, mine Host
fast asleep, the Maid attending the hogs, and my hungry self half starved
with expectation; I awaked mine Host, and asked him where the Beef was, he
told me that he had none, and desired me to be contented with eggs fried with
parsley; I prayed him to show me my chamber, which he did; the chamber was
suitable to the rest of the house; there I stayed till near 9 a clock, expecting
fried eggs, when mine Host came to me with an empty answer, there were no
eggs to be had, so at the last I purchased a piece of bread and butter, and to
bed, and then began my further torments; for thinking to take a little rest, I
was furiously assualted by an Ethiopian Army of Fleas, and do verily believe
that I laid so manfully about me that I made more then 500 mortuus est: they
were so well grown that as I took 'em I gave 'em no quarter, but rubbed 'em
between my finger and my thumb, and they were so plumpe and mellow, that they
would squash to pieces like young boiled pease: But all these troubles I
patiently past by, making no more account of them, then of so many
Flea-bytings. For my further delight, my chamber pot seemed to be lined within
with crimson plush, or shag'd scarlet bays, it had escaped a scowring time out
of mind, it was fur'd with antiquity, and withal it had a monumentall savor;
and this pisse-pot was another of my best contentments.

At last, weariness and watching, began to enforce sleep upon me, so that (in
spite of the fleas teeth) I began to wink, when suddenly, three children
began to cry, and for an hours space I was kept waking, which made me fall to
the slaughter again. The children being hushed asleep, the game began afresh
amongst the dogs, for the cry was up, and the bawling Currs took the word one
from the other, all the Town over; and the dogs had no sooner done, but the
day break appeared, and the hogs began to cry cut for their breakfast: so I
arose, and traveled (almost sleeping) 10. miles that day; which was to a Town
called Dunstar, where upon a lofty hill stands a strong Castle, it had then a
Garrison in it; I'must confess I was free there,

From nasty Rooms, that never fels broomes,
From excrements, and all bad sents,
From childrens bawling, and caterwawling,
From grunting of hogs, and barking of dogs,
And from biting of Fleas, there I found ease.
The fourth of July, I traveled to Exfourd (so named) because it stands near
the head, or spring of the River Ex, which runs down fom North to South near
40 miles to the City of Exeter, and to Exmouth, where it delivers it self into
the Ocean, and from thence to Brayfourd, (another Fourd which runs into the
River of Ex, as the people told me; but I find it not so in the Map,) that
days journey was sixteen miles, a teadious weary way for a crazy, old, lame,
bad, foundered footman, I am sure I found it so; for when I came to my lodging
I had more mind to eat then to fight, and a better stomach to a bed then a
supper.

The fifth of July, I walked but seven mi'es to Barnstable, a very fine sweet
Town, so clean and neat, that in the worse of weather, a man may walk the
streets, and never foul shoe or boot; there I stayed till the next day noone,
being well and wellcomely entertained by one Mr. John Downs, who gave me
Fiddlers fare, meat, drink and money, for which I heartily thanked him: From
thence I past by water five miles to Aplear.

July the sixth (being Friday) I paced it ten miles to a place named Ferry
Cross, in the Parish of Allington, and the seven day I turned my back upon
Devonshire, having gone that day fifteen miles to the first Market Town in
Cornwall (on the North-side of the County) named Stratten.

Cornwall is the Cornucopia, the complete and repleate Horn of Abundance for
high churlish Hills, and affable courteous people; they are loving to requite a
kindness, placable to remit a wrong, and hardy to resort injuries; the
Country has its share of huge stones, mighty Rocks, noble, free, Gentlemen,
bountiful housekeepers, strong, and stout men, handsome, beautiful women, and
(for any that I know) there is not one Cornish Cuckold to be found in the whole
County: In brief they are in most plentiful manner happy in the abundance of
right and left hand blessings.

It is a wonder that such rugged Mountains do produce such fertility of Corn,
and Cattle; for if the happy days and times of peace were once settled.
Cornwall might compare with any County in England, for quantity of all
necessaries needful, and quallity of persons.

The ninth of July I left Stratten and ambled twenty miles to the Town of
Camelfourd, and to a Village called Blistland, and there I was taken for the
man I was not; for they suspected me to be a bringer of Writs and Process to
serve upon some Gentlemen, and to bring men into trouble: But with much ado I
escaped a beating, by beating into their beliefes that I was was no such
creature.

July the tenth, I came to Bodman, (a Market Town) and from thence the same day
to a Village called St. Enedor, a part of which Parish is called Penhall, there
at a Smiths house was good lodging, better cheer, and best drink; the Smith
was lame, his Wife was fair and handsome, where if I could have acted the part
of Mars, there might have been played the Comedy of Vulean and Venus: that
days travel was eighteen miles.

July eleaventh, I progressed to Trure, another Market Town, which is the Lord
Roberts his Land; there I bought a fish called a Breame for three pence, it
would have served four men; after dinner I went eight miles further to a Town
called Redruith, in all that days travells eighteen miles, I saw nothing
strange to me but a few Cornish Dawes (or Choughs) with red bills, and legs:
They saluted me upon the wing, just in the language of our Jack Dawes about
London, Ka, Ka.

The twelfth of July, I came within two miles of Saint Michaels Mount, to an
ancient house called by the name of Trimineague: it has been, and is the birth
place of Worthy Families, of the Noble name of the Godolphins: The right owner
and possessour of it now is Francis Godolphin, Esquire, a Gentleman endowed
with Piety, Humanity, Affability and Ability; he has a heart charitable, a
mind bountiful, and a hand liberal; he has (deservedly) the cordial love
of all the County, and would have the enjoyments of earthly contentments, if
once these discontented times were quieted: Seven days I stayed with him, in
which time he was pleased to send a Kinsman of his (M. Anthony Godolpheny) with
me to see the Mount, which I thus describe. It is about a mile in compass at
the foot, and it rises 700 pieces very steep to the top, it is in form like a
great haycock or Reeke, or much like a Mounteere; on the top or Piram^s of it,
is a fine Church called Saint Michaels, the said Church is now for no other use
but a well stored Magazine with Ammunition, from whence (for a relic of
remembrance) I brought half a yard of Saint Michaels Mounts Monumentall Match:
I went to the top of the Church Tower seventy steps higher, and in my coming
down I viewed the Bells (which were five in number) being fair and handsome,
they cannot be rung, because the crack rope Soldiers have broke all the
Bell-ropes, insomuch as for any more ringing there, the Bells being ropelesse,
the people are hopeless.

To speak the truth of this so much talked of Famous Mount; it is lofty,
rocky, innaccessible, impregnable not to be taken, or kept, nor worth the
taking or keeping: It is a barren stony little wen or wait, that with men,
Ammunition, and Victuals is able to defend it self; but if it has not the Sea
and Land to friend, there is an Enemy called hunger (or famine) that will
conquer Mounts and Mountains: It can do no service to the seaward, for the
water is so shallow, that no ship can sail within shot of it, and for Land
service the Town of Market Jew, stands better for defense: The Mount is an
Island, and no Island, twice in every 24 hours: for when the Sea is up, Boats
must be used to go to it, but upon the ebb, Troopers may ride to it forty in
Rank: Market Jew is about two flight shoot of it, the Mayor whereof (one Mr.
William Mabb) caused me to dine with him, for which I return him a few printed
thanks.

In the Mount I saw a craggy rugged seat, of Rocky Upholstery, which the old
fabulous rumor calls St. Michaels Chair: and a Well I saw there, which twice
in 24 hours is fresh water, and salt water: This Mount had a Garrison within
it, which made the Country people to grumble without it; yet the soldiers are
pretty civil: and one Captain Geary did courteously regard and drink with me
at the Majors house at Market Jew. From thence I returned to Mr. Godolphins,
and he did persuade me to see the Lands end, fourteen miles further; for which
journey on the 16. day of July, he did lend me 2. horses, with his kinsman to
ride with me, where (for his sake) I was welcome by the way, with a good
dinner, at one Mr. Levales house, from whence I rode, and went as far as I
could ride, go, or creep, for rocks and sea: and there I saw the Island of
Silly, with other smaller Islands, which are said to be 16. or 17. in number.
The main Island is held for the Prince, by one Captain (or as some say, a
Knight) called Sir John Greenvill; it is very strong, with a good safe harbor,
and as it is reported there, has a good fleet of ships in it: some do call it
a second Argiere, for there cannot a ship or vessel pass by it, but they do
make out upon them, whereby they have great riches, with all necessaries: it
was 8. leagues at least from me, insomuch that I could but only see it dimly,
and 2. ships I perceyved that lay at road (perdue) to give notice (as I
conjectured) of the appearance of any shipping that sailed within their ken: I
did cut my name 4. inches deep in a small patch of earth amongst the Rocks, at
the Lands end, and I am sure no man can go thither and set his name or foot,
half a foot before me.

The same day I returned to one Mr. Jones his house a mile thence, in the
farthest Western Parish of the County of Cornwall, called Sevin; there I had
good entertainment all night, by the Gentleman's and his Wives free welcome,
which was out of their own courteous disposition; but chiefly for Mr.
Godolphins sake, to whom at Trimiweagow I returned, on the 17. of July, where I
rested one day: and on the 18. day I took my leave, having received 7. days
hospitality in plenty, with many other courtesies in money and other necessaries
which I wanted; besides he sent his kinsman with me to direct me the way to
another Francis Godolphin of Godolphin house. That Gentleman is the chief of
that noble name; his house a stately ancient Palace, and my cheer and welcome
at dinner, most freely bountiful. After dinner he walked with me, where (in
my way) I saw his Mines of Tin, and a house where his workmen were refining
and melting of Tin, which is a rich commodity. So at my taking leave of him,
he put ten shillings in my hand, which came to me in an acceptable time.

From thence I jog'd 3. miles further, to a house called Clowance in the Parish
of Crowen, where dwells one Mr. John Sentabin, he is son in Law to the first
Godolphin I came to, whose daughter he married (a virtuous and beautiful
Gentlewoman) where I took a welcome, a supper and a bed, till the next
morning, being July 19. he sent a man with me eight Miles to a sister of his,
named Mrs. Gertrude, to her I was so welcome, that after I thought she had been
weary of me, she would feign have had me to stay two days more, which I (with
thanks refusing) she lent me a Mare (and a man to bring her home again) which
Mare I road to a Town called Penny com quick, within a mile of Pendennis
Castle, which Castle I looked on a far off, but I durst not attempt to offer to
go into it, for fears and jealousies might have mistaken me for a spy; for at
all places of Garrison, there is very strict examinations of persons, and at
every Towns end, in all the sea Towns of part of Cornwall, Devonshire,
Dorsetshire, and every Shine, no traveller could pass without catechizing
words: As what is your name, whence came you, where dwell you, whither go you,
what is your business, and wherefore came you hither? Now he that cannot
answer these particular demands punctually, is to be had before Governors,
Captains, Commanders, Mayors, or Constables, where if a man do chance to be
suffered to pass freely from them, yet it is a hazard of the loss of a
Travelers liberty by either their unbelief or misp ision, and at the best it
is a hinderance to a man's journey and loss of time.

These considerations made me doubtful to presume to look into Pendennis
Castle, or any other Garrison or place of defense: This Castle is seated very
high, and it stands very defensive for the famous Haven of Faymouth, (one of
the best Harbors for shipping in the world:) it was built by King Henry the
eight, it is impregnable, and as long as it is well manned, amunitioned, and
victualled, it is thought to be invincible, and there is an end of that point.

That day I past a Ferry called King Harries Passage, (but why it is so named
few men know) there I lodged at the Ferry man's house, and the next morning
being 21 of July, I traveled twelve miles to a fisher Town called Mevageasie;
that Town has in it two Tavernes, and six Alehouses, to every one of which I
went for lodging, and not any one would harbor me, then I fought for a
Constable to help me, but no Constable was to be found; the people all
wondering at me, as if I had been some strange Beast, or Monster brought out of
Africa; at which most incivill and barbarous useage, I began to be angry, and
I perceiving that no body cared for my anger, I discreetely went into the house
where I first demanded lodging; where the Hosts being very willing to give me
the courteous entertainment of Jack Drum, commanded me very kindly to get me
out of doors, for there was no room for me to lodge in. I told her that I
would honestly pay for what I took, and that if I could not have a bed, yet I
was sure of a house over my head, and that I would not out till the morning:
with that a young saucy knave told me that if I would not go out, he would throw
me out, at which words my choler grew high, my indignation hot, and my fury
fiery, so that I arose from a bench, went to my youth, and dared to the
combat; whereat the Hostess (with fear and trembling) desired me to be
quiet, and I should have a bed, at which words my wrath was appeared, and my
ire assuaged.

But strait ways another storm seemed to appear; for an ancient Gentleman
came suddenly out of another Room (who had heard all the former friendly
passages,) and he told me that I should not lodge there, for though I had
sought and not found a Constable, yet I should know that I had found a Justice
of Peace before I sought him; and that he would see me safely lodged: I was
somewhat amazed at his words, and answered him, Let him do his pleasure, for I
submitted my self to his disposal.

To which he replyde, That I should go but half a mile with him to his house,
which I did, and there his good Wife and he did entertayne me courteously, with
such fare and lodging, as might have accommodated any Gentleman of more worth
and better quality then one that had been ten times in degree before me: there
I stayed the Saturday and all the Sunday, where I found more Protestant Religion
in 2. days, then I had in 5. years before. The Gentleman's name is Mr. John
Carew, a Gentleman of noble and ancient descent, and a worthy Justice of the
Peace in those parts.

I was certified, that in that little Town of Mevagesey, there are 44. Fisher
Boats, which do fish for Pilchards, that every Boat has 6. men, and that
every 2. Boats have one net between them: they do call the 2. Boats a Seine;
so there are 22. Seines, and 22. Nets: every Cornish Bushel is in measure 2.
Bushels and a half of our measure at London: every 2. Boats (or Seine) do
spend 250. Bushels of Salt (Cornish measure) to salt Pilchards only; every
Seine do use 100. Hogsheads to pickle the said Pilchards in yearly. So that
this one little Town, does spend by Gods blessing, and the means of those
small fishes, every year,

Of Salt, 22 times 350 Cornish Bushells, which is in the number of our
Bushells, 14000,350.

Of Hogsheads, or Caske, 2200.

Of men for 44 Boats, 6 men for each, 264.

These men with their Families (being many in Number) are all maintained by
Pilchard catching; but this is not all, for there are other greater ^ownes in
the County, which do every one of them use the same trade of fishing, with
more and greater numbers of men, boats, nets, caske, and much more quantity of
salt; some of the other Towns are S. Keverne, Foye, Lee, with others which I
cannot recite.

This infinite number of Pilchards, being salted and put up in Caske, are
bought a mane by the Spanish, French, Datch, Italian, and other Merchants, and
by them they are either eaten or fold, and transported to many other people and
Nations: And now I hope I have filled my Renders bellies with Pilchards,
without cloying or offending their stomack^; if any one be queasie, or do
feel a wambling in the Gizzard; let them call for a cup of S^ck, drink it,
and pay for it.

The 23 of July, I came to Foye, and to Loo or Low) twenty miles; this Town of
Loo, is divided in two parts, or two Towns together, two Mayors, two Churches,
two Governors, and more then two Religions; all that I can say of either of
the Looes, is, that there was Soldiers and swordmen, strong Beer and dagger
Ale, Land flesh and Sea fish in plenty.

On the 24. of July, I turned my back upon Cornwall, and went from Loo to
Plymouth in Devonshire, twelve miles: At Plymouth I stayed not two hours, the
Town was too full of suspicions to hold me: There I saw Colonel William Leg, a
prisoner in the Towerhouse, or Guild hall, I spoke to him (being on the ore
side of the way in a window, and he on the other) in a low whispering voice
that every one might hear what we said; I wished him health and liberty, and
so left him in thraldom; There was two Stationers did make me very welcome for
two or three hours; their names were Thomas Ratcliffe and William Weeks, they
gave me smoke and drink in Plymouth, for which I require them in Paper and
Inck at London.

That afternoon I left Plymouth, and went four miles further, to Plimpton,
and on the morrow (being Saint James his day) I hired a horse forty miles to
Exeter, where I was two days entertained at mine own cost, with some charges
that Burgomasters and Bookesellers underwent: I can say little of Exeter, but
that it is a fair sweet City, a goodly Cathedral Church (not yet quite
spoiled or stabled) and it had large Suburbs, with long streets, and many fine
dwellings till this mad fire of contention turned all to ruins, rubbidge,
cinders, Ashes, and fume.

Two hours before Phabus appeared in our hemisphere, I was on footback from
Exeter to Honiton, the 27. of July, there I had a nights lodging, and diet of
such a homely fashion, as I have no occasion to boast of; there I hired a Horse
(which proved to be a blind Mare) she had two wens as big as clusters of
Grapes hung over both her eyes, and five or six wens on her shoulders and
flanks, all which beautiful ornaments I could not perceive or see till I had
road the beast four mile, (for I was mounted before the break of day;) but
when I saw the comeliness of the beast, between shame and anger I was almost
mad at the Rogue that owned her; and being near to a Market Town called
Axmister, I dismounted, and footed eight miles to Broad Winsor in Dersetshire,
where I was better horst eight miles further to Evershot, and then I paced on
foot eight miles further to the Town of Sherbourne, that days travel was 31
mile.

The 31 of July, I went from Sherbourne to Shafisbury, and so to Wilton, and
Salisbury, 31 mile: At Wilton I saw the Earl of Pembrokes Magnificent and
Sumptuous Building and repairing of such a stately Fabric, that for strength,
beauty, form, state, glazing, painting, gilding, carving, pollishing,
embellishing and adorning: It may be a Palace for the greatest King in
Christendom: the Springs, and Fishponds, the Garden, the Walks, the rare
Artificial Rocks and Fountains, the Ponds with fish on the house top, the
strange figures and fashions of the water works, the numerous, innumerable
varieties of fruits and flowers; yea all, and every thing that may make an
earthly Paradise, is there to be seen, felt, heard, or understood, (which
because I understand not) I shut up all with this, there is inestimable cost,
exquisite Art and Artists, most exceeding good work and workmen, only one
thing (that is quite out of fashion almost every where) is used there, which is
good and just payment.

From Wilton, to Salisbury two miles, there I sleeped out the later end of the
whole Month of July. I had a desire to go into the Church there (one of the
fairest in England) but now the plays be down, there was no sights to be seen
without money, which though I could have paid, yet for two Reasons I would not;
the one was because I had oftentimes seen that Church in former times, when
Gods Service was said there, and the second cause why I would not be guilty of
Simony, and with corrupting Mammon enter or intrude into the House of God.

The first of August, I footed to Andover, fifteen old miles, and eighteen
new ones, (of the Posts late measuring:) The next day to Merrell Green, 24
miles, the third day to Stanes, eighteen miles, and the fourth of August
fifteen miles to London: My journey being in all 546 miles, which I went and
came in six Weeks, and lay still and rested twelve days in several places on
Week days, besides six Sundays: But all this was nothing to me, being a
youth of threescore and ten, with a lame leg and a half, and there is an end
of the story.

Like to the stone of Sisiphus. I roll
From place to place, through weather fair and foul,
And yet I every day must wander still
To vent my Books, and gather friends good will;
I must confess this work is frivalowse,
And he that (for it) daigues to give a lowse,
Does give as much for it as it is worth, I know;
Yet merely merrily I this jaunt did go
In imitation of a mighty King.
Whose warlike acts, good fellows often sing,
The King of France and twenty thousand men,
Went up the Hill, and so came down again.
So I this travel past, with cost and pain,
And (as I wisely went) came home again.
FINIS.

