NATHANAEL, OR An Israelite Indeed; Lively portraied, and evidently proved to
be an object most worthy both of our Admiration and Imitation; His Privileges,
and Characters are also laid down.

Together with a Discovery of the sinfulness and misery of all Hypocrites and
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel.

In that day shall Israel be a blessing in the midst of the Land, whom the Lord
of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Israel mine inheritance. Isa. 19.24,
25.

Haec lege, fac itidem, tuque beatus eris.

By Faithful Teate, D. D. Preacher of the Gospel in East Greenwich in Kent.

LONDON, Printed for George Sanbridge at the Bible on Ludgate Hill. 1657.

To all my Worthy and welbeloved friends in the Lord, and for some years
Auditors in the City of Dublin, both Magistrates and People. And to all my
dear and much respected Parishioners of East Greenwich in KENT.
Dearly beloved,
THe true Israelite (you know) is a stranger in the world, marvel not therefore
that he comes unto you in a mean dress: yet being glorious within and bearing
the lively image of God upon him, he doubts not to find acceptance with you
his brethren, and with all true Christians. As for any other, he needs not
care, what they either think or say. I begin with you the inhabitants of the
city of Dublin in Ireland: Excuse me for not nominating any, since your number
is so great as by your voluntary subscriptions for my employment and
maintenance amongst you, in a book yet kept by me, may appear; that if I
should name some, and should pretermit others, and misplace any, not knowing
after so long absence and at so great distance, what alterations time has
wrought among you, I might give some offense, I believe I shall never forget
your great and constant affection toward me, since my first coming among you,
how cordially you embraced my person, how readily and gladly you received the
Gospel whereof I was made a minister according to the gift of the grace of God
gi^en unto me for your sakes, while I was with you; how freely and plentifully
you contributed toward my maintenance; and, since my removal from you by the
clandestine practices of some, (who then seemed to stand for the English
interest, but since have been discovered to be worse enemies within than any
without could be) how mindful you have been of me, and still are, as all that
come hither from you do certify. I cannot, and hope you will not, forget how
many days of humiliation, even once a week for two years space, we kept
together in public, during the time of our sad distresses, when our only
weapons were prayers and tears, when your city was environed round by hostile
forces, and in no less danger by reason of intestine foes, when our enemies
were furnished with daily supplies of choice Commanders and Arms, from foreign
parts by popish adherents; and in the mean time, all help (except from Heaven
only, which was thereby rendered more signal) was denied us by the obstruction
of long continued contrary winds, out of England; and by implacable dissentions
(which in that juncture of time was far worse) falling out in the bowels of our
native country, from whence under God we could only expect relief; what
flockings were there then daily by all sorts to the Courts of Gods house, as of
doves to their windows, in such abundance that diverse knowing men have been
heard to say, that they hardly ever saw so great a concourse, the number and
quality of the persons considered, in all their lives in any other parts of the
world? And how often have we seen God in the mount, a present help in the time
of trouble? What blessed returns did the Lord continually make to our humble
supplications even to admiration? what great success did the Lord then
graciously give to the word of his grace, in converting some, in strengthening
others, and in comforting all? How great violence did the kingdom of Heaven
suffer among you? so that God heard your voice, and you hea^ Gods voice, and in
the end he adm^^istred to us many causes of public thanksgivings, turning all
our prayers into praises for his audience, and our wonderful deliverances. We
have seen five to chase an hundred, and an hundred to put thousands to flight.
It would seem incredible to many, if one should relate to them but one half of
that which the Lord has done for us, which we have seen, and know to be most
true; we can subscribe a probatum est to the sovereign virtue of fasting and
prayer, whereby Israel-like we had power with God and with men, and prevailed,
Genes. 32.28.

But now Satan envying at our prosperity, and having great wrath, because he
knew his time was but short, found out new stratagems advantageous for his
destructive ends. First now was a new court of delegates erected by arbitrary
power among you, in the room of the high Commission formerly by authority
dejected, but this was the same with the former (and far worse) the name only,
being altered, and rightly was it termed by some, a spanish inquisition, by
others the Abomination of desolation. The men authorized to be Judges in this
delicate Court were such as professed themselves to stand for the interest of
the Irish rebels, one of them boldly affirming in the pulpit in your hearing
and mine (as by diverse sufficient witnesses can be proved) that These Wars
are for us Bishops, which Maxim had been formerly divulged among the people,
but more secretly. Whereupon Dr Beadle, Bish. of Kilmore a most worthy and
learned man in a vehement indignation against the same when he first heard
thereof, burst out into this expression, If we Bps be the cause of this
horrible tempest, let them take us, and, with Jonah, cast us all over board.
Another of the inquisitors, being an Irish man by birth, in the same pulpit
excused the discontented gentlemen, meaning the rebels his countrymen,
dissuading the Soldiers from vigorous prosecution of them, and the Judges from
condemning such of them as had been taken prisoners in open hostility, unless
two or three witnesses should first depose, that to their knowledge the said
prisoners had before in cold blood committed things worthy of death, whereas we
all know that those bloody Canibals murdered man woman and child, except here
one, and there another, escaped by Gods extraordinary preservation, as one of
Jobs servants escaped from the Caldeans, and another from the sword of the
Sabaeans, only to bring the sad tidings to their Master of what had been done
to the rest of his servants, and to his cattle. At the same time did this
merciful Orator, directing his words to me who then sat before him, with his
forefinger pointing at me, condemn all bloody preaching and praying against
them who he said were Christians, and admonished me and all others from using
the like for future time: whereas our Preaching was to animate the soldiers
Courageously to prosecute so just a war against such unparalleld murderers;
and our Prayers were, that the righteous God would teach their hands to war and
their fingers to fight, what other language he used, I have in writing,
attested by the hands of good witnesses.

A third man, was a civilian, who had been unhappily intercepted from going
beyond sea to be bred a Jesuit, yet retained his Jesuitical principles. These
with some others ejusdem furfuris with their revived oath ex-officio,
imprisoned some, and banished or drove to flight others, to the number of
fourteen in one week, some whereof might be truly called, The Horsemen and
Chariots of your Israel, who stood day and night in the gap for you, being
able, peaceable and diligent ministers of the Gospel, besides many others who
were driven away by this tempest.

After this, a new project, of far more dangerous Consequence, was promoted by
a faction in the army siding with the Irish party: to wit a cursed Cessation
was hatched to be made with the Irish rebels, when we were masters in the
field, and our army was maintained mostly by the spoils which they daily
recovered from the enemy, who had formerly made a prey of all the estates of
the English throughout the land, excepting some few cities and castles which
stood out upon their own defense, and could only preserve such goods as they
had within the walls in most places.

The very mention of this design was odious to all the remnant of our English
nation, who utterly abhorred the thought of ever shaking hands with such a
barbarous generation of men, or rather incarnate devils, who had robbed them of
all, burnt their dwellings, murdered their wives, children, and kinsfolk,
after they had exercised upon them all imaginable cruelties, as full well you
know. And all that had but half an eye foresaw what the issue of this would be,
as afterward the event manifested, even a deadly snare to our side: now were
our brave soldiers left to starve in their garrisons, many of them punished
with death by their own disaffected officers upon the least complaint of any
of their inhumane perfidious enemies; whilst they were free to kill, rob and
spoil at pleasure without control, and hereby had they opportunityes of
recruiting themselves with fresh men and ammunition for a new war, when the
cessation should be expired: now were four of our best friends privy
counselors clapped up in the Castle of Dublin for opposing the Cessation; when
all the rebels who had been committed, having been taken prisoners by our army
in the open field, were released, and some of them dubbed (forsooth) for their
good service; and more of our Ministers were driven to follow their brethren to
shift for their lives and safety by flight: some for preaching and praying
against the Treaty, as in duty and conscience they thought themselves bound to
do: others for fear lest they should be destroyed, if it took effect. Thus
were we (like Levi) divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel.

But since my departing from you, I have been exceedingly desirous to return
to you, insomuch as I once advanced as for as Nesson toward you, and thence
was turned back; how ever I am still mindful of you, in my Prayers on all
occasions, sympathizing with you; in your straits and dangers have I condoled
with you, and joyful have I been and still am at your deliverances and
enjoyments of mercies, as at the present to hear of your welfare, that the
Lord has placed over you a prudent, well principled and religious governor in
chief, and others subordinate magistrates men of Courage, fearing God, hating
covetuousness; that the Lord has stored you with able, conscionable, orthodox
divines. And in testimony of my thankfulness I send unto you (since I may not
come over to you my self) this small tract having thoughts of preparing a
larger treatise for you upon a subject which I made entrance upon, while I was
among you, entitled The way of salvation, which may therefore more properly be
laid claim unto, by you; as this present Treatise more peculiarly belongs
to my now parishioners of East Greenwich, among whom most of the contents
hereof have been published in diverse sermons in the pulpit; though here much
contracted, and in other particulars enlarged.

And now to you do they come from the Press (my loving Christian friends and
neighbors of East Greenwich, and no less beloved) for the help of your
memories, and for a permanent testimony of my thankfulness for all your loving
kindness from the first day of my coming among you till his present time, which
I shall never be forgetful of. viz. how unanimously you made choice of me
between six and seven years ago, to be your Minister, three Lords days
together meeting for the confirmation of your choice, and for contriving the
best way for my better encouragement and subsistence among you, and continuing
your real affection for the far greatest part of you till this day toward me:
and I trust that your love is of the right kind which will not decrease, but
increase more and more, till death put a period to our lives. I shall not
deteine you long in this praeludium, as I have done my remote friends, because
you have me daily with you upon all occasions to speak unto you viva voce.
Only thus much I cannot but signify to you in as public a manner, as I could
devise, that I am yours, and most unfainedly do I desire, and accordingly (by
the Lords assistance) I shall endeavor the spiritual and eternal welfare both
of you and yours in striving to remove all the hindrances thereof, and in
faithfully revealing to you all the whole counsel of God, that I may be kept
clear from the blood of precious souls, and so save my self, and them that
hear me; for, for none other end do I desire to live among you, and for this I
humbly and earnestly implore your daily Prayers to God for me. To whom I commit
you, and to the word of his grace, which is able to save your souls. In whom I
remain.

Your humble servant, for the good of your souls, for which the Lord of life
died, FAITHFVLL TEATE.

Books Lately Printed for George Sawbridge at the sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill.
THe power of Godliness both Doctrinally and Practically handled; whereunto is
annexed distinct treatises, 1. Of the Affections. 2. Of the Spiritual Combat.
3. Of the Government of the Tongue. 4. Of Prayer, together with, 5. An
Exposition upon the Lords Prayers.


By that late eminent Divine Mr John Ball. And published by Mr Simeon Ash.

Predestination defended against Post-destination, being an answer to Mr Thomas
Pierce his correct Copy, concerning Gods Decree especially of Reprobation, by
Mr Will: Barlee.

The Saints Communion with God, and Gods communion with them in Ordinances, by
Mr. William Strong.

A Learned exposition of the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, and Psalms:
By Mr John Trap.

The Preachers Tripartite, in three Books.

1. To raise Devotion, in Divine Meditations upon Psalm. 25.

2. To Administer Comfort by conference with the soul, in particular Cases of
Conscience.

3. To establish Truth and Peace, in several Sermons against the present
Heresies and Schisms.

By R. Mossom, Preacher of Gods word, lately at St. Peter Pauls-Wharfe London.

An excellent piece of Philosophy, commonly Called the Morals of Plutarch,
Translated out of Greek into Eng: By Philemon Holland, Dr in Physic.

A Medicinal Dispensatory, containing the whole body of Physic, Together with
a most perfect and absolute Pharmacopaea or Apothecaries Shop: with a useful
Physical Dictionary Composed by the Illustrious Renodaeus, chief Physician to
the Monarch of France. And now englished and revised by Rich. Tomlins of London
Apothecary.

Londinopolis, An Historical Discourse, or Perlustration of the Cities of
London, and Westminster, by Ja: Howell Esquire.

Of Government and Obedience, as they stand Directed and Determined by
Scripture and Reason.

In 4. Books, by John Hall.

An exact abridgment of Public Acts and Ordinances of Parliament made from the
year 1640 to 1656. by William Hugle, of Graies Inn, Esquire.

A True ISRAELITE Pourtraied, for our IMITATION. The first Part.
Joh. 1.47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.


Sect. 1.

THE coherence of these words. Nathanael, for ever renowned, by the
recommendation of our blessed and heart-searching Savior, is the subject of
our present discourse. For our more orderly proceeding, let us reflect upon the
43 verse, where Jesus found and called Philip to follow him: Immediately after,
verse 45. Philip found Nathanael, and (...). Chrysostom. in Joan. Hom. 20.
inviteth him to come and see Him, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote;
namely, the true Messiah. Nathanael had some scruple and prejudice against him
at the first, as his question imports, ver. 46. Can there come any good thing
out of Nazareth? Yet, is he afterward persuaded by Philip, to come and see
him; Whence observe, That it is the desire and endeavor of true Believers, to
bring others to Jesus Christ: As Andrew brought Simon (...). Hom. 19.
his brother with him, verse 41. For such is their zeal to the glory of Christ,
from whom they themselves have received so much soul-good, that they would have
all others (if they possibly could) to glorify God, by believing on him. It
was the prayer of the Church of old, for all Nations, that yet knew him not,
and were yet unborn, Psalm. 67.3, 5. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all
the people praise thee: where their ardency to obtain appears by the
repetition of their suit.

2. Such is their charity to others that they would have all to be partakers of
the benefit, as well as themselves; yea though they be their enemies, 1 Cor.
9.22.
as St. Paul became all things to all men that by all means he might save
some, and I would to God said he to Agrippa, that not only thou, Act. 26.29.
but also all that hear me this day, were such as I am, except these bonds;
yet many of those were his mortal enemies.

3. Such is the fullness of grace in the Lord Jesus, that there is sufficient
for all comers, Joh. 1.16. It is other wise in earthly riches, none can impart
to another; though his own store be never so great; 2 King. 20.12.17.
but he will have less himself, as Hezekiah showing his treasures to the king
of Babylons messensengers, was thereby deprived of them: but the communication
of our spiritual treasures to others, brings an increase hereof to ourselves:
as Paul was edified by the faith of the Romans, which himself had planted, Romans
1.12. Observe secondly in Nathanael's querie that there ever will be demurrs
and obstacles to hinder our coming to Christ.

But 3ly. in Philips prevailing with him to come and see; and in Christ's
satisfying of him being come, that he was the true messiah, the son of God;
observe with me again, that nothing shall hinder Gods elect from coming off
fully to Jesus Christ in Gods time, Joh. 6.37. all that the father gives me
(says our Lord) shall come to me.

Philips means Nathanael being brought near to Jesus, comes to be considered;
the conference which passed between them: at the first sight, our Lord, who
knew him from all eternity, does give him an high encomium, Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile. Where we have 1. an Adverb of demonstration (...)
Behold! secondly Nathanaels description laid down. 1 by way of assertion, an
Israelite indeed. 2. by way of negation, In whom is no guile. In both together
is implied a maine argument, why Nathanael was to be respected, because he was
an Is^alite indeed, in whom was no guile. Intus and in ctu. Pers. satyr. Doct.
From the demonstrative particle, behold, considering from whose mouth this
charge proceeds, we collect, That an Isral^te indeed, is a most worthy sight;
one to be well viewed, and known most exactly. Behold, behold them, (says God)
Isa. 41.27. He is the best sight in this inferior world, since our Lord Jesus
left it himself. To Jesus Christ indeed primarily, the eyes of all nations are
directed, and this sight alone, if it be right, will bring salvation to the
beholders, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, (says the Lord) and be ye saved, all the
ends of the earth. To him John Baptist his immediate forerunner pointed again
and again, v. 29. Behold (said he) the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of
the world, and to Andrew and another Disciple v. 36. looking upon Jesus as he
walked, he said, Behold the lamb of God: next to Christ comes in the true
Isralite to be beheld by us. Such a one was Nathanael, whom our Lord does here
in ligitate.

For 1. God takes so great delight in the sight of such, as his eyes are never
off them, Job. 36.7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous. It is not
any man's countenance, nor the height of his stature or outward appearance,
that the Lord regards, or would have others to be taken with, but he looks
on the heart, 1. Sam. 16.7. To this man will I look (says the Lord) even to
him, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa.
66.2. Secondly to the same object are the eyes of the holy angels bent: we are
made (says the Apostle) a spectacle to angels and men, 1. Cor. 4.9. (...) etc.
3. In imitation of God and his blessed angels, good men how great soever have
their eyes upon them; Psalm. 101 6.
Mine eyes (said king David) shall be on the faithful in the land and not without
cause for in these persons we may find a confluence of all attractives of the
eyes of our minds imaginable, For 1. We account great personages, Kings,
Princes, and their well deserving favorites worthy of our aspect and respect:
when Samuel had anointed Saul (according to the Lords commandment) See ye him
(said he to the people) whom the Lord has chosen that there is none like him
among all the people, 1 Samuel 10.24. Why? These are they whom Christ has washed
in his blood, and made Kings and priests to God his father, Rev. 1.5, 6. These
are his favorites Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, Jer. 5.1.
and see now and know (says the Lord by Jeremiah) and seek through the broad
places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment,
that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it.

2. Do not we deem men eminent for wisdom worthy to be viewed and reviewed;
How far came the Queen of Sheba to see Solomon upon this account; Our Saviovr
informs us, Luke 11.31. even from the utmost parts of the earth Now wisdom
makes the faces of these (whom we speak of) to shine, Eccl. 8.1. as Stephen's
did, when all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face,
Act. 6.15
as if it had been the face of an Angel. And wisdom and truth it self terms
all these, children of wisdom. Mat. 11.19. and of them may be truly affirmed
that which we read of Job, the ear that hears them, cannot but bless them,
Job 29.11.
and the eye that sees them, cannot but give witness to them, Job. 29.11. 3ly.
what flocking together is there to behold great conquerors; yea, how desirable
are their very statues and pictures to such as by distance of place are
debarred from the sight of their persons; It is recorded that the king of
Sodom, yea and Melchizedek king of Salem, went both out to meet Abraham, after
the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him. Genes.
14.17, 18. Behold, I present unto your view such as scripture language styleth
more then conquerors, Romans 8.37. Such are all true believers through Christ who
loves them. Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit.
These resist the Devil, and put him to flight. Jam. 4.7.2 They subdue their
own spirit which is a more signal victory then the taking of a strong city.
Pro. 16.32.3 Christ gives them victory over death, which has vanquished the
noblest conquerors of the world. 1. Cor. 15.57.4. Strange and rare shows never
want spectators. The sacred Chronicle relates (and therefore it desreveth our
observation) that Solomon's ships brought from Tarshish apes and peacocks for
their rarity, as well as ivorie, gold, and silver, for their value 2 Chronicles.
9.21. But true converts are most rare New creatures, in whom old things are
passed away, BEHOLD, all things are become new, Ephesians. 2.1
2 Cor. 5.17.2 They are raised from death to life you has he quickened (says
the Apostle to the Ephesians) who were dead in trespasses and sins. This is a
more admirable work then the raising of Lazarus from the grave, which
notwithstanding drew a great concourse of people to Jesus who had raised him,
Joh. 12.9. Who came not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also, whom he had raised from the dead.

persons sumptuously apparrelled, Luke 7.25. what went you out, (says our
Savior to the people) into the wilderness to SEE? a man clothed in soft
raiment. BEHOLD they which are gorgeously apparrelled, are in kings courts. But
St John Rev. 12 1. discovers to us, a greater matter of admiration: There
appeared (says he) a great wonder in heaven a woman (the Spouse of Christ
whereof every true believer is a member) clothed with the Sun, Oecumen. in
Apoc. cap. 33. Ecclesia Sole justitiae Christo stipata est.
the righteousness of Jesus Christ whom she has put on, Gal. 3.27. for uxor
fulget radiis mariti; with the Moon under her feet, (that is, worldly things
which are mutable like the moon, are by her little accounted of) and upon her
head is a crown of twelve stars (the doctrine of the 12. Apostles whereon she
is founded) Revel. 21.14. and this her raiment is like the Isralites garments
in the wilderness, which waxed not old Neh. 9.21. but grows more and more
glorious by wearing, as faith increases by exercise.

6. Exquisite beauties have an attrative force over men's eyes and minds. When
David espied from the roof of his house Bathsheba, who was very beautiful to
look upon, washing her self, he sent messengers to fetch her to him, 2 Samuel
11.2. But lo here is an incomparable beauty, as the Lord himself describes
it, Ezec. 16.13, 14. Thou wast exceeding beautiful (says he to Israel) and
thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was PERFECT
through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee. These are endued with perfect
beauty; neither are they snowt-faire, for the Proverb, for as Helena, intus
Hecuba, has no room here, but they are all glorious within, Psalm 45.13.
neither is this a decaying beauty like Naomies, Ruth. 1.20. who in a few years
was metamorphosed into Marah, as herself complains: nor yet is it like
Ephraims glorious beauty, which became like a fading flower, Isa. 28.1.4.
neither does that proverb take place here at all. Isa. 28.1.4.
Fair in the cradle, foul in the saddle; for this is a permanent, yea an
increasing beauty, like the olive trees, Hos. 14.6. Jam. 2.3. Lo*


7. Riches win respect among men Lo their riches are correspondent to their
raiment and beauty. It cannot be said of them, which is too truly of some
others averred, that they have gold and silver on their backs, and copper in
their purses; for they are a peculiar treasure unto the Lord above all people,
Exo. 19.5. and though they may be poor in the world; yet are they heirs of the
kingdom of Heaven, Jam. 2.5. yea, all things here below are theirs, as they are
Christ's and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22.23

Esth. 6.8, 9.
8. Observance attends honor: Their honor is equivalent to their riches, 1.
Chron. 4.9. Iabez was more honorable then his brethren; the reason hereof is
rendered verse. 10. He called on the God of Israel. God honors them, Isa.
43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight (says he to Israe) thou have been
Honorable, and I have loved thee. In them dwells the spirit of God, 1. Cor.
3.16. and can we find such a man as this is (said king Pharaoh of Joseph) in
whom the spi^ t of God is? Genes. 41.38 And by the Spirit of the Lord, are they
changed into the image of the Lord, from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3.18. and for
this cause the holy angels (according to to their charge) readily vouchsafe
their attendance night and day upon them, the least among them not excepted,
Mat. 18.10. Heb. 1.14. Mat. 18.10.
The godly also, who only among men know the true estimate of persons, make
high account of them; In whose eyes a vile person, (be he never so highly
advanced in the world,) is contemned: but they honor all that fear the Lord,
Psalm. 15.4. Lastly Christ himself is the glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.32.

Use 1. Serves for exhortation. Since then Christ our Lord inviteth you to
behold an Israelite indeed; imitate ye God, Angels, and good men, turn the
eyes of your minds toward these excellent ones on the earth, Psalm. 16.3. Genesis
23.6.
princes of God, children of wisdom, the most glorious conquerors in the
world, rare new creatures, clothed with the Sun, perfect in beauty,
transcendently rich, endued with honor and the spirit of glory, partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pe. 1.4. Having the glorious angels for their attendants.
This your sight will be well pleasing to God; Motives.
for as all the works of Gods creation and providence are to be minded by us;
Ps. 143.5. so especially are these first fruits of his creatures whom he has
begotten with the word of truth, Psalm. 143.5. Ephesians. 2.10.
Jam. 1.18. who are His workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
Ephesians. 2.10.2 There can be no danger in the contemplation of this beauty: as
there may be, and too often is, in gazing upon other fair objects, as David
found by experience, and the sons of God, in seeing the daughters of men that
were fair, Genesis 6.2. for he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart, as our Lord witnesses, Mat.
5.28. But thirdly this sight will bring great profit with it, to the spectators.
Here we shall see the beauty of holiness, which will inflame our hearts with
the love of it, Cic. offic. l. 1.
as the heathen said, virtue would do if it could be seen with the eyes; and we
read that many who beheld Lazarus, after he was raised from death believed: and
thereby themselves were raised from the death of sin, John 12.9.11.
Joh. 12.9.11. St Peter affords us two remarkable instances of this, the
former is of Christians even under persecution living among heathens, whom he
counsels to have their conversation honest among them, that whereas some
speak against them as evil doers, others by their good works, which they shall
behold, may glorify God in the day of visitation: yea, by this means the very
persecuters themselves may become true professors, 1. Pet. 3.12. The other is,
of wives, though the weaker vessels; whose pious and meek demeanor may be an
occasion of converting their ignorant and unbeleeving husbands, on whom the
word as yet cannot work, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Likewise, ye wives (says he) be in
subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives: while they behold
your chaste conversation coupled with fear.

Secondly, this serves for our direction in two things, 1. What are we
chieffly to behold in this true Israelite? Answ, 1. his original, he was borne
in Zion the city of God, whereof glorious things are spoken, and which the
highest himself shall establish, Selah, Psalm. 87.2.5. He is of the seed royal
begotten not of corruptible, but incorruptible seed the word of God, which
lives and abides for ever, 1. Pet. 1.23. borne not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, Joh. 3.5. more then a servant, even a son; and if a son, then an
heir of God through Christ, Gal. 4.7.

2. Observe his life and conversation, Brethren (says Saint Paul) mark them
which walk so as you have us for an ensample, Phil. 3.17.

3. Mark him in his sufferings and the issue thereof: Behold (says the
Apostle) we count them happy which endure; ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, Jam. 5 11. How courageous have some
been even under persecution, daring and provoking their tormentors, and crying
out to them, as Tertul. l. ad Scapulam. Magis damnati quam absoluti gaudent.
Tertull. relates, Crudelitas vestra est gloria nostra.

4. View well his catastrophe or the end of his life, as it is in Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the the upright; for the end of that man is
peace.

Again, This directs us concerning the manner how he is to be observed:
namely, 1. with an eye of recognition, he is to be known and acknowledged by
us, Isa. 61.9. All that see them shall acknowledge that they are the seed which
the Lord has blessed.

2. With an eye of complacency and love. As David was accepted in the sight of
all the people, and also in the fight of Saul's servants, 1 Samuel 18.5.

3. With a respectful eye, as the prophet Elisha regarded the presence of king
Jehosaphat, who professed that had it not been for his sake, he would not have
so much as looked upon Jehoram king of Israel, nor have seen him, 2 King. 3.14.

4. With a joyful eye, as they that feared God were glad when they saw David,
Psalm. 119.74.

5. This fight ought to be joined with a desire of adhesion as when Jonathan
saw David's valor, his soul clave to him; 1 Samuel 18.1.
and when Judah and Benjamin and many other saw that the Lord was with Asa the
king, they fell to him out of Israel, 2 Chro. 15.9.

6. It must be accompanied with a desire of imitation in that which is right.
Those things (says St Paul) which ye have both learned and received, and heard
and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you, Phil. 4.9.

Lastly, we should look upon them with an eye of sympathy. 1. If they be
regular in their lives, it should afford us occasion of joy, as Paul absent in
the flesh, yet was present with the Colossians in the spirit, and rejoiced to
behold their order, and stedfastnes of their faith in Christ, Col. 2.5. 2 If
they be in prosperity we should congratulate with them, so the Psalm m^st
prays, Lord, let me see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance, Psalm. 106.5. 3
If any of them be at any time in distress, we must cast an eye of compassion
and pity upon them, Hear all people and behold my sorrow, says the church in
captivity, Lam. 1.18. So when the father saw the penitent prodigal, he had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him, Luke 15.20.

discovery how purblind or squint-eyed the men of this world are, who can see
no excellency in the children of God. The reason hereof is rendered, 1. Joh.
3.1. the world knows them not, because it knows not the father: yea, it was
prophesied of Jesus Christ, that he should be fairer than the children of men;
Psalm. 45.2.
yet when he comes into the world, he has no form nor comeliness: and when
we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him, which is spoken
of the very elect, as well as of others, before they become believers; 1 Pet.
2.7.
and then is Christ indeed precious to them, and not before. How then can the
unbeliever spy any beauty in the members of Christ, who are indeed comely, yet
withal are black, whilst they remain here below? Cant. 1.5. He can discern
their blackness, but not their comeliness: if there be any infirmities or
deformity in the Saints, the world can soon epsy the same, and discover them
to others, as Cham looked on his fathers nakedness when he lay drunk in his
tent, and told his brethren without, Genes. 9.22. Here the wicked be as
quicksighted as L^nceus to behold a mote in the best man's eye, Mat. 7.3.
and may fitly be compared to bats and owls that can see better in the dark,
then in the light: or secondly the carnal man beholds the godly with an evil
eye, as of scorn and contempt, as Michael Saul's daughter saw David leaping and
dancing before the Lord, and despised him in her heart, 2 Samuel 6.16. or, with
an eye of envy and hatred, as Saul eyed David, 1. Sam. 18.9.

consolation; though the perverse world censure and unjustly condemn them; and
not only so, but they be loathsome also in their own sight, for their
iniquities, Ezekiel. 36.31. for the Lords eyes are ever upon them for good, and
his ears open to their cry, Psalm. 34.15. yea, though their dearest friends who
loved them best, while they were alive, yet when they are dead can hardly brook
to look on them, as when Sarah was dead, Abraham bought a burying place of the
sons of Heth, to bury his dead out of his sight Genes. 23 4. yet precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. yea and he will
make them to be had in honor of all that have any spiritual discerning, for
many things, for which the injudicious worlding condemns them: as David
assures M^chal, who had despised him in her heart and rated him for dancing
before the arc, that he should be had in honor for that very cause of the
handmaids of Israel, 2 Samuel 6.22. and this their glory shall be like to the
morning light, Pro. 4.18
that shines more and more until the perfect day, even till Christ shall come
to be glorified in his Saints 2 These. 1.10. For they are already the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what they shall be: but this is most certain,
that when he shall appear, they shall be like him, and shall see him as he is, 1
J^h 3.2. And then shall all that ever hated them, and vilified them, see it and
be ashamed, and be grieved, and gnash with their teeth, and melt away, Ps.
112.10.

Israelites if they do but consider that the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the earth to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. and that he will give them favor and
respect not only in the eyes of good men, such as David was: but of moral,
though carnal persons; as he made Joseph (a servant) to find grace in
Potiphars sight, and afterward of the keeper of the prison, when he was his
prisoner, Genes. 39.4.21. whereas on the other side all wicked persons are
loathsome in God's eyes, Psalm. 34.15. The face of the Lord is against them that
do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth: for as he has
promised that they who honor him shall be honored: so he has threatened that
they who despise him, shall be leightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. for which end he
sets Nigrum Theta an ignominious asterisk upon them, as he did upon Doeg, Psalm.
52.7. Lo, this the man, that made not the Lord his strength but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness, neither
can the godly abide the sight of them, He that works deceit (says David
Psalm. 101.7.) shall not dwell in my house; he that tells lies shall not tarry in
my sight: much less shall he reside in Heaven, or tarry in Gods sight, but be
extruded from his presence for ever, and from the glory of his power and be
made an abhorring to all flesh, 2 These. 1.9. Isa. 66.24. O then! let this
prevail with you to enter into this honorable society your selves, and to
draw others with you into this happy and glorious estate: then shall ye shine
as the stars of the firmament for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.

so many eyes are upon them, even of God, angels and men Oh! Mat. 5.16.
let your lights (dear christians) so shine before men, that they may see your
good works and glorify your father which is in heaven: and pray continually
with David, Lead me, O Lord, Psa. 5.8.
in thy righteousness, because of mine observers.

Israelites indeed to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to bless God for him; For
by his means are we advanced to all this excellency: who when he found us in a
most loathsome plight, naked and in our blood, none eye pitying us, said unto
us live, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. And for that end he became man, and was Nazianz. orat.
1. in pascha. Christus servi formam accepit, ut nos libertatem accipiamus;
contemptus est, ut gloria afficiat, etc.
content to be emptied that we might be filled: to fast, that we might feast;
to be vilified, that we might be dignified: to be impoverished, that we might
be enriched: to take shame to himself, that he might clothe us with honor and
glory: to be without form and comeliness Bern. de passione Domini c. 16.
nostra charitate devinctus ad tempus corponis nostri deformitatem accepit.
for a time, Isa. 53.3.
that we might be beautified for ever. Behold our Lord Jesus, I pray you in
that dress, wherein Pilate presented him to his implacable enemies, crowned
with thorns, and wearing purple in derision and all besmeared with his own
blood, saying to them, (...) behold the man, thinking by that ruthful sight to
have pacified their immense fury, but to little purpose; for they were the more
enraged against him. Now let us behold him, and let Pilates counsel, rejected
by those bloody persecuters, be acceptable to us that our love may thereby be
enflamed toward him; for it was for our sakes (brethren) that he was so
pointed at by Pilate, Behold the Man: John 19.5.
John. 19.5. that it might be said of us, behold Israelites indeed! and happy
art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the
shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency! Deuteronomy. 33.29.

The Second Part.
Sect. 1.

HItherto I have held forth the flag or streamer, to invite you all to take a
right survay of the true Israelite: Israel venit a (...) princeps.
now I shall present you with the sight of him, as he is characterized in the
holy Scriptures. In my text, we have 1. his name, an Israelite, because
Jacob-like, who was first called Israel, he has prevailed with God and
obtained his blessing, Genes. 32.28. who elsewhere is called a righteous man,
a believer, or a Christian, 2. We have his qualification annexed in the adverb
(...), in deed or in truth, hinting to us a distinction. There is a threefold
Isralite, 1. nomine tenus, in name only: such a one was Saul before his
conversion, proceeding from the stock of Israel, Phil. 3.5. secondly indeed,
and so is every true convert; Isa. 4.8.1. Romans 2.17.
though not descended lineally from Jacob, Romans 9.6.8. They are not all Israel
which are of Israel: but the children of the promise are accounted for the
seed, 3. There are Isralites both by nature and grace; so was Paul after his
conversion: and, were they all such who call themselves Jews at this day, we
should be glad to receive them into our hearts and houses, and give them all
respect: but to be Jews in name only and Judasses indeed, that is, enemies to
the Gospel, tends to their greatest ignominy: for nomen inane, crimen immane.

this maxim clearly arises, That it is a great privilege, honor and
happiness to be an Isralite indeed. David's epiphonema attesteth the same, Psalm.
24.5, 6. This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O
Jacob; or, O God of Jacob, Vatab. in Psalm. Aut Subaudiendum in ac sidicat.
Talis est generatio eorum qui in Jacob quaerunt faciem Dei: aut verbum
substantivum hoc modo, Jacob sunt and very Israelitae qui quaerunt faciem Dei.
or (as Vatablus expounds it), in Jacob, As if he should say, this is the
generation of them who in Jacob seek the face of God; or (says he) the verb
substantive is to be understood, thus, They are Jacob, and true Isralites who
seek the face of God. And all such, and only they, shall receive the blessing
from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of their salvation. verse. 5.

The same does the prophet Isaiah confirm Chap. 43.1.4. Thus says the Lord
that created thee, O Jacob, and formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: since thou
wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee;
therefore will I give men for thee, and people for they life. The former of
these divine witnesses describes their happiness, the other their honor above
all other persons and people, and so both branches of the point are proved.

Isralites, God is their God, Isa. 43.3. I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of
Israel, thy Savior; Mark well, I pray you, here the eternal God styleth
himself the Lord God of Israel, God is theirs by Covenant.
and blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Luke 1.67. said Zacharias in his
prophecy, whereof this was the first word, yea the first that he uttered,
after he had been long dumb, and might well be our last word; if we were never
to speak more. So else where he styleth his people the Israel of God, Gal.
6.16. See here, which of these is the better title, Gods or ours? Great men use
to derive their titles from some eminent places, or such as they love best. So
the great God deriveth his title sometimes from Heaven: the God of Heaven,
Genes. 24.3. but here from his chosen upon the earth. And is not this a
Mavelous honor to us poor dust and ashes? As God is the God of Israel, so
are we that believe the Israel of God.

Behold here again, and you shall find our happiness running in an equipage
with our honor; in the other words, I am the Lord thy God. Israel has God for
his portion. The Lord is my portion, says the church, Lam. 3.24. God has
Israel for his portion, for the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot
of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Judge here who has the better portion, God or
we? The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof says David, Psalm. 24.1.
But the Lord is my God and my portion for ever, can the true believer say,
Psalm. 73 26. But what says God to this? will he allow of it? yea, he says so
too, I am his God, Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia.
and I will be his God, and I will never be ashamed to be called His God, Heb.
11.16. And in having God, who has all things, the true Christian has all
things.

Yea moreover, if this be not enough for him, God has not only tied himself
by an everlasting covenant of grace to be His God, but to be the God of his
seed also: Genesis 17.7. which consideration so transported David with admiration,
that it drove him to break out into these pathetical expressions, 2 Samuel 7.18,
19. who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brought him
hitherto? And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God; but thou
have spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come, And is this the
manner of man, O Lord God? And what can David say more unto thee?

And for our fuller assurance and comfort he has ratified this his holy
covenant unto us, Luke 1.73, 74, 75.
1. by his oath, which he swear to our father Abraham, that he would give unto
us, that we being delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, might serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, before him all the days of
our lives Every word of which Grant ought to be weighed more exactly then gold,
If we meet with enemies to endanger us, as indeed we have many and sore
enemies, visible and invisible; he will deliver us out of all their hands; If
we complain, we cannot serve so holy a God, as we would, or ought to do: as
Ioshuah said to the people, Joshua 24.19. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Ye cannot serve the Lord; for he is an holy and jealous God: here we see, God
has undertaken to enable us to do, that which we (who are not sufficient of
our selves* as of our selves, to think a good thought) cannot do; for our
sufficiency is of God.

If we fear our own inconstancy, or that our hearts will prove false toward
God, like a deceitful Bow, as the Israelites did, who are said in their
extremity to flatter him with their mouth, and to lie to him with their
tongues. For their hearts were not right with him: neither were they steadfast
in his covenant, Psalm. 78.36.37.57. For remedy hereof, set faith on work by
reviewing this promise, and press God with his oath, and say, Lord I have many
enemies, too strong and subtle for me, but be thou my strong rock. I have a
deceitful backsliding heart but thou art a true God, purge out mine
hypocrisy, and heal all my backslidings. Thou requirest that I should serve
thee in holiness and righteousness without fear: but thou have bound thy self
as well to me, as me to thy self, grant me thy grace and power to do thy will;
Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
and banish far from me all slavish fear by planting thy love in mine heart,
for perfect love does cast out slavish fear, 1 John 4.18.

2. This covenant is established in the hand of a mediator Jesus Christ, who
has paid our whole debt, Heb. 12.24.
though we cannot satisfy for the least farthing: and he is able to work all
our works in us and for us, Isa. 26 12. Adam indeed soon brake his covenant
though he were in innocence, because he stood by his own strength: but the
second Adam God and man is our upholder, who is bound in the covenant of grace
with us and for us, to whom the Lord has said, In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve
thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
cause to inherit the desolate heritages; that thou may say to the prisoners
go forth: to them that are in darkness show yourselves, Isa. 49.8.9. God
promises to help and preserve him, that he may help and uphold us. Are we in
darkness? he will be our light. Are we weak? he the Lord Jehova will be our
everlasting strength. Do we fall? he will raise us up, Psalm. 37.24. Though we
break the covenant; he has kept it to the utmost.

Thirdly To render us yet more secure, Act. 2.38, 39.
God has confirmed this covenant that he will be our God and guide unto death,
by outward seals, commonly called Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords supper;
as circumcision is called the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. As
also by the inward seal of his holy Spirit, who bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the children of God, Romans 8.16. as the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 1.21, 22. Now he which establishes us with you is God, which words [with
you] are added, lest some weaker Christians should demur and surmise, that the
Apostle and strong christians may well say so; but we may not be so bold: Yes,
says the Apostle, you may avouch so much as well as I or any other. He who
establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God, who has
also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Here is a
seal and an earnest both mentioned, and annexed to Gods covenant and oath, that
we might have strong conso^ati^n, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before was, Heb. 6.18

God loves them
for the love of God is the original and fountain of all the Saints
blessedness and dign^^y, (which two may all along be distinguished, but cannot
be separated). The primary product of this love is our election from all
eternity, Ephesians. 1.4. which is therefore called the election of grace, Romans 11.5.
The object of this grace is the Israel of God, as appears by the Lords
compellation, Isa. 44.1, 2. Hear now, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I
have chosen, Thus says the Lord that made thee who will also keep thee, Fear
not, O Jacob, my servant, and thou Jesurun, Whom I have chosen, The
consideration hereof emboldened David against all his ranting enemies, Psalm.
4.2, 3. O ye sons of men, said he to them how long will you turn my glory into
shame. But know, (or be it known to you) that the Lord has set apart him that
is godly, for himself. These only have their names written in the Lamb's book
of life, Rev. 21.27. whereas all others who have forsaken the Lord the fountain
of living waters shall be written in the Earth, Jer. 17.13. They are built upon
the rock of ages, the foundation of God which stands su^e, 2. Tim. 2.19. all
others shall be like the chaff which the wind drives to and fro, Psalm. 1.4.

Secondly This love moved God to send his only begotten son in the fullness of
time, into the world to die for them, that whosoever believe on him might not
perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3.6. Here we have the privative part of our
happiness, they shall not perish; but be delivered from hell: and the positive
part, they shall have eternal life. Reader, stand here, and meditate, what the
terrors and torments of hell are, from whence Christ by his death has freed
us: and what the joys and glory of Heaven be, which he has purchased and
prepared for us. And when you can fully conceive how great these two are, or
how great Christ's love is, who has done both these for us, then and never
before will you be able to conceive how great the believers honor and
happiness shall be.

Thirdly, As the love of the Father induced him to give us his Son, Isa 9.6. so
the love of the Son moved him to give himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. and that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. and consequently from hell. Now, might
the damned Spirits be certified, that they should at last be released out of
those intolerable torments which they suffer, and we have deserved, and in the
end be invested in celestial glory, thought it should be gra^^ed them, not til
after some thousand of years first expired, what a great mercy would even they
account it? And will not you seek to know this, how you may escape hell, and
attain everlasting glory?

dwelle^h ^n us, and we in him, 1 Illumination.
1 John 3.24. By whom we 1. are enligh ened, to know what is the hope of his
calling and what are the riches of the glory of his inh^ritance in the Saints,
Ephesians. 1.18. How earnest was bl ssed Paul* who rightly apprehended this mercy of
illumination, in praying for others that they might have it, who wa^ted it, and
in rendering thanks for them who had obta^ned it? And will not you be aff^cted
therewith to seek it till you find it? and to bless God for it, when you have
it? 2 Vivification.
2. By the operation of this Spirit are they q^ick^ned, who were dead before in
trespasses and in sins, Joh. 6.63. Now put these two together; Prove. 15.30.
If the light of the body be so pleasant as Solomon averreth; how much more
delightful is the light of the soul? and if temporal life be so dear, that
(as the devil could say) all that a man has, will he give for his life; Job
2.4.
how much dearer is spiritual life? And how can you once imagine that you have
either this spiritual l^ght or life in you if you have no care to show forth
the praises of him who has called y^u out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Pe^. 2.9. where we have another of the true Israelites high
privileges sp^cifi^d, 3. Vocation.
effectual vocation, wh^reby they are called to be Saints, and to have
fellowship with J^su Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 2.9. for which, G^d who is
f^ithfull by whom they a^e called and will also confirm them unto the end,
that they may be blameless in the day of the Lord esus Christ, can never
sufficiently be admired and adored v. 8. Eternity will be filled with praises
for this, with other mercies.

How unspeakable a praerogative is our ^doption, 4 Adoption.
who may say with the prodigal, that we are not worthy to be called his sons or
daughters? Luke 15.19. yet, as many as receive him, to them he gives this
right or prerogative to become the sons of God, (...)
even to them who believe on his name, Joh. 1.12.

5 Faith.
And for this end to them it is given to believe, Phil. 1.29. For should God
give Christ, and not give us faith to receive him, Christ would profit us
nothing: faith is termed precious, 2 Pet. 1.1. yea the very trial of faith is
more precious then that of gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, 1
Pet. 1.7. How precious then is faith it self, whereby we lay hold on, and have
an interest in all the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel;
that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. Now suppose a
believer be poor in the world, yet is he rich in faith, and an heir of the
kingdom, which God has promised to them that love him, Jam. 2.5.

1 Wrought Romans 10.15.
For this end again God furnishes and sends his messengers (whose very feet
are beautiful to his chosen) with the fullness of the blessings of the Gospel
of Christ, Romans 15.29. to beget faith in their hearts. For Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, verse. 17. verse 17.
And although other persons may hear the same word; yet to them it is but a
savor of death to death even to as many as perish; whilst it is a savor of
life unto life to them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2.16

2. 2 Workeing in them.
This Grace of Faith being once wrought in their souls it purifieth the heart,
and this speaks of them, blessed: for Blessed are the pure in heart (says our
blessed Savor) for they shall see God, Math. 5.8. Faith also is attended with
all the train of saving graces, as Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, Brotherly-kindnesse, and Charity, 2 Pet. 1.6, 7. and it brings
forth in them all the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ to the
glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. and to the exceeding great benefit of
others, even to their conversion and salvation, as is prophesied of them, Esai.
19.24, 25. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria,
even a blessing in ^he middle of the Land: Whom the Lords of hosts shall bless
saying, B^essed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and
Israel m^ne inheritance. They are blessed of God, and become blessings to
others round about them; not to some few in a corner or two, but in the middle
of the Land. O the blessedness of these persons, as the H^brew word (...)
imports.

6 Reconciliation.
They only are reconciled to God by Jesus Csirist, who were before, as all
others are still, alien^ted and enemies in their minds by wicked works C l^ss.
1.20. What a change is here? By nature they were ch^ldren of wrath even as
others, Ephesians. 2, 3 But now, of enemies they are made the friends of G^d yea his
favorites, as our Savior declares, John. 15.15. H^nceforth I call you not
servants ( Theodosi s accounted it a f^r gre ter honor to ^erve Christ then o
be Empe or of the whole world.
though that were an high honor; for to serve God, is to reign) for the
servant knows not what his master does* b^t I have called you friends; for
all things that I have heard of my father, I have made known to you. They are
as near and dear to him, as children to their Parents, the beloved spouse to
the husband, and members to the head. To him they are united and made one with
the Father by him, John. 17.21. John 17.21.
with whom, as also with the spirit of grace they have communion, as St. John
asserteth, 1 John. 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
son Jesus Christ; and St. Paul makes mention of their communion with the holy
Ghost, 2 Cor. 13, 14, They are of Christ's flesh and of his bones Ephesians. 5.30.
they are one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. partakers of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Whereas all others have fellowship with devils, and the unfruitful works of
darkness; 1 Cor. 10 20. Ephesians. 5.11.
and not with God: for what communion can light have with darkness; or
unrighteousness with righteousness; or Belial with Christ? or an infidel with
him that believes, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. They may perhaps think and say they have,
but if we walk in darkness and say we have fellowship with him, we lie, and do
not the truth, 1 John. 1.6.

But ere we pass from this part of the Saints pre-eminence, a few things are
necessary to be advertised for prevention of mistakes, which some have made, of
most dangerous consequence. 1. Whereas it is said by our Savior that they who
believe on him are one with the Father as he is, John. 17.21. Here we must know
that the particle [as] denotes a quality, not an equality; for Christ is one
with his Father immediately, but we by means of Christ; this union being
wrought by the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. 2 We are not in the same kind or degree nor in
so high and glorious a manner one with the father as he: for in Christ the
human nature is united to the divine; yet the union is not natural, but
supernatural and mystical. Again the persons of believers are united to
Christ; yet is not that a personal or essential union, as Christ with his
Father is. Lastly, we must distinguish between (...) rightly attributed to
Jesus Christ, and (...) the divine Nature, whereof all are partakers who have
the Image of God renewed in them, consisting in wisdom, holiness, and true
righteousness.

If these things had been duly known and weighed by some, they would never have
blasphemously usurped to themselves the titles of God, and Christ; or have
given out that they are so one with Christ, that they can sin no more then
Christ can sin. To whom Luther and some others being too bold with those
hyperbocall expressions of Nazianzen (...) and (...) have given too much
occasion.

7. They, and they only have Christan liberty, 7 Liberty
of grace in this life and of glory in the life to come, called the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.21. St. Paul was caught up into Paradise,
and admitted to see the glory thereof, but not permitted to utter what he had
heard and seen, for it is as easy to contain the Sea in an Egge-shel, as to
relate heaven's happiness, 2 Cor. 12.4. Hither is our Lord Jesus gone before to
prepare many Mansions for believers, and he will bring them all thither, when
he has thoroughly prepared them for the same, John. 14.2. Whereas all
unbelievers, the fearful, the liars, and workers of iniquity shall in no wise
enter in thither, but have their part in the Lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone which is the second death, Rev. 21.8.27.

Lessius de justicia. p. 600. Christiana libertas a quintuplici servitute nos
solvit. 1. peccati. 2. diaboli. 3. legis, etc.
2. The liberty of Grace is either privative or positive, 1. They are freed 1.
From evil, 1. By means and their justification they have freedom 1. From the
bondage of the devil, Col. 1.13. Who were before taken captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 From sin Romans 6.22. both in regard of the guilt of it,
Romans 8.33. who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, since Christ
dyed for their sins: yea rather is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God to make intercession for them, v. 34. and also in regard of the dominion
of sin. For to such the Apostle says, Sin shall not have dominion over you,
for ye are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. As also in regard of
the fruits of sin, both in the world to come, they are freed from eternal
condemnation, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The reason
follows, v 2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made
them free from the law of sin and death, v 2. As also in this life they are
delivered from the terrors of death, under which others are in bondage all
their life time, Heb. 2.15. Secondly from the evil of afflictions not from the
afflictions themselves; for it is good for them to be afflicted, Psalm. 119.71.
But to them the Lord turns the evil of their troubles to good, Genesis.
50.20.

3. They are freed from the law, 1. from the intolerable yoke of the Ceremonial
Law, Acts. 15.10. and 2. in part from the Moral Law, in four regards, 1. of
the curse which it denounces again all that continue not in all that is
written in that Law, Gal. 3.10, 11. which Christ has freed us from, by being
made a curse for us.

2. They are exempted from seeking justification by the works of the Law, Romans
3.20, 21, 22. who are justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, v 24.3. from the exact obedience which the Law
requires to be performed in their own persons for justification and the
obtaining of eternal life; for Christ is become the end of the Law, for
righteonsnesse to every one that believes, Romans 10.4, 5. and through him God
accepts the will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8.12.

4. From the irritation of the Law which by reason of the corruption that is in
man by nature has a provoking power in it, so that when the law commands
obedience, and threatens the disobedient he grows more outrageous in evil
then before; Spumeus et fervens et abobice fortior ibit.
as a river dammed-up swells and overflows the Banks according to that of the
Apostle, The Law entered that the offense might abound, Romans 5.20. But these
persons of whom we discourse are of a more excellent spirit, who delight in the
law of God, after the inward man, Romans 7.22. and the love of God renders his
Commandments not grievous to them, 1 John. 5.3.

Fourthly, they are delivered from the evil of evils, the immense and direful
wrath of God, by Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. which shall come inevitably and
irrecoverably upon all the Children of disobedience, Col. 3.6. and burn to the
lower Hell.

Lastly, they shall be delivered from death and the grave: for Death is the
last Enemy that shall be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26. And, though die they must,
yet the sting of death, which is sin, is pulled out, and they shall be raised
from their graves in the great day of the resurrection; Hos. 13.14.
so that they may sing Hosea's and Paul's (...), O Death where is thy sting? O
Grave where is thy victory? thanks be to God who has given us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55.57.

2. The positive part of their liberty follows: As they are and shall be free
from all evil; so they are set free to good, as 1. to righteousness, to serve
the Lord in newness of spirit, and not in oldnesse of the letter, Romans. 7.6.

2. To their use all things are sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4, 5.
which to others are unclean Tit. 1.15. To the pure all things are pure, but to
them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds
and consciences is defiled.

3. They are free to the communion of Saints, fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of the same promises in Christ, by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6.

4ly. By Christ they have bold access to the throne of grace to ask what they
will, if it be agreeable to Gods will; with confidence in him of obtaining
their suits at all times, 1 John 5.14. What is said of Luther, may be affirmed
of them also; I sle potuit quod voluit; for to them it is promised, Ask and
have

8 Peace.
8. The peace of God which passes all understanding does keep their hearts and
minds through Jesus Christ, Phil. 4.7. whereas there is no peace (says God)
to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. To this peace with God and their own consciences we
must add peace with the creatures, even with the stones and beasts of the
field, Job. 5.23. and both these spring from their reconciliation with God.

9. Joy
9. From all these immunities arises joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet.
1.8. which none can ever take from them, Jo. 16.22. for it shall be
everlasting, Isa. 51.11. whereas all others joys besides are neither solid nor
durable. For though wicked men may glory in appearance; yet that joy never
proceeds from the heart, 2 Cor. 5.12. and it is but like the crackling of
thorns under a pot, soon extinct ending in smoke and ashes, as Solomon
describes it, Eccl. 7.6.

I might proceed but that of the Apostle calls me off; with which I shall
conclude my arguments for confirmation, and come to application of this truth.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love Him. 1 Cor. 2.9. which
yet is Cornel. a Lapide upon this place commenteth thus, Nota Isaiam cap. 64.4.
quem hic citat Paulus, agere de incarnatione Christi, and vita praesenti. Unde
hunc versiculum de miraculis Christi, deque sapientia, virtutibus, omnique
gratia quam Christus nobis, hic vivens communicavit, accipiunt, Chrysostom,
Ambrosius, Theophil. Oecumenius. quibus adjiciantur non nulli recentiores.
spoken of the present life, what then will their glory be in the life to come?

Use 1. This serves for the information of all that are willing to be
reformed: and for the conviction of the refractary. Would you then know whether
you be true Israelites or no, and, if you be not so, yet, how you may become
such? I shall lay down the chief marks, wherewith the pencil of Gods Spirit
has delineated them.

Characters of a right Israelite. 1.
1. They are acquainted with the mind of God revealed in his word, Psalm. 147.19,
20. The Lord shows his word unto Jacob, His statutes and his judgments unto
Israel, He has not dealt so with any nation, and for his judgments they have
not known them. Augustine and Bernard derive the name Israel from seeing God.
Aug. sup. Psa. 121. Bern. hom in luc. 24. Israel videns Deum inter pretatur;
quamvis hane etymologiam Mercerus improbat.
And certain it is, none but they have the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ,
which is life eternal: we have the mind of Christ, says St. Paul, 1 Co^. 2.16.
Others may have a superficial or speculative knowledge of him and the Gospel;
but these only are taught by him as the truth is in Jesus.

Wherefore all such as know not God, neither desire to be acquainted with his
ways exclude themselves out of this blessed catalogue, Job. 21.14. that refuse
to come and hear his word duly taught that they may know in this their day
the things which belong to their peace, Luke 19.42. Let them well peruse the
Apostles direful commination recorded in, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.8. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel, of the Lord
Jesus Christ. O! here observe in time, I pray; the party coming is the Lord
Jesus, who if he set himself against you who can or dare appear for you? 2. His
attendants are the angels of his power. 3. the manner, how he will come, in
flaming fire, 4. the end for which he comes so attended, and in so dreadful
sort, to take vengeance, 5. the subject parties on whom he will take vengeance,
and they are of two sorts; first such as know him not. If there were no other
sin but this, wilful ignorance, where means of knowledge may be had, and are
neglected, his eye shall not pity: for he has sworn in his wrath, and
therefore will not repent, that the people who err in their hearts, and have
not known his ways, shall never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.10, 11.
Psalm. 95.10.11. The second sort, against whom this great Judge will come so
armed, are all that obey not the Gospel of God; it is not sufficient for them
to know it, unless they obey it: for Basil. Quomodo supplicia sempiterna
dieuntur hic pauca? Resp. Non numerum poenarum sed differentiam indicat
Dominus. Potest enim aliquis esse dignus inextinguibili flamma vel remissiori
vel intensiori: and indeficiente verme, vel mitius torquente, vel fortius.
he that knows his masters will, and does it not shall be beaten with many
stripes, Luke 12.57. but he that knows not, and does commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes, v. 48. Secondly, Every true
Israelite is a true believer; for we read of the faith of Abraham, Heb. 11.17.
of Isaac, v. 20. and of Jacob, v. 21. and every one whether he be Jew or
gentile, in circumsion or uncircumcision, who is justified by faith, and
walks in the steps of the faith of Abraham, has Abraham for his father Romans
4.11, 12. whereas the Jews of whom Saint Paul speaks Romans 11.20. were broken
off (though lineally descended of Abraham) because of unbelief. Here let all
unbelievers and misbelievers, (who content themselves with a dead faith, Jam.
2. 20.22. Without attaning to the saving faith of Gods elect which works by
love, that their works may justify their faith, as true faith justifies the
persons in whom it is,) know that our Savior has spoken it, and none can
reverse it, I dare not conceal it, and though they will not yet believe it,
they shall find it so, They shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
them, Joh. 3.36.

A 3. character of this Israelite indeed is true repentance, Acts. 5.31.
Character.
God exalted Jesus Christ by his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: whence it manifestly
appears, first that Repentance is an Evangelical grace, because it is the
gift of Jesus Christ: 2. that none are able to repent of themselves, for it is
a supernatural work of Christ in the elect: 3ly, that it was one end of
Christ's exaltation in glory to confer repentance: 4ly, that the subject
parties in whom conversion is wrought, are Gods Israelites: 5ly. that remission
of sins does accompany true repentance; and that none ever had or shall have
pardon of sin; who repent not of it. And this calls upon five sorts to look
to themselves, 1. Such as have not yet repented, 2 Such as will not repent, 3.
Such as repent but feignedly, Jerem. 3 10. 4 They that do not renew their
repentance after the reiteration and fresh commissions of sin: 5ly. but most of
all They that decry and oppose the doctrine of Repentance, as legal work or
unnecessary for a Christian: what high conceits soever any of these may have of
their spiritual estate, they shall never be found to be Israelites of Gods
denomination.

Character*
4. A true Israelite is one that has a clean heart, as the Psalmist teaches
us, Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel to them that are of a clean
heart. Obj. But who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? Pro. 20.9. Ans. It is confessed, no man in this life can say so, nay of
all others the best complain most of hardness and pollution of heart Isa.
63.17. why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear, says the Church; we
are all as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. yet in a threefold respect, their
hearts may be truly said to be clean 1. As they are justified by faith, God
imputes not to them their own sins, but the righteousness of his son, Romans
4.6. by whose blood they are cleansed from all iniquity 1 John 1.7.9. so that
they confess their sins to God. Christ interposeth his merits, and tells
them, they are clean every whit, Joh. 13.10. and this made David so confident
in his prayer to God. Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean;
wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

2. In respect of regenerating or sanctifying grace, God has begun to purify
their hearts by faith, Act. 15.9.

Thirdly Their unfaigned desires are to have their hearts cleansed, as
appears by David's prayer, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart; O God.

Fourthly Their constant endeavors are (since they have received such
promises, and grace withal) to clea^se themselves (as the Apostle teaches)
fron all filthyness not only of the flesh, but also of the Spirit, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. And for that end, 1 They hide
the word in their hearts that they may not sin against God, Psalm. 119 11, 2
They keep their hearts with all diligence, well knowing that from thence spring
the issues of life, Pro. 4.23. 3 They suffer not vain thoughts to lodge in their
breasts, Jer. 4.14. but carefully expel all evil imaginations and disorderly
affections, which therefore are compared to strangers and wayfaring men who
come into an other man's house, but tarry not there long; as Augustine
interprets that passage in Nathans parable, 2 Samuel 12.4. There came in a
traveller unto the rich man; A traveller, not an Inmate.

4. They are much afflicted, and in great bitterness and sorrow of spirit, when
they seriously reflect upon their souls, and find them out of order by reason
of pride, hypocrisy, or any other obliquity, they weep and mourn, yea their
laughter is turned to mourning, and their joy to heaviness and they humble
themselves before the Lord, as St James commands Iam. 4.9.10. and though they
enjoy outward health and prosperity, yet are they weary of their very lives by
reason of their inward exorbitances and lusts.

Fifthly, they are like to a living spring which works uncessantly day and
night, till it has purged out the filth that by any means is cast into it; so
can not they rest till they have washed themselves in the fountain opened for
sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13.1.

Sixthly, being jealous of their own hearts, which by nature are deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, so that none but the Lord who
searches the heart, and tries the reins can know it, Jer. 17.9, 10. And
withal being conscious to them selves how unable they are to subdue their
unruly passions, and vile affections: they pour forth many and fervent prayers
to God, in the name of Christ to discover to them their hidden corruptions, and
to cleanse them from their secret sins, as may be seen in David, Psalm.
139.23, 24. Search me O God, and Know my Heart: Try me, and Know my Thoughts.
See if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me into the way everlasting: and
Psalm. 19.12. Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Application.
Hereby it may appear that such bebelong not to the Commonwealth of Israel who
1. boast of the goodness of their hearts, 2. that hold thoughts to be free, 3.
who never watch over their hearts, 4. that never are troubled about the
filthynesse of their inward parts, 5. never wash them in the blood of the
immaculate Lamb, 6. nor pray for wisdom to discover, nor power from on high
to purify and order them aright. This is one of the liveliest and surest
Symptons, whereby you may know whether your heart be right with God or no^* It
is true, others cannot judge immediately of them, but God can and does, and
will one day bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of
God, 1 Cor. 4, 5. Oh therefore judge your selves, that you may not be judged of
him to eternal condemnation.

Jacob personated his brother Esau; yet his father, though he were blind,
discerned his voice, Genesis. 27.22. The voice is Jacobs voice (says he) but
the hands, are the hands of Esau. So ordinarily may a true Christian be
discovered by his dialect or language, for he speaks best his mothers tongue
called the language of Canaan, Isaiah. 19.18. which consists, 1. In abstaining
from evil talk, 1 Pet. 3.10. for he that will love life, and see good days,
must refrain his tong^e from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

But if at any time he over shoots and breaks out into distempered words,
either offensive to his God, or infections to his neighbor, knowing that evil
communication infecteth good manners, 1 Cor* 15.33. 1. he recalleth himself,
2. confesses his sin to God with selfe-abhorrencie, and humbles himself for
it, as Job did in his answer to the Lord, Job. 40.4, 5. Behold I am vile, what
shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken,
but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further.

Thirdly, he resolves for the future to bridle his tongue better, as David
did, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me.

Fourthly, he prays the Lord to set a Watch before his mouth, and to keep the
door of his lips, Psa. 141.3. as unable to do it himself.

Fifthly, It is a daily vexation to his righteous soul to hear others to
dishonor God by their uncircumcised lips, and profane discourses. Lot vexed
his soul day by day, as well in hearing the Sodomites unlawful speeches, as in
seeing their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. and of old they used to rent their
garments, when they had heard any to speak blasphemy.

Secondly, the Language of Canaan consists not only in shunning of evil
words, but also in bringing forth good things out of the good treasu e of his
heart, as an evil man out of the evil treasure brings forth evil things,
Mat 12.35. For as the righteous bath the law of God in his heart; so his mouth
speaks of wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment, Psalm. 37.30, 31
according to the Apostles charge, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying that
it may minister grace to the hearers.

Now bring your selves to this test; Application.
for by men's words they shall be justified; and by their words shall they be
condemned, Tit. 1.10.
Man. 12.37. Hereby 1. all unruly and vain talkers, cursers, customary
swearers, railers, and scoffers that walk after their own ungodly lusts, Jude.
18. manifest themselves to be rather Pagans then Christians indeed; as Peter
was discovered to be a Galilean; for his speech bewrayed him, Mat. 26.73.

And suppose a gilded Hypocrite may have his tongue tipped with Scripture
expressions, and holy discourses yet if he be well observed at other times he
will be found to speak ordinarily the language of A^hdod, and to trip and
faulter in his most affected and best discourses. As many Ephramites were
detected to be what they were by the men of Gilead in pronouncing Sibboleth for
Shibboleth, for they could not frame to pronounce it right, Judge. 12.6.

2. What may they think of themselves, if they had any spiritual judgment,
who think or say; words are but wind, little regarding what the Judge of quick
and dead has forewarned, us of, that men shall give account of every idle
word which they speak, in the day of judgment, Mal. 12.36.

Thirdly, where shall they appear that reproach and laugh them to scorn, and
shun their company, whose tongues use knowledge aright, as Solomon says every
wise man does, Prove. 15.2. If any do but once make mention of the Lords
righteousness, reprove sin, or exhort to reformation of life: or use any
savory passages tending to the souls good, they have done with them as too
precise for their society, and jeere at them, as ridiculous persons: or
tremble as Felix trembled when Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance and
judgment to come, but would give no further audience, Acts. 24, 25.

Fourthly, woe unto them who never call themselves to an account for preventing
frothy obscene or noisome language; nor yet for the omission of seasonable and
holy conferences being far unlike to the Prophet Isaiah, who cries out to God,
Woe is me: for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in
the midst of a people of unclean lips, Chap. 6.5.

Sion distinguished from all the Sons and Daughters of Babel. Gods holy word is
the rule by which they square all their principles and practices, as the
Apostle shows us, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be
upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Now it is well known that a
Rule is very useful for builders for the discerning of that which is straight
from that which is crooked that there may be a symmetry and just proportion
between the several parts of his edifice. This rule of the word must 1. be
known by us, 2. we must have it ever in readiness, 3. It is to be applied to
every doctrine of faith embraced by us, and to all your imaginations,
affections, and works, that we may all walk by the same Rule, Phil 3.16.

Application.
But alas, how little do many think of any such rule from one end of the day to
the other, nay, from one end of the week or year to another? how few of us know
it? and how do most persons cast it behind their backs? Do you, when you awake
every morning consider, what affairs you are to go about the ensuing day? do
you contrive as architects use to do that your undertakings may all be good
for the matter; and right for manner and ends thereof, that all your works may
be wrought in God? that they may be carried on in faith and obedience to the
glory of God? then you build upon the Rock, and your labors shall be accepted
of God, and rewarded by him. But if you reject the word of God, what wisdom
is in you? Jer. 8.9. God will bring upon you the fruit of your thoughts and
doings, Jer. 6.19. and in fine reject you, as he did Saul (for this very cause)
from being King, 1 Samuel 15.26.

whose praise is not of men but God, Romans 2. 29. He will neither forbear doing
good or be drawn to evil for the applause of men, or for fear of reproach; 2
Cor. 6.8.
he can pass through good report, and bad report both, willingly and
cheerfully, knowing well that they are happy, who are reproached for the name
of Christ, Luke. 6.22.

Quest. How does God praise his people? Answ. in his word he prefers them
before all others, giving them this suffrage, The righteous is more excellent
than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26,

Secondly, in advancing them by his all ruling providence above others even
many times in this life; as he avouched Israel to be his peculiar people
according to his promise, and made them high above all nations in praise, in
name, and in honor, Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19.

Thirdly, by the approbation and commendation of the godly, whose judgment is
to be preferred before thousands of other men's, as Jonathan pleaded for David
against his father Saul, 1 Samuel 10.4.

Fourthly, In their own consciences by his spirit bearing witness to them
that they are such as God approves of, in which sense the spirit of glory is
affirmed to rest upon them, Pet. 4.14.

Fifthly, in the consciences and confessions of wicked men sometimes, even
their worst enemies; as Saul justified David whose life he had long sought
acknowledging to him, Thou art more righteous then I, 1 Samuel. 24.17.

Sixthly, by clearing up their innocence from obloquies and slanders in this
life, and bringing forth their righteousness as the light, Psalm. 37.6.

Seventhly, in reviving their credits and estimations in the world, after their
bodies have been long dead and rotten. So the Prophets who had been slain by
the Fathers, had Tombs built them, and their sepulchers garnished by their
children worse than their Ancestors, who justified the Prophets and condemned
their own Fathers, saying, If we had been in the days of our Eathers we would
not have been partakers with them, in the blood of the Prophets, Mat. 23.29,
30. yet even these men afterward put to death the prince of Prophets Jesus
Christ.

Eighthly, at the last day in proclaming their innocence before God, Angels,
and men; when that one word Euge, well done faithful and good servant will
countervaile all the calumnies and aspersions that ever were cast upon them in
this world, Mat. 25.21.23.

Ob. But great men speak evil of me. Ans. So did they of David, Psalm. 119.23.
Princes also, says he, did sit and speak against me but thy servant did
meditate on thy Statutes. Where the word also imports that others did the like,
as else where he complains to God in prayer. Let the lying lips be put to
silence, which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously, against the
righteous, Psalm. 31.18. In this case there is need of the Patience and faith
of the Saints: Rev. 10.
But do as David did, go to God by prayer, and keep close to his testimonies
and mark (as James speaks of Job) the end which God made with David, and
certainly in due time he will wipe off all dirt cast upon your faces also.

I deny not but praise is desirable among all; Application.
And whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there
be any praise, these things are to be thought on, Phil. 4 8. for a good name is
rather to be chosen then great riches, Prove. 22.1. But they that love the
praise of men more then the praise of God; or will not be content with the
honor that comes from God alone: But receive honor one of another, neither
do nor can believe John. 5.44. Obj. How then does the same evangelist avouch
that many of the chief rulers believed on Christ; but because of the Pharisees
they did not confess him lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, for
they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, John. 12.42, 43. are
they not here said for all this to believe? How then can you affirm that such
persons neither do, nor can believe? A. What I affirm, Christ has taught: and
therefore we must distinguish of faith; they believed the truth, but not truly,
as Illa non est vera and legitima fides, doctrinam credere simpliciter esse
veram; non autem penitus se illi subjicere. Calvin. Non fuit vera and viva
fiides; haec enim a confessione non separatur- Brentius in Ioh. 12, Non
habuerunt veram fidem, sed fictitiam, quae cum non constiterit adversus
insultum Pharisaeorum, multo minus constare poterit adversus insultum Sathanae.
Bucer and others conclude out of the comparing of these places together. True
faith they had not; because they did not wholly submit themselves to Christ and
his truth. True and lively faith (says Calvin) is not separated from
confession; for with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with mouth
confession is made unto salvation, Romans 10.10. For albeit it is likely (says
he) that they were not altogether dumb, yet because their confession was not
ingenuous or free enough, the Evangelist-absolutely denies that they professed
their faith. Wherefore let no man flatter himself, who in any part concealeth
and dissembleth his faith, lest he should incur the Odium or hatred of men.
For albeit the name of Christ be odious, that fear is not excusable which
compels us to decline in the least manner from his confession.

If any therefore preserve their reputations with whatsoever depends
thereupon, as worldly profit and safety, before Jesus Christ and his truth,
they are not worthy of Him, but they and their credit shall perish together as
1. all such, whosoever they be as comply with evil times, embrace heterodox
tenets, and side with factions swerving from the right rule of Gods word;
either for fear of loss, or hope of preferment: and 2. all such as dare not
own the cause of Christ, nor join with the true professors thereof in time of
persecution and danger, or basely forbear holy duties and religious
performances for the same causes; for all these are but mongrel Christians, as
appears by the parable of the sower, where they are compared to stony ground;
for though they hear the word, and anon with joy receive it; yet have they
not root in themselves, but when persecution arises because of the word, by
and by they are offended, Mat. 13.20.21. where we meet twice with by and by:
suddenly they receive the word, and as suddenly they start aside and recede
from it. How many such are there in our days, as there have bin in former ages
as they that were then eyewitnesses inform us? Lessius in Joan, 12. Hodie
multi affirmant, in persecutione licere abnegare doctrinam Evangeli et,
occultare sententiam suam, si modo cord servetur fides.
Many faith one of them at this day affirm, that one may deny the doctrine of
the Gospel in time of persecution, and conceal their opinions, if so be faith
be retained in the heart. This well considered would bring back into the right
way, all such Demasses as have fallen away, and preserve others from
backsliding.

Israelite loves them who appertain to the same city, and are of the same
family, as all true believers are, Ephesians. 2.19. And hereby we know (says the
beloved Disciple) that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren: he that loves not his brother abides in death, 1 John 3.14. For
every one that loves him that begot, loves him that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. and how can we love the head, Christ, if we love not His members
also? But this love must not be in word, nor in tongue only, but in deed and
in truth, and then thereby we shall know that we are of the truth, and shall
assure our hearts before God, 1 John 3.19. True Christian love is like to the
planet called Stella Veneris which attends the Sun of righteousness, and
appears first and last in the soul, among all the planets of graces; in an
Israelite indeed, and shines brightest in the night of temptation when faith,
and other graces (like the rest of the stars) are many times so clouded and
obscured that we cannot discern them in our selves.

Quest. But how may we know that our Love of the brethren is sincere? A 1. If
it proceed from faith; for faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. and assures us of
Gods love to our own souls; and this makes us to love one another as Christ
has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2. 2* If it extend to all the Saints; the poor, as well
as rich, Philem, 5. to such as never yet showed us outward kindness, as well as
to them who have been beneficial to us.

3. If it be real and operative in affoarding them seasonable and necessary
relief, according to our ability, then God will not be unrighteous to forget
our work and labor of love, which has been showed toward his name in
administering to the Saints, Heb. 6.10.

4. If it be constant, yea increasing every day, more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.10.
5 If it be chiefly set upon the good of the souls of men and women, that they
may prosper, 6 If we can forbear and for give them, pray for them, and
sympathize with them in their several conditions, and delight in their society
above others. These will be clear evidences of the soundness of our affection
to them, which will evidence to us again that we are of the fold of the great
shepherd, and little flock for whom he has prepared the kingdom.

On the contrary they who hate the righteous, as Esau did blessed Jacob,
Application.
Genes. 27.41. who Gregor moral. l* 25 c. 9. Si ergo tanta poena mulctatur qui
non dedisse convinci tur; qua poena feriendus est, qui redarguitur abstulisse
aliena?
rob and spoil them instead of feeding and clothing them, who traduce, revile,
curse, and despise them, separating them out of their society, discover
themselves to be the serpents seed, Genesis 3.25. or as St. John. plainly tells
them, children of the Devil, 1. Joh. 3.20. Among all whom, they fall under the
heaviest censure who disclaim all duties of charity as if none could perform
them but forthwith they must needs make a ladder for themselves to ascend to
Heaven by: whereas the Judge himself has foretold us, that they shall be placed
on the left hand among the goats who neglect them, Mat. 25.41. to whom he will
say, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
and his angels; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc. v. 42. And
when they shall answer, when saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, etc. v. 44. he
shall reply, In as much as ye did it not to one of these little ones, ye did it
not to Me, v. 45.

And as for those who decry and explode the word, Duty, as contrary to, or
inconsistent with, the free grace brought unto us by Jesus Christ, let them but
consult with these places of Scripture, that they may see their error, and be
better informed, The 1 place is Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. But some retort, This is in
the old Testament. Answ. 1. The old Testament is Gods word, to which our
Savior refers us, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life, mark his reason, which he backeth the charge with: That is
to be searched, in which ye may have eternal life: but in the old Testament ye
may have eternal life; Therefore the old Testament is to be searched. The minor
he takes to be granted by themselves, ye think so: whereto I may well add, they
who reject that wherein eternal life is to be had or found, reject eternal
life; but they who reject the scriptures extant in our Saviors time which were
the old Testament only; reject that wherein eternal life is to had or found:
therefore they reject eternal life it self, 2 The Church under the new
testament is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. where, by the Prophets
we are to understand their writings contained in the old Testament for
whatsoever things were written before time were written for our learning, as
well as for our comfort, Romans 15.4. 3 Let us pass over to the new Testament,
there is duty allowed, commended, and commanded also, as in Luke 17.10. When
you have done all those things, which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do, where
observe that, Every command laid on us, obliges us to duty, and the works of
charity toward, poor Saints is termed Duty, Romans 15.27. where the Apostle
exhorting the Romans to afford liberal contribution to the poor Saints at
Jerusalem, draws his argument ab officio thus, If the Gentiles have been made
partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to administer to them
in carnal things, 4. By grace we are not exempted from duty, but more obliged
to Duty, as you may read, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared to all men teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts we should live godlily, righteously, and soberly in this present
evil world.

Israelites garland. Therefore I must insist more largely upon it than upon any
of the former. He is one, in whom there is no guile For the better
understanding whereof, we must distinguish of guile, 1. there is a lawful and
commendable guile, as may be seen in St Paul's expression, 2 Cor. 12.16. who
being crafty (as he affirms of himself) caught the Corinthians with guil, as
the cunning angler covers his hook whith some such bate, as he knows the
fish delights in, and then he uses to draw back his line, that the fish may
less perceive the fraud, and more eagerly snatch at the bait, till it be
caught; so here, this fisher of men forbore in policy to receive any
maintenance of the Church of Corinth, (which otherwise he might have done) that
he might the better win them to the love of the Gospel, it being thus
unchargeable to them. And I desire that there were more of this guile, and less
of the other, in all Ministers and Christians, which is nothing else but
Christian policy separate from hypocrisy, tending to the spiritual good of
such as we deal with.

2ly There is a sinful guile ever condemned as most odious to God and man: and
this again is threefold, 1. guile in heart, as Solomon has it, Pro. 12.20.
Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil, 2. There is guile in the
tongue, arising from that in the heart; and both these are the Israelites
branded for, Psalm. 78.34.36.37. when God slew them, they sought him and, they
returned, and enquired early after God Nevertheless they flattered him with
their mouth, and lied unto him wi h their tongues. For their heart was not
r^ght with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant, 3. There is deceit
in act; the wicked works a deceitful work, says Solomon, Pro. 11.18.

From this threefold sinful fraud are our Heaven-borne Nathanaels acquitted, 1.
for they are upright in heart as they be described in that song of degrees,
Psalm. 125.4. Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are
upright in their hearts.

2. There is no guile in their mouths; for so it was prophesied of those that
should return from the Babylonish captivity, Zeph. 3.13. The remnant of Israel
shall do no iniquity nor speak lies neither shall a deceitful tongue be found
in their mouth. The like is affirmed of the hundred forty and four thousand:
which were redeemed from the Earth mentioned, Revel. 14.1.4. that in their
mouth was found no guile: for they were without fault, before the throne of
God, verse. 5.

Thirdly, there is no guile in their demeanor: either toward God; for him
they worship in spirit and truth John. 4.24. or toward men; as Samuel after
his many years government challenged all the people, Whom have I defrauded? and
they all gave him this honorable testimony. Thou have not defrauded us, 1 Samuel
12.3, 4. and St. Paul's conscience enabled him to say no less truly, then
boldly, We have defrauded no man, 2 Cor. 7.2. for which cause Jacob also is
called (...) Aug, de civit. Dei. L. 6. C. 37. Simplex sine dolo vel fictione, a
(...) fingo inquit Ludovicus Vives in comment.
a plain man, Genesis. 25.27.

But here a grand Question arises, Is there any man under Heaven free from
Hypocrisy and deceit, when the Apostle condemns all men to be liars, Romans 3,
4. There is none, no not one. Answ. For proof of this, we need go no further
then my Text; where we have a double instance and that of two eminent persons,
1. Of Nathaniel expressly named, and 2. Of Jacob (his (...)) alluded to. For
the former, it is evident there was gross error in Nathanaels judgment when
he demanded of Philip inviting him to come and see Jesus of Nazareth; Can there
any good thing come out of Nazareth, v. 46. And Jacob cannot be excused by
Aquin 22. 7. 110. 3. ad 3. Vsus est Jacob hoc modo loquendi per spiritum
prophetice. Aug. l. de mendac c. 1. figurate pixit, etc
his best compurgators from doubling four times together; since his own heart
accused him for imposture in following his mothers counsel, as will appear if
we view the whole transaction, recorded Genesis 27.6. Rebeccah having heard Isaac
bidding Esau to go out to the field and take some venison, and to make him
savoury meat, that he might eat and bless him before he died: She advised her
son Jacob to fetch two good Kids from the flock, that she might dress them and
make savory meat, such as his Father loved, that he might bring it to his
Father, and so obtain the blessing before his brother, v 10. But Jacob answered
his mother, that Esau is an hairy man and I am smooth. My Father peradventure
will feel me,, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver, and so shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing; yet he was overruled by his mother, and
brought her the Kids which she prepared, and sent by the hand of Jacob to his
Father, who was dim-sighted, and therefore Paraeus in locum.
demanded of him Who he was? Jacob said, I am Esau thy first born which was an
untruth: then he goes on, I have done according as thou baddest me, when he
was not bidden at all, 3. excusing his haste alleged that God had brought the
venison to him, whereas he had fetched it out of the fold without any miracle
or extraordinary providence: and lastly, his Father doubting whether he were
Esau, he affirmed, he was v. 24. The Quest. then remains yet in force, How
can the assertion of our Savior be justified, where he affirms of Jacob and
Nathanael, that there was no guile in them, since it is clearly proved, that
there has been and ever will be falsehood found in all the Childeen of Adam
excepting Christ himself alone, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22.

Answ. As we have before distinguished of guile in general, so here again we
must distinguish of sinful guile, 1. There is gross and hidden fraud.

Secondly; such as men approve of in themselves; and such as they allow not of.

Thirdly; There is guile continued in, or truly repented of.

Fourthly; there is such guile as God imputes to the party in whom it
resideth: or such as he charge not at all upon them in whom it is.

Fifthly, There may be guile in the flesh when there is none in the spirit Now
it is granted that this sin has infected all mankind by nature except Jesus
Christ: yea that there remain some dregs of Hypocrisy in the best of the
children of man, while they live in this world. But as for gross falsehood, it
seldom or never surpriseth the true Christian, unless it be while he is under
some strong temptation or other, as here Jacob was, for 1. his dear Mother
persuaded him to take this sinister course for obtaining the blessing; the end
was good, he saw his mother counseled him to it in great love to him, he might
happily imagine, that his mother being withal a gracious woman knew better than
himself what was both lawful and expedient (in such a case) to be done, and
he knew that obedience was due to her that bare him, Prove. 1.8. especially when
she was so importunate, and had taken the curse upon her (which she feared he
should have brought upon himself by this collusion) for me had said unto him,
Upon me be thy curse, my Son: Only obey my voice, Genesis. 27.13.

Secondly, Here carnal reason for the present overtopt his faith, and
suggested, The blessing is promised to me, and now is the time or never for me
to seek it, lest my brother prevent me, and this is the most probable way of
procuring it.

Thirdly, Here (we may be sure) Satan would not be wanting to employ his utmost
policy to thrust him forward. And thus was he drawn into the sin; yet got the
blessing in this sinful method, to teach us all, that all our blessings
proceed from Gods mere grace toward us in Jesus Christ and not for any
worthiness of our own: though Jacob here did that which might justly have
forfeited the blessing, yet even then did the Lord graciously confer it upon
him, 2. Though he feared hereby to bring a curse upon himself, which plainly
argues strong doubting in him; yet this hinders not his speeding. Where
observe again that theoreme of the Apostle to be a solid truth, 2 Timothy 2.13. If
we believe not, yet God abides faithful he cannot deny himself. Though we
alter never so much; yet God is the same most faithful and just in all his
promises and undertakings.

But setting aside this time of Jacobs temptation, I conjecture that you shall
hardly find him offending in this kind either before or after: Some may ask?
Did he not supplant his brother? Answ. Esau indeed termed him a supplanter to
his Father Isaac descanting upon his name Jacob which signifies a supplanter,
Genesis 27.36. saying Is he not rightly named Jacob? for he has supplanted me
these two times: he took away my birthright, and behold now he has taken away
my Blessing also. But learned interpreters both Orthodox and popish herein
justify Jacob and condemn. Esau. Paraeus in locum: Supplantavit fratrem non
dolo malo, sed prudentia and divino instinctu. Thomas. 22.9.100. art 4. ad. 3.
Jus primogeniturae debebatur Jacob ex divina electione, secundum illud, Mal. 1.
Jacob dilexi, Esau atem odio habui. Ideoque Esau peccavit primogenita vendens:
Jacob autem non peccavit emendo, quia intelligitur suam vexationem redemisse.
Paraeus asserteth that Jacob used prudence, not without a divine instinct, but
no sinful guile: and again he cleereth him of injustice in this matter,
because he bought not rem alienam, sed suam redemit; for without doubt (says
he) Esau had often offered him the birthright, and this he gathers from those
words Sell to me this day, swear to me this day, Genesis 25.31.33. q.d. Now
perform to me, what thou have often promised me.

Secondly, although there is hidden guile, and may be sometimes gross fraud
(in the times of temptation) in a true Christian; yet when he discerns it in
himself, and after the temptation is past, he allows not of it in himself,
as the wicked do, e.g. Ephraim justifies himself in his legerdemain, Hos.
12.7. He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves to
oppress. And what says he to this? v. 8. yet am I become rich, I have found
me out substance in all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me, that
were sin.

3ly The wicked continues in this sin, as the Psalmist charge him; Thou
give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit, Psalm. 50.19. But
as soon as the Lord brings a soul to true repentance, either initial, or
renewed, then he confesses his fault with sorrow and shame, as Zacheus did,
Luk 19.8. If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore
him fourfold. And Peter, after he had denied with swearing and cursing that he
knew his master, he went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.70.72.75. and with
David he prays the Lord to remove from him the way of Lying, Psalm. 119.29.
and thence forward he renounceth the hidden things of dishonesty, and walks
no longer in craftiness, 2 Cor. 4.2. but studiously according to the Apostles
rule he puts away lying, and speaks the truth with his neighbor, knowing
that we are members one of another.

4ly. And though there remains guile in his flesh, or unregenerate part; yet
is there none in his spirit, or regenerate part, Psalm. 32.2. In his spirit
there is no guile, This distinction Saint Paul makes when he found in himself
experimentally a bitter-sweet contrariety, Romans 7.18. In me, that is in my
flesh (says he) dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me, but
how to perform that which is good, I find not, etc. and v. 22. I delight in
the law of God, after the inward man: But I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin, which is in my members.

5ly Though there be guile in him; yet (after his repentance for it) the Lord
does not impute it to him: witness the royal-prophet, Psalm. 32.12. Blessed is
the man, whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is he
unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, in whose spirit there is no guile. He
will confess of himself, I have a treacherous heart, and false tongue, who
shall deliver me from it? I will do this thing for thee, says the Lord, which
you desire; for I have found a ransom. Oh this makes him to cry out with
the blessed Apostle, Blessed be God through Jesus Christ, Thus God dealt with
the prophet Isaiah, c. 6. v. 5. Woe is me, (says he) for I am undone, because I
am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips:
for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Then flew one of the
Seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the
tongs from off the altar. And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this has
touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged, v. 6.7.
Here I cannot pretermit Nathanael in my text, in whom there was rooted a very
dangerous Error (as before has been showed) that Jesus Christ was not the
right Messiah, because he came out of Nazareth; yet our Lord Jesus foreseeing
that after he was better informed, he would embrace the truth; by way of
anticipation (as I may so speak) gives him this report, that he was a true
Israelite in whom was no guile. Upon which words Laudat in eo candorem, in
profitenda animi sui sententia. Etsi vitium erat quod Nathanael offendebatur
humilitate patriae Christi, non mediocris tamen virtus est, sententiam suam
nullo dolo malo celare, sed eam aperte et perspicue profiteri, 2. commendat in
ipso simplicitatem obsequii: Invitatus enim a Philippo, ut accedat ad Jesum,
etsi videbatur non infirmun habere argumentum, quod Jesus non esset Messiah,
tamen non resistit duriter, non repugnat odiose, sed sequitur obedienter.
Brentius dilateth thus 1. Christ says there was no guile in Nathanael,
because he uttered heartily his opinion, 2. being invited by Philip to come and
see Jesus he resisted not stiffly, but obediently followed him, to which I add a
third particular, that being convinced of his error he believed readily, and
constantly adhered to him for life and salvation.

By this signal, Application
all fraudulent persons are detected to be none of this number of Israelites
indeed, who therefore are advised in time to cast off all guile, and to repent
of their former d^ceit for though they deceive others, and themselves more then
any; yet God cannot be mocked, Gal. 6.7. Among these self-deluders, we 1. meet
with all such as dissemble with God; who shall get the curse for their pains,
Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, says the Lord, who draw nigh to God with
their mouths, but remove their hearts far from him, Isa. 29.13. 2 Such as
corrupt the word of God, mingling falsehoods with truths for sinister ends, 2
Cor. 2.17. 3 Papists who speak lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2. practicing
themselves, and teaching others the art of lying, fall under that double
dreadful censure of our Savior, whosoever shall break one of these least
commandments much more the greatest, and shall teach men so, he shall be
called the least in the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.19. The Jesuits teach
Parsons mitigat, c. 7. and 11. zanchez oper moral tom 1. l. 3. c. 6. disputat.
35. number. 13.
that it lawful to use aequivocation not only in ordinary discourse, but in
very oaths even before the civil magistrate, not only about civil, but also
religious matters. These may pass for Saints in the Romish calendar: but shall
never be owned for true Christians in Gods register; yea, this their practice
is condemned by the moral Heathen, who herein teach better divinity then the
papists O Plutar in apoph Cic. l. 1. offiic.
Plutarch and Cicero stigmatize Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian, who making a truce
with the enemy for thirty days, nevertheless destroyed their fields in the
night time, alleging for his excuse, that the truce was made for days, not
nights. This, and other passages like to it, are yet extant in Cicero's Offices
of former editions, but are not to be found in books (which I have seen)
printed Diog. Melius est in (...) quam (...) incidere, in corv^s quamin
parasitos; hi viventis animum corrumpunt, illi solum mortui corpus.
among the Papists; for their index expurgatorius has expunged the same as he
retical, 4ly. All ordinary liars, false witness-bearers, false-swearers,
Sycophants and flatterers together with all cheaters, and fraudulent dealers,
who promise and perform not, borrow and repay, not; though it be in their
power to do it; who use false lights, false weights, false measures, shall
never be numbered among these citizens of the new Jerusalem, unless they repent
in time: for thus holy Augustine Aug. super Psa 75. Si verus Israelita in quo
dolus non est: dolost et mendaces non sunt very Israelitae.
argues against them all. If he be a true Israelite in whom there is no guile,
then guilefull persons and liars are not true Israelites.

Obj. But some will say, Plain dealing is a jewel, but he shall dye a beggar
that uses it. Ans. Were this true; yet better it is to dye a beggar with
Lazarus, and after death to rest in Abraham's bosom, than to live in the
greatest plenty with Dives in this world, and to go to hell in the world to
come, 2. But, Christians, leave this maxim to Machiavel, and the father of
lies. For Jacob was a Genesis 25.27.
plain man; yet grew exceeding rich: with my staff (said he) I passed over this
Jordan, and now I am become two bands, Genes. 32.10. On the contrary; wise
Solomon inspired by the spirit of truth reaches, that wealth gotten by vanity
shall be diminished, Pro. 13.11. and again, An inheritance may be gotten hastily
at the beginning, Pro. 20.
but the end thereof shall not be blessed; And though the bread of deceit (for
a while) may seem sweet to a man; yet afterward his mouth shall be filled with
gravel, Pro. 20.17. and in the end he shall find that too true, which now he
will not believe, That he has labored for the wind, and when he returns to
go as he came he shall take nothing of his labor, Eccl. 5.15, 16.
which he may carry away in his hand.

Obj. But may he not leave them with his children? A. Solomon resolves this
quaerie, Those riches perish by evil travel, and he begets a son, and there
is nothing in his hand, etc. Eccl. 5.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Where we have 6.
things observable, 1. He may think that he has gotten riches: but he shall
find that he has labored for the wind, 2. Those riches shall not profit him,
3. They are kept (while he has them) for his hurt, 4. The unjust getting, and
ill keeping of them shall yield him no better fruit then much sorrow and wrath
in his sickness, 5. He shall carry no more out of the world, then he brought
with him into the world, 6. His children shall be nothing better for them, when
he is gone. He begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. But there
remains the last and worst thing behind, a sad reckoning for all Pro. 21.6.
The getting of riches by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to and fro, of them
that seek death. They sought treasures with very great toil: but shall find
death, when they think not of it; as the silly fish seeks the bait, but meets
with the hook; for these men seek death eventually, not intentionally: but,
would they consider in time that while they seek seeming good things, Eusebius.
Emisenus hom. 3. de pascha. Remanet quod damnat, praererit quod delectat.
which perish in the using, they shall find real curses, which will abide with
them for ever, they would not take so much pains to bring perdition upon
themselves.

10. Now let us proceed to our true Israelites last character, He,
Nathanael-like imitateth the good examples of holy men, which is termed by the
wise man, Pro. 2.20. walking in the way of good men, and keeping the paths of
the righteous. Among whom Jacob is here singled out as a most eminent pattern
for us. Let us therefore propound to ourselves Jacobs conversation; wherein we
shall find many memorable passages, whereby all other persons may try
themselves whether they be his spiritual sons and daughters, or no.

But before I come to particularize them, this double caution is to be
premised, that all things spoken and acted by this blessed Patriarch, are not
to be imitated; some of his words and deeds being justly liable to
animadversion and censure, as his praevarication and polygamie, Notanda non
imitanda.
which yet are to be noted by us; for much good may be learned out of his
evils, for 1. thereby we are advertised, that there is no absolute exemplar or
pattern to be found among men, except, Jesus Christ who is to be followed in
all things which are recorded in the Gospel, and propounded for our imitation;
for he only never offended in word or deed, and therefore the Apostle
exhorts the Corinthians to be followers of him, even as he also was of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11 1.
2 we must have a precept as well as a president to direct us how far or
wherein we are to imitate Jesus Christ, and other holy persons: otherwise
Christ himself is not to be imitated by us in all things without restriction;
for he did many things as God and mediator, as walking upon the Sea, and dying
for the sins of the world, wherein none of us may imitate him, 2. hence we
are taught, not to conclude against ourselves or others, that there is no true
grace at all where some remainders of sin are found, 3. what need we and the
best men have of an advocate with the father. 4 whosoever with the Egyptians
follow the dark side of the cloud must needs be drowned and perish, 5. and
therefore we are to cast our eyes on the light side thereof, for so the
Apostle, Heb. 12.1. compares the examples of believers to the cloud, which
guided the Israelites from the land of Egypt to Canaan, whereas the Egyptians
following behind it, perished: and Isid. de summo bono l. 2. c. 11. Qui sanctum
virum imitatur, quasi exemplar aliquod intuetur, sesque in illo quasi in
speculo prospicit, ut adjiciat quod deesse virtuti agnoscit.
Isidore resembles good examples to a looking glass, wherein others may see
what is defective in themselves.

Jacob was a servant of the true God, and accounted it his honor to be so,
Genes. 32.10. As many therefore as Luke 6.46.
call him, Lord, Lord, but do not the things which he commands him, assume
the name, but refuse the work, shall be reputed among the evil and sloathfull
servants, who will expect to enter into the kingdom of heaven, but shall be
shut out of it.

2. All that are ashamed of Christ, and his words, of them will he be ashamed
at the last day, before his Father, angels, and men, Mar. 8.38.3 Those that
serve Satan, and diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. and will not be
persuaded to yield their members servants to righteousness, unto holiness, as
they have yielded them formerly servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto
iniquity, are the bondslaves of sin and Satan, free from righteousness, and
shall in fine receive the wages of sin which is death, Romans 6.19, 20, 23. Let
us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear, (as Jacob did) Hebr. 12.28. Jacob was in covenant with God, Levit.
26.42. where God promises to remember his covenant with Jacob, with Isaac, and
with Abraham: with Jacob first, because, it was established with him last, and
the blessings of Jacob prevailed above the blessings of his progenitors. Genes.
49.26. So must you take hold of his covenant, and keep it, that all his paths
may be mercy and truth to you, Psalm. 25.10. All then, Isa. 56.4
that are not under this covenant, or refuse to bring their children to it in
due time and manner, or that despise Baptism the token of it, as circumcision
was of old, Genesis 17.11. are not yet in this rank, and they who have listed
their names in this holy Catalogue, but profane and violate this Covenant made
with the fathers Malach. 2.10. shall certainly be cut off, their iniquity
shall be upon them and they shall be found among the rabble mentioned, Romans
1.31.

humble and lowly in Spirit, and esteemed himself utterly unworthy of the
least of all Gods mercyes, and all the truth which God had had showed him. By
truth] understand the Promises which God had made and performed unto him, as
Luth. in Gen 32. veritas est promissio.
Luther interprets it, Genesis 32.10. was Jacob thus humbled, and Jesus Christ
who was equal to his Father, lowly in spirit, and will you be proud? what have
you, that you have not received, 1 Cor. 4.7? why should dust and ashes be
proud? There can be no shreuder sign of an approaching fall, then elevation of
spirit. This dead Fly will soon infect the whole box of the Apothecaries
precious ointment, and God has engaged himself in due time to exalt them who
humble themselves before him, Jam. 4.10. Away therefore with a proud heart, and
high looks, which otherwise will render you abominable to God, Prove. 6.16, 17.

Jacob desired above all things, whithersoever he went, Gods presence to go a
long with him, Genesis 28.20. and better it were for us never to stir one foot
further, than to proceed without it, as Moses desired of God if thy presence
go not with us, carry us not up hence, Exodus 33.15. Let this teach us to
acknowledge him in all our ways, and he shall direct our paths Prove. 3.6. As
for them who say to God depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job. 21.14. God shall in like manner abandon and dismiss them for ever,
with a malediction and say, Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire,
and then shall they know whether God had more need of them, or they of him, and
be enforced to confess, We are justly served. But who be they that say to God,
depart from us? Answ. All that desire not the knowledge of his ways. Consider
this all you that refuse to frequent the places where his honor dwells, the
assemblies of his people, and that neglect to read and meditate on his word, to
get the true knowledge of his will, that you may do it; you do as much in
effect, as if you had said, Depart from us, and he that knows the meaning of
your dealings toward him, will let you know his mind toward you, that he is
well agreed to grant you your desire in your life time, even when you are dead,
depart you did, and depart you shall for ever and ever; See who will have the
worst of it.

Israel was both instant and constant in prayer to God, Genesis 32.24, 25, 26. he
wrestled with God till the breaking of the day, and would not let him go, till
he had blessed him, and by his prevalency he obtained the Surname, Israel. By
his strength (the prophet says) he had power with God: yea he had power over
the Angel, and prevailed: Ambros. Arma nostra sunt preces and Lacrimae
he wept and made supplication to him, Hos. 12.3, 4, 5.

Right prayer is an infallible cognizance of a genuine Christian; for whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.13. 1 All here
required for salvation is the right calling upon the name of the Lord, 2. far
we need not to go: the Lord is in all places, 3. none are debarred from this
liberty; whosoever he or she be that call, shall speed, 4. the rewards of so
small a service, as calling on his name is no less then salvation, 5. Gods
willingness to hear and help us, is seen in this that he calls upon all to
call upon him, that they may be saved by him. We need not to awaken him but he
wakneth us; to ask him, he is more ready to hear us, then we are to ask of
him.

Quest. But what is right prayer? Answ. This is duly to be considered, for the
work is honorable and profitable, 1. the party that performs this service
aright, must 1. be righteous; for the fervent effectual prayer of the righteous
avails much, Jam. 5.16. But if I regard wickedness in my heart God will not
hear my Prayer, Psalm. 66.18. Greg. Moral. Tum cor nostrum fiduciam in oratione
accepit cum sibi vitae pravitas nulla contradicit.
2. he must pray according to his will, 1 John. 5.14. This is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us, 3. our suits must be commenced to God in the name of our mediator
Jesus Christ, John. 16.23. for so runs his direction and promise joined
together: verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the Father
in my name, he will give it you, 4. acceptable prayer proceeds from Faith
coupled with charity, Mark. 11.24, 25. whatsoever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that you receive them, and he shall have them. And when ye stand
praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father which is in
Heaven, may forgive you your trespasses.

On the contrary, all they that do not call upon God are wicked and shall be
accursed, Psalm. 14.4. for God has threatened to pour out his fury upon the
Families that call not on his name, Jer. 10.25. 2 All they that worship Idols
instead of the true God, Ier. 10.25.
shall be sent by him to their Idols for help if they will have any; for God
will afford them neither audience nor assistance, in their time of need, Judge.
10.13, 14. ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods: wherefore I will no more
deliver you: Go and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation 3. He that prays not in faith, has no
ground to think that he shall obtain any thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.6, 7. 4 He
also that wants charity, shall want success in his supplications, Prove.
21.13. Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard: and, unless you forgive others, neither will
your Father forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6.15.

Israel is called pater votorum the Father of vows, because he is the first
that ever we read of in Scripture who made any religious vow, Genesis 28.20. Jacob
vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I
go; and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on so that I come
again to my Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, v. 21. and
this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of all that
thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee, v. 22. The vow
consists 1. of prayer for Gods presence, protection and maintenance, and a
prosperous return, 2. of a promise that God shall be his God, to worship him
internally in spirit, and externally in that place to build God an house, and
to give him the tenth of all his increase. And accordingly he performed his
vow, Genesis 35.1.3.

In like manner are we called upon to vow unto the Lord and to perform, Psalm.
76.11. But alas how little do most mind their vow in Baptism? and many make
vows, but pay not, Bernar. Epist. 2. Just exigitur ad solvendum, qui non
cogitur ad vovendum.
whereas it were better, that is, less evil, not to vow, then to vow and not
to pay, Eccles. 5.5.

Jacob seeks not great things for himself all he desires is bread to eat,
and raiment to put on, to teach us that lesson which St. Paul deduceth hence, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment let us be therewith content; many better then
we, who have not had so much, have been better content. The great Apostle of
the Gentiles gives us his pattern as well as his precept he^ein, Phil. 4.11.
where he proclaims to the Churches not by way of boasting, but for our
imitation, that he had learned in whatsoever state he was therewith to be
content. If the Lord shall not give us estates suitable to our minds, let us
bring our minds to our estates, and say, The wise and loving God knows better
than we, what condition is fittest for us, who has taught us to ask for our
daily bread, that is, all things necessary and no more; for this is the
readiest way to have more bestowed on us, as Jacob afterward attained to
exceeding great riches who passed over Jordan at the first with his staff
only, at his return back became two bonds, Genesis 32.10.

How great need have we all, to beware and take heed of pride and
covetuousnesse, lest they discard us from among true Israelites? either of
which will never suffer the heart to be contented.

1. The proud man] meaning the Caldean; keeps not at home] within his own
bounds but enlarges his desire as Hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied, Habak. 2.5.

2. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver: nor he that
loves abundance with increase, Ec. 5.10. For this end, 1. Let us pray the Lord
with David, Psalm. 119.36. to incline our hearts to his Testimonies, and not to
covetuousnesse. Among the rest of Gods precepts, let us well study the tenth
Commandment, wherein covetuousnesse is condemned, and the contrary,
contentedness is enjoined 2. Think not that this Dropsy will be cured by
increasing wealth but purge out the noxious humors within, Quo plus sunt
potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. Ovi.
and this distemper will be healed. 3. Make Christ your portion, with whom you
are sure of all things, Romans 8.32. as St. Paul having nothing, yet possessed
all things, 2. Cor. 6.10. Thus do, and you shall find godliness with
contentment to be better then the largest Patrimony here below.

Jacob is a mirror of thankfulness both for privative and positive mercy, for
audience of prayer, preservations spiritual and temporal, as all along the
story of his life you may read. I will make an altar (says he) to God, who
answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I
went, Genesis 35.3. Of his children he says to Esau, These are the children which
God has graciously given to thy servant, Genesis 33.5. And of his cattle, God
has dealt graciously with me, I have enough, v. 11.

What Israel did, all the house of Israel are required to do. Psalm. 135.19.
Bless the Lord, O house of Israel. Others will not, or cannot praise God
aright: when the Gentiles knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, Romans 1.21. Hypocrites may boast themselves of a false gift, but in
so doing are like clouds and wind without rain, Prove. 25.14. The proud
Pharisee could say, God I thank thee, that I am not as othermen are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publicane, but went away as
he came, unjustified, Luke 18.11.14. Praise is comely for the righteous, and
for them alone, Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, praise is
comely for the upright, 1. God has blessed the house of Israel, Psalm. 115.12.
and they can bless God who has blessed them with all blessings in heavenly
places in Christ But a person who is neither elected, Ephesians. 1.3.
nor redeemed, nor justified, nor sanctified cannot in truth bless God either
for his election, redemption, justification, or sanctification, or any other
spiritual blessing, before he knows in some sort these things belong to him,
2. We must be in Christ, and by him offer up spiritual sacrifices, before we or
our praises can be acceptable to God, 1. Pet. 2.5. 3 None else can praise God
in faith, and without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.4. Their
Instrument is in tune, their heart is ready, all the faculties of their soul
are in right order, Psalm. 108.1. O God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise, 5. they only have skill to play upon this instrument, Proverbs. 10.32.
The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable to God and men.

the fear of his father Isaac, Genesis 31.53. where, by the the fear of Isaac, is
to be understood, God himself, as you see, ve se 41. where he says to Laban,
Except the God of Abraham and the fear of Isaac had been with me, surely thou
had sent me away now empty. And hence we learn 1. that swearing is not
altogether unlawful, but may be used as a part of Gods worship, 2 he swear not
ordinarily, till he had a weighty cause. 3 he swear by the Lord. 4 with fear
and reverence, as his form of words express: unlike to him (in their
judgment) are such as hold it unlawful under the Gospel to swear at all or in
any case whatsoever, as some in our days teach, and the Joseph. l. 2. De bello
Iudaico. c. 7.
Essaeans of old who thought all oaths as bad as perjurie, whereas Isa. 45.23.
the Lord has sworn by himself, that unto him every tongue shall swear, even
under the Gospel; for to those times the Apostle applied that Text, Romans 14.11.
and St. Paul used oaths for confirmation of his doctrine sometimes, Romans 9.1.
Gal. 1.20.

Obj. But does not Christ forbid us to swear at all, Mat. 5.24.

Ans. Christ forbids all swearing by creatures, (which the Pharisees and Lyra
since them held to be no sin) which is also condemned, James. 5.12. Above all
things swear not neither by heaven nor earth, but if you must needs swear, let
it be by the God of truth, Isa. 65.16.

1. They that swea^e by any but God, are unlike to Jacob (in practice) 2. So
are all common and rash swearers who take the name of God in vain and may be
sure he will not hold them guiltless. 3 for oaths the Land mourns, Jer.
23.10. how much more cause have they to mourn, who make the earth to mourn. 4
All that swear by the name of God, without due reverence to his sacred Majesty
are distinguished from the righteous and ranged among the wicked, Eccles. 9.1,
2. As is the good, (says the Preacher) so is the sinner, and he that swears,
as he that fears an oath. The good man fears even when he swears what he
knows to be truth. 5 He therefore that swears falsely is on the dark side
of the cloud, and the flying Roll full of curses shall find him out, and shall
remain in the midst of his house who swears falsely by the name of the Lord,
and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zach.
5.2, 3. Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this, if the party offending
repent of his sin with Peter speedily and seriously, Levit. 6.5. If he that
has found that which was lost, and lies concerning it, and swears falsely,
restore that which he has deceitfully gotten in the principal, and shall add a
fifth part more thereto, and give it to whom it appertains, and shall bring
his trespass offering unto the Lord, the Priest (Jesus Christ) shall make an
atonement for him, before the Lord, and it shall be forgiven him, verse. 5, 6.

Israel was very mindful of his mortality, reputing himself a Pilgrim and
stranger in the world as may be easily gathered from his answer to Pharaoh
demanding of him, how old he was, Genesis 47.9. The days of the years of my
Pilgrimage are 130 years; few and evil have the years of my life been, I have
not obtained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days
of their pilgrimage: out of which speech of his the Apostle gathers, that he
sought a better country even Heavenly. According to this our president let us
account our selves strangers and sojourners with God, as all our fathers were:
so did holy David, Psalm. 39.12. and let the Apostle's loving obtestation sink
deep into our hearts, 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers
and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; and
since we have no continuing place here, let us lay a good foundation for
eternity, 1 Timothy 6 19.

But alas, how few are there who write after this copy? many put the evil day
far from them, Amos. 6.3. and so live, as if they should live here for ever,
and not see corruption, Psalm. 49.9. yea, the very thoughts of death make too
many more profane and dissolute, who say to themselves, and others, Let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall dye, Isa. 22.13. little minding that after
death comes judgment, Heb. 9.27.

Israel is an exemplar to Christian soldiers, he was valiant in fight, Genes.
47.22. with his sword and with his bow he took a portion out of the hand of the
Amorite, which he gave to his son Joseph above his brethren; yet in times of
peace, none more harmless, quiet and patient in suffering injuries then he. As
Hamor and Shechem confessed of him and his sons, These men are peaceable with
us, Genes. 34.21. and to avoid the fury of Esau his brother for quietness sake
he fled into the country of Syria, Hos. 12.12. And when Shechem had defiled
his daughter Dinah, and he heard of it, He held his peace, Genes. 34.5. which
declares, that he had great power over his own Spirit. But when his two sons
Simeon and Levi had without his privity slain the Shechemites for deflouring
their sister, how did he abhor their bloody fact and condemn them for it? v.
30. Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink
among the inhabitants of the Land: yea, till his dying day he could not forget
it; for when he blessed his sons a little before his death, coming to these two
in their order, he calls them Genesis 49.5, 6, 7
brethren in evil, and detesteth with an execration their horrid crime, saying,
The instruments of cruelty are in their habitations; O my soul, come not thou
into their secret: unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united: for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their self will they dug down a wall.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel.
Again, let us view Jacobs admirable meekness and patience when Laban his
father in law put blear-eyed Leah into his bed instead of beautiful Rachel,
for whom he had served seven years all that he said to him, was this, What is
this thou have done to me; did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then
have thou beguiled me? here neither railing nor cursing proceeded from him, and
when at his departure, Laban, of whom he had deserved exceeding well, pursued
him as a thief; he was provoked to wrath, and chod with Laban; yet he brake
not out into any passionate distempers but mildly expostulateth the matter with
him: yea, after the unjust man had changed his wages dearly-earned ten times,
he committed the matter to God.

They therefore 1. who can bear no indignities or injuries: nor will part from
their right in the least sort for peace and concords sake, contrary to the
Christians rule which injoyneth us that if it be possible, as much as in us
lies we should live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18. but 2ly upon small
provocations break out into bitter maledictions, sclanders and railings, as
Micah's mother, when her eleven hundred shekels of silver were taken from her
brake out into cursings; though it were her own son who had taken them, Judge.
17.2. or 3ly. who upon any occasion small or great, study and endeavor
revenge, and so take Gods office out of his hand, as the Apostle teaches, Romans
12.19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath:
for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore
if thine enemy hunger, feed him; and if he thirst, give him drink, 4ly. Such
as are so far from taking wrong, that they do wrong to others; like some of the
Corinthians sharply taxed by the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.8. 5ly. Above all, they who
are so far transported with rage, that in way of private revenge they commit
the horrid sin of murder, as Joab slew Amasa and Abner men more righteous then
himself. All these (I say) are far from Jacobs spirit, and consequently are
none of his spiritual seed.

Israel is a worthy pattern to all, in oeconomical and family duties.

1. He was a dutiful child to his parents, he obeyed his father and mother;
his father when he was decrepi^ by reason of old age, and his mothe^ though the
weaker sex, Genes. 28.7. and for this among other his virtues his father
blessed him, and his mother loved him entirely. Yea, God also blessed him, who
has made many great promises to all obedient children, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3.
Children, (says the Apostle) obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right,
Honor thy father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise)
that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth, whereas
God has denounced grievous threats against stubborn and unruly children, Pro
30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother,
the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it:
the meaning is, In cruce Corvos pascere Horat.
he shall come to a shameful end, as the common proverb imports.

2. When Jacob was grown up to be marriageable, he was not Esau-like his own
carver to choose where he lusted* but submitted himself to be disposed o^ in
wedlock as his father and mother ^hought good, Genes. 28.1.2. Thou ^halt not
take a wife of the daughters of Canaan (said his father Isaac to him) Arise, go
to Padan- Aram, and ^ake thee a wife of the daughters of Laban thy mothers
brother, and he did so. Add to this the testimony of St Paul 1. Cor. 7.38.
where he says, the father is to give his virgin in marriage.

3. Jacob was a diligent and faithful servant twenty years together to Laban
a fraudulent and churlish master, as he pleads with him for himself at their
parting, Genes. 31.38. I have been with thee 20. years, they ewes and thy
she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not
eaten: that which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee, I bare the loss
of all that was stolen whether by day or night. In the day, the drought
consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes. v.
40. And he appealeth to the knowledge of Rachel and Leah, Laban's daughters; to
whom he thus spoke, Genes. 31.6. ye know that with all my power I have served
your father. With this precedent, agrees the Apostolical precept, Servants be
subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, 1. Pet. 2.18. not with eye-service as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart fearing God; and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as unto
the Lord, and not unto men, knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ, Coloss. 3.22.23. This
may let all idle, false, purloyning servant (who like Onesimus before his
conversions do their masters harm instead of good or, who Ziba-like slander
and deceive those who retained, and do maintain them for better ends) to know,
that they fear not God; nor be the servants of Jesus Christ; yet will he pay
them their wages, even the wages of sin, eternal death, unless with Onesimus
they repent.

4. He reformed and cleansed his household and all that were with him, and
brought them to the public place of Gods worship, Genesis 35.2.
Bethel. As David went with his train to the house of God Psalm. 42.4. and
Joshuah professed, as for me and mine house, we will serve the Lord, Josh.
24.15. But how many may be found in our times who absent themselves from the
assemblies of God Saints, Hebr. 10.25. even upon the Lords days; (though no
necessary impediment either of sickness, or other justifiable cause detain
them) or if they come, yet their children or servants are left to themselves to
go whither they will, and to do what they please? contrary to the express
commandment of God, which requires all masters with their children and
servants, and all within their gates to sanctify the sabbath.

5. He taught them before they came how to prepare themselves, charging them to
cleanse themselves, and to change their garments, Genes. 35.2. that they might
come with reverence into so great a presence; for holiness becomes thine
house, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93.5. So the preacher instructs us to keep our
feet when we go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear than to give
the sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 5.1. whereas many consider not that they do evil
when they lend God their bodily presence in his courts; though they lay not
aside malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings
as God commands 1 Pet. 2.1. and that is the reason, why many join with others
in praying and hearing, and it profits them not neither are they accepted with
God, as Cain offered up sacrifice as well as Abel, but God had respect to Abel
and his sacrifice, but to Cain and his sacrifice he had no respect, Genes. 4.4,
5.

6. Among other sins Jacobs care was, that they should put away their idols,
Genes. 35.2. put away (says he) the strange Gods, that are among you; and they
gave unto him all the strange Gods which were in their hands, and all their
earrings which were in their ears, and he hid them under an oak that they
might never be found again v. 4. In like sort the Lord enjoyneth, his people
to abolish all the relics of idolatry, Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. The graven images of
their Gods, shall ye burn with fire; thou shall not desire the silver or gold
that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is
an abomination to the Lord thy God neither shall thou bring an abomination into
thy house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shall utterly detest
it, and thou shall utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing. O that this most
strict charge were well regarded by all, even such as are called protestants,
then would they quickly remove out of their houses and closets all popish
pictures of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints and angels, and sacrifice
them to the flames, before they be cast themselves into the lake of fire and
brimstone. Here let not any of them think that the sorry distinction of the
Rhemists between the images and pictures of heathenish Gods and the true God,
and Christ, Rhemish on 1 John
will avail any thing. Saint John writes 1 John 5.21. Having in the former v.
laid down, that it is life eternal to know the true God aright he closes his
Epistle, Little children, keep your selves f om Idols. Amen. Keep your selves
not only from the adoration of them, but from the Idols themselves, the
making, the having, the keepin of them is condemned, as Tertullian expounds
these words, keep your selves from Idols, that is, not only from their
service, which he calls Idolatry, but from Ab ipsa effigy eorum, indignum
enim ut Imago Dei vivi imago idoli and mortui siat Lactan. l. 2. c. 19. Non est
dubium, quin religio nulla sit, ubicunque simulacrum est.
the very Image of them. Lactantius also affirms that there is no Religion,
wheresoever any Image is. Add Ephih epist, and Joan episcop Hierosoll.
to these, the practice of Epiphanius who tore in pieces the Picture of Christ
painted in a cloth, hanging up in a Church at Anablath against the Authority of
Scripture.

7. Jacob loved his wife Rachel most entirely, Genesis 29, 30. So are all husbands
commanded to love their wives, as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself
for it, Ephesians. 5.25. and he is so far from being a true Israelite, that he is no
man, who hates his own flesh verse. 29. as they do who in stead of nourishing
and cherishing their wives, are bitter and churlish to them, as St. Paul's
phrase is, Col. 3.19. By flesh understand the wife in this place, so says God
at the first institution of marriage, a man shall leave his Father and mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife; and they two shall be one flesh, Gen, 2.24.

Yet notwithstanding Jacobs great love to Rachel when she grew impetuous
through envy to her Sister, and male contentedness for want of children, and
brake out into distempered offensive words to God, saying to him, Give me
children, or else I dye, Jacobs anger was kindled against her, and he sharply
rebuked her saying, Am I in Gods stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit
of the womb, Genesis 30.1, 2. So let not the love of the persons of our dearest
friends so far blind our eyes, or stop our mouths, as to make us connive at
their faults, or to spare to reprehend them for the same; for then should we
turn to be their enemies, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart (says God) thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor and not
suffer sin upon him. The like may be truly affirmed of withholding due
correction from our children when they deserve it, Prove. 13.24. He that spares
his rod, hates his Son: but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes.

8. As Jacob was most careful for the souls of his wives and children; so was
he not improvident for their outward estates, and comfortable subsistence in
this present life; no less do his words to Laban import, Genesis 30.30. Thou
know how I have served thee all the while since my first coming. Now when
shall I provide for mine own house also? Usually very nature teaches men to
be provident for their posterity, for Children (says the Apostle) use not to
lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children, 2 Cor. 12.14. But it
is Grace, not nature, which teaches us here how to keep within the right
bounds of moderation, that we lay not up Curses for our Children in the room
of blessings: as all wicked and unjust dealers do; who get riches to lay them
up for their Children, but God lays up their iniquity for their offspring
Job. 21.19. Some there are in these last and perilous days, who (being without
natural affection, as was long since foretold, 2 Timothy 3.3.) do run into the
contrary extreme, and take no more care of their wives, and Children, then the
Ostrich does of her eggs, which she leaves on the earth, and forgets that
the foot may crush them, or that that the wild beasts may break them, and she
is hardened against her young-ones as though they were not hers, Job. 39.14,
15.19. This Ostrich is an emblem of a debosht spendthrift, who wastes his
time and means in riot and revelling, in whoring, gaming, surfitting and
drunkenness, like the Prodigal, Luke. 15.13. nothing regarding what becomes
of wife or Children: nay, he is worse then the Prodigal, for we read not that
he had either wife or child: again he is worse then an infidel, as the
Scripture determines, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse
then an infidel.

dyed in the faith, praying, and blessing his sons, Heb. 11.13.21. Perseverance
in grace is the last and surest badge of a true Israelite which sets the Crown
upon his head, Revel. 2.10. He that is faithful til death, shall receive a
crown of life, whereas they that begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, who
fall away with Demas for worldly profit 2 Timothy 4.10. or for fear of persecution
shall loose their reward, Prove. 14.14. The Apostate or backslider in heart
shall be filled with his own ways. It had been better for such never to have
known the way of righteousness, then after he has known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment delivered to him, 2 Pet. 2.22.

Israelite, blessed is every one who writes after it. I have also for the
greater perspicuity (for contraries illustrate one the other) laid down who
they are that deviate and swerve from this holy standard. 2 Use for terror.


few Israelites indeed, under Heaven: Jer. 5.1:
For run through the City, A Recaputulation.
yea through the world, and see what swarms and multitudes there are, of
Ignorant persons, yea grossly and wilfully ignorant men and women, 2. of
unbelievers and misbeleivers, 3. Of impenitent wretches, yea opposers of the
doctrine of Repentance, 4 Of such as make little conscience either of their
thoughts or words. 5 Of such as despise Gods word, and hate Gods people, 6 Of
such as love the applause of men more then the praise of God alone, 7 Of
Hypocrites, Liars, Juggling Equivocators, base flatterers and deceivers, 8 Of
such as like Jehojakin swerve from the gracious examples of holy men, Jer.
22.15, 16, 17. Or Ahaziah like follow the counsels and walk in the ways of
the wicked, 2 Chronicles. 22.3.4, 5.

As 1 of such who choose rather to be the servants of sin and Satan: then of
God and righteousness, 2 who are covenant breakers with God, 3 proud and
arrogant spirits, 4 forsakers of God, 5 who call not upon God daily, and duly
in private, and with their families, upon whom the Lord has threatened to pour
out his fury, Jer. 10.25. and yet alas! how many families are there in every
Town and City that make little or no conscience of family prayer, 6 covetuous
and malecontented murmurers, 7 unthankful souls, 8. rash, false-swearers, and
such as swear by creatures instead of God, 9 who put the evil day far from
them, 10. such as are contentious and injurious, much more Murderers, Raylers,
Cursers, 11 Stubborn and Disobedient Children with all false purloyning
servants, 12 neglecters of Gods public worship, with all Idolaters, 13
unnatural parents, and bitter and cruel husbands, 14. Apostates and
backsliders. All these together with all sorts of men women and children, by
nature of what nation or condition soever they be are as yet foreigners to the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. and have neither part nor portion in all or
any of the honor or happiness which appertains to true Christians, and if
they continue in the state wherein they are, till death, the wrath of God shall
surely seize and abide upon them for ever.

I know nothing can serve to convert any till the Lord take away the scales
from their eyes, and hardness from their hearts) to take down the pride of all
unbelieving and carnal Jews, who call themselves the holy seed, the people of
God, Israelites, and the children of Abraham, whom John Baptists reproves, Mat.
3.9. for having so much as a thought to say, we have Abraham for our father
and our Savior proves them to be degenerate, Ioh. 8.39. by this demonstrative
argument, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham: But
ye do not the works of Abraham: therefore you are not Abraham's children, but of
your father the devil, v. 40, 41, 42. And Saint Paul in sundry places
disproveth them by distinguishing between right and titular Jews, Romans
2.17.25, 26, 27, and between children according to the flesh, and children
according to promise, Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel which are of Israel
(says he) neither because they are the seed of Abraham, a e they all children,
v. 7. But the children of the promise are counted for the seed. And this
distinction is held forth in the old Testament, as a most certain truth from
the beginning: for, king Saul an Israelite according to the flesh of the tribe
of Benjamin, 1 Samuel 9.1, 2. is yet by the spirit of God termed an heathen,
Psalm. 59.5.8. compared with the title of the Psalm; for Saul was an Israelite
by descent, but an heathen in his manners. On the other side, Ithra was an
Ishmaelite by birth; for so he is called; 1. Chron. 2.17. and yet is he termed
an Israelite, because he was a proselyte, or an Israelite by grace, 2 Samuel
17.25. And unless all the rest of Abraham's posterity can demonstrate their
descent from Abraham, to be spiritual as well as carnal, all the benefit they
shall gain thereby will be the greater indignation and wrath, as Paul has
foretold, Romans 2.8, 9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul of man
that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the gentile.

Jews or Gentiles will follow this direction. Direction.


Quest. If any here demand, Is there not then any door of hope left for all
those who are excluded out of the number of true Israelites, as yet, by the
foregoing characters and instances.

Answ. Yes, there is hope in Israel concerning these; not only the Jews, but
also the sinners of the Gentiles; by nature, as scripture styles them, Gal.
7.15. But this hope and consolation is propounded only conditionally. To begin
with the Jew, there is hope laid down for him that he may be graffed into
Christ upon this condition that he become a true believer on his name, as the
great Apostle of the gentiles declares, Romans 11.23. They also, Romans 11.23.
if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to
graffe them in again. Then come to the gentiles yea take the worst in all the
series or pack of them who is alive, or hereafter shall live in this world,
there is a conditional ground of hope and comfort for every one of them,
(except they have committed that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost) for
they may become Israelits by grace and so be made partakers of the highest
privileges and forementioned glory. For blessed be the Lord of the whole
earth, as he is entitled, Psalm. 95.5. He has,

1. Prophesied of the conversion of the Gentiles; that they shall come unto him
from the ends of the Earth. Jerem. 16.19, 2 Samuel 22.44, 45.

2. He has invited all the ends of the earth to look unto him and be saved,
Isa. 45.22.

3. He has promised that in Abraham's seed all the nations of the earth shall
be blessed, Genes. 22.18. and that all the ends of the world shall remember and
turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before
him for the kingdom is the Lords: and he is governor among the nations, Psalm.
18.27, 28. and in him shall the Gentiles trust, Isa. 11.10.

4. Many fervent prayers have been made on our behalf for this end, recorded
in the oracles of God witness Noah's prayer, God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the
tents of Shem, Genes. 9.27. and the Churches supplications in after ages, Psalm.
67.2, 3, 4, 5. Cantic. 8.8. etc.

5. From the beginning, the Lord gave to his son Jesus Christ the heathen for
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm.
2.8.

6. Some of the Gentiles in all ages have been brought in, to embrace the
faith, as Rahab the harlot, Jam. 2.25. Ruth the Moabitess, Ruth. 3.11. and the
widow of Sarepta, Luke 4.26. with many others forerunners of the residue of
the heathen in the fullness of time to be brought home to Christ.

7. God gave his son to be a light to the Gentiles, as well as the glory of his
people Israel, Luke 2.30.

8. When our Savior Christ the Lord was newly born, the Angel brought to the
shepherds glad tidings of great joy, appertaining to all people, Luke 2.10.

9. The precious blood of the Lamb of God was shed to take away the sin of the
world, Joh. 1.29 and he is the propitiation for our sins (says Saint John) and
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world* 1 John 2.2.

10 By the death of Jesus Christ the middle wall of partition is broken down,
who abolished in his flesh the enmity, for to make in himself of twain one new
man, so making peace, Ephesians. 2.14, 15.

This is to be accounted an unspeakable mercy to us sinners of the Gentiles.

1. It is such a mercy as was denied to all nations, that ever lived before
Christ, excepting some few persons whom God looked upon with an eye of
extraordinary compassion above others, Deuteronomy. 7.6.

2. Before this, it was unlawful for a Jew to keep company with, or come unto
one of another nation, Act. 10.28.

3. The Apostle Paul calls this mercy to us a great mystery, Romans 11.25.
whereof he could not make mention without great admiration of Gods singular
goodness toward us, Romans 16.25, 26.

4. The prophecies which St. Paul alleges for the proof of the truth hereof
call upon us for our joy and thankfulness, Romans 15.9, 10, 11. Rejoice ye
Gentiles with his people. And again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud
him all ye people: and the Apostle shows there, that it was the end which God
aimed at, in granting this favor to us, that the Gentiles might glorify God
for his mercy, as it is written, for this cause I will confess to thee among
the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.

5. The godly Jews were exceeding thankful for their election and exaltation
above all others, and excited one another to render praise for it, Psalm.
135.3.4. Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name,
for it is pleasant: for the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself and Israel for
his peculiar treasure. And shall we be unthankful now, since he has written
upon their posterity Loammi ye are not my people, and I will not be your God,
Hos. 1.9. and in their room he has made us a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that we should show forth the
praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light;
which in time past, were not a people, but are now the people of God, which had
not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. What great
cause of joy did this administer to the believing Gentiles at their first
hearing of it? Act. 13.48.

6. St. Paul held it a gift of the grace of God given him that he should be
made a minister of the Gentiles to preach among them the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.7, 8. being glad to be our servant.

7. This mystery that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of the promise in Christ by the Gospel, in other ages was
not made manifest to the sons of men, (so fully, for the believers before could
not be altogether ignorant of a thing so often prophesied of) as it is now
revealed unto his holy Apostles and prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.5. and by
them to his Saints, Col. 1.26.27.

8. This mysterious mercy was after Christ's ascension, first revealed to Peter
by vision from heaven, whereby God taught him not to call any man common or
unclean, Act. 10.11. whereupon he conformed his demeannour toward the
Gentiles accordingly, and went immediately and preached the Gospel to Lorinus
in Act. 10.1. ait, Cornelius Italus fuisse videtur, quia centurio cohort is
Italicae. Bozius existinart eum e nobilissima Corneliorum Romana familia fuisse.
Cornelius and his company saying, Of a truth, I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness is accepted of him, Act. 10.28.35. whereas before this, he
thought it utterly unlawful to have conversed with them, as he there declares.

9. As Moses had foretold the rebellious Jews, that he would move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people, I will provoke them to anger with
a foolish nation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. which the Apostle applies to this various
manner of Gods dispensation of his grace to the sons of men, Romans 10.19. so it
fell out upon this occasion Act. 13.45. when the Jews saw the multitudes
gathered together to hear the Apostles doctrine, they were filled with envy,
and spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming, Acts. 13.45. But Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but
seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo, we turn to the Gentiles for so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have
set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation
unto the ends of the Earth: and when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad,
and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal
life believed, v. 46.47.48. whence note, that if our happiness provoke the
Jews to jealousy and envy, their envy ought to provoke us to the greater
gratitude, and readiness to receive the grace of God rejected by them, and
brought to us.

10. The blessed angels rejoice on our behalf to see the prophecies and
promises of conversion fulfilled in us, 1. Tim. 3.16. 1 Peter. 1.12. and have
not we much more cause to rejoice, and magnify the Lord for his goodness and
truth toward ourselves.

Indeed this honor and prerogative is ever to be granted to the Jews above
all nations, of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Romans 9.5. to be God's
first born, Exodus 4.22. and to them was the Gospel first sent, Act. 13.46. But
since some of them are broken off through unbelief, we must be graffed in
amongst them, before we can partake with them of the root and fatness of the
olive tree; yet this now is our happiness; though we be a wild olive tree by
nature we may be graffed in, and partake of the root and fatness of the true
olive. And since nothing without us can hinder us: oh! let not impenitency and
unbelief within debar us from it.

Use. So I pass on to a word of exhortation, Of exhortation. 1 Branch
1. to all in general to labor above all things, without delay by faith and
regeneration to become denizons of the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. As many of the Persians became Jews, when they saw how
great things God had done for his people, Esth. 8.17. and Zacheus by receiving
Christ into his heart, as well as into his house was made a son of Abraham,
Luke 19.9. It is not much material to determine whether Zacheus was a Jew by
lineall descent or no, this matter being controverted by interpreters
Chrysostom, and diverse others after him conceiving that Bonavent. in Luc.
Filius erat non carne sed fide. Stella in loc. Alie nigena imitatione morum
factus est filius.
Zacheus was by his original a Gentile, and now by conversion became a son of
Abraham. Chemnit. Harmon. c. 137.
Chemnitius thought otherwise, and let it be granted, that he was a Jew by
Descent; yet certain it is, he was no true Israelite before now, that is, he
was not the child of God adopted by special grace before his conversion. For
all are not Israel, which are of Israel, Romans 9.6.

If the Israelites privileges formerly laid down in my arguments cannot
prevail with him who reads or hears them, Motives.
truly he is unworthy to have any more spoken to him: but before I can hope to
persuade men, I must begin with God, who only can persuade the heart. O thou
great Captain of the host of Israel, who have the key of David, that opens
and none can shut, and shuts and none can open; be graciously pleased to
exercise thy great power and infinite mercy in working upon the hearts both of
the writer and reader of this treatise to answer this thy call, that of wild
olives by nature, we may be graffed into Jesus Christ, and may become trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord that thou may be glorified in us and
by us, and we with thee.

Alas! Lord, what can a weak man's words avail, where the word of the ^^ving
God is rejected? The arguments ^re full of power, but the hearts of the
^hildren of men are full of obstinacy, ^nless thou raisest the dead, and
crea^est clean hearts no good can be done. ^end therefore thine irresistible
Spirit ^o convince and convert us, give new ^yes and new ears, and renew a
right spirit within us, then shall we hear and see, and run to join
ourselves, who have formerly been sons of the ^^ranger) to the Lord, and to
thy people. ^hou who gatherest the out casts of Is^ael, remember thy promise to
gather others to thee, besides those that are al^eady gathered. Save us, O Lord
our ^od, and gather us from among the ^eathen, to give thanks unto thy holy
^ame, and to triumph in thy praise, Isa. 56.7, 8.
^sal. 106.47.

Now if after prayer to God, tears ^ould move you, whose good is here
^^tended, they should not be wanting. beseech you by the tears and preci^s
blood of Jesus Christ to grant me is desire not for any thing from you (...) my
self, but for the salvation of your own souls, that you lay these things
deeply to heart.

Is it nothing to you to have lived so long without Christ, being aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12.

Dare you continue in this estate, sinc^ you know not how little time you have
to live, before you go hence, and be n^ more seen. Is not God a portion wort^
having? is not his love worth embracing? fear you not the torments o^ Hell?
do you not value the joys an^ glory of Heaven. Return a candid an^ sober
Answer to these Questions, which God himself, (and not I,) propoun^ unto you.
Say in good earnest to him Lord enable us, and we will becom^ true Israelites,
and then I assure you (...) his name, and in the word of trut^ God will be your
God, and the Go^ of your seed, he will love you free^ unto the end, the second
death sha^ have no power over you: fear not, is your Fathers good pleasure to
gi^ you the Kingdom, Luke. 12.32. wh^ shall I say of the blessed spirit of
grace he stands at the door of your hearts and knocks, if you will hear his
voice and open the door, he will come into you, and sup with you, and you with
him, Revel. 3.20. And judge righteous judgment, whether is it better to walk in
that double Egyptian darkness of errors and manners, or to be children of
light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5? whether is it more eligible to be dead in trespasses and
sin, or to hear the voice of the Son of God, and live the life of grace, here,
and the life of glory hereafter, John. 5.25? Whether is it safer to be the
friends of God, or his cursed enimes, to have fellowship with God or devils;
yea, to be Gods sons and daughters, or children of the devil? for you must
needs be, either of the former or the latter sort of these. I call Heaven and
Earth to record this day, that I have set before you life and death, blessing
and cursing; therefore choose life, that you and your seed may live, Deuteronomy.
30.19. Thus shall you be free indeed, free from all evil, and free to all good
spiritual and eternal: for Jerusalem which is above is free which is the mother
of all true believers, Gal. 4.26. what vast sums of money do some forego to
purchase freedom in some great City, as the chief Captain did to be made free
in Rome, Acts. 22.28. But all the money in the world will not purchase any
freedom in this City, the spiritual Jerusalem; you must either be born in
Sion, or you can never be free here: again, men may confer political freedom,
as king Saul promised to make his house free in Israel, who should kill
Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.25. but none can confer this spiritual freedom, but the Son
the great King of Heaven, John. 8.36.

Lastly, if the Queen of Sheba pronounced Solomon's men happy, and twice happy,
for standing continually in his presence, and hearing his wisdom, 2 Chronicles.
9.7. how much more happy is it for us to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73.28. Herein
the children of Israel surmount all people in the world besides, for they only
are near to him, Psalm. 148.14. and as dear as the Apples of his own Eye,
Zachary. 2.8. And as they are near and dear to him, so is he nigh to them, to
hear them when they call, Psalm. 145.18. and to save them in all times of their
distress, Psalm. 85.9. Israel of old gloried in this privilege, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
what Nation is there so great, that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our
God is to us in all things which we call upon him for; and were it now
impossible for us to have him as near to us, as he was to them, our case were
miserable: but blessed be God, as he has commanded us to draw nigh to him, so
he has promised to draw nigh to us also, Jam. 4.8. But of all others shall we
be most miserable; if we would not obey this his Command of drawing nigh to
him, that he may fulfill his promise, and draw nigh to us; for they that say to
him now depart from us, shall hear him say to them at the last day, Depart
from me ye accursed into everlasting fire.

Israelites indeed. Impediments.
What these lets and remoraes are I shall briefly lay down: O! that you could as
soon overcome them.

These impediments are either external or within your selves.

1 Their small number.
The 1. external Let, is the paucity or fewness of their number. But do not
you know, that ordinary stones are more rife than orient Pearls? and is not a
precious stone the more valueable and excellent, by how much the more rare it
is? These are the Lords Jewels, whereas all other are but like lumber in the
house, Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts (who best
knows the true value of the children of men) in that day when I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own Son that serves him.
Isaac was no less dear to Abraham, because he had many servants to one Son: so
God set his love upon Israel, though they were the fewest of all people, Deuteronomy.
7.6, 7. 2. 2. Impediment their outward meaness.
Neither let their outward meaness offend you; for then, as many of the
unbelieving Jews were offended with Christ Jesus their head for this very
cause, Mark. 6.3. so if you had lived and seen him in the days of his flesh,
you would have been offended at him also. As the evangelicall prophet foretold,
Isa. 53.2, 3, he shall grow up as a root out of a dry ground; he has no form
nor comeliness: and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised and we esteemed him not. Are they poor in the world? Hearken, says
James, my beloved brethren, Jam. 2.5.
Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith and heirs of the
Kingdom, which the Lord has promised to them that love him, Jam. 2.5. Do
they seem to you to be simple, weak and base, give ear to another Apostle: See
your calling, brethren, how not many wise men after the flesh, nor many mighty,
nor many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. not many wise mighty, and noble (says
he) yet some such are called, and therefore are they wise mighty and noble,
because God has called and chosen them. Right Noble are they; as the Bereans
are called, more noble then others, because they received the Word with all
readiness of mind: Truly wise are they; in as much as Jesus Christ is made of
God to them wisdom: And no less m^ghty be they; for the Lord Jehovah is
their everlasting strength, who trust in him for ever, Isa. 26.4.

3. The worlds contrariety to them.
3 Let none like worse of them because the world hates them, speaks evil of
them, and persecuteth them; for so did the wicked of old, Psalm. 83.4. Come,
said they, and let us cut them off from being a nation: that the name of Israel
may be no more in remembrance.

1. Hatred.
1. Does the world hate them? marvel not at it, 1 John. 3.13. 2 Christ has
foreshewed his disciples that it must needs be so, and the Scripture must be
fulfilled, Mark. 13.13. ye shall be hated (not of some, but) of all men for my
names sake: but he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved. 3. he
renders the reason of it in his prayer to his father, John. 17.14. I have
given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the
world, as I am not of the world, 4. for their encouragement he gives them to
understand that it hated him before it hated them, John. 15.18. and can we
expect better entertainment then our Lord? 5. none hate them but such as are
the children of the devil, as God has revealed to his elect from the
beginning, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity (says God to the Serpent) between thee
and the woman, between thy seed and her seed, 6. they that hate the righteous
shall be clothed with shame and dishonor, Psalm. 35.26.7 God has sworn to
deliver all that fear him out of the hand of all that hate them, Luke. 1.71.74.
8 The Lord shall appear one day to their joy, and their enemies confusion, Isa.
66.5.

Secondly, 2 Reproaches.
be not deterred from entering into the way of holiness for fear of cruel
mockings, grievous reproaches and calumnies of wicked men; for Jam. 3.6. and
they cannot but run when the devil drives them, They are a generation of
Vipers: how then can they being evil speak good things, Mat. 12.34. Christ
has made it a note of an execrable person, when all men speak well of him,
saying to such, woe unto you, when all men speak well of you, for so did their
fathers to the false prophets, Luke. 6.26. Christ himself escaped not the
scourge of the tongue, nor was there ever any more lashed therewith than he,
who is most-worthy to be praised for all eternity 2 Samuel 22.4. whence he
infers, Mat. 10.24, 25. The Disciple is not above his master, nor the
servant above his Lord, It is enough for the disciple, that he be as his
master, and the servant as his Lord: if they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of the household, 5. Fear
them not therefore, for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed;
and hid, that shall not be known, verse. 26. that is, God in due time will set
all to rights. The Apostle having respect to this, distinguishes between Gods
judgment and man's judgment or day, as it is in the greek Text, and says, with
me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment: but he that judges me, is the Lord. Therefore he exhorts us to
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5.

3, 3. Suffering from Gods immediate hand.
Be not discouraged by reason of the sufferings of Gods chosen in this life
either from Gods immediate hand but consider in your hearts, that as a man
chasteneth his son so the Lord chasteneth his people; Deuteronomy. 8.5. for blessed is
the man whom he chasteneth, and teaches out of his Law, Psalm. 94 12. and, If
you endure chastening, God deals with you as with his sons, but if you be
without chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards and not
sons, Heb. 12 7, 8. That which moves God to correct his children is love, and
his end is their own profit; for though afflictions seem for the present not
to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward they yield the peaceable
fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby.

Or from men, Or men.
as Gods instruments permitted for their trial either to deprive them of their
means, outward comforts, and relations: but readily forgo all for Christ, who
has assured u,s that every one that forsakes houses, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children or lands, (together with liberty,
and life it self) for his names sake shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life, Mat. 19.29. Usurers put out their money after the rate
of an hundred for six to the great hazard of their souls, but here you may have
an hundred for one, from a sure hand with the salvation of your souls to boot.

Quest. But how do those who lose any thing, especially their lives for Jesus
Christ, receive an 100. fold in this world?

Answ. Appreciative, they receive that which is an hundred times of more worth
then all that they lose. And for a fuller Answer. I refer you to the learned
and ancient father Jerome in loc. tom. 9. who first lays down the exposition
of some millenaries on these words and refuteth the same, and then gives us his
own judgment on them. Ex occasion hujus sententiae quidam introducunt mill
annos post resurrectionem, dicentes, tunc nobis centuplum omnium rerum quas
dimisimus et vitam aeternam esse reddendam. Quod si in caeteris digna sit
promissio, in uxoribus appareat turpitudo, ut, qui unam pro Domino dimiserit,
centum recipiat in futuro. Sensus igitur, iste est. Qui carnalia pro Sa vatore
dimiserit, spiritualia recipiet, quae comparatione et merito sui quasi parvo
numero centenarius numerus comparetur.

Or to raise up bitter persecutions against them, for fear whereof many durst
not join themseves to the Apostles Act. 5.13. and others who receive the seed
of the word (as it were) into stony places, hearing and anon receiving it with
joy; yet not having root in themselves, endure for a while: but afterward when
tribulation and persecution arises because of the word, by and by they are
offended, Mat 13.20.21. For prevention hereof consider that ere long the case
shall be altered, that God shall recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you, and if you be of the seed of the Jews, as Zeresh said to Haman of
Mordecai, they shall not prevail against you, but surely fall before you,
Esth. 6.13. and the same righteous God, who has already pronounced them
blessed who are persecuted for righteousness sake, withal affirming that
theirs is the kingdom of heaven Mat. 12.10. will both enable you to endure
steadfast to the end, and in the end give you rest with Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
for if we suffer with him, we shall be also glorified together. Therefore
reckon (with the Apostle) that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans
8.17.18.

Satan will ever be sure to stand up against Israel as he did in David's time, 4
Impediment, Satan.
when he provoked him to number the people 1 Chronicles. 21.1. His grand and
constant design ever has been, estill is, and will be to keep, souls from
entering into this fold of Jesus Christ.

1. By raising up odious reports of the holy way as well as of the professors
of it, that none may seek after it; as when Paul spoke with the chief of the
Jews at Rome and told them that for the hope of Israel he was bound with that
chain, which was then upon him, they answered him, As concerning this sect, we
know that every where it is spoken against, Act. 28.20, 21.

2ly. By keeping (to the utmost of his power) the true preachers of the Gospel
from declaring and making known to the churches the excellency of this way even
the beauty of holiness; as he hindered Paul from coming to the Thessalonians;
though he endeavored it with great desire, 1 Thessalonians. 2.17.18.

3ly. By raising up false teachers, and fitting and furnishing them with all
possible dexterity to raise up disaffection in the hearts of all sorts against
the truth, and such as publish the same, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.

4. By blinding the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4.4.

5. If by all his wiles he cannot hinder the preaching, hearing, and believing
of the Gospel: then his next plot will be, to turn them, who began to run
well, from the right path into error and sinful courses; so when Paul had
espoused the Corinthians to one husband, that he might present them as a chaste
virgin to Christ, he feared lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty, so their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.

6ly. If he can effect none of these, projects, then he will strive to hinder
them from their speedy and comfortable proceeding in the Christian race by
raising up his instruments to do them all possible mischief and damage, as he
employed 1. the Sabeans to take away Jobs oxen as they were plowing, and his
asses feeding beside them, and to kill his servants with the edge of the sword,
suffering only one to be a messenger to acquaint him with the sad tidings
thereof, Job. 1.14, 15. 2ly. By causing a great fire to fall from heaven to
burn up and consume his servants and his sheep in another place, v. 16. 3ly.
By sending three bands of the Caldeans, who fell upon the camels and carried
them away, and slew others of his servants with the edge of the sword, v. 17.
4ly. By raising up a great wind from the wilderness, which smote the four
corners of the house, wherein his sons and daughters were eating and drinking
wine, so that it fell upon them, and killed them all at once. v. 19. 5ly. By
smiting Jobs body with sore boyls and diseases from the sole of his foot unto
his crown, Job. 2.7. 6ly. by instigating his wife, (who should have been his
chiefest comfort to become his bitterest cross) to persuade him to forgo his
integrity, to curse God and die. v. 9. 7ly when he thought, his bed should
comfort him, and his couch should ease his complaint, by scaring him with
dreams, and terrifying him through visions, so that he chose death rather then
life, Job. 7.13.14. 8 by his three friends, who became miserable comforters to
him, and endeavored to bereave him of his sincerity, the only support of his
spirit yet left him, yet in all these fierce encounters the Lord strengthened
him to hold out: and ye have seen the end of the Lord, that he is pityfull and
of tender mercy, Jam. 5.11. In like manner does the Spirit encourage the angel
of the church in Smyrna, to whom he writes thus, Fear none of the things
which thou shall suffer: Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison,
that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee the Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. See
here, the devil himself was to be the jayler, for he should cast not all, but
some of them into Prison; yet could he not have this power till it was given
from above, Gods end was not to destroy, but to try them, the time how long the
persecution was to last is limited to ten days, not so long as the devil
pleased; and therefore he assures them they had no cause to fear but advises
them to be fa^thfull unto death, and then promises to give them a crown of
life.

7. Satan is termed the accuser of the brethren, because he accuses them
before our God day and night, Rev. 12 10. seeking by this means to incense
Gods displeasure against them: but Jesus Christ ever lives to make intercession
to God for them, therefore is he able to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. They need not care who is the accuser that have
such an advocate to plead for them.

8. He is always prepared to hinder their prayers, especially when they make
intercession for Jerusalem, as he did Joshua the high Priest standing before
the Angel of the Lord; for that end Ministrantem Christo, and agentem typum
ipsius in ecclesia. Tremel.
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zach. 3.1. But the Lord said unto
Satan, the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem
rebuke thee, verse. 2.

9. He daily tempts us to sin against God, that thereby our peace with God
and our own consciences might be interrupted, so he buffeted Paul who upon that
occasion betook himself thrice to prayer to God, who answered him that his
grace was sufficient for him, his strength should be made perfect in weakness,
2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. and when he desired to have the disciples to sift them as
wheat, Christ told Simon, Simon I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not, Luke. 22.31, 32.

10. When the devil has drawn any soul into sin, he will labor to drive them
to desperation even after their repentance, as if there were no possibility for
such to obtain pardon. Thus he dealt with the incestuous Corinthian who had
been swallowed up of overmuch grief, had not this Lord provided a remedy
against the greatest of evils, by Paul's second Epistle written to the
Corinthians, Chap. 1.7.11. wherein he requires them to forgive and comfort
him; and again he beseeches them to confirm their love toward him, verse. 8.
as he himself forgave him, in the person of Christ, adding a cogent reason for
his and their so doing, verse. 11. lest Satan get an advantage over us: for we
are not ignorant of his devices.

Now Satan has a double end in all his slye and hellish contrivances against
the Saints, not only to tire them out but also to make others to take up hard
conceits of the yoke of Christ as an insupportable burden, whereby he drives
many to consult how they may break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords
from them, Psalm. 2.2.

Antidotes.
Against this impediment therefore I oppose these following Antidotes,

1. Jesus Christ has overcome the devil; for he took our nature upon him, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil, Heb. 2.14. and Aug. de agone Christiano. Hunc adversarium Dominus noster
prior vicit. ut etiam nos in illo permanentes vintamus per ipsum.
Christ's victory is ours.

2. He has bids us to resist the devil, and has promised that he shall
flee from us, 1 John. 4.7.

3. He has provided the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil, Ephesians 6.12.

4. He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches
him not, 1 John. 5.18. he cannot give him one blow.

5. Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Jesus Christ; Nay in all these things we are more then
conquerers through Christ that loved us, Romans 8.37, 38.

6. The true believer is built upon the Rock, against which the gates of hell
cannot prevail, Matthew. 16.18.

7. As the evil angels infest us, so God has given charge to his holy angels
to keep us in all our ways, to bear us up in their hands, lest we dash our
foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.10. And they, according to this charge, are all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
salvation; Heb. 1.14. no less does the devil himself confess, Math. 4.6.

8. If this be not sufficient, behold, God himself is the keeper of Israel,
who neither slumbreth nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4.

9. If ye fight not under Christ's banner against this enemy, according to your
vow in Baptism, you are his Captives, and he will torment you for ever: but if
you overcome him in this life, the time will come when you shall be made judges
of these wicked spirits which now annoy you, know ye not (says the holy writ)
that the Saints shall judge Angels, 1 Cor. 6.3. to wit in the day of the
general judgment. What confusion will these be to those proud spirits?

10. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.
It shall certainly be so, yea and that shortly too.

5. 5. Impediment, the world
The world also will not be wanting to play her prizes against this our true
Israelite.

1. By raising up troubles against him (as already has been declared) for
Christ has forespoken it, but withal has enjoined him to be of good comfort,
John. 16.33. In the world you shall have tribulation, but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the World.

2. By her various, and dangerous allurements of profit, honor, and pleasure.
First, the world will bespeak all mankind, as Saul did the Benjamites, 1 Samuel
22.7. Hear now, ye Benjamites will the son of Jesse give every one of you
fields, and Vineyards, and make you all Captains of hundreds and thousands: so
say the Hypocrites, and wicked, It is in vain to serve the Lord: and what
profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance? and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, As if they should say, Here is sorrow but
no gain; great cry, but little wool. But let us not hearken to this Enemy, but
to wisdom, and she tells you the truth, Prove. 8.18. Riches and honor are
with me, yea, durable riches and righteousness; and godliness with
contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. Further, this Delilah, the world, will
set the snares of pleasures before our feet, thereby to entangle us and betray
us to our spiritual enemies: thus was our mother Eve inveagled, when she saw
that the forbidden tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the Eye:
she did eat of the fruit thereof, and gave also unto her Husband with her, and
he did eat, Genesis 3.6. Here was delicious food (as they thought before trial)
but they paid dearly for the sauce; for, for this fact, were they driven out of
Paradise, verse. 24. yet multitudes of their posterity by the like inticement
are brought into a fools Paradise, imagining the bread of deceit to be sweet,
till they find their mouths to be filled with gravel, Prove. 9.17.20.17. And
many there be who when they have heard the word, are afterward choked with
cares and riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection,
Luke. 8.13.

Any one of these baits are over-prevalent with us; yet some are sooner caught
with one, and some with another of them, as Judas was hanged upon the silver
hook of profit: Herod was blown up with the blast of applause: and Dives sunk
in the gulf of voluptuousness: but when they all join together in one there
is hardly any avoiding of their solicitations; which take with us the more
easily, 1. when they are suitable to any of our inclinations, 2. because they
yield present contentments. ^ are in some sort necessary, without which (we
think) we cannot well be. ^ and in themselves they are not ab^^lutely
prohibited, and therefore are ^ot altogether unlawful, Licitis perimus omnes.
but only ^nfull profits are destructive: witness Achan who seeing among the
spoils ^ goodly Babylonish garment, and two ^undred shekles of silver and a
wedg of Gold, etc. coveted and took them ^ the ruin of himself and his family,
^os. 7.21.25. and Gehazi who took ^wo talents of Silver, with two chan^es of
garments from Naaman the Sy^an, whose leprosy also clave unto him, and his
seed for ever, 2 Kings 5.26, 27. ^he former of these exchanged his life for
filthy lucre, the latter lost his health to gain wealth, to whom let us add
wicked Ahab, who sold himself for Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings. 21.25. and that
you may not make the like bargain, remember the Question in the Gospel, Mark.
8.36. what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? So, vicious pleasures, termed the lusts of the flesh, war against the
soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. And when they are extinct leave weeping and howling behind
them, Jam. 5.1.5. as inordinate affectation of worldly credit and dignity,
keeps out true honor, and brings in everlasting shame and infamy, for
truth it self has spoken it. If any man desire to be first the same shall be
last of all, and servant of all, Mark. 9.35. and he that exalts himself shall
be abased, Luke. 14.11. All these three are condemned together 1 John. 2.15,
16, 17. Love not the world neither the things that are in the world for all
that is in the world, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the
pride of life is not of the father, but is of the world: which doom is backed
with a threefold argument, 1 These things are not of the Father, 2. they are
inconsistent with the Grynaeus in hunc locum. Cyprian. Cum mun dus oderi^
Christianum quid amas eu^ qui te odit? Serum 4. Demortalitate.
Love of the father, 3. the world passes away, and the lusts thereof. Lastly
all these three were contemned by Moses that worthy servant of God, for which
he is highly commended, Heb. 11.24. he 1. despised the honors of the world he
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, 2. he rejected worldly
pleasures choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, verse. 25. 3 He vilified the pelf
of the world, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures in Egypt: if it be demanded, What enabled him to do so? The Answer
is given, they did all this (as you also may do) by faith for he had respect
unto the recompense of the reward, v.. 26. This life is the time of doing
service; in the close of the day, will be a time of receiving wages.



Inter^ll im^dment ^^norance
1. Ignorance keeps off thousands from joining themselves to this small number
of Israelites indeed, Pharoh did not know who the Lord God of Israel was, Exodus
5.1, 2. And therefore the world knows us not, because they know not the
father whose sons we are 1 John. 3.1. Every true Israelite has Manna given him
to eat of; but it is hidden, and a white stone, with a new name written
thereon; but none knows it, saving he that receives it, Rev. 2.17.

2. Prejudice is a great remora: many take the true Israelites, 2 prejudice.
for so many Gypsies, I mean hypocrites, and the less wonder is it because
they are too prone to take one another for no better: As Jobs friends adjudged
that upright person to be such, one after another. Ask Bildad the Shuit, what
he thinks of Job, he concludes, he is an hypocrite, Job. 8.13. Zophar the
Naamathites verdict agrees with the foreman's, Chapter. 20, 5. But Eliphaz the
Temanite (it may be) will be more charitable: no, he answers both like an Echo,
and styles him an hypocrite, Job. 15.34. yet all this while Jobs conscience
acquitteth him, Chap. 27.5, 6. and the Lord, when he comes to decide the
controversy does not only acquit him, but prefers him before all three of
them, Job. 32.7, 8. But what will the men of the world think and say, when
they hear true Israelites themselves not only questioning their estates, but
crying out as the church did in great extremities, my hope is perished from the
Lord? Lam. 3.18.

3. 3. Unbelief.
As faith makes those in whom it is children of Abraham, and blessed with him,
Galat. 3.7.9. children of the promise, Chap. 4.28. children not of the
bondwoman, but of the free, v. 31. yea, children of God, Gal. 3 26. and heirs
according to promise, v. 29. so, by unbelief were many even of the Jews broken
off, Romans 11.20. And what hinders them now above sixteen hundred years from
being graffed in again? nothing but unbelief: for the Apostle foresheweth that
they also, if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is
able to graffe them in again. v. 23.

A 4th internal obstacle is Inconsideration, 4. Inconsideration
when a man begins in part to be convinced, and almost persuaded (with king
Agrippa) to be a Christian, Act. 26.28. yet waveth such thoughts, and suffers
not the word to sink down into his heart, and dwell there, til it has wrought
a thorough change in him, and does become an engraffed word, which is able to
save his soul, Jam. 1.21. but quenches the motions of the holy Spirit in him,
and so proves abortive, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.

5. Profaneness.
A 5. Hinderance is Profaneness of Spirit; without which, outward objects of
pleasures and profits could not bewitch poor souls so far as to make them to
prefer lying vanities before their own mercy, Jonah. 2.8. Esau-like who for
one morsel of meat, profanely made an irrecoverable sale of his birth right,
Heb. 12.16.

6. Sloth.
6. Otium est hominis vivi sepultura. Senec. l. 1. Ep. 82.
Slothfulness casts many into a dead sleep, Pro. 19.15. and then neither can
they hear good counsel; nor embrace any good offers; nor see nor fear any
mischief; nor shun any enemies or imminent dangers; though the house be on
fire over their heads or the ship wherein they are sleeping be in extreme
peril of sinking. I might give Jonah for an instance, Chapter 1.4. but his sleep
was corporal; theirs is altogether spiritual: the mariners awakened him; they
continue sleeping, and will not be so easily awakened; he repented. God give
them also repentance to life.

A 7th Let, is inconstancy, 7. Inconstancy.
proceeding from hypocrisy, and ending in apostasy. Orpah attended her mother
in law as well as Ruth, when she came from the country of Moab to return to
the land of Judah but she was persuaded by her mothers words to go back to her
own country; Pellicanus. Ruth adhaesit socrui, futura una ex ma tribus e
quibus mundi salus proditura erat.
whereas Ruth continued steadfastly minded to cleave to Naomi, till death should
part them, saying to her, Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God,
Ruth. 1 16. and great was her reward in the end:

8. Many are kept from becoming true Israelites by self delusion, thinking
(but falsely) that they are converted, have repented, do believe, and shall be
^aved, and what need they to do any more? Thus, the five foolish virgins, ^he
proud Pharisee, and many hypocrites ^ondly imagine their case is good, their
^aith is sound, and their hearts are clean, when as indeed they deceive their
own souls, Jam. 1.21.

Diverse other inward impediments there are: but these chiefly must be removed,
the mind must be rightly informed, the judgment must be rectified, prejudice
must be laid aside, and true faith attained, and often examined; and for these
ends, let the word of God be hidden in the heart, the greatness of Gods majesty,
his presence, justice and truth, the incertainty of our lives and the
strictness of the impartial Judge, before whom we must all appear, be
considered of; and let profanes, spiritual sloth, together with levity and
inconstancy of Spirit, and all delusion be avoided, lest any of us fail of the
grace of God, Heb. 12.15. or come short of the promise of entering into his
rest, Heb. 4.1. and I cannot pretermit how seriously and frequently the same
Apostle does caution us to take heed of deceiving our selves, or being deceived
by others, charging us all once that no man deceive himself, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Twice, that no man deceive us, Ephesians. 5.6. again, that no man deceive us by any
means, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Thrice, that we be not deceived either by ourselves, or
others, 1 Cor. 6.9.15.33. Gal. 6, 7. hereby warning all 1. that we are apt to
be deceived in spiritual matters, 2. that this is the most dangerous deceit of
all others. 3. That therefore we should continually look well to ourselves
that we be not overreached in matters pertaining to eternity.

2. Branch of the extation.
having thus dispatched the former part of mine advice to all in general, I now
descend to certain sorts of men, and,

called heirs of restraint, Judge. 18.7. I earnestly entreat them to become
Israelites indeed, to rule with God, and to be faithful with the Saints, Hos.
11.12. to execute judgment and justice without partiality or delay, to judge the
cause of the poor and needy; for then it shall go well with them, and the
common wealth under them, Jerem. 22, 15.16. yea, not only subjects at home,
but forreiners abroad shall have great cause to bless God for them: as the
Queen of Sheba blessed God for king Solomon, and pronounced ^is people happy,
Her words to Solomon run thus, Happy are thy men: and blessed be the Lord thy
God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne, because the Lord loved
Israel for ever; therefore made he thee king to do judgment and justice, 1
King. 10 9.

Nathanael to wash their hearts and hands daily from guile, they should not
need any regulation by others; for they would be a law to themselves: neither
should they have any cause to fear either levelling or antinomian aspersions
or designs; for a good conscience would be a brazen wall to them, and God the
righteous Judge would plead their cause better than they can their clients or
their own. Then would none of them take with both hands, nor receive bribes,
which is a sin inseparable from hypocrysie, Job 15.34. and blinds the eyes of
the wise, Exo. 23.8. and makes the tongue mercenary, either to keep silence
when they ought to speak, or to speak when they should be silent. They would
never desert any righteous cause, Isa. 1. 17. but keep themselves far from
every false matter, as the great Law giver requires, Exo. 23.7.

pleasing men, but God, who tries your hearts, 1 Thessalonians. 2.3.4. Then shall you
teach transgressors Gods ways and sinners shall be converted unto him. Thus
shall a numerous and blessed off spring be raised up to God, as of old the Lord
restifieth of Levi; The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not
found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many
away from iniquity, Mal. 1.6. Then also will the Lord soon wipe away all
disgrace and obloquie from your persons and function, which has been too long
cast upon you and it, for neglect hereof, as the Lord admonishes the priests,
Mal. 2.9. Saying to them, therefore have I made you contemptible and base
before the people, according as you have not kept my ways, but have been
partial in the law.

Paul 2 Cor. 1.12. Theophyl. enarrat. (...).
to prefer, both in their studies and practice, simplicity and godly sincerity
before fleshly wisdom and sophistry, which will afford unto themselves cause of
solid and permanent joy, and ascertain both our Church and state of future
felicity.

Jacobs plain dealing: not to abuse the buyers simplicity, nor to make too
much use of his necessity. And suppose their gains be not so great as formerly
they were; yet they may be sure a greater blessing shall accompany what they
honestly get, and make that Dimidium plus toto.
little to do them and their's more good, then a far greater store of treasure
unjustly gathered together can do others. Herein if they dare not credit me, I
commend to them Gods faithful assertion promise for it, who is able to
perform, and for their greater security they shall find it upon record, Psalm.
37.16. A little that the righteous has is better then the riches of many
wicked. Where, a little is opposed to great riches, and one man's modicum is
opposed to many men's great revenues. Again, Psalm. 112.1, 2, 3. Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments; his
seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed, wealth and riches shall be in his house: you see then I speak not any
thing tending to your loss in dissuading you from Tim. 3.3.
filthy lucre; for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things
which he possesses, Luke 12.15. An heathen fitly illustrateth this by a
similitude thus, Horat Sern. l. 1. Satyr. 1
A clear fountain being a man's own will yield better water, and sufficient for
his use with more safety then a deep muddy river can do.

Jesus Christ, and the commonwealth of Israel, if they be careful to improve
it to the best advantage, than many, I had also said any, others: for that end
be pleased to study well this subject, and take out this lesson, and commend it
to your scholars, that they may also learn it thoroughly; without which all
humane learning will but increase their guilt, and then will not you make
merchandise of the precious time of the youth committed to your trust, either
through sloth, or for sinister advantage, and then shall they grow in wisdom
and grace and favor with God and men, to the great joy of their Parents, and
your no less honor.

are not, but do lie, as John the divine speaks, Revelations. 3.9. much more
strive to attain to the reality, than vainly affect the Ne nomen eis ad
ignominiam ^it. Cypr ad Cornel. Papam.
bare name, which unless they be Israelites and Christians indeed, will rise up
in judgment against them. And let all who are named Nathanael resemble this
pattern in my Text, and be put in mind of it as often as they write or read their
own names or hear others to call them thereby; for, for that end may we well
conceive godly parents use so to call their children: and then shall all these
read their names registered in the Lambs book of life, and they shall never be
blotted out of it.

word of God prevail with all martial men and command them who in time of war
use to command others by the sword, to account it their highest honor to be
able to derive their spiritual pedigree from Jacob surnamed Israel, from his
prevailing first with God, and afterward with men, and there see that you
begin; be sure to prevail with God by prayers and then shall you be more then
Conquerers over devils and evil men, then will you not dare to do violence to
any innocent person, nor to accuse any falsely, but you will be a defense under
God to the godly and quiet in the Land, and the Lord your God will be a strong
and sure defense unto you; you shall go on and prosper against all the Enemies
of God and his Church whereof you are lively members, five of you shall chase an
hundred, and an hundred of you put ten thousand to flight and your enemies
shall fall before you by the sword, Levit. 26.8. for they are more with you
then can be against you 2. Chron. 32.7.

a natural generation, and of supernatural regeneration. Then will your
servants account you their Masters worthy of all honor, and be no more
unprofitable but with Onesimus after his conversion Ambros. in Philem. Tam
secularibus quam divinis obsequiis.
profitable unto you, Phil. 11. Then shall Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants be blessed of God and prosper.

Use 5. So I come to the last use of consolation to all those, Of consolation.
who (though with much difficulty) breaking through all impediments obstructing
them in the way, can peruse and find in themselves the forementioned
Characters, blessed are they that ever they were borne not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John. 1.13. For 1. all
they may truly challenge to themselves the Title of Israelites indeed, which
God never did, nor will allow any others (whether they be Jews or Gentiles) to
do, but very sharply reproves them for it, Isa 48.1, 2. They are called by the
name of Israel: and again, Isa. 48.1, 2.
they call themselves of the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of
Israel, and they swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of
Israel but not in truth, nor in righteousness. Hence observe, 1. in that
wicked men usurp this title and glory in it, how glorious are all Israelites
indeed, their enemies themselves being judges? 2ly. it is a heinous sin for
any to challenge this title, when it belongs not to them; as it is a Capital
crime for a varlet to pretend to be a Kings son and heir, 3ly. the spirit of
God, accounts it to be blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. (says he) I know the blasphemy
of them which say they are Jews, and are not,

2ly. This is not a bare and empty title, but accompanied with so much honor
and happiness, as none on this side heaven can express, or fully conceive of,
1. John. 3.1, 2. Behold what manner of love the father has bestowed on us,
that we should be called the sons of God! Beloved, now are we the sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: whence we collect,

3ly. That they, and only they shall surely enjoy all the honor and felicity
which heaven can afford in the life to come, who continue to walk aright in the
good old way, which has been set before you, as Christ has certified all
believers, Joh. 14.1, 2. In my fathers house are many mansions, I go to prepare
a place for you, and I will come again, and receive you, that where I am,
there ye may be also, v. 3. and then shall you find experimentally, and
confess that this glory does infinitely exceed the fame which you have heard
of it.

4ly. Yea even in this life, having once received the first fruits of the
Spirit in your hearts, he will so certify you of the truth hereof, and your
propriety therein, that you shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1
Pet. 1.8. even in the midst of manifold troubles, temptations, and
persecutions, v. 6. O therefore pray the Lord with all importunity to cause
Isa. 30.21.
your ears to hear a voice behind you, saying, This is the way, walk ye in
it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left; that Jesus
Christ may say of you, as here he did of Nathanael Beh^ld an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no guile. Amen.

FINIS.

