THE CREED OF Mr. Hobbes EXAMINED; In a feigned CONFERENCE Between HIM, AND A
STUDENT in DIVINITY.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1670.

To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, etc.
My LORD,
SEeing I ow^ to your Liberality both the leisure and subsistence which I enjoy
at Holywell, I am under the greatest obligation of presenting, to your Honor,
the First Fruits of my Studies, since my retirement to that Place. These
Studies promoted by the encouragement of your Lordship, were often suggested to
me, by the unwelcome conversation of two sorts of People, of which some
appeared deficient in Faith, and others, in Charity. It is not long, since, by
accident, I conversed with many who were forward enough in venting licentious
Principles, in the way, but without the accomplishments, of Mr. Hobbes: neither
have I escaped the trouble of meeting with some, who, having heard of the
Error, and Recantation, of an unhappy young man, committed, sometime, to my
care; began to reproach my self as a favourer of such opinions. As for this
rash attempt against my own good name (the prejudice, which, from thence, might
be sustained in my Calling, being set apart); I could have been content to have
sat down in silence under it; being ready to despise, rather then, deeply, to
resent the loudest noise of such impertinent accusers. For I had learned of
old, and by this instance was reminded of it, how unequal Judges the vulgar are
wont to be; and how very few either can, or do, examine the reason of Things.
It suffices me, that I continue in the good opinion of your Lordship, and of
some other very excellent persons, whose Judgments seem not to be corrupted by
ignorance, credulity, or, unjust suspicion: and doubtless, that Honor is to be
preferred which is rather tall then broad. In the mean time, it grieved me to
see the Truth lie bleeding at the feet of those who had not spurned at it out
of strength of Reason, but out of mere wantonness of humor; and I esteemed it
a piece of Religion to bear such a part as I was able in the vindication of
her. In this Cause some have already engaged, whose Learning is greater then
that I should either equal it, or give it such praise as it has merited: and,
certainly, the Pens of many others ought also to be sharpened and employed,
against our Author; that so Religion may the more, triumph over Atheism, and
glory both in the streng^h and in the number of her Advocates; and that there
may be le^t, as little soundness in the Reputations, as there is in the
Discourses, of such unreasonable men.

How sound those are, of which Mr. Hobbes has been the great Patron, I leave
to the judgment of all persons, who have not, by any sensual course of life,
received distastful impressions against Religion. He has affirmed of God that
he is a bodily substance, though most refined; and that he forces evil upon
the very wills of men. He has framed a model of Government, pernicious, in its
consequence, to all Nations; and injurious to the Right of his present Majesty:
for he taught the people, soon after the Martyrdom of his Royal Father, that
his Title was extinguished when his adherents were subdued; and that the
Parliament had the Right for that very Reason, because it had possession. He
has subjected the Canon of Scripture to the Civil Powers, and taught them the
way of turning the Alcoran into Gospel. He has said it is lawful, not only to
dissemble, but, plainly to renounce our Faith in Christ, in order to the
avoidance of persecution. His imagination has been infected with so strange an
itch after uncertain Novelties in Doctrine, that he has affronted Geometry it
self, which, so well, deserves the name of Science.

You see, my Lord, that the same Person, who endeavors to shake the
Foundations of Religion, does manage a quarrel against the very Elements of
Euclid. He has, long ago, published his Errors in Theology, in the English
Tongue, insinuating himself, by the handsomeness of his style, into the minds
of such whose Fancy leads their Judgments: and, to say truth of an Enemy,
he may, with some Reason, pretend to Mastery, in that Language. Yet for this
very handsomeness in dressing his Opinions, as the matter stands, he is to be
reproved; because, by that means, the poison which he has intermixed with them
is, with more readiness and danger, swallowed. Of late he has set forth his
Leviathan in the Latin Tongue; declaring his desire (as is the manner of
infected persons) of spreading his Malady throughout the World.

All this being considered, your Lordship will not think it strange, that I
use, toward him, in some places, a little warmth in my refutation: which just
Zeal, if he interprets, Passion and Railing, he falls into a like mistake
with the poor Norvegian in Balzac, who fled away from a Rose, conceiving it to
be Fire. Wherefore for any bitterness of style, I will not be so injurious to
my own innocence as to confess it: but for the Elocution it self, I cannot but
acknowledge, before so great a Master of speaking as your Lordship is known to
be, that, in many places it is beneath mediocrity: yet even that imperfection
serves the Character of such a person as speaks in an extempora^^ (...)
Dialogue; he being, now and then, at a loss for aptness or fullness of
expression. Concerning the Introduction to this Dialogue, if it seems a
little from the purpose of the ensuing Arguments, it is the more natural
beginning of an occasional Conference, in which men, otherwise then in the
Schools, come not immediately to the matter. And I well remember that Minutius
Felix, in that Dialogue, wherein he defends the Christian Faith against the
Cavils of the Pagans, begins with a story of his walking toward the Sea; of
his bathing, with good event, in the salt Waters; and of the little sports
which Children used in making the stones dance upon the surface of the waves.
That which, possibly, may offend more, is the frugality of notion, wherewith I
may seem to have managed some of these great Arguments; though in relation to
the chief business concerning matter as incapable of Thinking, I have not been
sparing in my words or conceptions. But your Lordship (I assure my self)
knows well, that a man can scarce keep at distance enough from the crime of
Albutius the Rhetorician, who desired to speak, in every Cause, not all that
was fitting, but all that he could say: That a Defender of Religion is not
always bound to produce the Arguments which prove the Truth, of which the
Church is always supposed in possession; but it suffices that he keep off
Aggressors: And this (for instance) was the manner of L^ctantius. Lastly, that
the Book being composed in form of a Dialogue; by the largeness of my Replies,
I should have seemed guilty of the incivility of common Disputants, who
endeavor to ingross the talk, and are unwilling to allow, to others, their
turns of speaking. For the rest, I might allege, with truth enough by way of
excuse, the performance of this Labor in the short space of the last
Winter-Quarter: but the Apology it self, the great haste in those twelve
Arti^les, might perhaps seem a crime and a matter of greater guilt then the
error of Ovid, who made the Sun to post through all the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac in a single day. The whole, such as it is, is most humbly submitted to
the Candor and Charity of your Lordship, of which, that it is great, I have
good assurance, seeing your Honor has pleased to receive into the number of
your dependants,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged, though unworthy Servant, Tho. Tenison.
Camb. June 4. 1670.
A TABLE Of the Contents.
THe Introduction, Page Mr. Hobbes and the Student meet at Buxton-well. 2. An
instance, of the train of imagination occasioned there. 4, 5. Mr. Hobbes his
fear, and suspicious nature, expressed in the instance of S. Roscius, and
paralleled with the Character of Epicurus in Cicero. 5. The entrance into the
Dialogue. The Students caution about Moroseness, Profaneness, etc. Mr. Hobbes
accused by des Carts, in one of his Epistles, as a man with whom no
correspondence is to be held. Des Carts himself noted for profaning the holy
Text. 5, 6. Mr. Hobbes defense against the charge of Moroseness, etc. 7. Why
des Carts an Enemy to Mr. Hobbes, and how they differ in the explaining of
Sense. ibid. Mr. Hobbes Creed, in 12 Articles, repeated. 8, 9. Mr. Hobbes
boasts of the good effect of his Leviathan upon many of our Gentry. 9. Article
1. Concerning the existence and immaterial nature of God. 9. etc. What Mr.
Hobbes means Atheistically, in his pretended argument for the existence of a
God. 10. Mr. Hobbes opinion concerning the corporeitie of God noted by des
Carts, and further showed out of his Leviathan. 10, 11. The absurd
consequences of that opinion (which in effect denies the being of a God:) one
of them noted by Athenagoras. 12, 13. Mr. Hobbes self-contradiction, whilst he
says all is body, yet denies parts in God. 14. Mr. Hobbes denies incorporeal
substances, because the terms are not in Scripture. 15. His self-contradiction
and improprietie of speech. 16. Against Mr. Hobbes, that the Scripture favors
the doctrine of incorporeal substances, (...), cited by Ignatius out of the N.
T. 17. Against Mr. Hobbes, that both Plato and Aristotle wrote of incorporeal
substances 17, 18. Mr. Hobbes argues against incorporeal substances from
Tertullian and the Doctors of the Greek Church. 19. Against Mr. Hobbes, that
the incorporeitie of God is asserted by Athenagoras; Theophilus Aut. Tatianus,
Eusebius, Athanasius, etc. 19, 20. Des Carts accuses Mr. Hobbes of making
false illations whatsoever the premises be. 20. An answer out of other places
in Tertullian, to the words cited by Mr. Hobbes. 22. Mr. Hobbes writes the same
over and over, especially about incorporeal substances. 23. That Mr. Hobbes
fixes a wrong sense upon the words substance and matter. 24, 25. A saying of
Marcellus concerning the making words free. 24. Mr. Hobbes doctrine concerning
the incomprehensible nature of God. 26. How God is incomprehensible. 27, 28.
Against Mr. Hobbes, that we may have an Idea of God: what an Idea is. 31, 32.
That Mr. Hobbes is not advanced above the power of imagination. 32, 33. That
Mr. Hobbes condemns himself by granting a conception of Vacuum. 35. Of the
Ancients calling God the place of all things. 36. The first Article concluded
with the Apostrophe of Arnobius. 36, 37. Article 2. Concerning the Trinity. 37,
38. Mr. Hobbes monstrous explication of that mystery. 38. Mr. Hobbes submits
to the Annotations of the Assembly. 40. Pope Alexanders absurd proof of the
Trinity noted by Enjedinus. ibid. According to Mr. Hobbes, there may be more
then 100 persons in the Deity. 41. Concerning Adam, Abraham, Moses, Saul,
Christ, etc. as representing Gods person. ibid. Against Mr. Hobbes, that Father
in the old Testament, is used sometimes in reference to Christ. 42. A text cited
by Just. Martyr disagreeing with the vulgar copy. ibid. The Trinity according
to the explication of Mr. Hobbes, no mystery at all. 43. Article 3. Of the
Origin of the Universe. 43, 44. etc. Mr. Hobbes, conception of a great bulk of
matter arising out of a point. 44. Against Mr. Hobbes, that men are not wearied
in ascending by effects and causes to the first. 45. Mr. Hobbes, supposing an
eternal cause in motion, supposes an eternal cause to be no eternal. 46. The
school of Epicurus noted by Cicero as deficient touching the source of motion.
47. Against Mr. Hobbes, that the Creation is to be proved by reason, not
authority. 48, 49. Mr. Hobbes is followed in his digression about the word
Magistrate, and refuted: and places out of Varro, Cicero, Tertullian, Grotius,
our Articles, are, to that purpose cited, and Castalio's niceness taxed. 49,
50, 51. Against Mr. Hobbes, that if God is, it follows he is Creator of the
order of the world: of the situation of the heart. 52, 53. Mr. Hobbes (in De
homine) confesses that the order of the parts of the body does infer the
existence of an intelligent framer of them. 54. Article 4. Concerning the
incorporeal and permanent nature of Angels: Mr. Hobbes supposes them as
phantasms in dreams, or pictures in a looking-glass 55. etc. Wh^t Spirit and
Angel signify, according to Mr. Hobbes at large. 56, 57. Against Mr. Hobbes,
that the being of Angels and Spirits may be proved from natural reasoning, and
the old Testament. 58. Against Mr. Hobbes, that Religion arises not from tales
publicly allowed 50. Of Cardan and his Genius. ibid. Concerning Witches,
Sybills, Oracles, that they ceased not (as Mr. Hobbes says) at Christ's coming.
Concerning Michael Nostredamus. 61, 62. Against Mr. Hobbes, that the Angels
sent to Abraham and Lot were not mere apparitions. 65. That Christ was not
tempted ( as Mr. Hobbes says) in a Vision. ibid. Scultetus's mistake of the
word (...), Mr. Hobbes his of (...). ibid. That the N. T. asserteth the
existence of Angels. ^piscopius mistake concerning Christ appearing a^ a mere
Spectre to the Disciples. 66* 67. Mr. Hobbes late confession of Angels, as
permanent and substantial, from the places in the N. T. Against Mr. Hobbes,
that the Scripture speaks of the cre^tion of Angels. 68, 69. Of the lord (...)
in Col. 1. the reading of Irenaeus noted. 70. Mr. Hobbes mistake about the word
Ghost. 71. Of his verses of the Peak. ibid. Conclusion of the first dialogue.
73. Beginning of the second dialogue. Article 5. Concerning the Soul, and
perception in matter. 75. According to Mr. Hobbes, the Soul is the organized
body in due mo^ion; and the Scripture means by Soul, bodily life. 75, 76.
This refuted. Why blood (called the life) not to be eaten. 76. Mr. Hobbes
hypothesis concerning sensation: be puts the apparatus for sense it self.
79, 80, 81. Difficulties concerning sensation explained, in the way, either of
Epicurus, or Des Carts; a vindication of him concerning the motion of the
Globul^. 81. It is proved, that sensation is not made by motion or reaction in
mere matter. 82, 83. That Imagination is not merely Mechanical. 86, 87. That
memory is not merely Mechanical, 88 to 95 That reason is not Mechanical. 96.
That the operation of simple apprehension is not Mechanical. 97. That
universals are neither real things nor mere names. 98. That the operation of
the mind in framing propositions is not Mechanical. 99. Or in deriving
conclusions. 100. Against Mr. Hobbes, that reason is not merely an apt joining
of Names. 102, 103. Article 6. Concerning Liberty and Necessity. 104, etc.
Regius inconsistent with himself, Mr. Hobbes consistent, and after the manner
of the Stoics, in this doctrine. 105. Man according to Mr. Hobbes chooses, and
refuses, as necessarily as fire burns. ibid. This doctrine refuted by the
reasons in the last Article, concerning the Soul. ibid. Of Bishop Bramhal
against Mr. Hobbes. Bishop Tailors judgment concerning that work. 107. This
Doctor charge God with all impieties, and barbarities committed by men; and
Mr. Hobbes is not ashamed of the consquence. 108, 109. Against Mr. Hobbes, that
Gods permitting of sin, is not the same with willing it. 110, 111, 112. Mr.
Hobbes doctrine upbraideth all laws. 114. The instance of whipping, and
drowning, Nicons Statue. 114, 115. Against Mr. Hobbes, that the will, if
physically necessary, cannot make the action just, or unjust. 115. Against Mr.
Hobbes, that men not merely punished for noxiousness to society. 116. Of the
kil^ing of Beasts. 117. Of the necessity whereby God does good; it differs from
Mr. Hobbes. 118. Against Mr. Hobbes, that man's liberty contradicts not Gods,
or his omnipotence, 119. Nor his Prescience. 120. Of a suff^cient cause. Mr.
Hobbes clearly refuted. he trifleth of moral and natural efficacy, distinct,
against Mr. Hobbes. 125, 126. Article 7. Conc^rning the law of nature: Jus and
Lex, not first distinguished by Mr. Hobbes. Of the fundamental rule of
temperance, self-interest. 127, 128. A description of Mr. Hobbes his state of
Nature 129, 130. This hypothesis refuted. 131. To such models a saying of the
Lord Baco^s applied. ibid. Of the Origin of man according to Epicurus. 132.
Epicurus (according to Gassendus) teaches the sa^e original of just and unjust
with Mr. Hobbes. 133. An instance out of Justin of the civilitie of the
Scythians without Law. ibid. All born under government. 134, 135, 136. There
may be sin against God, and a man's self in the state of nature. 137. Some sort
of murder, and theft, in a state of Nature. 138. Of promiscuous mixtures,
usual among the Gentiles. 139. Scarce any consent of Nations: the chief, about
the Existence of God. 140. What is right reason, and when it is the Law of
Nature, and eternal. 142. Concerning the irresi^tible power of God as the
measure of his actions. 144. Article 8. Of the power and right of the Civil
Sovereign. 147. Laws made in vain, if self-interest be the prime Laws. The
consent of Mr. Hobbes, and L.S. in Natures dowry. 148, 149. Mr. Hobbes doctrine
against the Kings Interest 149. Of the Earl of Essex. of Oliver. ibid. The
doctrine of Mr. Hobbes, and Mr. White Catholic, against the Kings return. 150,
A place out of Dr. Baily, where Oliver is courted. 151. Mr. Hobbes says
falsely, that no Bishops followed the King out of the Land. 152. That Bishop
Bramhal did so: his advice to the Remonstrants against Socinianism. ibid. and
153. Mr. Hobbes proved to speak falsely, when he says he never wrote against
Episcopacy. 155. Mr. Hobbes cu^^s zeal, ^or the late King, malicious. 156. He
places right in present might, against the King, considering the time. 157.
His doctrine destructive to Government. 161. The scurrility of his friends
pref. to Liberty and necessity noted. ibid. Why the Papists contrary to the
interest of the Kings government, and why Mr. Hobb's doctrine is not to be
tolerated under any Government. ibid. That Mr. Hobbes doctrine de Cive is old,
though bad, taught by Euphemus in an O^ation in Thucydides, and by others. 162.
Of Tyranny. 163. Of the prerogative of Princes, not rightly stated by Mr.
Hobbes. 165. Article 9. Of the Canon of Scripture, and its obligation before
Constantine. 167. A strange saying of Dr. Westons. ibid. Of sacred books not
written by those whose names they bear. 168. Of the history of Job in verse.
ibid. That the writing the Canon anew by Esdras is a Fable of the Synagoga
magna. Bellarmines opinion of Esdras fourth book of the Lxx. 169, 170. Why the
Apocryphal books were excluded the Canon. What books St. Hierom saw, under the
title of the first of Macc. in Hebrew. 171, 172. Of the N.T. declared Canon
before Constan^* or the Council of Laod. 173. What Pope Gelasius called
Apocryph^l, and wh^t books he condemned. ibid. Of the Apostles Can^ns. 174. A
place in Tertullian, con^^r^ in the books of the N. T. ibid. The Copies of the
N.T. not few, nor all in the hands of Ecclesiastics, proved against Mr.
Hobbes. Of the Traditores in Diocletian's days. 175. The N.T. Canon without the
civil sanction. 176. That Christ subjected not Jews to the laws of Moses. 178,
179. Nor the Heathens to the Laws of their Country. Idolatry there a Law,
proved from the 12 Tables. Augus^us, Caius, Cicero, Socrates, Protagoras,
Anacharsis. The design of Tiberius, for the deifying of Christ, obstructed by
the Senate: and that Christ came to destroy present Idolatry. 179, 180. Of the
new laws of Christ. 181. That the commands of Christ and decrees of his
Apostles, were laws, not bare counsels, against Mr. Hobbes. 184. Of the power
of the Church* and that Mr. Hobb^s throughout his books, supposes there is no
power without force. 184, 185. Of the Society of the Church. 185. It is proved
that the function Sacerdotal is not to be exercised, by the civil Sovereign
without ordination: though Mr. Hobbes grants to him or any man commissioned by
him, a right of Ordination, Abs^lution, Bap^izing, Administering the other
Sacraments, etc. 186. Jews and Gentiles condemned for unbelief, and not merely
for their old sins, against Mr. Hobbes, who in that matter, fals^fyes St. John.
190. Against Mr. Hobbes, that Christ had a kingdom, and could make laws. 191.
Article 10. Conc^rning profession of Christianity under p^rsecution. 192, etc.
Against Mr. Hobbes, that in any Country we are not obliged to active obedience.
194. Of Mr. Hobb^s, his becoming (as Mr. Sorbiere prayed) a good Catholic.
ibid. That we ought to suffer, rather then obey against Christ* a saying of
Tat^anus to that effect* of the Grae^i^ns refusing prostration before the King
of P^rsia. of the Christians bowing no longer before the Statues of the
Emperors, when Julian added those of false Gods. 195, 196, 197. Of Naaman's
bowing in the Temple of Rimmon. 199. Of Faith invisible, against Mr. Hobbes*
that we ought to profess the faith. ibid. That Christ is not to be ren^unced
with the mo^th* that the Magistrates command excuses not the Apostate. of Mat.
10.23. etc. 200, 201. Of Martyrs, their Era. A double sort in Mr. Hobbes. 203.
Of the words Acts. 4.19. Mr. Hobbes acc^seth them in effect, of impertinencie.
207. Mr. Hobbes remitting Martyrs to heaven, fallet^ into the scoff of Julian.
ibid. Article 11. Concerning the future estate and place of torment. 209, etc.
Mr. Hobbes aff^rmeth, falsely, that the Torments are eternal, but not to single
persons. 211. He uses the irresi^tible power, or mercy of God, as they serve
his turns; this proved out of ^is de Cive. 213. Against Mr. Hobbes; that hell
will not be on earth* of the vast numbers of people before the flood, and in a
few years after. 215. Mr. ^obbes supposes devils, earthly enemies of Gods
Church. 217. Of the second death. ibid. Whether the wicked shall be
annihilated. It is proved against Mr. Hobbes, from Sophocles and Grotius, that
a miserable life is usually expressed by death. 218. Article 12. Concerning the
future estate and place of happiness. 219, etc. Mr. Hobbes denying the
immortality of the soul, grants a future estate after the Resurrection, by
Grace. Ibid. It is proved that the soul surviveth the body, and receives
immediate recompense. 220, 221. A full answer, to the place of Solomon wrested
by Mr. Hobbes to prove that, in death, nothing remains of a man but a
carcass. 222, 223, 224. And to those out of Job. 227. That, although God could
raise the body to life, yet without the supposition of a substantial Soul, the
Doctrine of Religion would be prejudiced: against Mr. Hobbes. 228. Of the
Kingdom of God. Of the place of Heaven, on earth it is proved, that Christ's
Kingdom began long ago. 230, 231. Against Mr. Hobbes, that St. Marc. 9.1.
refers to the destruction of Jerusalem, and not to the Transfiguration of
Christ. 232, 233. Of the Siege of Jerusalem by Gallus and Titus. Ibid.
Celestial bodies, in opposition to this gross flesh and blood, confessed, by
Athenagoras and St. Hierom* they seem unagreeable to an Heaven on earth 234. If
a man has no substantial soul, he cannot be the same, in the altered
contexture of a Celestial body. Ibid. It is proved from Scripture, against Mr.
Hobbes, that The Heaven shall not be on earth. 235. Concerning the Argument of
Christ, for the Resurrection; against the Sadduces. 237. The double meaning of
(...) Ibid. An answer to 1 Cor. 15.22. alleged by Mr. Hobbes to prove heaven on
earth, and the blessed to be in the estate of innocent Adam. The Interpretation
of Crellius and Vorstius. 238, 239. Of Adams immortality on earth 240.
Jerusalem not to be the Metropolis of Heaven, 241. Answer to Psalm. 133.3.
produced unskilfully by Mr. Hobbes. 242. Of the New Jerusalem. Of Jerusalem
above. Of the new Jerusalem descending. With what it synchronizeth. 243.
Answers to the places produced, out of Isaiah; Joel; Obadiah; St. John; St.
Paul; to prove that The Heaven shall be at Jerusalem on earth, at the second
coming of Christ. 244, 245, 246, 247. The Conclusion. 284.
The Editions of such Books of Mr. Hobbes, as are cited in this Dialogue.
ELementa Philosophica de Cive. A^^stero^. 1647. Humane Nature, London. 1650.
Leviathan. London. 1651. Objectiones in Renati Des Carts Meditationes de prima
Philosophia. Amstel. 1654. Of Liberty and Necessity. Land. 1654. De Corpore, in
English, Land. 1656. Six Lessons to the Oxford-Professors of the Mathematics.
Land. 1656. (...), or marks of the absurd Geometry, Rural Language, etc. of Dr.
Wallis. Land. 1657. Elementorum Philosophiae sectio secunda de Homine. Land.
1658. Mr. Hobbes considered, or his Letter to Dr. Wallis, concerning the
Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and manners of the Author. Land. 1662. Mirabilia
Pecci. Land. Reprinted, 1666.
THE CREED OF Mr. Hobbes, etc. The First Part.
MR. Hobbes of Malmsbury, having pretended to furnish the World with
Demonstration, in stead of talkative and contentious Learning; and having
particularly attempted to resolve the appearance^ of Nature, by Principles
almost wholly new, without any offensive novelty; to discover the Faculties,
Acts, and Passions of the Soul of Man, from their original Causes* to ^uild
upon these two foundations, the truth of Cases in the Law of Nature, and all
the undoubted Elements of Government and Society; to discourse of God, and of
the most momentous Articles of Religion, in a way peculiar to himself; and
having done all this with such a confidence, as becomes only a Prophet or an
Apostle: there is certainly no man who has any share of the Curiosity of this
present Age, or has had his conversation amongst Modern Books, who yet
remains unacquainted with his Name and Doctrine. Of these, the latter has
spread its malignity amongst us too too far, and it has infected some who can,
and more who cannot read a difficult Author. Wherefore it is the business of
this little Book, to expose this insolent and pernicious Writer; to show unto
my Countrymen that weakness of head, and venom of mouth, which is in the
Philosopher, who has rather seduced and poisoned their Imaginations, than
conquered their Reason. And in doing this, I shall assume the usual and allowed
Liberty of feigning a Discourse betwixt Mr. Hobbes, and a Student in Divinity;
as also such Circumstances as gave occasion to the Dialogue, after the ensuing
manner.

A certain Divine having allotted one month in a year for his Diversion, as
also for his better information in the Topography of England, he chose, a while
since, to become an eyewitness of those Wonders of the Peak, of which he had
sometimes read with some content, in the elegant Prose of Mr. Cambden, and
heroic numbers of Mr. Hobbes. In this Progress, he was led at length, by his
Curiosity, to Buxton-Well, in such a juncture of time as he esteemed happy: For
at the same hour with him, Mr. Hobbes alighted there, together with three or
four other persons, of no inferior quality; for the old Man being a
well-willer to long life, and knowing that those Waters were comfortable to the
Nerves, M^rab. Pecc^. p. 1^. Haec r^^o^ luta (...) confirer a m^n (...)
tr^mentum, etc. Cam^d. (...) Provinc. Da^b. p. 361. F^ntes -- (...) corpori
^a^u^ es, etc.
and very useful toward the prolongation of health, was not unwilling to be a
visiter of them. The fellow-^ravellers of Mr. Hobbes had no sooner taken their
Foot out of the Stirrup, than they were surprised by the Contents of a Letter,
which a Messenger, dispatched after them, delivered into their hands. The
business was a matter of great importance, and such as admitted of no delay,
and was very improper for the attendance of Mr. Hobbes, who was therefore left
by them with much excuse, and many expressions of Civility, to the sole
conversation of the Divine. In their Address, Mr. Hobbes made his, with a stiff
posture, and a forbidding countenance, having no ground of hoping for good
usage from Men of that Order, upon which he had cast so much of his foulest
Ink, besides their Christian Charity in forgiving Injuries. But it was not long
before he learnt virtue from necessity, and chose, rather than to want, or seem
to shun, an equal Companion, to put himself into a more sociable humor. After
they had said those things which are of course amongst men in their
salutations, and made known to one another their names and qualities, and
purposes in this Journey, they prepared themselves to enter into the Bath;
whilst they were in it, in those intervalls wherein they abstained from
swiming, and plunging themselves, they discoursed of many things relating to
the Baths of the Ancients, and the Origin of Springs: Amongst other sayings and
enquiries of Mr. Hobbes, he at last brake forth, as it might seem, abruptly,
into this Question, What Proportion is observed in the Tuscan Order? The Divine
being well aware of those sudden leaps which the mind often takes, from one
thing to another, returned first this Answer, That the Tuscan O^der with Base
and Capital must be seven times its thickness; and then replied also, That he
could follow the train of Mr. Hobbes 's imaginations, as far as that Question,
having guessed within himself at the first hint of them; which proof of his
sagacity being desired, he applied himself in this sort, to the performance of
his undertaking: You first (said he) beheld the Bath in which we are, you
thence proceeded in your thoughts to the Baths of Rome Pagan; amongst them you
solicited the Fountain of Mars; and thence your imagination passed to the
rudeness of Nero, who (as Tacitus Vide^atur po^us sacros and Ceremoni^m loci
toto corpore poll ^isse, etc.
says, defiled those sacred Waters, and violated the Ceremony of the place, by
entering with his polluted body, immediately after one of his Riots: Having
thought of Nero, his barbarous act of setting Rome on fire* came next into your
mind; and thence y^u were led unto the motive which did in part induce him to
burn the City, that is to say, because it seemed unto him a rude heap of
inartificial structures, and might arise to a greater glory out of its ashes:
The thought of building occasioned that of the Fire Orders; and so at length
your fancy was guided to the Tuscan. Mr. Hobbes acknowleged that he had
conjectured aright, and begged pardon for that slight Question, protesting,
that whilst he ^^sed, it came from him unawares, and being pleased with the
quick ranging of his companions mind, which he conceived to have been assisted
by the study of his own doctrine, concerning a Chain of Phantasmes, he
increased in complacence. When they had in this manner Mira^^. Pecc^* p. 1^,
19. Postqua^ vexatis, per tota^, fluctib^^, horam Lusimu^; egressi siccis, etc.
Ve^^. tos stratis expecta^ c^^^ula menfis.
passed away an hour, they stepped out of the Bath, and having dried and
clothed themselves, they sat down, in expectation of such a Supper as the
place afforded, designing to make a meal like the Deipnosophistae, and rather
to reason, than to drink profoundly. But in this innocent intention they were
interrupted by the disturbance arising from a little quarrel, in which some of
the ruder people in the house were for a short time engaged. At this Mr. Hobbs
seemed much concerned, though he was at some distance from the persons. For a
while he was not composed, but related it once or twice as to himself, with a
low and careful tone, how Sextu^ Rostius was murdered after Supper, by the
Balneae Palatinae. Of such general extent is that Remark of Cicero, in
relation to Epicurus the Atheist, of whom he observed, that he of all men,
dreaded most those things which he contemned, Death and the Gods. But Mr.
Hobbes having in a short space recovered himself, he was willing to enter with
the Ecclesiastic, into a serious Discourse, and to examine and account for
such Doctrines in his Books, as were usually accused not only of error, but
likewise of downright irreligion. And for the more convenient managing of this
Dialogue, the Divine addressed himself to Mr. Hobbes, to this purpose.

Student. Before we engage in any Dispute, I am desirous to deal plainly with
you, in reference to some things which may obstruct our design; and I hope you
will not interpret for contempt, my ordinary liberty of conversation. You have
been represented to the world, as a person ^ivine (...). Di. (...) 5*6.
very inconversible, and as an imperious dictator of the principles of vice,
and impatient of all dispute and contradiction. It has been said (...).
that you will be very angry with all men that will not presently submit to
your dictates; and that for advancing the reputation of your own skill, you
care not what unworthy reflections you cast on others. Monsieur Descartes (...)
has written it to the confident Mersennus, and it is now published to all the
world, that he esteemed it the better for himself that he had not any commerce
with you; as also, that if you were of such an humor, as he imagined, and had
such designs, as he believed you had, it would be impossible for him and you to
have any communication, without becoming enemies. You are thought, in di^pute,
to use the Scripture with irreverence; and you have (...)
in a scoff men^ion'd the Focus of the Parabola of Dives and La^^rus. I am
ashamed of that humor in Descartes, who hearing that Monsieur Petit (...)
had a little relished his Meditations, said, he was well pleased; adding also,
that there was joy in Heaven for one sinner that converted. If you appear
morose, wedded to your* opinion, and profane; if you endeavor to enervate any
Ar^icle of moment in our Faith, you must expect, either to be left alone, or to
undergo the effects of a just indignation. I applaud in others, and I labor
after a mastery of passion in my self; but when the honor of Religion is
concerned, it is my judgment not to suppress my warrantable zeal; and I cannot
value such a moderate man, as in a worthy cause, is neither hot, nor cold.


Mr. Hobbes. For the morosity Mr. H. C^usid. p. 59, 60.
and peevishness which I am charged with, all that know me familiarly, know
it is a false accusation. But it is meant, it may be, only toward those that
argue against my opinion; but neither is that true. When vain and ignorant
persons, unknown to me before, come to me on purpose to argue with me, and to
extort applause for their foolish opinions, and missing of their end, fall into
undiscreet and uncivil expressions, and then appear not very well contented,
it is not my morosity, but their vanity that should be blamed.

For Descartes, he was moved without cause, being jealous Let de M^. D. 3. tom
p. 159. a^ M^rsen. Rego^e p^ura ex te discat de meis principiis, quam jam novit*
that I should supplant him in his Principles of Philosophy. That fear was
groundless; for I differed much from him, especially in the explication of
sense by motion. Let any man read Descartes, Mr. H. six Le^s. p. 38.
he shall find that he attributes no motion at all to the object of sense, but
an inclination to action, which inclination no man can imagine what it means.
Touching the holy Scriptures, I am so far from irreverence toward them, that I
have great regard Lib. and neces. p. 47.
to the Articles and Decrees of our Church, suspending my sentence, where the
Church has not determined.


St^d. It would be much satisfaction to find all this in the sequel of our
Discourse, confirmed to me by experience. But whatsoever your behavior is like
to be, I cannot but fear (having been conversant in your Leviathan) that your
opinions will deserve reproof. I have sometimes heard the substance of them
comprised in twelve Articles, which sound harshly to men profe^^ing
Christianity; and they were delivered under the Title of the Hobbist's Creed,
in such phrase and order as follows.

I believe that God is Almighty matter; that in him there are three Persons, he
having been thrice represented on earth; that it is to be decided by the Civil
Power, whether he created all things else; that Angels are not Incorporeal
substances, (those words implying a contradiction) but preternatural
impre^^^ons on the brain of man; that the Soul of man is the temperament of his
Body; that the Liberty of Will, in that Soul, is physically necessary; that the
prime ^aw of nature in the soul of man is that of self-Love, that the Law of
the Civil Sovereign is the obliging Rule of good and evil, just and unjust;
that the Books of the Old and New Testament are made Canon and Law by the Civil
Powers; that whatsoever is written in these Books, may lawfully be denied even
upon oath, (after the laudable doctrine and practice of the Gnostics) in times
of persecution, when men shall be urged by the menaces of Authority; that Hell
is a tolerable condition of life, for a few years upon earth, to begin at the
general Resurrection; and that Heaven is a blessed estate of good men, like
that of Adam before his fall beginning at the general Resurrection, to be from
thenceforth eternal upon Earth in the Holy Land.

These Articles, as they are double in their number; so do they a thousand
times exceed in mischievous error, those six so properly called bloody ones, in
the days of King Henry the eighth -- Nay Sir, I beseech you set not so
uneasily; neither prepare to vent your passion; for if it shall appear in the
pursuit of this disputation, that this charge which is now drawn up, is false;
I will not persist in it, but be zealous in moving all your slanderers to lay
themselves at those Feet of yours; at which (as you your self have written) Six
Less. p. 57. I beli^ve my Levia^han has framed the minds of a 1000 Gentlemen
to a conscientious obedience i^ p^esent G^vernm^nt, which otherwise would have
wavered in that point.
so very many of our English Gentry have, with excellent effect, sat for
instruction. At present I desire to take no other advantage from that presumed
Creed, than may be derived from the method in which the Articles of it are
propounded, as also from the particular subjects contained in them, without any
forestalling assent or dissent of mind. For from thence we may fitly borrow
both the Heads and the Order, of such a discourse, as will lead us without
confusion, throughout all those Opinions, with which you are said, to have
debauched Religion.

Let us then take our beginning from the first Article, that fundamental
principle, which being removed all real Religion falls to the ground; that is
to say; the Existence of a God. Are you then convinced, that God is?


Mr. Hobbs. I am. For Hum. Not. p 132 and Lev. c. 12 p. 53. and Object. 5. p.
97.
the effects we acknowledge naturally, do include a Power of their producing,
before they were produced; and that Power presupposes something Existent that
has such Power: and the thing so existing with power to produce, if it were
not eternal, must needs have been produced by somewhat before it, and that
again by somewhat else before that, till we come to an eternal (that is to say,
the First,) Power of all Powers, and ^^rst Cause of all Causes: and this is it
which all men conceive by the name of God.


Stud. By this argument, unwary men may be, perhaps, deceived into a good
opinion of your Philosophy; as if by the aids of it, you were no weak defender
of natural Religion; but such as with due attention, search your Books, they
cannot miss a Key, wherewith they may decypher those mysterious words, and show
that in their true and proper meaning, they undermine Religion in stead of
laying the groundwork of it. Descartes in an Epistle to Father Mersennus Tom.
3. p. 419 Dat. 1641.
makes mention, though with much neglect of your opinion concerning a Corporeal
God, this it seems you had broached in a studied Letter, which passed through
diverse hands, about that time when All things Sacred began to be most rudely
invaded; to wit, the commencement of our Civil Wars. And in diver* Books since
that time published, you have often insinuated, and sometimes directly
asserted, that whatsoever existeth is material. Seeing then, it is absurd to
say, that Matter can create Matter; it follows that the effects you speak of
in your argument, are not to be understood of the very Essences of bodies
(which in your Book de Corpore De Corp. Part. 2. p. 84.
you conceive to be neither generated nor destroyed) but of those various
changes, which by motion are caused in nature: your sense then amounts to
this impious assertion; that in the chain of natural causes, subordinate to
each other, that portion of matter which in one rank of causes and effects (for
you admit De Corp. c. 26. p. 307 'Till at l^st we came to one or many eternal
Cause or Causes.
of an eternal cause or of causes) being it self eternally moved, Ibid.
gave the first impulse to another body, which also moved the neighboring Body,
and so forward in many links of succession, 'till the motion arrived at any
effect which we take notice of, is to be called God. In the like sense the
Atheist Vaninus called nature, Tit. lib. ^. C. V. De Admirandis naturoe R^ginae
Deaeque mortalium.
the Queen and Goddess of Mortals; being (as says a learned Writer) D. Windet
de vita^ funct. Stat^. p. 13.
a sottish Priest of the said Goddess, and also a most infamous sacrifice.


Mr. Hobbes. This principle, that God is not incorporeal, is H. Consid. p. 32.
the doctrine which I have sometimes written, and when occasion serves,
maintain; I say, therefore, that Leviath; part. 4. chapter 46. p. 37*
the world (I mean not the Earth only, that denominates the lovers of it
worldly men, but the Universe, that is, the whole Mass of all things that are)
is corporeal, that is to say, body; and has the dimensions of magnitude,
namely, length, breadth and depth, also every part of body is likewise body,
and has the like dimensions; and consequently every part of the universe is
body, and that which is not body, is no part of the ^niverse: and because the
universe i^ all, that which is no part of it is nothing; and consequently no
where nor does it follow from hence, that Spirits are nothing; for they have
dimensions, and are therefore really bodies; though that name in common speech
be given to such bodies only, as are visible or palpable; that is, that have
some degree of opacity. But for Spirits they call them incorporeal; which is a
name of more honor, and may therefore with more piety be attributed to God
himself; in whom we consider not what attribute expresses best his nature,
which is incomprehensible, but what best expresses our desire to honor him.


Stud. If every part of body be body, not only ^s to us, but in it self; there
seems to be such an inexhaustibleness in the least atome, as will render it,
as infinite as the whole Mass of the remaining Matter, neither do I apprehend
how there can ever be made a true beginning of the Theory of Nature; if after
the utmost resolution of matter, it be impossible to descend to the very root
of Bodies: which Root I would name, a Physical Monad, if you would not use your
standing weapons of reproach, Lev. p. 4.11, 19, 39, 371. lib. and ^^c. p. 5.
six Less. p. 56.
Jargon; nonsense; absurd and insignificant speech. But I will pursue this
perplexing Argument no further, because we must not loose sight of our main
Subject, touching the Corporeity of God; which is affirmed by you in this
place, without the least offer of a Reason; which in good earnest were a very
vain attempt, for if All be matter; seeing God is infinite and every where Lev.
part. 2. p. 190. and Hum. Not. p. 134
and Body cannot be at the same time in the same space with body, D. Corp. part
2. p. 78, 79.
(both which by you are also granted) then by the name of God we must
understand the universe. Then Jupiter est quodcunque, vides quoc^nque mov^^s.
whatsoever we see, or whatsoever we move toward, the same is Jupiter, and
such an opinion if it once break in upon our belief, it will make a way there,
by which a million of absurdities may follow after it, and that I may not seem
to deceive by a general assertion, I will here repeat a few of them. It will
follow thence, that All the actions of God proceed by unavoidable compulsion,
from the mechanic Laws of moving and moved Matter. That some parts of the Deity
perceive, what others do not, there being in diverse bodies, diverse Re-actions,
in which you place the nature of conception Lev. p. 3. etc. and. part. 4. p.
352. etc.
in organized matter; and must also allow the same in that which has neither
brain nor heart, if you will admit of perception every where, in Your Deity.
That if any parts of matter be perfectly at rest, then such parts of the Deity,
(suppose of Gold, Lead, or Marble) are without understanding, and thus in
opposition to the Sovereign God, whose being and knowledge are no where
excluded, you have set up a Baal of your own, of which one part is asleep, in
the depth of Rest; and the other is in a journey hurried by motion. It will
also follow from this principle of yours, that Idolatry which you somwhere Lev.
part. 4. p. 359. to 366.
condemn as sinful, is no crime; it being no other than an amicable
officiousness in one part of the Deity toward the other, if the Universe be
God; and here a saying of Athenagoras Athenag. Leg. pro Christian. p. 14. (...)
comes in fit time into my mind; and it is to this effect. If God and Matter be
the same thing under differing appellations; we are impious if we deny to
Stones and Trees, to Gold and Silver divine honor. Lastly, if the Universe be
God, then Cain, and Cham, and Pharaoh, and Herod, and Pila^e, and Judah, and
(that I may say it with sufficient emphasis) the Teacher also of this doctrine
is part of the Deity.


Mr. Hobbes. This H. consid. p. 62.63.
is all error and railing, that is, stinking wine, such as a Jade lets fly,
when he is too hard girt upon a full Belly.


Stud. This nasty metaphor is widely misplaced, whilst instead of saying that I
am hard girt, you should have confessed your self (for that is the truth) to
have been galled to the quick. For my self, ^ was not intemperate in my
passion, but zealous in the truth: but your language is both foul and unjust*
and (to allude further to the beast you speak of) you therefore boggle and
foam, because of a sudden there is too much Light let in upon you, but laying
aside this reviling humor, which is common* not with ingenious Philosophers,
but with people of poor and evil education; let me with calmness be informed of
those Reasons, upon which you so confidently support your self in maintaining
the materiality of God.


Mr. Hobbes. Before I repeat my Reasons, I will let you understand that I have
expressly taught i^ My Leviathan, Lev. p^rt. 2. p.
that those Philosophers, who said the World, or the Soul of the World wa^ God,
speak unworthily of him; and denied his Existence: for by God is understood the
Cause of the World; and to say that the World is God, is to to say, there is no
cause of it, that is, no God.


Stud. In this you are at agreement with me, but seem to contradict your self,
for here you deny that the World is God, and elsewhere you defend it most
pertinaciously, that All is Body, which (...) it be, then as has been said)
the whole is God, if he existeth; seeing nothing that is, can give bounds unto
his in^inite nature, and Body can be a neighbor to Body, but not an
Inhabitant. In some places you write down, and in others you dash out your
fancy of a corporeal God: you have said, that whatsoever is, is Body; you have
also written, Ibid.
that to attribute to God, parts or totality, is not honor, because they are
attributes only of things finite: and now methinks you should not be so
impatient of contradiction from others, seeing you swallow it without straining
in your own Books. But from this diversion, please to return unto those
promised Reasons, wherewith you are wont to manage this Argument of the
materiality of our Creator.


Mr. Hobbes. In this I will comply with you; and my care F.B. Ep. to Humna^.
it is, and labor, to satisfy the judgment and reason of mankind.

And first, H. Consid. p. 32, 33.
what kind of attribute, I pray you, is immaterial or incorporeal substance*
Where do you find it in the Scripture? Whence came it hither, but from Plato
and Aristotle, Heathens, who mistook those thin inhabitants of the brain they
see in sleep, for so many incorporeal men; and yet allow them motion, which is
proper only to things corporeal? Do you think it an honor to God to be one of
these? And would you learn Christianity from Plato and Aristotle? But seeing
there is no such word in the Scripture, how will you warrant it from natural
reason? Neither Plato nor Aristotle did ever write of, or mention an
incorporeal spirit; for they could not conceive how a spirit, which in their
language was (...), (in ours, a wind) could be incorporeal.


Stud. In this first Endeavor (for a Reason I cannot style it) there are many
things which appear to me absurd. You tell us that the Attribute of Incorporeal
was borrowed from the Heathens, Plato and Aristotle; and yet almost in the same
breath, you say, that neither of them did ever write of, or mention an
incorporeal spirit. You reproach us, as learning Christianity (in stead of
which you ought to have used the more proper term of Natural Theology) from
such Heathens; and thereby you seem to herd with that ignorant multitude, who
of late decry'd all humane Learning, upon pretense that it was heathenish and
profane, as if the Pearl of Wisdom and Reason were so besmeared by the usage
of the Heathens, as to be rendered unfit for the touch and service of a
Christian Philosopher. You again are too too much in their humor, whilst you
require expres^ mention of a term in holy Scripture, and upon the supposed
silence of it, reject the notion which may be delivered in another form of
words. And moreover, when you say that Plato and Aristotle could not conceive a
spirit, by reason that with them it signified a wind, to be incorporeal;
therein also you ought not to have used such confidence in your assertion: for
if wind be motion, and motion be so unglued and loose, as to pass from Body to
Body, I know not whether the n^me of wind may not more promote, than obstru^t
the apprehension of an incorporeal Being. We are informed by Sextus Empiricus,
S^xr. Emp. Pyr. upp. l. 3. c. 17. p. 13^.
that some of the Ancients contended expressly for the incorporeity of motion. I
mean by motion, that force so little yet understood, which is the cause of the
translation of bodies, and not, as you somewhere De Corp. part. 2. c. 8. p. 79.
speak, the relinquishing of one place, and acquiring another.

But leaving this subtiler Consideration, I will proceed to show, that neither
the Scripture, nor the School of Plato, or Aristotle, is wholly unacquainted
with the Doctrine of an incorporeal spirit. Concerning the holy Scripture, it
says, that God created all things, and fills all things, and therefore it
teaches that he is immaterial. And for the very term, we may perhaps meet with
it in the words of our blessed Lord Luke 24 39.
who appearing to the doubting and amazed Disciples, encouraged and confirmed
their faith, by saying to them, Lay hold of me, handle me, and see that I am
not an incorporeal Demon: you will now tell me, that I follow not the true
Copy of the New Testament, in the translation of this produced Text. I defend
my self, by answering, that I follow holy Ignatius, who in his undoubted
Epistle to those of Smyrna Ign. Ep. ed. Vess. p. 3.
cited both by Eusebius and St. Hierome, brings in our Lord using these
words, (...). This excellent person who saw our Lord after his resurrection,
did either cite the words exactly He pref^c^th to them by (...), he said unto
them, not adding, to this purpose,
or else, which also strengthens my cause, he e^press'd the sense of them,
according as it was received in the incorruptest Age of the Christian Church.

Concerning the Philosophy of Plato, in relation to the Question which lay
before us, there is nothing more received, than that he affirmed the most
celestial parts of matter, neither to be God, or Angel, or spirit of man, but
to be (...), (as is the phrase of Hierocles) the spiritual Chariots of
prae-existing Angels, or of departed minds. In the beginning of the Dialogue
with the Jew Trypho, Justin Martyr J^st. M^r^. op. p 219. (...), etc.
at large, relating his small proficiency under the Tutorage of a Stoic, a
Peripatetick, and a Pythagorean, adds also, that he adjoined himself at last to
a Platonist of great fame; that he improved daily by his instruction; that he
was extremely pleased, amongst other parts of science, by him taught, with the
notion of incorporeal beings: and if I well remember, the great admirer of
Plato, Psellus, has called the Soul an immaterial and incorporeal fire. (...).
And touching Plato himself, I am sure that I have read this Maxim in his
Politicus, Plat. Pol. Ed. Fir. p. 182. (...). Soc^. (...).
that incorporeal Beings, which are of all others the most glorious and great,
are only conspicuous to the faculty of Reason, which though it be there said by
Hospes, yet it is approved of by Plato himself, under the name of Socrates, who
replied, that he had excellently spoken. Neither will I pass by the testimony
of Aristotle, who by his separate Intelligences, means (says Ben Maimon)
More Nerochim, part. 2. c. 6. p. 200.
the same with those, who maintain the existence of incorporeal Angels. And
concerning the rational soul, he teaches, Arist de An. l. 2. c. 1.
that it is separable from the body, because it is not the Entelech of any
body, having a while before enquired whether it be endued with any peculiar
function, not arising from this compounded estate. He also Ar. de Coelo. (...)
denies, that motion can arise from a body.


Mr. Hobbes. It is manifest by your thick quotations, that you are much in love
with Authority; to that therefore in the second place I will refer you. Know
then Mr. H. Cons. p. 37.
that whatsoever can be inferred from the denying of incorporeal substances,
makes Tertullian, one of the antientest of the Fathers, and most of the Doctors
of the Greek Church, as much Atheists, as my self.


Stud. You have not, by this means, advanced your hopes of victory; for I shall
make it evident, that the Forces in whose numbers you trust, are falsely
mustered. The Fathers of the Greek Church believe in the same sense with the
Doctors of our own, that God is a Spirit: for Ignatius, and Justin Martyr, you
have heard already on what side they stand.

Athenagoras, in his Embassy, in behalf of the Christians, to M. Aurelius
Antoninus, and L. Aurelius Commodus, discourses to this purpose. Athen. Leg.
p. 5. (...), etc.
The Athenians did most justly condemn Diagoras for sacrilegious impiety, who
rather than his Coleworts should remain unboyl^d, would cut in pieces the
Statue of Hercules, who also did expressly affirm that there was no God at all.
But as for us, who separate God from matter, and teach that God is one thing,
and matter another, the reproach of Atheism is most unreasonably and
injuriously charged upon our Creed. The same Athenagoras, in a few Pages after
this discourse Ath. p. 9. (...).
again professes, not as his private opinion, but as the faith of the
Christians of that Age, that God admits not of any division, neither
consists of any parts. Then for Theophilu^, the Patriarch of Antioch, who
likewise writes, not as a private man, but as a common Apologist for the
Christians; he tells Antolycus the Heathen Theoph. Antioch. l 2 p 81.
that God is every where, and that every thing is in God. Had he believed God
to have been a Body, he would not have placed all other Beings in his boundless
Essence, unless we shall take the boldness to accuse the holy Patriarch of that
fault, which Descartes imagined he had espied in your self, of failing Obj.
and Resp. 3. p. 103. R^^p. ad Obj. 12. M^ro^que m^ nullam hacte^^s rectam
^llationem in ^is objectioui^us invenisse.
whatsoever the Premises be, in the Illations deduced from them. If we consult
Tatianus, in his Oration contra Graecos, we shall likewise obtain his suffrage
Tat. Assyr. p. 162. (...).
for the immateriality of the first cause. There are, said Tatianus, who do
maintain that God is a Body; I am not of the same belief with them, for my
persuasion is, that he is incorporeal. E^sebius may be produced in the same
place Eus them. Evang. l. 3. p. 69. (...), etc.
both against your self, touching the materiality, and against Idolater^,
touching the worship of Angels; for thus he speaks, We have learned to honor
the incorporeal powers, according to the degree of their dignity, ascribing
divine honor to God alone. St. Athanasius tells the Followers of Sabellius,
that it is a very childish and foolish conceit, by the eye, or by the
circumscription of place, to comprehend that which is incorporeal Ath. cont.
Sab. gr^g. tom. 1. p. 660. (...), etc. (...), etc.
understanding this speech of the infinite Majesty of Almighty God. St.
Chrysostom in the same place affirms, God and the soul of man, to be
incorporeal. Ap. Sandit interp. Parad. in ^ c. 4.2^. p. 197.
I might here subjoyn in favor of the common opinion, St. Iren^eus, I^en. l.
3. c. 23. p. 290.
St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Gregory Nyssen* St. Epiphanius, and a
long order of others, if it were not a needless labor, and would not look more
like o^tentation, than necessary defense of truth.

Some indeed of the Ancients believed Angels not to be wholly incorporeal; and
St. Hierome places it amongst the Errors of Origin, that he ascribed to
Angels, bodies of Air: they taught not, that Body was their sole essence, but
their clothing. So that to speak after your own manner Lib. and Nec. p. 6.
I observe a great part of those Forces, by the strength of which you contend
against incorporeal substances, to look and march another way.


Mr. Hobbes. Tertullian however is on my side; for he Mr. H. Consid. p. 37, 38.
in his Treatise de Carne Christi, says plainly, Omne quod est, corpus est sui
generis; ni hill est incorporale, ^isi quod non est. That is to say, Whatsoever
is any thing, is a body of its kind; nothing is incorporeal, but that which has
no being. There are many other places in him to the same purpose; for that
doctrine served his turn to confute the heresy of them that held, that Christ
had no body, but was a Ghost: also of the soul he speaks as of an invisible
body. You see what fellows in Atheism you join with me.


Stud. Some perhaps might here reply, that Tertullian was a single witness, and
that his testimony might appear invalid, because he was condemned of old, as an
Heretic for this very Doctrine; because he was a man of a various Creed;
because he was better skilled in the Laws of the Roman Empire, than in those of
nature; at least that he attended not to the phylosophick consequence of his
opinion; lastly, because to avoid his adversaries, he ran too nigh the other
extreme, and would have used different weapons in another controversy. But it
will be more agreeable to the reverence which we owe to that very ancient and
learned Writer, to explain one place in him by another, than rudely to accuse
him. It is therefore to be noted, that Tertullian sometimes called the passive
matter by the name of body, and sometimes by body understood the mere
substance, being, or essence of things. In the first sense, are those words to
be expounded, which we find in his Book de Anima. Te^tul. de An. c. 7. p. 268.
In quantum omne corporale, passibile est, in tantum quod passibile est,
corporale est. Now it is not to be imagined, that in this meaning of the word
Corpus, a body should be attributed to the impassible Nature of God, by a man
who devoutly adored his Perfections. For the second sense, I will allege the
explication which he himself has made, in his Book against Hermogenes Tert.
advers Herm. c. 35 p. 246.
the Philosopher and Painter, who being perhaps debauched by his very
profession, which chiefly employed his fancy, affirmed that matter was
coeternal with God. Nisi fallor enim, omnis res aut corporalis aut
incorporalis sit necesse est: ut concedam interim aliquid incorporale de
substantiis dun^axat, cum ipsa substantia corpus sit rei cujusque And in the
very words which Us^er in those, now cited by you, and craftily concealed, it
is apparent that by body, Tertullian meant only essence, and not impenetrable
matter. The words are these, Quum autem sit, habeat necesse est aliquid, per
quod est: Si habet aliquid per quod est, hoc erit corpus ejus. Omne quod est
corpus, est sui generis.


Mr. Hobbes. Of Authority enough, let us consult natural Reason, by attending
to which I maintain, Hum. Not. p. 1^8.
that Incorporeal Body, is not a name but an absurdity of speech* Spirits Hum.
Not. p. 135
supernatural commonly signifysie some substance without dimension; which two
words do flatly contradict one another. I say, again, Lev. c. 4. p 17.
an Incorporeal Body or (which is all one) an incorporeal sub^tance, is a name
made up of two names, which have significations contradictory and inconsistent,
for Obj^ct. 9 p. 100. Subst^ntia est materia subjecta accid^nlibus, and
mutationibus.
a substance is matter, subject to accidents and alterations. If a man Lev. c
5. p. 19.
should talk to me of a round Quadrangle; or accidents of Bread in Cheese, or
immaterial substances; -- I should not say he were in an error, but that his
words were without meaning; that is to say, absurd. Though men may Lev. c. 12
p. 53.
put together words of contradictory signification, as spirit and incorporeal,
yet they can never have the imagination of any thing answering to them.
Substance incorporeal Lev. c. 34. p. 207.
are words, which when they are joined together destroy one another. I say
again, Lev. c. 34. p. 214.
that to men that understand the signification of these words, substance and
incorporeal, as incorporeal is taken, not for subtle body, but for not body,
they imply a contradiction.


Stud. This unbacked confidence in an argument of such moment, provokes me to
tell you, that you are as notorious in repeating, as those Priests whom men of
your persuasion are wont to flout at, whilst they should rather have regard to
the dullness of their common Audience: as also, that if all things twice said,
or elsewhere written by you were picked out; your Great Leviathan would shrink
to a little Scallop.

But to reason with you in your own way, I deny it, once and again, that the
speech, Incorporeal Substance, either is or implies a contradiction, there is a
bare Nay, of as good strength, as your naked affirmation, you have somewhere
promised Hum. Na^ p. 2.^ ^
to endeavor as much as you could, to avoid too happy concluding: but here you
are so hasty, as to leap over all proper premises into such a conclusion, as is
made only by a stiff and presumptuous will. But I will be content to answer
also, that we forsake the usage of speech, when we confound the names of Body
and Substance. The Logicians, who are at variance in other matters, consent in
this, that a Substance is either material, or immaterial. If you resolve to fix
a sense to the word, Substance, which hitherto all Custom (which is the
Interpreter of Speech) has determined against; you usurp too great Authority.
M. Pomponius Marcellus feared not to tell Tiberius the Emperor, who had us^d a
word not truly Latin, in one of his Edicts; that S^et^n. de (...) G^amm^^. p.
23. in M. ^ M. It Is eni^ Caesar (...) Ve^bis seem^th t^^ be^^er ^^^ding.
it was in his Power to make Men, but not to make Words free of the City.


Mr. Hobbes. Do you understand M^. H. ^o^s p 33.
the connection of Substance and Incorporeal? If you do, explain it in English;
for the words are Latin. It is something, you will say, that being without Body
stands under -- stands under what? will you say under accidents? almost all the
Fathers of the Church will be against you; and then you are an Atheist.


Stud. By avoiding the word, Substance, by which (in despite of general use)
you will mean Body, your cavil vanishes: for if we should use the terms of,
(...), Being, or Essence; affirming that God is a Being which neither is, nor
has a Body, you will be of a very quick and sagacious Nose to smell out a
contradiction in words so put together. For to Be, and to be without Body, are
not terms which destroy each other. It might then be inferred, that all moral
virtues and all Physical notions were names and nothing else. But I will admit
of the word, Substance, and (which may seem a concession with advantage) of the
word, Matter, too, without any real prejudice to this Cause, for by Substance
is frequently under^^ood (as Descartes himself, Resp. tertiae p. 94. Sub
ratione substantiae vele^iam si lubet, sub ratione materiae nempe Metaphysicae.
who favour^d not the abuse of words has phras^d it) Metaphysic-Matter. That
Matter is the subject about which our mind is conversant, whither it be a
feigned notion, a name, a privation, or negation; for as Plato ha^s observed,
the Art of Reasoning, handles, (...), Matters, which are not real, after the
manner of Reals; and Aristotle (whom you are wont to cite when he may serve
your occasion) divides Ar. ^. 8. M^t c. 6. (...).
matter into intelligible and sensible; not meaning, as is manifest from his
context, such matter as is composed of imperceptible parts, but such as I now
described. Cicero ^nver. Or. 8 l. 3. p. 203.
likewise calls Indoles by the name of Matter.

But substance (you say) being construed aright, does signify something that
stands under, under what, when ascribed to God? that is your smart question,
it sounds hastily to answer under Accidents, which are for the most part
appurtenances to Body. But if I say, under Attributes (seeing the
Anti-Remonstrants have of late allowed it for good Doctrine, that the Decrees of
God are not the very essence of God;) Vide A^min Ex. These. Gom. p. 159. and
Goma^. Tom. 3. Disp. 9.
I am not for such an answer, so nigh the borders of Atheism (you should have
said of Heresy) as you by your false prospective are ready to epsy me. But to
take away all occasion of further cavil about this name, Incorporeal Substance;
I will at last referr you to the Law, toward which you pretend the profoundest
reverence, submitting your very words at the Footstool of such Authority. If
then a Substance signifies Body; and every thing that is, be body; then is the
first Article of the nine and thirty (which has as much validity in Law, as
the Kings Broad-Seal can give it, which I know you judge sufficient) an heap of
absurd and inconsistent words, for, in that Article we are taught that there is
but one Living and true God, Everlasting, without Body, Parts or Passions.


Mr. Hobbes. To those Doctrins of the Church, which are made Law by the Kings
Authority, I owe reverence; and have always a will to pay it, in pursuance of
which will, I have taught in my Leviathan, Lev. part. 2. p. 190.
and you your self a while since took notice of it, that to attribute Totality
or parts to God, is not to honor him; you may likewise understand, that my
opinion concerning God, says nothing of him, but that he is. Forasmuch Hum.
Not. p. 132.
as God Almighty is Incomprehensible, it follows, that we can have no
conception or Image of the Deity, and consequently all his Attributes signify
our inability and defect of power to conceive any thing concerning his Nature,
and not any conception o^ the same, excepting only this, that there is a God.
The Nature, I say, of God Lev. c. 34 p. 208.
is incomprehensible; that is to say, we understand nothing of what he is, but
only that he is; and therefore the Attributes we give him, are not to tell one
another what he is, nor to signify our opinion of his Nature, but our desire
to honor him with such Names, as we conceive most honorable amongst our selves.
S. Lev. p. 53. and p. 371. and Hum. Not. p. 134 and H. cons. p. 31.



Stud. To this last effort of yours, there are diverse things to be replied; and
in the first place, whereas you have said that to attribute parts to God, is
not to honor him; it follows then, that you, who would seem to mention his
Nature with the highest degree of veneration, have notwithstanding a most
unworthy conceit of him; seeing to call him Body, is to cast the reproach of
having parts upon him. So that the character which Cicero gave of the Herd of
Epicurus, will not be disagreeable to the followers of a Philosopher whom you
know very well; in words they affirm, but in truth they deny the Existence of
God Verbi^ quidem ponunt rei^sa tollunt Deos.
.

Again, whilst in your opinion the Deity is so incomprehensible, that you
understand not any thing of his Nature; but profess to honor him at adventures,
by such tokens of esteem as are in use with men: or by such as imply our
inability to conceive of him; the burden of our holy Lord against the blind
Zealots of Samaria, may be most justy taken up against you, who worship, you
know not what? and to say that God is, and also that you apprehend not any
attribute that properly appertains to his nature, is only to pronounce of
God, as of an indefinite Name: for such is naked Being, strip^d and divested o^
all such attributes as are required to particularness or distinction of things.
Tell me not ^ow, Hum. Not. p. 133. Obj. ^.p. 97. Lev. c. 11. p. 51.
that though it be not possible for a man that is born blind, to have any
imagination what kind of thing fire is, yet he cannot but know somewhat there
is, that men call fire, because it warmeth him: for it is not to be concluded
from that similitude, that all that will consider, may know that God is, though
not what; he is for a Blind man warmed by the fire understands well, because
he feels the true nature of it, which consists not in the color or shining
of i^, but in that sensation which arises in him from his nerves touched by
such of the more earthy parts of matter, as are put into vehemen agitation.
That God is incomprehensible in some sense, is acknowledged by all, who will
not arrogantly suppose their minds, as infinite as God, but to say that we know
not any thing of God, because we have not an adequate conception of him, is as
absurd, as if a Navigator should affirm, that he knows nothing of the Sea, but
that it is, because he cannot fathom the utmost depths of it. Maimonides, in
the same place More Nev. c. 59. part. 1. p. 98 99.
acknowledges God to be incomprehensible, yet shows that he is incorporeal;
and that something is to be known of him, besides his bare existence, because
some men have better apprehensions concerning God than others, who are equal
with them in knowing that he is, we pretend not by searching, to find out God;
to find out the Almighty to perfection, but after some imperfect degree of
knowledge to apprehend his Nature, if this be denied to the mind of man, after
the most sagacious ranging of it; and if the attributes, not only of
incorporeal and Omnipotent, but also of good, and just, and holy, and true, be
not some real strokes of the divine Image, but only marks of honor in the
societies of men, then is it an impossible undertaking (so far will it be from
the rule of Religion) to labor to imitate Him we worship, then are those places
to be blotted out of the holy Canon wherein it is written, That God is Love:
that we must be holy, because God is holy: that it behooves us to be merciful
(for the quality of our virtue) as our Father, who is in Heaven is merciful,
than by affirming that God is good, or just, or holy, we cannot assure our
selves, that we shall not by such speeches talk wickedly for God.


Mr. Hobbes. That Lib. nece^^. p. 21.
which men make amongst themselves here by Pacts and Covenants, and call by the
name of Justice, and according whereunto men are accounted and termed rightly
just or unjust, is not that by which God Almighties actions are to be measured
or called just, no more than his Counsels are to be measured by humane wisdom,
that which he does is made just by his doing of it, just I say, in him, though
not always just in us.


Stud. Of eternal reasons of good and evil, we may discourse more pertinently,
in our intended Disquisition touching the Law of Nature, and the obligation of
humane Laws. Yet I cannot abstain from interposing here this short reply, that
although the most incomprehensible God has not submitted all the Acts of his
boundless wisdom to our narrow Judgments, yet for his Acts of justice and
equity, he has appealed to the reason of mankind; which therefore is an
universal and eternal standard, and not made a just and equal measure, by the
mere seal and allowance of humane authority. O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
men of Judah, judge I pray you (says God Almighty) betwixt me and my Vineyard!
Isa. 5.3, 4.
He also by the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 18.25, 29.
makes appeal to the faculties of mortal men, touching the equity of his
dispensations. Ye say the way of the Lord is not equal; hear now, O house of
Israel! Is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal?


Mr. Hobbes. I am willing to dismiss this Argument for a time, and to reassume
it, as you propounded, in its more proper place. In the mean time, I will go on
with my opinion, concerning the incomprehensible nature of God. It is Mr. H.
Cons. p. 31.
by all Christians confessed, that God is incomprehensible; that is to say, that
there is nothing can arise in our fancy from the naming of him, to resemble
him, either in shape, color, stature, or nature; there is no Idea of him. At
Hobbii Obj. 5. p. 97
the venerable name of God, we have no Image or Idea of God; and therefore we
are forbidden to worship God by an Image, lest we seem to our selve^ to
conceive him, who is unconceivable. Christian Religion Obj. 11. p. 10^.
obliges us to believe that God is unconceivable, that is, as I understand it,
such a one of whom we have no Idea. And Reason teaches, that because Lev. c.
3. p. 11.
whatsoever we conceive, has been perceived first by sense, either all at once,
or by parts, a man can have no thought representing any thing, not subject to
sense.


Stud. If ^od be a body, seeing man may have an image of extention, and of all
the possible figures, which may be made by the varieties of extention in
matter, what hinders that we may not have, in your gross way, an Image of God?
But because he is an immaterial substance, we cannot indeed have any bodily
resemblance of him; but there is in every man a power to have an Idea of him.
For although it has been said that there have been found whole Nations (as in
the Western World in Brasil) who have lived without the least suspicion of an
infinite Being, yet there is no Nation so very barbarous, wherein the
Inhabitants have no faculty at all of exciting in them, this Idea of God. And
here I cannot but reprehend it, as a very shameful error, in a man who places
truth in the right ordering of names, and pretends See Lev. c. 4. p. 15.
to begin the sciences, by settling at first the significations of their words,
to confound the names of Image and Idea, as if they were terms of equal
importance. It is also an argument of thickness of mind, of a soul not yet
advanced above the power of fancy, to say that no man has, or can have any
kind of conception without an Image, as if nothing were authentically written
upon the table of our minds, without a seal and sensible impression affixed to
it. I conceive (said a very learned person) Ep. to R. before Phylos. E^say.
that case in this to be alike, as if whilst two men are looking at Jupiter,
one with his naked eyes, the other, with a Telescope; the former should avow
that Jupiter had no attendants, and that it were impossible he should have any.
The reason why Mr. Hobbes denies immaterial Beings, whilst other men apprehend
them, is, for that he looks at them with his fancy: they, with their mind. By
Idea, is understood, not merely a corporeal similitude, but any notion without
imagery, and whatsoever occurreth in any perception: the very form of
cogitation, whereby I become conscious to my self that I have perceived, is an
Idea. And Plato, to whose School we owe chiefly this name of Idea, has expressly
contended for a knowledge, soaring above the ken of fancy, and taught us, that
the greatest and most glorious objects have no Im^ge Plat. Po^^^. p. 1^1.
(...), etc.
attending on their perception. And Clemens Alexandrinus Cl^m. Al. Adm. ad G^nt
p. 34 (...), etc.
in his admonition to the Gentiles, told them, with reference to their
Idolatry, that the Christians had not any sensible image of sensible matter in
their divine worship, but that they had an intelligible Idea of the only
sovereign God. There is a great difference betwixt an object seen through a
polished Chryst^l, and a piece of painted Glass; and there is a far greater
difference betwixt the Idea of God in a perspicuous mind, and the notion of a
God taken through the pictures of Imagination. When we consider that all
perfections that are, or can be thought of, by man a second cause, are more
eminently to be ascribed to the first; and when we further conceive, that it is
much better to have wisdom, power, truth, justice, goodness, than to want them,
and that therefore they are, in any being, so many perfections, and when we
thence indefinitely extend those perfections by the utmost stretch of our
minds, we form aright* though not by way of adequate comprehension, such a true
and pure Idea of God, as is not discolored by corporeal phantasms. But because
you move in the lower sphere of fancy, you must be satisfied in your own way,
and be instructed through a corporeal image, or otherwise you will not admit of
any Idea. The Jews of old were of that unreasonable temper, who although they
had miracles wrought amongst them, exceeding great, great as their own
unbelief* yet would not they be contented without a sign from Heaven, such as
was that of the descent of Manna, to which that Nation had sometimes been more
accustomed. But if this should naturally be in others, as it seems
accidentally to be in you, the effect of poring upon points, and lines, and
figures; to conceive nothing without a bodily image, Archimedes and Euclid
should as soon by me be condemned to the flames, as Aretine, and any of the
Histoires G^lantes.

But because you stick in this lower Form of Imagination, I will therefore
attempt to take you out such a lesson, as is most agreeable to you in that
capacity.

Call to mind then, that you begin your na^^ral Philosophy De Corp. c. 7. p. ^7.
from a feigned annihilation of the World, though you dwell not upon the notion
of empty space remaining, but straightway fill it with the phantasms of all
such bodies, as before their supposed annihilation, you had perceived by your
eyes, or any other instruments of sense. And I must note it by the way, that
you except man only from this universal annihilation of things, and leave not
God out of it, although his Idea implying necessary existence, the not
retaining of him, be a contradiction. After this, you lay aside those
phantasms, and De Corp. p. 68.
grant a conception of boundless space. You likewise maintain that body and
space are not the same; and you conceive, though you do not assert, a Vacuum.


Mr. Hobbes. No man De Co^p. ib. Sect 2.
calls this phantasm, space, for being already filled, but because it may be
filled; nor does any man think bodies carry their places away with them, but
that the same space contains sometimes one, sometimes another body, which could
not be, if space should always accompany the body which is once in it. --
Place Ib c. 8 p. 77.
is immovable; for seeing that which is moved is understood to be carried from
place to place, if place were moved, it would also be carried from place to
place, so that one place must have another place, and that place another place*
and so on infinitely, which is ridiculous. And for the conceit of Vacuum, I say
Ib. p. 79. Sect. 9.
that though between two bodies there be put no other body, yet if there
intercede any imagined space, which may receive another body, then those bodies
are not contiguous. I suppose also P. 83. Sect. 19.
that a finite body, at rest, when all space besides is empty, will rest for
ever.


Stud. Be it so. From hence it may be collected, that you conceive of space, as
of something without your mind, into which you suppose no notion can come but
from some outward object. You conceive it as something, which does exist
betwixt two bodies, and hinders the contiguity of them: for bodies are not
therefore separated, because I so magine; but because they are not contiguous,
I have an imagination of their distance, and of something interceding. Seeing
also you must acknowledge, that this Vacuity may be conceived, greater or less,
you cannot imagine that as a mere nothing, which is capable of such affections.
You then by consequence (though in direct terms you will not grant it) conceive
this space as a phantasm of something; yet not of body, seeing you have said,
one body may relinquish and another possess the same immovable space; whereby
it follows, that you apprehend it as a phantasm o^ such a Being, as has
largeness and penetration appertaining to it. Extend then your conception of
this space indefinitely; and remember that you conceive the world without any
involution of body in body, placed in it; and that it may remain in your
imagination after you have by fiction destroyed the visible world; and that the
imagined space is such, as you cannot disimagine; and observe at last, whether
you have not attained in your own way, to some competency of fancying an
infinite immaterial Being. For my self I have been apt to think of space, as a
phantasm of body, really existing; and because I conceive this boundless
extention, by you supposed an iniquity, as dull and unactive, and understand
not how to deduce from it, or apply to it, the moral perfections which
appertain to the Idea of God; I therefore suspend my sentence. But the Argument
presses yourself, who distinguish the conceptions of space and body, beyond
the probability of a Rejoinder.

If you were much concerned for Authority, I would here suggest to you, that
St. Paul affirms of God, that in him we live and move; and that it is said by
Theophilus A^tiochenus, Ad Ant. l. 2 p. 81. (...).
as also by Tertullian (the Author whom you your self celebrate, that God Te^t.
adv. Prax. p. ^03. a. etc.
is the Place of all Beings But touching the particular explication of such
sayings, let every man abound in his own sense.

And now having spun out this first S^bject of our Discourse, (concerning the
Immateriality of God) into such an undesigned length, I remember no Conclusion
less improper for the winding of it up (if it may stand with your good liking)
than the Apostrophe of Arnobius, which may thus be rendered: Arn. l. 1. p. 17.
O thou greatest and chiefest Creator of invisible things! O thou invisible
Divinity, never to be comprehended by the scanty compass of created minds! Thou
art worthy, thou art truly worthy (if our unhallowed mouths may presume to
mention that transcendent worthiness) to receive from every understanding
nature, never-ceasing praise; to be petitioned throughout our lives, (too short
alas for such devotion) with the humblest prostrations; for thou art the First
Cause, the Place and Space of Things, the foundation of the Universe, infinite,
unbegotten, immortal, eternal, whom no corporeal Image can describe, no
circumscription can determine.

We have dwelt long on this first head; and it was necessary on my part to
pursue it with such a copiousness: for if this foundation of the corporeity of
all things had not been shaken, your superstructures would have become almost
inexpugnable by Philosophy. But this being rendered sandy and unsound, there
will be the less work and strength required to the demolishing of those; and so
in our proceeding, we may imitate (perhaps) the descent of heavy bodies, making
the more have, the further we go. I Am sure in our next Subject,

The holy Trinity; we cannot speak much, and well, it being a deep and revered
mystery.


Mr. Hobbes. That Doctrine is entangled in words, whereby there is little said
of it intelligibly. Hypostatical Lev. c. 5. p. 21.
is a name that signifies nothing, but is taken up, and learned by rote from
the canting Schoolmen. The Lev. c. 42 p. 268, 269
doctrine of the Trinity, as far as can be gathered directly from the
Scripture, is in substance, this, that the God who is always one and the same,
was the person represented by Moses; the person represented by his Son
incarnate; and the person represented by the Apostles. The true God Lev. c. 16.
p. 82.
may be personated; as he was, First, by Moses, who governed the Israelites,
(that were not his, but Gods people) not in his own name, with Hoc dicit Moses,
but in God^ name, with Hoc dicit Dominus. Secondly, by the Son of man, his own
Son, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, that came to reduce the Ie^s, and induce
all Nations into the Kingdom of his Father; no^ as of himself, but as sent from
his Father. And thirdly, by the holy Ghost, or Comforter, speaking and working
in the Apostles; which holy Ghost was a Comforter, that came not of himself,
but was sent, and proceeded from them both. It is pl^in from Lev. p. 210 214
215. that he means not a person by the H. G. but zeal. The voice of God in a
dream. Gifts; the power of God working by causes to us unknown.
Moses and the Priests, Lev. c. 33 ^. 204, 205
the Man Christ, and the Apostles, and the Successors to Apostolical power,
these three at several times did represent the person of God: Moses, and his
Successors the High Priests, and Kings of Judah, in the Old Testament; Christ
himself, in the time he lived on earth; and the Apostles and their Successo^s
from the day of Pentecost, to this day. God Lev. p. 266.
is one person as represented by Moses, and a^^o her person, as represented by
his Son the Christ: for Person being a relative to Representer, it is
consequent to plurality of representers, that there be a plurality of persons,
though of one and the same substance.


Stud. You surprise me here with such an explication of the Trinity, as has not
been invented by any Heretic of the unluckiest wit, for these sixteen hundred
years. And now I am guided after the manner of the multitude, whose curiosity
leads them to see the deformed births and misshapen effects of miscarrying
nature, rather than to contemplate the Masterpieces of the Creation: it is not
so much the goodness, as the prodigiousness of this novel doctrine, which
enticeth me to consider it. And in truth, this conception of a Trinity seems to
me more a Monster, than the head of Cerberus, (that is, death) it self; which
head would have been called fourfold, if the fourth part of the world (
America) had been then discovered: but this conception, as will by and by
appear, may multiply it self an hundred fold, and be rather a Century, than a
Trinity. There is also in it this inconvenience, that before the days of
Moses, you must affirm one only natural person to have been in the divine
nature.


Mr. Hobbes. There was but one from whence we may Lev. c. 42. p. 26^.
gather the reason, why those names, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in the
signification of the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament: for they are
Persons, that is, they have their names from representing, which could not be,
till diverse men had represented Gods Person, in ruling, or in directing under
him. Our Savior Lev. ^. 41 p. 266.
both in teaching and reigning, represents (as Moses did) the person of God,
which God, from that time forward, but not before, is called the Father.


Stud. Where is now your will to pay a reverence to the Law, by whose Authority
you are taught, in the first Article of the Church of England, that there be
three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity. But you will say, that
your Leviathan was published in those days Ann^ 1650.
when the King by your doctrine, was no King; when the Parliament having the
supreme strength, had for that very reason, (the reason which you give, and I
may consider in its assigned place) the sovereign Right, by which they
preferred their own Ordinances, and the Constitutions of the Assembly, to the
Canons and Articles of the Convocation. And indeed you have told us in that
Book, Lev. p. 238. and H. Cons. p. ^^.
that you submitted in all Questions* whereof the determination depends on
the Scriptures, to the interpretation of the Bible, authorized by the
Commonwealth, whose Subject you were:that is to say, to the Annotations of the
Assembly of Divines; wherein, no doubt, you might have read the Doctrine of an
eternal Trinity asserted, seeing in their shortest Catechism, it is not omitted.
But Law and Scripture (like the servants of an hard and selfish Master) are
used by you, whilst they have strength to serve your purpose; but when you
cannot work your design by them, they are cast off with utter neglect.

But to proceed; you your self, together with the Law, have affirmed Jesus to
be God-man; Lev. p. ^61. c. 45. O^ S^viou^ was a m^n, whom w^ also believe to
be G^d imm^r^al.
and Arrius granted to him a duration before the world; and Eusebius, who had
some favor for the Arrian Doctrine, supposes him often to have appeared
before, and under the times of the Law. And a very late Writer, who has not
feared, in his Rhapsodie of Ecclesiastic Stories, Sandius in Enuel. H^st Ecc.
l. 10. p. 229.
to deny the Eternal Godhead of Christ, has yet maintained it to he very
dangerous, to deny his Pre-existence. There were then (and it follows from the
sense of your own confession) at least two natural persons, of the Father and
of Christ, before this world was founded.

Further, if every one, representing the Person of God, in ruling or directing
under him, adds a person to the Godhead then may it be thence concluded, (as
Enjedinus speaks G. Enj^d. cont. Trin. p. 2.
in relation to Pope Alexander, who would infer three persons from the three
Attributes of Fecit, dixit, benedixit, at the beginning of Genesis) that there
are not only three, but six hundred. For all Civil Powers are Representatives
of the King of the Universe; and you your self affirm, that any Civil Sovereign
is Lieu-tenant of God, Lev. c. 1^ p. 89.
and represents his person. To speak with propriety, Moses was rather a
Mediator betwixt God and the People, who were under a Theocracy, and not a
Sovereign on earth. And Saul, who was appointed them in the place of God, whom,
in their unreasonable wishes, (out of an apish imitation of the Heathen Models)
they had deposed, seems the first Person representing God among the Jews. It is
also to be noted, that the Apostles were Representers, not strictly of Gods
Person* but of Christ God-man, from whom they received commission, in his name,
to teach and baptize, after all power was given to him. Wherefore the Bishop of
Rome has presumed to call himself, rather falsely than improperly, the servant
of the servants of God, and Vicar of Christ. But if you are not willing to
multiply Persons in the Godhead, by the number of Vicegerents, but choose to
understand this threefold representation of a threefold state of People,
under Moses, Christ, and the Apostles, (which yet is an evasion, not at all
suggested by you) even by this artifice, you will not find a back door open,
out of which you may escape. For besides that the Apostolical times are but the
continuation of the state begun by Christ, and that the Reign of Christ at his
second coming, will be a state perfectly new, we must remember, that there were
two states before the days of Moses; the one to be computed from Adam, who in
most eminent manner represented God, being appointed by him, Universal Monarch
of the Earth: the other, from the Revelation made to Abraham who may be said
the first person, with whom God made a formal Covenant, Sealed by the Rite of
Circumcision, and by Promises guarded from violation.

Again, whereas you have affirmed that the names of Father and Son, in the
signification of the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament, therein you
consulted not your Concordance. For seeing Christ is called the Son, in the
second Psalm, the cor-relative Father is as directly pointed out, as if the
very name had in Capital Letters been written down. Neither do I here create by
my Fancy (as is the manner of such, who deal in Allegories of Scripture) a
mystical sense; because the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Hebr. 1^5
has expounded the words of our blessed Lord, and not of David. Saint Matthew
likewise has made the same interpretation: if Justin Martyr was not deceived,
either by his memory, or by oral Tradition, or a spurious Copy; for in stead of
those words from Heaven, M^tth. 3 15
at the baptism of Jesus, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; he
has in two places, ^ust. Matt. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 316. and p. 331.
affirmed the voice to have been this, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee.


Mr Hobbes. Let us not labor any longer in Lev c. 32 p. 195.
a particular sifting of such mysteries as are not comprehensible, nor fall
under any rule of natural Science For it is with the mysteries of our Religion,
as with wholesome Pills for the sick, which swallowed whole, have the virtue to
cure; but chewed, are for the most part cast up again without effect.


Stud. The danger, in my opinion, arises not from the mastication of the
Physic, but from the indisposed Stomach and Palate of the Patient, to whose
health Religion conduces more, when it is relished by an uninfected Judgment,
in the particular accounts of it; than when it is taken in the lump by an
implicit faith which is a way agreeable, not to grown men, but to children in
understanding, whom we cannot satisfy, and must not distaste. But because you
seem not willing to intrude further into this mystery of the Godhead,
considered in its self and persons, (which yet, as you would make it, is no
more a mystery, than if his Majesty should be called one Sovereign with three
persons, being represented by three successive Lord Lieutenants of Ireland;)
let us descend to the consideration of the Godhead in its outward works; in
which perhaps we may have surer footing; seeing Philosophers, unassisted by
Revelation have discoursed much upon


Our third Head, the Creation of the World.
Mr. Hobbes. The questions about the magnitude of the World De Corp. c. 26. p.
306, 307. Sect. 1.
(whether it be finite or infinite) or concerning its duration, (whether it had
a beginning, or be eternal,) are not to be determined by Philosophers.
Whatsoever we know, that are men, we learn it from our phantasms; and of
infinite (whether magnitude or time) there is no phantasm at all; so that it is
impossible either for a man or any other creature, to have any conception of
infinite.


Stud. You prove not here, that a man can have no conception, but only that he
can have no image of an infinite Cause: whereas it has been already shown, and
may hereafter be ev^^ced from the immateriality of Man's Soul, that all
conception^ and Ideas, are not phantasms, or arise not from them. But whilst
you plead the difficulty of conceiving an eternal being in reference to the
Creation, you elsewhere De Corp. c. 8. p. 84 Sect. ^0.
admit of an Idea, difficult enough* for you can feign in your mind that a
point may swell to a great figure, such as that of Man (and this you say O^j.
10. p. ^01.
is the only Ide^ which we have at the naming of Creator) and that such a
figure may again contract it self into the narrowness of a point, hereby you
admit of a natural phantasm of Creation out of nothing, as also of
re-annihilation; for all the supposed points besides that first, which is just
commensurate to so much space, can neither arise out of that one, nor shrink
into it, and wherea^ you add that you cannot comprehend in your mind, how this
may po^^ibly be done in nature, De Corp. p. 84. ib.
of which before you pranted a phantasm which arises from real impulse, if all
be Body, it is as much, as if you had said, you can, and you cannot comprehend
it. And I cannot but here admire it in a man who pretends to a consistency with
himself, that you should allow the above said phantasm* and yet reprehend it as
principle void of sense, Enis. Ded. before six Less. p. 3.
and which a man at the first hearing, whether Geometrician or not Geometriciam
must abhor; (the which notwithstanding the learned Lord Bacon did embrace)
that the same Body without adding to it, or taking from it, is sometimes
greater and sometimes less. But to return to the conception of an eternal
Cause, though it be not possible to have an Image of God, yet it is easy by
the help of Reason, from the Images of things we see, to climb by degrees above
the visible World, to the eternal Creator of it. Curiosity or love of the
knowledge of Causes, does draw a man (as you will grant) Lev. c. 11. p. 51.
from consideration of the effect to seek the Cause; and again the cause of
that Cause, till of necessity he must come to this thought at last, that there
is some cause, whereof there is no former cause, but is Eternal, and is called
God.


Mr. Hobbes. Though De Corp. c 26. p. 307
a man may from some effect proceed to the immediate cause thereof, and from
that to a more remote Cause, and so ascend continually by right ratiocination
from cause to Cause; yet he will not be able to proceed eternally; but wearied
will at last give over, without knowing, whether it were possible for him to
proceed to an end, or not.


Stud. We are not, as you imagine, wearied in this assent of our Reason, upon
the several roundles of second causes to that which is eternal. for we pass
not through every single cause and effect; but like those who search their
pedigree no further, than their great great Grandfather, yet say, they at
first sprung from Adam; we view some more immediate causes and effects, and
consider that there is the like reason of dependency, in the rest and thence as
it were, leap forward unto the top of this Jacob's Ladder, and arrive a^ the
acknowledgment of an eternal, immovable Mover.


Mr. Hobbes. Though from this, that nothing can move it self, De Corp. c. 26 p.
307
it may rightly be inferred that there was some first eternal Movent; yet (...)
can never be inferred (though some use to make such inference) that that Movent
was eternally immovable, but rather eternally moved: for as it is true that
nothing is moved by it self, so is a^ true also, that nothing is moved, but by
that which is already moved.


Stud. Here you proceed not with such consistence and scrupulous ratiocination
as becomes a Philosopher: for if nothing be moved by it self, then to say an
eternal Mover is moved, is to say, that that Eternal is not Eternal: for there
is something presupposed to give it motion, and another thing foregoing and
causing that motion, and so on, in infinitum. Yet you acknowledge in your Book
Hum. Not. p. 13. Lev. c. 12.^3.
a first Power of all Powers: but at the present, your reasoning is connected
with your beloved notion o^ a corporeal Universe. For Matter can never move,
but by that which is moved, and so forward, not to an eternal Cause, but in an
endless Circle, which yet in some part must have had a beginning, for here the
question will return; how came the sluggish Matter, which cannot help it self,
to have motion at first imparted to it? if there were not an eternal
incorporeal self-moving mind; wherefore you are, again, involved in the
condemnation of the Epicureans, of whom Cicero, in his first De Finibus Cum i^
rerum natura duo sint quaerenda, unum, quae materia sit ex qua quaeque res
efficiatur; alterum, quoe vis sit, quae quidque efficiat; de materi^
disseruerunt Epicurei; vim and causa^ efficiendi reliquerunt
has left this pertinent observation. There being two things to be inquired
after in the nature of things, the one, what the Matter is out of which every
thing is made; the other, what is the force or motion which does every thing:
the Epicureans have reasoned concerning Matter, but the efficient Power is a
part of Philosophy which they have left untilled. So little of Reason in this
Article of the Creation, is on the side of some men, who would monopolize that
honorable name.


Mr. Hobbes. Natural Reason is not so much concerned in this question, because
De Corp. p. 307.
so much cannot be known, as may be sought, the question about the beginning of
the World is to be determined by those that are lawfully authorized to order
the worship of God, for as Almighty God when he had brought his People into
Iudaea, allowed the Priests the First Fruits reserved to himself; so when he
had delivered up the World to the disputations of men, it was his pleasure that
all opinions concerning the nature of infinite and eternal, known only to
himself, should (as the First Fruits of wisdom) be judged by those, whose
ministry they meant to use in the ordering of Religion. I cannot therefore
commend those that boast they have demonstrated by reasons drawn from natural
things, that the World had a beginning.


Stud. Where find you the Supreme Civil Magistrate (for him you mean) to be
constituted a Judge of true and false? then would the Truth be as inconstant,
as the Opinions of those Powers; who being thronged with employments, have of
all men, the least room left for speculation.

The Great Turk, who has made the Alcaron to be Law, has there affirmed, that
two verses in Surata Vaccae, ^p Hotting Bib^i-O^ient. p. 10^, 109.
were made by God Almighty, two thousand years before the World was framed and
written by his Finger; and all Christian Princes, who determine the Bible to be
the Word of God, have thereby determined, that such Stories are absurd Fables.
If you had so stated the Power of Princes, as to have ascribed a right to them,
not (as you now have done) of determining questions (that is, of resolving them
into true negations or affirmations) but of restraining the tongues or pens of
men, from venting what they esteem inconvenient for Society; I know few men of
my Order, who would with any vehemence have become your opposers, provided
always that this Power be meant of such Opinions, as subvert not natural or
Christian Religion: for it is as necessary at all times to profess such
Articles, as it is to make profession that we are not Atheists; the necessity
of which may hereafter be proved.


Mr. Hobbes. I have so done, as you require, I should; for in my Letter to Dr.
Wallis, H. Consid. p. 36.
since his Majesty's return, I have upon second thoughts restrained the
decision of Authority to the publication and not the inward belief of Doctrine.
I say, there that these opinions about the Creation, are to be judged by those
to whom God has committed the ordering of Religion; that is, to the Supreme
Governors of the Church; that is, in England to the King. By his Authority, I
say, it ought to be decided, (not what men shall think, but) what they shall
say in those questions.


Stud. In this question of the Creation, you seem too bountiful to Authority;
seeing by your own concession, the affirmative is a point so very fundamental,
that all natural Religion, if that be taken away, will fall to the ground; for
in the Epistle before mentioned, H. Cons. p. 34.
you doubt not to affirm, that, as for arguments from natural reason, no man
has hitherto brought any one, except the Creation, to prove a Deity, that had
not made it more doubtful to many men, than it was before. Wherefore it follows
that whilst you attribute unto the Civil Magistrate a Right of binding men, if
he shall so please, to profess this falsehood, that the World had no beginning;
you also ascribe unto the same Magistrate, a Right of banishing the Profession
of a Deity out of his Dominions.


Mr. Hobbes. Why do you H. Cons. p. 36.
style the King by the name of Magistrate? Do you find Magigistrate to signify
any where the person that has the Sovereign Power, and not every where the
Sovereigns Officers?


Stud. Although you are here guilty of an excursion, yet I am content to follow
you, not being ignorant how soon you are out of breath in pursuing any Game
started in Philology; And first, I will grant it to you, that if we have regard
to the nicest application of the Word, at some times amongst the Romans, it
will not so elegantly agree to the Supreme Power. For in the fourth Book of
Cicero (or rather Cornificius) ad Herennium, P. 2 9. Sect. 35. Senatus of
^icium est, consilio Civitatem juvare, Magistratus officium est, opera and
diligentia consequi voluntatem Senatus.
the Magistrate is said to be employed in the execution of such Decrees, as
were made Law by the Senate: And I have read in Varro, De Lingua Lat. l. 4. p.
15. Sect. 14.
that the Officers inferior to the Magister Populi or Dictator, and Magister
Equitum, were by way of diminution called Magistratus; as from Albus, Albatus:
and yet I am assured that Cicero sometimes used the Word Magistrate in such a
sense as derogates not at all from the super-eminence of things; for in his
third Book De Legibus Cic. l. 3. de Leg. p. 1^04.
we have this sentence; The Magistrate is a speaking Law, and the Law is a mute
Magistrate, and a while after, citing the words of the old Roman Law, he
styles the Consuls, Magistrates, and the Office, Magistracy: and yet he
shows, that the Consuls at first had Regal and Supreme Power.

But seeing Custom since the days of Cicero, has otherwise applied diverse
words; and seeing that from a diverse administration of affairs, and from new
inventions, and other causes, there have arisen new words also; those persons
who will precisely speak, with Cicero and the old Romans (every of whose words
and phrases, cannot be thought extant in the fragments now in our hands;) they
rather betray their own affectation, than declare themselves Masters of
Propriety of Language; whilst Castalio uses Iova, Tinctio, Genius, Sancte
colatur; in stead of Jehovah, Baptismus, Angelus, Sanctificetur (which word by
the favor of so great a Critic, is not avoided by Cic*
Cicero himself) he seems to study rather niceness, than true cleanness of
Latin. The word Magistrate is not forced, when it is used in expressing the
Supreme Power; for Magisterare in Festus De Verb fig. p. 308.
is glossed by Regere. Your own Champion Ter^ullian (who well knew how to
speak, with the Laws) interprets Tert. adv. Hermog. p. 240. Sect. 19.
(...) by Magistratus: and (...) denotes sometimes so great a Power, that it
is spoken of the very Prince Ephesians. 2.2. see Rev. 1.5.
of the Powers of the Air, that learned Person had in the above said place an
Eye to the Government of the Athenians, which after the succession of Kings
failed at the death of Codrus, was administered by Thirteen Magistrates called
(...), of which the first was Medon. Cavil not now at the number of these
Rulers; for how many soever the persons are in such a Senate, the Supreme
Authority Lev. p. 89 Man* or Assembly of m^n, having the Sovereignty.
is but one.

If you require modern Authority, the Testimony of Hugo Grotius is beyond just
exception, for he acknowledges, that Summus Magistratus Hugo Grot. de Imp. sum
Pot. circae sacra. p. 2. c. 1.
is used commonly in denoting the Sovereign Power; although he approves not of
it for exact Roman, and nice Latinity. Lastly, Magistrate is a word, in the
sense in which I use it, used also in the Law of King and Church, with which we
Englishmen are to speak, rather than with the Twelve Tables, or the Prince of
Orators. Recall then to your mind the thirty seventh Article of the Faith
pro^essed in England; that Article, though it consists in declaring the Power
of the King, in affairs both Civil and Ecclesiastical, yet bears the Tide, Of
the Civil Magistrate.

But I have busied my self too long in a nicety ^f words, which improve the
memory, but give not much advantage to the nobler faculty of reason. It is time
then, that we look back upon our main Subject, the Creation of the World. If
you have any further matter to deliver, in relation to that Subject, I am ready
to attend to you and it.


Mr. Hobbes. Something I have to say, but there is little coherence of it, with
our former discourse. I add however, (seeing you seem to have required
something more) that upon supposition of the Being of a God, it follows not
that he created the World. V. de Obj. 5. p. 97 in conclus.
Although it were Obj. 10. p 101. De Corp. c. 26. p. 307. Whether we suppose
the World to be finite, or infinite, no absurdity w^ll follow.
demonstrated, that a Being infinite, independent, omnipotent, did exist; yet
could it not rightly be thence inferred, that a Creator does exist also. Unless
a man should think, that because there is a Being, which we believe to have
created all things, therefore the World was created by Him.


Stud. Seeing dependent nature is so far removed from a power of making, that
it cannot so much as move it self, but will, if once moved, be without
impediment in perpetual motion; and arre^ always, if once at rest, without
fresh impulse from some neighboring body; we must of necessity have recourse to
a Creator: and because we suppose already in the Idea of God, such infinit^
^ower, as excludes the like power from all things else; it cannot but follow,
that there being a World He was the Maker of it. Seeing by the Hypothesis, the
impotent World exists, and an infinite power also; who else can be imagined
this Omnipotent Architect?

This absurd Assertion puts me in mind of Heraclitus, who having denied that
any of the Gods were Creators, subjoyned also, that neither had any man created
the world; fearing (says Plutarch, in a dry jest) lest after he had overthrown
the power of the Deities, we might suspect some mortal man had been the Author
of such a Masterpiece. The like consequence is natural from the attribute of
divine wisdom, which being infinite, can appertain but to one Essence. If then
the world be m^de in number, and weight, and measure, it is demonstrable from
thence, both that there is Mirab. Pecci. p. 8. Laudamusque tu^s, Aeterne
G^ometer, A^tes.
an eternal Geometer, as also that if such a one existeth, the world, which
could not so frame it self, was his Artifice And doubtless, the disposition of
the parts of the greater world, and even the economy of the parts of the
lesser, that of man, implying most wise designs, do necessarily infer (
Gassendus himself Gass. in l 10 Diog. Laert. p. 696.
confessing it) the Being of a Creator. We need not search further, than to
some one particular Note in the situation of the heart, which is a kind of Box
containing many wonders one within another. It is to be observed, D. Lower de
Motu cordis. p. 2, 3.
that in man, and in almost all such Animals as live of flesh, that the
situation of the heart is not in the center, but in the superior part of the
Body, that it may the more readily convey to the head a due portion of blood.
For seeing that the trajection and distribution of the blood, depends wholly
upon the Systole of the heart, and that the liquor cast forth, does not so
easily ascend, as it flows into vessels parallel or inferior; if the seat of the
heart were more removed from the head, the head would be rendered impotent for
want of blood, unless the heart were framed with a far greater strength,
whereby it might, with more potent violence, force up its liquor. But in such
Animals, whose neck is extended by nature, as it were, on purpose to meet their
provisions, the heart is placed without any prejudice, in the center; because
the head being frequently pendulous, the blood runs to it in a wide and daily
supplied Channel. Go now (that I may bespeak you in the way of Gassendus) Gass.
ubi sup^a. I nunc, and dic ^asu id sactum, quod non potuit sapientius sieri.
and applaud your wit, in saying that that was done by chance, which could not
have been more wisely contrived.


Mr. Hobbes. In this Argument, I my self, in my Book de Homine, have not denied
the frame of nature to argue design; and I have there spoken to this purpose.


Stud. Please to spare the Translation of the place, for there is (as I
remember) a conceit in the words, which will be lost in English.


Mr. Hobbes. Mock on; I am not ashamed of the words; and they are these: De
Ho^. c. 1 p 4.
Ad sensus procedo: satis habens, si hujusmodi res attigero tantum, planius
autem tract andas aliis reliquero; qui si machinas omnes tum Generationis tum
Nutritionis satis perspexerint, nec tamen eas a Mente aliqui conditas
ordinatasque ad sua quasque officia viderine, ipsi profecto sine Mente esse
censendi sunt.


Stud. Seeing thus much is acknowledged from you, in reference to the Body; how
great may that conviction be (of the existence of a Creator) which arises from
the consideration of Souls and Angels; whilst Thought is much more admirable
than motion, and incorporeal spirit, than matter.


Mr. Hobbes. Incorporeal Substance is Answ. to Pref. to Gondibert p. 87.
a note which you shake too too often; and here, with much absurdity: For, to
say, Lev. c. 34 p. 214.
an Angel or Spirit is an incorporeal substance, is to say, in effect, there is
no Angel or Spirit at all. The Universe Lev c. 34 p. 207.
being the aggregate of all bodies, there is no real part thereof that is not
also body. The substance of invisible Agents Lev. c. 12 p. 53.
is by some conceived, to be the same with that which appears in a dream, or
in a looking-glass, to them that are awake. But the opinion, that such Spirits
were incorporeal, could never enter into the mind of any man by nature:
However, that name will serve our purpose, for the Introduction of the


Fourth Head of our Discourse, The Nature of Angels.
Stud. To requite your Quibble; that Note of Incorporeal Angel ought not to
have offended your purged ^ars, seeing the old Philosophers thence derived the
harmony of the celestial Orbs. But to be in good earnest; you seem, by denying
Intelligencies or Incorporeal Angels, not only to contend with those despised
Philosophers, but to encounter almost the whole world.


Mr. Hobbes. It is true, Hum. na^. c. 11. p. 13^ ^39.
that the Heathens, and all Nations of the World, have acknowledged that there
be Spirits, which for the most part they hold to be Incorporeal; whereby it
might be thought, that a man by natural reason may arrive, without the
Scriptures, to the knowledge of this, that Spirits are; but the erroneous
collection thereof by the Heathens may proceed from the ignorance of the Causes
of Ghosts and Phantasms, and such other apparitions: that is to say, Hum. not.
p. 138. Sect. 5.
from the ignorance of what those things are, which are called Spectra, Images
that appe^r in the dark to children, and such as have strong fears, and other
strange imaginations.

By Lev. c 34 p. 211, 212
the name of Angel, is signified generally a Messenger; and most often, a
Messenger of God; and by a Messenger of God, is signified any thing that makes
known his extraordinary presence; that is to say, the extraordinary
manifestation of his Power, especially by a Dream, or Vision.

That Angels are Spirits, is often repeated in Scripture; but by the name of
Spirit, is signified both in Scripture, and vulgarly, both amongst Jews and
Gentiles, sometimes thin bodies, as the Air, the Wind, the Spirits vital, and
animal, of living Creatures; and sometimes the Images that rise in the fancy in
Dreams and Visions, which are not real substances, nor last any longer, than
the dream or vision they appear in; which Apparitions, though no real
substances, but accidents of the brain; yet when God raises them
supernaturally, to signify his will, they are not unproperly termed Gods
Messengers, that is to say, his Angels.

And as the Gentiles did vulgarly conceive the imagery of the brain, for things
really subsistent without them, and not dependent on the fancy, and out of them
framed their opinions of Demons, good and evil; which because they seemed to
subsist really, they called substances; and because they could not feel them
with their hands, incorporeal. So also the Jews upon the same ground, without
any thing in the Old Testament that constrained them thereunto, had generally
an opinion (except the Sect of the Sadducees) that those Apparitions (which it
pleased God sometimes to produce in the fancy of men, for his own service, and
therefore called them his Angels) were substances not dependent on the fancy,
but permanent Creatures of God; whereof those which they thought were good to
them, they esteemed the Angels of God, and those they thought would hurt them,
they called evil Angels, or evil Spirits; such as was the Spirit of Python, and
the Spirits of mad men, of Lunaticks and Epilepticks: for they esteemed such as
were troubled with such diseases, Daemoniacks.

But if we consider the places of the Old Testament, where Angels are
mentioned, we shall find, that in most of them, there can nothing else be
understood by the word, Angel, but some Image, raised (supernaturally) in the
fancy, to signify the presence of God, in the execution of some supernatural
work; and therefore in the rest, where their nature is not expressed, it may be
understood in the same manner. Concerning Spirits, Hum. not. p. 136.
which some call incorporeal, and some corporeal, it is not possible, by
natural means only, to come to knowledge of so much, as that there are such
things.


Stud. Touching the incorporeal nature of Angels, I will evince the necessity
of it, by proving (when we come to examine the nature of man's Soul) that matter
is not capable of Cogitation. At present, I will consider your two Assertion
now delivered; that the existence of Angels, as permanent substances, is not to
be collected from natural Reason; and that the Writings of the Old Testament
speak not in favor of such Doctrine.

Concerning the first, it is wont to be said, that strange presages of mind,
and warnings in dreams; wonderful effects in men snatched away, and mountains
and buildings removed and demolished, by power invisible; real apparitions to
many men at once; predictions of Oracles; confessions and exploits of Wizards,
and Witches, do by natural argumentation, prove the existence of Angels: as
also that these are apt instruments, to beget terror in the minds of wicked
men, in order to their speedy reformation.


Mr. Hobbes. I know, that from fear Lev. c. 6. p. 26.
of Power invisible, feigned by the mind, or imagined from Tales publicly
allowed, arises Religion; not allowed, Superstition.


Stud. If these be mere Tales, the public allowance of them cannot make them
to become Religion. For God, being infinitely powerful and wise, refuses to
be served by the effects of solly and ignorance; neither stands he in need of
pious frauds and stratagems, wherewith to bring to pass his holy designs; for
they are arguments of impotency in those who use them, and the truths of
Religion appear most genuine, when there is due trial made of them, by exposing
them to the light. But if these things which I have mentioned, be Tales and
Fables, (all thoughts of which do often shake the higher Powers, who are said
to feign them) then the faith, almost of mankind, is called in question; and
the most knowing persons are accused of eredulity or imposture. These Stories
have not been merely believed by children, and short sighted people, but by
Socrates, Plotinus, Synesius, Dion, Josephus, Pomponatius, Cardan, and (his
Transcriber) Caesar Vanine, and diverse others, not idiots in Philosophy, nor
yet some of them zealots in Religion. Cardan, a man who would speak liberally
of himself, not dissembling his very follies and vices, has, in his Life
written by his own hand, Card. d^ vita prop. c. 47 p. 262.
spent an whole Chapter, in discoursing about his good Genius; and therein he
insisteth upon such evidences, as made it manifest to him that his Imagination
did not impose upon him. He also foretold Thuan* ad Ann. 1576. p. 136.
the year, and day of his death; which, because some will not allow to have
been done by skill, they have said, that by starving his body, he effected it,
becoming a self-destroyer, to gain the reputation of a Prophet. If there may
exist such Inhabitants of the air, (and there is nothing in nature, which does
hinder such Beings, more than it does the existence of understanding creatures
upon earth; and there is reason enough to persuade us that all Regions of the
Universe are some way peopled) why should it then seem incredible, that they
sometimes bestow a Visit upon mortal men. Were all Body and Matter, the air, as
well as earth might be folded into shapes, which think, and direct their
motions at pleasure. Although some Stories are hatch^d in Chimney-corners, or
in the disturbed imaginations of fearful people, and are told by such as love
to hear themselves talk, and to be believed, and are of easy confutation; it
follows not thence, (though it be the common reason) that all are fables.
Then, as is usually said, all Histories would be condemned, because there is
such a vast crowd of Romances, which multiply with the number of idle and
sensual persons; and your Thucydides would fall into the dis-repute of Amadis
de Gaul. I could tell of one, who wearing good Clothes, and denying the
existence of real Wizards and Witches before vulgar Judges, and by staying in
his Chamber from Church, procured, amongst the people, the esteem due to a man
of a shrewd headpiece, and one that saw behind the Curtain; though I am well
confirmed, that his ignorance was the Mother, and his laziness the Nurse of his
in-devotion.


Mr. Hobbes. Necromancy, Witchcraft, charming, and conjuring, (the Liturgy
Lev. p. 54.
of Witches) is but L^v. c. 12. p. 56.
juggling, and confederate knavery. The Priests Ibid more at la^ge.
at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, were Impostors; the Leaves of the Sybils, (the
Fragments of which seem to be the invention of later times) and the Prophesies
of Nostradamus, are from the same Forge.


Stud. For the Sybils, the learned D. Blondel has not ineffectually cast away
his studies, in relation to my self. Concerning Oracles, although I underst^nd
by diverse Authors, and particularly by your Thucydides, See Thucyd. p. 68, 77,
82, 113, etc.
that they gave some Answers dubious, and others false, and diverse true, but
such as a prudent man might have returned, out of deep insight into civil
affairs; yet, without a suspicion of ancient Historians, too uncharitable, I
cannot prevail upon my mind to think, that the Priests had no assistance from
Demons. I know not what other judgment to make of the Answer, which the
Pythia H^rod. Clio. p. 39.
gave to Craesus; an instance, to which you cannot be a stranger. He inquired
at Delphos, touching the proper means for the loosning the tongue of that
beloved Son of his, who was apt for every thing, besides speech. The Pythia
returned answer, that there was no great reason for his solicitousness about
the dumbness of the Child, seeing when he should first speak, the hour would be
unhappy to his Father. The event was agreeable to the prediction, his Son first
crying out, when Sardis being taken, Craesus was ready to fall by the
inglorious hand of a common Persian. I could, if you required it, produce
strange Instances, in times not so remote from our own; a good while after the
coming of our Lord; notwithstanding that you have asserted, Lev. c. 12. p. 59.
that in the planting of the Christian Religion, the Oracles ceased in all
parts of the Roman Empire. Marcellinus would have un-deceiv^d you; and even
Julian the Apostate, who in his works, is frequent in the mention of present
Oracles; and particularly, in an Epistle to Maximus the Cynic, Jul. Ap^st. op.
p. 181. Epist. 38.
(which being private, and to a Philosopher does argue, that he wrote as he
believed) He there tells Maximus, (who was brought into some danger under
Constantius) that he had consulted the Gods concerning his estate, being far
distant from him, and solicitous for his welfare; and that he could not do it,
in person, but by others, not be able to hear immediately, as he suspected, ill
tidings of his Friend: as likewise, that the Oracle had returned answer, that
the Philosopher was in some trouble, but not pressed with such extremity, as
gives unnatural counsel.

Touching Michel Nostradamus, Physician in Ordinary to Henry the Second of
France, I have read his Centuries, with very little edification. Yet, when I
remember, that in sixty six, I beheld London in the Flames, I know not how to
despise that Stanza of his, Cent. 2. p. 20 Quart. 51. Le sang du just a
Londres fera fault, Bruslez par foudres de vingt trois les ^tx, etc.
which, if it has not satisfied our reason, I Am sure it has astonished the
imaginations of many. But whether he spoke the words, and we contrived the
sense, I leave under debate. But be these things as they will; this I am enough
confirmed in, that such, as publicly deny Witchcraft, are saucy affronters of
the Law, and therefore, for their opinion, which rather establishes
irreligion, than subverts the faith, they ought to be chastised from those
Chairs of Justice, which they have reproachfully stained with the blood of many
innocent and mis-perswaded people.


Mr. Hobbes. As for Witches, Lev. c. 2* p. 7.
I think not that their Witchcraft is any real power; but yet that they are
justly punished for the belief they have, that they can do such mischief,
joined with their purpose to do it, if they can.


Stud. I have heard it elsewhere said, Dram. Poes. p. 4.
that our Witches are justly hanged, because they think themselves so; and
suffer deservedly for believing they did mischief, because they mean it.

But methinks, that Law were to be accused of unreasonable severity, which
should take away the life of those, knowingly and deliberately, who before they
make confession of their inefficacious malice, are in no sort hurtful to the
Commonwealth, which is not concerned in our thoughts; and when they make
confession, not of any evil practices, but of their delusions of distempered
fancy, appear to be possessed with madness rather, than a Demon, and ought
rather to be provided for in Bedlam, than executed at Tyburn. But could we
grant it to be a piece of justice; yet would that evasion be too thin to
shelter those from the censure of the Law, who (as I think) do most insolently
revile it, by denying all real confederacy with Demons. For the Statute of
King James, 1 Ja. c 12.
whom you somewhere honor with the attribute of most wise, Lev. c. 19 p. 101.
condemns to death only such Authors of Enchantment and Witchcraft, as are
convicted of real effects: And it is not felony without Clergy, (though it be
imprisonment, with shame of the Pillory) to attempt to tell of stolen goods,
or to destroy or hurt man's body by Conjuration. The Statute also mentions the
making Covenants with some evil and wicked Spirit, as a practice granted and
notorious.

But passing from the Law of our Sovereign, to that of Moses, let us

Secondly, Consider, Whether thereby you are not also condemned, in the Article
of the permanent substances of Angels.

It is thought by learned men, that Moses and the Prophets had so conspicuously
taught the Being of Angels, See Episcop. Just. Th^ol. l 4. c. 2. p. 347.
that the very Sadducees denied not absolutely the existence of such Spirits,
but their natural Being and duration, conceiving, by their appearing and
disappearing on a sudden, that God had created them, upon account of some
extraordinary Embassy, and the service being done, reduced them to their first
nothing.

The Old Testament describes Angels by such Offices, of standing before the
Throne of God, and ministering perpetually to the Favorites of God, See Dan. 7
10. Ps. 34 7. Ps. 68.17. Ps. 91.11, 12. comp. with Mat. 4.6. and Luk 4.10.
as show, at once, their unfancied existence, and their permanency. It were a
voluminous labor, to write each Authority in the old Law; and it were also a
superfluous one, seeing the bare instances of Lot and Abraham are so pregnant
with evidence, that no reason can overthrow it, though a boisterous impudence
may turn it aside.


Mr. Hobbes. Why Lev. c. 34 p. 212.
may not the Angels that appeared to Lot Genesis 19.
-- be understood of Images of men, supernaturally formed in the fancy? -- That
Lev c. 36 p. 227.
to Abraham, was also of the same nature, an Apparition.


Stud. The Angels sent to Lot were not mere Phantasms, for the Texts seems as
much an historical Relation, as any pas^age in the Acts and Monuments of Gods
Church; the very History of the Passion scarce excepted. And in truth you have
bidden very fair toward a fantastical Cross, by affirming our Savior to have
been Lev. c. 45. p. 354.
tempted in a Vision. Were that true, it would be but a faint encouragement,
which the Author to the Hebrews Heb 2.18.
thought a sufficient motive to animate our hopes in the day of the spiritual
battle; to consider with our selves that our Savior imagined himself to be
tempted, and therefore will succor us that are really tempted. Scultetus In
delic. Evang.
was See Deuteronomy. 22*8.
betrayed into this error by his mistake of the Greek word rendered a Pinnacle;
having read, it seems, in Josephus, that the Pinacles of the Temple were so
very sharp, as not to sustain a bird without piercing its feet. Whereas (...),
signified a Battlement of the Temple, a support easy and sufficient; on which
Saint James the Just was placed, and thence by the violence of bloody men, was
thrown down headlong. And for your self, you fell into this conceit, by being
ignorant, or by not considering Lev. ib. --. No Mo^ntain high enough to show
him one whole Hemisphere
that (...) does often signify, not the whole World, but the Land of
Palestine, the whole glory of which might, as in a mapp be seen, in the places,
at and about Jerusalem. But to return (if this be a digression from our
business in hand) to the Instance of Lot. It is to be noted that not only Lot,
but all his Family, and likewise diverse of the impure Sodomites, at the same
time, beheld the Angels. There were also such effects, concomitant and
remaining (such as were amongst the rest, Striving and Blindness) as do
manifest that the Angels were real, and substantial Messengers. But if it shall
be said, that this whole affair was acted, merely in the scene of Imagination;
it will thence follow, by a cons^quence bold and impure, as the very sin of
Sodom, that God Almighty infused into the Sodomites such bewitching Images, as
were proper to enkindle in them unnatural Lusts, and then condemned them to
their darkness for pursuing such Fancies as were his own Offspring.

The Angels that appeared to Abraham, out-went the power of Fancy, feasting
themselves upon real food, and not being entertained as at an Imaginary Banquet
of Witches.

Now, for the New Testament, to collect the sev^ral places, were with Samson,
to multiply heaps upon heaps. That diverse mentioned under the name of
Daemoniacks, in the Scripture, were men disturbed by Melancholy, and possessed
with the ^alling-sickness, is not denied by me; and has been publicly
asserted Mr. Mede book 1. s. 37, 38, 39. fol.
* long since, by a very eminent Divine, but to conclude that all were such, is
to do violence to the holy Text, and our own Reason in the interpretation of
it; and thereby to render our selves as mad as the persons we discourse of. It
sounds untowardly to say, that Epilepsies and Phrensies s. Mat. 8 28, to 32.
should beg leave of Christ to go into swine; and being cast out or cured,
(that is annihilated, as such, by the change of figure and motion in the
vessels, blood, and humors) should after this, be able to enter into the herd,
and to hurry them into swift destruction.

Yet, of Possessions there may be room for scruple in many cases; and Galen
mentions a Disease, under the horrid name of (...), as I have learnt from Peter
Martyr, in his Discourse upon the Mela^choly of Saul. But touching the
existence of Angels, there is no place left for the Sceptick, in the Gospel.

The Disciples Mat. 1^*26;
seeing our blessed Lord, when he walked upon the Sea, supposed him to be an
Angel. They would not hereby mean a Phantasm, because he was seen by many of
them at the same time, whose differing fancies and motions of brain, cannot be
reasonably supposed in this juncture, to have conspired. And therefore I cannot
commend that interpretation of Episcopius Episcop. Inst. Theol. p. 347.
, which he made upon a passage in St. Luke Luke 24*33, 34.
; conceiving that Christ, surprising the Disciples after his Resurrection, was
judged, at first, by them a mere spectre, and not a spiritual essence; it being
utterly improbable that the same Spectre, or Phantasm should arise, at the same
time, in the brains of all the eleven, without some outward object dispensing
its influence to them all.

Go now, and say, that the Apostles were not men of so clear an apprehension,
in this matter, as your self, being smutted with the dark doctrine - of
Daemonologie amongst the Greeks. But what evasion is sufficient, when you read
the History of the Deliverance of St. Peter? Concerning whom the Spirit of God
affirms expressly Act. 12.9 And he went out and followed him, and wist not
that it was true which was done by the Angel; but thought he saw a visiou.
that it was done, not in a Vision, but by the real efficacy of an Angel,
commissioned by God.


Mr. H^bbes. Considering L^v. c. 34 p. 214.
the signification of the word Ang^l, in the Old Testament, and the nature of
Dreams and Visions that happen to men by the ordinary way of nature; I was
inclined to this opinion, that Angels were nothing but supernatural Apparitions
of the fancy, raised by the special and extraordinary operation of God, thereby
to make his presence and commandments known to Mankind, and chiefly to his own
People. But the many places of the New Testament, and ou^ Saviors own words,
and in such Texts, wherein is no suspicion of corruption of the Scripture, have
extorted from my feeble reason, an acknowledgment, and belief, that there be
also Angels substantial, and permanent. But to believe they be in no place,
that is to say, no where; that is to say, nothing; as they (though indirectly)
say, that will have them incorporeal; cannot by Scripture be evinced. I add
also ^ev. p. 211
that concerning the Creation of Angels, there is nothing delivered in the
Scriptures.


Stud. The Scriptures affirm of Angels, that they are permanent Substances;
they also make them inferior to God; and they ascribe to God the creating of
all things, besides himself; and therefore, by apparent consequence, they
affirm of Angels, that they were created. If an express testimony be required,
the Jews will tell you, that Moses (of whose secret Cabal they think themselves
the chief) understood those words of his, especially of Angels, when he said of
God, that In the Beginning he created the Heavens. But the words of St. Paul
have seemed to me, of more easy and particular application. Christ (said Col.
1.15 16.
that great Doctor of the Gentiles) is the Image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every creature; for by him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones
or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers: all things were created by Him, and
for Him. These words must be interpreted of Men and Angels, from the importance
of the phrase in other places of St. Paul Ephesians. 1*20, 21. comp. with Hebr.
1.3, 4, etc. to the end.
, and from the mention of procured reconciliation or recapitulation which
appertains not to the other parts of the upper or lower World Col. 1.20
.

If any man here replieth, that because our Savior took not hold of Angels,
became not God incarnate to reduce them, and by his blood to soften and loose
their Adamantine chains; it seems, therefore, absurd to apply this Text to
those invisible Orders: he may be satish'd by taking notice of the proper
signification of (...), in that verse; and this will be best done, by observing
the agreement betwixt this Chapter, and the first to the Ephesians; of which
Epistle this to the Colossians is said, by Crellius Crell. com. in Ep. ad Col.
p. 528.
and some others, to be a Compendious Rehearsal. The seventh verse of the first
to the Ephesians, answers to the fourteenth of the first to the Colossians;
and the tenth of the first, to the sixteenth and twentieth of the other Gr^t.
in 1. Ephesians. 10. Certe ut pleraque Epistolae ad Coloss. cum bac Epist.
congruant, ita and l^cur iste (Col. 1.1^.) bu^c incem adferre and vicissim ab
eo lucem mutuari videtur.
. We are then to observe that (...), in the Epistle to the Colossians, is the
same with (...), in that to the Ephesians. And Ireneus Iren. l. 1. c. 1. p. 16.
citing that, amongst other Texts in the first to the Colossians, uses this
second, and not that first Greek word, Now (...), signified first a sum of
Money, and afterward was applied to any Collection. And we speak not
improperly when we say, A general recapitulates his dispersed Soldiers into a
Troop. So that hereby is set forth that Sovereignty over Men and Angels, which
was acquired by the Death, Resurrection and Ascension, of the Captain of our
Salvation, to whom, as Head and Lord, the whole body of them is referred; and
under whom they shall not contend as of old the Angels of Persia and Graecia
are said to have done.


Mr. Hobbes. For Angels, be they permanent, created, substances, be they what
they will; this I am sure of, that I have no Idea of them. When I think of an
Angel, Object. 5. p. ^7.
sometimes the Image of Flame, sometimes of a beautiful Cupid with wings, comes
into my fancy; which Image, I am confident, is not the similitude of an Angel;
and therefore is not the Idea of it. But Credens. elegantly.
believing that they are certain Creatures ministering to God, invisible and
immaterial; we Imponimus, elegantly.
impose upon the thing believed or supposed the name of Angels; whilst in the
mean time, the Idea under which I imagine an Angel, is compounded of the Ideas
of visible things.


Stud. You here again are blindly fallen into the old mistake of an Idea for an
Image. If we suppose an Angel to be an understanding Essence, either not united
vitally to matter, or only to the purest Ether, and conceive it employed in
such offices as are in Scripture ascribed to it, we have a competent notion of
it, and that is an Idea.

But of these invisible Powers above us, methinks we have spoken largely
enough, considering their nature, as also the season of the night; if we pursue
our Subject much longer, the morning will break in and affright away the Ghosts
we talk of. When Goddess, Thou lifts up thy wakened head
Out of the Morning's Purple bed,
Thy Quire of Birds about thee play;
And all the joyful World salutes the rising Day.
The Ghosts, and monster-spirits, that did presume
A Body's Privilege to assume,
Vanish again invisibly,
And Bodies gain ag^n their visibility.


So said the best of English Poets, in his Hymn. to Light Mr. Cowl^y, p. 36, 37.
.


Mr. Hobbes. A Poet may talk of Ghosts; but I Am sorry you think that we have
been seriously discoursing about them; for then, it seems, we have talked about
nothing. It is not well that we render spirits, by the word Ghosts Lev. c. 34
p. 210.
which signifies nothing, neither in heaven, nor earth, but the imaginary
inhabitants of man's brain.


Stud. Gast, or Geast, whence Ghost is a good old English word, and signifies
the same with spirit; and I could produce Verstegan Versteg. Ant. and Prop. of
the Anc. English Tongue, p. 220.
to avouch it. The word is good, and the Poetry excellent; and since I am
fallen upon it, I think it will not be amiss, if we unbend a little, and
refresh and smooth our spirits with some Poetic numbers, and dismiss our
severer Reasonings 'till the morrow. And now, it comes into my mind, that I
have about me, your Verses o^ the P^ak, which are most agreeable to the place
and circumstances, in which we have been; and in r^peating which, I might be
satisfied concerning some expressions, and particularly that of -- ( ninos sibi
concolor Author Fallat).


Mr. H^bbes. For Mr. H. S^gmai. p. 14.
my Verses of the Peak, they are as ill in my opinion, as I believe they are in
any man's; and made long since -- I will by no means hear them.


Stud. Then let us get on the other side of our Curtains, without any Epilogue
at all; for I begin to be as heavy as if the Mines of this Shire had a powerful
influence upon me. I would have been glad to have diverted the humor a little
with something pleasant, that we might have concluded, as the Italians advise,
Con la bocca dolce. But I will force none of my humor upon you. Sir, I return
you thanks for your Conversation; and I wish you, most heartily, a good night.


Mr. Hobbes. Sir, Concl^s. of Mr. H. of lib. and necess. p. 80
praying God to prosper you, I take leave of you, and am your humble Servant.


The End of the First Dialogue.
The Second Dialogue.
Art. 5. Concerning the Soul of Man.
Stud. A Good morrow to you, Mr. Hobbes, I hope you slept well, since I parted
from you, notwithstanding the heat of our Disputation.


Mr. Hobbes. Very well; as quietly as if I had been rocked by one of those good
Genii, which we spoke of, a little before we took our leaves.


Stud. I thank God, I slept so soundly, that the passed time is esteemed by me
^ong, upon no other account, than that it has kept me some hours, from
debating such further matters in Philosophy and Religion, as we at first
propounded.


Mr. Hobbes. Let us then delay no longer, but enter immediately upon our second
Conference.


Stud. I am ready to wait upon you, and setting aside the time of sleep as
nothing, to connect this part of our life with that, wherein we were awake,
conferring about Angels; and because we said as much as we intended upon that
Subject, let us descend to the

Fifth Article, which concerns those Beings next in order, the Souls of Men; of
them I would gladly hear your thoughts, seeing it is a matter which relates, so
closely to the greatest interest of man.


Mr. Hobbes. By the Soul, I mean Leviat: cap. 46. p. 373. Soul or Life.
the Life of Man; and Life it self is but motion, Lev. p. 29
so that the Soul or Life Lev. p. 1.
is but a motion of Limbs, the beginning whereof is in some principal part
within.


Stud. By this means you will make of Man an excellent piece of Clock-work;
which though you have been hammering out, more than thirty years, may methinks,
(like the artificial man of Albertus Magnus) be broken in sunder in a moment. I
know that you may set the wheels of your machin a going; but what is there
within, that shall understand when it goes well or ill, or feel and number the
repeated strokes? You mean surely, by your description the mechanism of the
Body set on work, and not the Soul perceiving its operations.


Mr. Hobbes. Perception or Imagination Obj. 4. p. 96.
depends (as I think) upon the motion of Corporeal Organs; and so the Mind will
be nothing else but a motion in certain parts of an Organized Body.


Stud. If you can clearly and distinctly both explain and prove that which you
have now proposed in gross, you shall then be esteemed that great Apollo, whom
every one that has feigned any singular Hypothesis, does in the absence of good
Neighbors, boast himself to be.


Mr. Hobbes. Before I undertake this, I will remove out of your way that
prejudice which you may have against the notion of the Soul as consisting in
Life, by proving most effectually to an Ecclesiastic, that the Scripture
gives countenance to my definition. The Soul Leviat. c. 44. page 339, 340.
in Scripture signifies always, either the life, or the living creature; and
the Body and Soul jointly, the body alive. In the first day of the Creation,
God said, Let the Waters produce Reptile animae viventis; The creeping thing
that has in it a living soul: the English translate it, That has life: And
again, God created Whales, Et omnem animam viventem: which in the English is,
Every living creature. And likewise of Man, God made him of the dust of the
Earth, and breathed in his face the breath of life; Et factus est homo in
animam viventem; that is, And man was made a living creature. And after Noah
came out of the Ark, God says, He will no more smite, Omnem animam viventem;
that is, Every living creature. And Deuteronomy. 12.23. Eat not the blood, for the
blood is the soul; that is, the Life. From which places, if by Soul were meant
a substance incorporeal, with an existence separated from the body, it might
as well be inferred of any other living Creatures, as of Man. --


Stud. To argue from one sense of an equivocal word to the universal acceptance
of it, becomes not a man of ordinary parts. Nephesh, Soul (as well as Ruach,
Spirit) is a word of various signification in the Old Testament; and in many
places it denotes See Maimon. more, Nev. pa. 1. c. 41. page 59.
will, lust, or pleasure. We read in the Psalms Psalm 105.22. and Psalm. 27 1^.
See Ier. 8.15. Judge. 1.10.16, etc.
this phrase -- To bind his Princes Benaphscho, according to his soul, or, at
his pleasure: And again, Deliver me not Benephesch, unto the soul, or will of
mine Enemies. When the word is improperly attributed to God in Scripture, this
usually is the sense of it. You would now esteem me absurd enough, if I went
about to infer from hence, either that the essence of the Soul consists in
Will and Pleasure, or that the Deity had a Soul, that is Life, that is Motion:
The Soul being the spring of bodily life in man, it might by an easy
Metonymie, be used (as in the recited places) in expressing Life. In that place
where the Blood is called the Soul or Life; it was not the design of Moses to
set forth Philosophically, the inward essence of a Beast; but to let the people
understand, that the blood of a Beast, which was sprinkled upon the Altar,
being an emblem of the life of Man forfeited through disobedience, and an
instrument in expiation, they should abstain out of reverence, to that Mystery,
from a rude quaffing and devouring of it.

But what answer have you in readiness to those places, where the Scripture
speaks distinctly of Body and Soul?


Mr. Hobbes. Body and Soul is no more than Body and Life, or Body alive. In
those places of the New Testament Lev. c. 44 p. 340.
, where it is said, that any man shall be cast body and soul into hellfire; it
is no more than body and life, that is to say, they shall be cast alive into
the perpetual fire of Gehenna.


Stud. Your Gloss is extremely wide of the unwrested meaning of the holy Text.
For our Savior Mat. 10.28.
counsels his Apostles not to fear them that can kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul; making a manifest distinction thereby betwixt the Soul
and the Life of the Body; for if the Soul were nothing but the Life of the
body; it were in the power of every man to kill our Souls, unto whose sword and
malice our lives lay do open. And thus you see, instead of removing truth,
which in me you call a prejudice, you have laid a stumbling block in the way,
an occasion of falling into error.

But let us leave the explication of Scripture, in which you are for the
greater part unhappy* and attempt the explication of the exalted mechanism of
Living Man, wherein you have labored so many years, and concerning which you
have raised the expectations of many.


Mr. Hobbes. The cause of Sense Lev. p. 3^
, is the external body, or object, which presses the organ proper to each
sense; either immediately as in the Taste and Touch; or mediately as in Seeing,
Hearing and Smelling; which pressure by the mediation of nerves, and other
strings, and membranes of the body, continued inwards to the brain and heart,
causes there a resistance, or counter-pressure, or endeavor of the heart to
deliver it self; which endeavor because outward, seems to be some matter
without; and the seeming or fancy, is that which men call Sense.


Stud. You do not here at all surprise me, as if some new Philosophy (for the
main, not heard of, in former ages) had, to your immortal renown, been first
discovered by you. For it has been said of old, that, All variety in bodies
arises from motion; and that Sensation is a perception of that manner in which
impressing bodies affect us. For Aristotle Ar. de An. l. 3. c. 2. (...).
has recited an ancient saying of Philosophers, who holding that Phanta^ms
were not the things themselves, but only in our Senses, expressed their opinion
by asserting, that there was no blackness, without Sight, nor without Taste.
And Descartes in his Meteors, published in French together with his Method
Dioptriques, and Geometry, as soon as I was born A Leyde, 1637. la Diopt. p. 5,
etc. les Meteor. Disc. prem. p. 161 162.
, explained the nature of Colors, light, and vision, otherwise than by
intentional Species; and told us that by cold and heat, are to understood
perceptions occasioned by the less or more vehement touch of little bodies upon
the capillaments of the nerves which serve in our organs to that purpose. Yet I
am not tired in hearing such Hypotheses repeated or varied; please then to
proceed, and if it likes you, particularly in the explication of the nature of
Vision, wherein the Doctrine of Phantasms is most concerned.


Mr. Hobbes. In every great Hum. not. p. 11, etc.
agitation or concussion of the brain (as it happens from a stroke,
especially if the stroke be upon the Eye) whereby the Optick-nerve suffers
any great violence, there appears before the Eyes a certain light, which
light is nothing without but an apparition only; all that is real, being the
concussion of motion of the parts of that nerve; from which experience we may
conclude that apparition of light is really nothing but motion within -- and
image and color is but an apparition to us of that motion, agitation, or
alteration which the object works in the brain, or spirits, or some internal
substance in the head.


Stud. This exposition of Light by the crouding of the parts, though it be not
wholly to be rejected, yet may it (I think) be rendered suspicious for a time,
by that which deserves, at least, the name of a puzzling Objection. Let us then
suppose unto our selves, such a circumference as is surrounded with Eyes: for
in every point of enlightened space, and at all times there may be Vision. I say
then, that the part in the Center being equally crowded on all sides, no motion
or pressure can be thence conveyed Diametrically, from Eye to Eye; which is
against the Hypothesis mentioned. This Scruple concerns also the Philosophy
of Descartes; against whose Globuli, in Vision, there has likewise of late,
been this Exception made. They have been supposed, in a right line, to move
after the manner of Jack-wheels, the one from East to West moving the next from
West to East: from whence it has been concluded that the motion being thus
disturbed, the knowledge of the Object cannot distinctly be attained to by the
endeavor of the last Globulus. But, to on it what he himself, has written
Meteor* c. 8. p. 28^. to 285.
concerning the Collateral Globuli; I observe, that the Globuli are so exactly
turned, that they touch but in a point, in the right line of them, and that
therefore, according to Mechanic Laws, the Motion from the first Globulus is
conv^igh'd directly through the Center of the second, and so in succession,
'till it has described such a right line as is required in Vision, without
other variation in the pressure, than out ward impediments shall occasion. But
not to digress too much, or to conjure up such Objections as we cannot easily
dismiss by Solution; let us attend to what is plain. And first, to speak more
generally, to me it is plain, that all this while you have described the
Apparatus for Sensation, and not the inward Substance which has a faculty to
perceive that it has been variously pressed by Objects. Aristotle De A^. l. 3.
c. 8.
enquiring how the first principles of Knowledge should be Images; does cut in
sunde^ rather than untie the knot, by saying, that in truth they are no^
Phantasms, yet not without them. And Descartes, supposing Beasts without a
Soul, does therefore, notwithstanding the curious workmanship of their Machin,
not much in^erior unto Man's, deny that they have Perception; but only move, as
the Dove of Archytas, or the Eagle of Regiomontanus. I enquire, then, not after
the instruments of Sensation, but the Substance perceiving: Neither do I, yet,
understand, after all your words about it, what is properly sense?


Mr. Hobbes. Sense De corp. c. 25. page 292.
is a Phantasm, made by the Re-action and endeavor outward in the Organ of
Sense, caused by an endeavor inwards from the Object, remaining for some time
more or less.


Stud. There is not only excited in the Brain an appearance of the Object, but
also a Perception of that Image or appearance; as all, who have their Senses,
find by daily experience. If Impressions were, not only Instruments, but acts
of Sense; might we not strongly argue, that a Looking-glass saw, and a Lute
heard?

But, to descend unto particulars; I will endeavor to make it evident, that
neither Sense, nor Imagination, nor Memory, no^ Reason, nor Will, can ever
become the results of moving and rebounding Matter* without the presence of an
Immaterial Mind.

First, Sensation is not made, neither can it be, by the mere re-action of
Matter. It would thence follow, That every part of the World, being capable of
moving and rebounding, is also, so often as there is this counter-pr^ssure
sensible. Then the springs of all Engines. the Elastic air, resisted wind, and
an echoed v^ice, are so many perceiving Essences; and it is an act, almost of
as great unmercifulness though not of so great detriment to the Commonwealth^
to knock a nail as a man on the head; for either nail or hammer would ex^reamly
smart for it.


Mr. H^bbes. I know, De corp. p. ^93.
there have been Philosophers, and those learned men, who have maintained that
all Bodies are endued with Sense. Nor can I see how they can be refuted, if the
nature of Sense be placed in Re-action only. And, though by the Re-action of
Bodies inanimate a Phantasm might be made, it would nevertheless cease, as soon
as ever the Object were removed. For, unless those Bodies had Organs, (as
living Creatures have^ fit for the retaining of such Motion as is made in them,
their Sense would be such, as that they should never remember the same. And
therefore this has nothing to do with that sense which is the Subject of my
Discourse.


Stud. If this be good Doctrine; we must, ^bove most persecuted M^n, pity the
Hammer or Anvil of Vulc^n; they being, for the most part* tormented by repeated
Strokes. But let this ludicrous Argument give place to more sober Reasoning.
Consider then, that Corporeal motion, in all things (as in water) aris^th not
further in its effects than the Springhead of its own causal Energy.


Mr. Hobbes, It is Lev. p. 3.
confessed, that Motion produces nothing but Motion.


Stud. Then the part counter-pressed, being still only moved, it does not
perceive either that, or how, it self is moved, unless Motion be the perceiving
of it self, and the apprehending of M^tion, and of all the varieties of Motion;
which is a phrase of greater insignificancy than any you have not^d amongst the
Aristot^lians or School-Doctors In whatsoever Matters we are at difference, I Am
sure we are of the same judgment in this, That a Body at rest, Se^ de Corp. p.
15* Lev. p. 4.
will always be at rest, unless there be some other body, which by getting into
its place, suffers it no longer to remain at rest. So that Matter, in its own
nature, is thoroughly dull and stupid; and in receiving Motion it is merely
passive; for a Body, when moved, only suffers it self to be crowded from a
first place to a second.


Mr. Hobbes. In that also, we differ not; for De Corp. c. 8. Art. 10. and also
p. 150. de Corp.
Motion is, by me defined, to be the continual privation of one place and
acquisition of another.


Stud. How then does passive Matter, by being crowded more slowly or swiftly,
containing in its own Idea only impenetrable extention, obtain an infused
power, from that Motion, to perceive that it is crowded, and in what degree;
and thereby also, to have an active Conc^ption of the Varieties in Nature?

But what av^ileth Rebounding to the very Act of Sense? ^or to have Re-action
is no more than for passive Matter to be thrust first forward, and then
backward. And why then, may not the part which is crowded forward, perceive as
well in proceeding from one term in a right line, as in receding from the other
term? the difference not consisting in any Physical causality, but in relation,
or respect to diverse Terms? The purest parts of the Blood thrust forward to the
spinal Marrow, have the same virtue imparted to them; as, when they are beaten
backward toward the Retina, in relation to the Object of Sight; if we suppose
their force unbroken and unaltered. The difference is resp^ctive, as in the way
which leads from Cambridge to London, the way is the same; and the Hackney
coming to Cambridge, may be almost, as well imagined to be wiser, when he is
whipped and spurred back toward London, as that a part of the Matter thrust
from the influence of the Object into the Brain, may be thought more to
p^rceive in its return to the Optick-nerve, than in its direct course Hum. not
p. ^4. The Interior Coat of the Eye is nothing else, but a piece of the
Optick-nerve; and therefore the Motion is still thereby continued into the
Brain; and by resistance or re-action o^ the Brain, is also a rebound into the
Optic* nerve again, which we not conceiving it as such, call Light.


The like Arguments are to be used against Fancy or Imagination, as a material
attribute; it being but a Perception of Phantasms, (especia^ly in Vision) when
the Object is removed. H^re we must say again, that, A perceiving of an Image,
and a perceiving that it still dwells with us; and a perceiving that we
perceive it; that is to say, a feeling of a motion, and a knowing that we feel
it, and in what manner, in the Organs of Sense; is not the Motion it self which
we perceive we feel: and yet, Motion is all that is introduced into the
Senseless, Un^ctive, Matter, and not any new Principle capable of perceiving
Motion. For Motion, as was granted, begets nothing but Motion. You h^ve
somewhere Hum. ^at. p. 13.
said, That Color is but an Apparition to Us, of that Motion, Agitation or
Alteration, which the Object works in the Brain or Spirits, or some Internal
substance in the head: should you proceed and say, That such Motion, Agitation
or Alteration, in the part, is the Sense or Fancy perceiving that Motion,
Agitation, or Alteration, that is, it self, (which yet is your Opinion in
varied Terms) you would surely grate the Ears of the veriest Ass in Nature.

And here the Argument is of stronger conviction, than in sense. For if a part
of Matter moved, perceives not that Motion, when the O^ject presses by an
immediate influence; much le^s is it capable of so Doing, when Motion in the
Spirits, or Nerve, or Membrane, is subject in short time to languish, and to
lose its degree of swistness, or its determination, by the Encounters of fresh
Pressures from without, or endeavors from within, which are numerous and
almost perpetual.

Farther; you have admitted of the feigned conceit of Vacuum in nature; which
you apprehend not as a Phantasm of subtle Matter extended, but conceive a
perfectly void space between two Bodies. Of this, you can have no Sensation,
because there is no Object to press into the Brain. You have no proper
Imagination of it; for, of Nothing there is no Image. But you have an Idea, or
Perception, or in your own word, a Phantasm of it: This Phantasm (by an
Argument ad hominem) overthrows the opinion of Imagining, or Fancying Matter,
whilst it arises from the Negation or Privation of it. But that which is of
greater strength, is a Reason taken from the disproportion of some Images to
the Material Sentient, and the manner how the Image conveigheth it self to the
perceiving Matter. We have within us, an Image of the Sun, about two foot in
Diameter: were the whole Head the Imagining Subject, it would be no more
capable of so wide an Image, than a common Wafer is, of the Broad-Seal.
Besides, we may consider, that in the Sentient-Body, each part of it has either
the appearance of the whole Image, or of a Part. If, of the whole, then seeing
every part of Body is Body, and the smallest atom we can see is resolved
further into its parts, and those into their parts without end; it will follow
thence, that we shall have an appearance not of one only Sun, Sun, but of more,
perhaps, than we have, of fixed Stars in the widest and clearest view of the
Face of Heaven. If of a part, then w^ perceive no whole Image, or entire
Apparen^^; but have as many singular Perceptions broken and divided, as parts
in the Image or Percipient: If in any part of the Percipient, all the
Impressions are united; then are the parts of the Image confounded by so doing;
and the parts o^ the Percipient by communicating their Motion have lost all
their Sense: neither is there a part which has not Parts; so still the Image
will be infinitely multiplied, or not entirely seen.

The next Faculty, is that of Remembrance, which is not to be ranked amongst
Mechanical Powers. I ^^quire then, what Faculty perceiving the Image in the
Brain, perceives also that the Object is removed; and how many hours it has
b^^n absent; and when there aris^th a like p^^ssure from the same Object,
discerns that such a pressure was formerly made?


Mr. Hobbes. By De corp. c. 25. p. 290.
what Sense (say you) shall we take notice of Sense? I answer by S^ns^ it self,
namely, by the Memory which for some time remains in us of things sensible,
though they themselves pass away: for he that perceives that he has perceived,
remembers.


Stud. I understand that there may remain a quivering in the Retina,
Choroeides, and whole Pia Matter, or in the Spirits, after the Object of Sight
is removed, whose presence occasioned a more stiff Pressure. We see the like
in extended and moved Nets and Ropes, and a thousand other Examples in Art and
Nature: but this trembling in them, as also in such Machins where the Motion
may be more entirely and longer imprisoned, does soon vanish. Whereas the
Re-action must remain extremely long, in such Men (for Instance), who at the
seventieth year remember most perfectly, and will repeat with pleasure the
passages of their School-play; even those who retain not the things more newly
passed. To tell how this can be explained by the mere Mechanism of the Brain,
which has received many millions of changes in it self, and Reactions
occasioned from the Objects of every Hour, requires a more skilful Oedipus than
has yet pretended to unriddle the Secrets of Humane Nature. But if we suppose
the Motion remaining in the Brain (which you call Memory), there is no
satisfaction given to the Question: in which, proceeding further, we demand, By
what Power do you perceive this remaining Motion as formerly, caused, and now
continuing? for to say, That the Motion of the Brain is Perception of that
Motion; and that Motion remaining, is the Perception of remaining Motion; and
that decaying is a perception of the remaining yet decaying Motion; and that
this decaying Motion is a Perception that it was a brisker Vibration in time
past; (whilst all these Motions suppose a faculty pre-existing, or newly
produced and apprehensive of them; which, being the issue of Motion cannot be
more apprehensive than its Parent) to say all this, is to pile up absurd
speeches unto the very height of Nonsense; and I have done them too much
honor, whilst I have taken such frequent notice of them.

I again inquire of you, Whether Sense and Imagination, and Memory, being
Motions Phantasms, perish, or are transformed as an impression upon the stamp
of new Arms, when the rebounded Motion perishes, as to the Brain; or is
altered there?


Mr. Hobbes. Phantasms De corp. c. 25. p. 291. S. 1.
or Ideas, are not always the same; but new ones appear to us, and old ones
vanish, according as we apply our Organs of Sense, now to one Object, now to
another; wherefore they are generated and perish. And from hence it is
manifest, that they are some change or mutation in the Sentient. Now all
mutation, or alteration is Motion, or Endeavor; and Endeavor also is Motion,
in the Internal parts of the thing that is altered.


Stud. If then, Motion cease, Memory also vanishes away.


Mr. Hobbes. It is confessed. And I have said already, That unless Bodies had
Organs (as living Creatures have) fit for the retaining of such Motion as is
made in them, their Sense would be such as that they should never remember the
same.


Stud. If then, Oblivion seizes on us, that is to say, in your sense and
phrase, if the Motion be removed from the Sentient; when the Organ is again
moved by the same Object, there arises a new Motion, and a new Sensation, but
no Remembrance that we were formerly thus moved; because the S^ntient has only
had Motion as it had at first; the old is perished* We find by common
experience, that when something has escaped our M^mory for many years;
(suppose, the name of a Person in Story), we turn our Dictionaries, we chime
over all Syllables we can think of; we use all endeavors to rubb up (as we
say) our Memories, and perhaps in vain.


Mr. Hobbes. This is Re-conning. And our thoughts run Lev. p. 10
, in the same mann^r, as one would sweep a room to find a Jewel; or as a
Spaniel ranges the field, 'till he find a scent; or as a Man should run over
the Alphabet, to start a rhyme.


Stud. This business of the Brain is set on work, by the Will or Desire, and so
far from being caused by Mechanic impulse, that it is occasioned by a
Privation, or, in your way, by the missing of parts.

But, to connect my Discourse to those words wherein you interrupted me; when,
after all rubbings up of Memory, we despair of finding this much-sought Name,
a^ la^t, p^rhaps by accidence we espy it on a Monument, or Medal, or in a Book;
or hear it, o^ something of like sound with it, pronounced by another;
straightway there a^iseth in us not only ^ P^rception of this Name, by this new
Motion which is the whole Mechanic causality; but also a knowledge that this
was the g^oat we swept for, the Name sought after; and a rej^ycing in the
discovery. The sound was not able to produce in us any other Image than we held
of old, when we first read or heard the word; by what token then could it be
known to be the lost Name found, if M^mory be performed without an Immaterial
Soul?

Having mentioned Ob^^vion, I will go on, by showing, that, according to your
Principles, almost every thing would be as deeply, and as soon forgotten, as I
wish your Doctrines were concerning God, and his Angels, and the Sou^s of Men.

Attend then to the meaning of Heraclitus, who was wont to say, That no Man
bathed twice in the same River; and of a Modern Physician who has told us,
That no Man sits down the same to a second Meal. The Spirits, which with the
greatest reason, are supposed to be most the Soul, and to rebound (because it
is not so proper to say, That the Nerves and Membranes rebound from the Spinal
Marrow ^o the plexus retiformis) are always shifting postures and places, and
many of them transpire daily, whilst new parts of the Blood are exalted and
conveyed into their room. In Children the Organs are changed by accession of
Parts; and in all, in the space perhaps of less than seven years, the whole
Sentient, whatsoever it is, is, for the main vanished, 'though the Texture be
alike, as was the form of Structure in the Ship of Theseus. How then, (as
Raimundus Martini, argues Raim. Mart. pug* ^idei. par. 1 c. 4. p. 165 Ipsu
^sse illum quoque nunc, qui fuit tunc, est ^ir^nissima mentis ejus conceptio:
bujusmodi ergo essentia ejus non est complexio, quae ab ill^ tempore forsitan
est plus quam millesies permutata.
Can any person (...) him^^l^, after seventy years, to be individually the
same, it he be not endued with a Spiritual and Incorruptible Soul, which
remains the same entirely throughout that space; but consists only of a
Body in Motion, with perpetual flux of Parts? Or by what fetch or wit can it b^
explaned, how the new add^d Matter, by new pressure can remember what was
perceived by the former, whose Motion is scattered with it sel^? If we should
suppose the P^rts to remain, and yet the Motion to h^v^ p^rished, it is all one
to them, when they are moved by a fresh impulse, as if they never had been
moved but at that time. Now that the Motion p^risheth daily in effect, that is,
that (...) far varieth in its degrees and determinations, as not to be in
capacity of repr^senting the Object as it did in its unchanged condition, will
I think be concluded by premises, by your self, laid down. Do you not then, not
only ascribe to the several Senses, proper Organs, and in them proper parts
which have animation; but also affirm the Heart to be the common seat of Sense?


Mr. Hobbes. The Heart De Corp. c. 25 S. 10 p. 301.
is a common Organ to all the Senses; whereas that which reaches from the Eye
to the roots of the Nerves, is proper only to sight. The proper Organ o^
Hearing is the Tympanum of the Ear, and its own N^rve, from which to the Heart
the Organ is common. In the proper Organs of Smell and Taste are nervous
Membranes; in the Palate and Tongue, for the Taste; and in the Nostrils, for
the Smell; and from the roots of those Nerves to the Heart, all is common.
Lastly, the proper Organ of Touch are Nerves and Membranes dispersed through
the whole Body; which Membranes are derived from the root of the Nerves. And
all things else belonging alike to all the Senses seem to be administered by the
Arteries, and not by the Nerves.


Stud. The Spirits, then moved in Vision by the Object, return by
counter-pressure to the Retina, and from thence by such Arteries as you make
conjecture of Ibid ad init.
, unto the Heart, the source of Spirits.


Mr. Hobbes. Conceptions Hum. not. c. 7. p. 69.
and apparitions (which are nothing really but Motion in some Internal Substance
of the Head) stop not there; but the Motion proceeds to the Heart. And as in
sense Lev. p. 25 ^. 6.
that which is really within us, is only Motion but in appearance; to the Sight,
light and color; to the Ear, sound, etc. -- So when the action of the Object
is continued from the Eyes, Ears, and other Organs to the Heart; the real
effect, there, is nothing but Motion or Endeavor; which consists in
Appetite, or Aversion, to or from, the Object moving. But the appearance or
sense of that Motion, is that we either call delight, or trouble of Mind.


Stud. It is then, impossible to remember, seeing the Motion, in passing to the
heart, and in being in the heart, whilst it is dilated in receiving blood from
the Vena Cava, and contracted in forcing what is received into the Habit of the
Body, (for the vulgar Systole is the Diastole of the Heart, and vice versa)
must needs be either communicated to other parts already in Motion, or
increased by the receipt of Motion from such infinite parts of blood justling
with it, or at least, varied once and again in its determinations, rebounding
often from diverse terms: wherefore it must be supposed to perish; not properly
indeed, seeing no Motion is lost any other way than money is said to be lost
when it passes from one Gamster to another, but to all the intents and
purposes of representing the Object; which, to awaken a new Sensation, must
come into the Brain by a new Impulse. So that Motion in the Blood, from the
Impression of an outward Object, is like that of water, by a stone cast in; it
is propagated from one circle to another, 'till at length it passes
undiscerned into a foreign subject.

But it is time to hasten our pace in the present Controversy. In which, I
could not, to say truth, have been very brief, if I had but made a short
rehearsal of the very heads of such Arguments as overthrow the Doctrine of
Thinking Matter.

Let us then, pass by these lower powers of Sense, and Fancy, and Memory; and
consider the more advanced faculty of Reason; and here we shall perceive, by
the manner of Mental working, that Reason is a power superior to Imagination,
and much more to all the causality of corporeal pressure. For (as Descartes
Medit. 6. p. 36.
has, with acuteness, and truth, observed) we otherwise think of or understand
a Triangle, and a figure of a thousand Angles. When we think of a Triangle, we
not only understand a figure comprehended by three lines, but also we have a
Perception, or Image of those three lines in our Brain; and that is
Imagination. But when we think of a Figure of a thousand Angles, we as
perfectly, by our Reason understand, that it consists of a thousand sides, as
we perceive the other to consist of three; but we cannot imagine those thousand
Sides and Angles after the same manner that we did the three; that is, behold
them as distinctly pictured in our Brain, as present in a Phantasm. And
although, by reason of the custom which we have gotten of imagining something
as often as there is mention made of a corporeal subject, we may perhaps
represent to our selves some confused figure at the hearing the foresaid figure
named; yet it is plain, that this is not the image of a figure of a thousand
sides and Angles, because it is in nothing differing from that Image of a
Figure which should represent to my self, in thinking of a Figure with a myriad
of Sides and Angles, or of any other of very many Sides; neither does it
conduce at all to the understanding of those proprieties whereby a figure of a
thousand Angles differs from other very Polygonous Figures.

Again, to proceed in order, I will endeavor to make it evident, beyond all
just exception, that the power of Reasoning, in the acts of simple
Appreh^nsion, of connecting simple notions into a Proposition, of deriving
consequences from premised propositions, is not the mere result of the moved
Mechanism of Man's Body.

First, In the Acts of simple Apprehension, our Reason, exercised in Notions
purely Logical, or Metaphysical, has Ideas which are estranged from all
Corporeal Matter. For they are not conceptions of single Beings, but of the
manner how we conceive of them our selves, or declare our conceptions unto
others. Thus every Youth will tell us, within few days after Matriculation,
That Homo is Species.


Mr. Hobbes. The Universality Hum. not. p. 48, 49.
of one Name to many Things, has been the cause that Men think the Things are
themselves universal; and so seriously contend, that besides Peter and John,
and all the rest of the Men that are, have been, or shall be in the World,
there is yet something else that we call Man, viz. Man in general; deceiving
themselves, by taking the universal or general appellation, for the thing it
signifies: For, if one should desire the Painter to make him the Picture of a
Man; which is as much as to say, of a Man in general; he means no more but
that the Painter should choose what Man he pleases to draw, which must needs be
some of them that are, or have been, or may be; none of which are universal:
But when he would have him to draw the Picture of the King, or any particular
person; he limiteth the Painter to that one person he chooses.


Stud. I affirm not, that there is such an existing Being as Man in general;
yet that, there is such an abstracted notion of Man, or Manhood, all
Circumstances of Individuation laid aside, is manifest; seeing it is not a true
and proper Predication to say, a Man is Socrates: and therefore the notion
reaches beyond a singular; and therefore is not an impulse from Sense, whose
Objects are all singular. And because a Painter cannot make the Picture of
Human Nature, but only of a Human Person; i^ follows that such a Notion is
not Pictured in the Fancy. Besides, when we say, a Man is a Species; we
represent not to our selves (properly in Logic) Human Nature, but the manner
whereby our Mind conceives of it, whilst it takes notice that it agrees to
Peter and Paul, and Thomas, and every single Man that has been, or is, or shall
be produced: For to be Species is not said of Man alone, but of every common
Nature. And, this also you might have known more than 6ty years ago in
Magdalen-hall in Ox^. It is a shame therefore, for you, to upbraid the Schools,
of nonsense and deceit; into which, if you had entered with apprehension, this
backdoor to Atheism had never bin set open by you.

Further, To take you a short lesson out of Ramus, a Man who understood the
Mathematics, and yet despised not, though he reformed Logic: The Invention of
Arguments, shows Reason to be above the Laws of Matter. For, the Arguments in
his first part of Logic; (that is, Topics apt to argue or declare the
relation of one thing to another; as ( Virgil in the fourth Aeneid, says, Fear
does argue degenerate Minds) such as are Cause, Effect, Subject, Adjunct, and
the like; being used here, not to find out the nature of single Beings (which
appertains to Natural Philosophy, Medics, and other Sciences) nor to interpret
Names (which appertains to Grammar) but only as places declaring the mutual
(...) or habitudes of one thing to another, which may be related diverse ways;
they cannot possibly arise from the single and absolute motions of sense.
Wonder not, now, that I am so busy in the first Elements of Logic, seeing
your own misconceit about the art of Reasoning, is a manifest relapse into the
Ignorance of a second Childhood, and shows a necessity of your returning to
Oxford anew.

Again, if we consider Reason in the framing of Propositions, we find that we
connect and disjoyn Subjects and Predicates, we compare and refer them; we say,
this appertains to the other, or it does not; it is equal to it, or unequal;
like, or unlike; which being acts of Relation, cannot wholly arise from any
thing pressing into the Brain from without, which must be some single and
absolute Object; but from the mere efficacy of an Incorporeal mind. It is
impossible that the Sentient by mere Motion should connect or compare one Image
with another. For, a diverse Phantasm is a diverse Motion; and supposing they
remain, the Motion is in a diverse part: seeing, the Phantasms or diverse Motions
would be confounded, if in the same part of the Brain, they should conspire. If
then there be one Phantasm in one part, and a second in another, by what
imaginable power can they confer? For, if any part gives its Motion to the
other, or receives from it; the Motion, that is the Phantasm of it, is, by so
doing, changed. I may here subjoyn, that, without the Anticipation of
Propositions in the mind, it is a difficult matter to understand, how we can be
capable of Sense or Fancy, unless we first know what it is to know, and have
some antecedent rules whereby to judge of received Images.

Last of all, in deriving Consequences, in longer or shorter trains of
coherence, reason shows it self to be an immaterial faculty: For if two Images
cannot, as has bin proved, be aptly connected by Imagination and Memory,
supposed Mechanical; Reason, surely, which ranketh all Beings into their
distinct Orders and Dependencies; and connecteth myriads of such Ideas as have
no Phantasm appertaining to them, must be divine. Images and Thoughts are
produced in us in much disorder, by reason that the Objects which we converse
with are many and diverse; and because, our Studies vary upon infinite
occasions: so that our thoughts at first do spring up one by one, as Jewels are
found. It is, then, the work of Reason to recall and gather together all such
of them as are of the same kind, and to lay aside the rest for a convenient
season; and to judge further of their agreeableness, and how they depend upon
and illustrate each other, and so as it were to string them into a long and
nervous coherence; a chain most fit to adorn a Philosopher. I know not, how a
Phantasm, or moved part in the Brain, can receive any other into mutual
dependence, which the force of the antecedent or consequent Objects adds not to
it. For that which is in Motion acts not at a distance, but presses only its
neighbor; and that, by way of pulsion, not attraction.

Again, Reason, by the drawing of diverse Consequences, corrects Sense; which,
though it does not properly deceive, (being such a Perception as naturally
arises from such a pressure, and such a disposed Organ) yet would it leave us
for ever in Ignorance, if our Reason did not convince us, that the Object is
not adequately represented by the Image. In Sense, Imagination, or Memory, one
of the fixed Stars seems not bigger than that in the Badg of the Order of the
Garter: the Image is no greater, the Motion of no further force; and therefore
Reason, which by consequences in Astronomy, infers that it is bigger than the
Earth, is something much superior to Motion derived from the Object.

If after all this, a Man shall say, that the very train of Corporeal Motions
in the Head, is the Reason which judges of that train, disturbeth its
dependence made by succession of Objects, disposes it after a new manner, and
also at pleasure orders the train of Logical Ideas not generated by Motion;
it may sooner be resolved concerning such a saying, than about the
Perpendicular and Circle in the Angle of Contact (touching which you think you
have written Ep. ded. before 6. Less. p. 4. D. W's. Treatises de Aug. Cont and
Arith Infin I have in two or three leaves wholly and clearly con^uted.
shrewd matters) that it does not merely incline to, but is co incident with
nonsense.


Mr. Hobbes. Here is a great deal said, and Mr. H. Consid. p. 60.
too much to be confuted. yet almost every saying may be disproved, or ought to
be reprehended. In sum; It is all error and railing.

But what will you say, O^j. 4. p. 96.
if perhaps Ratiocination be nothing but the coupling and concatenation of
Names, by the Verb Est? whence we collect by reason, nothing at all of the
Nature of things, but of their Appellations, to wit, whether we join the Names
of things according to the Agreements which we made (at pleasure) about their
signification, or whether we do otherwise. If this be so, as so it may be,
Ratiocination may depend upon Names, Names upon Imagination, and Imagination,
perhaps, as I think, upon the motion of Corporeal Organs; and so, still, the
Soul will be nothing else besides agitation in certain parts of a well framed
Body. Nay, It is plain Hum. not. p. 49.
that there is nothing universal but Names. And Reason Lev. c. 5. p. 18.
is nothing but reckoning of the Consequences of general Names agreed upon, to
certain purposes.


Stud. Let Descartes Resp. 3. p. 96.
answer this Objection, to whom you once proposed it. There is (said he) in
Ratiocination; a coupling not of Names, but of things signified by certain
Names; and I admire how the contrary could enter into the mind of any Man: For,
who doubts that a Frenchman and a German do reason the same things concerning
the same Subjects, whilst they conceive their Notions in different Words or
Names? And does not this Philosopher condemn himself, whilst he speaks
concerning Pacts which we made at pleasure, teaching the signification of
Words? for if he admits that any thing is signified by Words, why will not
he have our Ratiocination consist in that something which is signified, rather
than in the bare Words themselves. Thus he, and (as I think) with unanswerable
pertinence. It might be also said, that, by this Doctrine, an Ass, and a
Dumb-man, are equally without Reason, and that a Parrot is endued with it.


Mr. Hobbes. There Lev. c. 4. p. 16.
is no Reasoning without speech. By Hum. not. p. 46.
the advantage of Names it is that we are capable of Science; which Beasts for
want of them, are not, nor Man, without the use of them.


Stud. Where is your Reason in these words, considering the ingeniousness of
diverse Dumbmen, excelling that of many who are loudly talkative? Names
doubtless, though connected, are not Reason, but the Registers of our Thoughts
and Reasonings; and we proceed from Mental to Verbal discourse; and when we
have conceived a Book, we may, express to the World, the sense of it, in what
language we please, if we be Masters of it. The use of Names causes rather a
readiness in Reasoning than begets Reason; and, I think, you somewhere, in
your Leviathan Lev. p. 12 in the end, and p. 14.
do confess it. So that I may say of Names, as you have done of Symbols in
Geometry, that themselves are not Science Ep. ded. bef. ^ Less.
but serve only to make men go faster about, in Reasoning; as greater wind to a
windmill.

Well, I have talked my self into a necessity of drinking this untempting Ale.
Sir, A good Health to you.


Mr. Hobbes. Your Servant, Sir, -- that Liquor is not very proper for
Philosophers.


Stud. This very Draught has put me in mind of an Objection, which makes me
extremely to dislike the Doctrine of Mechanic Ratiocination.

This muddy Ale, it seems, shall in some part of it, circle with the Blood, and
be sublimed in the Heart, and sent up in Arteries to the Head, and there shall
perceive, imagine, remember, and help me to Philosophize, and to make divine
Discourses; and give me not only the warmth, but the very essence of Mental or
Verbal Prayer and Thanksgiving. Nay (that we may pass, in due time to our Sixth
Subject), It shall also Will and Nill: which I find I may do; and think strange
that I can do so by the mere power of Matter.


Mr. Hobbes. There Libert. and Nece. p. 61
are certain and necessary causes which make every man to will what he wills.


Stud. Herein, I confess, you disagree not from your self, though you seem at
the widest distance from the truth. And Regius Phil. not: p. 478.
is much more to be blamed for inconsistency, who ass^rting that the Soul might
be a mode of the Body, did yet profess that the Will was free; and, in his own
phrase, sui juris. For your self, it was fit, upon supposition of your belief
of a Corporeal Universe, that you should maintain a necessity of Willing. For
if every thing be Matter, each effect in the World, being the mere result of
motion in Matter, will be produced by fatal impulse: And, likewise, that
producing impulse, will be necessitated by a former, and so on in so long an
order, as cannot be pursued, (without the admittance of an Incorporeal God) to
any end of it, distinctly known. Wherefore the Stoics, long before you,
supposing God to be a kind of Fire, and the Soul to be a subtle Body; held also
the opinion of Irresistible Fate. And Plutarch, and Stobaeus take notice of
both Opinions together, as I find them cited by Lipsius in his Manuduction I.
Lyps. Phys. Stoi. l. 1. p. 28.
to that Philosophy: Upon which occasion, a worthy and learned person, has in
his Discourse at the Funeral of Bishop Hall, deservedly called you the New
Stoic. If then there be nothing more divine in Man, than Matter and Motion; he
does as necessarily choose or refuse, as Fire ascends, or a Stone is pressed
toward the Earth.


Mr. Hobbes. It is no more Libert. and Necess. p. 17, 18.
necessary that Fire should burn, than that a man or other creature, whose
Limbs be moved by Fancy, should have Election, that is Liberty, to do what he
has a fancy to do, though it be not in his Will or Power to choose his fancy,
or to choose his Election and Will. Good Liber. and Nec. p. 61, and 62.
and evil sequels of Men's Actions retained in Memory, do frame and make us to
the Election of whatsoever it be that we elect; and the memory of such things
proceeds from the Senses, and Sense from the operation of the Objects of sense,
(which are external to us, and governed only by God Almighty) and by
consequence all actions, even of free and voluntary Agents, are necessary.


Stud. Were Man such a piece of Mechanism as has been forged by your untoward
invention much of the Cause would be granted to you: and yet, not this, that
the Memory of good or evil Sequels of Men's Actions do frame us unto Every
election; because there are too many whom no examples of Punishment will deterr
from such evil manners, as they see daily producing bitter effects. But, seeing
it has been proved that there is in Man, an Immaterial Soul; it follows thence,
that the Motions from the Object, continued to the Brain and Heart, can only
solicit, and not force the Assent of that Incorporeal Being which gives them
passage, or resists them, and determines them at its pleasure, in diverse
cases. Neither can outward force any more restrain this Spiritual mind, than
Xerxes could properly fetter the Hellespont. There is then, left me but little
work in oppugning your Opinion about Liberty and Necessity, seeing the
foundation of your belief of Fate, is the Corporeity of the Universe.

It is also, to be considered, that a Person of great fame and place, has
already contended with you; so very much to your disadvantage, that it seems
not worth the while for any Man henceforth, to enter the lists. And of this I
will not make my self the Judge, but repeat the opinion of a Learned Man, who
was wont to declare his mind in Controversies, with unbyassed freedom. It is
known every where (said that Elegant Bishop Taylor's Fun. Ser. on Bishop
Bramhall, p. 55, 56.
Writer), with what Piety and acumen [the last Lord Primate of all Ireland]
wrote against the Manichean Doctrine of fatal Necessity, which a late witty Man
had pretended to adorn with a new vizor; but this excellent person washed off
the Cerusse, and the Meritricious Paintings; rarely well asserted the Economy
of the Divine Providence; and having once more triumphed over his Adversary,
Plenus Victoriarum and Trophaearum, be took himself to the more agreeable
attendance upon Sacred Offices.


Mr. Hobbes. This luxuriant Penman boasts of Trophies; and the Bishop himself,
of old, talked of Liber. and Necess. p. 5.
clearing the coast by Distinctions, and dividing his forces into two
squadrons, one of places of Scripture, the other of Reasons. And I say
notwithstanding (to continue in the military allusion begun by them) that in my
Books Lib. and Nec. p. 64.
not only his squadrons of Arguments, but also his reserve of Distinctions are
defeated.


Stud. I perceive you intend to make good the Character now given of you, of
being a witty Man: although, according to the Principles of your own
Philosophy, it redoundeth not much to your reputation. For Wit See Hu. Not. p.
124
depending upon a tenuity and agility of spirits, there seems wanting in a
very witty Man, that fixation of parts which is required to Prudence.

Touching your Antagonist, there is no doubt (and it appears by your fretting
and sprawling) that you have felt the smart of that Opposition which he has
made against you. But, so far as I can remember, (for I have not had for some
years, any writing of his in my possession) he has not levelled his men in
force against that place wherein you seem (to me) most capable of being
wounded, and wherein your chief strength seems to lay; that is to say, the
Materiality of the whole Sphaere of Nature. In relation to which, I am apt to
be persuaded, that in this Controversy about Fate, you by a daring
consequence, do charge the most holy God with all the iniquities committed in
the World. For all Effects arising from Motion; and all Motion being derived
from the first immovable Mover, all subordinate Causes and Effects will owe
themselves in a chain-like dependence, to the supreme Original Cause.


Mr. Hobbes. The concourse Lib. and Ne^. p. 16.
of all causes makes not one simple chain or concatenation, but an innumerable
number of Chains, joined together, not in all parts, but in the first link, God
Almighty. -- That which, I say, necessitateth Lib. and Nec. p. 15.
and determines every action, is the sum of all things, which being now
existent, conduce and concur to the production of that Action hereafter,
whereof if any one thing now were wanting, the effect could not be produced:
This concourse of Causes, whereof every one is determined to be such as it is
by a like concourse of former Causes, may well be called (in respect they were
all set and ordered by the eternal Cause of all things, God Almighty) The
Decree of God. Every act Eev. c. 21 p. 108.
of man's will, and every desire and inclination proceeds from some cause, and
that from another cause, in a continual Chain (whose first link is in the hand
of God, the Cause of all Causes); and therefore the voluntary Actions of Men
proceed from Necessity.


Stud. Impute not that, with falsehood and dishonor, to God, which is caused by
Man's unconstrained Will; the only Mother which conceives and brings forth
Sin; not withstanding that Objects may incline, and Examples may entice, and
opportunities may invite, and evil Angels may tempt, and Constitution may
incline, and God permits. Let no Man, therefore, say when he is tempted, he
is tempted of God; for, every Man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
lust, and enticed.


Mr. Hobbes. It Is Blasphemy Liber. and Nec. p. 24.
to say, God can sin; but to say, that God can so order the World as a sin may
be necessarily caused thereby in a Man, I do not see how it is any dishonnour
to Him.


Stud. These Answers should not have proceeded from a Man, who professes
himself a Christian of no mean degree. Hi Cons. p. 46, 47. Nor can the clamor
of my Adversaries make me think my self, a worse Christian than the best of
them.
They come (I was ready to say) as unexpectedly, as if they had dropped out of
the Heavens; but that they have relation to a lower place. If we brand mortal
Men with Names of Infamy and tokens of our abhorence, calling them unmerciful,
bloody, deceitful; who are said by you, in all their actions, to be drawn by
Fate; how can we speak or think with honor of the Deity, whilst we apprehend
him as the Original Causer of all those evils, for which we (unhurt) abominate
one another; which he himself has told us he does abhor; and for the
commission of which Immoralities he will execute vengeance upon the brutish
part of Mankind? When a Sword is sheathed in the Bowels of an innocent and good
Man, we reproach not the bloody Weapon which was moved by force; but we give
titles of extraordinary dishonor to the barbarous will of that savage Man, who
made it an instrument of such dreadful mischief. If men be carried on in all
their Circumstances, by the mighty torrent of irresistible Motion; their
iniquities, and the dishonours due unto them, are chargable upon the source and
spring of Motion. If Men are necessitated to act or omit, as also to will or to
refuse, then Exhortations unto such Duties as they perform not, are bitter
taunts, and like commands to a Criple to rise up and walk; and punishment for
such evils as they commit, is a cruel usage; and a declaration against Sin, as
hated by the first Cause, (who cannot be thought in earnest to detest his own
workmanship); and as the default of Man (who is asked in Scripture why he will
die? whilst his very Will to die, is by you supposed fatal) is imperious
mockery, and unworthy deceit. St. Austin himself in his 10 th. cap. de Fide,
contra Manichaeos Quis non clame^ stultum esse praecep^ta dare ei, c^i librum
non est quod pracipitur facere. Et iniquum esse ^um damnare, cui n^n fuit
potestas jussa complere?
, speaks in words to the same effect; Who (said the Father) may not cry out,
that it is a ridiculous thing to bind Precepts upon him, who is not at liberty
to obey them; and an unrighteous thing to condemn that man who had no power to
perform what he was commanded? And what can be said of God, which may betoken
honor, if he be once accused as the Author of Sin?


Mr. Hobbes. Men Lev. cap. 21. p. 108.
may do many things which God does not command; and therefore he is not the
Author of them.


Stud. He is more the Author, who does secretly necessitate, than he who only
does command the effect; in as much as a command may, as it is daily, be
disobeyed, but power irresistible is not to be eluded. And David would have bin
more entirely and notoriously the Murderer of Vriah, by forcing the armed hand
of an Ammonite upon him, and the Ammonite less guilty; than by a bare
appointing of him to be placed in the Front of the Battle. Besides, it seems
superfluous perfluous to command the doing of that, which the supposed
Commander (with or without promulgation of his Will) does unavoid^bly bring to
pass: for you make God the first Causer of all that is performed, even against
the Revelation of his pleasure.


Mr. Hobbes. I grant that, though Lev. ib.
Men may do many things which God does not command; yet that they can have no
passion, nor appetite to any thing, of which appetite God's Will is not the
Cause.


Stud. Why then did accused Adam transfer the blame on Eve, and she upon the
Serpent? It had been an easy, if it might have been a true reply, for both of
them to have said, Thou thy self did force us unto that, which by thee is so
severely reprehended. The Serpent himself at the hearing of his doom, remained
silent; the very Father of Lies not being impudent in so excessive a degree, as
to charge the Almighty with his own evils. Wherefore, in ascribing Sin to God
as the first cause of it, you put me in mind of their fancy, upon a mistaken
Text, who See Heinsii. Exer. Sac. p. 227
affirmed Leviathan to be the very Father of the Devil. I cannot heartily beg
your pardon for that note, because it is necessary that I be zealous, when once
the holiness and goodness of God is reproached by humane wit, impudence,
madness.


Mr. Hobbes. Condemn not in such a furious way, good Dedoctor 6 Less. p. 64.
of Morality; for with as ill manners you affirm that God is the Permitter, as
I have done, in saying he is the Cause of every action.

I am L. and N. p. 22.23.
not ignorant that Divines distinguish between Will and Permission; and say,
that, God Almighty does indeed sometimes permit sins, and that he also
foreknoweth that the sin he permits shall be committed, but does not will
nor necessitate it. -- But I find no difference between the Will to have a
thing done, and the permission to do it, when he that permits can hinder it,
and knows that it will be done unless he hinder it.


Stud. The difference is heavenly-wide betwixt bare Permission, and that Will
which you have fancied in Almighty God; a Will See Lev. p. 108.
attended with such a disposal of all things, as begets a necessity in Man's
Will of doing Gods. For no Man ever could imagine (your self excepted) that bare
Permission should have the influence of a necessary Cause; whereas such
influence is ascribed, by you, to the Will of God. It appears by the
Revelation which God has made to Man, that he does so will Religion that it
would be more pleasing to him for Man to obey, than to remain perverse; yet not
in such a manner, that he compels him to become his subject by active
compliance: for that were to unmake Man as such, that is, as a creature endu'd
with a free Will. When God says of his Vineyard, which made not such returns
of fruitfulness as were proportioned to his cultivation of it, that he could do
no more for it than he had done; he declared plainly that he used such means as
were consistent with a liberty in Man of neglecting or misimproving them: And
the exercise of this liberty in sinning he permits, in regard to Man's free
free nature, and because he can, not only chastise him for his delinquency, but
likewise, by his Methods and infinite wisdom, bring good out of it. There being
then in God, in many cases, a Conditional Will, that will, without the
rescinding of any law of Man's unconstrained Election, is always done, either
by the obedience of Man, or by the vindication of abused mercy in the
correction of a stubborn sinner. And thus we have seen how injurious your
Doctrine of Necessity, has been to the just honor of the most Holy Will of
God. It is, also, manifest that by the same way, I will not call of reason, but
of bold asseveration, you upbraid all Laws, whereby any punishment is inflicted
upon Malefactors, of most rigorous and unreasonable procedure; and thereby,
after dishonor done to God, you vilisie his Vicegerents. For, why is the
Scourge or Brand, the Rope, or Fire; the Press, Axe, or Bullet, prepared for
those Men, who do not, by their own free choice and power, lay open the fence
which Authority has set down; but are hurried through it by a foreign
violence, against which it is in vain to struggle? Sword and Pistol, or
whatsoever is an instrument in the violation of the Law, or safety of Man, is
as guilty as Man himself, and with indignation to be broken in pieces; if Man
be unavoidably and fatally managed (as in a Puppet-play) by a foreign hand,
discerned only by you who pretend to see within the Curtain. I remember to have
read, that Draco, the Athenian, made a Law, whereby the very Instruments of
Homicide were punished. And the Sons of him that perished by the fall of
Nicon's Statue Suidas in Nicon.
which he had whipped, in order to the greater infamy of Nicon, condemned the
Statue as a Murderer, and with solemnity, threw it into the Sea But they were
not so sottish, by these Laws and practices, to pretend a real punishment of
such Instruments; but they designed, to move Beholders to the greater
abhorrence of spilling human Blood; and they gave some vent to the fermenting
rage of their inward passion, which might have swelled to their greater
discommodity, if they had not sought some means of dischargeing it.


Mr. Hobbes. It Is Lib. Nec. p. 66.
unreasonable to punish some Actions of Men, which could not be justly done by
man to man, unless the same were voluntary. -- The Lib. Nec. p. 41, 42.
nature of Sin consists in this, that the Action done proceed from our Will,
and be against the Law. A Judge, in judging whether it be a sin or no which is
done against the Law, looks at no higher cause in the Action than the Will of
the doer. Now when I say, the Action is necessary, I do not say it was done
against the will of the Doer, but with his will. -- And Lib. and Nec. p. 27, 28.
the Will to break the Law, makes the Action unjust; because the Law regards
the Will, and no other precedent Causes of Action.


Stud. The Will, if we have regard to the Opinion which you hold concerning it,
can neither render the Action unjust, or the Judge righteous in his sentence of
Condemnation: because every Volition See Lib. and Necess. p. 42.
or Act of the Will and Purpose of Man is, by outward violence, made
unavoidable; and the beginning See L. and Nec. p. 17.
and progress of deliberation depends, also, upon necessary Causes.


Mr. Hobbes. I acknowledge that Lib. and N. p. 71, 72.
when first a Man has a Will to something, to which immediately before he had
no Appetite nor Will; the cause of the Will is not the Will it self, but
something else, not in his own disposing. So that whereas it is out of
controversy, that of Voluntary Actions, the Will is the necessary Cause; and
by this which is said, the Will is also caused by other things whereof it
disposes not: it follows, that Voluntary Actions have all of them necessary
causes, and therefore are nec^ssitated.


Stud. Wherefore, if the Law inflicteth capital punishment upon a Man with
regard unto his Will; the Man suffers for that which was not in his power to
help; and is therefore to be reckoned amongst those whose blood is shed without
any proper stain in it.


Mr. Hobbes. Men Lib. and Nec. p. 29.
are justly killed, not for that their Actions are necessitated, but because
they are noxious. -- Men are not L. and N. p. 30.
therefore put to death, or punished, for that their theft proceeds from
Election, but because it was noxious, and contrary to Men's preservation.


Stud. The Law regards the free choice, 'though it has respect also to the
mischief derived on the Commonwealth. Wherefore there have been Cities of
Refuge constituted for the safeguard of those who had unwittingly, killed a
man; whilst the wilful Murderers were to repay blood for blood. And amongst
our selves the blood of the most unuseful person in the Land, shall be avenged
by the death of the ablest Soldier, or Counselor, if the Law may have its
course, and it be satisf'd, that he shed it with a deliberate stroke; whilst a
pitiful ignorant Criple shall escape, if by mere mischance, he shall slay such
a man as is able to serve a Kingdom, either by his Sword or Prudence. In which
cases, the Laws have regard, rather to the wilfulness than the noxiousness of
the Actors. So also in the Roman Law Mosaic. and Roman. Leg. Collat. Tit. 12.
p. 37.
(reported by Paulus I. C. de poenis Paganorum) he that wilfully burnt an house
was to suffer death; but he that, by accident, burnt a Village, or an Island,
was but a Debtor. But if noxiousness be the Rule of Judging, then are you to
change your phrase and say, not that men are punished (which presupposes a
crime) but afflicted or killed; after the manner of Beasts, which, not being
capable of Law, do perish without Law; as their ruin conduces to the behoof or
security of Man. And therefore the Civil Law L. i. ff. s^ Quadrup. S. 1.
calls not the fact of a Beast injuria, but damnum; and determines that a
Beast, being devoid of Reason, can do no Injury.


Mr. H^bb. As for Lib. and Nec. p. 30.
Beasts, we kill them justly when we do it in ord'r to our own preservation.


Stud. But that Justice depends upon the dominion which God has vouchsafed
Man over those Creatures to which some will not allow so much as sense, See
Descartes in 2. vol. Epist. lat. p. 6, 7. etc.
and many no more than direct Perception; though you are so profuse, in one of
your Books Lib. and Nec. p. 10, 11, 12.
, as to grant them Election and Deliberation. And here, let it be observed,
that God who has given this Dominion to Man, has revealed it also to be his
purpose, not to rule and judge him by absolute Sovereignty; nor to approve of
Men, whilst they measure their Right amongst themselves by a power not to be
controlled. But he has showed that he will govern them, and have you deal with
one another, according to the equal Laws of their reasonable Nature.


Mr. Hobbes. You run on in Exceptions against that Doctrine of Necessity, which
I have proposed; but you take no notice of the inconveniences wherewith your
own opinion is pressed.

And first, you take no notice of the consistence of Freedom and Necessity; or
that God and good Angels Lib. and Nec. p. 48.
are supposed to be freer than Men, and yet do good necessarily. It was L. and
N. p. 34.
a very great praise, in my opinion, that Villeius Paterculus gives Cato, where
he says, That he was good by Nature; Et quia aliter esse non potisit.


Stud. The Necessity wherewith Almighty God does always good, is of a kind
extremely different from that Physical co-action which you believe to be the
Cause of each effect, For, he determines himself by the eternal Reason of his
own most perfect nature, and is not urged by outward impulse; which if it could
once be attributed to him, he would, straightway, cease to be God Omnipotent.


Mr. Hobbes. That word, Omnipotent, reminds me of a second inconvenience, which
attends the Opposers of my Doctrine. For if Lev. c. 21. p. ^08.
Gods Will did not assure the necessity of Man's Will, and consequently of all
that on Man's Will depends; the Liberty of Men would be a contradiction and
impediment to the Omnipotence and Liberty of God.


Stud. It is in you absurd to mention Liberty even in relation to God himself;
because, by ascribing to him a Material Nature, you assign him no Motions but
such as arise from Physical compulsion. -- But, upon what account is it said by
you, that the Omnipotence of God must be obstructed by the grant of an
undetermined liberty in Man? It is not, that I know of, affirmed by any
Disputant, that there is such a lawless Liberty in Man, as is not under
subjection to the absolute Power of God, but that it is a Liberty which God
Almighty, in an agreeableness to the free nature of Man, has been pleased to
grant; and for the greater part to suffer in the exercise of it. Only it is
said concerning sin, that God cannot force the Will of Man to the commission of
it: for, the production of such a wretched Issue, would argue, not omnipotency,
but impotence and imperfection in the parent of it. God created Man, and gave a
Law to him; and designed not to use his Almighty Power to effect the fulfilling
of that Law; which Power supposes the Command of a Law to be in vain. He
therefore that interposeth not his Power whilst he may, has not his Power
disanulled when his preceptive Will is only withstood, and he permits that
disobedience.


Mr. Hobbes. But what Elusion can be invented touching the foreknowledg of God?
The denying necessity Lib. and Nec. p. 79, 80.
destroys both the Decrees and Prescience of God Almighty; for, whatsoever
God has purposed to bring to pass by Man, as an instrument, or foreseeth shall
come to pass; a Man if he have Liberty, from necessitation, might frustrate and
make not to come to pass; and God should either not foreknow it, and not decree
it; or he should foreknow such things shall be, as shall never be, and decree
that which shall never come to pass.


Stud. Touching the Decees of God, it cannot be proved that they extend to all
things which come to pass. For his Prescience I Am sure, that it extends to
all things possible to be known, and that it has no necessary influence upon
the Event; it does neither hinder the Power of God, nor the Liberty of Man. God
foreseeth that the Event may come to pa^s, and that he will not hinder it, yet
that he might: and it comes to pass most necessarily if God ^oreseeth it; but
the necessity arises from the supposition of the infallibility, and not from
any causal energy, of divine foreknowledg. It is manifest by the fulfilled
Prophesies of diverse inspired Men, that there is Prescience; and a man may also
be assured, that neither is his Liberty intringed by it, nor Prescience by his
Liberty. It is evident to every Man, in many cases, (as evident as that he
perceives at all or understands) that he wills or ^efuseth without any
constraint upon his freedom. But there is great difficulty in unridling the
manner of the consistence of Foreknowledg and Liberty; because, although there
be some notion, yet there is not a knowledge, fully comprehensive of the Divine
Wisdom, in a finite Soul. Thus much, notwithstanding, may, with sobriety be
offered toward the explication of this mysterious truth; that the boundless
wisdom of God who made the World, understanding the Laws and Operations of his
Workmanship from the beginning to the end of them, understands also the
nature of all appearances in all Objects in relation to the mind of Man, in
every Estate wherein he is placed, and at all times, together with the
dispositions of each Man's Soul, and thereby foreseeth what he will refuse or
choose, whilst he had power (absolutely speaking) otherwise either to elect or
reject. He that should drop a piece of money, by an undiscerned hand, in the
way of a man afflicted with extreme poverty; the same person might readily
foresee, that the espied money would infallibly be taken up by that poor man,
though he could not but understand that the Beggar had so much power over his
own limbs, as not to stoop unless he pleased.

But it seems not worth the time and pains to reconcile to your apprehension,
the Doctrins of Foreknowledg, and undetermined Liberty; because this Objection
is by you, proposed, in order to the amusing of other Men's Reasons rather than
in justification of the Truth, For, according to your Principles, all evidence
or knowledge arises from Objects already in being. Neither understand you this
of Essence in the Sense of the Metaphysick-Schools, but of the actual presence
of caused Objects.


Mr. Hobbes. In my Opinion Lib. and Nec. p. 16.
, Foreknowledg is Knowledge, and Knowledge depends on the existence of things
known, and not they on it.

However, the Objection serves for the incommoding of those who maintain
another sort of Foreknowledg; but the argument on which I establish my Doctrine
is of another kind.

I hold Lib. and Ne, 72, 73.
that to be a sufficient cause, to which nothing is wanting that is needful to
the producing of the effect. The same also is a necessary cause: For, if it be
possible that a sufficient cause shall not bring forth the effect, then there
wants somewhat which was needful to the producing of it, and so the Cause was
not sufficient; but if it be impossible that a sufficient Cause should not
produce the Effect, then is a sufficient Cause a necessary Cause; (for that is
said to produce an Effect necessarily, that cannot but produce it.) Hence it is
manifest, that whatsoever is produced is produced necessarily, for whatsoever
is produced has had a sufficient Cause to produce it, or else it had not been;
and therefore also, voluntary actions are necessitated.


Stud. In the alterations made in Bodies, every sufficient is an efficient
Cause, by reason that matter sufficiently moved cannot stay it self, but is
wholly determined by foreign impulse; which impulse also had an undefeated
determination. But because I have proved the existence of an Immaterial Soul, I
may affirm that all outward preparations being made, so that there remains
nothing wanting but the Act of Volition; the Spiritual Mind not being overcome
by the sway of Matter, has a power to abstain from acting, though perhaps it
is not pleased to use it. And this we may illustrate by the Example of Abraham,
whose Fire, and Wood, and Son to be a Victim, and Sacrificing-knife, were in a
readiness and sufficient strength, with these, to execute the Command which God
Almighty, by way of trial, had given to him: yet who can doubt that Abraham had
a power, at the same time, to render these preparations useless, and to be
disobedient? For, how could those Objects and this Command conveigh a force
into his Will, and thence into his Arm, to slay his Son? though they might
present him with a reason which the goodness of his Disposition would not
refuse: The intention of Abraham to slay his Son was wrought by a Moral, and
not a Physical, or Natural Power.


Mr. Hobbes. Natural L. and N. p. 16.
efficacy of Objects does determine voluntary Agents, and necessitates the
Will, and consequently the Action; but for Moral efficacy, I understand not
what you mean.


Stud. I understand by Moral efficacy, the perswa^ive power of such Motives as
those which arise from fear, and love, and trust, and gratitude and especially
such as arise from the mere reason of the Case; as when a man does therefore
give Alms, merely because he apprehends it to be more blessed to give than to
receive, and not to be rid of the pang of compassion, or to obtain praise or
other reward. By such Motives, the Mind is often prevailed upon, without the
force of Corporeal Motion, being wooed, and not pressed unavoidably into
Consent. Of these Motives, that of Fear, may seem to have Me^hanick force;
because, that Passion is often stirred up by the horror of Objects, disturbing
the natural course of the Blood. But it will be granted by your self, that the
very passion of Fear does not compel, but incline the Will: For, you
acknowledge Leviath. p. 108.
that Fear and Liberty are consistent; as when a Man throws his Goods into
the Sea for fear the Ship should sink, he does it nevertheless very willingly,
and may refuse to do it if he will: It is therefore the action of one that was
free. Seeing then the Incorporeal Soul of Man is induced by persuasion, and not
compelled by Natural Motion; you may as soon convince me, that every sufficient
Man (as we are wont to call a wealthy person) is therefore a dispenser of his
Goods, and a liberal Man; as that the immaterial Soul is, forthwith, compelled
to act, when all things are present which are needful to the producing of the
effect, and all impediments are removed.


Mr. Hobbes. To say that an Agent Lib. and Nec. p. 73.
in such Circumstances, can nevertheless not produce the effect, implies a
contradiction, and is nonsense, being as much as to say, the Cause may be
sufficient, that is to say, necessary* and yet the effect shall not follow.
That all L. and N. p. 76, 77.
Events have necessary Causes, has been proved already, in that they have
sufficient Causes. Further, let us in this place also suppose any* Event never
so casual, as the throwing (for example) Ames-Ace upon a pair of Dice, and see,
if it must not have been necessary before 'twas thrown. For, seeing it was
thrown, it had a beginning, and consequently a sufficient cause to produce it,
consisting partly in the Dice, partly in outward things, as the posture of the
parts of the hand, the measure of force applied by the Caster, the posture of
the parts of the Table, and the like: In sum, there was nothing wanting which
was necessarily requisite to the producing of that particular Cast, and
consequently the Cast was necessarily thrown; for if it had not been thrown,
there had wanted somewhat requisite to the throwing of it, and so the cause had
not been sufficient.


Stud. Here you make instance in an Event resulting from Circumstances of
Bodies, and from Physical motion: in relation to which I have already granted,
that a sufficient is an efficient Cause; and declared the reason of it; and how
it touches not the present business. But by this last Answer I begin to
understand that you obtrude a Sophism upon me, instead of a real Argument. For,
whilst you say, that sufficient is the same which necessary, and that if the
Cast had not been thrown, there was something wanting; you include, in your
sufficient Cause, when you speak of Man, the very act of Volition, besides all
the furniture prepared for that act: And then your meaning amounts to this,
that when there is each thing needful, and no impediment, and also a Will to
act, the effect follows. But here you beg the Question, which is this;
Whether, all things requisite to action being present, the will and act of
Volition excepted, the Soul has not a power to forbear that Act? and whilst
you suppose a removal of impediments, and the presence of all things necessary,
and the act of the Will also; and then say, the Cause is sufficient and
efficient too, you say no more, than that a Man produces necessarily, an
effect, whilst he produces it; which indeed is a truth, (for he cannot act and
not act at the same time) but in the present Controversy it is an egregious
Impertinence. For, the Necessity which you speak of, is not in the Will it
self, or in the Effect; but in that consequence which the mind creates, by
supposing that the Will complieth with the means, and that, whilst it chooses,
it cannot but choose. Wherefore this fallacy is like to theirs, who say, the
Will is necessarily determined by the last act of the Understanding, meaning,
because it is the last: they suppose the last act, and that the Will closes
with the Understanding, and then they say, it follows upon necessity: which
is no more than to affirm, that there is nothing later than the last. And if I
am not imposed upon by my memory, you somewhere argue Leviath. c. 6. p. 2^.
, that the Will is the last appetite in deliberating; and that therefore,
though we say in common Discourse, A man had once a will to do a thing, that
nevertheles he forbears to do; yet that is not properly a will, because the
action depends not of it, but of the la^t inclination or appetite. You suppose
the Will to be the last Inclination, and that therefor the Action depends upon
it, because it is the last; and then you call it sufficient and necessary, when
you have made it to be such; not in its own nature, but by the supposition
framed in your own brain. And thus you have made a great noise and kackling
about Sufficient and Efficient, whilst there is nothing here said by you, which
is not as insipid as the white of an Egg.

But of that Necessity which is said to compel the Will of Man, enough; let ^s
consider that Law which obliges it, though not by force to action, yet upon
default, to punishment.

And that we may proceed in order, let our beginning be made at

Our Seventh Head, The Law of Nature, that inward Law, in relation to which
each Man is a Magistrate to himself, erecting a Tribunal in his own Breast.


Mr. Hobbes. There is Leviath. c. 14. p. 64.
right, and also, a Law of Nature. The Right of Nature, is the Liberty each Man
has, to use his own power as he will himself, for the preservation of his own
nature, that is to say, of his own life; and consequently of doing any thing,
which in his own judgment, and reason, he shall conceive to be the aptest means
thereunto. -- The Law of Nature is a precept, or general Rule, found out by
Reason, by which a Man is forbidden to do that which is destructive of his
life, or takes away the means of preserving the same; and to omit, that, by
which he thinks, it may be lest preserved, -- the sum of the Right of the
right of Nature, is, by all means we can to defend our selves: This is De Cive.
c. 1. p. 11. Iuris naturalis fundamentum primum est, ut quisque vitum and
membra sua, quantum potest tueatur.
the first foundation of Natural Right.


Stud. The distinction betwixt the Right, and the Law of Nature, is, with good
reason, to be admitted. But you ought not to challenge it Leviat: p. 64. they
that speak of this Subject use to con^ound Ius and Lex.
to your self, seeing it is expressly noted by diverse ancient Authors, and in
particular, by Laurentius Valla Lauren. Vall. Elegant. l. 4. c. 48. p.
. That which you add, seems as false as the other is ancient. For the right
dictate of Natural Reason obliging Man (not yet supposed a Member of the great
Community) to an orderly behavior toward God, and his Parents, as also
toward his own Soul and Body, in cases which concern, and which concern not,
life and death, is the Law of Nature.


Mr. Hobbes. The Dictates of Reason [concerning Vice and Virtue Lev c. 15 p.
80. lin. 8 etc.
Men Ibid. line 17, etc.
use to call by the name of Laws, but improperly: for they are but Conclusions,
or Theorems, concerning what conduces to the conservation, and defense of
themselves; whereas Law properly is the word of him, who by Right has command
over others.


Stud. These Dictates being the Natural Operations of our Minds, the Being, and
undepraved condition of which in right reasoning, we owe to God; we cannot but
esteem them as the voice of God within us, and consequently Law: wherefore St.
Paul calls the Rule of Natural Conscience amongst the Gentiles, the Law
written in their Hearts. -- But whence does it come to pass, that self-interest
is laid by you as the foundation-stone of the Law of Nature? in such sort, that
nothing is unlawful which conduces to such preservation. For, it is commonly
taught amongst us, that many things are condemned by the light of Reason; and
that we ought not to do evil that good may come on it; but prefer the Law of God
in nature before private Utility; it being the truest Self-interest to lose the
present secular advantage, for the future recompense of such as, with peril,
obey God.


Mr. Hobbes. The Reasons of my Opinion are manifest. Because it is natural for
Man to avoid pain De Cive. p. 11. fertur unusquisque etc.
and pursue utility; and because in the state of Nature, there is nothing
unlawful against others. For Leviath. c. 13 p. 62.
the desires, and other passions of Man, are in themselves no sin: no more are
the actions that proceed from those Passions, 'till they know a Law that
forbids them: which, till Laws be made, they cannot know: nor can any Law be
made, 'till they have agreed upon the person that shall make it.


Stud. Unless you explain your self concerning this state of Nature which you
speak of, the way of our proceeding will be darkened by words.


Mr. Hobbes. The natural condition of Mankind may be thus explained.

Nature has made Men so equal Lev. c. 13 p. 60, to 63. more at large.
in the faculties of Body and Mind; as that, when all is reckoned together, the
difference between Man and M^n, is not so considerable, as that one man can
thereupon claim to himself any benefit to which another may not pretend as well
as he.

From this equality of ability, arises equality of hope in the attaining of
our ends. And therefore if any two Men, desire the same thing, which
nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they become Enemies; and in the way to
their end (which is principally their own conservation, and sometimes their
Delectation only) endeavor to destroy or subdue one another. Whereupon some
are invited to invade others, and from others may fear the like invasion.

From equality of ability, competition arises fomented by equality of hope;
and from thence diffidence of one another: And from this diffidence attended
with desire of glory in conquering, there arises a war of every Man against
every Man.

And therefore, whatsoever is consequent to a time of War, where every Man is
enemy to every Man; the same is consequent to the time wherein men live without
other security, than what their own strength, and their own inven^ion shall
furnish them withal. In such condition, there is no place for industry; because
the fruit thereof is uncertain; and consequently no culture of the earth, no
Navigation, nor use of the Commodities that may be imported by Sea; no
commodious bu^ding; no instruments of moving and removing such things as
require much force; no knowledge of the face of the earth; no account o^ time,
no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and, which is worst of all, continual fear,
and danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short.

To this War of every Man against every Man, this also is consequent. That
nothing can be unjust. The notions of Right and wrong, justice and injustice
have there no place. Where there is no common power, there is no Law; wh^^^ no
Law, no Injustice. Force and Fraud, are in war the two Cardinal Virtues.
Justice and Injustice are none of the Faculties, neither of the Body, nor Mind.
I^ they were, they might be in a Man that were alone in the World, as well as
his Senses, and Passions. They are Qualities, that relate to Men in Society,
not in Solitude. It is consequent also to the same condition, that there be no
propriety, no dominion, no Min^ and Thine distinct; but only, that to be every
Man's that he can get; and for so long as he can keep it.

And this is the ill condition, which Man by mere nature is actually placed in;
though with a possibility to come out of it: consisting partly in the Passions,
partly in his Reason.

The Passions that incline men to peace, are, fear of death; desire of such
things as are necessary to commodious living; and a hope by their industry to
obtain them. And Reason suggesteth convenient Articles of Peace, upon which Men
may be drawn to agreement. These Articles, are they, which otherwise are called
the Laws of Nature.


Stud. It is a very absurd and unsecure course to lay the groundwork of all
civil Polity and formed Religion, upon such a supposed state of Nature, as has
no firmer support than the contrivance of your own fancy. Let Ptolemy endeavor
a Solution of those appearances which arise from the heavenly Bodies, by one
sort of Scheme; and Tycho by another, and Copernicus by a third; and let
Descartes attempt a fourth; for the declaring, not only in what manner, but by
what Efficient Cause, the Stars may move; for thus far the interests of Men
remain secure, not being minded by such remote Models and Hypotheses. But when
the Temporal and Eternal safety of Mankind is concerned (as in the Doctrines of
Civil and Moral, and Christian Philosophy) then are Hypotheses, framed by
imagination, and not by reason assisted with Memory touching the passed state
of the World, as exceedingly dangerous as they are absurd. Wherefore, such
persons who trouble the World with fancied Schemes and Models of Poli^y, in
Oceana's and Leviathan's, ought to have in their Minds an usual saying of the
most excellent Lord Bacon concerning a Philosophy advanced upon the History of
Nature. That Dr. Rs. Pref. to Sir F. B. not. Hist.
such a work is the World as God made it, and not as Men have made it: for that
it has nothing of Imagination.

The faithful Records of time give us another account of the Origin of Nations;
and common Sense, whereby one apprehends in another's birth, the manner of his
own, does sufficiently instruct us in this truth, that we are born, and grow up
under Government; Our Parents being Leviath. c. 22. p. 121
before the Institution of Commonwealth, absolute Sovereigns in their own
Families: And as Hicrocles speaks, (...).
Gods upon Earth. Wherefore Cicero, discoursing of the many Degrees of the
Society of Men, calls Cicero de Offic. l. 1. S. 17. op p. 1217. Principium
urbis and quasi Seminarium Reipublicae.
Wedlock the beginning of a City; and, as it were, the Seminary of a Kingdom*
So that, to talk of such a state of nature as supposes an Independency of one
person upon another, is to lay aside not only the History of Moses, but also of
Experience, which teaches that we are born Infants, (of Parents, for that
reason, to be obeyed), and to put some such cheat upon the World, as Nurses are
wont, in sport, to put upon unwary Children, when they tell them, they started
up out of the Parsley-bed. And verily some such odd conceit is to be suspected
in that Man who says, that all is Matter, and by consequence, that Mankind
arose, at first, out of the fortuitous Concretions of it. Epicurus therefore in
sequel of that doctrine of his, that all things were produced by atoms,
explained the birth of Man, by supposing certain swelling bags or wombs upon
the earth, which brake at last, and let forth Infants ^ucret. Crescebant uteri
terrae radicibus apti, etc.
nourished by her Juice, clothed by her Vapors, provided of a bed in the soft
grass: and he also taught that in the beginning (though he knew not when) Men
wandered about like Beasts, and every one was for himself, and that merely to
secure themselves, they combined into Societies; and that those Societies were
formed by Pacts and Covenants, and that from those Covenants sprang good and
evil, just and unjust. For, such a Romance is to be read, at large, in his
Compurgator, Gassendus, Gassend. Phil. Epi^. Synt. c. 26. de Orig. Juris, p
238, 239.
who subjoyneth no Essay of confutation.


Mr. Hobbes. It may Leviath. c. 13. p. 63.
peradventure be thought, there was never such a time, nor condition of War, as
this now described; and I believe it was never generally so, over all the
World: But there are many places where they live so now. For, the Savage People
in many places of America, except the Government of small Families, the concord
whereof depends on Natural Lust, have no Government at all, and live at this
day in a brutish manner.


Stud I am sorry that so much barbarousness being charged upon Mankind, so
little of the imputation can be fairly taken off Yet that the condition of
human nature is not so very rude as you seem to represent it, appears from
many passages in undoubted Story. Justin Just. Hist. l. 2: p. 18, 19.
, in his Epitom of Trogus Pompeius, describes the ancient Scythians in such a
manner, that their Behavior seems to upbraid those People, who call
themselves, The Civilized parts of the World. By him we are informed, That they
had neither Houses, nor Enclosures of ground, but wandered with their Cattle in
solitary and untilled Deserts; That Justice had honor derived, to it, not from
positive Law, but from the good natures of the People. That no man was more
odious, amongst them than the Invader of such things as were occupied by
another. In consideration of which inbred civility, the Historian wishes that
the other Nations of the World were followers of the Scythick Moderation; after
which, he thus concludes. It may seem a matter fit to be admired, that Nature
should bestow that upon the Scythians, which the Graecians themselves, though
long instructed by the Doctrines and Precepts of Lawgivers and Philosophers,
have not attained to: and that formed manners should be excelled by uneducated
Barbarity.

But, let it be supposed that many brutish Families in America (in whose stead
you might have rather mentioned the wild Arabes See Martyr. Legate. Babylon. l.
3. p. 81.
, are so many dens of Robbers, and live by such prey as their power and
wildness can provide for them. Yet by this Instance, because it is made in
Families, where Government has place, you rather overthrow than prove your
supposed state of Nature. Wherefore, in a note added, upon second thoughts, to
your Book de Cive De Cive. c. 1. p. 14.
in order to a Solution of this Argument [that the Son killing his Parent, in
the state of Nature, acts unjustly] you subjoin an Answer to this effect A
man cannot be understood to be a son in the mere state of Nature, seeing as
soon as he is born he is under the lawful Ibid. Potestas, not potentia.
Power and Government of them, to whom he owes his conservation; to wit, of
his Mother or Father, or to him who affords him Provisions of common life.

It is further to be marked, that one Family, as it stands separated from
another, is as one Kingdom divided from the Territories of a Neighboring
Monarch. If therefore the state of Nature remains in a Family not depending
upon another Family, in places where there is no common Government; then all
Kingdoms which have not made Leagues with one another, are, at this day, in the
same state. Whereas they rather are in a state of defense dictated by prudence;
and, as you say, in the posture Leviath. p. 63.
of Gladiators, having their swords pointing, and their Eyes fixed on one
another, than in a state of War, prompted by pride and insati^ble ambition. And
therefore no affront being offered to a foreign Prince before his Invasion, he
is esteemed both injurious and unjust, whilst for no other reason than his
greedy Will, he thrusts inoffensive people out of ancient possession. I know
you esteem all distinct Kingdoms in a state of War in relation to each other
See Lev: p. 110.
, and that therefore they have a right, if they have a Power of invading: but
he that consults Grotius, in his Book de jure belli and Pacis (designed chiefly
Vide Grotij Prolegom.
to set forth the Rights, not of Domestic, but Formsick War) will not be much
of your opinion; neither will he, easily, be reconciled to the Practice of the
Romans, in Petronius Arbiter, Si qua foret tellus quae fulvum mitt^^^t aurum
bos^is erat.
(a Practice to which that of the Spaniards is akin), who made foreign Nations
to be Enemies, as Princes sometimes make their Subjects, Traitors; for the sake
of their Riches.


Mr. Hobbes. I confess Lev. c. 20 p. 105.
that a great Family, if it be not part of some Commonwealth, is of it self, as
to the Rights of Sovereignty, a little Monarchy: whether that Family consist of
a Man and his Children; or of a Man and his Servants; or of a Man and his
Children, and Servants together, wherein the Father or Master is the Sovereign.
But yet a Family is not properly a Commonwealth; unless it be of that power by
its own number, or by other opportunities, as not to be subdued without the
hazard of War.


Stud. In those Places, where there is no common Government (as of late amongst
the West- Arabes, 'till their acceptance of Muley Arsheid, first for their
General, and then their King) a Family may be called a small Kingdom,
notwithstanding the meanness of its Power; because it can, as well, secure it
self, against the assaults of another Family, as one Kingdom can withstand the
Opposition of another. For, we compare Family to Family, and not to a vast
Empire, against whose mighty numbers, it is in vain to make resistance: For, if
want of strength does render a Family no Commonwealth, than by the same reason,
the Republics of Athens, Corinth, Lacedaemon, and the rest, were properly no
Republics, because they were but so many weak and little Members, compared to
the vast Body of the Grecian Empire.

But, further: Were every man supposed loose, even from the yoke of Paternal
Government, yet in such a state, there would be place, for the Natural Laws of
good and evil.

For, first, There is in Mankind, an ability of Soul to ascend unto the
knowledge of the first invisible Cause De Cive. c. 14. page 250.
by the effects of his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, which are conspicuous
in all the parts of his Creation. I say, an ability to know, not an actual
acknowledgment, of the Being of a God. For the Acrothoitae are said, by
Theophrasius Ap. Sim. plic. Com. in Epictet. Ench. page 200. Ed. Cant.
, to have been a Nation of Atheists; as also to have been swallowed up by the
gaping Earth; undergoing a Judgment worthy that God whom their Imaginations
banished out of the World. If, then, there be such ability in the Mind of Man,
he is capable of sinning by himself, in the secretest retirement from the
Societies and Laws of his Fellow Creatures* either by the supiness of his mind
in being secure in Atheism, for want of exerting those Powers, by exercise,
which God has implanted in him; or, by the ingratitude of his mind, by want of
Love and Thankfulness to God, whom in speculation he confesses to exist; the
notion of a Deity including that of a Benefactor.


Mr. H. I must acknowledge De Cive. c. 1. p^ 13. in Annot.
, that it is not impossible, in the state of Nature, to sin against God.


Stud. A man may also, in that state, fin, by being injurious to himself.


Mr Hobb. Neither is that denied, because De Cive. p. 14.
hec may pretend that to be for his preservation, which neither is so, nor is
so judged by himself.


Stud. But he may, likewise, sin, with reference to himself in matters wherein
no prejudice accrueth to his health, or outward safety. The Instance may be
made in Buggery with a Bea^^, which seems to be a sin against the order o^
God in Nature. This monstrous Indecency, this detestable and abominable Vice
(as the Statute calls it) is, by our Law 25 Hen. 8. c. 6.5. Eliz. c. 17.
, made Felony without Clergy; and this, surely, in regard it is rather a sin
against Nature than Commonwealth; it being less noxious to Society, to humble,
than to kill the owners beast, the latter of which is but a tre^pass.

Lastly, In relation to ot^ers, I cannot but judge, that one man espying
another, and not discerni^g in him any tokens of mischief, but rather of
submission; if being thus secure and unassaulted, he rusheth upon him, and so,
to display his power, and please his tyrannous mind bereave^h him of life; he
is a murd^rer, in the account of God and Man. The reason seems unst^ained and
cogent. For there is no such near propriety to a man in any possession as in
that of life; which a man, as to this state, can no more forego, then he can
part with himself: neither can the Right be more confirmed to him than his own
Pe^^^nality. Wherefore, in no condition of Mankind, can it be forfeited but by
his own default or consent. But in mere self defense there is no murder,
because one life being apparently in hazard, it is reason that the assaulted
man should esteem his own more dearly than his Enemy's. It is e^sie to
understand on which side to act, when it is come to this pass that (as the
Italians say of War Cibisogna essere spet^atori dell' altrui morte, O
spettacolo delta nostra.
, We must either be spectators of other men's deaths, or spectacles of our own.

Moreover, it appeare^h, unto me, not altogether improbable, that in this
feigned state of nature, unjust robbery may have place. For, in this community
there being sufficient portions both for the necessity and convenience, of all
men; if one shall intrude into the possessi^n of another who is contented with
a modest share, being moved only by ambition and wantonness of mind; he seems
to be no other than an unrighteous aggresso^. For all men being, by you,
supposed of equal righ^* the advantage of pre-occupancy on the one sid^, does
turn the scale, if natural justice holds the balance: For it is in Law, an old
maxim, In pari jure, melior est conditio Possidentis. Wherefore, if any person
endeavors, by such unnatural practices, as I have mentioned, to increase his
outward safety, or brutish delight, he, in truth, destroys by his iniquity
more of himself than he can preserve by his ambition and lust. And he may be
resembled to a rash Seaman, who out of presumed pleasure in swimming, throws
himself headlong into a boisterous Sea; temporal delight and preservation by
sin, being the ready way to bottomless ruin.

By what has been said, I am induced to believe, that there is not only
iniquity, but injustice too, in a mere state of Nature; although neither of
them be capable of such aggravations, or are extended to so many Instances, as
in that state, where men live under Positive Commands. For, to make Instance,
not in the lower restraints of fishing, fowling, hunting; but in the more
considerable case of promiscuous mixtures; such practice seems not so much
condemned by the Law of Nature, as by Custom, and the commands of Moses* and
Christ, and Christian Magistrates, and heathen Powers. For the most holy God
would never have begun the World by one Man and Woman, whose Posterity must
needs be propagated by the mixtures of their Sons and D^ughters, if what we
call Incest, had been inconsistent with any immutable Law of Reason and Nature.
Neither would ^e have allowed the Patriarchs in Polygamy, if it had been in
truth an absolute evil; and not rather, in some Circumstances of time and
place, and persons, fit and convenient. Neither is there, in these matters, any
consent of Nations, who have no other instructor besides Nature: for, the
Garamantici married not; but engendered as the Monsters at the Springs of
Africa. And S^leucus gave his own Wife to his son Antiochus, and then passed it
into a Law. And Socrates the great pretender to Moral Prudence, esteemed it a
civility to his Friend to permit his wife to enter into his embraces. Wherefore
St. Paul affirming that the taking of the Father's wife, was a For^ication not
once named amongst the Gentiles, is to be understood of those Heathens whose
manners and conversations he had observed in his Travels. And Aelian's Reading
or Memory was but narrow, when Ael^l. 6. var. Hist. ap. Grot. de Iur. bell. and
pa. p. 464.
in contemplation of the victorious Sicy^^ians deflouring the Pollenaearian
Virgins, he cried out, These Practices, by the gods of Graecia, are very cruel,
and, as far as I remember, not approved of by the veriest Barbarians.

And, as I think, it must be granted to you, that such consent of Nations, as
may seem to argue a common principle, whence it is derived; is not easily, and
in many cases, found by those who look beyond the usages of Europe, and the
Colonies planted by the Europ^ans. For Pagans (unless it be in the
acknowledgment of God, in which most agree) do infinitely differ, not only from
Jews and Christians, but from one another, and from their very selves also in
process of time. And those who lived but an hundred years ago, before the
strange improvement of Navigation and Merchandise, could understand but little
of the manners of distant Nations; the Traffic being then in a few Port-Towns
which held little Commerce with the Inland-inhabitants at any remoteness. Yet
is there not hence to be taken such licentious advantage, as if there were no
Law of Nature. For how various soever the opinions and customs of several
Nations are; in this, they all agree, that good is to be done, and evil to be
shunned: which were a vain determination, if it never descended from a general
sense, to particularness of direction, which is the immediate rule of manners:
for it is this or that good which is to be done, and good in general is an
unpracticable notion. Again, there may be eternal Laws of good and evil, though
all consent not in them; because the understanding and manners of men, are
depraved and debauched by ^^stom, and the several arts of our common Enemy;
in^omuch that diverse appear to be men rather in shape and speech, than by
severe Reason the law and rule of Life. And here, let it be noted also, that
such virtues as a man out of society cannot practice, as, some sorts of
justice, gratitude, modesty, and mercy, are laws eternal in the reason of them,
because it can never come to pass that, with advantage to society, they may be
banished out of a Commonwealth. And indeed all the Laws of nature, which relate
to certain states, though alterable in the alteration of Circumstances, yet, in
the reasons of them, they are everlasting: And Reason that bids a man obey his
Father, bids him in some cases, obey not Man but God: and yet the reason is
unchangable on which both depend; to wit, of allegiance to the higher Authority.


Mr. Hobbes. If, now, it were agreed upon, amongst men, what right Reason is,
the controversy would be immediately ended. Reason Leviath. p. 18, 19.
it self is always right reason --. But no one man's reason, nor the reason of
any one number of men, makes the certainty: But the Reason of some Arbitrator,
or Judge, to whose sentence men will stand: When men that think themselves wiser
than all others, clamor and demand right Reason for Judge; they seek no more,
but that things should be determined, by no other men's reason, but their own:
and this is as intolerable in the society of men, as it is in play after trump
is turned, to use for trump on every occasion, that suit whereof they have most
in their hand. For they do nothing else, that will have every of their
passions, as it comes to bear sway in them, to be taken for right reason, and
that in their own controversies: bewraying their want of right reason by the
claim they lay to it See L^v. p. 79, 80.
.


Stud. I cannot but say that prejudice and self-interest does blind the
understanding, and cause it to put evil for good; and humor, and education, and
profit, for reason; and that an unconcerned Judge decideth a difference, to the
commodity not only of peace, but of truth and right. But^seeing it is supposed
that an Arbitrator can pronounce such a righteous sentence; it follows that
he has some standing Rule whereby to guide his judgment. This is not always
the b^ho^f of society; but it may be known, and it may oblige a man considered
by himself, and it concerns the Hermit, and the shipwra^kt person, who is
unfortunately cast upon an uninhabited Island.

Now this dictate of right Reason, which, together with the superadded act of
Conscience, is the Law of Nature, consists in that moral congruity or
proportion which is betwixt the action (of mind, or ^ongue, or hand), and the
object, considered relatively in their proper circumstances. That ou^ minds can
compare the act and object, or discern whether they are congrous or
incongruous, equal or unequal, is plain enough by the daily operations of our
Faculties; the truth of which none but a professed Sceptick, calls in
question; being moved thereto, rather by capricious humor, than strength of his
argument, the reason of which is destroyed by his very Hypothesis, that,
Nothing is certain. And he that calls ou^ Faculties into question, does raze
the foundations of the Mathematics as well as of moral doctrine, and leaves no
more place for the foot of Archimedes, than of Socrates. For it is as manifest
by the comparative operations of our minds, that hatred (for instance) and
disrespect, toward that Being on which we depend for what we are and have is
an ununiform, incongruous, unequal, and disproportioned carriage, as that a
crooked line is unequal to a straight one laying between the same terms.

The like may be said of killing an innocent man whom we know to have bin such,
and whose continuance in integrity we suspect not; and of the abusing a
benefactor. And he that justifies such returns, may with equal truth and
reason, maintain, that the shortest Garment of David is well proportioned to
the properest stat^re of Saul or Goliath* Now to this perception of moral
congruity betwixt the action and the object, considered in their proper
circumstances in relation to men's manners, is added an act of conscience in all
those who attend to the Laws of their Nature, as rules imprinted in them by the
Governor of the World, who made them what they are; and consequently as the
rules of his will in such manner declared to them: and from thence what is
reasonable passes into a Law. And as the mind of man perceives this
proportion, or conformity, greater or less, he knows in some sort the measure
of hi^ obligation. And when he perceives the incongruity to be very little, he
concludes it to be a counsel, rather than a law; yet will he be moved by that
which Ovid calls, decor Recti, if he be endued with a generous nature.

From hence it is manifest, that some primary rules of good and evil, carry a
reason with them so immutable, in the etern^l connection of their terms, that
with modesty enough, we may use, concerning them, that boast of Ovid, touching
his ow^ works; affirming, that neither the rage of Jupiter, nor the most
devouring fire, or War, nor what consumes more than they both, even Time it
self, can abolish and destroy them. And this was the meaning of those in
Aristotle Aristo^. de mor. l. 5 c. 10. p. 84
, who believed that what was natural was immovable, and of the same force in
^ll places, as fire burns here and also in Persia. And this they mean, who
affirm, that God cannot lie, or deny, or hate himself, or approve of him that
hates him, or adoreth him contrary to his declared will; and that he cannot
torture a man, supposed innocent, with never-ceasing misery.


Mr. Hobbes. There is no rule which God may not most justly break, because he
i^ Almighty. This I know Liber. and Nec. p. 24.
God cannot sin, because his doing a thing makes it just, and consequently no
sin. Power Ib. p. 22.
irresi^tible justifies all actions really and properly, in whomsoever, it be
found; less power does not: ^ and because such Power is in God only, he must
needs be just in all his actions, and we who, not comprehending his Counsels,
call him to the Bar* commit injustice in it. And I kn^w that Ib. p. 42.
God may afflict by a right derived from his Omnipotence, though sin were not.


Stud. Far be it from me to say, that God can be supposed to sin, because there
is no Lord superior to him: but, That he would break the rule of eternal
Reason, if he should let his power loose, and do whatsoever might be done,
whether with agreeableness or contradiction to his most excellent Nature:
thous^nds have thought it, neither can they persuade themselves into another
belief. It is true that God might* temporally, have afflicted or annihilated
man if he had lived in a state of uprightness and integrity. For, there is
strict justice observed in this case, whilst God freely takes away what he
freely gave, or sends a calamity to which life is preferred by the reasonable
choice of man. But to afflict a man extremely and eternally without the
intervention of any sin, is to send a torment which does infinitely outweigh
the good of naked existence, and therefore is, by Curcell^us Curcell. de Iure
Dei in Creat. innocent. p. 5. etc.
and diverse others of that School, esteemed inconsistent with that Justice
which is in^eparable from the first Cause: It being absurd to think that such
Justice is not a perfection; and as absurd to imagine that there should be such
a perfection in a created Soul, and not in the self-originated Mind. Therefore
Chrysippus, and the Stoics did make God the Original of Right. And some Ap.
Grot. de Iu. bell. in Prolog.
have derived Ius from Jupiter. And Abraham, the Friend of God, made this
expostulation, for which he had no rebuke* Will thou destroy the Righteous with
the Wicked? And again, this also, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right?
An Agent, armed with Power irresistible, though he cannot be withstood in that
action of his which might produces, yet may he be justly condemned for
unreasonable proceedings. A man who being bound hand and foot, has a fatal
knife put to his throat (in which case the Power is irresistible in respect of
his body, as much as if it were omnipotence) such a one cannot help himself;
but he may judge without either falsehood or partiality, that if in that manner
he is butchered, without regard to any crime, the practice is both cowardly and
unmerciful. But further, if the Deity justifies all by power, and can do
rightly whatsoever may be done by Omnipotence (and for that reason;) then all
the Arguments of the Christian Apologists against the Gentiles (the barbarous
and lascivious practices of whose supposed Gods they judged enough to overthrow
their Divinity, and therefore represented at large their immoralities) were
weak and unconvincing: for there was room of replying, that such manners were
not to be reproved, because the powers above them could so behave themselves
without control. To conclude, whilst by the absolute Sovereignty of God, you
affront his other Attributes, you set up an omnipotent Devil in a worse sense
then Manes the Persian, who, being seduced by the Fable of his Country,
concerning Orimaza and Areimanius, asserted a supreme evil; but did not,
directly, exclude the supreme good out of the world. See, then, how you
reproach the Author of all good, by such an imputation of arbitrary Government,
and of imperious will which stands for a Reason; whereby you take away the
most ingenious motive to Religion, Love and Reverence, produced by a conception
of God as one who See Hum. Not. p. 89.
has the power to do unto us both good and hurt, but not the will to do us
hurt. Remember, also, that the Atheists, in the Book of Wisdom Wisd. 2.2-3 10.11
, who taught after this manner, That the soul was a little spark in the moving
of the heart, said likewise, Let us oppress the poor righteous man, let us not
spare the widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged. Let our
strength be the Law of Justice; for that which is feeble is found to be nothing
worth. Thus want of reason is betrayed by those bold Writers, who slacken the
laws of good and evil.


Mr. Hobbes. Notwithstanding all this clamor, you may find in my own Books,
diverse laws of Nature ^ee de Civ^. c. 2-3. p. 18, 36. and Lev. c. 14, 15. p.
64, etc.
(no fewer then nineteen Lev. p 78
) set down, and dignified with the Epithet of eternal Lev. p. 79
.


Stud. You have, indeed, mentioned certain natural Laws; but you have not
derived them from the reason and equity of their Nature, but from
self-preservation; and called them eternal, not from the unalterable connection
of the terms, but because they always conduce (in your opinion) to the temporal
peace and safety of single persons: which if it may, at any time be advanced by
the violation of such Laws (as is manifest in every Usurpers breach of Faith
and Love) they can not oblige in that instance, because the Reason of them
(such a Reason as you have imagined) is then taken away.

And doubless upon this account, the Fundamentals of your Policy are Hay and
Stubble, and apter to set all things into a blaze, then to support Government,
and (what we are in the eighth Place to discuss) the Laws of Society. For, if
men be lawless in a state of Nature, and for the mere sake of temporal
security, do enter into Covenants, and are obliged to Justice, and Modesty, and
Gratitude, and other suchlike sociable Virtues, only because they conduce to
our peace, and to the keeping of us from the deplorable condition of a War of
every man against every man; then when any subject shall have fair hopes of
advancing himself by treading down Authority, and trampling upon the Laws in a
prosperous Rebellion; what is it, according to your Principles, which can
oblige him to refuse the opportunity? If it be said that one Covenant is this,
that we must keep the rest; it will be again inquired, what Law engages men to
keep that Pact, seeing there is no Law of more ancient descent, unless it be
that of self-preservation? for the sake of which (as it includes not mere
safety, but delight also, as you have stated it Lev. p. 61.
and display of Power) we suppose the Covenants to be broken. So that, without
the obligation laid upon us by Fedility (the Law of God Almighty in our nature)
antecedent to all humane Covenants; such Pacts will become but so many loose
materials, without the main binder, in the fence of the Commonwealth, which
will, therefore, be trodden down, or broken through, by every herd of unruly
men. Men are apt to violate what they esteem most just and sacred, for the sake
of Reigning; and they will be, much more, encouraged to break all Oaths of Duty
and Allegiance, when they once believe, that their ascent into the Throne, and
Possession of the Supreme Power, like the coming of the reputed Heir unto the
Crown* as in the case of Henry the Seventh Lord Bacon in H. 7. p. 13.
, does immediately clear a man of all former Attaindors.


Mr. Hobbes. This specious Lev. p. 73
Reasoning is, nevertheless, false: For when a man does a thing, which,
notwithstanding any thing can be foreseen, and reckoned on, tends to his own
destruction, howsoever some accident, which he could not expect, arriving, may
turn it to his benefit; yet such events do not make it reasonably or wisely
done -- As for the instance of attaining Sovereignty by Rebellion; it is
manifest, that though the event follow, yet because it cannot reasonably be
expected, but rather the contrary; and because by gaining it so, others are
taught to gain the same in like manner, the attempt thereof is against Reason.
Justice therefore, that is to say, keeping of Covenant, is a rule of Reason, by
which we are forbidden to do any thing destructive to our life; and
consequently a law of Nature.


Stud. This then is the Doctrine of Politics, in which you so much applaud your
self; and of the same strain with the pernicious Book, entitled, Natures Dowry
1652. P. 31. cited by the Learned A. of the F. D. in Append. p. 123* Those
Christians who lived under the Heathenish Emperors, but wanted strength to
defend themselves, were by that Precept (Romans 13.1.) obliged to sit still and
to endeavor nothing against those that had the sword in their hands, etc.
, printed the year after the Leviathan: That Rebellion is not iniquity, if,
upon probable grounds, it becomes prosperous: That he who usurps not like a
Politician, is therefore a Villain, because he is a Fool: That all the Usurpers
in the World stepping up into the Throne, by means likely to further their
ascent, pursue the Fundamental Law of Nature, and are rightful and undoubted
Sovereigns: That the Earl of Essex, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth (who, after
some stain of fame in Ireland, and in the days of a popular Queen, and in a
time when he had potent enemies for strength and headpiece, such as Cecil and
Sir Walter Rawleigh, appeared with a small company, upon presumption of the
Queens love in case he should miscarry, and upon hopes of the multitude not
formed to his purpose by confederacy) was a Rebel and a Traitor, because he
was a weak and unfortunate Politician; but that Oliver (who was led on by
success to things he never dreamt of in the days of his Poverty,) and saw the
power of the King declining; and was as sure of being Protector, as a King can
be (upon your grounds) of remaining Sovereign, by the inclination of the
Soldiery, and possession of the Militia; and therefore usurped upon as sure
foundations of self-interest, as the nature of Civil Affairs admits of) was,
by the direct consequence of your opinion, a lawful Prince, a man of
inestimable merit and renown, worthy the Government of thrice three Kingdoms,
of dying in his bed, and of a Fame too wide to be contained betwixt the
Deucalidonian and British Ocean. No, no, there are words more agreeable to his
merit, and they have nothing Poetic in them besides the genuine strain of
verse Mr. Cowley in his Disc. of O. C. p. 59.
. Cursed be the man (what do I wish? as though
The wretch already were not so;
But cursed on let him be) who thinks it brave
And great, his Country to enslave;
Who seeks to overpoise alone
The Balance of a Nation,
Against the whole but naked State;
Who in his own light scale makes up with Arms the weight.



Mr. Hobbes. I have written concerning Oliver ^. Consid. p. 12.
, that his Titles and actions were equally unjust.


Stud. This you wrote indeed, but since the return of his Sacred Majesty, who,
if men had pursued your destructive Principles, and judged his Right to have
ceased with his Power, had for ever been destitute of any other Throne, then
what had been erected in the hearts of the Loyal. Mr. White, also, the
part-boyl'd Romanist, who is honored with the Title of, Most Learned, in the
scurrilous Preface to your Book of Fate, declared in English, in an unhappy
time, Th. White of Obed. and Govern. 17. ground p. 144. etc. to 156. second
Edit. published London 1655.
that a dispossessed Prince ought neither to be desired, nor to endeavor to
return, if the people think themselves to be well, and their Trade and
Employment be undisturbed. And he adds also; Who can answer they shall be
better by the return of the dispossessed party? Surely, in common presumption,
the gainer is like to defend them better then he who lost it. Certainly for
this sentence, at such a time published to this Nation, if for no other cause,
his Books ought to be burnt in England, as well as some of them have been
condemned at Rome; unless we suppose the crabbedness of the style, and the
obscureness and weakness of the Reasoning in them, may tempt the Author, when
better informed, to save Authority the labor of it. Dr. Baily likewise,
revolting from the Church of England, forsook his Loyalty at the same time, and
caressed Oliver, and hoped that, by his means, the Pope might come again, and
set his Imperial feet upon the neck of English Princes: For he concludes his
Legend O. B. life of Bishop Fisher, published the same year with Mr. Whites
Book London, p. 260, etc.
of the Bishop of Rochester, after this manner.

Thus we see Gods Justice in the destruction of the Churches Enemies; (meaning
Thomas Cromwell, Vicar General of the Church under Henry the eighth, and spoiler
of Religious Houses): who knows but that he may help her to such Friends,
though not such as may restore her own Jewels, yet such as may heal her of her
wounds? And who knows but that it may be effected by the same name? Oliva vera
is not so hard to be construed Oliverus, as that it may not be believed, that a
Prophet rather then an Herald, gave the common Father of Christendom, the now
Pope of Rome, Innocent the Tenth) such Ensigns of his Nobility ( viz. a Dove
holding an Olive Branch in her mouth) since it falls short in nothing of being
both a Prophecy and fulfilled, but only his Highness running into her arms,
whose Emblem of Innocence bears him already in her mouth. These Romanists and
your self agree too well in owning of U^^rpers, and measuring right by the
length of the sword: and therefore when such Politi^ians say, that Olivers
Titles and Actions were equally unjust, they are to be understood in such a
sense, as when we say of a very D^nce, that he is as good a Logician as
Grammarian, that is, in truth neither.


Mr. Hobbes. Believe me Sir, my Leviathan was written when Oliver was but
General H. Cons. p. 18.19.
who had not yet cheated the Parliament of their usurped power: [and I never
had a kindness for him or them. I lived peaceably under his Government, at my
return from France, and so did the Kings Bishops also.] Of the Bishops that
then were H. Consid. p. 11.12.
-- there was not one that followed the King out of the Land, though they loved
him, but lived quietly under the protection, first of the Parliament, and then
of Oliver (whose Titles and Actions were equally unjust) without treachery.


Stud. That this is false, your own Conscience will inform you; for the then
Lord Bishop of Londonderry (a man of whom, to your cost, you have heard)
conveyed himself beyond the Seas, and was not there unmindful of the Kings
interest; although he has not boasted of his Travels, as you are wont to do of
your living at Paris. Let the testimony of Bishop Tailor, who was as likely as
any man to know and report the truth, decide the controversy: his words are
these. Bp. T. Fun. ser. p. 49-50.
God having still resolved to afflict us, the good man was forced into the
fortune of the Patriarchs, to leave his Country and his charges, and seek for
safety and bread in a strange Land. -- This worthy man took up his Cross, and
followed his Master. -- At his leaving the Low Countries upon the Kings return,
some of the remonstrant-Ministers coming to take their leaves of this great
man, and desiring that, by his means, the Church of England would be kind to
them; he had reason to grant it, because they were learned men, and in many
things, of a most excellent belief: yet he reproved them, and gave them caution
against it, that they approached too near, and gave too much countenance to the
great and dangerous errors of the Socini^ns. He thus having served God and the
King abroad, God was pleased to return to the King and to us all.

As for diverse others of them, some were imprisoned, and others were by reason
of Age, not so apt for foreign travel: and at home, they promoted the cause of
their Sovereign, which, if all zealous Loyalists had withdrawn themselves,
would, by degrees, have dyed away: and because they refused the Oaths imposed
at the peril of their lives, and of their fortunes (which though they were but
little, were their all,) they therefore are not to be judged treacherous in
undermining the usurped Government, or disloyal to the King in enjoying
protection under Oliver, whom they neither armed, nor owned in power: neither
do you, here, take notice of the great number of loyal Priests, of which, some
fled beyond the Seas, and others, staying in the Land, were, for their the sake
of Allegiance, exposed to as great dangers as the roughest sea could have
threatened them with: but it is the manner of some men, to wound true Loyalty
and Religion through the sides of Ecclesiastic Officers.


Mr. Hobbes. I have not said this to upbraid the Bishops, nor ever H. Con. p.
43-44.
spoke I ill of any of them, as to their persons: and against their Office I
never writ any thing. I never wrote (I say) against Episcopacy; and it is my
private opinion, that such an Episcopacy as is now in England is the most
commodious that a Christian King can use for the the governing of Christ's
Flock: [and if they submitted to Oliver they did justly, being then absolved of
their obedience to their Soveraign]: for the Lev. c. 21. p. 114.
obligation of subjects to the Sovereign, is understood to last as long, and no
longer, then the power lasts, by which he is able to protect them. -- The end
of obedience is protection; which, wheresoever a man sees it, either in his
own, or in another sword, Nature applies his obedience to it, and his
endeavors to maintain it.


Stud. You have here, according as the nature of falsehood requires, backed one
untruth with a second: for, in your Leviathan Lev. p. 385.
, you called Episcopacy a Praeterpolitical Church Government, and preferred
Independencie above all other forms; for, at that time, it was gotten
uppermost, and seemed the growing Interest, and Presbytery decayed: the truth
is, the latter declined before the death of the King, to whose fall, that
Party was loath to give the last thrust: but when your Leviathan came forth,
the house of Lords had bin voted useless, and the members that had voted the
Kings concessions a ground for the House to proceed to a settlement, were
secluded; and the dregs of the House were Anabaptists and Independents: soon
after this Members secluded, Feb. 1. 1648. Lords voted down, Feb. 6. 1648. Lev*
pub. Lo^. 1651.
you, thus libeld, that government which was, then by right, his present
Majesty's:

The Analysis, of the Pontifical Power, is by the same way, the Synthesis or
construction was; but begins with the knot that was last tied (the Popes
Supremacy); as we may see in the dissolution of the Praeterpolitical
Church Government in England. First the power of the Popes was dissolved
totally by Queen Elizabeth; and the Bishops, who before, exercised their
Functions in right of the Pope, did afterward exercise the same, in the right
of the Queen and her successors; though by retaining the Phrase of Jure divino,
they were thought to demand it, by immediate right from God: and so was untyed
the first knot. After this, the Presbyterians lately in England obtained the
putting down of Episcopacy: and so was the second knot dissolved: and almost at
the same time, the power was taken also from the Presbyterians: and so we are
reduced to the Independencie of the Primitive Christians, to follow Paul, or
Cephas, or Apollos, every man as he likes best: which, if it be without
contention, and without measuring the doctrine of Christ, by our affection to
the person of his Minister (the fault which the Apostle reprehended in the
Corinthians) is perhaps the best. Wherefore speak no more of your reverence for
Episcopacy, whilst you have cried hail to it, and yet betrayed it: neither is it
for you to pretend to loyalty, who, when one asked what was the price of a
Roman penny, amidst a Discourse of our civil Wars, (whilst his thoughts were
guided by a train, from, our Wars, to the delivering of the King, from that
to the delivering of Christ, from that to the thirty pence received by Judas,
and from that to the value of the Roman penny) called this, in Print, Lev. p. 9.
a Malicious question, in the days of the Parliament: as if it were malice,
and not just zeal, which occasioned his comparing of the Martyrdom of King
Charles to the death of the blessed Jesus. It is not, for you, to pretend to
loyalty, who place right in force, and teach the people to assist the Usurper,
with active compliance, against a dispossessed Prince; and not merely to live,
at all adventure, in his Territories, without owning the protection by unlawful
oaths, or by running into arms against their dethroned Sovereign.


Mr. Hobbes. I cannot but place the right of H. Cons. p. 19.
government there, weresoever the strength shall be; [whatsoever be the
ignominious terms with which you revile me.]


Stud. I say then again, (and I neither revile nor slander you, unless it can
be done by the repetition of the truth) that you give encouragement to
Usurpers; and also, when civil discords are on foot (as it happens too
frequently in all States) you, hereby move such people as are yet on the side
of their lawful Prince, whose affairs they see declining, straitway to adjoyn
themselves to the more prospe^ous party, and to help to overturn those thrones
of Soveraigntie, at which a while before they prostrated themselves: for, in
your way of reasoning, they have a right to preserve or delight themselves, by
any course of means, and can be best protected by the prevailing side, which
because it has more degrees of growing power, has it seems, therefore more
of right. The people thus miss-instructed, will imitate those idolatrous
Heathens, who, for some years, worshipped a presumed Goddess made fast unto an
Oak: but as soon as the Tree began by Age and Tempest, to appear decaying,
they paid no further devotion to their Deity, neither would they come within
the shadow of the Oak or Image.


Mr. Hobbes. Against this abuse of what I have taught, I have made provision,
by inser^ing this amongst other Laws of Nature, that Lev. p. 390.
every man is bound by nature, as much as in him lies, to protect in War the
Authority, by which he is himself protected in time of Peace.


Stud. That Law was forgotten in the body of your Leviathan, and comes late
into the review: the wound is first made, and then you endeavor to skin it
over; but neither can it so be closed: for this and all other Laws of Nature
obliging no further (as has been already noted) then they promote the first,
the Law of self-interest; it is in the choice of every subject (whom De Civ. l.
1. c. 1 p. 12. Sect. 9.
you make Judge of the means to preserve himself,) to apply himself to the
stronger side; or for a company combined in arms and counsel, when an Heir and
a Traitor are engaged in Battle with equal success (as was the practice of the
Lord Stanley, and Sir William Stanley and their adherents in the Engagement at
Bosworth-Field) to give the day to the side they presume will most favor them,
by over-poising the power of the other side, by their fresh supply. Fear will
not keep men from such attempts; especially fear of outward punishment, whilst
every one hopes to conquer, and to mend his game (as you well Lev. p. 48.
know) by a new shuffle; and is (by you) misperswaded, that failing in the
enterprise, to his temporal peril, is his only offense against the Law of
Nature. There is no tie so strong as that of Religion, which eternally binds
a conscientious subject in allegiance to his Sovereign: and Wars arise from
men's self-interests and lusts: and true goodness is both the Creator and
Preserver of Peace: unless a man obeys for Conscience sake, all the cords of
outward Pacts and Covenants will not hold him, when he ^reameth that the
Philistines are upon him, and that he can deliver himself by force from the
^ower of his Enemies; in which number the Prince himself is reckoned by
ambitious subjects, ^ut of favor: neither will such Covenants hold the people
that pretend unto Religion, if ^hey be mis-taught that God is glorified in
their private good, and that their private good is to ^e valued before the life
of a Prince, if they can ^afely deprive him of it. For it is truly said ^y a
Friend of yours, Memoires of Q. E. p. 53.
That zeal, like lead, ^s as ready to drop into bullets, as to mingle with a
composition fit for medicine.


Mr. Hobbes. Covenants Lev. p. 89 See p. 87.
being but words, and breath, have no force to oblige, contain, constrain, or
protect any man, but what it has from the public Sword. The Laws of Nature
Lev. p. 85
(as Justice, Equity, Modesty, Mercy, and (in sum) doing to others as we would
be done to) of themselves, without the terror of some power, to cause them to
be observed, are contrary to our natural passions, that carry us to partiality,
pride, revenge, and the like. And Covenants without the Sword, are but words,
and of no strength to secure a man at all.


Stud. The matter is much mended by this answer; and you who cause or permit
(for with you they are the same) a person, of none of the best manners, in a
Preface to your Book of Destiny to revile the Ambassadors of our Lord, and to
levy against them, not the force of argument, but of foaming malice, and to
reproach them by saying that they are ignorant Tinkers, and Soderers of
Conscience; how do you merit the same mock-name, by making wide holes and
passages for every rebellious spirit, instead of stopping an Objection which
charged your Doctrine with disloyalty? For thus, Society is like a State of
Nature, and all is managed still by force, notwithstanding the formalities of
transferring Right by Pacts, and every man is to stand no longer to his
bargain, when he can break it to his advantage: And thus, the Prince is always
in a state of danger, because he cannot be, a day secure, of remaining
uppermost; seeing the people are taught by you, to believe that the right of
Authority is a deceit, and that every one would have as good a title, if he had
as long a sword: For the many-headed Beast will throw the Rider when he
burdens and galls them, having no check of inward Law. For the Prince has but
the strength of a single man, and the people cannot confer irresistible Power,
unless when they lift up their hands on high, they can give up their nerves,
and muscles, and spirits, as well as testify their present approbation. Woe to
all the Princes upon earth, if this doctrine be true, and becomes popular: if
the multitude believe this, the Prince, not armed with the scales of the
Leviathan, that is, with irresistible power, can never be safe from the Spears
and Barbed irons, which their ambition and presumed interest will provide, and
their malice will sharpen, and their passionate violence throw against him. If
the Beast, we speak of, come but to know its own strength, it will never be
managed: Wherefore such as own these pernicious doctrines, destructive to all
Societies of men, may be said to have Wolves heads, as the Laws of old were
wont to speak concerning excommunicated Persons; and are like those ravenous
beasts, so far from deserving our love and care, that they ought to be
destroyed at the common charge. What you have written three times over, in your
de cive, de corpore politico, and Leviathan, ought rather to be esteemed seeds
of sedition, then Elements of government and society: the Principles of the
Zelots amongst the Papists (who obey a Foreign Power against the King) are not
consistent with the government of England; yet, like the Elements in Aristotle,
they are not burdensome in their proper place of Italy: but of such large
infection is the doctrine, that it will endanger the life of the Commonwealth,
wheresoever it is entertained in the consequences of it.


Mr. Hobbes. At Paris H. Co^. p. 7.
I wrote my Book de cive in Latin -- and I know no book more magnified then
that beyond the Seas. Natural Philosophy Ep* ded. Be^. d^ Corpore.
is but young; but civil Philosophy yet much younger, as being no older (I say
it provoked, and that my detractors may know how little they have wrought upon
me) then my own book de Cive: a short Six Less. p. 56.
sum of that book of mine, now publicly in French, done by a Gentleman I
never saw, carries the title of Aethics demonstrated: accuse not then such
Politics, as are, though new, yet of sure foundation.


Stud. Your Doctrine is old enough, and I wish it had one property of Age, to
be attended with decay. Carneades and diverse others bottomed Policy and
self-Interest, and you have only wire-drawn that which is delivered by them in
a lump: and for this, as is the manner of diverse who have an itch of writing,
you claw your self. I could repeat to you, diverse sayings of the ancient
deceivers in Morality; such as are, Armatus leges ut o^gitem? nec natura
potest justo secernere iniquum, -- utilitas justi prope matter and aequi, and
the like: but you would then turn all off, by deriding me for having made a
motly Oration. I have sometimes, by my self, made this conjecture, that you
being so conversant with Thu^ydides; the Oration of Euphemus Thucyd. l 6. p.
467. (...).
delivered there, might first hint to you your sandy Politics: for that
Athenian Ambassador to the Camarin^i, amongst other things tending much that
way, at last plainly told them, that to a Governor nothing which was
profitable was dishonest, or unreasonable: which Doctrine, because it invites
ambitious men to step into Authority when the door is open, and mercenary
soldiers to decide a dispute, not in favor of the right, but the most
profitable side; because it moves them that are supreme to become Tyrants in
the exercise of that power, which Religion ought to limit, though the people
may not, and to make their passions their chief rules, and to govern with
Armies rather then Laws, or, if with both, to die their Flags, and to write
their Edicts, in the blood of whom they please: because, I say, it takes off
all sense of what we call humanity from the supreme powers, and so, not unlike
to a Porta Sabina, calls in innumerable evils upon such people as are quiet and
modest; it therefore ought, no more to be sucked in, by Prince or People, then
pernicious air in time of common Pestilence.


Mr. Hobbes. Name not Tyranny as a word of reproach, for the name of Tyranny
Lev p. 392. Review^
signifies nothing more nor less, then the name of Sovereignty, be it in one,
or many men, saving that they that use the former word, are understood to be
angry with them they call Tyrants: and I think the toleration of a professed
hatred of Tyranny, is a toleration of hatred to Commonwealth in general -- So
that here, Six Less. p. 62.
I must say to you, Peace, down, for you bark now at the Supreme Legislative
power; therefore it is not I but the Laws which must rate you off. And now me
thinks my endeavor Ep. ded. bes. Lev.
to advance the civil power, should not be by the civil power condemned; nor
private men, by reprehending it, declare they think that power too great [and
after what manner I endeavor the advancement of it, I think it worth the time
to declare to you.] I show Lev. p* 105.
that the Scripture requires absolute obedience: I teach Lev. p. 108.109.
that the people have made artificial chains, called civil laws, which they
themselves, by mutual Covenants, have fastened at one end, to the lips of that
man, or Assembly, to whom they have given the Sovereign power; and at the other
end, to their own ears: that, ibid. and Lev. p. 90. ^82.
nothing the Sovereign can do to the Subject, can properly be called Injustice
or injury, because every subject is Author of every Act the Sovereign does.
That Lev. p. 128. see p. 169.
the propriety of a subject excludes not the dominion of the Sovereign, but
only of another subject.


Stud. Remember Sir, the case of Ahab and Naboth; unless you suppose it in
times of public necessity.


Mr. Hobbes. Interrupt me not: I teach also, that Lev. p. 95.
the King is the absolute Representative, and that it is dangerous to give such
a title to those men, who are sent up by the people to carry their Petitions,
and give him (if he permit it) their advice. That Lev. p. 137.169.
the Sovereign is sole Legislator, and not subject to civil laws. That Lev. p.
143. c. 26.
to him there cannot be any knot in the law, insoluble; either by finding out
the ends to undo it by; or else by making what ends he will, (as Alexander did
with his sword in the Gordian-knot,) by the Legislative power; which no other
Interpreter can do. That there is Lev. p. 24.
no common Rule of good and evil, to be taken from the Nature of the objects
themselves; but from the Person of the man (where there is no Commonwealth)
or, (in a Commonwealth) from the Person that represents it, or from an
Arbitrator or Judge, whom men disagreeing shall by consent set up, and make his
sentence the rule thereof. That Lib. and Nec. p. 29.
where there is no law, there no killing or any thing else can be unjust. That
L^v. p. 91
the civil Sovereign is Judge of what doctrines are fit to be taught. I also
maintain Leviath. p. 119 c 33
that Sovereigns, being in their own Dominions the sole Legislators; those
books only are Can^nical, that is, Law in every Nation, which are established
for such by the Sovereign Authority.


Stud. In some things you are just to the Praerogative of Kings; but in others,
you ought to have remembered the words of our Lord, who advises us to give to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. For
your cavil at the name Tyrant, it is in the sense I used it (for exercise of
unlimited power) unbecoming a Prince: but I know how very frequently it is
misapplied by those, who will call the very bridling of their licentiousness,
hateful Tyranny; and find fault with the law, for no other reason but because
it is a r^straint upon their supposed freedom: whereas the hedges which the
law sets down, are to keep them only in the truest and safest way. The absolute
Princes of Syracuse were called Tyrants, though some of them deserved the title
of Benefactors: and amongst our selves, the best of Kings was branded with that
ignominious character. For that which you have justly said in favor of a
Monarch, had it bin Printed before Forty eight, it might have bin of good
effect, at least it might have showed a disposition to promote Loyalty. But
being published, after the Kings Martyrdom, and his Sons exile, it served the
purposes of those people who had then the Militia in their hands. For you say
Lev. p. 102.
that the Rights of a Commonwealth by acquisition, are the same with those, by
Institution or Succession: That the power of the Representative (whether in one
or many) cannot without consent be transferred, forfeited, accused, punished:
and that such a person is Supreme Judge. The Parliament therefore ought to have
returned you thanks, for ascribing to them the strength of the Leviathan, and
for keeping their nostrils free from the books of the right Heir and his
adherents. They ought, especially, to have given you the thanks of the House
for saying, Lev. p. 241.
I maintain nothing in any Paradox of Religion; but attend the end of that
dispute of the Sword, concerning the Authority, (not yet amongst my Countrymen
decided) by which all sorts of Doctrine are to be approved, or rejected; and
whose commands, both in speech and writing; (whatsoever be the opinions of
private men) must by all men, that mean to be protected by their Laws, be
obeyed.

But notwithstanding all this, what you seem to build up on the side of the
Sovereign, you pull down on the side of the People. For whilst you found all
upon single Self-interest, (to the advancement of which all safe means are, by
you, esteemed Lev. p 90 De Cive, c.
lawful) these specious rights are no longer his, then by main force he can
keep possession of them. That will not be long, if great Delinquents called in
question, and miserable people (who, like such as stake their Cloak in an
over-hot day, are willing to hazard the life they would be rid of; and are
easily misled, not looking upon the stumbling blocks in the way, but Lev. p.
159.
on the light that others carry before them), if these, can promote their
private good, by Sword, or Poison, or Mutiny. The people, if they believed that
a company of Delinquents Lev. p. 111, 112-113 See p. 69 o^ Lev. and L. S.
Natur^s Dowry in Append. to F.D. p. 54
, joining together to defend themselves by Arms, do not at all unjustly; but
may, lawfully, repel lawful Force, by Force; they would soon be stirred up, and
suffer none, for whom they have respect, to be brought to justice.

For your last particular concerning the Power of the Civil Sovereign, in
relation to that for which we have assigned

The Ninth place, that is to say, the Canon of holy Scripture; it see^eth a
great indignity offered to the Sovereignty of Christ. Upon this occasion, I
remember a saying of Dr. Weston, which would better have become a man in Buff,
then a Prolocutor of the Convocation. After six days spent in hot dispute about
Religion, in the Reign of Queen Mary, he dismissed those of the Reformed way in
these words Dr. Hey^ins Hist. of the Reform. in Q. M. p. 30
: It is not the Queens pleasure that we should spend any longer time in these
debates; and ye are well enough already: for you have the Word, and we have the
Sword. So little of the obligation of holy Writ is perceived by those whose
eyes are dazzled with Secular Grandeur.

But, before we come to dispute of the power which makes the Scripture- Canon,
which is, as 'twere the Main Battle; may we not a little breathe and prepare
our selves, in some lesser Skirmishes, touching the Writings of the Old and New
Testament?


Mr. Hobbes. If you like that course, I am ready to join with you. First, then,
I take notice Lev. p. 200.201. at large.
that diverse historical Books of the Old Testament, were not written by those
whose names they bear; to wit, much of the Pentateuch, the Books of Ioshuah,
and Judges, and Ruth, and Samuel, and Kings, and Chronicles.


Stud. This has bin, long since said, and proved, by the places which you cite
in your Leviathan, by the Frenchman who founded a Systeme of Divinity upon the
conceit of men before Adam! who also, by Recantation, unravel'd his own Cobweb,
spun out of his own fancy, rather then the true Records of time. But this does
not invalidate the truth of those Histories, whose sufficient antiquity is, by
you, granted.


Mr. Hobbes. I observe, again, concerning the Book of Job Lev. p. 202.
, that though it appear sufficiently that he was no feigned person, yet the
Book it self seems not to be an History, but a Treatise concerning a question
in ancient time disputed, why wicked men have often prospered in this world,
and good men have been afflicted: and it is the more probable, because the
whole dispute is in Verse -- but Verse is no usual style of such as either are
themselves in great pain, as Job; or of such as come to comfort them, as his
Friends; but in Philosophy, especially moral Philosophy, in ancient time
frequent.


Stud. It is not thought that Job or his Friends, but Moses, or some other,
penned the History in the form in which we have it. But however you here allege
a Reason, which proves the contrary to the purpose you would have it serve
for: For Poetry exciting the imagination and affections, is fittest for
painting out the Scene of Tragedy. You have surely forgotten Ovid de Tristibus.


Mr. Hobbes. Please your self in replies: I will proceed to observe further,
that Lev. ^ 203. See Lev. 284.
as for the Books of the Old Testament, they are derived to us, from no other
time then that of Esdras, who, by the direction of Gods Spirit, ^etrived them,
when they were lost.


Stud. That place in the fourth Book of Esdras, wherein it is said in his
person, Thy Law is burnt 4 E^d. c. 14.21, etc.
, therefore no man knows the things that thou have done, is a very fable. For
though the Autographa of Moses, and the Prophets have been thought to have
perished at the burning of Jerusalem, yet it is not true that all the Copies
were destroyed: For the Prophets, in the Captivity Dan. ^.11, 1^, 1^.
read the Law. And concerning that whole fourth Book, it is said by Bellarmine
himself, De Sc^^p. Eccles. p. 22.
that the Author is a Romancer. Of the like nature may they seem who talk of
the men of the Synagoga magna, making Ezra to be a chief man amongst them, and
ascribing to them the several divisions and sections of the Old Testament; even
that, wherein the Book of Daniel is (most absurdly) reckoned amongst the
Hagiographa. Of that Synagoga magna, there is not one word spoken by Josephus,
or St. Hierom, though both had very fair occasions, in some parts of their
writings, to have entreated of it. And the deficiencie of the Jewish story,
about that time, may move us to believe that this was the fiction of modern
Rabbis; and Morinus thinks he has demonstrated that so it was.


Mr. Hobbes. I note again, that the Lev. p. ^99.
Septuagint, who were seventy Learned men of the Jews, sent for by Ptolomy King
of Egypt, to translate the Jewish Law, out of the Hebrew into Greek, have left
us no other Books for holy Scripture in the Greek Tongue, but the same that are
received in the Church of England.


Stud. It is not resolved whether they translated any more then the five Books
of Moses, and whether they turned them out of Hebrew, Chaldee, or the Samaritan
Tongue, to which latter Pentateuch the translation of the seventy is showed, by
Hottinger, to agree most exactly, in a very great number of places, by him
produced in order See ^^otting. These. Philolog. p. 2^1, etc.
: but there is as great question whether that we have, be the true Copy of the
Seventy: for seeing therein the names of places (as (...) for Caphto^im) are
there rendered not according to the Hebrew, but after the manner in which they
were called in the latter times under the second Temple See Dr. Light-foot's
Horae Hebr. in S. Marc. p. 49, 50.
; the antiquity of the Copy of Rome may be suspected.


Mr. Hobbes. Be it also observed, that those Books which are called Apocrypha
were left out of the Canon, not for inconformity of Doctrine with the rest, but
only because they are not found in the Hebrew.


Stud. Here, again, you err: for by the same Reason, some part which is
contained in the Canon, should have been, of old, excluded. For instance, the
Book of Daniel is partly written in Hebrew, and partly written in Caldee; for
Daniel had learnt that Tongue in Babylon by the command of the King. Neither
are all Apocryphal Books to be thought not written in Hebrew; for that
excellent Book of the Son of Syrach, as is manifest by his Preface to it, was a
translation out of the Hebrew Copy of his Grandfather Jesus. The Reason why
such Books were not received by the Jews into the Canon, was not what you
suggest, but because they seemed not written by that kind of prophecy which
they called Ruach Hakkodesh See Vo^sin in Proem. Pug. fid. p. 103.
.


Mr. Hobbes. I confess Lev. p. 199. c. 33.
St. Hierom had seen the first of the Maccabees in Hebrew.


Stud. Neither is that rightly noted: For the Book which St. Hierom saw, as is
thought by Drusius, a man profoundly learned in these matters, was the first
Book of the History of the Hasmon^ei, whose Epoch was of later date, though the
names are used promisouously amongst the Jews.


Mr. Hobbes. I proceed to note, that Lev. p. ^03, 204.
the Writers of the New Testament lived all in less then an age after Christ's
Ascension, and had all of them seen our Savior, or been his Disciples, except
St. Paul, and St. Luke; and consequently whatsoever was written by them is as
ancient as the time of the Apostles. But the time wherein the Books of the New
Testament were received, and acknowledged by the Church to be of their writing,
is not altogether so ancient -- These Books, of which the Copies were not many,
nor could easily be all in any one private man's hand, cannot be derived from a
higher time, then that wherein the Governors of the Church collected,
approved, and recommended them to us, as the Writings of those Apostles and
Disciples, under whose names they go. The first Enumeration of all the Books,
both of the Old and New Testament, is in the Canons of the Apostles, supposed
to be collected by Clement the first (after St. Peter) Bishop of Rome. But
because that is but supposed, and by many questioned, the Council of Laodicea
is the first we know, that recommended the Bible to the then Christian
Churches, for the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles: and this Council was
held in the 364 year after Christ. At which time, though ambition had so far
prevailed on the great Doctors of the Church, as no more to esteem Emperors
though Christian, for the Shepherds of the people, but for Sheep; and Emperors
not Christian, for Wolves; and endeavored to pass their Doctrine, not for
counsel and informatition, as Preachers; but for Laws, as absolute Governors;
and thought such frauds as tended to make the people more obedient to Chr^stian
Doctrine, to be pious; yet I am persuaded they did not therefore falsify the
Scriptures, though the Copies of the Books of the New Testament, were in the
hands only of the Ecclesiastics; because if they had had an intention so to
do, they would surely have made them more favorable to their power over
Christian Princes, and civil Sovereignty, then they are.


Stud. It is plain to those who are versed in the Monuments of the Church, that
the Books of the New Testament were declared Canon very early, though the
precise time and place be not so easily known. Upon the Enumeration made in the
Apostolic Canons, we rely not; not because that Book is to be esteemed wholly
spurious; but because this Enumeration is made in the eighty fourth Canon. For
the first fifty are those for whose antiquity we contend. It is true that the
whole is called Apocryphal, by the Council Bin* Conc. tom. 3. p. 663.
at Rome under Pope Gelasius: and it has been answered, Dr. Him. Conc. Ign^t.
Ep. p. 4.
that they were so called, not as if they were not ancient Pieces, but because
they were not made Nomocanon or Canon Law. But doubtless that Council rejected
them as spurious Writings, numbering them amongst the late and feigned pieces of
the Gospel of St. Andrew, the Revelation of St. Paul, the Books of Og the
Giant, of the Testament of Job, of the Daughters of Adam, and the like. But it
has also condemned the works of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius,
and the History of Ensebius; and therefore it is not material what writing
stands or falls, before such erroneous Judges. Certain it is by other
passages, in ancient Writers, that the New Testament was acknowledged to be
Canon, long enough before the Council of Laodicea. The earliest Christian
Writers whose Books are derived to our hands, abound in ^itations of the New
Testament, as the undoubted Register of what was done, and taught, and as the
public Rule. Tertullian (for example) cites very many places out of every
Book which now is contained in the Canon of the New Testament, if I except the
second of St. Peter. And in his fourth Book against Marcion Tert. adv. Marc. l
4. p. 415.
he speaks effectually to our present purpose. If that (said he) be tru^st
which was first, and that be first which ^as from the beginning, and that be
from the beginning which is derived from the Apostles, it is also manifest,
that that was from the Apostles which is sacred in the Churches of the
Apostles. Let us see then what milk St. Paul fed the Corinthians with: by what
rule the Galatians were reformed; what the Philippians, Thessalonians,
Ephesians read; as also what the Romans preach, to whom St. Peter and St. Paul
did leave the Gospel sealed with their blood. We have also Churches instructed
by St. John. For although Marcion has rejected his Apocalypse, yet the
succession of Bishops traced to the begin^ing, will establish him as the
certain Author of that Book. And he had taught a while before Ter^. ^b. p. 14.
B.
, that the Gospel had Apostles and Apostolic men for their undoubted Authors.
The Books then of the New Testament were received anciently enough, as the
Writings of such whose names they bare, and as the Records of Truth. And for
the Copies of them, they were so widely dispersed, that it was as hard to
corrupt them all, as to poison the Sea. They were before the Council of
Laodicea, not only in the hands of Ecclesiastics, but of Christians of any
profession; and of Heathens also. So it appears by the reflections,
invidiously made on them, by Celsies, and Hierocles; not to name Porphyry, who
was once of the Jewish, then of the Christian Religion; and against both at
last, by foul Apostasy. In the persecution of D^ocletian, in the beginning of
the fourth Century, there was an Edict for the delivering up the Copies of the
Gospel: which for fear, was done by diverse Christians, known by the name of
Traditores in Church History; and yet notwithstanding very many Copies were
preserved by such good men, who valued the other ^tate before this, and feared
to be blotted out of the Book of life, if they should so contribute to the
extermination of the Books of Scripture. Historians tell us Vide Bisciol. Epit.
Annal. Bar. p. 137. Tradit. ingens numerus; sed prope insi^irus ill^rum, qui
mortem potius, etc.
that the number of the Traditores was very great; but that the number of such
who (as the Roman Office says) chose rather to give up themselves to the
Executioners, then to deliver up holy things to Dogs, was almost infinite: and
amongst these were very many Virgins, particularly Crispina, Marciana, Candida.
So apparently false it is, that the Copies were but few, and those few only in
the hands of Ecclesiastics. But in whatsoever hands these Books were, and at
whatsoever time they were first publicly acknowledged, in this (I think) we
agree, (and Julian himself Jul. Apost. Epist. p. 195.
confessed it, when Apostate) that they are genuine.


Mr. Hobbes. I see not Lev. p. ^04.
any reason to doubt, but that the Old and New Testament, as we have them now,
are the true Registers of those things, which were done and said by the
Prophets and Apostles.


Stud. What hinders then, that we may not at all times, do or speak the
things contained in them, after such manner as we are there directed? And that
the Scripture should not be a perpetual Canon to every Christian; seeing the
Laws of Christ are contained in it, and the Successors of the Apostles (who
could bind them upon the Church with sufficient right, though not with outward
force) propounded them as necessary Rules of life? But, methinks, it is enough
to constitute a Canon to any particular man, if he may, by any means attain
unto a certain belief, of any Rule, as delivered by Christ; without a
superadded Decree Ecclesiastical or Civil.


Mr. Hobbes. That Lev. c. 42 p. 284 285
the new Testament should in this sense be Canonical, that is to say, a Law in
any place, where the Law of the Commonwealth had not made it so, is contrary to
the nature of a Law. For a Law is the Commandment of that Man, or Assembly, to
whom we have given Sovereign Authority, to make such Rules for the direction of
our Actions, as he shall think fit; and to punish us when we do any thing
contrary to the same. When therefore any other man shall offer unto us any
other Rules, which the Sovereign Ruler has not prescribed, they are but
Counsel, and Advice; which, whether good or bad, he that is counseled, may
without injustice refuse to observe; and when contrary to the Laws already
established, without injustice cannot observe, how good soever he conceives it
to be. I say, he cannot in this case observe the same in his actions; nor in
his discourse with other men; though he may without blame believe his private
Teachers, and wish he had the liberty to practice their advice; and that it
were publicly received for Law.


Stud. Then, it seems, before the days of Constantine, a private man was
obliged to be, a Jew, or a Gentile, according to the Civil Authority under
which he was; and that Christianity did not oblige^ ^e conversation of any man.


Mr. Hobbes. Christ Lev. p. 285.
has not subjected us to other Laws then those of the Commonwealth; that is,
the Jews to the Law of Moses, (which he says ( Mat. 5.) he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill) and other Nations to the Laws of their several
Sovereigns.


Stud. That Christ subjected the Jews to the Laws of Moses, considered as such,
is a saying which relisheth both of ignorance and irreligion. It is evident
that the very Law of the Ten Commandments, obliges not any Christian man,
(though he be supposed to live under a Jewish* Sovereign) as delivered by
Moses, but as the design of them agrees with the Law of Nature, and of
Christ, who advanced both Laws, and filled them up, adding as 'twere his last
hand to an imperfect Draught. And for the Cer^monial Law, our Savior came to
put an end to it, because it was but an estate of expectation, and consisted in
shadows of good things to come: and if he had established that as an enduring
Law, he had, in effect, denied himself to be the true Messiah. For the
sprinkling of the Altar with the blood of Bulls and Goats, after the ancient
manner of the Jews, imports manifestly that the effectual Oblation is not yet
offered: wherefore S. Paul G^l. 5.^, ^.
bespeaketh his Galatians after this manner: Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke
of bondage. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing. Moses himself foretold that our Savior should arise
after him, and become a Prophet to be obeyed in whatsoever he taught the people
Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. comp. with. Acts 3.22, etc.
: wherefore Caesar Vanin, who suffered as an Atheist, said, in his Dialogues,
that Moses was not so politic as the Messiah, in delivering his Laws; because
he foretold the abrogation of them, whilst Christ propounded his as everlasting.

Then for Christ's subjecting the Gentiles to the Law of their Civil Sovereign,
of what persuasion soever, it is contrary to the great design of our Saviors
coming: for amongst the Heathen the worship of false Gods was the Law of their
Country. It was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables Nemo separatim Deos
habesci^.
, that no man could have a personal Religion, but worship ^^ch Gods, and in
such manner, as the Law of his Country did prescribe. And Cicero shows ^ow, in
his days, it was not lawful to worship any sort of Gods; lest a confusion
should be brought into Religion. Hence Augustus, tra^elling in Egypt, would
not step out of his way, to visit Apis; and Caius his Nephew, passing through
Judea, would not worship at Jerusalem. Hence Socrates and Protagoras,
main^aining opinions disagreeing with the Religion of their Country, were
condemned; and Ana^^arsis, also, suffered in Scythia for celebrating the Feast
of Bacchus, by the Foreign Ceremonies of Greece. Hence Christ was not
registered in the Calendar of the Gods, though Tiberius understanding his
Divinity from Pontius Pilate, gave his suffrage for it; because it pleased not
the Senate; and because (says Tertullian) it was an old Decree of Rome, that
no man should be consecrated for a Deity by the Emperor, without their
Approbation. If then all persons were to be outwardly obedient to the Civil
powers, they were to worship false Deities; Idolatry being then established by
a Law: but on the contrary, it is evident, that one main end of our Saviors
coming was to destroy the works of the devil, and to bring the Gentiles from
the worship of Demons, to the service of the true God. Idolaters, therefore,
are reckoned amongst those who shall not inherit the kingdom of Christ: and S.
Paul wrote so much particularly to 1 Cor. 6.9 Ephesians. 5.5 1 Cor. 10.7
the Corinthians, and Ephesians, of those days, when the Powers were Heathen;
and not merely to such as should read his Epistles in and after the Reign of
Constantine and preaching at Athens against the Altar, To the unknown God (set
up, no doubt, by public^ Authority) and declaiming against the honor paid to
false Gods; he lets them understand that the times of the ignorance of the
Gentiles Acts 17.30, 31.
God winked at, but now he commandet all men everywhere to repent; because he
has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom h^ has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him from the dead.


Mr. Hobbes. Such discourses are Counsels and not Laws. Our Savior Leviath. p
285.
and his Apostles left no new Laws to oblige us in this world, but new Doctrine
to prepare us for the next; the Books of the New Testament which contain that
Doctrine, until obedience to them was commanded, by them that God had given
power to on earth to be Legislators, were not obligatory Canons, that is, Laws,
but only good, and safe advice, for the direction of sinners in the way to
salvation, which every man might take, and refuse at his peril, without
injustice.


Stud. The Doctrines of Christ avail not, at all, toward an entrance into his
kingdom, without obedience Heb 5.9.
to his Laws: and besides, those of mere Nature, he has left new Laws unto the
world: such are those of forgiving enemies, and against private Revenge: those,
concerning Baptism, and his holy Supper: concerning Divorce and Polygamy:
concerning a professing of faith in him as the Messiah: concerning an Inward
Religion, which the Governors of the world cannot take cognizance of; and
which Trypho the Jew, with many others, has denied to have been given by
Moses, whose Laws they suppose to have extended not to the thought, but the
conversation. That which concerns Polygamy has (I know) bin doubted; yet (as
it seems to me) without reason: for when our Savior said S Luke 16.18.
that he who puts away his wife and marries another, commits Adultery;
he plainly forbad plurality of wives at the same time; which if it had bin
allowed, the man might have taken more then another to him, without sin. Here
then the Law of perfection has bound us, where Nature seems to have left us
at liberty. Now seeing these Institutions are the will of Christ, and that
Christ has made sufficient promulgation of them to millions of men, and that
he is King of kings, and Lord of lords, and that he has annexed to them the
greatest rewards and punishments to secure them from violation; it is evident
that these are sufficient Laws, both without and against the Civil Sanction.
For to say that the Princes of the Earth are Superior to Christ, is a Blasphemy
of such altitude, that the ninetieth degree being cut, we can scarce take the
height of it. What makes a Superior Law, but a Superior Power, declaring
his Will in some particular instances, to be obeyed? The Prohibition of the
Tree of Life was the firmest Law to Adam, though no humane Law was then
enacted; nay, although Adam was King of the Earth.

But, if the Christian Faith was not a Law for more then three hundred years,
to what end is it See Lev. p. 286.
that the Apostles, and other Pastors of the Church, after their time should
meet together, to decree upon what Doctrine should be taught, both for faith
and manners, if no man were obliged to observe their Decrees?


Mr. Hobbes. To this Ibid.
may be answered, that the Apostles and Elders of that Council, were obliged
even by their entrance into it, to teach the Doctrine therein concluded, and
decreed to be taught, so far forth, as no precedent Law, to which they were
obliged to yield obedience, was to the contrary; but not that all other
C^^istians should be obliged to observe what they taught: For though they might
deliberate what each of them should teach; yet they could not deliberate what
others should do, unless their Assembly had had a Legislative Power; which none
could have but civil Sovereigns.


Stud. That is, the Gospel preached by them was no Law then, because it did not
cut its way by the Temporal Sword, and had no outward Power to give it
countenance, and urge its entertainment. Is that your meaning?


Mr. Hobbes. You conjecture aright: For Lev. p. 285.
in Christ's Commission to his Apostles and Disciples -- there is nothing of
power but persuasion. -- They had not in Commission to make Laws; but to obey,
and teach obedience to Laws made; and consequently they could not make their
writings obligatory Canons, without the help of the Sovereign Civil Power.


Stud. That See in the end of that page, and p. 286.
which may seem to give the New Testament, in respect of those that have
embraced Christian Doctrine, the force of Laws in the times and places of
persecution, is the Decrees they made amongst themselves in their Synods. For
we read ( Acts 15.28.) the style of the Council of the Apostles, the Elders,
and the whole Church, in this manner: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and unto
us, to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary things, etc. which
is a style that signifies a power to lay a burden on them that had received
their Doctrine. Now to lay a burden on another, seems the same that to
oblige; and therefore the Acts of that Council were Laws to the then Christians.


Mr. Hobbes. They were no more Laws then are those other Precepts, Repent; be
baptized; keep the commandments; believe the Gospel; come unto me; sell all
that thou have; give it to the poor; and, follow me: which are not Commands,
but Invitations, and callings of men to Christianity, like that of Esaias 55.1.
Ho, every man that thirsts, come ye to the waters.


Stud. I^ seems strange that such Counsels should not therefore be Laws,
(though some of them are given imperatively enough) because men are gently
wooed and invited, and not by outward force compelled to an outside obedience.
Our subordination to Christ obliges us to the performance of his revealed
will, which is, for that reason, Law. And because he chooses to rule us,
rather with a Scepter of Righteousness, then an iron Rod, we are, by that, the
more obliged, and not at liberty from obedience. You ought, therefore, to have
said, not that the Doctrines of our Savior were not Laws, but that the Civil
Sovereign may lay a further obligation upon his Christian subjects, (as those
that make a vow of Chastity, do, upon themselves) by making them become his
Laws. Thus many Articles of the Christian Faith are inserted into the first Law
of the Codex Theodosianus; not having thereby, first obtained, but doubled
their obligation. But this string of error runs through the whole body of
your Leviathan, that, without apparent force, there is no Law. And this is the
chief ground of your irreverent and false Doctrine, against the Power of the
Christian Church. Because it is a visible society professing the Doctrine of
the Cross, and has not of it self external co-active Power, but, by virtue of
the Commission of Christ as King, lays spiritual obligation upon men, (and
thereby is consistent with the Civil Empire, in which it is,) therefore you
deny unto the Church the right either of making or declaring Laws Lev. p. 171.
as if there were not only a quibble but a truth, in the meaning of the
Frontispiece of your Leviathan, which compares the Canons of the Convocation,
to those of the temporal Militia; and that they could not properly have that
name, unless they had Powder, and Bullet, and Fire, (external force) attending
on them. It is plain enough (and you your self do own it) that after the
Ascension Lev. p. 267.
of our Lord, the Power Ecclesiastical, was in the Apostles; and after them, in
such as were by them ordained to preach the Gospel, and to convert men to
Christianity, and to direct them that were converted in the way of Salvation;
and after these, the Power was delivered again to others by these ordained. But
how this Spiritual Power, in the Administration of Spiritual Affairs in
Christ's Kingdom; in ordaining Successors; in celebrating the Eucharist; in
loosing and binding; in admitting members into this Spiritual but visible
society by Baptism (which is a proof both of the Society and its Power) how
all this (I say) was derived on the person of Constantine, who was neither
Ordained, nor (as some tell us) baptized till his death; requires greater
skill to explain, then I dare yet pretend to: he therefore rather gave outward
aids and succors, then true Authority and Right to the Doctrines and
Commandments of his Sovereign Jesus. Which things being well considered, you
ought not to have ascribed (as somewhere you have done) the very rights of the
Priestly Function to the Civil Powers. Grotius, who has not had thanks from all
for his liberality to the Civil Magistrate in relation to the Affairs of the
Church, has yet made it his whole design (in the second Chapter of his Book
De Imperio summarum potestatum circa Sacra) to make it manifest, that Authority
about Holy things, and the Sacred Function, are distinct. In the same person
they may be (as in Anius the King and Priest of Phoebus) but not without
Ordination. For the Power depending upon our Lords Commission, is not conveyed
but by Succession, through the hands of the Commissioned. Our thirty seventh
Article, does attribute to the King a Power of outward Rule in Ecclesiastical
matters, yet grants not to him either the ministering of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments. And under the Law, it was said unto Vzziah the King 2 Chronicles. 26.18,
19, etc.
It pertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests, the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense. And because
he would use his force in usurping the rights of the Priest, God Almighty smote
him with immediate Leprosy; and taught him to discern betwixt might and right.
Yet the Kings of Judah had power in the Synagogue. They had ^o de facto;
neither in many things, wherein they ordered Religion, were they reproved. Yet
to say the truth, the having such right is no where commanded in the Old Law;
which enjoined not the people to have a King; but, upon conditions, permitted
one to them, if they should prefer the customs of the Heathen-nations, before
the most excellent estate of Theocracie. Wherefore let them see whether they
build closely, who establish the Ecclesiastical Power of Christian Princes,
upon the exercise of it amongst the Kings of Judah. It concerns you also to
consider whether you have not unduly ascribed unto the Prince, as such, the
Power of the Keys, and the Right of Ordination, and Ministration of the
Sacraments, and Word of Christ. The Monarch (say you) or Lev. p. 125.
the Sovereign Assembly only has immediate Authority from God, to teach and
instruct the people; and no man but the Sovereign receives his Power Dei
Gratia simply -- He it is that has Lev. p. 297.
authority not only to preach (which perhaps no man will deny;) but also to
baptize, and to administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and to consecrate
both Temples and Pastors to Gods service -- If the Sovereign Power Stigm^^^ p.
18.
give me command (though without the ceremony of imposition of hands) to teach
the Doctrine of my Leviathan in the Pulpit, why am not I, if my Doctrine and
life be as good as yours, a Minister as well as you? This is saying and not
proving; and because the Power was from Christ derived to the Apostles, and
from them in Succession, by Ordination; and can be in none to whom it is not
conveyed in such a Channel; what you have said, had you been versed in the
several Writings of a Divine of the Church of England (a man of greater and
better Learning then either your self or Mr. Seldom, whose Doctrine you seem to
have swallowed down together with the good provisions of his Table; and who is
said to have mistaken the very sta^e of the Erastian-Controversie See Just
weights and meas. p. 25.
whilst he defined Excommunication to be a censure inferring a civil penalty*)
you would have either altered your opinion, or aggravated your error.

It appears, by what has been delivered, that there is Authority enough,
without the civil Sanction, to make the Doctrines of the Apostles to become
Laws, to wit, the Kingly Power of Christ, whose Commissioners they were, and
who had power to cause their rights to descend to others by Ordination. And
before the days of Constantine, there wanted not the Fountain of outward force,
not only in our Lord, who could dash in pieces Sovereigns of the finest mold;
but also in his Members, who (as is manifest from Ecclesiastical story) had
often strength enough to have checked the fury of their persecutors, and to
have forced the yoke of Christ upon their necks. But it seemed good to our
blessed Lord, during this state of man's probation; to deal chiefly with him,
according to his reasonable nature, and to invite rather then compel. And yet,
methinks, the threatenings of eternal vengeance seem to carry more force with
them, then all the prisons in the world. And it is time to think that the
Gospel obliges, when we hazard perpetual misery by disobeying it, whether we
be Jews or Greeks, if its sound has reached us.


Mr. Hobbes. The Jews and Gentiles were to be damned, not for their infidelity,
but Lev. ^. 285.
their old sins. If the Apostles Acts of Council were Laws, they could not
without sin be disobeyed. But we read not any where that they who received not
the Doctrine of Christ, did therein sin; but that they dyed in their sins; that
is, that the sins against the Laws to which they owed obedience, were not
pardoned. And those Laws were the Laws of Nature, and the Civil Laws of the
State, whereto every Christian man had by pact submitted himself. And therefore
by the burden, which the Apostles might lay on such as they had converted, are
not to be understood Laws, but Conditions, proposed to those that sought
Salvation; which they might accept or refuse at their own peril, without a new
sin, though not without the hazard of being condemned and excluded out of the
Kingdom of God, for their sins past. And therefore of Infidels St. John says
not, John 3.36
the wrath of God shall come upon them, John 3.18
but the wrath of God remains upon them; and not that they shall be
condemned, but that they are condemned already.


Stud. What will not a man say rather then acknowledge himself in an error,
though the thing it self speaks it? Here Is mistake clapped upon mistake: yet
the scales of the Leviathan are not so close, but a blind Archer may shoot
between them. Have you not read what our Lord said to his disciples, after his
resurrection? Go ye into all the world S. Marc. 16.15.16.
and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. The Author, also, to
the Hebrews Heb. 4.11. etc.
exhorts the Jews to believe in Christ; and tells them they shall, for
ever, be excluded the Kingdom of heaven for their unbelief, (it they persevere
in it) as their forefathers came short of Canaan, for the same reason. And
although S. John, in the places cited, does speak in the present tense, yet in
others of the same Chapter, he speaks in the future: and in that very verse
which you cite partially, concealing the words which are against you, he makes
their unbelief the cause of that severe decree which, already, was gone forth.
V. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned; but he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. V. 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were
evil. V. 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.


Mr. Hobbes. There is, yet, behind, a reason, whereby I prove that the
doctrine of the Gospel is not made Law, by Christ or his Apostles. The Apostles
power Lev. c. 42. p. 286.
was no other then that of our Savior, to invite men to embrace the Kingdom
of God; which they themselves acknowledged for a Kingdom (not present, but) to
come; and they that have no Kingdom can make no Laws.


Stud. Christ, as Mediator, before his Resurrection, had power of making
s^ronger Laws then any Sovereigns now upon Earth, for he had immediate
Commission from God in Heaven. He that saw Christ John 1^*45.48.^0*
saw him that sent him; and whatsoever Christ spoke, even as the Father said
unto him, so he spoke. And he that rejected him was to be condemned by his
words at the last day. And Christ when his Father sent him, was designed to be
a King over Men and Angels, and for that purpose he came into the World: and he
acquired this Kingship by way of Conquest in his resurrection from the dead:
after which he spoke Mat. 28.18.
unto his Disciples, saying, All power is given unto me i^ Heaven and in Earth.
Go ye, therefore, and ^^ach all Nation^, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo^, I am with you allwaies unto
the end of the World. And when he ascended and sat on the right hand of God,
he was inaugurated into his Heavenly Kingdom 1 Pet. 3^
and became in truth a Divine Hero, as those amongst the Heathens were in
pretense; and he at present reigns, be the Earth never so rebellious, in the
Oeconomie of his Church.

But to step, out of this, into our

Tenth Place of Discourse: if the commands of Christ and his Apostles, are not,
also, Laws, without the civil Sanction; what means the common doctrine, in
the Scripture, of suffering for the sake of Christianity? we are enjoined to
take up the Cross, and to follow Christ: Blessedness is promised to those who
are persecuted for righteousness sake; that suffer as Christians: and we are
taught, that the way to preserve our lives, is to loose them, for a time, in
the glorious cause of Jesus. Such commands and exhortations to dye rather then
to obey unchristian injunctions, are delivered in vain; yea they deserve the
name of impious, if they be not a royal Law, without the stamp and allowance of
civil Authority. It is then, in your opinion, not only our Privilege but our
duty, to save the skin entire; and, for the sake of outward safety, (...)
to obey that which is truly Law, the Law of our Country, though we live
amongst the Heathens; rather then to follow dangerous, though Evangelical,
Counsel.


Mr. Hobbes. You may easily make conjecture of my sense, in the present case;
because I say the disobedient to the civil Powers do violate that which is
properly Law. We are not obliged Lev. p. 27^.
to obey any Minister of Christ, if he should command us to do any thing
contrary to the command of the King, or other Sovereign representant of the
Commonwealth whereof we are Members, and by whom we look to be protected.


Stud. Were this truth, there ought not to have bin any zealous propagation of
the Gospel; but it should have expired, with the Author of it upon the Cross.
For the Apostles sinned both against the Law of Nature, and Commonwealth, in
exposing their lives to hazard by preaching to the Gentiles; if it was
injustice to gainsay their Pagan Edicts. St. Thomas, then, though armed with
Miracles to command assent, ought, either not to have wandered to the
East Indies; or being there, not to have preached up a new Religion: and what
he suffered, for that cause, was just, from the hand of Pagan Authority.


Mr. Hobbes. Into what place Lev c. 27. p. 152.
soever a man shall come, if he do any thing contrary to the Law, it is a
crime. If a man come from the Indies hither, and persuade men here to receive a
new Religion, or teach them any thing that tends to disobedience of the Laws
of his Country, though he be never so well persuaded of the truth of what he
teaches, he commits a crime, and may be justly punished for the same, not only
because his doctrine is false, but also because he does that which he would not
approve in another, namely, that coming from hence, he should endeavor to
alter the Religion there.


Stud. A good man would be desirous of information, in matters of the greatest
moment, from what quarter soever of the Heavens, the light shined into his
understanding: and the question is only of the assurance which the Teacher can
give, and not of the equity of his Practice. But to pass by that enquiry, I
cannot refrain from asking you (though I can guess at your opinion) whether
every Traveller is bound to profess the Religion of that Country into which he
goes? I mean not this of mere prudence and caution, of an open countenance and
close breast; but of actual compliance with all foreign institutions; so as to
do as men do at Rome, or Constantinople, or Agra, if we were sojourners there.


Mr. Hobbes. To this I shall, by and by, say something particularly; but I will
now, in general terms, affirm, that whosoever L viath. p. 114.
enters into another Dominion, is subject to all the Laws thereof; unless he
have a privilege by the Amity of the Soveraig^s, or by special License.


Stud. Seeing then the Romanists depend much upon Opus operatum; if you
returned but to Paris, the prayer of Monsieur Sorbiere would be heard, who, (in
his Voyage, when he weeded England) desired you might become a good Catholic:
this digression puts me in mind of a saying of B. Andrews, who, when it was
told, that some of the Scotch-Clergie, were to be made Bishops; advised, that
they should be made Priests First.

But, what great motive is there to this compliance with the civil Power, of
any persuasion?


Mr. Hobbes. That I hinted, just now, in saying, that by them we look to be
protected.


Stud. As if the favor of our Lord, the Prince of glory, toward his sincere,
and faithful, patient, and undaunted subjects (who will not be baffled out of
truth, nor be ashamed of the Gospel) were not of more value then the thin
shelter of worldly-power; which, if it could hide us under Rocks and Mountains,
could not secure us from the stroke of him, who is, in the first place, to be
feared: methinks, in the competition betwixt danger from men and disobedience
to Christ, (as in the case of such as are commanded by Heathen powers to
sacrifice to Demons) it is easy to see on which hand we ought to turn: when
there is before us, a Natural and a Moral evil, the Natural being the least, is
therefore to be chosen: thus Socrates was obliged to prefer Death, before the
acknowledgement of Polytheism; and by such choice, we, in truth, preserve our
selves, and most effectually obey that dictate of Nature: for we part with a
short and unpleasant, for an happy and endless life; and our health is
eternally secured to us, by the effusion of the blood of Martyrdom: and,
indeed, it has been the sense of almost all mankind, derived from the fear of
a God, or the excellent Nature of virtue, that the honest good is to be
preferred before either the profitable, or the pleasant; and that in such cases,
the powers on Earth are not to be obeyed, though upon the refusal of their
pleasure, they will glut their malice with the blood of men.

The three Children, menaced with the Furnace, chose rather to suffer the wrath
of Nebuchadnezzar, then to do his will, in worshipping the golden Image; and God
Almighty declared his acceptance of such a refusal, whilst, by Miracle he
delivered them. And the fact of those Parents who saved Moses, not being afraid
Heb. 11.23.
of the commandment of Phara^h, who designed all the Males of Israel for
slaugh^er, is delivered down unto posterity, with honor and applause, by the
Author to the Hebrews: and in that little book of Martyrs, we read V. 35.
of some, who scorned to accept of a temporal deliverance, when it was offered
to them, upon the unworthie terms of Apostacy or recantation; they having, in
their eye, a greater reward. And it is recorded, rather to the same then
reproach of the Eastern Magi, S. Mat. 2 ^ etc.
that in returning to their Country, they passed by, Herod, who had, with evil
intent, commanded them to bring him word concerning the birth of the King of
the Jews. If a Prince (said Ta^ian. p 144.
Tatianus) commands me to deny my God, I will rather dye at his foot, then live
to exercise his pleasure: and the holy Bishop Felix Africanus and his
Associates (men of great Integrity and constancy of mind) would r^ther give
up their own lives, then the copies of the new Testament which Dioclesian
intended so to destroy, that it might not be found at all in the Annals of the
World, that ever there was such a doctrine as Christianity. The very Grecians,
whose manner was to use prostration only in the Rites of their Religion,
refused, what peril soever was imminent, to worship, in that fashion the King
of Persia: and the Christians who sometimes paid a civil respect before the
Images of the Emperors, chose rather to expose themselves to the cruelty of
their Enemies, then to humble themselves, as in former days, when Julian added
to them, the Images of false Gods: and such refusals are not destructive of
Government and Society, because the true Christian, does not, in these cases,
fill the World with clamours, or endeavor to raise tumults, but is led in
imitation of his Savior, like an innocent and weak Lamb, unto the slaughter
O^ig. (...) Cells. l 3. (...).



Mr. Hobbes. For an Lev. c. 45. p. 362.
unlearned man, that is in the power of an idolatrous King or State, if
commanded on pain of death to worship before an Idol, he detesteth the Idol in
his heart, he does well, though if he had the fortitude to suffer death rather
then to worship it, he should do better.


Stud. The most obscure and illiterate person, doing outward worship to false
Gods, though he sins not with such scandal as the wise and the renowned, who
are apt to draw a multitude in^o the like snare, yet he is not to be acquitted
as an innocent man. For, by such means, the Idolators who affright this man out
of his Religion, do triumph over the honor of the true God, the procuring of
whose dishonor is against Reason, which teaches man, apart, to adore his
Sovereign Lord, and in Society, to be public in his adoration, and not to
conceal it under the Vizour of an ill-instructed Pagan who serves Devils.
Reason (you Lev. p. 192.
know) directs, not only to worship God in secret; but also, and especially
in public, and in the sight of men: for without that, (that which in honor is
most acceptable) the procuring others to honor him, is lost.

But to come to somewhat peculiar in Christianity; what if Lev. c. 42. p 271.
a King or a Senate, or other Sovereign Person, forbid us to believe in Christ?


Mr. Hobbes. To this Ibid.
I answer, that such forbiding is of no ef^ect; because belief and unbelief
never follow men's commands. Faith is a gift of God, which man can neither give,
nor take away, by promise of rewards, or menaces of torture.


Stud. But Ibid.
what if we be commanded by our lawful Prince, to say with our tongue, we
believe not; must we obey such command?


Mr. Hobbes. Profession Ib^d.
with the tongue is but an external thing, and no more then any other gesture
whereby we signify our obedience; and wherein a Christian who holds firmly
in his heart the faith of Christ, has the same Liberty which the Prophet
Elisha allowed to Naaman the Syrian. 2 Kings 5.17.
-- Naaman believed in his heart; but by bowing before the Idol Rimmon, he
denied the true God in effect, as much as if he had done it with his lips.


Stud. In both these answers you miss-understand the Faith of the Gospel, which
is not complete, unless the outward profession answers to the inward act of
assent: for the Church is a visible society professing the Christian faith;
which men entered into by a visible sign; in which are Officers of diverse
ranks; in which there is a communion of visible symbols; and he that chooses
only to have faith in his heart, renounceth his title of Member, in this
spiritual Society: our Savior commanded his Disciples, that their light
should shine before men. And St. John John 12^42, 43.
upbraideth many of the chief Rulers, who believed on Christ, but, because of
the Pharisees, did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue: because they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God.
Hear also what St. Paul says unto the Romans: Romans 10.9, 10.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: for
with the heart man believes unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession
is made unto Salvation. For Naaman, who was a Gentile, amongst Gentiles, he had
promised to sacrifice for the future, to none but the God of Israel; and his
incurvation was his civil Office toward the King, for which notwithstanding,
he begged especial License. If this be not an answer, I refer you to Episcopius
Episcop. Resp. ad 64. Quaest. p 59, 60.
who will not send you away unsatisfied.

But what can you Lev. p. ^71.
answer to our Saviors saying, Whosoever denies me before men, I will deny
him before my Father which is in Heaven?


Mr. Hobbes. This Ibid.
we may say, that whatsoever a subject, as Naaman was, is compelled to in
obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, but in
order to the Laws of his Country, that action is not his, but his Sovereigns;
nor is it he that, in this case, denies Christ before men, but his Governor,
and the Law of his Country.


Stud. Instead of showing the consistencie of your Doctrine with our Savior's
words, you tacitly accuse them, either of impertinency, or ill advice: For you
make him to speak to this effect: Persecutions will arise S. Mat. 10.23, 24, 25.
, but be willing to be treated like your Master, a man of sufferings, and
acquainted with grief: and fear not the faces Verse. 20.
and menaces of men; but publish, in the openest manner, unto the World Verse.
27.
, such Doctrines as you hear in private, whilst you sit at my feet. And do not
so fear Verse. 28.
those who persecute you, as to save your bodily life by the renouncing or
suppressing of my Doctrine: but stand in aw of me, whom if ye disobey, ye
forfeit life eternal. And remember that there is a God Verse^ 29, 30, 31.
, who, in such perilous times, will take care of you. If, therefore, you will
own and publish my Faith, Verses 32, 33.
I will own you as my loyal Subjects, and make you happy in my Kingdom: if you
will renounce my Faith for fear of men, I will not take notice of you, as
appertaining to me, when you shall stand in the greatest need of protection.
But, though I have said all this, yet upon second thoughts it seems
reasonable that I excuse you, and condemn such bloody Powers as shall, by
persecution, compel you to blaspheme: It Is they who force open your mouths, and
move your tongues, and form the breath, and renounce me; but you are all the
time very sound Believers; Believers in your hearts. And therefore, if you deny
me before such powers, I will transfer the blame on them. So wretched is your
Paraphrase, that it overthrows the plainest and often-reapted letter of the
Text. But supposing that our Savior had not delivered himself thus expressly
against your Doctrine; how would you have reconciled your gross dissimulation
with that sincerity which the Searcher of the hearts requires?


Mr. Hobbes. If any man Lev. p. 271, 272.
shall accuse this Doctrine, as repugnant to true, and unfeigned Christianity;
I ask him, in case there should be a subject in any Christian Commonwealth,
that should be inwardly in his heart of the Mohammedan Religion, whether if his
Sovereign command him to be present at the Divine-service of the Christian
Church, and that on pain of death, he think that Mohammedan obliged in
conscience to suffer death for that Cause, rather then to obey that command of
his lawful Prince. If he say, he ought rather to suffer death, then he
authorizeth all private men, to disobey their Princes, in maintenance of their
Religion, true or false: If he say, he ought to be obedient, then he allows
to himself, that which he denies to another.


Stud. In this reply, which touches not the proposed difficulty, you run out
into two absurd suppositions. First, that a Christian Magistrate sheddeth the
blood of an Heathen for not frequenting the Christian Assemblies: next, that
there is a parity of reason in the persecution of a Christian, and of a
Mohammedan; and that the Alcoran may as much oblige the Conscience, as the
Testament of our Lord.

But I must again ask you, what you Lev. p. 272.
will say of all those Martyrs we read of in the History of the Church? I hope
you will not say that they have needlessly cast away their lives. Their blood
has been more truly the seed of the Christian Church, then the opinion of
Ghosts, Ignorance of second causes, Devotion toward what men fear, and taking
of things casual for Prognostics, have ever been (as you affirm) the seeds of
natural Religion, Lev. p. 54.
which is generated out of the inquisitive temper of men, who, by observing any
excellent effect, are naturally led to search out the cause, and so proceed to
the first Original. The Martyrs (I say) did, under Christ, preserve the
Christian Faith, which if it had not been professed with the mouth, would have
died away, as a spark where no breath does cherish it. Their memory is precious
in the Church of God, and their names will be had in everlasting remembrance.
They have been thought See Mr. Mede's works, p. 944.
to have the privilege of rising first, and, in that sense, to have a part in
the first Resurrection. The Christians anciently kept their Assemblies at their
Monuments: and the Church of Alexandria See Scal. de Em. Temp. Proleg. p. 18.
begins its account, at the Era of holy Martyrs. And yet you seem to
disrespect them as imprudent Zealots, and to think their blood was but so much
water spilt upon the ground, a rash and useless effect.


Mr. Hobbes. For answer hereunto Lev. p. 272.
, we are to distinguish the persons that have been for that Cause put to death;
whereof some have received a Calling to preach, and profess the Kingdom of
Christ openly; others have had no such Calling, nor more has been required of
them then their own Faith. The former sort, if they have been put to death, for
bearing witness to this point, that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, were
true Martyrs; for a Martyr is, (to give the true definition of the word) a
witness of the Resurrection of Jesus the Messiah, which none can be but those
that conversed with him on earth, and saw him after he was risen: for a witness
must have seen what he testifies, or else his testimony is not good. And this
is manifest from Acts 1.21, 22. of these men which have companyed with us-must
one be a Martyr (that is, a Witness) with us of his Resurrection. Where we may
observe that he which is to be a witness of the truth of the Resurrection of
Christ -- must be -- one of his Original Disciples: whereas they which were not
so, can witness no more, but that their Antecessors said it, and are therefore
but witnesses of other men's Testimony; and are but second Martyrs, or Martyrs
of Christ's witnesses.


Stud. By this answer, wherein you approve of the Martyrdom of the Apostles,
you grant unto me what I contend for, and contradict your former doctrine. For
if the Apostles, drawing temporal deaths upon themselves, by preaching the
Gospel, when they were enjoined to desist, by the Civil Powers, are to be
justified by us, and honored, for such resistance unto blood; then there was
given to them a Superior Law by Christ, by the virtue of which higher
obligation they were free from active duty to the Civil Powers: otherwise, if
without a Law, they had opposed the present Governors, they had been
pernicious Rebels, and not honorable Defenders of the Faith. What you add
concerning the word Martyr, is a weak nicety of Grammar, upon which the stress
of this Cause does not depend. For the Question is not, whether no man be
properly called a Witness but an eyewitness, or he who bears testimony of
report received at second or third hand, but whether, at any distance of time,
a man may not have sufficient ground to believe the Gospel; and whether, after
the hearty belief of it, he may with his mouth renounce it out of a tender
regard to flesh and blood.

To proceed in this Argument; there is yet remaining another objection, to
which, I know not what answer can be by you returned. It is the Argument used
by St. Peter and St. John, to the Rulers of the people and Elders of Israel,
when, by menaces, they urged them to desist from the propagation of the holy
Gospel: Whether it be right (said those Apostles) in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye Acts ^. 19.



Mr. Hobbes. If the command Lev. p. 321, c. 43.
of the Civil Sovereign be such, as that it may be obeyed, without the
forfeiture of life eternal; not to obey it is unjust -- but if it be such as
cannot be obeyed, without being damned to eternal death, then it were madness
to obey it. -- All men, therefore, that would avoid, both the punishments that
are to be in this world inflicted, for disobedience to their earthly Sovereign,
and those that shall be inflicted in the world to come for disobedience to God,
have need to be taught to distinguish well between what is, and what is not
necessary to eternal Salvation. -- Now Lev. p. 322.
all that is necessary to Salvation, is contained in two Virtues, Faith in
Christ, and Obedience to Laws. Now -- Ibid. Sect. 3.
our Savior Christ has given us no new Laws, but counsel to observe those we
are subject to; that is to say, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of our several
Sovereigns: and for Faith, The Lev. p. 324.
( Vnum necessarium) only Article of Faith, which the Scripture makes simply
necessary to Salvation, is this, That Jesus is the Christ. Having thus Lev. p.
^30.
shown, what is necessary to Salvation; it is not hard to reconcile our
obedience to God, with our obedience to the civil Sovereign, who is either
Christian or Infideld. If he be a Christian, he allows the belief of this
Article, that Jesus is the Christ; and of all the Articles that are contained
in it, or are, by evident consequence, deduced from it; which is all the Faith
necessary to Salvation: and because he is a Sovereign, he requires obedience
to all his own, that is, to all the Civil Laws; in which also are contained all
the Laws of Nature, that is, all the Laws of God: for besides the Laws of
Nature, and the Laws of the Church, which are part of the Civil Law, (for the
Church that can make Laws is the Commonwealth,) there be no other Laws Divine.
-- And when the civil Sovereign is an Infidel, every one of his own subjects
that resists him, sins against the Laws of God. -- And for their Faith
Lev. p. 331.
it ^s internal, and invisible; they have the Li^ense that Naaman had, and need
not put themselves into danger for it. But if they do, they ought to expect
their reward in Heaven, and not to complain of their lawful Sovereign -- In the
mean time, they are to intend to obey Christ at his coming, but at present they
are bound to obey the Laws of that Infidel King: all Christians are bound in
Conscience ^o to do. -- Thought is free Lev. p. 238.
-- but when it comes to confession of Faith, the private Reason must submit to
the public; that is to say, to Gods Lieutenant.


Stud. Instead of the resolution of this Que^y, when we are to obey God, rather
then man, you show that we may very well do both together; and so ^ndirectly
you accuse the Apostles of falsehood or folly in their suggestion. And here
again you repeat your errors, that Christ has not made any new Laws, and that
the Faith of a Christian is entire without, or contrary to profession; and you
suppose, what the experience of the World refuteth, that Infidel Kings command
not sometimes against the Laws of Nature. Also, whilst here you remit the
Martyrs, scoffingly, to heaven for a reward, you fall, unawares, into the mock
of Julian the Apostate, who amidst his persecution, used this taunt; It
becomes not you Christians to enjoy any thing in this world, for your Kingdom
is in Heaven. But if such persons as suffer for Christianity, shall be rewarded
in Heaven; their constancy then was noble and excellent, whilst they chose
trouble rather then base compliance; and those who inflicted evils on them for
doing what God approved, were unjust. If then you remit the Martyrs to Heaven,
you send the civil Sovereigns, who shed the blood of the Apostles for
disobedience to their unrighteous Edicts, to a place of less refreshment.


Mr. Hobbes. You have made your instance in the Apostles, of whose Martyrdom I
approve, because of their Commission. For others, who hazard their lives for
Christianity, I praise them not: he that is not sent Lev. p. 272. c. 42. ^ and
p. 273.
to preach the fundamental Article, but takes it upon him of his private
Authority, though he be a witness, and consequently a Martyr, either primary of
Christ, or secondary of his Apostles, or their Successors; yet is he not
obliged to suffer death for that cause; because being not called thereto, it is
not required at his hands; nor ought he to complain, if he loses the reward
he expects from those that never set him on work. None therefore can be a
Martyr, neither of the first nor second degree, that have not a warrant to
preach Christ come in the Flesh; that is to say, none, but such as are sent to
the conversion of Infidels.


Stud. Every Member of the Christian Society is bound to profess the Gospel; as
has been proved: and therefore a private man, though he has not right, not
having Commission to exercise the Offices of a Priest, yet has he a command to
own the truth, when he is adjur'd to confess of what faith he is; not only in
relation to Christianity in general, but also in relation to the Doctrines of
Moment in it, which sometimes the Christian Powers do err in. And every person
will, with readiness, make such profession, notwithstanding the terrors of the
Civil Sword, who has sworn in his heart and tongue Allegiance unto Christ; who
is sincere in his Religion; who valueth his soul more then his body; who is
heartily persuaded of a life or death eternal, the latter of which is


Our eleventh Subject.
Mr. Hobbes. The maintenance Lev. p. 238. c. 38.
of civil Society, depending on Justice, and Justice on the power of life and
death, and other less rewards and punishments, residing in them that have the
Sovereignty of the Commonwealth; it is impossible a Commonwealth should
stand, where any other then the Sovereign, has a power of giving greater
rewards then life; and of inflicting greater punishments then death. Now seeing
eternal life is a greater reward then the life present; and eternal torment a
greater punishment then the death of Nature; it is a thing worthy to be well
considered, of all men that desire (by obeying Authority) to avoid the
calamities of confusion and Civil War, what is meant, in holy Scripture, by
life eternal, and torment eternal.


Stud. What is then to be understood by eternal Torment, if we aright interpret
the Holy Scripture?


Mr. Hobbes. I mean by these, such torments Lev. p. 345.
as are prepared for the wicked in Gehenna, or what place soever, [for a
Season]. These have been Leviath. p. 242, 243
set forth by the Congregation of Giants; the Lake of fire; utter darkness;
Gehenna, and Tophet; which things are not spoken in a proper, but Metaphorical
sense. Now where, or whatsoever, these torments shall be, I Lev. p. 345. Sect. 1
can find no where that any man shall live in torments everlastingly.


Stud. In St. Matthew St. Mat. 25 last.
the same Greek word, in the same sentence, is used in setting forth as well
the happiness of the Righteous, as the punishment of the Wicked; which
therefore is to be construed as endless as the joy of the Pious, to the
blessedness of whom the most daring Origenist has not affixed a period.


Mr. Hobbes. I confess the torments to be eternal; but I am of opinion that the
same persons do not eternally feel them. The Fire Lev. p. 345. Sect. last.
or torment prepared for the wicked in Gehenna, ^ophet, or in what place
soever, may continue for ever; and there may never want wicked men to be
tormented in them; though not every, nor any one eternally. The Fire Lev. p.
245. c. 3^.
prepared for the wicked, is an everlasting fire: that is to say, the estate
wherein no man can be without torture, both of body and mind, after the
Resurrection, shall endure for ever; and in that sense the fire shall be
unquenchable, and the torments everlasting: but it cannot thence be inferred,
that he who shall be cast into that fire, or be tormented with those torments*
shall endure, and resist them so, as to be eternally burnt and tortured, and
yet never be destroyed, nor dye.


Stud. You have by this means, so very much allayed the heat of the everlasting
burnings (so far as it can be done by confidence in opinion) that they are
rendered almost as tolerable as a death by fire on earth. For the Epithet
Everlasting, thus interpreted, cannot mightily affright a single person from
evil manners, who considers that the Flame, how long soever it be continued in
it self, shall scorch him but for a season. But God in holy Scripture
threatens every man with perpetual misery; and where S. Mark 9.44.
it says that the fire shall not be quenched, it says also, not that The
worm, but their worm, or remorse of conscience, dies not. Our Savior also
taught us S. Matt. 5 25, 26.
to make our Peace with God in this estate of Probation; before we were haled
to Prison; where every one that cannot pay his deb^s to that Supreme Lord
(toward whom our obligations can scarce be cancelled in that state, where we
are deprived of means, neglected by us in this life) shall be chained to
eternal Bondage. St. John also says, Rev. 20.10.
that the Beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented in the Lake of fire
and brimstone, day and night, for ever and ever. The Fuel, it seems, shall be
as eternal as the Flame.


Mr. Hobbes. It seems Lev. p. 345.
hard, to say, that God who is the Father of Mercies, that does, in Heaven and
Earth, all that he will; that has the hearts of all men in his disposing; that
works in men both to do and to will; and without whose free gift a man has
neither inclination to good, nor repentance of evil, should punish men's
transgressions without any end of time, and with all the extremity of torture,
that men can imagine, and more.


Stud. God has so given such gifts to all, whom he will severely account with,
that they are left without apology. And he will not seem an hard Master, if we
have as due a regard to his Majesty and Goodness, both abused by us; and to our
own means, and wilful refusal of the better part, whilst he has set before us
life and death; as we are wont to have to our own flesh and blood; seeing
nothing burns in Hell (as St. Bernard noted) besides the proper will of man.

But why to you of all men should this seem hard? For you believe that the
irresistible power of God, as such, does justify all things; and Lev. p. 187.
that the right of afflicting men at his pleasure, belongs naturally to God
Almighty; not as Creator and gracious; but as omnipotent.

This irresistible Power is urged by you, where it serves your Hypothesis; and
where it yeildeth no advantage to your Cause, there you will have Mercy to
succeed in its place. And this may be, more particularly observed, in a Section
of your Book De Cive De Cive c. 4 p. 69. Sect. 9.
. To the sixth Law of Nature (says that Book) which teaches that punishments
respect the future, belong all those places of Holy Writ, which enjoin the
showing of Mercy; such as are ( Matt. 5.7.) Blessed are the merciful: for they
shall obtain mercy. Lev. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge nor bear any grudge
against the children of thy people. Now there are who think this Law so far
from being confirmed, that they imagine it invalidated by the Scriptures:
because there remains to the wicked eternal punishment after death, where
there is no place either for amendment or example. Some resolve this objection,
by saying, that God, who is under no obligation, refers all things to his
own Glory; but that it is not lawful for man so to do: as if God would seek his
glory, that is to say, please himself in the death of a sinner. It is more
rightly answered, that the institution of eternal punishment was before sin,
and respected this only, that men might, for the future, be afraid of sinning.

It is, from this place, to be observed, that you once construed the phrases of
Scripture, wherein it speaks of eternal torments, with relation to the
persons, and not the mere state of torture; as also that you here advance not
power, but plead for Mercy; and lastly, that you abuse the veracity of God, by
supposing him to scare the children of men, with such bugbear threatenings, as
shall never, upon their most enormous delinquencie, be put in execution.

But in what horrid place, and of what confounding quality, are the future
torments, if they be not, to single persons eternal? for I cannot but imagine
that they are extremely bitter, if they be but short. What then seems to you
to be the place and state of the damned?


Mr. Hobbes. Gods enemies, and their torments after Judgment Lev. p. 242.
, appear by the Scripture to have their place on eaath. And there the Reprobate
Lev. p. 345, 346.
shall be in the estate, that Adam, and his Posterity were in after the sin
committed; saving that God promised a Redeemer to Adam, and such of his seed as
should trust in him, and repent; but not to them that should dye in their sins
as do the Reprobate. And further -- the wicked being left in the estate, they
were in after Adams sin, may at the Resurrection live as they did, marry, and
give in marriage, and have gross and corruptible bodies, as all mankind now
have; and consequently, may engender perpetually, after the Resurrection as
they did before.


Stud. If all the wicked shall (as you acknowledge Lev. p. 244.
), be together raised up; and put into Hell on earth; if also their condition
shall be such as to admit of Generation, eating and drinking (the provisions
for which require wide spaces upon earth, not at all possessed by the bodies of
men) and there be also required room (as you assert) for the followers of
Christ; it will try the utmost of your Mathematick-skill, to find place
sufficient, for the bodies of all that have already lived, or shall live before
the Universal Judgment. Some of no mean degree amongst the Learned See Dr. B's
Pseud. Epid. p. 374. and^
have, by probable Rules, computed the number of men before the Flood (who
begat Sons and Daughters at a very great age); and have found it to exceed much
more then a thousand millions: insomuch, that the Flood may seem to have been
almost as necessary in relation unto the numbers of people, as to the increase
of their iniquities. And they observe how, in less then four hundred years
after the Flood, there were Armies Of Ninus against the Bactrians consisting of
700000 Foot, 200000 Horse, 10600 Cha^i^^^ Of Semira^is against the Indians, of
1300000 Foot, 500000 Horse, 100^00 Chariots: Of Staurobates against her,
consisting of a greater number.
in the Eastern Countries, sufficient to leave nothing rising there besides the
Sun. If therefore Tophet be on earth, let it not any more be taken up, as a
Proverb, by us, That Hell cannot be satisfied, seeing it will be glutted with
half the people for whom it is prepared.

But, methinks, if that be, in truth, the estate of the Reprobate, which you
have described; the literal Hinnom may seem to have been overspread with
greater horror, then the mystical shall be; and the unrighteous may dance and
leap with joy in their very chains of darkness; seeing they neither pinch
extremely at the present, nor shall be everlasting: there is nothing more
Divine to voluptuous men, then to eat, and drink, and to exonerate nature, and
to be immortal in their offspring.


Mr. Hobbes. You are too hasty in your reflections: you mistake that for the
full description of Hell, which I designed for the easier part of it. I
therefore tell you further, that they Lev. ^. 244.
shall be punished with grief, and discontent of mind, from the sight of that
eternal felicity in others, which they themselves, through their own
incredulity, and disobedience, have lost. And because such felicity in others
is not sensible but by comparison with their own actual miseries; it follows
that they are to suffer such bodily pains and calamities, as are incident to
those, who not only live under evil and cruel Governors, but have also for
Enemy, the eternal King of the Saints, God Almighty.


Stud. But shall not there be Devils let loose upon those persons who have bin
seduced by them from obedience to God! shall not they be delivered over to the
Tormentors, who have not discharged their obligations toward him, and have
such outward scourges superadded to the lash of remorse within?


Mr. Hobbes. For Leviath. p. 244. ^ect. 1. See Lev. p. 213.
the Tormentors, we have their nature and properties, exactly and properly,
delivered by the names of the Enemy, or Satan; the Accuser, or Diabolus; the
Destroyer, or Abaddon: which significant names, Satan, Devil, Abaddon, set not
forth to us any individual Person, as proper Names use to do; but only an
Office or Quality; and are therefore Appellatives. -- Gods Kingdom was in
Palestine; and the Nations round about were the Kingdoms of the Enemy; and
consequently by Satan, is meant any earthly Enemy of the Church. [You are
therefore mistaken in the notion of Tormentors. Now that which completeth the
misery of the damned is, that they shall dye again.]


Stud. That which you make the top of their calamity, is to be reckoned as a
privilege, because it puts an end to their torment together with their being;
the continuance of which cannot make recompense for that misery with which in
the real Hell, it will be oppressed: but whence is it proved, by you, that the
last pain of the damned is such destruction?


Mr. Hobbes. I learn, from the Scripture Lev. p. 244. See p. 243.
that amongst bodily pains, is to be reckoned also to every one of the wicked,
a second death: for though the Scripture be clear for an universal
Resurrection; yet we do not read, that to any of the Reprobate is promised an
eternal life. [I know you will now salve your self by saying Lev. p. 332.
] that by the second and everlasting death, is meant a second, and everlasting
life, but in torments; a Figure never used but in this very case.


Stud. The Figure in which we speak, whilst we express a great calamity by
death, is of common use, in relation to the incommodities of this present life:
for nothing is more usual then to say, that to live is to be well. St. Paul
with reference to his many troubles, said he dyed daily. And Grotius, somwhere
Grotius in Apoc. 14.13.
expounds (...) by such, quibus vita haud vitalis. In Sophocles, you might
have read these words; -- (...)
(...).


That this, also, is the true meaning of the second death, appears to those
who are aware that the phrase was borrowed by St. John, from the
Hebrew-Doctors; with whom it was, and is, most frequent, to call the torments
of Hell by that very name. Wherefore those words of David Psalm. 49.11*
He sees that wise men die, are thus Paraphrased by the Caldee Paraphrast: He
shall see wicked wise men, who die the second death, and are adjudged to Hell.

Having now attended to your Opinion concerning the Place and Estate of the
damned; methinks, it begets, in me, as feeble belief, as the Fables of
Charon, and the River Styx, and the black Frogs therein, were wont to do in
Iuvenal's days, amongst the Romans; whose very children, (he says) unless
they were so young as not to pay for their Bath, were apt to scoff at such
improbable stories.

But let us now understand (in order to the dispatch of our Twelfth and last
Head) What, more successful doctrine you can deliver, concerning the felicities
of the just. He that cannot paint a Devil well, is not likely to show masterie
in the painting of an holy Angel: but whatsoever your description be of eternal
life, I am ready to fix my eye upon it; and if I epsy reason, to approve it.


Mr. Hobbes. In delivering my opinion concerning the future state, I will begin
by telling you, that, Lev. p. 241.
the Soul of man is not in its own nature eternal, or a living creature
independent on the body; and that no mere man is immortal, otherwise then by
the resurrection in the last day, except Enoch and Elias. -- But Lev p. 344.
though there be no natural immortality of the Soul; yet there is life
eternal, which the Elect shall enjoy by grace.


Stud. It has bin, already, proved, that there is, in man, a spiritual
substance which immagineth, remembers, reasons; and that therefore naturally
it endures after the dissolution of that body from which it is, by such
notorious marks, distinguished: neither does it slumber, 'till the sounding of
the last Trump, at the general resurrection. It is true, that without the
assistance of Revelation we cannot, well understand that our withered bodies
shall spring out of the dust: and therefore, with reference to the
resurrection, the ancient Jews, in their Forms of Benediction Pococ^ in no^. in
Doct. Moy^. p. 149.
celebrated the power of God above the ordinary Laws of Nature: and whatever
hopes the Heathens may have, they cannot have firm assurance, that their Souls
shall be permitted to enjoy that duration which they are, by nature capable of;
or that, if they shall be permitted to survive their bodies, they shall have a
great, or endless, happiness. For when they consider that there is God, and
that, how virtuous soever they have bin, yet, their own consciences bearing
witness, they have, too often, transgressed his Laws; they may be justly
suspicious either of annihilation, or at best, of a low degree of felicity:
and this suspicion will be increased if, with you, they gaze at his
irresistible power, and look not, with hope, upon his Philanthropie: and
therefore such salvation, as signifies the advancement of the Soul of man to
the utmost height of blessedness, is not of Nature or humane merit, but of
grace; and an effect of the merits of our Lord, who having overcome death, did
open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers. But yet of this bounty we, in some
measure, partake, if we dye as Christians, so soon as ever we have laid down
this burden of the flesh: and of this we are assured by Revelation;
especially, by that in the New Testament: therein we read, that our Savior
promised to the repenting Thief, that very day, a place in Paradise, that is,
in some Region of happy Souls; which the Jews were wont to call Paradise, or
the Garden of pleasure. That, besides the bodily life, there is a Soul in man
which cannot be touched by the sword, or utmost violence of our Enemies. That
St. Stephen, in the very Article of death, commended his Spirit into the hands
of Christ* beseeching the same Jesus to receive it. That the dead, who dye in
the Lord, are from henceforth, or Rev. 14*13. (...). jam nunc. Grot. i^ loc.
immediately in an happy estate. Neither can we, with tolerable sense, expound
the Article of Christ's descending into Hell, or into Hades, that is, the state
of the dead; as also his preaching to Spirits in prison; unless we suppose him
to have had an immaterial Soul, whereby his Spirit might be in the state of
separate Spirits, as well as his body was in the state of dead bodies, their
corruption excepted: for to mean All of the body, is to say in effect, twice
over, that he was dead and buried; and so to commit Tautology in the most
compendious systeme of the Christian Faith* Neither must we forget the wish of
St. Paul, who desired to be dissolved that he might be with Christ; esteeming
that far better for his own Person, though his continuance in the world was of
more advantage to the Christian church. Now it cannot but be imagined that S.
Paul exspected, so soon as ever he had quitted this earthly Tabernacle, to be
received by Christ, into the mansions prepared above: for seeing his
inclinations were so poised betwixt the thoughts of the benefit of the Church,
and the delay of his consummate happiness, that he knew not which way to turn
the scale; there is no doubt but he would have preferred the advantage of the
Church, for which he would gladly spend, and be spent, before such an Estate,
wherein, for more then sixteen hundred years, he should not so much as think of
Christ, or his holy Gospel, but be as if he had never bin.


Mr. Hobbes. [There are other places, perhaps more pertinent, to which I will
return an answer.] And first, Lev. p. 343, 344.
there are the words of Solomon (Ecclesiastes 12.7.) Then shall the dust return
to dust, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God that gave it: which may
bear well enough (if there be no other Text directly against it) this
interpretation, that God only knows, (but man, not) what becomes of a man's
Spirit, when he expireth: and the same Solomon, in the same book, ( Chap. 3. v.
20, 21.) delivers the same sentence in the sense I have given it: his words
are, All go (man and beast) to the same place; all are of the dust, and all
turn to dust again: who knows that the Spirit of man goes upward, and that
the Spirit of the beast goes downward to the earth? that is, none knows but
God: nor is it an unusual phrase to say of things we understand not, God knows
what, and God knows where. -- But, what interpretation shall we give, besides
the literal sense of the words of Solomon, Eccles. 3.19. That which befalls
the sons of men befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them: as the one
dies, so does the other; yea, they have all one breath (one Spirit) so that a
man has no pre-eminence above a beast, for all is vanity. By the litteral
sense here is no natural immortality of the Soul.


Stud. You would here impose upon me, by confounding the sense of those several
verses, which are to be interpreted apart from each other. And that we may
aright conceive the meaning of them (and not say only, though perhaps with
reason we may do it, I Am sure with Authority Raimund Pug. Fid. p. 155.
that Solomon here and in other places does personate the Atheist;) it is fit
that we observe how the Preacher, in this book, sets forth the beginning,
progress, and ripeness of his disquisition, concerning the happiness of man.
Wherefore in the beginning of his enquiry, he sets down his raw
apprehensions: and he relates, in the first and second Chapters, how he, once,
thought folly equal with wisdom, and that there was nothing better then to eat
and drink; and what adventures and trials he made, toward the better
understanding of what was good for the sons of men: and in this third Chapter,
he declares how full of mystery he found the works of God ( v. 11.) and how
little was manifest, especially to sensual men, of the future state: but in the
eleventh and twelfth Chapters, wherein he declares his advanced judgment, and
calls men off from the world, to the thoughts of the day of account, and to
the early remembrance of their Creator; to the fear of God, and the observance
of his commands; he lays it down as a positive doctrine (a doctrine apt to
promote such observance, fear, and remembrance) which at first was delivered,
by him, as a problem, or as the mistake of worldly men, that when the wheel
shall be broken at the Cistern, and the circle of our blood utterly disturbed,
then the dust shall return to the earth as it was; and the Spirit shall return
to God who gave it.

But if the Spirit be the breath and life, and not an immaterial substance, why
make you it so hard to know what becomes of it; so that only God can understand
it? for might we not say, that the machine of the body is dissolved, the breath
vanishes in the soft air, the motion is gone from the carcass into ambient
bodies? we might then, with equal admiration say of a Clock broken all to
pieces, and in rest; God knows what is become of it; for, in both instances,
there is only a dissolution of the contexture of the parts, and the motion,
conveyed to other portions of neighboring matter.

Why, also, do you vary from the translation of the Hebrew copy* in Chap. 3. v.
21. for instead of, Who knows the spirit of man that is ascending, and the
Spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth? You have thus rendered the
words; Who knows that the spirit of man goes upward? for there is great
difference betwixt this saying, Who knows that Mr. Hobbes is a Mathematician?
and this, Who knows Mr. Hobbes, who is a Mathematician? The former
disposition of Solomon's words supposes a Spirit, and the ascent of it, and
withal, our ignorance of the nature of the Soul: the latter leaves it
doubtful whether the Spirit ascends or not. It is well (though I believe you
knew it not your self) that the Seventie Interpreters Lxx* (...), etc.
are, a little, on your side.


Mr. Hobbes. But what is, on your part, to be said Lev. p* 344.
to those words of Solomon in Chap. 4. ver. 3. of Ecclesiastes? Better is he
that has not yet been, then both they; that is, then they that live or have
lived; which if the Soul of all them that have lived, were immortal, were a
hard saying; for then to have an immortal Soul, were worse then to have no Soul
at all.


Stud. To this, the easy truth is to be replied, that the wise man prefers
a condition of not being (if we suppose him speaking in his own Person) before
a life of misery: and doubtless it is better to have no Soul, then to have a
Soul immortal, together with immortal grief: and the saying is common amongst
Divi^es, that it had bin better for Dives to have had no tongue, then to have
bin possessed of it, merely as a subject, for the fury of the infernal flames
to prey upon: and I think also, it is the natural sense of mankind. Wherefore
though Job was a man of great fortitude of spirit, and one who feared, by
impatience, to offend God; Yet when his calamities, as so many waves in thick
succession, were ready to over-whelme him, he began to curse the day of his
Nativitie.


Mr. Hobbes. There is yet another place in the book of Ecclesiastes, which
confirms my opinion of the state of the dead. It is said, Lev. p. 344.
in Chap. 9. ver. 5. That the living know they shall dye, but the dead know not
any thing; that is, naturally, and before the resurrection of the body.


Stud. For answer to this citation, I ^efe^ you to Diodati, whose notes you
have no reason to despise, seeing you have submitted the declaration of your
judgment Lev. p. ^38.
to the Annotations of the Assembly, who pleased to transcribe so very many
places out of the aforesaid Author: observe therefore the context, and his
interpretation, which I may represent to you in this Paraphrase. Ver. 3. By
reason of this indifferency of events (mentioned by Solomon, in the beginning
of the Chapter) worldly men dally with, 'till they die i^, their sins. ( Ver.
4.) For whilst life does last, the gate of hope, and repentance, is open*
though men make not use of this opportunity in order to their salvation. For a
living dog, that is to say, a great sinner alive, is happier whilst God grants
to him life, and opportunity of conversion; then a lesser sinner (compared to
a Lion, which is a more noble, and not so unclean a beast as a dog) who dies
in his impenitencie, and so is past all remedy. ( Ver. 5. For the living know
they shall die, and through the fear of death, may be induced to repentance,
whilst there is space for it: but the dead know not any thing; not in this
sense, that their souls do loose all knowledge, conscience, or remembrance; but
in this, because it avails them nothing to Salvation; and they understand not
now the things that belong to their peace, for they are, by the absence of
opportunity, quite hidden from their eyes: neither have they any more a reward,
set down for virtue, whilst a man lives in this world, which is the place
appointed for us to labor* and run our race in: for the memory of them is
forgotten; God has for ever cast them off, according to that of David Psalm.
88.5.
-- Like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more: and
they are cut off from thy hand. And this sense of the place is confirmed by the
tenth verse, where Solomon presses men to a speedy exercise of religion, in
these words: Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there
is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.


Mr. Hobbes. What answer have you to the words of Job, Lev. p. 241.
Chap. 14. ver. 7. There is hope of a tree, if it be cast down: though the root
thereof wax old, and the stock thereof dye in the ground, yet when it senteth
the water, it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant: but man dies and
wastes away, yea, man gives up the ghost, and where is he? And (ver. 12.) man
lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more. But when is it, that
the heavens shall be no more? S. Peter tells us that it is at the general
resurrection.


Stud. It has been thought by some, a sufficient answer to this place, to
understand it of entire man, as he consists of soul and body; seeing man is
not, man arises not, 'though the soul existeth and ascends, before the
consummate estate of both, in the great day of the Messiah. I know, also, that
the Jews, Truth springing out of the Earth, p. 209 See Job 7. ^,10.
consider Job as a Gentile, who had no assurance of a future state, and that he
speaks, in the seventh Chapter, as much against the resurrection of the body,
as the immortality of the soul. As the cloud (says Job) is consumed and
vanishes away; so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more. And
there are many who expound the letter (in the 19 Chap. and 25, 26. verses) of
the restitution of Jobs body, tormented with worms, to soundness of health; and
of the blessings descending upon him, in his latter days, even to the
eclipsing the glories of his first posterity.


Mr. Hobbes. What need is there of answer upon answer in the present case? for
this doctrine of the natural immortality of the soul, which you so eagerly
conted for, is Lev. p. 339.
unnecessary to the Christian faith. For supposing that when a man dies, there
remains nothing of him but his carcass; cannot God that raised inanimated
dust and clay into a living creature by his word, as easily raise a dead
carcass to life again, and continue him alive for ever, or make him dye again,
by another word?


Stud. If you attempt, thus, to explain the resurrection of entire man, you
will be pressed with such a weighty inconvenience, as cannot, by the utmost
strength of your wit, be ever sustained. For if man be not raised up by a
reunion of his immaterial soul to the main Stamina of such a body as he,
sometimes, had; but merely by the framing again, and moving, of such matter as
he is supposed to have wholly consisted of, and by the help of which he has
done worthy, or shameful acts; then either the same man, who obeyed or
transgressed, is not raised up to an estate of reward or punishment; or else he
is raised with all the parts of matter which conduced to action, and
appertained to him, almost from the cradle, to the grave, and is, therefore, in
the last day, of such dimensions, that he may not only equal the ancient Giants
of which we read in story, but likewise come nigh the bulk of those very
mountains which they are said to have heaped up in defiance of H^aven.


Mr. Hobbes. Well; whatsoever the essence of man is, or whenever any part of
him is supposed to be happy; it is most probable, that, at the last day, the
place of heaven, shall be on earth. The Lev. c. 35. p. 216.
kingdom of God in the writings of Divines, and specially in Sermons, and
treatises of devotion, is taken most commonly for eternal felicity, after this
life, in the highest heaven, which they also call the kingdom of glory; and
sometimes for (the earnest of that felicity) sanctification, which they term the
kingdom of grace; but never for the Monarchy, that is to say, the Sovereign
power of God over any subjects acquired by their own consent, which is the
proper signification of Kingdom. To the contrary, I find the Kingdom of God to
signify, in most places of Scripture, a Kingdom properly so named, constituted
by the votes of the people of Israel in peculiar manner; wherein they chose God
for their King by Covenant made with him, upon Gods promising them the
possession of the land of Canaan -- Now the Throne Lev. p. 240. See more to
this purpose, in this page.
of this our King is in Heaven, without any necessity evident in Scripture,
that man shall ascend to his happiness any higher then Gods footstool the earth.


Stud. There is no need of the consent of men, in the right notion, of the
Kingdom of God; for the Lord is King, be the people never so unquiet. Also,
there is nothing more frequent, in the New Testament, then the notion of Gods
Kingdom of Grace in the dispensation of the Gospel; and of glory, in the
highest Heavens. And for the latter, we pray in the second petition of that
Form which our Lord taught us; and the former we acknowledge in the Doxologie.
The holy Baptist, being the forerunner of the Christ, preached unto the Jews
(who though they justified themselves at present by the works of the Law, yet
held repentance necessary to the reception of the Messiah) the Doctrine of
Penance; adding this reason, because the kingdom of heaven was at hand: and
this had been an improper Doctrine, if the Messiah, as you dream, was not to
have a Kingdom, till after more then sixteen hundred years. Our Savior,
therefore, when he preached (as his Forerunner had done) that Doctrine of
Repentance; he used not the same phrase, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand; but he said, Matt. 4.^7. See Matt. 12.^8.
Repent, and believe the Gospel, that is, forsake sin, and enter into the
Kingdom of the Messiah, by Grace. Our Lord, also (in the twelfth Chapter of St.
Matthew) proves, by his great power over Satan and the Kingdom of darkness,
that the Kingdom of the Messiah, was then come. And he declared St. John 3 5.
That Baptism was a Sacrament of entrance and admission into the Kingdom of the
Gospel. And he Joh. 12.13.
received the Hosannah's of the people, who saluted him as that King of Israel,
who came unto them in the name of the Lord. And when he was asked Luke 17.20,
21.
by the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should come, he answered; The
Kingdom of God is within you; that is, it is already come, it is 'Ev (...) Luke
1.28. Inter Mulier.
amongst you. The further manifestation of his Kingdom, he foretold, in
prophesying of his coming to take vengeance on the bloody Jews, by his
scourges, the Romans, in the destruction of Jerusalem: the History of which, as
it stands in Josephus, if it be duly compared with the predictions of our
Lord, is sufficient to stop the widest mouth of profaneness; and to hold up a
powerful light against the dim Ey-balls of the most forsaken Atheists. To this
the words of St. Mark have relation, in the ninth Chapter, and first Verse:
Verily I say unto you, that there be some of them that stand here, which shall
not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.


Mr. Hobbes. Those words (alleged Lev. p. 341, 342.
by Beza long ago) if taken grammatically, make it certain that either some of
those men that stood by Christ at that time, are yet alive, or else that the
Kingdom of God must be now in this present world. -- But yet if this Kingdom
were to come at the Resurrection of Christ, why is it said, Some of them,
rather then All? for they all lived till after Christ was risen.


Stud. Christ, at his Resurrection, had vindicated to himself, by way of
conquest over Death and Hell, this spiritual Kingdom; but the manifestation of
it, in power, was displayed in the desolation of the City of Jerusalem. And
because (for instance) St. John lived, to see the triumph of Christ, over his
bloodthirsty Enemies, though all the Apostles did not; there was, therefore,
reason for saying, Some of them, rather then, All.


Mr. Hobbes. If Lev. p. 342.
it be lawful to conjecture at the meaning of the words, by that which
immediately follows, both here, and in St. Luke, where the same is again
repeated, it is not unprobable, to say they have relation to the
Transfiguration, which is described in the Verses immediately following. -- And
so the promise of Christ was accomplished by way of Vision.


Stud. You are to look backward and not forward: for the words do manifestly
relate to those of the eighth Chapter, where our Savior had commanded the
embracers of his Gospel to take up the Cross; and promised that, by their
constancy in their Christian Profession, they should save their lives; whilst,
others, who would endeavor to preserve life by denying the persecuted faith,
should be destroyed: and so it came to pass, when Gallus, even against the
reason of State, did raise the Siege before Jerusalem; the Christians and
convert-Jews, escapeing, whilst a door was open, unto the Mountains, and into
the City Pella; and not remaining 'till Titus, some months after, renewed the
Siege. After this exhortation to constancy, and promise of deliverance, our
Savior, threatened that he would be ashamed of such, who should refuse to
confess him before men, at his coming, in the glory of his Father, with his
holy Angels: which coming with Angels, and open rejection of cowardly spirits,
(importing their present claim, and his refusal) agrees not to his
Transfiguration, which was transacted in secret with some of the Disciples, and
the apparition of Moses and Elias. -- There is therefore reason for Divines, to
insist upon a kingdom of Christ, already come, a kingdom of the Gospel:
neither want they reason on their side, when they affirm, that the kingdom of
glory is in the highest Heavens; and not on earth: which if men rise the same
they were when they acted in the present world (retaining all their parts,
howsoever new-moulded,) then according to your Hypothesis, which conceives man
to be wholly material, the whole earth will be little enough to give the
Blessed space, wherein to move with pleasure; and we shall be as much in the
dark for the place of the damned, as the place it self is said to be.

Our blessed Savior has assured us, that we shall, in the Resurrection, be
like the Angels. And St. Paul has, also, informed Christians, that they shall
be endued with Celestial Bodies, when they have put off these earthly
Sepulchers in which their nobler minds lay entombed; and that this body of
flesh and blood (for of that, is his whole discourse St. Hieron. in Esai. c.
24. p. 102. Caro and sanguis reg. Dei non possidebunt. Non quod, secundum
haeriticos, dispereat natura corporum, sed quod corruptivum hoc induat
incorruptionem, etc.
and not of any moral body, of sin and corruption) shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. And from hence Athenagoras Athenag. p. 35.
has been taught to say, that in the Resurrection, we shall not be as flesh,
though we bear flesh about us. Now this Angelical, Celestial Body, seems
very unagreeable to the condition of Inhabitants upon earth: neither had
innocent Adam such a body in Paradise. And it is, also, to be noted, that the
Blessed cannot, by any means enjoy such Celestial Bodies, according to the
principles by you delivered; and of this I, above, have given some intimation.
For if man be only a piece of well-disposed matter, and is devoyd of an
immaterial soul, upon the permanent oneness of which depends, chiefly, his
individuation, he is no more the same person upon so great an alteration made
in the contexture of the body, then a spire of Grass is the same with part of
the flesh of an Ox, into which after digestion, it is transformed.

But why does it seem to you incredible, that holy men shall be caught up with
Enoch, and Elias, and St. Paul, and enjoy their happiness in Heavenly Regions,
when there are so many places of Scripture which look that way?

Our blessed Lord Matt. 5.12.
administreth comfort to such as bear his Cross, by telling them that their
reward is great in Heaven. And he advises Matt. 6.19, 20, 21. and Luke 12.33.
all his followers, to lay up for themselves treasures, not on earth, but in
the heavens, that their hearts may with the greater facility be lifted up, by
Divine and Heavenly Meditation. And Joh. 14.1, 2, 3.
he spoke these words of consolation to his Disciples who began to be, most
deeply concerned, at the thoughts of his departure: Let not your heart be
troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Fathers house are many
mansions; if it were no: so, I would have told you. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I
am, there ye may be also. This, then, was the Doctrine of Christ; as also of
his Apostles. St. Paul delivers this Doctrine with much confidence, saying 2
Cor. 5.1.
, We know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And
Col. 1.5.
he blesses God for the faith of the Colossians; and for the hope which was
laid up for them, in the Heavens. And he comfort the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians.
41.6, 17.
, after this manner: The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive, and remain, shall he caught
up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall
we ever be with the Lord. The Author, also, of the Epistle to the Hebrews Heb.
10.34.
, extolleth the patience of the afflicted Converts, and likewise insinuates
the great Reason which they had to take joyfully the spoiling of their earthly
goods, because they had in Heaven a better and enduring substance.


Mr. Hobbes. I have, with much patience, attended to your citations: there is
reason that now you should listen to such as on my side, may be produced. We
find Joh. 3.13. Lev. p. 240, 241.
written in in St. John, That no man has ascended into heaven, but he that
came down from heaven, even the son of man that is in heaven -- yet Christ was
then not in Heaven, but upon the earth. The like is said of David ( Acts 2.34.)
where St. Peter, to prove the Ascension of Christ, using the words of the
Psalmist Psalm. 16.10.
, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy One to see
corruption, says, they were spoken (not of David, but) of Christ; and to prove
it, adds this reason, For David is not ascended into Heaven. But to this a
man may easily answer, and say, that though their bodies were not to ascend
till the general day of Judgment, yet their souls were in Heaven, as soon as
they were departed from their bodies; which also seems to be confirmed by the
words of our Savior Luke ^0.^3, 38.
who proving the Resurrection out of the words of Moses, says thus, That the
dead are raised, even Moses showed, at the bush, when he called the Lord, the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For he is not a God
of the dead, but of the living; for they all live to him. But if these words be
to be understood only of the immortality of the soul, they prove not at all
that which our Savior intended to prove, which was the Resurrection of the
body, that is to say, the immortality of man. Therefore our Savior means
that those Patriarchs were immortal; not by a property consequent to the
Essence, and Nature of Mankind; but by the Will of God, that was pleased of
his mere Grace, to bestow eternal life upon the faithful. And though at that
time the Patriarchs, and many other faithful men were dead, yet, as it is in
the Text, they lived to God; that is, they were written in the Book of Life
with them that were absolved of their sins, and ordained to life eternal at the
Resurrection.


Stud. Our Lord designed to prove a future state, against the Sadduces, who
denied, not only the Resurrection of the body, but likewise the existence of
Angel or Spirit: and the words (...) or (...), do not always imply the raising
of the body; but, being used without the addition of flesh or body, do usually
denote the future life, and the awakening, and advancing of the Soul; or the
conserving or keeping of it alive; as God is said to have raised up Pharaoh,
that is, to have kept him still alive Vorst. in Romans 9 17. (...) Hoc es^. feci
ut restares, vel superesles. sec. Hebr. itaque sensus est, Nolui ^^ exscindere,
sed potius reservare.
And whereas you suggest, that the Patriarchs were alive only by destination;
it is an exposition derived by you, from your Hypothesis, that man is wholly
mortal, and not from the letter of the words, where Christ speaks in the
present, and not the future time; affirming that the Patriarchs live already,
and not that they shall be awakened unto life, after many hundreds of years.


Mr. Hobbes. A second place is Lev. p. 239.
that in St. Paul (1 Cor. 15.22.) For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive -- Now, if as in Adam, all dye, that is, have forfeited
Paradise, and eternal life on earth; so in Christ all shall be made alive; then
all men shall be made to live on earth; for else the comparison were not proper.


Stud. That Adam, if he had remained obedient, should have lived eternally upon
earth, together with all the race of men to have been produced out of his loins
(to whom this earth would, at last, have denied Elbow-room) is a conceit of
yours which reason does not favor. For the first man was of the earth earthy,
he was sustained by corruptible food; he was designed for propagation before
his fall; which things seem to argue a mortal nature, and are, by our Savior,
excepted from the condition of those who shall enjoy eternal blessedness. And
though it was said to him, that in eating the forbidden fruit he should dye the
death; that argues thenceforth a necessity of dying and denies not a
capableness of dying formerly: and though God Almighty could have sustained his
mortal nature for ever upon earth, yet there is (as I think) no promise of it
in Holy Writ: and whilst we consider the future estate of blessed men,
described in Scripture; there is some reason for us to believe, that he should
have rather been translated to an Heavenly Paradise, then to have dwelt, for
ever, in the Eden below.

Neither was it the business of the Apostle, in this Text, to determine any
thing of the place, but to set forth the privilege of Believers, by the means
of Christ, at the last day. The meaning of the Apostle, who speaks here of
those that are Christ's, seems no other then this. As all who came from Adam
were obnoxious to death, and could not, naturally, claim the privilege of a
Resurrection to life eternal: So all who believe in the Messiah shall not rot
for ever in the grave, but be raised up to everlasting happiness. To this sense
agree both Crellius, and Vorstius, whom I, the rather, name to you, because
they were men of singularity in conceit, and such as stepped out of the beaten
Road of Divinity, which the Orthodox believe the truest and safest way. In the
Paraphrase of this comparison, All of one kind, is answered by All of the
other kind, and death by life: And therefore there is no impropriety in the
comparison, though, in other particulars, the things compared disagree. The
main scope of the Apostle, in setting forth the advantage of Believers at that
day, by Christ, does justify the similitude, though the place of life be not
the same to all the Sons of Adam which was possessed by that Root of mankind.
Parables (says Salmeron, who wrote of them) are like to swords; the Hilts and
Scabbards of them are variously wrought, but it is the Edge whereby they ^o
execution.


Mr. Hobbes. Notwithstanding what has been talked, I still maintain that Lev.
p. 345.
the Elect after the Resurrection shall be restored to the estate, wherein Adam
was before he had sinned: [and that the place shall be on earth, and more
particularly at and about Ierusalem]. Concerning Lev. p. 246.
the general salvation, because it must be in the Kingdom of Heaven, there is
great difficulty concerning the place. On one side, by Kingdom (which is an
estate ordained by men for their perpetual security against Enemies, and want)
it seems that this Salvation shall be on earth: for by Salvation is set forth
unto us, a glorious reign of our King, by conquest; not a safety by escape: and
therefore there where we look for Salvation, we must look also for Triumph; and
before triumph; for victory; and before victory, for battle: which cannot well
be supposed, shall be in heaven -- and it is evident by Scripture, that
Salvation shall be on earth, then, when God shall reign (at the coming again of
Christ) in Jerusalem; and from Jerusalem shall proceed the Salvation of the
Gentiles that shall be received into Gods Kingdom.


Stud. In this speech of yours, there is a threefold error, easily confuted and
broken in sunder. First, you say the Elect shall be in the estate of innocent
Adam; and you would have comparison answer comparison, as face answers face.
Yet our Savior says, That the elect shall neither eat, drink, nor marry.
Secondly, you suppose a War in the estate of the heaven on earth; and after
that victory: the former of which, is inconsistent with that uninterrupted
peace which the Scripture ascribes to that estate; and the latter is meant of
Christ the Captain of our Salvation conquering death; in behalf of Believers,
by dying, and arising again, and triumphing over death in ascending and
reigning at Gods Right Hand. Wherefore St. Paul says 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? And, again, Thanks
be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither
(in the third place) do you speak consistently with your self, when you mention
Jerusalem as the Metropolis of Heaven. For blessedness being, by you, supposed
the recovery of the estate lost in Adam, the chief seat of it ought, by you, to
have been fixed in the Region of Eden; which, where it is, those Atheists who
scoff at the story of Adam, may be instructed, both in relation to their
knowledge and manners, by an obscure, but yet most learned Mr. Carver of the
situation of the terrestrial Pa^adise.
Geographer and Divine.


Mr. Hobbes. Will you suffer me to proceed in proving that the future estate of
Gods subjects shall be upon earth, and particularly at Jerusalem?


Stud. You shall not be unseasonably interrupted.


Mr. Hobbes. That it shall be on earth is proved from a third place Lev. p. 239.
, Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. This was the Tree of Adams
eternal life, but his life was to have been on earth.


Stud. You here mistake (as many have done in attempting to unfold the
Revelation) this Book of Mysteries which represents, Allegorically, to our
senses, the things in Heaven, by patterns on earth. There is a Paradise not
upon earth; an entrance into which our Savior promised to the relenting and
believing Malefactor, that very day upon the Cross. Besides, the mere letter of
the Text fixes the chief Seat of Heaven in Eden, not in Jerusalem.


Mr. Hobbes. To my opinion concerning the Heavenly Jerusalem on earth, seems
L^v. It.
to agree that of the Psalmist (Psalm. 133.3) Upon Zion God commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore: for Zion, is in Jerusalem, upon earth.


Stud. This blessing is meant of temporal long life which God promised, so
especially, to the obedient, in the Land of Canaan: neither cannot it (with
reason) be interpreted of a life eternal; for David says, in the last place,
that God did there command a blessing. Besides, though Zion was at Jerusalem;
yet Hermon, which is first named, was on the other side of Jordan, on the
utmost part of the holy Land Ea^tward.


Mr. Hobbes. My opinion seems, again, to be confirmed Lev. p. 239.
by St. John, (Rev. 21.2.) where he says, I John saw the holy City, new
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband. And again, verse. 10. to the same effect; as if he should say, The
new Jerusalem, the paradise of God, at the coming again of Christ, should come
down to Gods people from heaven, and not they go up to it from earth.


Stud. Heaven is the Jerusalem above, which the Patriarchs sought Heb. 11 10,
to 16.
in contra-distinction to Canaan below: of this Jerusalem above, St. Paul says
Gal. 4.25, 26.
that it is free that is, typed by Sarah the freewoman, and cannot but be free
from Enemies seeing God is the King of it) and that it is the mother of us all;
that is, the Gospel came thence immediately by Christ, and not, as the law, by
the mediation of an Angel. Our original, as Christians, we owe to heaven, and
thence are we nourished; and preserved by the divine grace: and to the
revelation of this Jerusalem Christians attain, by the preaching of the Gospel,
which is a dispensation of more clearness and comfort then the Law See Heb.
1.12, to 258.
And the new Jerusalem descending is a type of Heaven in a glorious estate of
the Christian Church on earth; the commencement of which has much puzzled those
who have spent their studies about the great Millenium. But this new Jerusalem
descended is not to be esteemed the estate of just men made perfect, because it
is said that the Rev. 21.24.
Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and also that
after the thousand years, wherein the Martyrs are thought to reign with Christ,
in the new Jerusalem below; the devil Rev. 20.7, 8, 9.
shall be loosed and go out to deceive the Nations, and with them, as Enemies
in battle array, to encompass the holy City: which things are improperly
ascribed to a state of entire joy, in the life eternal, of the saved in the
Jerusalem above. If then as Mr. Mede affirms M. Medes in Clav. Apoc. par. 2.
p. 534.5.
and attempteth to prove) the new Jerusalem Syncronizeth with the seventh
Trumpet or Interval from the destruction of the beast, and supposes afterward
a loosing of Satan, it cannot be understood of the highest heaven, or the
consummate happiness of man.


Mr. Hobbes. [There are behind, diverse places in the Prophets, in order to the
evading of whose force, you will much perplex your understanding: and when I
have once produced them, I shall then have done drawing, at my end, of this Saw
of disputation.]

How good soever Lev. p. 246* 247, c. 38.
the Reason, before alleged, may b^, I will not trust to it, without very
evident places of Scripture. The state of Salvation is described at large,
Isaiah 33. ver. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Look upon Zion, the City of our
solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle
that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be
removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken. But there the
glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers, and streams, wherein
shall go no galley with oars; neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. For the
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will
save us. Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their ma^t;
they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided, the
lame take the prey, and the ^nhabitants shall not say I am sick; the people
that shall dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. In which words we
have the place from whence salvation is to proceed, Jerusalem, a (...); the
eternity of it, a Tabernacle that (...): be taken down, etc. the Savior of it,
the Lord, their Judge, their Lawgiver, their King, he will save us; the
Salvation, the Lord shall be to them as a broad mote of swift waters, etc. The
condition of their enemies, their tacklings are loose; their masts weak, the
lame shall take the spoil of them. The condition of the saved, the inhabitant
shall not say, I am sick: and lastly, all this comprehended in forgiveness of
sin; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. By which
it is evident that Salvation (as I said) shall be on earth, then, when God
shall reign (at the coming again of Christ) in Jerusalem; and from Jerusalem
shall proceed the salvation of the Gentiles that shall be received into Gods
kingdom: as is also more expressly declared by the same Prophet, Chap. 65.20,
21. And they (that is, the Gentiles who had any Jew in bondage) shall bring all
your Brethren for an offering to the Lord, out of all Nations, upon Horses, and
in Charrets, and in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy
Mountain, Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an
offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord: and I will also take of
them for Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord. Whereby it is manifest, that
the chief seat of Gods kingdom (which is the place from whence the salvation of
us that were Gentiles, shall proceed) shall be Jerusalem: and the same is also
confirmed by our Savior, in his discourse with the woman of Samaria,
concerning the place of Gods worship; to whom he says, Ioh. 4.22. That the
Samaritans worshipped they knew not what, but the Jews worship what they knew,
for salvation is of the Jews, ( ex Iudaeis, that is, begins at the Jews:) as if
he should say, you worship God, but know not by whom he will save you, as we
do, that know it shall be by one of the tribe of Judah, a Jew, not a Samaritan:
and therefore also the woman not impertinently answered him again, We know the
Messiah shall come. So that which our Savior faith, Salvation is from the
Jews, is the same that S. Paul says* (Romans 1.16, 17.) The ^^spel is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first and also to
the Greek: for therein is the righte^^sness of God revealed from faith to
faith; from the faith of the J^w, to the faith of the Gentile. In the like
sense the Prophet Joel describing the day of judgment ( Chap. 2.30, 31.) that
God would show wonders in heaven and in earth, blood and fire, and pillars of
s^^ak; the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before
the great and terrible day of the Lord come; he add^th, ver. 32. And it shall
come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be
saved: for i^ mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be Salvation. And Obadiah ver.
17. says the same, Upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness, and the h^use of Jacob shall possess their possessions, that is, the
poss^ssions o^ the heathen; which possessions he expresses most particularly
in the following verses, by the mount of Esau, the land of the Philistin^s, the
fields of Ephraim, of Samaria Gilead, and the Cities of the South; and
concludes with these words, The kingdom shall be the Lords. All these places
are for salvation, and the kingdom of God (after the day of judgment) upon
earth.


Stud. It is manifest that Isaiah, in those places, means the salvation from
Senacherib and the Assyrians wrought by God himself, in the days of Hezekiah;
whilst the Jews relied upon Sethon, who deceived them, hoping that the
As^yrians and they weakening each other, his strength might be the better
promoted against both. The Prophecy of Joel concerns, literally, those times,
when the Caldeans, by sword and fire, destroyed Jerusalem, at which season,
(according to the height of the prophetic style) the very face of the heavens
(by reason of the flames, and smoke, and streams of blood) were altered, to the
amazement of common spectators. It seems also a type of the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus. The saved, V. 32. were the captives reserved alive, a
remnant designed by God for the continuance of his Church. Obadiah is to be
understood See 2. Chron. 28.9.16, 17. etc.
of the destruction of the Edomites, and of the aforesaid salvation from the
Assyrians. The places in S. John, and S. Paul, relate to the beginning of the
Gospel, and not to the beginning of the kingdom of glory Luke 24.47. Rep. and
rem. to be preached to all -- beginning at Jerusalem Acts 13.46. -- the word
first spoken to you --
the Messiah according to the flesh, arising from that Nation; and the Gospel
being first offered to them. You should have done well to have added those
other words in St. John (V. 21.) The hour comes and now is when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. You have,
for the serving your hypothesis erred most grossly in these your last
interpretations of holy writ: and I cannot but pity you, whilst I perceive you,
in gloriously, stumbling, when you are just stopping out of this disputation.
Let no man, hereafter, honor you with the name of Philosopher, who finds you
no happier at the interpretation of Nature, then of the holy Bible; into the
inward sense of which you enter not, by any expedite unlocking of its
mysteries; being resolved to force a way, through it, to your own novel
conceits. But at this, I am not to be astonished: for there is so much
learning, and so much attention required to the true understanding of diverse
sections of holy writ; that if a man has not made it much his business, to
study, and meditate, about that true and concerning part of Antiquity, to
compare text with text, and reading with reading, and sacred history with
profane, his thoughts will scarce be worth the writing down upon the most
neglected piece of paper. Good Sir be wise to sobriety; handle the Scripture
with more reverence and care; be not rashly busy in relation to the things of
the Altar, for there is a burning coal, ready, always, to stick to a profane
finger, which will endanger something of greater price then your reputation.


Mr. Hobbes. You your self have not examined An Imitation of his conclus of
Stigmal, p. 31.
the Scriptures to the bottom: therefore you perhaps may be, but are not yet, a
good Divine. I would you had but so much Ethics, as to be civil: but you are a
notable expositor, so fare you well, and consider what honor you do to the
University of which you have bin a member; and what honor you do to Corpus
Christi College, by your divinity; and what honor you do to your Degree, with
the manner of your language: and take this counsel along with you; Think me no
more worthy of your pains; you see how I have fouled your fingers.


Stud. Nay, if the scene be so changed, that we must rail and quarrel instead
of debating matters with sober reason, it is time to have done; the world
having long since, had enough of passion and impertinent noise.


ERRATA.
IN ^pist. Ded. lin. 6. for owe, read ow. page 6. lin. 11. for extemporanious
read extemporary.

^n the Table. Mr. Hobbes very often printed for Mr. Hobbes's. p. 7. l 2. f.
doctor r. doctrine. l. 21. after trifleth, add a period. l. 25. f. temperance
r. nature. p. 9. l. 22. after table, add a period. p. 12. l. 22. after on
earth, a comma.

In the Book. p. 4. l. 17. for solicited r. selected. l. 30. for Fire r. Five.
p. 5. l. 19. for Rostius r. Roscius. p. 6. l 14: for the Confident r. your
Friend. p. 10. l. 22. after God, a period. p. 14. l. 2. for wine r. wind. p.
14. in Marg. after part 2. p. add 190. and l 14. and 21. p. 22. l. 1. and l.
22. and p. 27. l. 25. and p. 33. l. 33. and p. 37. l. 6. and p. 43. l. 22. and
l. 29. and p. 46. l. 16. and p. 47. l. 9. f. Phylosoph etc. r. Philosoph. etc.
p. 16. in marg. for. upp. r. hyp. p. 17. in marg. for (...) r. (...) l. 33. f.
lay r. lays. p. 18. marg. f. ed Fir. r. ed Ficin. f. Necochim r. Nevochim. p.
19. in marg. for (...) r. (...) f. (...) r. (...) p. 20. in marg. for (...) r.
(...) p. 23. l. 7. for signifyfie r. signify. p. 24. l. 10. after affirmation,
a period. p. 25. l. 7. f. (...) r. (...) p. 26. l. 3. f. hastily r. harshly. p.
28. the colon to be set after [what he is:] p. 29. l. 2. after he is, a period.
l. 5. after nature. a period. l. 29. after wisdom, a period. p. 33. l. 29.
after Imagination, a comma. p. 35 l. 33. f. iniquity r. inanitie. p. 36. l 12.
after celebrate, a comma, p. 39. l. 7. after, but one, two points: p. 40. l.
24. f. he r. be. p. 44. l. 26. f. pranted r. granted. p. 45. l. 26. f. Assent
r. Ascent. p. 46. l. 1. after rest, a comma. p. 48. l. 9. after ^ramed, a
comma. p. 50 l. 13. f. things r. Kings. p. 51. l. 9. after air, a period. p.
59. l. 8. f. All r. the. p. 62. l. 10. f. be able r. being able. p. 72. l. 13.
after Ghost, a comma. l. 27. f. ninos sibi r. ni nos tibi. p. 73. l. 9. f.
humor r. humors. p. 76. l. 11, 12. most effectually to an Ecclesiastic, in a
Parenthesis. p 78. l 22. blot out do. p. 79. l. 32. for to underst. r. to be
underst. p. 83. l. 7. after counter-pressure, add a comma. p. 90. l. 10. after
motions, a comma. p. 93. l. 5. in the marg. f. ipsu r. i^sum. p. 94. l. 5. blot
out in. p. 96. ^ult. f. should r. I should. p. 103. l. 18. l. teaching r.
touching. p. 108. l. 20. f. men in r. main. p. 118. l. 5. f. you r. them. p.
127. l. 18, 19. of the right, printed twice. p. 131. l. 21. f. invaded r.
minded. p. 133. l. 28. ^. Epitom r. Epitome. p. 134. l. 19. f. Arabes r. Arabs.
l. 21. f. wildness r. wiliness. p. 136. l. 13. f. Arabes r. Arabs. p. 140. l.
9. f. Pollen. r. Pellenaearian. p. 144. l. 8. blot out their. p. 161. l. 21. f.
the r. your. p. 162. l. 8. f. and self r. on self. p. 163. l. 8. f. calls r.
lets. p. 201. l. 22. f. reapted r. repeated. p. 203. l. 21. f. effect r.
effusion. p. 227. l. 8. f. cast r. cut. p. 228. l. 14. f. posterity r.
prosperity. l. 18. f. conted r. contend*


