THE DIFFERENCE Betwixt the PROTESTANT AND Socinian Methods: In ANSWER to a
BOOK Written by a ROMANIST, and Entitled, The Protestants. Plea for a Socinian.

LICENSED, December. 14. 1686.

Printed for Benjamin Took at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1687.

THE Introduction.
THE Author of a late little Book, which bears the Title of [Seek and you shall
find,] does, both in his own Name, and in the Name of many Sincere Persons,
make open complaint of the Licentiousness of the Press. In the Epistle to the
Reader, p. 9.
If he means by those Persons, such as are so Sincere in their Credulity, that
they mixed not one grain of reasonable Inquiry with it, the Complaint will give
no pain to judicious People, unless it be by moving them to pity his Weakness.
And a Man would imagine, that his ^ort of Sincere People were so purely
Credulous, seeing the Justice of the complaint is on the side of the Reformed.
This lesser matter puts me in mind of a greater, yet of a like Nature, in the
Circumcellions, one of those Branches into which the Faction, which sprang from
Donatus, was divided. They went about doing injury to the Christians, from whom
they had made a causeless Separation; and when their Incivilities were, by
those whom they had provoked, turned upon them, they took the confidence to
call themselves Martyrs.

But certainly, those, who are the illegal Aggressors, deserve the Blame. Those
who send the Challenge are the Litentious, rather than the modest Accepters.
And, when Truth and Innocence are assaulted, such as Honor them and have
interest in them, ought to do some just thing in their necessary defense; and,
if need be, draw their Pens in their Service. Provided that it be done (as, I
think, by our Churchmen, it has been generally done) in a way consistent with
decency of Manners, and public Peace.

If, therefore, there appear amongst the Romanists, Misrepresenters and crafty
Softners and Colourers of their own Doctrine; True and Faithful Representers
are not unreasonably Officious, when they enter upon the Stage and take off the
Disguise.

If Artificial Expositions are imposed, and set to Sale in our own Language
upon every Stall; it is very proper for such as are Friends to Sincerity, to
take upon them the Office of True Expounders, and to convince the World, that
such Sweetners of the Doctrines of the Synod of Trent, have not declared what
those Doctrines are, but what, in their Opinion, they ought to be; or, by what
turns of Wit, they may be fenced against the Arguments of Reformed Catholics.

If any Man thinks fit not only to Preach, but to Publish in this Nation, a
Sermon of St. Peter, and, in that Sermon, to reproach all Churches See Dr.
Godden's Ser. on St. Pet. day, p. 39.
besides the Roman, as New Trimmed Vessels, Leaky at the Bottom, and unable to
carry those, who Sail in them; to the Haven; it cannot be a Crime to set forth
a Discourse on the same Subject, (without any reflection either on such a
Person, or his Performance;) and to show the true Sense of Thou art Peter, and
the safety of our Communion, and the Soundness of our Bottom; whilst some are
in a Vessel which has suffered so many Alterations and Additions, that it
cannot be called the same Ship it was, when St. Peter was in it.

Again, if such Guides in Controversy offer themselves, as lead Men out of the
way, and turn them round in an endless Circle; the Direction of honest Guides
is a debt which they owe to Truth and Charity.

If Men in Books, in Pulpits, in Conversation, shall daily ask the question,
Where is the Protestant's Judge? they ought to esteem it a Civility in others,
when they give them a full Answer about a Judge in Controversy.

And if Men of like Persuasion revile this Church as the Schismatical party of
Donatus, it is out of decency and not want of ability, that Men do not give
them an Irene for their Lucilla. In the mean time, they have a Substantial
Answer, though not so sharp a Rebuke, as their bold uncharitableness justly
merited.

Last of all, If a Romanist accuses the Church of England, as a Patroness of
the Heresy of Socinus, though not with a direct and downright charge, yet from
the consequence of her Methods; common Duty to so Good and Venerable a Mother
constrains her Sons to appear in her Vindication; and to show that her Plea
is very widely mistaken. If she pleads for Arians, Socinians, or any other
Faction of Men, who have departed from the true Faith; she does it no otherwise
than in the Words of her Litany. In that Pious Office, she beseeches God to
bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived: And may
God abundantly favor her Charitable Petition.

By such Considerations as these, I have, at last, been moved to write an
Answer to the Book which the Author is pleased to call The Protestants Plea for
a Socinian, and to make that Answer public. But I must acknowledge, that, upon
other Accounts, the Diversion which this Answer has given me, has been very
unwelcom: As unwelcom as the trouble was to those of old time, who, when they
were employed in offering Sacrifice, were forced to turn aside, and drive away
from the Altar the greedy Fowls, and the impertinent Flies.

Now, in this Answer, I shall, for Order-sake, and that I may proceed
distinctly, reduce what I purpose to say to certain Heads; and they are these
three which follow.

I. Observations touching the Book itself, its Edition, Character and design.

II. Considerations relating to the General Argument of it, by which it may
appear to be of no real force against the Plea of the Reformed.

III. Particular Answers to the Particular Parts of this pretended Protestants
Plea, as it stands divided in the Five Conferences of the Author.

The Difference betwixt the Protestant and Socinian Methods, etc.
CHAP. I.
Observations touching the Book itself, its Edition, Character and Design.

FOR the Book itself, it may be noted in the First place, That it is neither
new, nor entire. It is the Fourth Discourse in the Second Edition of the Guide
in Controversies, set out in the Year 1673. If this Tract was published before
that time, to me it was not; for then, and not before, it came to my knowledge.
But this is not the thing which gives our Ecclesiastics offense; for whether
the Men of Controversy bring into the Field either their Old or their New
Artillery of Arguments, this Apostolical Church is proof against them.

The Book, of which this Plea is a part, is believed, by many of the same way,
to be of very great Strength and Solidity: And when a Question is moved
concerning their Faith, they think it enough to say, The Guide is unanswered
See Resp. ad (...) Ep. D. (...).
If that be a good Method, a Protestant, upon the like occasion, may take leave
to say, The Book against the Popes Supremacy, written by the learned and humble
Dr. Barrow, is unanswerable. And, after all this, the Guide is actually
answered, though not in the Formality of Word for Word, in a great Volume of
Refutation See D. Still. sev. Discourses in Answer to the Guide in Contr. etc.
p. 326, 327, etc.
. The Bottom on which all is built is showed to be false; and if a Workman
discovers the unsoundness of the Foundation, he is not obliged to tell
particularly how every single Brick is dawbed with untempered Mortar. The Guide
is sufficiently answered, if it be proved, either that the first step he sets
is false, or that he wants Eyes, or that he is, by prejudice, blinded. Some
such thing seems to be, in some degree, in this Guide in Controversy; and I
may set it down as my

Second Observation, That though there is a commendable Temper in this, and his
other Writings, yet there is an obscureness in all of them; and he that is
conversant in his Books, is as if he walked in a calm, but darkish Night.

Part of this obscureness to the Unlearned rises from Hard Words, which,
though they seem not to be affected by the Author, are yet very frequently used
by him. Such are, in his other Discourses, Disc. 3. p. (...).
Relative Cult. Salvifical P. 3^2.
. Non-clearness Disc. of (...). of Chapter Guides, p. 8.
. Inerrability Dis. 3 p. 169
. Church-Anarchical Disc. 1. p. 9
. Traditive-Sense Disc. 2. p. 138
. Decession Disc. 1. p 47.
.

And, in this Plea, Autocatacrisie Prot. Plea, p. 24, 28. 29, 30
, Plerophory P. 13.
, Cognoscitive Faculties P. 10.
, Unliteral P. 11.
, Consubstantiality P 4. 14, 16, 26, 32, 37.
.

But the plain truth is this, That where the Cause will not bear manifest and
sound Sense, it must be darkened with Words, if Men will plead, with Art, for
it. Concerning the Sense of the Protestants darkened in this and his other
Discourses, he has done it with Art enough; I cannot say, with equal Sincerity.
Little Pieces of their Writings are taken out of their Places, and inlaid in
such manner as to serve the Figure of his Work, but to blemish theirs. And it
may be a

Third Note, with particular reference to Mr. Chillingworth, whom, in this
short Dialogue, he has cited more than twenty times, that whilst he has picked
out of him many other Words, he has omitted every one of those which do
expressly answer this Plea for a Socinian. I will set down these Words
afterward, in their due place, for the Satisfaction of Ingenuous Readers; See
M. Chill. Pref. to the Author of Char. maintained, Sect. 16, 17, 18. and, in
this Answer, p. 13, 22, 54, 58.
and to show that great Accomplishments may be attended with great Insincerity.

Fourthly, I observe concerning this Writer, That he has not, in this Dialogue
betwixt a Protestant and a Socinian, strictly kept the Character of either of
them.

First, He has not accurately observed the Character of a Socinian.

He introduces the Socinian as insisting perp^tually upon the Point of the
Consubstantiality of the Son of God, or his being of one and the same E^sence
or Substance with the Father: Whereas that ^^ properly the Point in
Controversy betwixt the ^^rians and the Catholic Christians, rather than
betwixt them and the Socinians, who derive them selves from Artemon and
Samosatenus more directly than from Arius. It is true, they deny that Christ is
of the same Substance with his Father, but their proper Heresy is the denial
of his being any thing before he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin Mary: For this reason the Extracts out of the Readings of the
College of Posnan See Bibl. ^tr. Pol. in Vol. 2. Op. See. p. 422.
against the Socinians, have the Name given to them of Theological Assertions
against the New Samosatenians, and not the New Arians; yet in some respects
they are, and may be so called, without absurdness of Speech. Socinus himself
will not admit that the true Arians are of his way, further than as they agree
with him in affirming the Father to be the only God by Essence Socin. Contra
(...), Vol. 2. p. 618.
. And Sandius, though he was a professed Arian, and an avowed Enemy of the
Nicene Doctrine, yet he wrote against the Socinian Heresies, which affirm, That
Christ was a mere Man, and deny that the Spirit of God is a Person Script. S.
Trinit. Revelat^ix, p. 173, etc. and Proh^m. Paradox. de Sp. S. p. 3. etc.
. But the Author may have been moved to select this Point because of its
accidental difficulty occasioned by Scholastic Niceness in their Disputes
about this Mystery, and the Controversies which they have carried on about the
very term of Homousiety. There was artifice, therefore, in singling out this
Point as capable of being turned into perplexity. Especially (as Go^ us Gos^.
in (...) ad Disp. de Persona.
the Socinian notes) when the Occams and the Durands enter into Questions about
Formalities, Quiddities, and Personalities. Other Points (as about Baptism, the
Lords Supper, Orders, and the Church) would have been too plain for the purpose.

Again, This Author brings, or rather forces in his Socinian, and makes him to
speak to the Protestant in these words: Prot. Plea, p. 5.
-- I pray tell me, Whether do you certainly know the Sense of the Scriptures,
for the Evidence of which you separated from the Church before Luther,
requiring Conformity to the contrary Doctrines as a Condition of her Communion?
This is rather the Phrase of a Papist than a Socinian. For, though Socinus
believed his own Scheme to be new, and distinct from the whole Church, he did
not believe that the Lutherans had made such a Separation. Neither would he
have disputed with them about the Sense of the Scriptures, for the Evidence of
which they separated (or rather were driven) from the Church of Rome; for he
did allow that those places were clear. Nor would he have given to the Roman
Church the name of the whole Church, or scarce of a Church at all. He did not
so much as allow it to be a true Church in the most favorable sense of the
Protestants, who distinguish betwixt a true and a pure Church, and compare it
to a Mass of Silver embased with Lead.

Socinus placed the Truth of the Church in the Truth of its Doctrine Socin. de
Ecclesia, Op. Vol. 1. p. 341, 342.
, from which Truth he held the Church of Rome to be extremely departed. He
affirmed concerning the Notes or Signs of the Church, That either they were
false; or, if true, belonged not to the Church of Rome: And he made particular
Instance in the Mark of Holy. He declared concerning Luther, Socin. Solut.
Scrupul. Resp. ad 23. Vol. 1. Op. p. 332.
That he drew Men off from false Worship and Idolatry, and brought them to that
Knowledge of Divine Matters which was sufficient for the procuring of Eternal
Life. He added, That God did afterward, by Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, reform
certain things of very great importance. He repeats it again, That, by the
means of Luther, Men were enlightened in those things which were absolutely
necessary to Salvation. So that this Author does not exactly personate a
Socinian when he speaks thus in a Sonian's Name; Whether do you certainly know
the Sense of the Scriptures for the Evidence of which you separated from the
Church before Luther?

Again, A Socinian would not have spoken as this Author does in his Name,
calling a heinous Iniquity a Prot. Plea, p. 43.
very great Mortal Sin. Nor would any accurate Speaker have used that improper
Expression.

Then (Secondly) for the Protestant in the Dialogue, he does here and there
misrepresent his Sense, and speak, at the same time, as by him, and yet against
him. For Example-sake; the Socinian having said out of Mr. Chillingworth, That
his Party had not forsaken the whole Church, seeing themselves were a part of
it, (which, by the way, a Socinian would scarce have said, but rather have
owned his Church to have been a new one upon the whole Matter, and granted a
kind of Universal Apostasy Prot. Plea, p 37. Soc. Though I stand separated from
the present unreformed Churches, or also (if you will) from the whole Church
that was before Luther.
) the Protestant is brought in as in a manner deriding this Argument in his own
Person, or at least as contented with it as, by a Socinian, proposed: -- So
then it seems we need fear no Schism from the Church Catholic till a part can
Prot. Plea, Conf. 5. p. 33.
divide from itself, which can never be. Whereas a Protestant would have first
told them, that there is just fear of a Schism in the Body of the Church
Catholic, though not from it: And that they had made a Separation from the
sound parts of it, though not from the whole; whilst the Protestants were both
Members of the Universal Church, and in Communion with all particular Churches
so far as they are Christian. He would have added, That Mr. Chillingworth's
Words were proper in his own Case, but not in the Case of a Socinian Church,
which is taken to be a Member in the Universal Church, but unsound and out of
its place.

Fourthly, It may be noted, that the Author of this Book is not the Inventer,
but the Borrower of this Argument called The Protestants Plea for a Socinian.
It has been used by Valerianus Magnus; by the Author of the Brief Disquisition;
by Sir Kenelm Digby, in his Discourse Chap. 16. p. 199.
concerning the Infallibility of Religion, (if he be the genuine Author;) by
the Jesuit who cavill'd against Dr. Potter's Book called, Want of Charity.
Which Argument of the Jesuit was long ago answered by Mr. Chillingworth See
Chill. Pref. to the Author of Char. Maint. Sect 16. 17. 18 And here p. 9, 22,
54, 58.
, though this Author, who was under Obligation, by the very Nature of his
Undertaking, to have Replied, is pleased to pass it over in silence.

Since that time, Louis Maimbourg (then a Jesuit) wrote a Book Entitled, A
Treatise concerning the True Word of God Traite de la Vraie Parole de Dieu, a
Pari^, 1671. c. 7. p. 47. c. 8. p. 62. c. 9. p. 71. c. 10. p. 87. Seepartic. p.
82. 87. 88.
. Four Chapters of that little Book are spent in the managing of this Method.
And, If you will take it upon his own Word, he has come into the Field with
Invincible Weapons P. 380. Par des Raisons invincibles.
. About two years after, this Protestants Plea is set to sale among us, after
the English manner in other knacks. After the French, comes the English Guide;
after the Foreign Expositor, the English Misrepresenter. We follow when the
Mode declines elsewhere. When others molt their Feathers, we take them up and
write with them. Yet this is to be acknowledged, that our Author, both in his
Judgment and Manners, and closeness of Writing, does much exceed that Monsieur
Maimbourg, though he may seem to have taken some Hints from him.

My Last Observation touches the design of this Book, which looks as if it
were particularly levelled against the Established Church of England. It is
true, the more general Name of Protestant is used, but the Authors who are
cited are not Luther or Calvin; Cal^xtus or Daille; Cartwright or Travers; but
Archb. Laud; Archb. Bramhal; Mr. Chillingworth; Dr. Hammond; Dr. F^rn, and Dr.
Stillingfleet. Now it has been one of the later Stratagems of evil Men, to
Misrepresent the Ministers of this Sound Church, as favorers of the Doctrines
of Socinus, and at this very time this Art is in Practice. Otherwise, why d^es
the Paper just now scattered abroad, Request to P^ot p. (...).
style the Socinians the Brethren of Protestants by descent and iniquity? To
what other purpose serves the beginning of the long Book just now appearing,
and called, a Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln See P. II^. fourth Letter, p.
129, 130, 131.
? For the Author complains of the Arian History of Sandius, as published here
at London, (though 'twas set sorth in Holland, and in England twice refuted)
and of that Bishops declining an Answer to it; which (surely) he might
reasonably do, without any approbation of so ill a Book; for every Man is not
at leisure to do every thing in Learning, which, in the general, is fit to be
done.

The Title of this Book is Serviceable to the abovesaid design, by way of
Insinuation. And who will assure us, that it was not picked out of the Guide
for this disingenuous end? That it was gathered merely as the choicest Flower
contained in that Book; and not as the fittest in this juncture for this
calumniating purpose? I do not believe that this was the principal design
either of the Author or the Publish^r. But, if a Man, that goes about to fence
himself from his Neighbor, can both dig his Ditch, and cast his dirt upon him,
he may, perhaps, be so ill natured as to think he does well to dispatch two
works at a time.

However it be with our present Author, this is certain, Socinus himself taking
notice of it Socin. Solut. Scrup. Vol 1. p. 332.
, that England and Scotland were not favorable to his Doctrine; and that it
sprang out of Italy. Sozzo the Uncle, Blandrata, Paruta, Alciat, were Italians,
and bred in the Roman Church. Ochinus was of Siena, and, some say Biblioth.
Anti-Trin. p. 2. and Bzovius, A. 1542.
, Confessor to the Pope, and General of the Order of the Capucins. Faustus
Socinus the Nephew, as well as Laelius the Uncle, was of the same Siena, and
nearly related to Pius, the Second, and Third; and to Paul the Fifth Ibid. p.
64.
. And, of the First Chapter of the Second Book of the Reformation of the Church
of Poland Hist. Refor* Polon. p. 38.
, these are the Contents. After what manner the Seeds of Divine Truth were
carried out of Italy into Poland, in the Year 1551 by Laelius Socinus. And
before his remove in the Year 1546, he had formed a Socinian Cabal of Italians
in the Territories of Venice Bibl. Anti-Trin. p. 18. and H. Ref. Pol. p. 38.
, and especially at Vicenza, amounting to a considerable number. And I find it
said elsewhere Excerpta MS. e Lib. Annal. Polon. p. 1.
, that, in the Year 1539, the burning of a Lady who had turned from the Church
of Rome, opened the Eyes of Men in Poland, and disposed them to inquiry into
Truth.

I have seen some Applications MS. Ep. of English Unitarian^ to Ameth Ben Ameth
Amb. of Fez and (...).
of the Socinians to the Mahometans, in which they show what approaches they
make toward them. I have read of Conditions of Accommodation betwixt the
Socinians and the Romanists Bibl. Anti-Trin. p. 149. Conditiones Unionis
Christianorumcum Catholico-Rom. in Polonia.
. But Fame it self (I think) has not invented any such project betwixt the
Socinians and the English Church.

I do not offer this discourse, as a proof of encouragement for Socinianism in
the Church of Rome, yet it is an Argument sufficient for the Silencing of those
of that Communion, who charge it upon Ours.

And for other Churches, that which is said already may be a proof of the
wonted Sincerity of Monsieur Maimbourg, who tells his Readers with assurance,
that the Persons who, after the interval of nigh 900 Years, revived Arianism,
were all of them either Lutherans or Calvinists before they became the
Disciples of Socinus Maimb. Hist. de l'Arianisme. Live. Douz. p. 360.
. A Man ought to have been Master of their History, before he had pronounced so
freely of them: But some have an extraordinary Talent in making History.

It is true, the Author de Constantia Religionis Christianae MS. in Praef. p. 1.
, was by Education a Lutheran; but he was taken young into the School of the
Jesuits: And, after having been Ten Years among them, he turned Socinian; as
he himself relates his own Story. And Men, who consider the Nature of causes
and effects, are inclined to believe that the way to Socinianism has been much
opened and widen'd by the Popish Doctors who have so vehemently urged the
Obscureness of the Scriptures in the Doctrine of the Trinity; and who, at this
very time, furnish the Dialogue between a new Cath. Convert and a Prot.
Hawkers with their little Dialogues, endeavoring to equal the new Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, with that of Three Persons in one incomprehensible Essence.
For to say, that that invention of Paschasius is as reasonable to be believed
as the great Mystery of the Trinity, by all good Catholics, is in effect to
say, that neither of them is reasonable.

CHAP. II.
Considerations touching the General Argument of the Protestants Plea for a
Socinian; showing the weakness of it, and that it is not of force enough to
overthrow the Plea of the Reformed.

LET that which has been said, suffice for the Quality of this Writing, I will
proceed to the General Argument of it, which may, in brief, be thus represented.

The Protestants and Socinians, agree in their Plea, they allege Scripture,
they measure Faith by it as by a complete and clear Rule. They reject Councils,
and the Major part of Church Authority, if they are not convinced that they are
founded on the Scriptures, in finding out the sense of which both sides profess
due Industry. Both parties excuse themselves, (whatsoever Doctrines they
advance, whatsoever Wounds they open in the Church) as uninfected with H^si,
and free from Schisan, till their private Spirit be satisfied, and, before the
Tribunal they erect in their own Heads, they are self-accus'd and
self-condemned.

Therefore Protestants make Apology for Socinians, and are neither able to
confute them, upon these Principles and Methods; nor to justify themselves;
but are obliged to appeal to the Infallible Judge, or the Major part of the
Bench of Judges in the Roman Church, where all such Controversies may be
effectually ended.

The force of this specious Argument will be abated (as all such Arguments may
easily be, whose force lays only in plausible appearance) by a few plain
Considerations.

First, the Socinians will not allow their Plea to be perfectly the same with
that of the Protestants; especially those of the Established Church of England.
The Socinian Author of the Brief Disquisition proceeds upon a supposed
difference; and he endeavors to show that unless the Evangelical quitted their
own way of Resolving Faith, and made use of the Methods of Socinus, they could
not Solidly and Evidently refute the Romanists, and particularly the Judgment
of Valerianus Magnus, concerning the Protestant Rule of Believing.

Secondly, Both Arians and Socinians plead Tradition; though their Plea is not
managed exactly after our better manner. And when they plead Tradition, why is
not theirs then as much the Popish Plea, as, when they plead Scripture, it is
the Protestants? for neither do they plead that just as this Church does.

Two Assertions may be here advanced.

First, that the Arians and Socinians plead Tradition.

Secondly, that some Papists have helped the more Modern of them to Materials
for the making of that Plea.

First, Arians and Socinians plead Tradition against the Divine Nature of
Christ, as the Romanists plead Tradition for it. Artemon taught the Heresy of
our Saviors being a mere Man. And we are assured by an unnamed A^on. ap. Eus.
Eccl. H. E. l. 5. C. ult. p. 195.
, but an ancient and (as appears by his Fragments) a very sagacious Author,
that his Party declared that they followed Antiquiry; that their Ancestors and
the Apostles themselves were of the same belief; that, to the time of Pope
Victor, the true Doctrine of the Apostles was preserved; and that it was
corrupted in the times of his Successor Zephyrin. These (how unjust soever)
were their Allegations.

Socinus Soc. de Eccles. Op. Vo^. 1. p. 323.
takes the boldness to affirm, That the Romanists are not able to defend their
Principles about the Trinity, by the Authority of the Fathers; And, on the
contrary, that the Earlier Fathers Socin. Resp. ad Va^m, p. ^18.
. who lived before the Council of Nice, were firm in his belief. He cites the
Council of Ariminum, Justin the Martyr, and S. Hilary. He promises (upon
supposition of leisure) to write a Tract on this Subject, for the satisfaction
of those who are moved with such Authority.

Crellius Crell. Praes. ad Lect. Lib. de Satisfact. p. 4, 5.
pretends that, during 300 years after Christ, the Doctors of the Church
consented in this Faith, That the Father was the most High God, whilst the Son
was a Diety different from the Creator of the World. He says of Grotius, in
upbraiding manner, That he must needs know of this Historical Truth, being a
Man conversant in the Fathers. He quotes Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with
Trypho, as Evidence on his side. He has the Confidence to say, That the Men of
his Way have demonstrated this; and that the very Adversaries of the Unitarians
have confessed this to be true in Tertullian and Origin. He introduces S.
Hilary as a Patron of that Doctrine which denies the Divinity of the Spirit of
God. He presumes to say, That the nearer approaches we make to the
Anti-Trinitarians, the higher we come to the Apostolical Faith.

Mosc^rovius Hieron. Moscorov. in R^ Append. Mart. S^glecii, p. 19.
charges his Adversaries with misrepresenting of the first Fathers, when they
bring them in as Witnesses of that Faith concerning the Trinity which they
profess. And he proceeds in telling of them, That Ignatius, the most ancient of
those Church-Doctors whose Writings are extant, does openly say the contrary in
his Epistle to those of Tarsus, affirming that Christ is not the Deity who is
God over all, but only the Son of God. He goes on in citing Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Origin; how much to the purpose, it is not my business here to
determine. It is true, Ignatius is not the most ancient of those Doctors whose
Writings are extant: but when he wrote this R^v. 1611.
, Mr. Young had not published Clements Epistle, nor M^rdus that of Barnabas. It
is also confessed that he cites a spurious Piece of Tradition, (for Ignatius
wrote not that Epistle Ad Tarsenses); but, in the mean time, to Tradition, he,
in part, appeals.

Lubieniecius Lubien. first. Ref. Po^. (...). 1. c. 2. p 5, 6, 7, 8.
spends a Chapter in Demonstrating (as he imagined) that God had not left his
Church, from the Apostles times to his, without Witnesses of the Doctrine which
denies the Trinity. He glories in Artemon, Samosatenus, Photinus, and others:
for Men are apt, in all Factions, to pretend to Number and Antiquity.

Christopher Sandius wrote his indigested Heap of Church-Story with this very
design, that, in the several Centuries, he might take especial notice of the
Favorers of the Arian Doctrine. And, under the borrowed Name of Cingallus
Cingal. Script. S. ^rin. Re^trix. p. 30.
, he gives himself the Honor of having made a most solid proof concerning all
the Fathers of the three first Ages, that they believed as Arius believed.

Mr. Biddle, in the Appendix to his Book against the Holy Trinity Bid^e's
Apostol. Opin. conc. the holy Trin. revived and affor^d, Land. 1653.
, endeavors to strengthen his Plea with the Testimonies of Irenaeus, Justin
Martyr, Novatian, Theophilus, Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius of
Caesarea, and Hilary of Poictiers. He pretends to the Fathers, though he is
guilty of false mustering.

Monsieur-Aubert du Versoy tells the World Protestant Pacifique, part 2. p. 25.
with great assurance, That all the Fathers who lived before the Council of
Nice were ignorant of that Notion of the Trinity which is now commonly
embraced; that all of them denied the Eternal Generation of the Son of God;
that all believed the Father to be the only Sovereign, Omnipotent, Eternal God.

The Socinians, who offered to make Application here to the late Ambassador of
the King of Fez and Morocco, would, in their Epistle Tp. o^ S^ (...) to (...).
, persuade his Excellency, That Antiquity was on their side from Adam to
Christ: and that all the Primitive Christians, in and after Christ and his
Apostles times, never owned any other besides the single and supreme Deity of
the Father. This could not be said of all the Fathers from a Judicious Reader
of them, but might be borrowed from the same Person who furnished Sandius with
his false Witnesses V. Sand. (...) 1. S^. 4, (...). (...). 156^ (...).
. This brings to my memory, in due method, the

Second Assertion, That some of the Arians and Socinians who put Tradition into
their Plea, have fetched their Materials from a Roman Storehouse, th^ugh not
directly from the Church herself. The Jesuit Petavius is the Man: And his
Second Tome of Ec^lesiastical Doctrines, is their Magazine See Petav. (...). c
5 Sect. 7. de (...). etc. and ap Sand. N^l H. E. 12. l. 1. p. 217, 218. l. 2.
p. 30. and ap. Cingal. p. 35, 36 and p. 31. quomodo enim illud queat esse ex
Trad. Apostol. qu^d de^um quarto (...). patefact. and constitut. ait Dionysius
Petavius. See Sand. in Ind. H. Lit. P. Petavius probat omnes Patres ante Conc.
Nic. Eadem cum A^io ante doc^isse
. Insomuch that the Companions of Monsieur Clerc Desense des S^ntimens, p
(...). A^es le P. Pe^u Jesuit.
, having first taken notice of the Citations of Curcellaeus in favor of the
Arian Doctrine, do after that, refer us to Father Petau, as to the Author whom
he followed. The Modern Arians have, also, called Huetius in to their
assistance, in their Plea from Tradition, against the Divinity both of the Son
Cingall. p. 35, 36.
and of the Spirit of God P. 16. P. 66, 67. ex Huet. Origin.
. But the mistakes of Petavius and others in this matter have been publicly
showed by a Learned Person D. G. Bull. Def. Fid. N^c.
of this Church, whose Work, though the Friends of Monsi^ur Clerc have touched
upon, they have not refuted Defense des Sentimens, etc. p. 78, etc. See here p.
9, 1^, 54, 58.
.

Mr. Chillingworth urged some such thing as this in part of his Answer to the
Jesuit who charged the Protestant as the Advocate of the Socinian, and he
cited only the Notes of Petavius on Epiphanius; the Ecclesiastical Doctrines of
that Father not being then come forth into the Light. I will set down Mr.
Chillingworths words, because they are omitted by this Author, who quotes him
often where it is less to the purpose, and omits that in which he speaks
directly to his point.

The Jesuit had thus Misrepresented the Faith of the Reformed, Chap. (...).
Sect 2. In Chill. Pref Sect. 9. p. 6. 17, 18. p. 9, 10, 11.
The very Doctrine of Protestants, if it be followed closely and with coherence
to itself, must of necessity induce Socinianism. To this Charge Mr.
Chillingworth Chill. Pref. to the Author of Charity Maintained, Sect. 16,
makes the following Reply.

16. Had I a mind to recriminate now, and to charge Papists (as you do
Protestants) that they lead Men to Socinianism, I could certainly make a much
fairer show of evidence than you have done. For I would not tell you, You deny
the Infallibility of the Church of England; Ergo, you lead to Socinianism,
which yet is altogether as good an Argument as this, Protestants deny the
Infallibility of the Roman Church; Ergo, they induce Socinianism, nor would I
resume my former Argument, and urge you, that by holding the Popes
Infallibility, you submit your self to that Capital and Mother Heresy, by
advantage whereof, he may lead you at ease to believe Virtue Vice, and Vice
Virtue; to believe Antichristianity Christianism, and Christianity
Antichristian; he may lead you to Socinianism, to Turcism, -- if he have a mind
to it; But I would show you that diverse ways the Doctors of your Church do the
principal and proper work of the Socinians for them, undermining the Doctrine
of the Trinity, by denying it to be supported by those Pillars of the Faith,
which alone are fit and able to support it, I mean Scripture, and the Consent
of the ancient Doctors.

17. For Scripture, your Men deny very plainly and frequently, that this
Doctrine can be proved by it. See if you please, this plainly taught, and urged
very earnestly by Cardinal Hosius, De Author. Sac. Scrip. l. 3. p. 53. By
Gordonius Huntlaeus, Contr. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. De Verbo Dei C. 19. By
Gretserus and Tannerus, in Colloquio Ratisbon. And also by Vega, Possevin,
Wiekus, and others.

18. And then for the Consent of the Ancients, that that also delivers it not,
by whom are we taught but by Papists only? Who is it that makes known to all
the World, that Eusebius that great searcher and devourer of the Christian
Libraries was an Arian? Is it not your great Achilles, Cardinal Perron, in his
Third Book 2 Chap. of his Reply to King James? Who is it that informs us that
Origin (who never was questioned for any error in this matter in or near his
time) denied the Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost? Is it not the same
great Cardinal in his Book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis l. 2. c. 7?
Who is it that pretends that Irenaeus has said those things, which he that
should now hold would be esteemed an Arian? Is it not the same Perron, in his
reply to K. James, in the Fifth Chapter of his Fourth Observation? And does he
not in the same place peach Tertullian also, and in a manner give him away to
the Arians? And pronounce generally of the Fathers before the Council of Nice,
that the Arians would gladly be tried by them? And are not your Fellow-
I^suites also, even the prime Men of your Order, Prevarieators in this point as
well as others? Does not your Friend M. Fisher, or M. Floyd, in his Book of the
Nine Questions proposed to him by K. James, speak dangerously to the same
purpose, in his discourse of the resolution of Faith, toward the end? Giving
us to understand, that the new reformed Arians bring very many Testimonies of
the Ancient Fathers to prove that in this point they did contradict themselves,
and were contrary one to another, which places whosoever shall read, will (...)
see, that to common People they are unanswerable; yea, that common People are
not capable of the Answers that Learned Men yield unto such obscure passages.
And has not your great Antiquary Petavius, in his Notes upon Epiphanius in
Haer. 69. been very liberal to the Adversaries of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
and in a manner given them for Patrons and Advocates? First Just in Martyr, and
then almost all the Fathers before the Council of Nice, whose Speeches, he
says, touching this Point, Cum Orthodoxa Fidei regula minime consentiunt?
Hereunto I might add, That the Dominicans and Jesuits between them in another
matter of great importance, viz. Gods Prescience of future Contingents, give
the Socinians the Premises, out of which their Conclusion does unavoidably
follow. For the Dominicans maintain on the one side, That God can foresee
nothing but what he decrees; The Jesuits on the other side, That he does not
decree all things; and from hence the Socinians conclude, (as it is obvious for
them to do,) That he does not foresee all things. Lastly, I might adjoyn this,
That you agree with one consent, and settle for a Rule unquestionable, That no
part of Religion can be repugnant to Reason, whereunto you in particular
subscribe unawares in saying, From Truth no Man can by good Consequence infer
Falsehood; which is to say in effect, That Reason can never lead any Man to
Error: And after you have done so, you proclaim to all the World, (as you in
this Pamphlet do very frequently,) That if Men follow their Reason and
Discourse, they will (if they understand themselves) be led to Socinianism. And
thus you see with what probable Matter I might furnish out and justify my
Accusation, if I should charge you with leading Men to Socinianism. Yet I do
not conceive that I have ground enough for this odious Imputation. And much
less should you have charged Protestants with it, whom you confess to abhor and
detest it; and who fight against it, not with the broken Reeds, and out of the
Paper-Fortresses of an imaginary Infallibility, which were only to make sport
for their Adversaries; but with the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; of
which we may say most truly, what David said of Goliah's Sword, offered by
Abimeleck, Non est sicut iste, There is none comparable to it.

Thirdly, Though the Modern Arians and Socinians do speak of Tradition, and not
of Scripture only, yet our Plea and theirs is not perfectly the same. Touching
the Holy Scripture, we have a greater Veneration for it than many of them; and
for Tradition, though we make it not the very Rule of our Faith, nor place
Infallibility in it; yet, in concurrence with Scripture, it weighs not so
much with them as with us.

We have a greater Veneration for the Holy Scripture itself, than the right
Socinian: For such a one makes Reason the Rule of that Rule; and though he
thinks a Doctrine is plain in Scripture, yet, if he believes it to be against
his Reason, he assents not to it. Whereas a Man of this Church believes the
Scriptures to be written by Inspiration from God: And, upon that account he
assures himself that nothing contrary to true Reason can be contained in the
Scriptures. Therefore when he finds any thing in Holy Writ which to him is
incomprehensible, he does not say he believes it though it be impossible and
irrational; but he believes it to be rational though mysterious; and he
suspects not Reason itself, but his own present Art of Reasoning whenever it
concludes against that which he reads, and reads without doubting of the sense
of the words: And by Meditation he at last finds-his error.

The Socinians Hist. Res. Polon. l. 1. c. 1 p. 7.
challenge to themselves Petrus Abailardus as one of their Predecessors: For
this they cite St. Bernard; and they strengthen their challenge with the
Testimony of Baronius, who says of Abailardus, That he made Reason the Judge of
Articles of Faith. It is true, a Protestant judges whether his Faith be
rational, or whether it be founded on Divine Revelation; but he will not allow
his Reasonings to oppose any Principle in Holy Writ: For that were either to
deny it to be of God, or, with blasphemous irreverence, to reproach the
Almighty Wisdom with a Contradiction. Yet after this manner Socinians argue,
though some of them use great caution, and few make open profession of it: Nay,
they sometimes tell us, That the Scripture contains nothing contrary to
manifest Reason Slicht adv. Meisn. de SS. Trin. p. 67. Smalc. Cont. Frans.
Disp. 4.
. However, by their manner of objecting against the Doctrine of the blessed
Trinity, the Sagacious are convinced, that they first think it to be against
plain Reason, and then, rejecting it as an error, they color their Aversion
with forced Interpretations of Holy Writ.

The words of Ostorodius Ostor. c. 4. Instit.
hint to us at what end they begin. If Reason (said he) shows expressly that a
Trinity of Persons in God is false, how could it ever come into the Mind of an
understanding Man to think it to be true, and that it can be proved by the Word
of God? And further, They own, with us, from the Principles of Reason, that God
is just and good; but then, with the Platonists, they measure Justice and
Goodness by particular Notions, which are their Reasonings, but not the Reason
of Mankind. And when any thing is said in the Scripture which is contrary to
such measures, they are ready to depart from it. Upon this account it is, that
many of them deny the Doctrine of the Eternal Torments of the finally
Impenitent; not because it is not plain enough in Scripture, but because it
seems contrary to their Notions of Justice, Goodness and Mercy; though to the
true Notions of them it may be reconciled. Thus Ernestus Sonnerus lays it down
Ern. Son. Demonstr. Theol. and Philos. p. 36.
as his Principle in the first place that the Eternal pains of the Wicked are
contrary to Gods Justice; and being prepossessed with this prejudice, he can,
thenceforth, find nothing in the Scripture which may overrule his Opinion.

All this is not my private, and (as some Socinians may call it) uncharitable
conjecture; there is a Romanist Disc. of Infallib. in Religion. p. 200.
who has said the same thing, and in very plain terms. The Socinian (says he)
judges the Bible to be the wisest and most Authentical Book that ever was
Written; such a one, as no other humane Writing can contest with it; yet not
such a one as no slip nor error may fall into it, even in matters of
importance, and concerning our Salvation: And therefore, that where reason is
absolutely against it, he may leave it; though for Civility sake, he will
rather choose to put a wrong Gloss upon it, than plainly refuse it. -- It
cannot be pretended that Scripture is p. 20^.
his Rule: for, seeing he supposes Scripture to be Fallible, and that, upon
all occasions, he corrects it by his discourse; it is not Scripture but his
discourse, and his reasoning, that is his true and Supreme Rule. Which is the
cause that they, or some of their party did denominate themselves Sanarations
from right reason.

And as we have a greater Veneration for the Scriptures than most Arians and
Socinians; so have we a truer regard to real Tradition, which they use, not so
much as a witness of any great value, as a fit weapon for the encountering those
who dispute out of Antiquity; to the end that they may overcome them with their
own Arms. Socinus Resp. ad Vujek. p. 618.
had consulted some of the Ancient Writers. He was one of the first in his Age
who suspected some of those Epistles to be spurious, which went under the
Venerable Name of Ignatius the Martyr. But I have not observed in any of his
Writings, that he puts a value upon any such Authority, nay, he writes in
Divinity in such manner as if no Church-Writers had so gone before him as to
give any considerable light to him. He promises a Tract for the satisfaction
of those, Socin. ibid. -- in illorum gratiam qui istorum Patrum Authoritate
plus quam deceat moventur.
who were moved (in his opinion) more than was fit with the Authority of the
Fathers. And though, in this one point of the Father as the one Creator, he
cites the Ancients by way of Argument to the Men who esteem them; yet in other
Articles he confesses that he stands divided from them Soc. ibid. p. 618. Col.
1. Neque enim (arbitror) ex Script. nostr. hom. ostendetur unquam, eos afferere
aut exstimare. Scriptores ante Conc. Nic. qui hodie extant, nostrae sententiae
fuisse, etc. nisi nostrae sent. nom. intelligatur simpliciter id, quod sentimus
de Uno illo Deo, etc.
, and rather Glories that he gives light to all the World, than borrows from
it. The Author of the Brief Disquisition Brev. Disqu. c. 5. de Trad. p. 22. See
c. 2. p. 6, 7. etc.
blames the Protestants for the great deference they pay to unwritten
Tradition, meaning by it that which is not Written in the Scriptures, but in
the Fathers; although, at the same time, he makes them to ascribe to Councils
and single Fathers a greater Authority than they really do, notwithstanding
they are very just to them. Ruarus Ruar. Epist. Vol. 1. p. 116. to 139. partic.
p. 132, 134.
though he was a Man of extraordinary Candor, yet, in his Letters to Bergius,
he does not barely refuse, but reject with derision, his Catholic
Interpretation of Scripture according to the Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis
which admits, That Sense which was every where, always and of all believed.
[A Rule by which we help our selves.] And he further professes that he should
be much concerned, if the Interpretations of Calvin and Luther were not more
solid and acute than those of the Fathers.

We of this Church consider in the Interpretations of the Fathers, not so much
the acuteness (though in S. Chrysostom, for instance sake, and in Theodoret,
it is not wanting) as we do the History, and the light which they may give us
into the consent of the Churches in the Primitive times.

We are not apt to believe that there was such an Universal Corruption and
Apostasy See Slicht. contra Cicohov. p. 181, 182.
as Socinians speak of immediately after the Apostles times. We are not
Strangers to the Testimony of Hegesippus Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 32. p. 104, 105.
(...).
of which they make use for the blackning of the Primitive Church He does not
say that the Leprosy was spread throughout the Church, but that it began early.
We do not undervalue the Fathers, but proceed in the method of the Ancients who
begun first with the Holy Scriptures V. Frag. ap. Eus. E. H. l. 5. c. 28. p.
195, etc.
and then descended to those who wrote next after the Holy Penmen. The
Calvinists themselves, Radon and Silvius, in a Disputation at Petricow in
Poland A. 1566. See Maimb. Hist. Vol. 3. p. 355, 356, 357.
did not plead just after the manner of the Socinians. They pleaded the
Scriptures together with Councils and Fathers as Subordinate Witnesses. Their
Socinian Adversaries, Gregorius Pauli and Gentilis, mocked at their way of
arguing. They professed they would admit of nothing but the pure Word of God as
shiing sufficiently by its own Light. And they denied that there was contained
in formal terms in the Holy Scriptures, the Doctrine of Three Persons in one
Divine Essence.

Again, the Members of our Church do not imitate the Socinians in traducing
Maimb. ibid. Biddle's Pref. to Cat. p. 23. After Constantine the Great,
together with the Council of Nice, had once deviated, etc. this opened a Gap,
etc.
Constantine the Great and preferring Constantius the Arian before him. They
celebrate his Memory as a Defender of the Faith, so far are they from reviling
him as a Perverter of it. They do not join with Socinians in reproaching the
Fathers of Nice as Mercinary and Flexible Men, whom Constantine had gained to
his party by interest or force See Disp. in Maimb. H. Arian. p. 357.
. They do not, with Gregorius Pauli Id. ib. p. 361.
call the Explication of the Nicene Faith the Creed of Sathanasius. They hate
the irreverence as much as they despise the jingle. They do not believe that
the Nicene Creed is forged, as some Socinians do See Slicht. cont. Cicov. p.
184. and his mistake followed by Sandius, H. E. l. 1. p. 100, Octavo.
, though at the same time they take this upon the modern Authority of
Laurentius Valla, whom they make to say, that he read it in very Ancient Books
of Isidore, who in his time was a Collector of Councils: Such a Collector of
Councils as Varillas of History; a Father and a Collector together. The truth
is, it is Valla's business to elude the sense of Isidore, and to ascribe a
twofold Creed to the Nicene Fathers, the Apostolical, and that which bears
their Name. Whereas Isidor^ distinguishes betwixt their Creed and that of the
Apostles Is^l Deer. Sub hoc (...). (...). Constantino) juxta fidem (...)* post
etiam sancti Patres in Concilio Niceno de omni orb terr. convenientes,
Evangelicam and Apostolicam secundum (Vall^ from MS. A. C. reads it Apostolos
symb. tradiderunt.
.

The Protestants repeat in their Liturgy the Creed of Nice in the form agreed
on in the Council of Constantinople, and would not do so, if they did not
believe it Orthodox. They do not say with some modern Arians Chr. Sand. Nu^
(...). 1. p. 100. Oct^.
that it was framed by Marcellus Ancyranus a Heretic, or join with those
Spanish Jesuits, who (it seems) charged this Creed with the Heresy of
Photinus the Master of Marcellus. They pay a more just Duty to the Emperor and
the Nicene Fathers, than to say with the Enemies of the Holy Trinity, that,
setting Council against Council See Maimb. H A. 357.
, they choose rather to follow those of Sirmium and Rimini than those of Nice.
Our Churchmen do not, with the Socinians, disregard the Fathers who lived
after that famous Council, and acknowledge that those Fathers are against it,
and bid defiance to their opposition. But so does Socinus Resp. ad V^iek. p.
618. Col. 2.
, so does Crellius Crell. Praef. ad lib. de Satisfact. p. 5.
, so does Pisecius Pisec. An Doct. de Trin. sit M^st. In Ep. Ded.
, for thus he discourses. Do they say Theology knows nothing of this? It is
enough if the Apostles do. S. Austin damns this. Christ approves it. The same
Pisecius is more severe in his censure than Socinus himself; and he agrees with
Scaliger (if Scaliger be by him rightly cited) in accusing all the Fathers up
to S. Austins time, of ignorance in another Doctrine about the Receipt of
departed Souls not Martyrs; and in affirming that the Errors of the first
Fathers prepared the way for Antichrist.

In fine, Though the Church of England does not make the Councils her Rule of
Faith, or make her last Appeal to them; yet she believes that, in times of
Controversy, when the Heads of Men are apt to be disturbed even in Matters
otherwise plain enough, by the Heats and Distempers of the Age they live in,
they are of special use. The Authority of them tends to the quelling of the
Party: And then, when the Faction cools, it tends to the fixing and further
strengthening of the weak and interrupted Faith of many. For, as in a Balance
one Scale may descend more or less below the Level; so there may be Faith and
Assent without adding the weight of Fathers and Councils; and yet (in unquiet
Times especially and disputing Ages) such Testimonies may give some further
strength to Minds made feeble either by public Distractions, or the private
Attacks of Crafty Seducers. Thus our Church gives to the Scripture the things
that belong to the Scripture; and to Tradition the Dues of Tradition: And it
gives more even to the former than generally Socinians do; and more also to the
latter, though with just Caution and Subordination. So that their Plea and ours
is not, in a strict way of speaking, the very same. But

Fourthly, If we admit that the Plea of the Protestant and Socinian is the
same, for the general nature of it; we cannot be truly said to plead for them,
unless the general Plea be, with Truth and Pertinence, as well as Boldness,
applied to the very merit of the Cause. If two Men will plead the same thing
with equal Assurance, but not with equal Reason, in Truth and Merit it is not
the same. If the Confidence of Men in pleading might weigh against the Right of
others, they that were in the wrong would be in the right: For what was wanting
in the Reason of the Case, would be supplied by Impudence. But is it said by
any of the Robe, that when the Counsel on either side pleads Presidents, and
Statutes, or Equity, the Plaintiff pleads for the Defendent, and the Defendent
for the Plaintiff? Both pretend to the same Rule, but he that is in the right
measures his Case by it; the other would bend it toward his illegal Interests.
One has a Plea, the other a Pretense. If a Socinian will plead Scripture, and
plead it falsely, it is so far not ours, but his. If Confidence in pleading may
either carry or balance a Cause, then Pleas of Laws, Scriptures, Oral
Tradition, Fathers, Councils, may be urged contrary ways, and each side be
equally justified: For all such Pleas have been made by contrary Parties. Mr.
Lilburn pleaded Law as much as Judge Ienkins, though not as well. Some
Dissenters in the Queens time wrote down their Arguments, and gave their Book
the Title of Sions Plea. It may be their Adversaries might call it the Plea of
Babylon. Whether it was the one or the other, was to be tried not by the Name
of the Plea, or the Persuasion of the Advocates, but by the Merit and Nature of
the Cause itself. The Apostles pleaded before Magistrates of another Faith,
that it was better to obey God than Man. All Parties who dissent from the
Established Religion, use the same Plea, and generally in the same Words. But
does this make the Pleas equal! Must they not join Issue upon the Reason of the
Case, and compare their Circumstances and those of the Apostles, and observe
wherein they agree, and wherein they differ?

If Men, who plead Scripture as their Rule of Faith, make Apology, by so
doing, for all others who pretend to the same Rule; then Catholic Councils
themselves plead for Socinians: For (to give an example,) the General Council
of Chalcedon (and after it Evagrius) testifies Evagr. H. F. l. 2. c 4. p. 293.
-- (...).
, That the Intent of the Second Council was, to make it appear by
Scripture-Testimony, That such as Macedonius erred in that Opinion which they
had advanced against the Lordship of the Holy Ghost. The Council here used the
like Plea with Socinus, but to a contrary End, and upon surer Reason. In such
Cases there will be no satisfactory Conclusion, till the moment of the
Scriptures be particularly weighed.

For Tradition, that was pleaded See Clem. Alex. Str. l. 5.
by Valentinus, Basilides, Marcion, who boasted of their following the Apostle
S. Matthias. And Irenaeus Iren. l 3.
observed concerning Heretics, that, being vanquished by Scripture, they
accused it, and took Sanctuary in Tradition. Thus, after his time, did the
Nestorian Heretics See Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 2. c. 18. Tom. 3 c. 17. Socr. H.
E. l. (...). c. 32.
: Their Epistle to the People of Constantinople begins on this manner, The Law
is not delivered in Writing, but is placed in the Minds of the Pastors. And
when the Metropolitans and Bishops of the Third Council (that of Ephesus,) had
confuted Nestorius out of the Scripture, in stead of answering, he foamed
against them. S. Cyprian S Cypr. Ep. 55. Pam. 59. Oxoh. p 136. Na^ (...)
statutum sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter ac justum, ut uniuscujusq^
(...) audiatur, ubi est Crimen admissum, and sing. Pastor. portio Gregis sit
ads^ (...) ^egat, etc. V. P. Nicaen. Can. 5.
pleaded Universal Consent against Appeals to Rome; and that is part of our
Plea too. Yet the Romanists will not allow that he either pleads for our
Church, or against their own.

The Plea is to be considered, and not merely offered. If, for example sake, a
Churchman quotes the same S. Cyprian in favor of the Doctrine of the Unity in
Trinity, and Sandius the Arian cites the same Father as being against it, are
we not to have recourse to the Book itself, and to examine the Pretenses on
both sides? Or can any Man believe a Quotation is made good by the mere quoting
of it? And may not one Party be confuted without the Spirit of Infallibility?
It is evident it may be done, for it is done on this manner. Sandius Chr. Sand.
Append. ad Interpr. Parrad. p. 376, etc. 379.
cites the Book De Duplici Martyrio, as not owning the Text in S. John's
Epistle, There are three that bear Record in Heaven. Now that Book is not S.
Cyprians. It would be a very Extraordinary Birth, if he should be the Father of
it; for it makes mention of Dioclesians De Dupl. Mart. Ed. Ox. p. 40.
persecution. And yet that spurious Book does not reject the place in S. John,
though it does not exactly set down the Text De Dupl. Mart. p. 594. Ed.
Goulart. Sect. 4. 5. Commemorat and Joh. Evang. Triplex in terra Test. Sp. Aqu.
and Sang. etc. quanquam hi tres unum sunt, etc.
. And for the Genuine S. Cyprian S. Cypr. de Unit. Ecclesiae, p. 109. Ox. dicit
dominus, Ego and Pater unum sumus, and iterum de Patre and F. and Sp. S.
scriptum est, Et hi Tres Unum sunt, V. Annot. Oxon.
he mentions the Text directly, in his Book of the Unity of the Church. And of
this how are we sure? Why! Let us open the Book and read plain Words, and their
unwrested sense gives us satisfaction.

I conclude, then, that notwithstanding the Protestants and Socinians do, both
of them, plead Scripture as the rule of Faith; yet because Protestants plead
the rule rightly in the point of the Divinity of the Son of God, and the
Socinians very falsely (even in the opinion of the Arians and Romanists
themselves) Editor. Diss. Anon. de Pace and Conc. Eccl. p. 3. ad Lect. Ingenue
fateor, Socini de Chr. persona dogma -- In eo mihi maxim improbari quod
Christum ante suam ex Maria Virgin Nativitatem extitisse, neget.
; the Plea of the former does not justify the Plea of the latter; and
[justifie] is our Authors word. For the Trial of the Plea we must come to dint
of Argument; and Truth is great, and will, in time, prevail.

CHAP. III.
Particular Answers to the particular Branches of the Protestants Plea for a
Socinian, divided into five Conferences by the Author of it.

THIS Third Chapter needs not to be drawn Sect. 1.
into any very great length; for after the general Considerations which answer
the general Argument, there wants little more than the Application of them to
the respective Heads in the Dialogues.

Of the First Conference this is the Sum, both Arg. 1. Prot. Plea, p. 1. to p.
12.
Protestants and Socinians plead Scripture as the sole Rule of Faith. Both say,
the Scripture is sufficiently clear. Both say, it is clear in the Doctrine of
the Nature of the Son of God. The Socinian professes himself to be as
Industrious in finding out the sense of the Scripture as the Protestant; and he
is as well assured in his persuasion; therefore the Protestant, in this Plea,
Iustifies the Socinian, the latter saying the same thing for himself that the
former does.

I answer,

First, (as before,) That though they pretend to the same Rule, they Walk not
alike by it. One Answer to Arg. 1.
follows it, the other wrests it. And this ought not to be turned to the
prejudice of him who is true to his Rule. Let both Opinions be brought to it,
and then it will appear which is strait and which is crooked. If Two men lay
before them the same Rule of Addition, and one works truly by it, and the
other, either through want of due attention, or out of unjust design, shall
cast up the Sum false, there is no man who will tell us in good earnest, that
the first justifies the Second; or that both of them needed an Infallible
Arithmetician to be their Judge.

Secondly, Though this Author picks out this one point of the Divinity of
Christ, and represents it in the term of Consubstantiality, which to the Vulgar
here, is more difficult than that of Homonsiety was to the Greeks; and passes
by many more easy Socinian Doctrines, yet so it is that we find in St. John
this very Article plainly revealed. For that Apostle (who certainly was
conscious of his own design) wrote the History of his Gospel to this very
purpose, That we might believe that Jesus S. Joh. 20. 31.
is the Son of God: By which each Romanist, who owns (what his Church does,)
the Catholic sense of St. John's first Chapter, can understand no other
Article than that of Nice, that Christ is God of God.

Thirdly, Though the Socinians do pretend that the Writings of St. John are to
them as clear as to any Protestant, and that they cannot discern in them the
Divinity of Christ; yet Confidence in saying a thing is not clear, is not an
Argument that it is not. The House is not naturally made dark, because the
Blind will excuse their Infirmity upon it.

Men will say Doctrines are obscure, even when they are secretly convinced of
their evidence. For Pride and Prejudice are not very yiedling. My Adversary
here (says a Learned and Good Man D. F. Answ. to the Author of Sure-Footing, p.
346, 347
) seems to object as elsewhere, that some who seem to follow the Letter of the
Scriptures deny this, [that is, the Divinity of Jesus Christ,] as do the
Socinians. What then? This is not for want of Evidence in Scripture, but from
making or devising ways to avoid this Evidence. Will this Author say, that
there was no Evidence of there being Angels and Spirits, amongst the Jews,
because the Sadduces, who had opportunity of observing all such Evidence,
believed neither Angel nor Spirit? And will he say that there was no clear
Evidence from the Word of Christ and his Miracles, that they were from God,
because the Pharisees and other unbeleiving Jews, who conversed with him, and
saw his Miracles, and heard his Word, did not acknowledge him for God? [I
suppose not].

Fourthly, It does not become the Author (who is a Romanist) to say of the
Protestant pleading Scripture, that, in so doing, he justifies the Plea of the
Socinian? For that supposes that the one has as much reason on his side as the
other. Whereas a Romanist is obliged to own that the Protestant, so far as it
is opposed to the Socinian Creed, is the true Catholic Faith; and that the
Nicene Creed which is common to us and them, is founded on the Scripture,
though the bottom on which it stands is by the Church to be discovered; whilst
his Church condemns the Doctrines of Socinus as Haeretical, and therefore as
such as cannot at all, either plainly or obscurely, be contained in the Holy
Canon.

Fifthly, This Author seems to magnify the Industry Prot. Plea, p. 1. and p.
4. etc.
of the Socinians, saying, That none have used more diligence in the search of
the Scriptures, as appears by their Writings. This is true in part, and but in
part; for sometimes they have been in haste enough. Slichtingius Lubieniec.
Historial. p. 6.
made quick dispatch, writing many Commentaries in a few Months, and doing this
amidst the Heats and Interruptions of War.

But, I will allow Socinus himself to have been very industrious, and Crellius
also. Some of the rest have been industrious rather as Scriveners than
Commentators, transcribing the sense, and, in part, the words of those who went
before them. But if Men are engaged in new Conceits, they are under a necessity
of being diligent. A Text cannot be wrung and squeezed with a dead Hand, and
there is more study required for the perverting of Truth, than for the
declaring of it. For the true Interpretation of Scripture, much more is
required than Industry and Study. The Protestant therefore, in this Author
Prot. Plea. p. 8.
, speaks of a due Industry, void of Pride, Passion, and other Interest; and
such Industry has not been always acknowledged either in the Arians, or
Socinians.

For the Arians, the Ancients looked upon them not so much as idle and
ignorant, as mad and impious. The Fathers of the Sixth Synod Auct. Incert. de
6. Syn. Oec. ap. Instell. p. 1161. -- (...).
were gathered together against Arius the Distracted Presbyter. And the Latins
called his Doctrine the Arian Frenzy Tit. c. 8. l. 1. E. H. Bedae, ut, etc.
utque ad temp. Arianae Vesaniae.
Vincentius Lirinensis V^. Li^. (...). 6 p. 13.
calls that Heresy the Poison of the Arians, as if it was some venomous and
enchanted Liquor. And the Leudness of the Arian Manners V. Li^. p. 15.
Temeratae Conjuges, etc.
discovered the Evil of their Temper; and there was Fierceness in it as well as
Leudness. A Disposition more fierce than that of their Adversary Nicholas V.
Sand. Append. ad Nucl. H. E. p. 22. Quarto.
, who, they say, gave Arius a Box on the Ear, in the midst of the Council.
Arius exercised the Office of an Expounder Theod. H. E. l. 1. c. 1. -- (...).
of Scripture in the Church of Alexandria: But his Fundamental prejudice is
well understood; that is, be falsely imagined that Alexander was teaching the
Doctrine of Sabellius, who confounded the Three Persons and made them but One;
and he ran headily from thence, and fell into his own extreme V. Theod. Haer.
Fab. l. 2. c. o. and Niceph. Call. H E. (...) S c. 5.
.

It is true, the Temper of the Socinians (especially that of their Master
Socinus, and of Crellius and Ruarus) seems much more Virtuous than the
Disposition of the Arians, less sensual, less fierce and bloody: For they were
almost always bred in the School of Affliction, whilst the Arians were
sometimes an Imperial Party. Notwithstanding which, all Romanists have not
allowed the Socinians to be very well qualified for the reading of the
Scriptures. Vuje^us charge them with beginning at the Alcoran, before they
came at the Holy Bible V. Resp. (...). p. 535.
; though I believe that Charge has a grain of the Misrepresenter in it.
Cichovius the Jesuit has spoken as severely as Vujekus, accusing the Secinians
V. Conf. Christ. Vind. p. 3. in Resp. ad Ep. Ded. (...).
of making such a progress in blaspheming the Son of God, as to seem to have
fallen from a desire either of speaking or thinking rightly of Divine Things.

Let a Romanist consider of the Qualifications of a Protestant and a Socinian
by the effect of their Labors in Matters of Christian Faith, and if he be not
blinded with very gross Partiality, he will acknowledge a difference. The
Protestant finds in the Scripture the Divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost,
and the Merit of Christ's Sacrifice; the Socinian pretends the contrary. If the
Protestant and Socinian were equally disposed, how comes the One to Interpret
as a Catholic, the Other as a Heretic? And how can a Romanist believe, that
God gives an equal Blessing to the Industry of the Protestants and Socinians,
whilst the latter do not so much as pray for Grace to the Spirit of God, nor
apply themselves to God the Father, through the Meritorious Sacrifice of his
blessed Son; nor to Christ himself as God, but as to the highest of Creatures?
Cichovius V. Resp. ad Ep. Cicho^. p. 3.
therefore, has accused the Socinians as making Christ an Idol. Socinus thinks
Resp. ad V^k. p. 534.
those unfit to make such an Objection, who add to the end of the Books they
write, Praise be to God and the Holy Virgin. And Moscorovius Moscor. Refut.
Append. M. Smigle^. p. 21.
mentions a Polish M^ssal, in which Prayer to the Holy Ghost was exprelly
forbidden. And before the Conference betwixt a Carmelite and Stoienski De Jesu
Chr. Divin. etc. Disputat. Relatio, p. 3. 3.
a Minister of Lublin, the One prays for success first to the Virgin, and then
to Christ as God; the Other to Christ, though not as the only God. But let
those Parties look to this matter whom it so particularly concerns.

The Question I here ask is this, Whether these following Doctrines proceed
from an industrious search of the Scriptures, by a Mind humble and free from
Prejudice, Passion, and Worldly Interest? As, (ex. gr.) That Christ was not at
all, till he was conceived in the Body of the Virgin: That the Question Slicht.
in 1. Tim. 6. p. 258.
, Whether Christ was before the World, or after it, is of no moment. That his
Blood is not a proper Sacrifice. That the Holy Spirit is not any Person at all,
either Divine or Created. That those who are not Ordained by others may step
forth and preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments Socin de Eccl. p.
325, 326. Ep. 3. ad Radec. p. 384. Cat. Rac. de Eccl. p. 306, 307.
. That although Officers are generally employed in those Functions; yet other
Christians are not under Obligation to forbear the performance of them. That
Baptism is none of Christ's perpetual Precepts in his Church. That it may be
used in admitting those of riper years into a Church, but not as a necessary
Christian Rite. That to hold it to be such is to add to the Scriptures Socin.
Op. Vol. 1. Ep. ad P. Sophiam Siemichoviam, p. 431, 432, 433.
. That it is an indifferent Ceremony, and, if to be used, it is to be used in
the admission of those who come from some other Religion to Christianity Socin.
Vol. 1. Ep. ad P. Stator. p. 433.
. That in the words of Christ S. Luke 22. 20. (...).
, [This Cup is the New Covenant in my Blood which is shed for you,] there is a
Solaecism, or false Grammar, and that there are many such Incongruities in the
New Testament Socin. de usu and fine Coenae Domin. p. 773.
That it is an abuse of the Lords Supper to believe that it confers any benefit
upon us, conveighs any Grace from God, or give us any further assurance of his
favor Socin. de usu Coen. Op. Vol. 1. p. 775. Hales of Sacr. p. 59. Op. Vol 2.
p. 185, 186.
. That it is Idolatry to kneel at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that
it may be Celebrated with the Head covered. If these Doctrines be the results
of due Industry in searching the Scriptures, Prejud^ce and Negligence may
likewise put in their Plea as Preparatives to true Interpretation.

But farther, in the very manner of Socinian Exposition, there is apparent
failure. For, though the Holy Writers express the same thing very differently,
and without respect to nicety of Words, (as is evident from the several forms
of Words used in representing Christ's Institution of the Lords Supper); yet the
Socinians make Interpretations of places which relate to the great Articles of
Christian Faith, to turn upon subtleties of Grammatical construction. For
Example sake, they perplex the most comfortable Doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction with curious observations about the Particle For See Crell. de
Sat. p. 6. 190, etc. about (...) and (...), etc.
. Whereas our Churchmen make the Old Testament, the Key of the New; and finding
plainly that the Sacrifices of Atonement under the Law, were the Types of the
Offering the Blood of Jesus upon the Cross; they conclude that God, with
respect to Christ's Death in the quality of the great Expiation, did admit the
guilty World into a reconcilable Estate.

I might add that, by coming to particulars, the Socinian Prejudice and
insincere Artifice, in expounding such places of Holy Writ as concern their
Scheme, will appear to all unbyassed Readers. I will instance in the
Interpretation of that place in S. John S. Joh. 3. 13. Soc. Exp. Loc. Script.
Vol. 1. p. 146.
, No Man has Ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even
the Son of Man which is in Heaven. Socinus, for the avoiding a twofold nature
in Christ, by which he might be both in Heaven and in Earth, and exist before
he was born of a Virgin, sets down a twofold Evasion in the place of an
Explication. First, he interprets Ascending into Heaven, by seeking after
Heavenly things, and Descending from Heaven, by having Learned such Celestial
things. And, to make all sure, he takes the hardiness to say, in the Second
Place, that as S. Paul was snatched up into the third Heavens, and let down
again; so the Man Christ Jesus, was taken up into Heaven, somewhile before his
Death, and made some stay there. And by his coming down again he explaineth his
going forth from the Father, his Ascending into Heaven, his being in Heaven.

If this be Interpreting, what is Perverting?

Sixthly, Whereas (in the end of this first-Conference) the Author himself
speaks as a third Person (...). Pl^, Di^ession, p. 9, 10.
and a Romanist, and raises a doubt about the certainty any Man can arrive at
in having rightly used his Industry; I would only ask him, Whether a Man cannot
be as sure of his industry in consulting his Reason and the Scriptures, as in
attending on Councils, Fathers, Decrees of Popes, and the Method of the Major
part of Church-Governors, in the Universal Church of all Ages?

For the Argument of the Second Conference, this is the Substance of it. Sect.
2. Arg. 2.

THE Socinians Plead, that they ought not to receive the Article of the
Divinity of Christ, Prot. Plea, p. 12. to 16.
from the Major part of Church-Governors: That it was not originally in the
Creed: That no Article ought to be received from Church Authority, till Men are
convinced that it is grounded on the Scripture, which Conviction they want.
Now, unless the Church were Infallible in all she determined, or at least in
distinguishing those necessaries in which she cannot err, from Points which are
not of such necessity, she cannot justify her self in putting her Definitions
into a Creed. Protestants, not withstanding they own the Article of Christ's
Divinity, and urge the whole Creed into which it is put, do yet argue after the
manner of the Socinians against Church Authority, and plead the Scripture as
their Ground, and a necessity of Conviction; therefore (whilst they continue
this kind of Plea) they cannot by Church Authority either justify themselves
or confute their Adversaries.

All this reasoning may be confuted by these distinct Answer to Arg. 2.
Answers.

1. We have no need of confuting Arians and Socinians, by Church Authority,
seeing we can do it more effectually out of the Scriptures; and if they say,
that the Scriptures are on their side, their saying so does not alter the
Nature of Truth. And the Romanists allow that they say not true, and they may
be confuted when they are not silenced. Protestants decline not a disputation
with Socinians, by the Rule of Primitive Church Authority. But if they
undervalue this rule, it is discretion in Protestants to debate the matter with
them in a way which they themselves best like of, seeing that is also a more
certain, as well as a more speedy way, to Victory.

2. Protestants do not well understand what Romanists mean by Church Authority,
for some of their Doctors. J. Richard Apho^ismes de Controverse. Instr. 34. p.
223. Le Concile de Trente, c'est a dire, toute l'Eglise.
, can by a new figure of their own, make a part and the whole of the Church to
be the same* They do not think that the present Major part of Church-Governors
throughout the Church can be their Rule, because the People cannot always know
which is that Part; or that it ought to be their Rule, because, in some Ages
the Minor part is the wiser and better. Let not the Roman Church be grieved at
this, as said from me; Vincentius Lirinensis said it long ago, that in the
Arian times Vinc. Lirin. adv. Haereses. cap. 6. p. 13. -prope cunctis Latini
Sermonis Episcopis, partim vi, partim f^aude deceptis, caligo, etc. Prot. Plea,
p. 15. Sect. 17.
there was a general darkness even over the face of the Latin Church. In the
mean time they are made to suppose by this Author what they do not suppose,
that the judgment of the Catholic Church is not Infallible, in judging what
points are necessary, what are not. For though this or that Church or party of
Christians may fail, yet all cannot at once; for then the Church would fail.

3. This Article of the Divinity of the Son of God was originally in the Creed;
for that the Fathers meant when in the Apostolical Creed they confessed Christ
to be Gods only Son. And this they grounded on the Gospel of S. John, who wrote
his Gospel (which begins with Christ's Divinity,) with this intention, that Men
should believe Jesus to be the Son of God.

4. Protestants admit of no Article of Faith which is not grounded on the
Scripture, which was never known before, and never obliged before; yet, in the
mean time they see no reason, why an Article assaulted by Heretics and
Sophists may not be explained; or why the form of Confession designed for
Baptism, might not be enlarged for the benefit of the Church, and made a Sum of
the Necessaries to be believed. It sufficed at the first Incorporation of
Persons to be Baptized, that they professed to believe the Religion which
owneth Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

5. A particular Church may put an Article of Faith into a Creed, without
pretending to Infallibility. She has Ability to do it, because she has an
Infallible Rule by which she can go. But she ought not to say it is impossible
any Church should do otherwise; because a Party of Men may do that which they
ought not to do, and to which they were not constrained. Prejudice,
Mis-attention, Corruption may so prevail as to clap a false Bias upon Makers
of Creeds: Else how came we by those of Sirmium and Rimini? And for instance
sake, in the Infallible Science of the Mathematics, the perverseness of the
Temper of the Leviathan, would not permit him to agree with a Learned Professor
of that Science, even in the first Elements of Geometry; and a Controversy was
maintained not only about the squaring of the Circle, but about the Dimensions
of a Point and a Line.

The Force of the Third Conference may be Sect. 3. Arg. 3.
set down on this manner.
A Protestant submits to the Decrees of a Council, Prot. Plea, from p 1^. to p.
24.
no further than he is convinced that the same Council is rightly constituted,
and that her Definitions are founded on the Word of God. He believes that it
may err in things not Necessary, and in Necessaries too if it be not a truly
General Council. He can scarce give to it the Obedience of silence in that
which he believes contrary to the Scripture. The Socinian says the same things,
and denies the Council of Nice to be constituted rightly; Therefore the
Protestant justifies the Socinian.

Our Author should have gone on, and said, (for Answer to Arg. 3.
so a Romanist is by the Tenor of his Faith obliged to say) That the
Protestant, with reference to the Council of Nice, has the Reason on his side.

A Son of the Church of England reverenceth the Four General Councils, of which
Nice is the First. He believes its Faith to be bottomed on the Scriptures, and
so did the Council itself, and so does the Church of Rome. He receives it as a
General Council rightly Constituted, though no Pope called it, or otherwise
confirmed it than the rest of the Patriarchs, Metropolitans and Bishops. He
believes Vinc. Lir. adv. haer. c. 6. De Arianorum ^eneno, p. 15. ^ene fundata
Antiquitas.
its Doctrine to be, in the Phrase of Vincentius (...), well-founded Antiquity,
and he offers to prove it. A Socinian therefore, if he has retained him, will,
as soon as he hears such a Plea as this, desire him to return his Fee.

But what if a Socinian be found perverse, and, being a Disputer of this World,
will have his own way of arguing? May not the Protestant wave the Council of
Nice, and enter the Lists, with Reason and Scripture? He that will not have him
do it, is not of the same mind either with the Fathers of Nice, on with the
Celebrated Latin Doctor S. Austin. The Council of Nice disputed with the Arians
out of the Scripture, and confuted them by it. The Bishops of it, by Eusebius,
cite against them the words of St. John, In the beginning was the V. l. 3.
Conc. Nic. Ed. Pis.
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. They argue from the
words themselves, as words clear and plain in their signification: They take
notice of the [Word was,] as contrary to [was not,] and [was God,] as contrary
to [was not God.] S. Austin observing the perverseness of Maximine, lays aside
Councils, not as useless, but as of lesser Authority than the Holy Scripture,
the force of which his Adversary could not, with the same ease and readiness,
have avoided. Neither ought I (says S. Austin) to allege the Council of Nice,
nor you that of Ariminum; for neither am I bound to the Authority of the one,
nor you to that of the other. Let us both dispute with the Authorities of
Scripture, which are Witnesses common to us both. Our Author puts this Citation
Prot. Plea. p. 18.
into the Socinians Mouth, and takes it from Dr. Taylor's Diss^asive from
Popery; but, seeing it is the Method of S. Austin, why does he not justify a
Protestant in using of it?

The Sum of the Fourth Conference is Sect. 4. Arg. 4.
this.
A Protestant excuses himself from Heresy by Prot. Plea, p. 24. to 32.
saying, A Heretic is (what he himself is not) an Obstinate Maintainer of a
Fundamental Error. None can be such Heretics to whom the Truth is not
sufficiently proposed. Councils may not always rightly distinguish betwixt
Fundamentals and not Fundamentals. He is not obliged to receive their
Definitions till he is convinced of the truth of them. He himself is Judge
whether the Article be sufficiently proposed, and whether he is convinced by
that which is offered to him. The Socinian says the same thing for himself. Our
Author should have added, that he says it with equal Answer to 4 Arg.
Reason, if he would have made the one plead for the other. But the Protestant,
in this point of the Divinity of the Son of Gone, (which is the Authors
Instance) does acknowledge that the Doctrine is sufficiently proposed; does
receive the Council of Nice; does own that he is convinced. And the Romanist
confesses that, thus far, he is in the right, and the Socinian in the wrong.
This comes to the same thing which was said before, and the Answer is repeated,
because the Objection is brought again. And indeed there is but one Argument,
strictly so called, in all the Five Conferences which turn upon the same Hinge;
and one Answer suffices: viz. That when Two say the same things concerning
contrary Doctrines, one of them only can have Truth on his side: And that if
both be equally confident, the Confidence of the Persons does not make the
Contradiction true. The Plea is his, not who barely offers it, but who can make
it good. In this Point of the Divinity, the Protestant makes his Plea good by
the Scripture and the Council of Nice, as a true General Council: And if his
Plea be true, surely it does not cease to be so, because he has not had it
allowed before a Roman Judge: A Man is sure that all the Articles in the New
Covenant are genuine, though they be not confirmed under the Lead of the Fisher.

I come to the last Conference, where our Arg. 5. Sect. 5.
Author reasons to this effect.
THE Protestants imagine they excuse themselves Prot. Plea, p. 32. to p. 45.
from Schism, by alleging, that they left a Corrupt part of the Church,
(meaning the Roman) and Reformed themselves. That the Schism is theirs who
caused it, that they are united to all Churches in Charity, and in the unity of
the Catholic Church, being with them in all things in which they are obliged
to be with them. And in the rest they are hindered from external Communion by
the sinful Conditions which a particular Church puts upon them. The Socinians
say the same thing for themselves, with reference to other Communions besides
the Roman, therefore the Protestant justifies the Plea of the Socinian in
Relation to Schism.

The same Answer serves for the same Objection. Answer to 5 Arg.
Socinians say as Protestants do, but the reason is on the side of the latter,
and not on the former. And our Author himself, with respect to his Instance of
the Divinity of the Son of God, will, by no means, say, that the Soci^ians, who
make that Article, where imposed, a sinful condition of Communion, can by
saying so, excuse themselves from Schism, whilst they any where refuse external
Communion upon the pretense of that Article as not Christian. A Romanist cannot
say that it is not sufficiently proposed to the Socinians, and that it was
never in their power to be convinced. If they will turn this upon us with
reference to our not separating from them but standing where we were, after
having in Christian, and Legal manner also, thrown off the Corruptions which
were unagreeable to the Primitive Christianity, we will try it over again with
them by Scripture, Antiquity and Reason; and the Impartial World shall judge,
if it pleases, Whether the Additional Articles in the Creed of Pope Pius are of
God or Men.

For this point of Schism, as here managed, the reasoning of this Fifth
Conference was long ago confuted by Mr. Chillingworth. But our Author did not
condescend to take notice of it, though he cites many other Words of Mr.
Chillingworth not far from these. But a Cunning Marks-Man will not put that
into his Gun which may make it Recoil. However I shall be bold to produce the
Words, which he, in all probability, did studiously omit See here p. 9, 22, 58.
Chill. part. 1. Chap. 5. p. 255. Sect. 8c.
.

-- Whereas D. Potter says, there is a great difference between a Schism from
them, and a Reformation of ourselves: This (you say) is a quaint Subtilty, by
which all Schism and Sin may be as well excused. It seems, then, in your
Judgment, that Thieves and Adulterers, and Murderers, and Traitors, may say
with as much probability as Protestants, that they do no hurt to others, but
only Reform themselves. But then methinks it is very strange, that all
Protestants should agree with one consent in this defense of themselves from
the imputation of Schism: And that, to this day, never any Thief or Murderer
should have been heard of to make use of this Apology! And then for
Schismatiques, I would know, whether Victor Bishop of Rome, who Excommunicated
the Churches of Asia, for not conforming to his Church in keeping Easter;
whether Novatian that divided from Cornelius, upon pretense that himself was
elected Bishop of Rome, when indeed he was not; whether Felicissimus and his
Crew, that went out of the Church of Carthage, and set up Altar against Altar,
because, having fallen in persecution, they might not be restored to the Peace
of the Church presently, upon the Intercession of the Confessors; whether the
Donatists who divided from, and damned all the World, because all the World
would not Excommunicate them who were accused only, and not convicted, to have
been Traditors of the Sacred Books; whether they which for the slips and
infirmities of others, which they might and ought to Tolerate, or upon some
difference in matters of Order and Ceremony, or for some Error in Doctrine,
neither pernicious nor hurtful to Faith or Piety, separate themselves from
others, or others from themselves; or lastly, whether they that put themselves
out of the Churches Unity and Obedience, because their Opinions are not
approved there, but reprehended and confuted; or because, being of impious
Conversation, they are impatient of their Churches Censure; I would know (I
say) whether all or any of these, may with any Face or without extreme
Impudency, put in this Plea of Protestants, and pretend with as much likelihood
as they, that they did not separate from others but only reform themselves?
But, suppose they were so impudent as to say so in
their own Defense falsely, does it follow by any good Logic, that therefore
this Apology is not to employed by Protestants who may say so truly? We make
(say they) no Schism from you, but only a Reformation of ourselves: This (you
reply) is no good justification, because it may be pretended by any
Schismatique. Very true, any Schismatique that can speak may say the same
Words, (as any Rebel that makes Conscience the Cloak of his impious
Disobedience, may say with S. Peter, and S. John, We must obey God rather than
Men:) But then the Question is, whether any Schismatique may say so truly? And
to this Question you say just nothing: But conclude, because this defense may
be abused by some, it must be used by none. As if you should have said, S.
Peter, and S. John did ill to make such an Answer as they made, because impious
Hypocrites might make use of the same to palliate their Disobedience and
Rebellion, against the Lawful Commands of Lawful Authority.

The Conclusion.
AFter all this causeless finding fault with the Plea of the Protestant, what
is it that the Romanists aim at, and after what manner would they mend this
Plea? They will tell you, This seems to be the Consequence Prof. Plea, Digress.
p. 9.
of the late way taken up by many Protestants, viz. That in stead of the Roman
Church her setting up some Men (the Church-Governors) as Infallible in
Necessaries; here is set up by them every Christian, if he will, both
Infallible in all Necessaries; and certain that he is so. They will endeavor
to persuade you, that the Great Ends they aim at are, Truth and Peace: And that
these Blessed Ends are never to be universally attained without an Infallible
Church to which all may submit their Judgments in Religion, and, by such
submission, preserve Unity. They will continue their discourse, and say,
Without such a Judge, every Man's Reason is Reason, and every Man's Scripture is
Scripture, and he is left to run wild after his own Imaginations. And though a
Man is not in the right, he will not yield he is so, till it is given against
him by an Infallible Judge.

But Men must first be satisfied that there is such a Judge, and who he is, and
where and how to be found, and how far Men will follow him. When there was such
a Judge on Earth, (the most Infallible High Priest, the Blessed JESUS)
prejudiced and perverse Men would neither be of One Faith, nor of One Heart.
The Wisdom of God will not, by forcing of Assent, destroy the Nature and Virtue
of it; and he has declared that he will permit Heresies, that those who are
approved and excellent Christians may be distinguished from those who are not.
This Expedient of the Romanists is like that of the Atheist Spinoza, who has
left the following Maxim to the World as his Legacy for Peace, viz. That the
Object of Faith is not Truth but Obedience, and the quiet of human Society. And
they say in effect, Shut all your Eyes, and agree in one who shall lead you
all, and you will all go one way: But the difficulty lies in getting them to
agree. It is not difficult to say a great deal more upon this Subject; but, in
stead of that which might be here offered from myself, I will refer the Reader
to a Book lately published, and called, A Discourse concerning a Judge in
Controversies; if he be not satisfied with that which Mr. Chillingworth has
said long ago, and to which this Author has here said nothing Chill. Pres. to
Char. maintained, p. 8, 9. Sect. 12, 13, 14, 15.
.

You say See here p. 9. 13. 22. 54.
again confidently, That, if this Infallibility be once impeached, every Man is
given over to his own Wit and Discourse. By which if you mean Discourse, not
guiding itself by Scripture, but only by Principles of Nature, or perhaps by
Prejudices and popular Errors, and drawing Consequences not by Rule but by
Chance, is, by no means, true. If you mean by Discourse, Right Reason, grounded
on Divine Revelation and common Notions, written by God in the Hearts of all
Men; and deducing, according to the never-failing Rules of Logic, consequent
Deductions from them: If this be it which you mean by Discourse, it is very
meet, and reasonable and necessary, that Men, as in all their Actions, so
especially in that of greatest importance, the choice of their way to Happiness
should be left unto it: And he that follows this in all Opinions and Actions,
and does not only seem to do so, follows always God; whereas he that follows
a Company of Men, may oft-times follow a Company of Beasts. And in saying this,
I say no more than S. John to all Christians in these words, Dearly Beloved,
believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no:
And the Rule he gives them to make this trial by, is to consider, whether they
Confess JESUS to be Christ; that is, the Guide of their Faith, and Lord of
their Action; not, Whether they acknowledge the Pope to be his Vicar. I say no
more than S. Paul, in exhorting all Christians, To try all things, and hold
fast that which is good: Than S. Peter in commanding all Christians, To be
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them: Then our Savior himself,
in forewarning all his Followers, that if they blindly followed blind Guides,
both Leaders and Followers should fall into the Ditch. And again, in saying
even to the People, Yea, and why of your selves judge ye not what is right? And
though by Passion, or Precipitation, or Prejudice, by want of Reason, or not
using what they have, Men may be, and are oftentimes, lead into Error and
Mischief; yet, that they cannot be misguided by Discourse, truly so called,
such as I have described, you yourself have given them security. For, what is
Discourse, but drawing Conclusions out of Premises by good Consequence? Now,
the Principles which we have settled, to wit, the Scriptures, are on all sides
agreed to be Infallibly true. And you have told us in the Fourth Chapter of
this Pamphlet, That from Truth no Men can, by good Consequence, infer Falsehood;
Therefore, by Discourse, no Man can possibly be led to error; but if he err in
his Conclusions, he must of Necessity, either err in his Principles, (which
here cannot have place) or commit some error in his Discourse; that is, indeed,
not Discourse, but seem to do so.

13. You say, Thirdly, with sufficient confidence, That if the true Church may
err in defining what Scriptures be Canonical, or in delivering the sense
thereof, then we must follow either the private Spirit, or else natural Wit and
Judgment; and by them examine what Scriptures contain true or false Doctrine,
and in that respect ought to be received or rejected. All which is apparently
untrue, neither can any proof of it be pretended. For though the present Church
may possibly err in her Judgment touching this matter, yet have we other
directions in it, besides the private Spirit, and the Examination of the
Contents (which latter way may conclude the Negative very strongly, to wit,
that such or such a Book cannot come from God, because it contains
irreconcilable Contradictions; but the Affirmative it cannot conclude, because
the Contents of a Book may be all true, and yet the Book not Written by Divine
inspiration;) other direction therefore I say we have, besides either of these
three, and that is, the Testimony of the Primitive Christians.

14. You say, Fourthly, with convenient boldness, that this Infallible
Authority of the Church being denied, no Man can be assured, that any parcel of
the Scripture was Written by Divine Inspiration: Which is an untruth, for which
no proof is pretended; and besides, void of Modesty, and full of Iniquity. The
First, because the Experience of Innumerable Christians is against it, who are
sufficiently assured, that the Scripture is Divinely inspired, and yet deny the
Infallible Authority of your Church, or any other. The Second, because if I
have not ground to be assured of the Divine Authority of Scripture, unless I
first believe your Church Infallible, then can I have no ground at all to
believe it. Because there is no ground, nor can any be pretended, why I should
believe the Church Infallible, unless I first believe the Scripture Divine.

15. Fifthly and lastly, You say, with confidence in abundance; that none can
deny the Infallible Authority of your Church, but he must abandon all infused
Faith, and True Religion, if he do but understand himself: Which is to say,
agreeable to what you had said before, and what out of the abundance of the
Heart you speak very often, that all Christians besides you are open Fools, or
concealed Atheists. All this you say with notable Confidence, (as the manner of
Sophisters is, to place their Confidence of Prevailing in their Confident
manner of Speaking,) but then for the Evidence you promised to maintain this
Confidence, that is quite vanished and become invisible.

Hitherto I have been arguing against our Author; but now, in the close, I
cannot but join with him in his Protestants Exhortation to Humility Prof. Plea,
p. 45.
. It is an Admirable Virtue; and may God grant to me, and to all Men, a greater
Measure of it. It is a Virtue proper even for Guides in Religion, that they may
humbly help the Faith of others, and not exercise Dominion over it.

And, because a late Writer has been pleased to suffer this severe censure to
drop from his Pen A Defense of the Papers, etc. p. 126.
, [ it is the less to be admired that [our Author] is such a stranger to that
Spirit [of Meekness and humble Charity,] because among all the Volumes of
Divinity, written by the Protestants, there is not one Original Treatise, at
least, that I have seen or heard of, which has handled distinctly and by
itself, that Christian Virtue of Humility.] I will tell him of one Book (as I
could of many others) written singly upon that Subject. I mean a late Treatise
by Mr. Allen A Practical Discourse of Humility, by W. A. Land. 1681.
, a Man who had considered many ways, but long before his Death, approved of
that of the Church of England, as the most safe and Apostolical. He was a
Layman, a Citizen, a Man of little skill in Languages or Scholastick-Learning,
yet, by Gods Blessing upon his Industry and Sincerity, and the Ministeral helps
he met with in our Communion, I will be bold to say he understood the
Scriptures as judiciously as many Learned Romish Commentators, who have got a
Name in the World, and stand pompously, in several Volumes, upon the Shelves of
Students.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 7. for mixed, read mix. Page 13. lin. 6. for Fourthly, read
Fifthly. Page 34, lin. 22. for Queens time, read unquiet times.

A Table of Contents.
THE Introduction, showing, That this Tract, and most of those which have been
lately written in the Controversies betwixt Romanists and
Churchof-England-Protestants, have been occasioned by the former. P. 3. to p.
7. Chap. 1. Observations touching the Book itself called the Protestants Plea,
etc. Its Edition, Character and Design. P. 7. to p. 17. Chap. 2. Considerations
touching the General Argument of the Protestants Plea, etc. showing the
weakness of it, and that it is not of force enough to overthrow the Plea of the
Reformed. P. 17. to p. 38. Chap. 3. Particular Answers to the Particular
Branches of the Protestants Plea, etc. divided into Five Conferences by the
Author of it. P. 38. to p. 57. Sect. 1. The Argument of the First Conference,
with the Answer. P. 38. to p. 46. Sect. 2. The Argument of the Second
Conference, with the Answer. P. 46. to p. 49. Sect. 3. The Argument of the
Third Conference, with the Answer. P. 49. to p. 51. Sect. 4. The Argument of
the Fourth Conference, with the Answer. P. 51. to p. 53. Sect. 5. The Argument
of the Fifth Conference, with the Answer. P. 53. to p. 56. The Conclusion,
showing that the Roman Plea does not mend that of the Reformed of this Church,
but come short of it; and that every Protestant is not wholly left to the
private guidance of his own Imagination.
THE END.

