Imprimatur,

Guil. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Nov. 10. 1677.
OF IDOLATRY: A DISCOURSE, In which is endeavored A Declaration of, Its
Distinction from Superstition; Its Notion, Cause, Commencement, and Progress;
Its Practice Charged on Gentiles, Jews, Mahometans, Gnostics, Manichees,
Arians, Socinians, Romanists: As also, of the Means which God has vouchsafed
toward the Cure of it by the SHECHINAH of His SON.

By THO. TENISON, B. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and late Fellow of
Corpus-Christi College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Tyton at the Three-Daggers in Fleetstreet, over
against St. Dunstans Church, 1678.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of MANCHESTER, One of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Huntington, etc.
My LORD,
IT is now a year, and almost another, since I wrote a Letter for private Use,
about the Worship of Images: A Practice most scandalous to the Christian
Religion, and (as some use it) so extremely ridiculous, that the very statue,
had it any apprehension, would modestly bow it self, and prevent the Adorer.
From that small beginning has arisen a Book sufficiently big; but of the less
solidity by reason of the hasty growth of it. More art, together with more
hours of leisure would have made it a lesser Volume. For in writing of Books,
as in carving of Statues, the cutting away of each superfluity is a work of
skill and time.

But if this Volume were equally great and good, it would be the more suitable
Present for your Lordship, to whom the Dedication of it is due, whether the
Author be considered, or that which be has written.

For the Author he has had long dependence on your Honorable Family; such as
may almost be dated from that happy time in which these Islands were
disenchanted, and received their true and undoubted Sovereign, in place of that
Spectre of Authority which then walked at Whitehall. He is possessed of one
Living by the Bounty of the then Lord Chamberlain your Father, whose most
generous kindness and condescension must for ever be remembered by him. And
seeing the Noble offer makes the favor, and not the acceptance; he owes to
your Lordship his acknowledgments for another. Many other Obligations from your
Honorable Person and Family, and therein from your most excellent Lady, (whose
eminent and exemplary Virtues surpass the very height of her Birth and
Quality) as in Gratitude I must not forget, so in good manners I ought not here
to repeat them at large; for it would be a rude abuse of your Lordships
patience to turn this Epistle into a second Book.

For the Book it self, some part of it was meditated, the whole revised at your
Castle of Kimbolton; a place where your Lordship does yearly offer new matter
to the admiration of Travelers, who speak with such praise of the Fair Villa's
of England. It was enlarged, and now at last published, not without the desire
of some of your Lordships very Learned Relations, who by their own accurate
Pens have made amends to the world for any trouble they may occasion by mine.
It has already some hope of your favorable acceptance; and therefore it lays
it self with the greater assurance at the feet of your Honor.

Where it offends either in Matter or Form, (for in an heap of so many
particulars some which are not very current may pass through my hand
undiscerned;) I beg not Patronage, but excuse.

In the matter, I would hope that the main of it is passable, because I have
used as its touchstone the Doctrine and Worship of that Church, in whose
Communion (by Gods good Providence) I have always lived, the Church of England:
a Church of unparalled sobriety and invincible Truth. The Country was one of
the last of those which the Arms of the ancient Romans subdued; and the Church
is such that it can never be conquered by the Arguments of the Modern.

It is true, I have said many things which the Church has not said; for I was
unwilling to disgust any curious Reader, by serving up nothing but what had
formerly been often set before him. But against the Church I am not conscious
that I have written a syllable. And for some Speculations which might have been
subject to misconstruction, I have committed them to (that which they call the
best keeper of Secrets) the Fire. If any offensive phrase or notion have
escaped me, as soon as I am showed it, I shall be readier to blot it out, than
I was ever to write it.

Touching my manner of writing, I crave leave to observe a few things about the
style, and the temper of this Discourse.

Concerning style, had it been my Talent, it had not been possible in such an
Historical and Philological Argument to have made any considerable use of it. A
Discourse into which the words of other men of differing Professions, Ages,
Countries, Languages and styles, are so frequently woven, must needs be uneven
and parti-colored.

Concerning the Temper observed in this writing, I have endeavored to abstain
from all unnecessary heat and severe Language. For I cannot persuade my self
that the Witchcraft of Error can be removed, or so much as weakened by the mere
scratches of the Pen. It has also been my care not to misrepresent the
opinions of those from whom I differ. Yet I am sensible that this very
Impartiality, with which I move in the middle path, will draw upon me the
censorious lashes of many Zealots who place themselves on either hand. Those
whom Jesuitick Bygotry possesses will say I have maliciously blackned their
Church. Others whose over-rigid humor must needs pass for the only
Protestancy, whose Religion shows it self in nothing but in a fierce and
indiscreet zeal against Popery, will think my Pen has flattered. They will cry
out that it has imitated his pencil, who drew the loose Gabrielle in the
figure of chaste Diana.

But I have (I hope) avoided both those Extremes: Most certain I am, I have
studied to do so. And if just moderation must be blamed, I am willing to be a
sufferer in so good, so honorable a cause.

There are another sort of Enemies of whose Censures I am also in some
expectation, though in no fear at all: I mean the lower sort of Critics, into
whose Province of Philology I have sometimes stepped. This sort of men seems
to me like those wretched Barbarians on the Coast of Guinea, whose Idol is a
certain Bundle of Feathers. Religious men of the warmest temper are not more
earnest about matters of Faith than these are in questions of wit, and debates
about words and tittles. For though the interest of the thing they contend
about be insignificant, yet they think that power and mastery in any thing is
worthy their zeal. If I have but mispelled the name of some Heathen-god, I
expect severe usage from such Grammarians. But though they shall prove angry, I
will not retaliate. It is not worth the while to keep up a controversy begun
about a trifle, and to bandy light matters backward and forward by eternal
dispute.

But I trespass upon your Honor by the liberty of this Discourse, and by
introducing these Pedantick people who make so absurd a figure in Courts.

This only I have to add: If there be any thing useful in this writing, I know
your Lordship will accept it for its own sake. And for that which is useless,
or defective, I hope it may obtain pardon through the submission of the Author,
who is,

From Dr. Lawson's house in Mincing-Lane in London, March 16, 1677. My Lord,
Your Lordship's most Obliged and Obedient Servant, THO. TENISON.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
CHap. I. Of the Notion of Superstition page 1. Chap. II. Of the Notion of
Idolatry p. 12. Chap. III. Of the causes and occasions of Idolatry in the World
p. 24. Chap. IV. Of the commencement and progress of Idolatry p. 38. Chap. V.
Of the Idolatry charged on the Gentiles Part 1. How far the Gentiles were
ignorant of a supreme God p. 49. Part 2. Of the Worship of Universal nature,
etc. by the Gentiles as God p. 52. Part 3. How far they owned one true God p.
55. Part 4. What applications they made to one God p. 62. Part. 5. Whether they
worshipping one God could be guilty of the sin of Idolatry p. 65. Part 6. Of
their Idolatry in worshipping the Statues of God p. 68. Part 7. Of their
Idolatry in worshipping Demons p. 75. Part 8. Of their Idolatry in worshipping
the Images of Demons p. 88. Part 9. Of their worshipping Demons more than God
p. 95.
Chap. VI. Of the Idolatry of the Jews. Part 1. Of the provisions made by God
against the Idolatry of the Jews p. 97. Part 2. Of the Idolatry of the Jews p.
101. Part 3. Of the worship of the Golden Calf p. 108. Part 4. Of the worship
of the Idol Apis p. 112. Part 5. Of the Originals of Apis and Serapis p. 118.
Part 6. Of the Egyptian-Apis whether he were Moses p. 125. Part 7. Why Moses
might be Idolized among the Egyptians p. 131. Part 8. Why Moses might be
honored by the Symbol of an Ox p. 136. Part 9. Why Moses might be called Apis
p. 138. Part 10. When the Worship of Apis commenced p. 139. Part 11. Of the
Idols Apis and Mnevis p. 140. Part 12. Whence the Original of Apis might be
obscured p. 141.
Chap. VII. Of the Idolatry of the Mahometans p. 143. Chap. VIII. Of the
Idolatry with which some are charged who profess themselves Christians Part 1.
Of the Idolatry of the Gnostics p. 148. Part 2. Of the Idolatry of the
Manichees p. 155.
Chap. IX. Of the Idolatry with which the Arians and Socinians are charged Part
1. Of the Idolatry of the Arians and Socinians jointly p. 157. Part 2. Of the
Idolatry of the Arians p. 163. Part 3. Of the Idolatry of the Socinians p. 169.
Chap. 10. Of the Idolatry charged on the Papists Part 1. Of the Charge which
is drawn up against them p. 176. Part 2. Of the mitigation of the Charge of
Idolatry against the Papists p. 184. Part 3. Of the Idolatry charged on the
Romanists in the Invocation of Saints p. 189.
Chap. XI. Of the Idolatry charged on the Romanists in the Worship of Images,
and particularly of the Worship of an Image of God p. 264. Chap. XII. Of the
Idolatry charged on the Romanists in worshipping Images Part 1. Of the Worship
of the Image of Christ p. 276. Part 2. Of the Worship of the Images of Saints
p. 296.
Chap. XIII. Of the Idolatry charged on the Church of England p. 303. Chap.
XIV. Of the means which God has vouchsafed the World toward the curing
Idolatry; and particularly of his favor in exhibiting to that purpose the
Shechinah of his Son Part 1. Of the cure of Idolatry p. 311. Part 2. Of the
cure of Idolatry by the Shechinah of of God p. 315. Part 3. Of the Shechinah of
God from Adam to Noah p. 320. Part 4. Of the Shechinah of God from Noah to
Moses p. 323. Part 5. Of the Shechinah of God from Moses to the Captivity, and
therein largely of the Ark and Cherubims and Urim and Thummim p. 330. Part 6.
Of the Shechinah of God from the Captivity to the Messiah p. 368. Part 7. Of
the cure of Idolatry by the Image of God in Christ God-man p. 371. Part 8. Of
the Usefulness of this Argument of Gods Shechinah p. 379. Part 9. Of the
Usefulness of this Argument of Gods Shechinah, with relation to the Worship of
Angels and Images p. 382.
Chap. XV. A Review and Conclusion p. 391.
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 14. for, of a remorse, read, of remorse, p. 12. l. 13. f.
Fritbert r. Freiberg. p. 26. l. 17. f. Deitas r. Deutas. p. 34. l. 2. f.
notions r. motions. p. 40. l 20. f. Families of Cain and Lamech r. Family of
Cain. p. 41. l. 32. and p. 47. l. 33. f. Loyn r. Line. p. 42. l. 18, 19. f.
Commical r. Conical. p. 43. l. 6. f. Vatallus r. Vatablus. p. 48. l. 18. f.
ascends a Pyramid r. ascends in a Pyramid. p. 196. l. 25. f. opposite r.
apposite. p. 230. Marg. for Virgin r. Virgini. p. 249. Marg. f. quid r. quod.
p. 324. l. 20. f. re-acting r. reaching. p. 338. l. 18. f. man r. mean. p. 355.
l. 26. blot out and. p. 385. l. 6, 7. f. Heaven r. Heathen. In p. 385, 387,
389. there is left out in the Title on the top. with Relation to the Worship,
etc. p. 400. l. 2. f. He r. We. p. 410. l. 23. f. second r. third. p. 413. l.
21. f. chres r. sepulchers.

Other Mispellings and little mistakes are left to the candor of the Reader,
who is desired as he peruseth the Book, to cast his eye sometimes upon the
Review at the end of it, a few amendments and additions being there subjoined.

CHAP. I. Of the notions of Superstition and Idolatry, as they are usually
confounded; and as they ought, of right, to be distinguished.
I Know not how I can better begin this discourse concerning Religious Worship,
than by imitating the Prologue of Origin, or rather of Maximus, to his dispute
against the Heresy of Marcion. In the entrance of that Dialogue, he Orig.
cont. Marc. S. 1. p. 2. (...).
makes a right opinion concerning God to be the Basis and Foundation of
Universal Goodness. Men are imperfect, and oftentimes the more they are known,
the less they are honored; insomuch, that distance and reservedness is made
use of, especially among the Eastern Princes, as the necessary instrument of
Veneration. But God is a Being absolutely perfect; and the better he is
understood, he is worshipped with the more rational Religion, and with the
profounder Reverence. God is that One, Supreme, Infinite, Spirit; who by
Almighty Power, Wisdom and Goodness, made and governs the World. And if men
entertained such a notion of him, instead of those rude and false draughts,
which are pictured in their vain Imaginations, they would pay him an homage
more agreeable to his Divine, and to their own reasonable, though humane
nature. They would then serve him with that pure Religion, or sincere
Christianity, which is not adulterated either with Idolatry or Superstition. Of
these, the notions being so commonly entangled, that Hesychius expounds the
name, (...) [a superstitious person] by (...) [an Idolater]; and the
translators of the Psalms * render (...), the vain or empty (that is, the
exceeding) Psalm. 31. 7.
vanities of Idols, by superstitious vanities: I will in the first place offer
to the Reader a distinct consideration of them.

Superstition, if we have regard only to the bare derivations of its names in
the Greek or Latin Tongues, is no other than a single branch of Idolatry. It is
the worship of the Divi, coelestes semper habiti, (as the Law of the twelve
Tables speaks) that is, of the Sempiternal Demons; and also of those, Quos
in coelum merita vocarunt (as the same Law distinguishes); of such Hero's and
superexisting Souls as were, through their eminent and exemplary virtue,
translated from Earth to Heaven. Yet in the notion of Plutarch, (...), or
Superstition, consists not so much in the bare worship of such invisible
Powers, as in that servility and horror of mind which possessed the
worshippers, and inclined them (like those who flatter Tyrants) to hate them,
and yet to fawn on them, and to suppose them apt to be appeased Plut. de
superst. p. 167. -- (...), etc.
by ceremonious and insignificant crouchings. Use has further extended the
signification of the word; insomuch, that sometimes it comprehends, not only
all manner of Idolatry, but also every false and offensive way, which
disguiseth it self under the color of Religion. Thus Socrates the Historian,
Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. p. 168. -- (...).
when he mentions the signs which Julian gave of his proneness to
Superstition he means by that word the whole Religion of the Gentiles.

But there is still behind its proper and especial notion; and the Synod of
Mechlin has attempted to set down a true description of it. The Council of
Trent having commanded the abolishing of all Superstition, the Fathers of this
Synod go about to explain the meaning of that Precept; and they do it Council.
Mech. inter. Conc. Max. c. 3. de Imag. p. 801.
after the following manner. This Synod (say they) teaches, that all that use
of things is superstitious, which is performed without [the warrant of] the
Word of God, or the Doctrine of the Church, by certain customary rites and
observances, of which no reasonable cause can be assigned: And when trust is
put in Them, and an expectation is raised of an event following from such
Rites, and not hoped for without them, from the intercession of the Saints.
Also when, in the worship of Saints, they are done rather out of rashness and
lightness, than out of Piety and Religion. But this description is in many
respects defective. For many of the Usages which it decrieth, do not relate to
Religion, and they deserve rather the names of follies, impertinences, and
ludicrous enchantments: unless a man would distinguish concerning the kinds of
Superstition, and call some, the Superstitions of common life, and others, the
Superstitions of worship. The rites of the former kind become the more
Superstitious, if their event be expected from some presumed Saint; for then an
impertinent custom becomes an impiety, or the usage of a Magical charm, by
which invisible powers are depended on, for the production of visible effects.
If (for instance sake) a man shall fall into that conceit which has possesled
many, even Origin Origin. cont. Cells. l. 5. p. 261, 262.
himself, that certain names signify by nature, and not by institution; and
that an event will follow from a certain ceremonious pronunciation, or other
use of them, he meriteth the Title of a Trifling and Credulous Philosopher. But
if he makes such use of words [suppose of Adonai or Sabbath, which Origin
believes to lose their virtue, if turned into any other language:] and hops
thence for the event from God, through the intercession of some Spirit; he
deserves the reproof due to a superstitious man, who, by supposing a Divine
attendance on his Trifles, does highly dishonor God and his Saints.

Neither does the Synod of Mechlin absolve such Rites from the guilt of
Superstition, by adding to the intercession of Saints the prescription of the
Church; for that cannot alter the nature of things, though it may render some
Rites, indifferent in their nature, expedient, not to say, necessary, in point
of obedience, for the preservation of Peace and Order. If Ri^es of worship are
exceeding numerous under Christianity; if they are light and indecent; if being
in themselves indifferent, or decent in their use, they are imposed, or
observed as necessary duties; the stamp of Authority does not much alter the
property of them. Wherefore others Reform. L^g. Eccles. Tit. de Idol. etc. c.
6. de Superstit. P. 32.
have, in more accurate manner, defined Superstition; A worship relating to
God, proceeding from a certain inclination. of mind, which is commonly called a
good intention; and springing always from man's brain; separately from the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures. But neither in this definition are we to
rest: For if the reason of man's brain answers the Piety of his intention; the
worship which he offers, though not commanded in Scripture, if not forbidden
by it, may be grateful to God. I should therefore choose, in this manner, to
describe Superstition. It is a corruption of public or private worship, either
in the substance, or in the Rites of it; whereby men (actuated by servile
motives) perform, or omit, in their own persons; or urge upon, or forbid to
others, any thing as in its nature Religious or Sinful, which God has neither
required, nor disallowed, either by the Principles of right Reason, or by his
revealed Will. It is the paying of our Religious Tribute, to God or an Idol, in
Coin of our own mintage. The positive part of it is the addition of our own
numberless, absurd, or decent, inventions, to the prescriptions of God, in the
quality of Laws and Rites, equal, or superior to those by him enacted.

First, An observance of a very great number of such Rites and Ceremonies in
the worship of God, as admit of excuse or praise in their single consideration,
is a part of this Superstition: For it prejudiceth the substance of our duty,
by distracting our attention, and is unagreeable to the Christianity which we
profess; because it is not, as was the Mosaic, a Typical Religion. The Greek
Church, as well as a great part of the Latin, abounds See their many
ceremonies toward the very elements before consecr. in Stat. Hodiern. Eccles.
Graec. p. 86. 87, and in receiving, in Christoph. Angel. (...). p. 20.
with Ceremonies; and the Rituals are of so great a bulk, that they look like
Volumes too big for the very Temple, much more for the Church. Neither
(probably) should such a number of Rites have ever been imposed on the Jews, if
their ritual temper, their conversation with a people of like ritual
disposition, and the use of Types in shadowing out the Messiah, had not moved
the Wisdom of God to prescribe them.

The late pretender to the Latin Text, and English Translation of the Order,
and Canon of the Mass, J. D's Great Sacr. of the new Law exp. by the Figures of
the old. Printed, A^, 1676.
conscious, one would think, of the absurdness of the Romish ceremoniousness;
at least of the appearance of it, as such, to the reformed in England; has in
less than Thirty Crosses omitted more than Twenty. He has never mentioned the
Incensing of the Altar, the Book, the Priest: He has left out, sometimes in
his Latin, and oftener in his English, a great number of Rites enjoined the
Priest, and daily performed by him. I will give a few instances in both kinds.

In the very beginning of the Order of the Mass, this is the authentic
Rubric. Miss. Romans Par. 1660. p. 210. Sacerdos paratus cum ingreditur ad
Altar, facta illi debita reverentia, signat se signo crucis a front ad
pectus. and clara voce dicit, In nomine, etc.
The Priest being accoustred, when he goes to the Altar, after having done due
reverence to it, he signeth himself with the sign of the Cross, from the
forehead to the breast; and with a loud voice, says, In the name of the
Father. Instead of this, J. D. thus begins his Order. Sacerdos, ad Gradum
Altaris, dicit, in nomine, etc. The Priest at the foot of the Altar, says, In
the name of the Father. In the Repetition of the Creed, the Priest is required,
Miss. Romans In Ord. Miss. p. 213.
when he says, Deum, God, to bow his Head to the Cross; when he says Jesus
Christ, to do the like: So that they are together adored. When he says, And
was incarnate, to kneel till those words, And was made man. When he has ended,
to cross himself from the forehead to the breast. All this J. D. has omitted,
both in his Latin and English Pages J. D. Order of the Mass, p. 18 19, etc.
. In his pretended Version, he thus rendereth, J. D. Canon of the Mass. p. 36.
37.
Genuflexus, adorat, surgit, ostendit Populo; Here the Priest elevates the
sacred Host: whereas this is the genuine Translation, Here the Priest, with
bended knee, adoreth the Host: Then he rises up, and shows it to the People.

Again, There is a superstitious levity and want of decence in many Rites,
which render them unfit for the solemnity of Divine Worship. The watchings of
women on the Eve of the Nativity, together with the consequent nursings and
rockings, used sometimes by those of the Roman Communion, are in some degree
superstitious. They are apt to raise in the mind a mean and common Idea of our
Lord's birth, and they give manifest occasions to profane men, to make
ridiculous a very solemn part of our Christian Faith. In the worship and
procession of some Images, the Rites are so apish, that they are fit only for
the service of such an Idol, as that in India, spoken of by Vincent le Blanc,
which had its Statue made of the Tooth of a Monkey. The very Rituals, and
Missals, and Ceremonials of Rome prescribe, too often, very idle and unbecoming
Rites, and make a kind of Farce to be the part of the Priest, or rather his
humor, who in Carneval-time, went dressed half in the Spanish, and half in the
French fashion. Lassels in Voy. to Italy. p. 190.
They forbear not such levity in the very use of the Keys: For if a person
dies excommunicate, but with testimonies of a remorse, the Roman Ritual
directs the Priest to give him Absolution Ritual. Roman. p. 61. 62. Ed. Antv.
1617.
by whipping the Body, if it remains unburied; or the Grave, if the Corpse be
in it, and it self be part of the consecrated Ground. A like mimical indecence
is enjoined by the Roman Missal Missale Roman. in Sabbato Sancto. p: 187, 188.
Ed. Paris, 1660. See Pontif. Romans de officio Sab. Sanct. fol. 192, etc.
on a very solemn time, the Eve of Easter. By order of that Missal, all the
Lights of the Church are extinguished, that they may again be lighted by new
consecrated Fire. Procession is made, and the Deacon, who carries on a Pole
three Candles in Triangular distance, does enter the Church with much Ceremony,
and lights one of the extinguished Candles, and cries out, The light of
Christ. He proceeding to the middle of the Church, lights a second Candle,
crying out again, The Light of Christ. At last, approaching the Altar, he
lights a third, and cries with a louder voice, The Light of Christ. Nor is
there yet an end; for further postures, and lightings of Candles, especially of
a great one in the Pulpit called Cereus, and of Lamps, are in such sort
required Miss. Ro^ p. 189.
, that the whole Ceremony looks more like to the play of Children, than to
the worship of Christian men.

Of the like levity most of their forms of Consecration may be justly accused.
Such is that of the Benediction of a Bell, Pontif. Romans part 2, fol. 68, etc.
which is ceremoniously washed with Salt Water, and Crossed by the Bishop, and
by his Ministers carefully wiped.

Such is that of the Dedication and Consecration of a Church, in which the
Bishop fills the Two Diagonal Lines of the Area, with the Latin and Greek
Alphabets, writing first from the Corner on the lefthand at his entrance, the
Row of the Greek Letters, with the end of his Pastoral-Staff; and then the
Latin ones from the corner on his right hand. Pont. Romans part 2. fol. 113, etc.


Lastly, Such is that of the Benediction of Chrism, Pontif. Romans part 3. fol.
186.
or a mixture of Balm and Oil. There the Bishop breaths three times
Cross-wise, over the Chrismal Phial. Then Twelve Priests, after having bowed in
order to the Sacrament on the Altar, and the Bishop, proceed to the Table where
the Phial is placed. There they successively imitate the Bishop, breathing
three times cross-wise over the mouth of the Vessel: which being done, together
with their obeisance, a second time to the Sacrament, and the Bishop, they
retire for a season. Now it is not readily imagined, by what virtue such forms
as these affect the Italians, who are a grave and steady people. Neither are
the Rites solemn enough, which the Greeks sometimes observe; as appears at
large in Goar and Habertus. And, methinks, those Greeks at Jerusalem Journey of
14 English to Jerus. p. 29.
might have better employed their Artists, than in making a narrow passage
through two Pillars, in order to their creeping through, in imitation of the
strait Gate, which leads to Life Eternal.

Last of all, The Laws and Rites of Worship which man inventeth, how few and
decent soever they appear, become Superstitious, as soon as they are made equal
with the express Laws of God. This Superstition our Savior condemned in the
Pharisees, who usurped the Legislative Power of God, and taught sometimes for
necessary Doctrines the commandments of men. Matt. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6, 9.
They made some of their Traditions equal to the most Moral Laws of Moses: Nay,
they often were more fond of the Issue of their own Fancy, than of the Edicts
of God. They were wont to say, Hieros. Beracoth, fol. 3. ap. D. Lightf. in
Matt. 15. 2. p. 185, 186.
That the words of the Scribes were more amiable than the words of the Law.
Also, That the words of the Elders were more weighty than the words of the
Prophets. Many of them vilified the Written Word in comparison of the Cabala,
or Oral Tradition of the Elders, which they called The Foundation. They held
the breach of a Traditional Rite, to be as capital as the violation of a Moral
Law; Rabbi Jose teaching, That the eating of bread with unwashed hands, was as
great a wickedness as the humbling of an Harlot See Drusius, on Matt. 15. 2.
. Hence our Savior defended the breach of this Tradition by his Disciples, not
as it was an innocent Ceremony, but as it was imposed as a necessary part of
Religion: the neglect of which defiled a man, Matt. 15. 20.
and rendered him as guilty in Gods sight, as if he had broken a written Law.
Nay, they judged of their Saintship rather by the obedience they paid to their
own Inventions, than by their observation of Gods Commands. Thus, by the device
of their Corban, they made a false estimate of Charity; believing themselves
Righteous, whilst they violated the indispensable Law of Love to their Parents.

Some Usages there are not commanded by God, yet acceptable to him, if our high
estimation of them, and our indiscreet zeal in their use or imposition, does
not become the dead Fly in the Spikenard. I cannot discern such Superstition,
as others think they have done, Culver, Light of Not. c. 17. p. 176. Some
superstitious ones, how devoutly do they complement with a Candle, etc?
in uncovering the Head when a light is brought in, and praying for the light
of Heaven. I know not what Irreligion there is, in using the like Ceremony when
our Neighbor sneezeth; and in wishing his health, or blessing God for his
deliverance from the offensive vapor. I mean this, of those persons by whom it
does not appear, but that the inward intention does accompany the outward sign.
A prudent Christian is not offended at him, who on a solemn occasion makes the
sign of the Cross on himself, as an external sign of his Christian Religion.
Neither does he censure those, who well understanding their own tempers, do use
fasting before the Eucharist, as an help to devotion: or those who use
abstinence on a Saturday with discretion; by way of preparation (as is alleged
Abridgement of Christ. Doctr. in Expos. of the Comm. of the Church of Rome. p.
166.
by some) for the Holy Day which succeeds it. And he is not well-grounded in
the Faith and Charity of a Christian man, who brandeth all those with
Superstition, that comply with the Church of England in her Rites, which are
neither in their number many, nor indecent, or immoral in their nature; neither
are they required as Usages in themselves necessary to Salvation. They are
enjoined and used for the sake of order and comeliness, without which a Church
is as it were undressed, and exposed in ungrateful and unbecoming
circumstances, to the devout, who with Reason conceive some difgust, as well at
the nakedness, as at the paint of their Mother.

There are, then, certain Free-will-offerings both of Churches and single
persons, which God Almighty [who as Learned men think, accepted voluntary
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving in the infancy of the World; and who most certainly
accepted of voluntary dedications of Feasts under the very Law of Moses,] will
not despise under Christianity; when they are presented with piety, humility
and prudence. But if any shall perform or enjoin such Rites, under the notion
of indispensable duties; if they shall value them as the weightier matters of
Religion, and impose them, as such, with fierceness and intemperate zeal; or if
by negative scrupulositie, they shall place Religion in the mere abhorrence of
them; they so far cease to be truly devout, and become ridiculously and
uncharitably superstitious. God has not required such things at their hands in
such manner, or such a mighty dread of them; neither is he pleased with such
Will Worship. Softer words are not to be used toward them who so highly exalt
their imagination, as to make it the measure of Gods Will, and enforce those
observances, or omissions, as heavenly Laws which the great Governor of the
Church has left to the discretion of his Christian Subjects. Their Usurpation
is insufferable, who make more duties and sins than God commands or
forbids: And nothing but blind and slavish Superstition subjecteth the neck
to their uneasy yoke. Lutherus referente Hofner^ in Saxon. Evang. p. 110.
nibil pestilentius in Ecclesia potest doceri, quam si ea quae necessaria non
sunt, necessaria fiant. Hac enim Tyrannide -- mendacium pro veritate, Idolum
pro Deo -- colitur.


Let this little suffice here, concerning that corruption in the Laws, Rites
and Motives of Worship; it being only spoken in the way to my direct Theme of
Idolatry, by which the object of Worship is depraved.

CHAP. II. Of the Notion of Idolatry.
IDolatry is either Metaphorical or Proper. By Metaphorical Idolatry, I mean
that inordinate love of Riches, Honors, and bodily Pleasures, whereby the
passions and appetites of men are made superior to the Will of God: Man, by so
doing, making as it were a God of himself and his sensual temper. The Covetous
man worshippeth Mammon; he valueth his Gold, (...), in the language of Philo
Philo Jud. de Monarch. l. 1. p. 813.
, as a Divine Image: As if the Image of God were cast, in eminent manner, in
that thick Clay spoken of by the Prophet, with which the Issachars of the world
do lade themselves. Such Idolatrous estimation of Money, gave to a Mine in
Friebert, which contained in it exceeding rich Ore, that high and mighty name
of Himmelfurst, or the Prince of Heaven. The Ambitious man, rather than he will
want high place, or popular fame, he will in unjust Wars, and unreasonable
Duels, offer himself a sacrifice to Honor; an Idol on whose Altars more blood
has been profusely shed, than on those of Moloch or Bellona. To the Glutton,
(as Tertullian in his Book of Fasting says of him, after his sharp manner,)
His Belly is his God, his Paunch is his Altar, his Cook is his Priest, his
Sawces are his Graces, and his Belching is Prophecy. The unchaste man owns
nothing so Divine as his Harlot, and borrows the phrases of his Courtship,
from the Goddesses and the Shrines, the Temples and the Altars, of the
Theologers of the Gentiles, that is, their Poets. Now this excessive value of
the things of the World, is a very high and impious presumption: But because it
sets not up Mammon or the Appetite, as a god, or an object of Religious
worship; therefore I call it Metaphorical, and not Proper Idolatry; in which
latter subject only, I am at present engaged.

This kind of Idolatry which I call Proper, is by many supposed a matter of
nice and difficult speculation. They think the notion of it too abstruse for
common heads; yea, too hard for some Scholastic ones, which are not very
accurate in dividing a Cummin-seed. And yet the Holy Writers do everywhere
reprove the people for this sin, supposing its nature to be commonly
understood: and sure it is no other than that which is briefly described by St.
Cyprian and Hilary. Then (says St. Cyprian) is Idolatry committed, when the
Divine Honor is given to another. So Hilary the Roman Deacon (sometimes
mistaken for St. Ambrose,) does, in this, place the nature of Idolatry, That it
usurpeth the Honor of God, and challenges it in right of the creature. Not
unlike to these descriptions is that which we find in the Book of the
Reformation Reform. Leg. Eccles. Tit. de Idol. c. 2. p. 32.
of Ecclesiastical Laws, begun by Henry the Eighth. Idolatry (says that Book)
is a Worship, in which not the Creator, but the creature, or some figment of
man is adored. To this worship of the Creature, the Scripture does frequently
give the name of uncleanness. This it has done, partly in compliance with the
Jewish Idiom, which calls any thing that is detestable, dirty or unclean; the
persons of that people being desecrated by corporal pollutions. It has also
done it, by reason of those very unchaste Actions and Rites, by which many of
the Idols of the Gentiles were served; though in the worship of some few, and
particularly in that of Vesta, the great observance was Chastity. But the
Scripture has, especially, given to Idolatry that name of uncleanness, because
it was an alienation of the hearts and bodies of the Jews from the God of
Israel, who had, as it were, chosen that Church as his Spouse on Earth. For the
like Reason Witchcraft is a sort of Idolatry, because it breaks Covenant with
God, and enters into solemn league and compact with Demons.

Now if this common notion seems, too briefly, or too generally propounded, I
am ready to make a particular enlargement of it in the following definition.
Idolatry is a sin, which by inward reverence or outward signs, gives to some
other object, in an act or habit of Religious Homage or Worship, that Honor
which is either essential to God; or being communicable, yet appertaining to
God only till he has declared his actual communication of it, is either not at
all communicated, or not in that extent or continuance of virtue, which seems
thereby to be attributed to it. This definition contains in it three
branches, which are also three degrees of Idolatry.

First, The Idolater gives away, sometimes, the essential and incommunicable
Honor of God. This he does two ways; first, when he dethroneth God in his
imagination, and sets up some other object in his place. Thus the
Babylonians offended, whilst they adored the primitive Baal, the Sun, as the
best and greatest Deity, not only in their World or Empire, but likewise
throughout the Sphere of all things. He does it, Secondly, when admitting of
God, he adds another principle equal to him; for he that divides the Empire
of God, diminishes his Honor: He makes him cease to be God, that is, to be
One and Supreme. This presumption Pliny, Plin. not. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. p. 3.
charge, in effect, on Democritus, giving to his two Principles, the names of
Poena and Praemium, Punishment and Reward; or (as I think) more properly,
Avenger and Rewarder. The like fault is found in the Persian Theology, which
constituteth (as they say) two Principles; the one the fountain of Good, under
the name of Oromasdes; the other the source of Evil, under the name of
Arimanius: Although it may appear from Theodorus, in his Book Theodor.
Mopsuest. Epist. apud Photium in Biblioth. Cod. 81. p. 199.
of the Persian Magic, that both (according to Zarasdas or Zoroaster) were the
offspring of Zaruam, who was owned as the Prince of all things, and the Father
of Hormisda and Satanas, and called (...), or Fortune. Such Idolatry is
likewise charged on the Americans of Mexico, who are reported (b) to have had
Two thousand gods, and amongst them two principal ones, Tezcatlipuca the c
Gages New Survey of the West Indies. c. 12. p. 116, 117.
god of providence, and Vitzilopuchtli the god of the wars. It may be that
there was a Deity owned by them superior to both these: For what else was
intended by that great and superior Image placed on the top of the Chapel of
Idols Gage ibid. p. 117.
in the City of Mexico? It was either the Statue of the Supreme God, or of the
supreme Demon of their Precinct. And why should it not be thought that Mexico
owned one God as well as Peru, in which the Sovereign Principle (as Acosta
instructs us) was called Pachacamac and Viracocha, inferior to whom they
esteemed the Sun and Thunder, their two Principles, (as I guess) of Good and
Evil.

In the next place, the Idolater gives to some other object, that Honor which
might have been communicated by Gods Authority, but has been entirely reserved
by his Wisdom, whilst no actual communication of it has been any way
declared. This impiety of his is likewise of two kinds. For he gives the
Honor which God has wholly reserved, to some other object, either with
respect to some inherent Power with which he supposes it to be indu'd by God;
or with regard to some external Relation which he supposes to be owned by him.
In the first kind the barbarous Goths offended, whilst they worshipped Nocca
Ol. worm. monum. Danic. l. 1. c. 4.
[a kind of Neptune amongst them] as one to whom a superior Power had
committed the government of their Seas and Rivers; whilst that Idol possibly,
had not so much virtue communicated to him, as might still one puff of Wind, or
crush a Bubble. In the second kind, they would have transgressed, who in the
Temple of Dagon should have done Religious, though relative and inferior,
reverence to his shapeless Trunk, or even to his Statue in the perfection of
its beauty; God having never owned it as his Image, or the Image of any Deity,
or Angel, substituted by him.

Lastly, The Idolater gives Honor to an Object which God owneth and
replenisheth sometimes with virtue, in the quality of the Fountain of that
Virtue; whilst God has not endued it with that constant Power in it self, but
used it as the instrument of his Works. The Power which heals Diseases not
curable by Physic, does not so essentially belong to the Prerogative of God,
that he cannot communicate it perpetually to Angel or Man, and invest him in
it, without diminution of his own Omnipotence. For it implies not a
contradiction, for a creature to be able to alter the whole Texture of so
little a frame as man's body: Neither is it impossible for man to be, by God,
endued with a knowledge, which in a certain precinct, may, by signs in nature,
to men unknown, and past their finding out, foretell several accidents which God
determines not to overruled; such as Plagues, or healthful Seasons; Famine or
Plenty: For this knowledge, though it is not man's natural Talent, is not
Omniscience. Yet whilst this is done by Gods immediate Power, and man is but
instrumental in it, he becomes an Idolater, who owneth and thanketh man as the
efficient cause. And he is guilty two ways: Either whilst he owneth the
Instrument as the efficient Cause, during the time that God makes use of it,
or after God has ceased to work by it. In the first kind, the Impotent people,
who were healed at the Pool of Bethesda, had offended, if they had given thanks
to the Angel as to the principal Physician. And against this kind of Idolatry
St. Peter gave caution, when seeing the multitude transported with admiration
at the recovery of the Cripple, Acts 3. 12.
He thus bespake them, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look you
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power, or holiness, we had made this
man to walk? The offense of the second kind is much greater than this first,
because it does not only give to Gods Instrument the honor due to the Divine
Efficient Cause; but it also gives Divine honor to that, which is not now so
much as the Instrument by which God works. And this becomes a very Idol
indeed, a vanity or lie, or nothing at all of that which it is esteemed to be.
The Magical Rod in the Temple of Isis, in imitation of that of Moses, was but
an Idol, if it was an Instrument of any wonders; for it was not the Rod of God,
but of a Demon. This matter may also be illustrated, both by the instance of
the Brazen Serpent set up by one of Gods Vicegerents, and, upon its abuse,
destroyed by another; and by that of the Cup of Joseph. This Cup by which he
Divined, was, probably, an instrument used in some Sacrifice, some
drink offering; and in the use of which God vouchsafed him a Spirit of
Prophecy, with relation to the affairs of Egypt. Now if the Egyptians
afterward made use of this Cup, or any other in form of it, without any precept
or promise from God Almighty; and trusted in it, as in the cause of Divination,
they then were Idolaters in this last kind of that impiety. And this, one would
think, was the Egyptian practice, who reads Lucian in his Book of Sacrifices,
Or rather in his Jupiter Tragaedus. p. 700. for I find nothing like it in his
Book de Sacr. though Pignorius, in Exp. Men's. Isiac. p. 31. has thence cited it.
and observes him there deriding the Egyptians, because they made, (...), or,
a drinking Pot, a God. And such a Cup may that be thought, which is described
in the hand of Isis in her Mystical Table, rather than a Measure, as Pignorius
contendeth; as likewise that mentioned by Arnobius Arnob. l. 6. p. 209. -- In
Liberi dextra pendens potorius Cantharus.
in the right hand of Bacchus, who often makes a Figure in the forementioned.
Table. But this, as it refers to Joseph, is but conjecture; scarce so much
as opinion: I therefore dismiss it. Yet I must not dismiss the Argument it
self, till I have further distinguished both concerning the Objects or Idols of
that Honor which is given from God; and the ways by which it is translated
from the proper to the false Deity.

These Idols are either Personal, Internal, or External Objects. By Personal
Objects, I mean the Idolaters themselves, who become their own Statues, and
worship their very selves by the estimation they have of their Persons, as
Christ's, or of their Souls as real portions of the Essence of God; the fancy of
some followers of Plotinus of old, who said, Their Souls at death returned to
the seminal Reason; and of some Quakers at this time, who say, as Edward
Buroughs See. F. H. Testimony.
the morning before he departed this Life, That his Soul and Spirit was centred
in its own being with God.

Internal Objects are the false Idea's which are set up in the fancy, instead
of God and his Divine perfections. For he who fancieth God under the Idea of
Indefinite Amplitude or Extension of matter, or of Light or Flame; or under the
notion of an irresistible Tyrant; and applies himself to him as such, without
the use of any visible external Statue or Picture; is as certainly an Idolater,
as he who worshippeth a Graven Image; for he gives Divine Honor to an Idea
which is not Divine. Only here, the Scene being internal in the Fancy, the
scandal of the sin is thereby abated.

External Objects, are such which have a subsistence distinct from the
Phantasms which are by motion impressed on the Brain. And the Catalogue of
these is a kind of Inventory of nature. I will here give only a summary account
of them, for the particulars are endless. Idolaters have worshipped Universal
Nature, the Soul of the World, Angels, the Souls of men departed; either by
themselves, or in union with some Star or other Body. They have likewise
worshipped the Heavens, and in them both particular Luminaries and
Constellations; the Atmosphere, and in it the Meteors and Fowls of the Air; the
Earth, and in it Man, together with the accidents of which he is the subject,
such as Fortitude and Justice, Peace and War. And further, on earth they have
deified Beasts, Birds, Insects, Plants, Groves, Hills, artificial and artless
Pillars and Statues, Pictures and Hieroglyphics [mean as that of the Scaribee
Porphyr. d^ Abstin. l. 4. p. 155, 156.
it self, resembling the Sun so many ways, as Porphyrie fancieth] together with
diverse fossils and terrestrial Fire. They have furthermore adored the Water
[particularly that fruitful one of the Nile] and in it, the Fishes and Serpents
and Insects; as likewise the creatures which are doubtful Inhabitants of either
Element; such as the Crocodile in Egypt. Kircher Kircher. in Oedip. AEg. Synt.
5. c. 3. P. 401.
has found the Temples of many of these Idols, even in that polite Nation of
China: For he has a Scheme containing the Temple of the Queen of Heaven, the
Temple of Heaven, the Altar of Heaven, the Temple of Demons and Spirits, the
Temple of the Planet Mars, the Altar of the God of Rain, the Altar of the King
of Birds, the Altar of the Earth, the Temple of the President of Woods, the
Temple of Mountains and Rivers, the Temple of the Spirit of Medicine, the
Temple of Gratitude, and of Peace, the Temple of the President of Mice, and of
the Dragon of the Sea. Menander, from Epicharmus Epicharm. ap. Stobe^min sermon.
89. p. 503. -- (...).
summeth up the Idols of the World under these fewer heads, of the Wind, the
Water, the Sun, the Earth, the Fire. But he is therefore deficient in his
computation; neither was it his purpose to make it accurate. Thus the Image of
God who made all things, has (as in a broken mirror) been beheld, without due
attention, in the several parts of the frame of the World, and by the foolish
Idolater distinctly adored: And this adoration being used toward external
Objects, and not confined to man's secret thoughts, has with the more success
and scandalous dishonor to God, been propagated in the World. And this
remindeth me of the distinction which I designed also to make, betwixt the ways
by which Gods Honor is derived on creatures. For it is either done by the
inward estimation of the mind, directing its intention in an Act or course of
internal Worship; or by the external signs of Religious Reverence. It is done
by both these together, or by either of them apart. There is no public worship
without manifest signs of it; the heart in it self not being discerned by man's
eye, but discovering it self by external tokens. The Ifraelites (says St.
Cyril) worshipped the Calf; and they did it, by crying out these are thy gods
(f). a St. Cyril. Alex. cont. Julian. l. 9. P. 308.
. In them the mind and the outward signs of it went together. But others, by
the mere outward shows of Adoration, how unconcerned soever they may have kept
their minds, have committed Idolatry: Such as the Thurificati in the Primitive
Church, who believing the Gospel, offered Incense before an Heathen Idol; that
being made a sign of their departure from Christianity, and their approbation
of Gentilism. They thereby did an act of open dishonor to the true God; and
they used external means apt to incline others, either to worship Idols instead
of Him, or to confirm them, if they were already Idolaters, in their detestable
profaneness. Such Idolaters (it may be) were some Englishmen, who went to Sea
with Mr. Davis, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in order to the discovery of a
North-West passage to Cataia, China, and East India. On the 29th of July, in
the year 1585, Hakluits Navigations. P. 778.
they discovered Land in 64 degrees and 15 minutes of Latitude bearing
North-East from them. They found this Land an heap of Islands, on one of which
they went on shore. There some few of the Natives made toward them; and
amongst that little herd of barbarous people, one pointed first upwards wirh
his hand to the Sun, and then smote his breast with very vehement force. The
English aptly interpreting this sign as an acknowledgment of the Deity of the
Sun, and an Oath by that Idol, of fidelity and peace, used the same sign
themselves; gaining thereby Friendship and Traffic with a few Salvage People,
at the expense of the most valuable thing, the Honor of God.

Of this external Honor, he is jealous, and he reserved it to himself, amongst
the Jews whom he had espoused, by express command, saying, Lo tischtachaveh,
Thou shall not, before an Image or Idol, put thy Body into such a figure, as is
a sign of worship. In the same sense ought to be interpreted the (...), of the
Seventy [Thou shall not bow down;] the word (...), not denoting there, a mere
act of the mind, but of the body, either by bowing of its whole frame, or its
head, or knee, or (which the notation of the word particularly imports) by
the kissing of the hand, (...). Eustath. ad 5 Odyss.
a common ceremony among the Gentile Idolaters; and ancient as the times of Job
Job 31. 26, 27.
Three ways of exhibiting such external reverence are suggested by the Psalmist
Psalm. 95. 6. -- Prosternamur, Incurvemus nos, genuflectamus. See Petr.
Picherell. de Imagine. P. 225, 226, 227, etc.
, where he calls upon the people, to worship with prostration, to bow, to kneel
before God their Creator. For the sake of external worship, solemn Days and
public Assemblies have in great part been appointed: By it, our Light (which
retained in the heart only, is as a Lamp burning in a Sepulcher,) does so
conspicuously shine before men, that it induces them to an happy consent in
glorifying God with us. By it, is maintained the visible Society of Gods
Church, whose outward communion is preserved by the external signs of words,
gestures and actions, relating to the Christian Religion, and making up the
profession of it. This Communion he, in effect, renounceth, who pretending to
the heart of a Christian, has the tongue of a Blasphemer, or the gesture of an
Idolater: who, whatsoever secret thoughts he entertaineth concerning God, says
openly of him, that he is not Supreme: or, what inward hatred soever he
conceives against Idols, sits in their Temples, and eats of their
Sacrifice. External Ceremonies (as is said Council. Rhem. inter Conc. Max. P.
73. Externae Ceremoniae sunt institutae ad declarandam suam in Deum affectionem.
by the Fathers of the Synod of Rhemes) are therefore appointed, that by them a
declaration may be made of our affection toward God. And common Reason
teaches, that by giving away the outward signs of worship, we are prodigal of
the internal Honor of God, which cannot be preserved or advanced amongst
Societies of men, merely by a secret and invisible Intention.

Hitherto I have pursued the notion of Idolatry in a positive way, according to
the proper nature of Worship, in which the Act passes toward the Object. But
it may not be amiss to take a little notice of a kind of negative impiety,
which precedeth this positive false-worship; and to which, some it may be would
give the name of negative Idolatry. I mean by this, that denial of any thing in
the Idea of God which is proper to it, succeeded by a Worship of Him according
to that maimed and unagreeable Idea. For the Idea of God being so entire that,
by any diminution, it becomes the Idea of something else; he that first
removes part of the Idea, and then adores the remainder; adores, as God, that
which is not like him. He, for instance sake, who denies the constancy of Gods
knowledge of human affairs, yet worships him at certain times, in which he
owneth him to have that knowledge (after the manner of those foolish Gentiles
who worshipped the Sun by day, and revelled by night when they thought he saw
not;) such a one, by breaking of such a necessary part of Gods Idea, as renders
it not his Image, and yet adoring it as such, first makes an Idol, and then
does it homage. So the god of the Muggletonians robbed of his Spirituality,
immensity, subsistences; what is he but their Idol?

The Premises being considered, it will thence follow That in giving the
Honor of God, supreme or subordinate, to any other thing, be it internal Idea,
or personal Principle, or outward Object, with respect to any supposed,
inherent, Divine Power, original or derived, or to any external Relation, by
internal worship, and by the external signs of it, or by either of them,
consists the Notion of Idolatry; the thing designed in this Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes and Occasions of Idolatry in the World.
IT has appeared in the foregoing Chapter, what kind of evil Idolatry is and
how it has spread it self into numberless branches. In this Chapter, my
purpose is to proceed further, and to inquire into the Root of it, and to
consider from what Causes and Occasions it has sprung; and on what rotten and
irrational grounds it is bottomed. The general Cause of Idolatry, is the
degenerate estate of the Soul, exerting it self in the headiness of the Will,
which hurrieth men to folly, under the wild conduct of Imagination and Sense.
The Scripture calls this distemper, The vanity of the mind; and to it it
ascribes the Worship of Idols. Of such Worshippers St. Paul observes, Romans 1.
21.
That when they knew God, [or had means of knowing him, by the reasoning of
their minds, excited by the beauty, order, and excellence of his Works of
Creation and Providence], they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful;
but became vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart was darkened. In
this estate of moral darkness they mistook, and confounded the Objects they met
with; and honored the Creature instead of God.

It is difficult, if not impossible, at this distance from persons and things,
to tell the causes and occasions of all their mistakes: Neither could it have
been done fully by the wisest of those times. For the love of Idols in some,
like that of Persons in others, was an unaccountable passion. That therefore
which I here undertake, is not a full, certain, and manifest; but a competent,
and probable account.

Those who worshipped Universal nature as an entire Object, or the several
visible parts of it distinctly, were led to such adoration, by one more general
Cause, and by diverse which were more special. The more general cause of the
worship of material nature, either in its own form, or in the shapes put upon
it by Art, is the natural inclination of the mind in this body to help it self
by sensible Objects. The substance of God Almighty is not an Object which our
mind can comprehend, much less is our acutest sight able to reach it. This
Principle many owned amongst the Heathens. Such were they mentioned by
Porphyrie Porphyr. ap. Eusebius. de praep. Evangel. l. 3. c. 7. p. 98.
who, that they might signify the invisibility of Gods Essence, painted his
Statues with black. Such were the Egyptians, remembered by Plutarch, who did
therefore make the Crocodile an emblem of God, because that creature, by the
help of a pellucid membrane descending from his forehead, was able (as they
vulgarly conceited) to see with closed eyes, without being seen. Now man
living, as it were, in the confines of Heaven and Earth, his celestial mind
being united to a body of gross flesh and blood; his understanding receives
instruction through the gates of the outward senses, and is, in especial
manner, assisted by Phantasms which Light pictureth in the Brain. This frame of
man renders him covetous in his speculations, of the help of some external and
visible Object. And amongst the numerous progeny of mankind, there are very few
heads metaphysical enough for that Proverb of the Arabians Erpen. Proverb.
Arab. p. 2.
; Shut up the five Windows, that the House may be filled with Light. It is the
same thing to the vulgar, not to appear, and not to be; and they would
therefore have a visible Deity, and one who might in a more bodily manner be
present with them. For this Reason, when Osiris was worshipped throughout
Egypt, and his living Image was visible only in the superior part of it, the
Metropolis of Memphis; the Priests took occasion to set on foot a Schism; and
those of Heliopolis would also have a sacred Bull, that their Deity might be as
visible and present to them, as to the other Egyptians. This Reason the
Brachman gave to Monsieur Bernier Bernier in his Letter to Mr. de la Mothe le
Vayer. p. 171, 172.
for the erection of the Statues of Brahma, and of other Deiitas or Deities: To
wit, That something might be before the eyes of the worshipper, for the fixing
of his mind. Of the like temper were the Heathens spoken of by Lactantius in
his second Book of the Origin of Error, Lactant. p. 146. Sed ^erentur ne omnis
Religio eorum inanis sit, and vana, si nihil in praesenti videant, quod adorent.
They were jealous lest all their Religion should be a vain beating of the Air,
if they saw nothing present which they might adore.

This Affection then for Sense, this wisdom of the Flesh, is a general Cause of
the Worship of material Idols. But they being of diverse kinds, have accordingly
diverse more special Causes.

Such who worshipped Universal Nature, or the Systeme of the material World,
perceived first that there was excellency in the several parts of it; and then,
to make up the grandeur and perfection of the Idea, they joined them
altogether into one Divine Being. Thus, probably, did Idolaters: But Atheists
also served themselves on this Pretense, as they do at this day, seldom
receding from any profitable Art. Such a one of old, was Pliny, who makes God
and Nature the same Plin. not. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. p. 4. -- Per quae [nempe illa
quae ne quidem Deus potest] declaratur haud dubi^ naturae potentia, idque esse
quod Deum vocamus.
. And such a one, in these times, is the bold Author of Tractatus
Theologico-politicus, Tract. Theol. polit. c. 6. de Mirac. p. 100. Ed. 2.
virtus and potentia materiae ipsa Dei virtus and potentia; Leges autem and
Regulae naturae, ipsa Dei Decreta, etc.
who defines God, the infinite power of matter.

Those who worshipped Nature in the parts of it, were such (as Pliny observes)
who labored under a weakness and narrowness of imagination. It was his opinion
Plin. ubi supra. p. 3.
, That frail and wearied mortality, mindful of its own infirm condition,
distributed Nature into its several parts, that every one might worship that
portion of it which was useful to him. Usefulness, indeed, was a common motive;
And Cicero affirms (in his first Book of the Nature of the Gods) That the
Egyptians consecrated no Beast, from whence they did not derive some profit.
And in his second Book of the same Argument, he cites it, as the saying of
Perseus the Scholar of Zeno, That they were held to be Gods, from whom great
advantage accrued to man's life. Neither is there any name so commonly given,
amongst all Nations, to Divine Power, as that which signifies the Goodness of
it. Such is the ancient Kod of the Germans, in the Vocabulary of Goldastus, and
their more modern Got, or God Got a Teut. Gut, bonus.
which we have borrowed from them. But Usefulness, though it was a very common
motive, yet it was not the only one which inclined the World to Idolatry. For
that which ravished with its Beauty [as the Rainbow, worshipped, says Josephus
Acosta, by the Peruvians; though not by those of Egypt who dwelt under a serene
Heaven]: That which affrighted with its malignant Power, [as the Thunder,
worshipped, says the same Acosta, by the Yncas of Peru; and by the ancient
Germans also, who as, Grotius notes, Grotii Proleg. Histor. Got. and Va^dal.
p. 21
called their God of Heaven by the name of Thorn, which signifies him that
Thundereth]: That which astonished with its greatness [as the mighty swellings
of the Earth in high Mountains, worshipped here by the ancient ush. de Primord.
Eccles. Britan. p. 2.
Britains]: That, I say, which was beautiful, hurtful, Consultwisd- 13. 1, 2,
3, 4, 7.
or Majestic, became a Deity, as well as that which profited with its use. Now
all these powers being united in the Sun, whose beauty is glorious, whose heat
scorcheth and refreshes, and is the cause of barrenness in some places, and in
others of fruitfulness; whose motion is admirable, whose Globe of Light
appears highly exalted; That, of all other parts of the visible World, has
been the celebrated Idol.

For other parts of insensible nature, lesser virtues were discerned in them:
But their motion, and the cause of it, being either not known, or not
considered, the Gentiles esteemed of them as such Subjects, in which a
celestial vigor resided. Ignorance of nature was, in them, the Mother of
Idolatry; as ignorance in Art was the cause of that admiration amongst the
Caribbians, which ascribed the effect of Firelocks Hist. of the Carib. Isl. p.
272.
to a Demon. On the same account Garlic and Onions obtained the reputation of
Deities in Egypt. Of such St. Chrysostom somewhere takes notice, and of the
Apology which they made, saying, That God was in the Onion, though the Onion
was not God. By this Onion, they meant not the common and very delicious one
among them, which they were not forbidden to violate, but did daily eat it; but
a certain Scilla which poisoned Mice, and had a strange fiery virtue in it, and
was called the Eye of Typhon. And I suppose it to be of the same kind with
that, of which the juice was used in the Lustration of Menippus in Lucian, when
he was initiated into the mysteries of Zoroaster Lucian. in Necyomantia. p.
159. Ad Tigridem me fl^vium ducens, purgavit simul atque abster fit, saceque
lustravit, (...).
. It decreased says [saith Kircher Oedip. Egypt, Theatr. c. (...). P. 74, 75.
] in the increase of the Moon; and increased in the decrease of it: for the
truth of which, let it rest upon the Relato.

Concerning Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Insects, they, in like manner, were
adored for their beauty, their beneficial, hurtful, or astonishing properties.
They were sometimes worshipped, for these and other such reasons, in the whole
species of them: For so Diana, being turned (as they feigned) into a Merula, [a
Mearl, or Black-bird] the whole kind of them was made sacred, in the quality of
her living Statues. Sometimes some one sort of them was worshipped by reason of
a particular effect of theirs, esteemed of with high veneration by the World.
So the Mice Sminthoi were deified, Clem. Alex. Admon. ad Gent. p. 25.
which eat in sunder the Cables of the Enemies of Troas. Likewise, such living
creatures were worshipped as Beings, which contained in them the Souls of some
departed Hero's, Friends, and Benefactors; or which were, themselves, portions
of the Soul of the World. Beasts at this day, are upon both these accounts
idolized by the Pendets of Indostan Berni^rs Memoirs. Tome. 3. p. 154, 155, 156.
. And after this manner it is, that they explain the several appearances of
their Deity; of which the first, they say, was in the nature of a Lion, the
second of a Swine: a strange Cabbala, and such as the Jews themselves will
disown.

Touching Artificial things, and lifeless Statues, the more Jgnorant sort
worshipped them for their surprising form, and costly matter. Such the Bramins
in India moved to the worship of the great Idol Resora fixed nigh Jagrenate,
which is one of the mouths of Ganges. For they framed him very curiously, and
set him forth very richly; giving him two Diamonds Taverni^'s Travels into
India. part 2. l. 3. c. 9. p. 173.
for his Eyes, and hanging another about his Neck: And of these, the least
weighed about Forty Carats. Others, not so very ignorant as to think, with the
former, that the Deity was Gold or precious Stones; Acts 17.
venerated their Images, as the places of residence of Divine Powers, or
perhaps, as their Bodies or Closets; their Temples being their Houses or common
dwelling-places. These were sacred to their Gods, not as shelters of their
Statues Arnob. adv. Gentes. l. 6. p. 192.
from Sun, Wind, or Rain (as the Heathens in Arnobius cunningly apologize) but
as instruments whereby they might have their Gods with them, behold them before
their Eyes, speak immediately to them, and with them, as present persons,
mingle, as it were, their Religious Colloquies.

Many Figures, Statues, and Images were made, at first, for very differing
ends. They were made, as Memorials of a departed Child Wisd. 14. 15, 16.
, or Friend, or Hero See Mandeslo's Travels concern. the Pillars of the
Japoneses. p. 154.
: As Remembrancers of a living Friend or Governor, Wisd 14. 17.
remaining at a distance from us on earth; as Monuments of some great Accidents
in the World, and preservers of the memory of things to late posterity; the use
(they say) of the Pillars of Seth. Likewise, they were made as Mathematical
Instruments, as also as Hieroglyphics, and mystical Emblems; such as a Dog,
the emblem of Sagacity; and an Egg, the Hieroglyphick of the material World.
The vanity of man, the Imposture of the Heathen Priests, the artifice and
splendor of the Statues themselves Wisd. 14. 18. The singular diligence of the
Artificer did help to set forward the ignorant to more superstition.
; effects, apt to stir up admiration, which followed their setting up, or their
remove, or their worship, though arising from other undiscerned Causes;
together with a multitude of feigned stories concerning their original or their
discovery: These things inclined the World to an opinion, that they were
receptacles of Divinity. Each Temple of the Heathen was like that mentioned by
Lucian in his Second Book of true Histories, a Temple of Imposture Luciani ver.
Hist. l. 2. p. 403. -- (...).
: And many Images were but the Instruments of Juglers. Some of them were
feigned to sweat and move [as those in the great Temple of Syria, mentioned by
the Author Lucian. De dea Syria. p. 1059.
of the Syrian Goddess]. Some were made very beautifully; and some in such
horrid shapes, that they almost affright us in their Pictures: Such are those
Pictures which Lorenzo Pignoria has added Cart. Seconda part delle Imagini de
i Dei. p. 374, 375, 377, 378, 387, 390, 393, 394, 396, 397, 398, 399.
to the Book of Cartari, concerning the Images of the ancient Gods. Some were
in such manner contrived that they seemed to hold immediate commerce with
Heaven: Thus, in the Image of Serapis at Alexandria, See Kircher's Oed. AEg.
Synt. 3. c. 5. p. 199.
a little Window was so framed by Art, that the Sun shone on the eyes, lips,
and mouth of it; and that the people believed it to be kissed by that Deity.
Some have been feigned to drop down from the Heavens [as those of Troy and
Ephesus]: Some to have been transported from place to place, in the Air, [as
the forementioned Image of Serapis, said to be translated, in a moment, from
Pontus to Alexandria]: And some, by direction of Spirits, to have been dug
out of the earth; or to have been miraculously pulled out of the Sea [as the
Golden Tripos of Apollo]. And pity it is that such Arts should be used by them
who profess the Christian Religion, which needs no pious frauds for the
support of it, but is best propagated, as it was from the beginning, by plain
and sincere dealing. But some Roman Catholics have, too frequently, imitated
the Sophistry of the Heathens; and particularly, in promoting the dangerous
worship of our Lady, at Loreto and Guadalupa. It seems, that her Image lay
concealed in this latter place, for the space of more than 600 years, till it
was, by miracle (as they say), after this manner discovered See Bzov. ad Ann.
1313. and Hotting. Eccles. Histor. vol. 3. p. 789. See also themirac. discov.
of our Ladies Image on Mount Serat, in Aug. Wichman's Sabbatismus Marianus. c.
5. p. 47, 48:
. An Heardsman seeking his strayed Cow, found her at last, but to appearance
dead. He went about, therefore, to take off her Skin; but whilst he was
attempting of it, the Beast, to his great astonishment, did miraculously
revive. Then, also, did the Holy Virgin appear to him in glorious splendour, and
bid him not fear. And she, further, gave him order to call the Ecclesiastics
of the City, and in her name to promise them, that if they dug in that
place, they should find her Image. The poor man fearing they would not believe
his report, she promised to enable him with this sign: to wit, That he finding
his Child dead at home, should be able, by his word, to raise it to life again
before them. This being done, the Image is sought and found (for they that
hide, have ill memories if they cannot find again); and it is placed in a
magnificent Temple, and it becomes famous for working Miracles [true as that of
its own discovery]. By such Arts as these, the people being induced to think
that Images were the dwelling-places of Divine Powers, it was difficult for
them that had blind zeal, thenceforth, to suspend their Religious veneration.
The like means inclined them to worship Beasts or Birds, as shrines and living
Statues of some Deity. Thus the Egyptians made the figure of the Bird Ibis the
emblem of their Delta, which it seems, by its open Bill it represented
Schualenberg in Aphorism. Hieroglyphic. l. 17. p. 117, 118.
; [though my fancy conceives not how it could represent the Basis of it] and
therefore, under the favor of Schualenberg, it fixes rather on the Passus
Ibidis or Trigon it made at every step. To this they added, That a certain
Medicine of extraordinary virtue was found out by those Birds; that a Feather
of them stupefied the Crocodile; that they were hatched out of the Egg of a
Basilisk; that they defended Egypt from the flying Serpents of Arabia. And this
was enough, with that Idolatrous Nation, to turn the bodies of those Birds, and
the very figures of them likewise, into Receptacles and Treasuries of Celestial
virtue; and to give Religious honor to them.

Concerning men on earth, the pride and pomp of the great, and the low and
slavish dispositions of the mean, begat sometimes the flattery, sometimes the
worship of them, as Gods in humane shape. This Honor was arrogated by
Nebuchadnezzar, who erected a mighty Colossus of Gold to no other Deity than
himself, requiring sacrifice and Religious adoration to be offered to it: which
when Sidrac, Misach and Abednego refused to do, he expostulated with them after
the manner of an eminent Deity, saying, What God is there potent enough to
deliver you out of my hands? Of this blasphemous arrogance there were many
instances in succeeding Ages, and that of Alexander cannot escape the common
Reader; and he may find too many others in the Book of Political Idolatry,
written by the Learned Filesacus. This kind of Idolatry flatterers helped
forward, and promoted as much as in them laid, even amongst Christian Princes.
They framed for them the heavenly style of [their Divinity, and their Divine
Precept:] words said to be used by Theodosius and Valentinian themselves. By
Filesacus who refers to l. 1. Cod. de sum. Trin. Tit. 1. -- Ex Coelesti
arbitrio sumpserimus. Though that may be meant of Arbitr. divinum. See Gothof.
in 16. Cod. Theod. de Fide Cathol. p. 5.
Pacatus Drepanius, in his Panegyric to Theodosius the Great, describes the
Emperor, as one, from whom Navigators expect a calm Sea; Travelers, a safe
return; and Soldiers Victory. And of Constantine the Son of Constantius, the
uncertain Author of his Panegyric affirms in deep Complement; That his
Beauty was great as his Divinity was certain. But much of this flattery is so
gross, that it can scarce be swallowed by the common people, who, in private,
smile at their own public fawnings.

For Spirits of all kinds; men have seen some Apparitions, and heard of more:
They have also had notions in the brain, representing to them Images as
specter in the Air: They have rightly judged the Soul so Divine in its
operations, as to superexist: They have seen many external effects, and could
not guess at the Cause, or ascribe it with such probability to Nature, as to
some higher invisible Power: They have seen appearances in the Heavens; and the
very appearances have formed in their fancy, the counterfeit Idea of a Spirit.
For so the Heathen of the Eastern India Berniers Memoirs. Tom. 3. p. 180.
believed the shadow of the Moon on the Eclipsed Sun, to be a black Demon
contending with it. Men thus believing, partly from good, and partly from
fanciful Reasons, the existence of Demons and Ghosts; and apprehending them,
truly, as more spiritual, active, and superior Beings; it is not to be admired
that their weakness adored them as dispensers of good and evil here below.

Touching Souls departed in particular; Gratitude deified some, but Admiration
put more names into the Calendar. The people were transported by their power
and splendour on Earth, and they thought their Puissance would increase in
higher Regions. Souls appeared otherwise to their mind, than Bodies do to the
eye, to which they seem the lesser the higher they ascend. And to this end, the
Devil was wont to represent Ghosts unto the eye or fancy of the Gentiles in
vast proportions Juven. sat. 13. -- Tua sacra and major Imago humana, turbat
pavidum -- Dido ap. Virg. AEn. 4. Et nun^ magna mei sub Terras ibit Imago.
. Such mighty figures Jamblichus, where he writes of the Egyptian mysteries,
ascribes to Principalities and Archangels. So that Solomon Prove. 21. 16. Lxx.
(...).
might aptly call the state of the dead, the Congregation of [Rephaim] or
Giants. Toward the advancement of the Souls of Heroes in the opinions of the
Idolizers of them, much was contributed, by strange appearances, real or
invented, at the time of their death. So the Soul of Paul the Hermit was the
more divinely esteemed of, because S. Anthony (as they tell us) saw it flying
to Heaven See Martyrol. Roman. in Jan. 10.
. So Julius Caesar became one of the Roman gods, whilst a Comet C. Sueton. In
vita Jul. Caes. ad fin. p. 70.
shining for Seven days together, was judged to be his Soul received into
Glory. And this conceit they further inculcated, by adding a Star to the top of
his Statue. Such Canonization of Heroes has likewise been promoted by strange
effects, done or counterfeited at their Sepulchers; and sometimes by their
obscure manner of going out of the World, which the people esteemed an heavenly
translation. Empedocles hoping this way to arrive at Divine honor, threw
himself secretly into the flames of AEtna; but his two Pattens which that Gulf
of Fire cast up, discovered his vain and miserable end.

Concerning the Soul of the World, men seeing in all parts of the Creation
motion and virtue judged erroneously of the greater World, as they did truly of
the lesser world of Man; and made one Soul to be the Sovereign principle which
actuated every part of it. And some of the Stoics Seneca, de Benef. l. 4. c.
7. p. 427. -- Quid enim aliud est natura, quam Deus, toti mu^do and partib^s
ejus inserta?
esteemed this Soul as a Form informing the Universe: But the Platonists judged
it rather a Form assistant, imagining it unsuitable to its Deity to be mixed
with, or vitally united to the grossest subcelestial matter; and to have
perception of all the motions of it. This conceit is driven very far by the
Indian Cabalists, or Pendets Bernier's Memoirs, Tom. 3. p. 178, 179.
. Creation (say those Doctors) is nothing else but an extraction and an
extension which God makes of his own substance, of those webs he draws from
his own bowels; as destruction is nothing else but a reprisal, or taking back
again of this Divine substance, and these Divine webs into himself; so that the
last day of the World, which they call Maperle or Pralea, when they believe
that all shall be destroyed, shall be nothing else but such a general Reprisal.
This conceit, in the superstitious, makes all things in nature adorable as
parts of God: And in the Atheistical it deifieth nothing at all; for at the
bottom of this imagination, they think they see not God but Nature. With them
Pornut. de natura deorum, p. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Coelum is the material Heaven, Juno is the upper Air, Neptune is the natural
cause of water in the Caverns of the Earth, Pluto is the thick Air next to this
Globe, and Rhea is the natural cause of showers.

Toward all the Idolatries already mentioned, much was contributed by the
figurative expressions of Orators, especially by their Apostrophe's in the
Encomiums of departed Hero's; as also by the elegant fictions of Poets, whose
invention has been justly reputed one of the great storehouses of Idols. And
for the Idolatry of Qualities, I know not whence to fetch it so readily as by
going thither. For though the first ground of it was the consideration of many
of these Qualities, in their eminent degree, as means by which the Pagan Heroes
were Deified Lex 12: Tab. Tit. de Rel. Illos quos in Coelum merita voca^unt,
Herculem, Liberum, AEseulapium, Castorem, Pollucem, Quirinum. Et Illa propter
quae datur bujusmodi adscensus in Coelum: mentem, virtutem, pietatem, fidem;
earum laudum delubra sunto:
; yet Poetry helped on that cause, by shaping these Qualities into personal
Powers, negotiating, as it were, betwixt Heaven and Earth, and conveighing
them, as the Angels did the Soul of Lazarus, into a more heavenly habitation.
Poets design to move, to surprise, to make deep impression on the People. They
cannot do this so readily, by proposing abstracted Truths to the mind, as by
clothing them in such Metaphors and Pictures as may affect the brain. Hence it
is that they have used such a variety of fictions, in which they have clothed
every thing they say, with the appearances of a Person. Peace, and War, Fame
and Justice, have such personal shape and action given to them, as is necessary
for the making a greater impression upon the Hearers. For (to give an ordinary
instance in this matter) it does not so much affect us when a man says barely,
that a Kingdom shall want supplies of Bread, as when he describes famine riding
toward us pale and meager upon a Sceleton of Man or Beast attended with
thousands of such ghastly objects; from whence the uncloathed bones stare upon
us, and tell us that we after the dreadful extremities of hunger and thirst,
enforcing us to prey upon Toads and Serpents, upon our Relations, and our very
selves, shall become lean, languishing, dying, as they.

By this transitory view of the Causes and Occasions of Idolatry, so full of
folly, error, and mistake, it manifestly appears, upon what weak and
clay-like feet the Idols stand, which the world has worshipped with so vigorous
a Devotion.

CHAP. IV. Of the Time in which the Vanity of Man introduced Idolatry into the
World.
THe Nature and Causes of Idolatry being considered, I intend in the next place
to inquire into the time of its Birth, so far as the silence or uncertainty of
Tradition will permit. It is one of the Aphorisms of Philo the Elder (if he
were the Author of the Book of Wisdom), that Idols Wisd. 14. 13.
were not from the beginning: And it is a question among the Learned, whether
Idolatry was any of those pollutions which defiled the old World, and brought
the deluge upon it. It does not appear that it was extant before the flood; and
many believe it to be no older than Cham. Tertullian, it is true, was of
opinion that Idolatry began in the days of Seth, and that Enoch restored true
Religion, and is for that Reason said in Scripture to have walked with God. He
has given us his opinion, but he has concealed the grounds of it: And I can
think of nothing so likely to move him to this belief, as the reverence he had
for the fictitious Prophecy of Henoch, which he often cites See Tertul. de
Idolatr. Sect. 4. p. 87, etc. -- Idem Enoch simul and cultores Idoli and
fabricatores in comminatione praedamnat.
, and in which are contained severe Comminations, both against the makers, and
worshippers of Idols.

S. Cyril of Alexandria is much of another mind, affirming in his first Book
against Julian the Apostate, S. Cyr. Alex. l. 1. contr. Jul. p. 16. (...), etc.
That all men, from Adam to the days of Noah, worshipped that God who by nature
was one. And he strengthens his opinion with this Reason Cyr. Alex. Ibid. p.
17. A. and l. 3. p. 110. A.
, Because no man is[by Moses] accused as a worshipper of other gods, and impure
Demons. If that false Religion had then set foot in the World, it would scarce
have escaped that Divine Historian; but he would, in likelihood, both have
mentioned it plainly, and severely reproved it. For this is no sin of a mean
stature: It is, in the judgment of Tertullian Tertullian thus begins his Book
de Idol. Principale crimen Generis bumani, summus seculi reatus, tota causa
Judicii Idolatria.
, the principal crime of mankind, the chief guilt of the world; the total cause
of Gods judgment, or displeasure. He means that it is a kind of Mother-sin,
containing in it all other evils, on which the Judge of the World passes
sentence of condemnation. Lactantius goes higher still in his censure of it
Lactant. lib. 1. Instit. c. 18. p. 94.
, giving to it the name of an inexpiable wickedness. And S. Gregory Nazianzen
shows what apprehension he had of the greatness of this guilt, when he
calls it Greg. Naz. Orat. 38. de Idol. (...).
The last and first of evils. So monstrous a sin, if it had been in those early
times committed, it would, a man would think, have been as soon reflected on by
Moses, as the violence or injustice which then filled the earth, Genesis 6. 11,
12, 13.
or the unclean mixtures of the sons of God Genesis 6. 1, 2.
with the daughters of men: [That is, as I guess, (in the same sense in which
the tall Trees of Lebanon are called the Cedars of God) the unbridled appetites
of the High and Potent, who made their Power subservient to their lust.]

In the infancy of the World, there were many Causes which might prevent the
sin of Idolatry. By the fresh date of it from the Creation, in which God,
almost beyond miracle it self, discovered his Almighty Being and Oneness; by
the appearance of the (...), or Son of God to Adam and others [of which
appearance, largely afterwards]; by the long-lives of Adam and Seth, and the
rest of the Holy Line, who could often inculcate to their families, what
themselves were so abundantly assured of; and possibly also, by the conviction
of him who was the head of the degenerate Line, unrighteous Cain himself, who
having seen God in his Shechinah, could not propagate either direct Atheism or
Idolatry, though he was the Father of evil manners: By these, and perhaps by
other Causes to us unknown, it might come to pass, that the worship of Idols
was either not in being, or at least, not in frequent exercise in those first
Generations.

We know nothing of those times but by the Pen of Moses; and a doubtful word of
his Genesis 4. 26. (...)
has inclined some to refer the Origin of Idolatry to the days of Enos. In
his time (says Moses) men began to Profane, as some would render his Text,
instead of translating it as our Church does, to call upon, the Name of the
Lord. It is true that the Hebrew word, Hochal, does sometimes signify
Profaned: But there is no Reason which may enforce such an exposition of it in
this place; the Name of God having been formerly profaned, and with great
irreverence abused in the irreligious Families of Cain and Lamech. Neither is
the termination of our worship on the creature, instead of the Sovereign God,
the only profanation of his Holy Name. A rude Tongue, and an immoral Life
commit that offense; and not only an Idolatrous mind or body. Such profaneness
the Arabian Metaphrast imputes to that time, whilst he thus turns the Hebrew
of Moses: Then began men to recede from their obedience to God. But to me, the
Chaldee Interpreter seems to come nigher to the scope of the Words, the sense
of which he expresses in this manner: In those days men began to make
supplications in the name of the Lord. That is, the numbers of Families
increasing in the days of Enos, they appointed more public places for Gods
service, in which at set-times, they might together, and in a more solemn
Congregation, worship their great Creator. I must confess that this exposition
does much disagree with the mind of Maimonides. For he does not only refer
Maimon. de Idolatr. c. 1. p. 3.
the beginning of Idolatry to the times of Enos, but he accuses Enos himself
of that gross and stupid wickedness. For thus he begins that short Book which
he has written on that Subject. In the days of Enos men erred very greatly;
and the minds of the wisemen of that age were overborn with stupidness: Even
Enos himself was one of them who thus erred. Now this was their error, the
worship of the Stars. A very rash and rude reflection upon so holy a Patriarch,
and relishing of Rabbinical dotage. For certainly diverse of those Writers, if
any others, have had a flaw in their Imaginations; though Maimonides, amongst
them all, may be allowed the largest intervals of sobriety.

From Cham, therefore, rather than from Enos, the Learned derive the beginning
of Idolatry; though I know not whether, under him, it may not be dated a little
too soon. The heart of Cham being before the flood deeply depraved, it was
rather hardened by the escape, than warned by the mighty danger of that general
Deluge. Insomuch that it was just with God to give him up to the further
seducement of his sensuality, and to the visible power of the old Serpent, who
may seem to have been, for a time, chained down by the Curse in Paradise, but
was now (as I conjecture) let loose again for the punishment of those, whom
Gods severe and miraculous discipline did not cleanse of their folly. He
therefore is esteemed the Father of Idolatry, that Monster in Religion, which
in his corrupt Loyn was, by degrees, multiplied into innumerable heads. But S.
Cyril of Alexandria, in two places begins Idolatry at the confusion of
Languages, and with Belus rather than Cham Cyril. Alex. contra Julian. l. 1. p.
17. and l. 3. p. 110.
; esteeming the difference of their Dialects, and the distraction of their
opinions concerning God, to have commenced together S. Cyr. ibid. (...). See
Elucidar. (inter Op. Anselm.) I. 2. c. 20. p. 475. de Orig. Idol. -- Apud
Babel, etc.
. For the critical minute, it is uncertain; yet for the first objects of
Idolatry, we may assent to him; and them he makes to be the Sun and the other
heavenly bodies: But the Sun in the first place. That was the most glorious
object which ravished the eye, and it showed it self nowhere more gloriously
than in the plains of Chaldea. In those plains the Tower of Babel was built,
and (as my private imagination leads me to think) consecrated by the builders
to the Sun, as to the most probable Cause of drying up mighty Waters. This
Tower is thought to have beenbuilt inPyramidal form, according to theScheme
which we have of it in the frontispiece of Verstegan. And this form was not
improper (though much unlike the figure of its Globe) because it expressed its
fiery nature; the fire ascending in a conical shape. The Ancients (says
Porphyry Porphyr. ap. Eusebius. de prap. Evang. l. 3. c. 7. p. 98.
cited by Eusebius) did set forth the nature of Fire by Pyramids and Obelisks;
and dedicated Statues of diverse figures to the Olympic gods, as a Cone to the
Sun, and a Cylinder to the Earth. But all will not allow this kind of reasoning
to have place here; such Philosophical considerations being thought by them
matters much later than the times of Babel. But for the building of Towers or
Pyramids as Altaria, or high Altars, to the Sun and other heavenly bodies, the
practice is ancient, and very general. The Sun was not, merely, a god of the
Hills; yet the Heathen thought it suitable to his advanced station, to ascend
them, and to worship him upon ascents, either natural, or, as was necessary in
such flat Countries, artificial; that they might come as nigh as they could to
the Deity they worshipped. Accordingly Abenephius the Arabian, in Kircher
Kircher in Oedip. Synt. 4. c. 12. p. 310.
, testifies that the Pyramids of Egypt were called, by their Priests, the
Altars of the Gods, and that they wrote on them Theological Mysteries. The same
Kircher notes, Kircher ibidem. See als^ p. 308, 309.
that the Coptites called them the Pillars and Altars of Deities: That Bama is
said, by Vatallus, to signify properly a very high place for sacrifice; that
such a one is mentioned by Virgil, as sacred to Juno: And that Lucan Votaque
Pyramidum celsas solvuntur ad aras.
speaks of Pyramids, as the Egyptian Priests and Coptites had done. The
Pyramids of Egypt were raised upon certain square Platforms set one upon the
other, and gradually lessening until they ended in one least and blunt square
of Stone. Monsieur Vattier, the Arabic Professor of the French King, believed
those blunt-tops to have been as Pedestals for some Colosses or Obelisks. They
might be sometimes put to that use, though not at first designed for it. For
Caligula was pleased to set his Head on the shoulders of the Statues of the
Grecian gods; yet those Statues were not made to serve as such Supporters. That
Learned Professor might, possibly, have made a truer conjecture from a short
passage in the Arabian Murtadi, whose Book he translated. For Murtadi Murtadi
of the Prodig. of Egypt acc. to the Arabians. p. 16.
speaks of the Maritine Pyramid, as of a Temple of the Stars, on which were
placed the figures of Sun and Moon. Such a Tower was that (as I suppose) which
the Tausi of China built, of a sudden, in the Piazza of Pekin Alvarez Simedo in
Hist. Chin. part. 1. c. 18. p. 87.
. They built it in Pyramidal form, with Tables upon Tables, till it ended in
one supreme Table: And on that they prayed for Rain, which the Sun, the
Original Jupiter Pluvins, does as a natural cause, both send and remove. The
Corinthian Tower once belonged to Sol See Laurenb. Corinth. and Sicyon. p. 23.
: And it is very probable, that the Sun was of old worshipped on a very high
Mountain in Crete: The Hill, in the time of Peter Martyr of Angleria Pet. Mart.
Legate. Babyl. l. 2. p. 80.
, was called by the name of the Hill of Jove, though the Cretians were then
great strangers to their ancient Demonology. A late Traveller Gage in his new
Survey of the West Indies. c. 12. p. 113, 114.
has informed us of a Pyramidal Tower in Mexico, on the top of which the
Heathen Priests worshipped toward the Sun, an American Deity. I should have
thought that he had meant the same with Cortesius See Kircher's Oedip. Synt. 5.
c. 5. p. 421, 422.
, and that which he called the Fane of the Id^ Horcolivo's. But they differ
much in their measu^: And the ascent of the former is said to be by 114 steps;
the latter by no less than an Hundred and thirty. Among the Apalachites of
Florida Hist. of the Carib. Isl. b. 2. c. 8. p. 236, 237, etc. See Kirch. Oed.
Tom. 3. p: 27. c. 3. of Mount Pagoda;
, the Priests of the Sun, called by the remarkable name of Jaovas, worshipped
their Idol on the top of a very high, round, steep and rocky Hill; a full
league in its winding Ascent. The builders of the Hill or Tower of Babel,
surely, designed that much higher yet; so high that it might hide its head in
the Clouds, and would, it may be, have put it, had it been finished, to the
like Idolatrous use. It is reasonable for me, here to expect an objection from
the Scripture, which seems to impute the building of the Tower of Babel to
another end. Come, say the builders in the Eleventh of Genesis Genesis 11. 4.
, let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the
earth. To this objection two things may be replied; First, the end expressed is
not exclusive of that which I supposed; and it is not a wonder, if vain men to
encourage one another, how many ends soever they had, did propound that of
their pomp and glory. Secondly, these builders designed a City, and not only a
Tower which was but the Appendix to it, though such a necessary one as an Altar
is to a Temple. And their design of getting them a Name, might rather refer to
the City, than distinctly to the Tower. They intended to build a place of fixed
Residence, which might be, as it were, the Head, and Center, and Metropolis of
all Towns, whenever their Families should so increase as to need further room
for habitation. They were resolved against the incommodities of a wandering
life, and they purposed to unite themselves into a more orderly body, and to
become a Corporation instead of a multitude. And this was the way to get them a
Name, to be the first City of the World, and to be owned as the Mother-Place of
all Nations.

But I am not so fond of this private fancy, as to contend further about the
Legitimacy of it. In this I am more assured, that the Lights of Heaven, which
in the clear firmament of those Countries, appeared so often and in such
luster, (whilst the Sun by day shone gloriously; and the Moon and Stars showed
beautifully in the night, to them who lay either on the ground, or on flat
Roofs, and found no evil influence from them); and which obtained afterward
the name of (...) from their continual motion, were the first Idols of the
World. Amongst these, the Sun excelling, he was made the principal Idol, and
was nowhere more in honor than at Babylon. Accordingly we read, so soon, of
Bell, [the Babylonian] and Baal [the Phenician and Hebrew Name], in the
Theology of the Gentiles, This Idol was originally, and principally, the Sun;
though great men likewise, when deified after their deaths, obtained that Name,
as a Title of highest renown. And from the many names of Canonized Heroes,
given to the Sun, has risen a great part of that uncertainty and confusion,
with which the Reader is perplexed in the Labyrinths of Heathen Mythologers.

This, however, is generally confessed, that the Sun was the first Idol;
instead of which why Jarchi Jarchi ap. Dionys. Voss. in Maimon. de Idol. c. 1.
p. 4.
has put men or herbs into the first place, is hard to understand, till he
come, and be his own Elias. Maimonides begins with the Stars, and he has
ground, not only from natural Reason, but from the Authority also of Job and
Moses. Job Job 31. 26, 27, 28.
thus expresses the Idolatry of those ancient times in which he lived. If I
beheld the sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness. And my heart
has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand: [If, with devotion
of Soul, or profession of outward Ceremony, I have worshipped those heavenly
bodies which by their height, motion and luster, ravish the senses]: This also
were an iniquity to be punished by the judge; for I should have denied the God
that is above. Moses gives caution to the people of Israel Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
who were coming out of that Idolatrous Land of Egypt, and were journeying
toward Idolatrous Canaan [who were coming from temptation, and going likewise
toward it]; That when they lifted up their eyes to the Heavens, they should
arm their minds against that enchantment to which they were subject by the
sensible glory of the Sun, Moon and Stars. Rabbi Levi Ben Gerson Ap. Dionys.
Voss. in Maim. de Idol. p. 4.
glossing upon this place in Moses, Observes that the Sun is first named,
because his virtues are most manifest. The most ancient inhabitants of the
World (says Diodorus Siculus, meaning them that lived soon after the Flood,
and particularly the Diodor. Sicul. Bibl. Histor. l. 1. c. 11. p. 10.
Egyptians) contemplating the World above them, and being astonished with high
admiration at the nature of the Universe, believed that there were eternal
Gods; and that the two principal of them were the Sun and the Moon: Of which
they called the first Osiris, and the second Isis. And of late years, when the
Mariners Compass directed men to a new World in America [peopled, no doubt,
from several distant parts of the old;] many different Idols were found in
peculiar places; but for the Sun, it was a Deity both in Mexico and Peru.

Babylon was the Mother of this kind of Idolatry; not Egypt, as the Author de
Dea Syria Lucianus de dea Syria. p. 1057. (...), etc.
, and some in Diodorus Siculus Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. l. 1. c. 13. p. 12.
, who make Sol the first King of it, have erroneously conjectured. For Egypt
was not a Nation when the Sun began to be worshipped in Chaldea, where Ur, it
may be in aftertimes, with respect to the worship of that hot Luminary, was a
kind of lesser Babylon. Babylon infected Egypt, Assyria, Phaenicia; and they
spread the contagion throughout the World.

To the worship of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and other appearances in Heaven or
the Air, such as Comets and Meteors, (for the worship of the former, was apt to
draw on that of the latter) succeeded the false Religion toward Heroes,
confounded, as I guess, with original Demons or Angels. And this came to pass
in the days of Serug, according to Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Syncellus, The Sun
was no sooner called Bell, Baal, or El, that is, Lord or Governor, but the
souls of men of renown were also flattered with like Appellations, and became
properly the Idols of the people. Nimrod and Osiris were Baals; and the King of
Phaenicia was Bell; and they had Religious veneration paid to them. If other
Demons were worshipped (as no doubt they were, being permitted to appear to
them); it is a question whether the Gentiles did not, by them, misunderstand
the deified Souls of some of their Ancestors, distinctly, or confusedly
remembered; rather than natural Genii, or Angels: For such Beings owed much of
their manifestation, as such, to the Tradition conveyed in the Loyn of Abraham
and Moses.

The worship of Demons was followed by that of Pillars or Artless Monuments of
remembrance See Mr. Selden's Prolegom. to Synt. de Diis Syris. p. 39.
. Such a Monument was that Pillar anointed by Jacob. It was no Idol in the
quality in which he made it, but a Record of the Divine presence: But it is
commonly thought that others did take from it a pattern of their follies.
Statues or Images were of a like ancient date, as is plain from the History of
the Teraphim, though Artists were then rare: The infancy of this new World
being, also, the infancy both of Mechanical and Liberal Arts. Idolaters
likewise chose for their Deities, living Statues, such as the Bull in Egypt for
the heavenly Taurus, according to Lucian Lucian. de Astrologia. p. 540. D.
, or rather for the Deity of the Sun, or of an Hero, according to truth.
Pausanias, in his Survey of Greece, finds Stones sharpened at the top, to
have been the earliest Symbols of their Gods. [They were, it may be, Cones
relating to the Sun, the parent of fire, which, as was before noted, ascends
a Pyramid,] and was thought to be an element of Triangular figure by the
ancient Philosophers of Greece Plato ap. Laert. p. 228. l. 3, (...), etc.
.] Scaliger, in that learned Appendix of his to his Book of the Emendation of
the accounts of time, does mention Rude Stones, as the original Statues in
Phenicia. What the first Symbols amongst the Romans were, is not distinctly
understood. One would guess by Numa's Temple, they were Symbols of the
Universe. But for particular Images, we have it upon the good authority of a
most learned Roman Varro ap. S. August. de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 31. p. 272.
, That an Hundred and Seventy years were passed ere they came in amongst them.
Under Christianity; the vanity and veneration of Images succeeded the Symbol of
the Cross. At this day the Barbarians on the Coasts of Africa reverence Stones,
like our greater Landmarks, as Fetiches or Divine Statues Villault's Rel. of a
Voyage to Guinee. p. 174.
; believing them to be as ancient as the World it self.

It appears by this short account of the Original of Idols, that they may
plead antiquity: But still their age is nothing, if we compare it to his who is
God everlasting.

CHAP. V. Of those who are charged with Idolatry; and of the conformity or
inconformity of their worship to the Nature of Idolatry. Of Gentiles, Jews,
Mahometans, Christians. Amongst them who have professed Christianity, of the
Gnostics, Manichees, Arrians, Socinians, Roman Catholics, the real Catholics
of the Communion of the Church of England. And first of the Idolatry charged on
the Gentiles.
PART 1. How far the Gentiles were Ignorant of one Supreme God.
I Have insisted hitherto, on the Nature, Occasions, and Commencement of
Idolatry. The next consideration shall extend to the persons charged with it,
and in the first place, to them who have first and most generally transgressed;
that is to say, the Gentiles.

Concerning their worship, it is here proper for me to attempt the resolution
of three Questions.

First, Whether the Gentiles acknowledged one Supreme God.

Secondly, Whether they made Religious Application to him.

Thirdly, Whether upon the concession of such acknowledgment and Application,
they may be, and really are chargeable with Idolatry.

First, then, I enquire how far the Gentiles owned one supreme God. This
enquiry is not capable of any nice and accurate resolution. For there is no one
Systeme of the Gentile Theology; as there is of Judaism, Mahometanism, and the
Christian Religion. Diverse persons, in diverse places, had diverse apprehensions
concerning a Deity; and diverse Rites of worship. And those distinct Rites, by
the commerce of Nations, were often so mixed together, that they made a new
kind of Religion.

It is not unlikely, that the dregs of the people among the Gentiles, whom God
had given up to brutishness of mind, did rise little higher than Objects of
sense. They worshipped many of them together; each as supreme in its kind, or
no otherwise unequal than the Sun and the Moon, or the other celestial bodies,
by the adoration of which, the ancient Idolaters, as Job Job 31. 28.
intimates, denied [or excluded] the God that is above. Porphyry himself, one
of the most plausible Apologists for the Religion of the Gentiles, does own in
some, the most gross and blockish Idolizing of mean Objects. He tells us
Porphyr. ap Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. l. 3. c. 7. p. 98.
that it is not a matter at which we should be amazed, if most ignorant men
esteemed wood and stones Divine Statues, seeing they who are unlearned, look
upon Monuments which have inscriptions on them, as ordinary Stones; and esteem
valuable Tables as pieces of common wood; and regard Books no otherwise than as
so many bundles of Paper. Sensible objects arrested the stupid and unactive
minds of the vulgar, who (like those indevout Mandeslo in his Trav. p. 154.
They have no knowledge of the worlds creation, etc.
Idolaters of Japan) reasoned no further concerning the original, or Government
of the World. For few Heads are exercised by Philosophy; and we meet not with
one Peasant of a Thousand among our selves, who asks how the Sun enlightens
this Globe, though he believes the body of it no bigger than his Bushel. Such
Heads are inclined to turn the Truth of God into a Lie; to exchange the
Sovereign Deity for that which is esteemed a God, but is not; and to multiply
the kinds of it, according to the variety of considerable effects and
appearances whose Causes are only known to the Secretaries of Nature.

It is more probable still, that many Gentiles reached no higher in their
devotion than to Demons. Saint Paul taxes them 1 Cor. 10. 20.
with offering to Devils and not to God. The same Apostle informed the
Lycaonians Acts 14. 15.
, that the design of his Preaching, was the converting of men from vanities
[that is, from their many Idols which were not what they were judged to be:
which being no Deities, were in that respect nothing, and vanity] unto one God,
the true and living God; from whom therefore, these many Idols had withdrawn
many of the Heathen. The Inferior objects had thrust the Superior out of
possession, as in the Case of that woman under the Papacy, who is said to have
forsaken God for the Virgin; and the Virgin in Heaven, for that Lady (as she
called her) which she saw before her eyes in the Church D. M. Antid. ag. Idol.
and Reply. p. 258. See Spal. de Rep. ^ccl. l. 7. c. 12. p. 287.
. Diverse Idols (I say) might crowd the Sovereign God out of their minds,
Jehovah might be banished whilst their imaginations were filled with many
hundreds of Jupiters; with no fewer than Thirty thousand in the account of
Hesiod, if he swells not the reckoning with Names, and Sir-names, instead of
distinct Gods.

Some of the Gentiles who knew God [that is, had means by the things that are
seen Rom; 1. 20, 21.
of ascending to the knowledge of the invisible Creator] did notwithstanding not
truly know him; nor reach him by that wisdom or vain sort of Philosophy 1 Cor.
1. 21. Psalm. 79. 6. Jer. 10. 25. 1 These. 4. 5.
which did not edify them, though it puffed them up.

PART 2. Of their worship of Universal Nature, etc. as God.
THis is the common oppinion, concerning many of the Gentiles; but there is not
sufficient reason to believe the same thing concerning them all. For it is
evident from the History of ancient and modern Idolatry, and from the Writings
of some of the Gentiles; that the acknowledgment of one supreme Deity was not
wholly banished from all parts of the Pagan World. But herein, likewise, some
of them greatly erred.

For, first, There were those amongst them who acknowledged Universal Nature,
as that one supreme Deity. This Deity the Egyptians veiled, sometimes under the
names of Minerva and Isis, before whose Temple Sai, as Plutarch witnesses,
this Inscription was to be read: I am all that which was, and is, and will be
hereafter. And in her Image were placed the emblems of all the kinds of things
with which Nature is furnished See the Statue of Ifis in Kirch. Oedip. Synt. 3.
c. 4. p. 189.
. Such a Deity the Arcadians worshipped under the proper Title of Pan, who as
Pornutus contendeth Pornutus de Not. Deor. c. (...), p. 69. -- (...), etc.
, is the same with the Universe. The same Pornutus proceeds, in showing, that
his lower part was shaggy, and after the fashion of a Goat; and that by it, was
meant the asperity of the Earth. Bardesanes Syrus Bardes. Sir. ap. Porphyr.
Fragm. at Styge, p. 283, 284.
describes at large the Statue of the Universe, by which the Brachmans
worshipped Nature. It was an Image of Ten or Twelve Cubits in height: It had
its hands extended in the form of a Cross. It had a face Masculine on the one
side, and Feminine on the other. It had the Sun on one of its breasts, and on
the other the Moon: And on the Arms were to be seen a very great number of
Angels, together with the Heavens, Mountains, Seas, Rivers, the Ocean, Plants
and Animals; and such other parts in Nature as make up the Universe. Yet I
cannot say that this was the Statue of their supreme Deity: For they tell us,
concerning it, that this was the Image which God set before his Son when he
made the World, as a pattern by which he should form his Work. But I may say it
more truly, of some worshippers of Isis, that they supposed her supreme, and
did adore her, not, with others, as the inferior Earth, but in the quality (as
I just now noted) of universal Nature. So Pignorius has taught us Pignor. de
Mensa Isiaca. p. 2, 3.
, and before him, Servius and Macrobius. Hence was it that the Infcription on
an Ancient Marble at Capua, owneth Isis as all things T^. Tibi una. Quae es.
omnia. dea. Isis. Arrius Babi^us V. C;
. A like opinion may be, with ground, entertained concerning Vesta, and the
(...), Fire, or Sun, in the midst of her Temple; as Plutarch in Numa has
suggested. Wherefore no Image was consecrated to her besides that of her
Temple, which by its roundness, denoted the World, and by its sempiternal fire,
the Sun in it. That fire was renewed, each year, on the first of March Macrob.
Saturn. l. 1. c. 12. p. 242.
, in allusion, sure, to the vigor of that Planet which then begins, in
especial manner, to comfort those parts of the Earth. Others again, amongst the
Gentiles, adored the Sun, as the one Sovereign Deity. Such were they in Julius
Firmicus, who expressed their devotion in this form. O Sol! Thou best and
greatest of things! Thou mind of the Universe* Thou Guide and Prince of all
Sol. Opt. Max. -- Men's mundi. Dux omnium Princepsq^.
. A like Egyptian form, translated out of that language, by Euphantus, is
remembered by Porphyrie; and thus it begins Porphyr. de Abstinen. l. 4. p.
157. (...), etc.
. O Sun thou Lord of all, and ye the rest of the Gods! There Euphantus (as may
be probably imagined) found Baal, or some such word, in the original Egyptian;
and gave us instead of it, the Greek (...). Such honor of the Sun we find on
the Ancient Egyptian Obelisk interpreted by Hermapion See Marsh. Cron. Can. p.
433, 434.
, and restored to its ancient beauty, by Sixtus Quintus. On it the Sun is set
forth as God; as the Sovereign disposer of the World which, it seems, he
committed to the Government of King Ramestes.

Others there were who mistook for the one supreme God, the Soul of the World,
and, it may be, thought the Sun the Head in that great animated Body, or the
place of that Souls principal residence. On this fashion, Osiris, in Macrobius
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 20. p. 299. (...), etc.
, describes his Godhead. The Heavenly world is my head; my belly the Sea; my
feet the Earth: In Heaven are my Ears, and for my allseeing Eye, it is the
glorious Lamp of the Sun. Pornutus likewise, reciting the Dogmata of the
Heathen Theology, discourses Pornut. de Not. deor. p. 4. de Jove.
to this effect. As we [men] are governed by a Soul, so the world has its Soul
also, by which it is kept in frame: And this soul of the World is called
Jupiter. Aristotle himself does somewhere style God, (...), a mighty Animal: So
apt are the highest Aspirers in Philosophy to fall, sometimes into wild and
desperate errors. Amongst the Romans who excelled Varro in knowledge? And yet S.
Austin says of him, that he believed no higher God than the Soul of the World
S. Aug. de Ci^. Dei. l. 4, c. 31. p. 272, 273.
, but that by disgusting Images, as debasers of Religion, he approached nigh to
the true God. Others, both in Egypt and Persia, worshipped for the true God, a
part only of his Idea; whilst they removed from it, the justice and mercy of
sending, preventing, or taking away, any temporal evils in which they thought
the supreme Deity not concerned; whilst they believed certain Demons to be the
chastizers of those who had not purged themselves sufficiently from matter See
Porphyr. de Abstin.
.

PART 3. How far the Gentiles owned one true God.
BUT it is not fair to fight always on the blindside of Nature. I come
therefore in the next place, to acknowledge, that some Gentiles used a Diviner
Reason than others, and owned one supreme God, the King of the World, and a
Being distinct from the Sun, or the Universe, or the Soul of it.

This appears from the Confession of many Christians; and from the words of
the Gentiles themselves.

First, Diverse of the Fathers, though they show the generality of their gods to
have been but creatures, yet they confess they had amongst them, some
apprehension of one supreme, eternal Deity. S. Chrysostom, in a second
Discourse in his sixth Tome concerning the Trinity S. Chrysostom. op, vol. 6. de
Trin. p. 189. B. C.
, does charge upon the Arians and Macedonians the crime of renewing Gentilism,
whilst they professed one great God, and another Deity which was less, and
created. For it is Gentilism (said that Father) which teaches men to worship a
creature, and to set up one Great[or greatest] God, and others of inferior
order. In this Discourse St. Chrysostom acknowledges that the Gentiles adored
the one Sovereign God (for him the Arians believed in, and were in that point
good Theists, though no Orthodox Christians), notwithstanding he accuses them
of Subordinate Polytheism. S. Cyril of Alexandria speaks the same thing, and in
more plain and direct words Cyr. Alex. contra Julian. l. 1. p. 23. A.
. It is manifest (said he) that they who Phylosophized after the Greecian
manner, believed and professed one God, the builder of all things, and by
nature superior to all other Deities.

And (to come to the second way of proof above mentioned) S. Cyril is very
copious in the authorities which he produces out of the Heathen Writers, in
order to the strengthening of his Assertion, that they believed in one infinite
God. He introduces Orpheus Cyr. ibid. p 26. (...) etc.
speaking as Divinely as David himself. God is one, he is of himself, of him
are all things born, and he rules over them all. He again, after he had cited
many Philosophers, brings in the Poet Sophocles, as one that professed the
true God; and the words which he there calls to mind, are worth the
Transcribing Cyr. Ib. p. 32. -- (...), etc. --
. Of a truth, There is one God, who made the Heavens, and the spacious Earth,
and the goodly swelling of the Sea, and the force of the Wind. But many of us
mortals, erring in our hearts, have erected Images of gods made of Wood, or
Stone, or Gold, or Ivory, as supports of our grief: And to these we have
offered sacrifices and vain Panegyricks; conceiting in that manner that we
exercised Piety. He forbeareth not, after this, to cite Orpheus again Cyr. Ib.
p. 33. (...), etc.
, and the Verses have their weight, and contain this sense in them. I adjure
thee, O Heaven! Thou wise work of the great God! I adjure thee thou voice of
the Father, which he first uttered, when he founded the whole World by his
Counsels. The Father calls to mind, likewise, many sayings of Porphyry, and of
the Author falsely called Trismegist. But they were too well acquainted with
Christianity, to have Authority in this Argument of the one God of the
Gentiles. Such a Gentile [one who dreamt not of any Gospel] was Anaxagoras, who
(as Plutarch testifies) did set a pure and sincere mind over all things,
instead of fate and fortune. In Laertius, we may hear him speaking in his own
words; and they admit of this interpretation (...).
. All things were together [or in a Chaos]: Then came the Mind and disposed
them into order. But on this declaration of Anaxagoras I will not depend;
because his (...) or mind, might be such as the Platonic (...) or Soul of the
World. I like better the words of Architas the Pythagorean Arch. Pytbag, ap.
Stobaeum, in Sermon. 1. p. 15. (...) etc.
, who speaks of God in the singular, and says he is supreme, and governs the
World. But nothing is more close to the purpose than that which has so often
been said by Plato. It is his opinion recited in Timaeus Locrus Tim. Locr. de
An. Mundi. Inter op. Plat. v. 3. p. 96 -- (...), etc.
, That God is the Principal Author and Parent of all things. And this he adds,
after an enumeration of the several Beings of which the Universe consists. He
affirms in his Politicus, "That God Plat. Polit. Vol. 2. p. 269. C. E. and p.
270. A.
made the great Animal of the World, and that he directs all the motions of
it: (...), and that there are not two Gods governing the World with differing
Counsels. In his Sophista Plat. in Soph. vol. 1. p. 265. C.
he determines that God was the maker of things, which were not [that is, as
such] before he framed them. In his Timaeus Plato in Timae^. vol. 3. p. 28.
he calls God (...), the Maker and Father of every being: Adding, that it is
difficult to find out this Father of the Universe; and that when he is found
out, it is not fit to declare him to the vulgar. He was, it seems, a Jehovah
not ordinarily to be named. They who have read his works with care, know what
distinction he makes betwixt Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 2. p. 68. Plato ille divinus
multa de Deo digna, nec communia sentiens multitudini, -- Deos dicit --
corruptibiles esse natura, sed voluntate Dei -- vinctione in perpetua contineri.
God and the gods: And how he extolleth the Divine goodness, and makes it the
very Essence of the supreme God. It is, indeed, to be acknowledged, that he set
up other gods, in his Scheme of the Universe: Nay, that he owned a second, or
third (...), or Artist of that great and noble frame of the visible World. But
both he and his Disciples, what other Principle soever they taught or believed,
They still maintained it to be distinct from the [(...)] the one supreme
uncompounded Good. Plato, in his Timaeus Plato ibid. p. 34. B. -- (...).
, teaches expressly that the Soul of the World, which he calls a blessed God,
was made by the God who is eternal. Timaeus Locrus Tim. Locr. de An: Mun^i,
inter Opufc. Graec. p. 6.
supposes the World to be framed by the supreme God, and the Soul to be put
into the middle of it by him that framed it: As if God made the World after the
manner in which he made Adam. And Sallustius the Platonist, in his Book of God
and the World Sallust. de Diis and mundo, c. 5. (...), etc. (...), etc.
, treats professedly of the first Cause; concludes a necessity of its
Oneness; and celebrateth its virtue as so eminent, that it can scarce be
expressed by any words. The truth is, those Gentiles who, with Sallust, admired
God as the first and incomprehensible Cause; and with Mercurius in Stobaeus
Stobae. Sermon. 78. de Diis. p. 466. (...).
, declared him to be a Being abstruse to the Mind, and impossible to the
Tongue; such Gentiles, I say, would have erred less, had they stopped there,
and not gone about to explane the mode of his Essence and Operation, whereby
they have fallen into many false Idea's, and particularly into that of the Soul
of the World. But makers of Hypotheses, especially in Subjects of such extent,
do commonly lose themselves in their own Labyrinths. That Hypothesis of the
Soul of the World is frequent, at this day, amongst the Philosophers of India:
And yet that Sect of the Benians which is called Samarath Mandesto's Travels
into the Indies. l. 1. p. 55.
, maintains the notion of a superior God. They call him Permiseer, and
believe Him to be the first Cause which created the World, and which governs
and preserves the Universe, with a sovereign and unchangeable Power. Change
here but names, and the matter may be applied to the Philosophy of Plato, who
believed in one God, though he idolized his (...), or Universal Soul, and too
many other Deities of inferior rank.

This, in brief, was the state of the Greeks, in relation to the knowledge of
God. Like to it was that of the Romans; and of them also, whence the Greeks and
Romans borrowed some valuable notions, together with much dross, that is, the
Egyptians. Also of the Arabians. See Abul Farajius and Sharestanius in not.
Pocock. p. 143. and of the Gaurs or ancient Persians, see the Trav. of
Tavernier. l. 4. c. 8. p. 167.
And they doubtless were beholding to Abraham, to Joseph, to Moses, to the
Jews, who both before and after the Captivity came amongst them. By such means,
and by the study of Nature, the (...) and Jove of the Greeks and Romans came
nigh, as well in sense, as in similitude of Letters, to the Mosaic Jehovah.
Numa Pompilius, whose Religion inclined the people to choose him King after the
death of Romulus, to the end that the Empire which was obtained by force, might
be governed by Piety and Justice L. Ann. Florus. l. 1. c. 2. p. 4, 5. And Dion.
Halicarn. l. 2, Sect. 78. p. 186, 187, 188, etc.
, as the Historian tells us, it was in his Reign; Numa, I say, had studied in
Egypt, and he brought some of its Religion into Italy some Ages before
Pythagoras Dion. Hal. ibid. p. 183.
set foot there. It was not pure Religion; for he introduced the worship of the
immortal Gods, Flor. ibid. Ille sacra, and ceremonias, omnemque cultum deorum
immortalium docuit: Ille Pontifices, Augures, etc.
and the superstition of Augury. He, in the worship of Vesta, offered to them
Universal Nature as the great Deity; but cannot be thought to have been
ignorant himself of a Deity greater still, having learned the same Cabala with
Pythagoras, though according to the reservedness See Dion. Halicarn. l. 2. p.
191, 192. of the unknown mist. of Numa.
which he saw practiced by the Egyptian Priests, he did not divulge the mystery
to the multitude. And manifest it is, that the Religion of the Romans, was in
less measure adulterated in the age from Numa to Tarquinius Priscus, than after
those times. For he corrupted the Religion of Numa with the vanity of the
Greeks and Ethruscans: And he erected Images which Numa would not admit of. For
Numa believed (says Dionysius Halicarnassaeus) that God could not be
represented See Lud. Viv. in S. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 31. p. 273.
by any Figure. And Tertullian Tertul. Apolo. get. Sect. 25. p. 25. -- nidor
exilis, and Deus ipse nusquam.
speaking of the debasement of Religion under Tarquinius Priscus, shows Numa
to have been more chaste in his Rites, and to have believed in a God to whom
Ubiquity belonged. Plutarch also reports it concerning that wise Prince, that
he forbade the People to think that God had the form of Man or Beast. And the
notion of Numa, though much stifled, was not quite destroyed by the multitude
of Gods and Statues. There were those, in the days of Cicero Cicero de not.
Deor. l. 1. Op. p. 1113. -- fed nos deum, nisi sempiternum, Iutelligere qui
possumus?
, who recounting many Deities held by the Philosophy of Anaximander, professed
themselves unable to understand any other than one eternal God.

This God was sometimes owned under the name of Jupiter, though that name was
ambiguously applicable, to Him, to the Sun, to many Demons or Heroes. We may
infer the eminency of the Deity, called by that name, from the Attributes given
to him by sober and Philosophical men, when they argue about his Nature. Such a
one was Diotogenes the Pythagorean Ap. Stobae. Sermon. 46. de Regno. p. 330, 331,
332.
, who speaks of God in the singular number; says of him, that he is a King
whose City is the World; calls him by the name of Jupiter; and affirms that
Jupiter is the supreme of all Powers, a God of Excellence, Goodness, Power,
Justice; dispensing benefits to the World, and in that sense, the Father of
Gods and Men.

It is true that the Fathers, and many others do esteem generally, of the
Grecian and Roman Jupiter as of an Arch-Devil, and a Topical-god. And they
deride his worship, as the adoration of a man, who was born and buried in
Crete; at least born somewhere on earth, as Callimachus himself confesses
Callim. ap. Orig. Cont. Cells. l. 3. p. 137. -- (...). -- See Tertul. Apol.
Sect. 25. p. 25. sed non ^tatim and Jupiter Cretam suam, etc.
, though he denies the honor to the Cretians; and is confident that, though he
was born, he never dyed. Jupiter, says Arnobius Arnob. l. 1. p. 19.
, has Father, and Mother, how can he then be a God? Tertullian also had no
other thoughts of Jupiter than of an Idol: For thus he discourses Tertul. de
Idol. Sect. 21. p. 98.
. I know one (whom God forgive) who when another, in the quarrel managed
betwixt them, used this imprecation, let Jupiter be angry with you, answered
again; nay, let him be avenged on you. What could have an Heathen man done
more, who believed Jupiter to be a God? The Senate and People of Rome do in a
late Inscription in the Capitol, give notice Chytr. Mon. Roman. A. 1568. p. 2.
, that the place was once dedicated unto Jove; but that they had made it sacred
to the True God, to Jesus Christ the Author of all good things. And this
opinion might well be entertained concerning Jupiter, for many Reasons: First,
because the multitude, both in Greece, and Italy, did worship him in the
quality of a Demon. The Poets of Greece set him forth as a Demon, though the
Superior of them; and (as we read in the first Iliad of Homer) as a Power not
perfectly Omnipotent, but subject to be bound by the rest of the Gods. And the
Law of the Twelve Tables, before-cited, represents him only as the President
of the College of the sempiternal Demons, or Dii Consentes See the Inser. ap.
Saubert. de Sacrific. c. 5. p. 101. I. O. M. caeterisque Dis consentib.
. Nay, of Jove Plato himself says Plato in Euthy. p. 5. Vol. 1. -- (...), etc.
, that men esteemed him the best and most just of the Gods, and one who held
his father in Chains for his unnatural cruelty to his Children. Secondly,
Because the worship of Jupiter, in how high a notion soever he was sometimes
taken, was not looked upon only by it felf, but as the principal worship in the
Religion of the Gentiles, giving denomination to the other parts of it. For the
worship of Jupiter was, in effect, an acknowledgment of the whole Gentilism of
Rome Pagan: And he that had adored Jupiter, would by that have been judged, to
have been likewise a devout Servant of Juno and Venus, and the rest of that
Society of Grecian and Roman Idols. However, under this name, some of the wise
Gentiles did mean the supreme Deity, distinct from their College of Demons: and
I suppose Marcus Antoninus, that Philosophical Prince, to have been one of
them. He says, indeed, concerning the thundering Legion, That they prayed to a
God which himself knew not Marc. Anton. ap. Just. Mart. In sine Apol. 2. p.
102. -- (...). --
: Not that he owned not one supreme God, but that he understood him not in the
subsistences of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in which quality the Christians
applied themselves to him. Thirdly, Jupiter, when thought of under the notion
of one highest God, whatsoever he was in speculation, he was actually but an
evil Demon. For the Persons and things which he countenanced could never be
approved of by the true and righteous God.

Let it then be granted (for why should men oppose the evidence of plain
words?) that some Gentiles entertained a notion of that God who is one and
supreme.

PART 4. What Applications they made to one God.
THis being confessed, There is a Second inquiry to be made, whether such
Gentiles worshipped him, or made Religious Application to him? And it is
evident they did so, both by Prayers, Sacrifices, and Images.

Prayer to him was consequent to their Apprehensions of him as the
Allsufficient and bountiful Governor of Mankind. And sometimes they prayed to
him in the very form of [(...), or] Lord have mercy, which the Ancient
Christians used. Ennius, in Cicero, Cic. de not. deor. l. 2. p. 1129, Adspice
boc sublime Candens, Quem invocant omnes Jovem.
declares that Jove was invoked by All. He calls him [Sublime Candens] not
meaning the Sun, but the Power that causes Lightning, and the Jove who, in
Euripides (there also cited by Tully), is owned as [Summus divns] the supreme
God. Simplicius, in the conclusion of his Notes on Epictetus Simplic. in Epict.
Enchir. p. 331. (...), etc.
, uses this excellent form: I address my self humbly to thee, O Lord, thou
Father and guide of our Reason, that we may be mindful of that nobility with
which thou have adorned us: -- That we may be purged from the contagion of the
body, and brutish affections; governing them as becomes us, and using them as
Instruments. -- If Simplicius be said to learn this under Christianity, that
cannot be objected against Socrates and Plato. Socrates prays Socr. ap.
Platon. Phaedr. in fine. p. 279. (...) etc.




d Plat. Alcib. 2. p. 138. (...), etc.
, not only to the gods, but to the supreme God, under the Title of Pan, in the
first place. And he prays that he may be beautiful within; and that he may
esteem the wiseman only to be the man truly wealthy: referring to the things
before discoursed of in the Phaedrus of Plato. The same Plato begins his second
Dialogue called Alcibiades (e) by this question (put to that Philosopher, by
Socrates, who apprehended him to be in a deep contemplation); Whether he were
going about to call on God? And thence occasion is taken of saying many wise
things, on that Subject, in the sequel of that Dialogue. And about the middle
of that Discourse, he repeateth a very prudent form of Prayer used by a Poet p.
143. (...), etc.
, who beseeches his God to give him the things which were good for him, though
he should happen not to pray for them; and to keep from him such things as were
hurtful, though through error he should make supplication for them. Again, in
Timaeus, Plato observes Plato in Timmaeo. Vol. 3. p. 27.
that those who have any share of understanding, when they undertake any thing,
be it of smaller or of greater concernment, do always invoke God. To such
Invocation he exhorts Plato de Legibus. l. 4. vol. 2. p. 712. (...).
at the constitution of any City or civil Body. And he urges Prayer in so many
places, that I have not room for the repetition of them, in that compass to
which I have designed to confine my Discourse.

For Sacrifice, That also the Gentiles offered to God. Plato joyneth both
together in the conclusion of his Theages. There Plato in The^g. Vol. 1. p. 131.
Theages exhorts to an appeasing of the Numen worshipped by Socrates, by
Prayer and Sacrifice; and Demodocus and Socrates are consenting to it. And
Porphyry supposes some Gentiles to have offered Sacrifice to the supreme God,
whilst he taxes them for offering to him Animals, as unmeet oblations, or
indeed, any thing besides a pure Mind. Martinius in the Fourth Book of his
History of China Mart. Hist. Sin. l. 4. p. 149.
, thinks that people to have worshipped the true supreme God under the name
of Xangti: And he further observes, that they offered Prayers and Sacrifices
to him, though they used no Images in his worship.

For Images, The Gentiles used them in the worship of the one God, and not only
whilst they Religiously observed their Demons. Origin supposes Statues of both
kinds in use amongst them, where he says Orig. contr. Ce^s. l. 7. p. 362.
, that Those Heathens expose themselves to the derision of all men of sound
mind, who, after their Philosophical disputations [(...)] of God or gods,
respect Statues, and either pray to them, or endeavor, by the contemplation of
them, as by conspicuous signs, to raise their minds [(...)] to the Intelligible
Deity. In the mean time (as he continues his Discourse) the meanest Christian
is effectually persuaded that all the World is the Temple of God: And he
prays to him, in all places, with closed eyes, but with the Lights of his
Mind erected toward Heaven. This had been no refutation of Celsus, if the
Gentiles had not worshipped the God that is every where, without Images, by
Prayer and a pure intention. Origin, in the same Book Orig. contr. Cells. l. 7.
p. 376.
, in answer to Celsus, who had denied Images to be worshipped as Gods, and
affirmed them to be Divine Statues only; replyeth in this manner. We cannot
think these Images to be so much as Divine Statues; seeing we circumscribe not
the incorporeal and invisible God, with any figure. He supposes the Heathen
had done so; else he had in vain contended against their Statues by such an
Argument, fetched from the spirituality and ubiquity, not of Demons, but of the
true and Sovereign God. To him it appears, that some Gentiles did apply
themselves in the three ways abovementioned, of Prayer, Sacrifice, and
Imageworship.

PART 5. Whether they worshipping one God, could be guilty of that sin.
NOW that being proved, a third Question comes to be resolved; Whether the
acknowledgment of one God by the Gentiles, and their Application to him, being
granted, they are yet liable to the charge of Idolatry?

In answer to this enquiry, I purpose to show, that they are still charged;
that they might be guilty notwithstanding that concession of owning one God;
and that in diverse respects, that guilt was actually contracted by them. They
are charged with this high offense, by Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Minucius Faelix, Origin against Celsus, S. Cyprian de vanitate Idolorum,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Julius Firmicus Maternus, and a long order of others: And
to cite them in all the places which are pertinent to this matter, were to
repeat a great part of their works. The matter is so notorious, that I will
illustrate it only by a single instance. Let that instance be made in Julian
the Apostate [if he were ever a Christian, in whom the tares of Gentilism were
sown so very early by Libanius; and appeared ripe so soon as ever the Glory of
the Empire shone upon him]: This man has been condemned by the common consent
of the Christian Church in being since his time, as a manifest and infamous
Idolater, and a very Bigot in Heathenism; and yet he acknowledged one God, and
him who is truly the Lord of Lords. He declared this to be the opinion of his
Sect Julian Apost. ap. S. Cyril. Alex. l. 4. ad Init. p. 115.
, That there was a common Parent and King of Men. He worshipped that Jupiter
Julian in Fragm. p. 534. Oper.
who is the giver of all kinds of good; who is Jul. ap. Cyr. Al. l. 10. cont.
Jul. p. 354.
the greatest and most powerful Being. He worshipped (though not without the
intermixture of a false Religion) the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He says
so much in Terms, in one place Ap. Cyr. Al. l. 10. p. 354. (...).
and upon his Oath. He says the same elsewhere Jul. in Frag. Epist. p. 541. op.
in effect, whilst he reports the pains he took (though perfectly in vain) to
raise the Temple of Jerusalem out of its ruins; and thereby, as he pretended,
to erect a Monument to him, to whom it was sacred. It is true, that S. Cyril
does bring his sincerity under question S. Cyr. l. 10. p. 355, 356.
, and believes that, in his heart, he placed the God of Abraham amongst his
Topical deities: Yet, for Jupiter Ithometes Id. l 4. contr. Jul. p. 128. (...).
worshipped by Julian, S. Cyril grants him to be esteemed the Prince of the
Gods. And why he should think that Julian believed not the God of Abraham to be
the true Jehovah, I cannot readily conjecture; seeing that Emperor had perufed
the Old Testament, which declares him to be the Creator and Governor of all
things, and not merely, as the Nations transplanted into Samaria, grossly
imagined, The God of the Land 2 Kings 17. 26, 27.
. If now Julian and some other Heathens entertained so worthy a notion of God,
they are, so far, acquitted of that sort of Idolatry which establishes the
Polytheism of some or many eoequal Gods; but still they might be, in other
regards, the worshippers of Idols.

That they might be so, appears from the definition of Idolatry, in which it
is showed that the giving away the honor of God to another Object is a degree
of that crime, though it be not his supreme honor: Though we do not take the
Crown of incommunicable honor from him, and, by our fancy, place it on a
creature. It appears again from the practice of the Jews, who are by God
himself accused of Idolatry, even when they in part owned and worshipped him,
and before they were wholly led into captivity, and mingled again among the
Heathen. They had not forgotten, perfectly, the God of Israel in whose Law they
read; though like Adulteresses, they shared their Love with Idols. Wherefore
God Almighty required Hosea, not (as I think) in a literal sense, but according
to the way of a Prophetical Scene, to take unto him an Adulteress Hosea 3. 1.
2, 3.
; thereby personating the state betwixt himself and the Children of Israel,
who, though they had not rejected him as their true and supreme Husband, yet
they had gone a whoring after the inventions of the Gentiles, and provoked God
to give them a Bill of Divorce.

Whilst I am here affirming, that a people who own one God, may yet commit
Idolatry, I mean not this merely of such who judge him to be, Nature, the Sun,
or the Soul of the World, all which are finite or imaginary Objects, and by
consequence, Idols, as often as they are adored in the place of God: But I
speak even of the Gentiles who owned one true incomprehensible Creator; who
with Callicratidas the Pythagorean Callicr. ap. Stob. Sermon. 83. p. 486. 20.
, acknowledged [(...)] one best Being, [(...)] and such as was the Beginning
and Cause of all things. Some of these did actually commit Idolatry, in their
worship of the Statues of God, of Demons, and of the Images of those
subordinate Deities.

PART 6. Of their Idolatry in worshipping the Statues of God.
FIrst, their Idolatry consisted in the worship of the Statues of God. This,
indeed, was not the highest degree of that false Religion, for they did not,
hereby, dethrone God, and give to the creature his most essential perfections;
but yet they gave away such honor as he had not bestowed who was the
proprietor of it. They did so, in the worship, both of the natural, and of the
artificial Statues of God. The Principal natural Statue was the Sun. For some
of the Philosophical Gentiles made not the Sun it self the ultimate Object of
their worship, but they adored God in it. Hence they gave to Vulcan [that is,
the Sun] the Name, sometimes of God, and sometimes of Fire, as Plutarch (c)
instructs us out of Archilochus. b Plutarch. de audiend. Poet. p. 23.
And Maximus Tyrius, being one of more refined Reason than the generality of
the Heathens, would not confess that the Sun and the Fire were any further
deified, than as they were Max. Tyr: Dissert. 38. utrum diis sint dicandae
statuae. p. 371.
(...), the Statues or Images of God. The same excellent Philosopher upbraideth
the Persians for neglecting the Statues of the fruitful Earth, and the glorious
Sun, and the great path of Commerce, the Sea; and choosing the devouring Fire as
their Statue and their God. In which words, he supposes the presence of a
Deity in the Fire, and the Fire to be only the Statue or Image of it, according
to the Persian Theology.

Now, in Two things, consisted the Idolatry of the Heathens, whilst they
worshipped the natural Statues of God.

First, They were Idolatrous in setting up those natural Statues, as the places
of Gods peculiar Residence. And this the Fathers objected to the Heathens;
showing them, that Christianity represented God, as one that filled the World,
and not as one that dwelt (like a Star) in some celestial Sphere; and taught
them in their Prayers to him, to exalt their thoughts above all material
Heavens: Or (as Origin Orig. contr. Cells. l. 7. p. 362. (...), etc.
is pleased to express it) above even supercoelestial Places. And for this they
had Reason: For the Gentiles, by worshipping creatures as Gods Statues, gave
Gods relative honor to them, whilst he owned them only as his workmanship, and
not as his especial Images or Temples. Thereby, likewise, they bred in their
minds a dishonorable Idea of God, as of one who, like a finite Being, dwelt in
certain places. This was not the notion of him amongst all, but the worship of
him by natural Statues made all of them prone to it. Plato himself was under
the Temptation. He was not come to any determinate belief concerning the Stars,
whether they were Gods, or only the Statues of them. But, upon supposition that
they were Statues (the part to which he is most inclined) he would have them
honored beyond all Statues on earth, as being made such by a Divine Power
Plato in Epinom. p. 983, 984.
.

Secondly, The Gentiles were guilty of Idolatrous Worship, in making some, at
least, of the natural Statues of God, voluntary and authoritative disposers of
good and evil, under God, in the World; though not as the supreme dispensers of
them. They believed the Stars to be animated [at least with an assistant form]
and as Maimonides reports of them Maimon. de Idol. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3.
, created by God for the Government of the World. And we receive it upon the
valuable Authority of Garcilasso de la Vega L. 2. c. 1:
that the Ynca's of Peru adored the Sun as the visible Deity, by which the
greater God, who was invisible, ruled this World.

A due confideration of this Fancy amongst the Gentiles, leads us to the true
Original of Astrology, and to a right account of Talismanick Statues. The
present Astrology pretends to be Natural and Philosophical, and to solve the
effects it foretells (if any it does, besides those of Light and Shadow, as
in Eclipses) by the mechanical influence of the Stars, which variously combine
their light and heat. But the Egyptian, Chaldean, and Grecian Astrology was, in
truth, an Astrological Magic, built upon the hypothesis of their Demons, and
the Heavens which they governed. And they did not think that the Stars wrought
a mighty effect, or impregnated a Talisman, by their proper virtue, but as they
were either Intelligences themselves, or divinely influenced and directed by
the Demons which resided in them, and governed part of this lower World. The
Chaldeans Diod. Sic. Bibl. Hift. l. 2. c. 30. p. 113.
assigned Twelve Gods as Governors of the year, and apportioned to each of
them one sign in the Zodiac. To these they added Thirty Auxiliary Gods in
Thirty Stars, of which Fifteen were to have inspection on things below the
earth; and Fifteen above it. And in the Calendar of Julius Caesar Ap.
Gassendum, in vol. 5. Op. l. 4. p. 560. and in Marm. Farnes. ap. Stew. Elect.
p. 120.
, each God had a Month under him, and in it, the several Constellations. Juno
governed January, Neptune February, Minerva March, Venus April, Apollo May,
Mercury June, Jupiter Quintilis or July, Ceres Sextilis or August, Vulcan
September, Mars October, Diana November, Vesta December. At this day the
Astrological Judgments refer to demonology. Thus Saturn the severe Demon, is
made to signify malicious persons; Mars the Bloody Demon, furious, proud,
valiant persons; and by their Influence to dispose to such Qualities. The
Horoscope or Ascendant is made the principal of all Angles, or if not that,
then the Culmen Coeli by Ptolomy; and this judgment at first came from the
worship of the Sun the principal Demon, and most reverenced in those Angles.

In this worship then, although subordinate, The Gentiles placed Gods Authority
where God himself had not done it; and their Hopes, and Fears, and Thanks,
respected certain Creatures, when they were due to God, dispensing good and
evil immediately by himself; or if by them, doing it by them as ministerial
Causes, not as sharers in his Government. But of this, more, when I come to
consider their worship of Demons; of which, the Stars themselves were one sort
to some of them, whilst they ascribed to them a high degree of perception and
voluntary Power. They thought of the Sun as of an Archangel; though the
Disciples of the Philolaick Systeme called it only the Organ of God Dorylaits,
ap. Censor. de die not. c. 13. p. 57.
, and the Divine Harp, by reason of the Harmony which its motion gave to the
rest of the celestial Bodies.

Again, they erred in their worship, about the artificial and instituted
Statues of God.

Some of these Statues were, possibly, at first, no more than monumental
Pillars, and Records of some extraordinary work of God, discerned to be the
effect of his finger, by proof of sufficient Reason: And so far the Gentiles
were commendable, as well as Jacob of the Line of Abraham. For it is the nature
of true and grateful devotion, to retain, and propagate the memory of Gods
Acts, which by the eminent Wisdom, Mercy, Power and Justice of them, are proper
for the exciting of admiration.

But I cannot go on in praising them, for the honor they gave to other kinds
of Statues, which their fancy erected to the supreme God.

Of these, some had less Art bestowed on them, being great pieces of Wood or
Stone, without any Imagery of Man or Beast, of Fish or Fowl, carved or painted
on them. Some regular figure they sometimes had, as that of an Egg which they
supposed in many things, and particularly in its figure, to resemble the World
(...). Porphyr. de Thebaidos Incolis. Coelum est Testa; item Vitellum, Terra;
inter illa duo humor quasi in sinum clusus aeri, in quo calor. Varro. See Voss.
de Theol. Gentil. l. 1. c. 5. p. 17.
. Such Statues they worshipped two ways, first, as the Symbols of Gods especial
presence: Secondly, as pledges of his favor to them, wheresoever he was, so
long as they held them in possession; and both ways they egregiously offended.
They offended by worshipping such Statues as the Symbols of Gods especial
presence. For thereby they ascribed the relative honor, due to Gods true
Shechinah, to an Object which was exalted to that Divine condition, not by his
approbation, but by their fancy. And if their fancy was moved to this false
estimation, by some amazing effects wrought before them, upon the performance
of their Religious Rites, they were Idolatrous in that case, by honoring the
power of Demons asGods Omnipotence. For God permitted evil Spirits to seduce
those Pagans, by strange and uncommon operations, wrought at their Statues, who
refused to live in the use of their Reason. Further, They transgressed in using
Statues as the pledges to assure them of Gods favor, so long as they remained
with them. Such were the Ancilia, and the Palladium introduced by Numa, amongst
the Romans. He did not celebrate them as Statues in which God dwelt, but as
secret pledges of Empire L. A. Flor. l. 1. c. 2. de Numa, P. p. 4. Ille
Ancilia, atque Palladium, secreta quaedam ImperiiPignora, etc.
. And this conceit, also, begat Idolatry amongst them; for they gave that
honorable trust due to God and his Shechinah, and the pledges of his favor,
to things devised by politic men, and such as God neither formed, nor sent,
nor appointed as Instruments of defense amongst any people.

Other Statues they used as Images and representations of the supreme God. This
practice Macrobius does not deny, but he denies it to be Ancient Macr. in some
Scipion. l. 1. c. 2. p. 9. nullum ejus [h. e. summi dei] simulachrum, quod cum
Dis aliis constitueretur, finxit Antiquitas.
. And it is plain, by his Context, that he refers to Plato, and to the
Platonic notions which exalted God above all the parts of Nature. And for
Plato, it was agreeable to his principles, to abstain from all representations
of God, whom he believed to be incomprehensible. Viretus says of him, Viret.
de Orig. vet. and novae Idol. l. 3. c. 9. p. 84.
that seeking after some matter fit for the Image of God, he could find none
proper for that Divine purpose. But he here commits a double mistake: For in
the place which he means, Plato speaks not of any matter for the Image of
God, but for the Statues of the Gods; and at last he pitcheth upon certain
materials for that use. The Philosopher Plato de Legibus. l. 12. p. 955, 956.
thought Gold and Silver unfit, because they were invidious things; and Brass
and Iron, because they were instruments of War; and Ivory, because it was the
Tooth of an Elephant, dead already, or obnoxious to death. But at last he
concludes (from what reason I know not), that an entire Tree or Stone might
make a Mercury, or an Image of a Demon. [For the Europeans were not so costly
and pompous in their Images Pl^n. not. Hist. l. 34. c. 7. p. 870. -- lignea,
etc. deorsimul. -- usque ad devictam Asiam. --
till the Conquest of Asia, the Fountain of Luxuries.] But though Platonists
contented themselves with inward Ideas, yet all the Gentile World did not; but
diverse of them made and worshipped external representations of God the Creator.
So did the Egyptians who represented their supreme Cneph, though diversely; as
appears from the description of him in Porphyry Porphyr. ap. Eusebius. de Praep.
Evang. l. 3. c. 11. p. 115. (...), etc.
, and his Image in Cartari Cartari Imag. Par. 1. p. 81, Imagine del dio
creatore degli Egittii, etc.
. So did the Greeks; Porphyry himself confessing that they worshipped God in
the Image of a man, but making an excuse which Statuaries and Worshippers
seldom thought of. By God he means the supreme Deity, and not some one only of
the Divine Powers; for he mentions [(...) Porph. ap. Eus. de praep. Evang. l.
3. c. 7. p. 97, 98.
as well as (...)] God himself, and not only Divine Virtues, in offering his
reason for their worship by Images. He, there, allows the Deity to be
invisible, and he yet thinks him well represented in the form of a Man; not
because he is like him in external shape, but [(...),] because that which is
Divine is Rational. That was not the common Cause, but an inclination to a
sensible Object, and an apprehension of humane Figure as that which was most
excellent, and which belongs to a King and Governor; under which notion, in
the grosser Idea of it, their reverence of earthly Potentates had pictured God
in their heads. When Origin objected to Celsus Orig. Contr, Cells. l. 7. p. 376.
the vanity of worshipping the invisible God in the visible form of man, Celsus
neither denies the matter of fact, nor apologizeth after the manner of
Porphyry, but retorteth the objection on the Christians, who professed that man
was made after the Image of God. And Origin observes, that Celsus did not
understand how to distinguish, here, betwixt being the Image of God, and being
made after it: And, that, he ignorantly cited the Christians, as saying, "That
God made Man his Image, and an appearance like himself Cells. ap. Orig. ibid. --
(...).
. And, at this day, Pagans, when they entertain a Phantasm of God, they are,
most commonly, Anthropomorphites. A very late and principal Actor, in the ruin
of the Town of Sacoe in New England, was an Enthusiastic Indian called Squango
J. Mather in Hist. of the War in New England with the Indians. p. 13.
, who, some years before, pretended that God appeared to him in the form of a
tall Man in Black Clothes. Now the Gentiles worshipping such Ideas or external
Images, as forms of God, do misplace his Honor, by paying their relative
veneration to Objects which were not like him, but infinitely unworthy of him.
They turned the Glory of Gods Essence into vile and despicable similitudes.

A worse sort of Idolatry still (if worse can be) were those Gentiles guilty
of, who, by Images (such as those of Baal and Pan) adored Nature, or the Sun,
as the supreme God. The very Prototypes, here, were Idols. So that, in this
kind of worship, both the ultimate and intermediate, the direct and the
relative Honor of God, was devolved on the creature.

PART 7. Of the Idolatry of the Gentiles in their worship of Demons.
A Second branch of the Idolatry of the Gentiles, even of their Philosophers,
and men of deep disputation, was the worship of Demons.

In this worship they were Idolatrous four ways.

First, By worshipping Demons as Powers which, under God, had a considerable
share of the Government of the World, by Commission from him.

Secondly, By worshipping Demons which were Devils, or wicked and accursed
Spirits.

Thirdly, By worshipping the Images of such Demons.

Fourthly, By their immoderate officiousness toward these inferior Deities,
which left them little leisure for attendance on the supreme God.

First, The Gentiles committed Idolatry by worshipping Demons, as Powers which,
with subordination to God, did, by his allowance, manage a great part of the
Government of the World. They did not deny the supremacy of God, but they
imagined that he ruled not the World by his immediate Providence, but by
several Orders of Demons and Heroes, as his Substitutes and Lieutenants. Such
as these were the Twelve Angels or Presidents, which the Egyptians believed
Kirch. Oed. Synt. 1. c. 5. p. 118.
to govern, by Ternaries, the four Quarters of the World. In the Flaminian
Obelisk Ap. Kirch. Ibid. Synt. 3. c. 2. p. 218.
the supreme Momphta, or supramundane Osiris, is represented, as ruling the
Twelve parts of the World, by Tw^lve Solar Demons in the form of Twelve Hawks
[that is, of Eagles, for of that kind were the sacred Accipitres of that
Country]. There, as likewise in Greece and Italy, several inferior Deities
were appointed over several places, persons and things. He that is not
otherwise furnished, may read in Kircher, of the Genius of Fire Id. ibid. Tom.
3. p. 277.
, Air p. 279.
, Water p. 2^0.
, the Earth p. 281.
, Agriculture p. 282.
, of the Clouds p. 292.
, the Sun and Moon p. 295.
, of Heat and Moisture p. 344.
; and of Forty eight Asterisms as the stations of Forty eight Deities p. 300.
. Pythagoras and Plato themselves, S. Aug. de Civ. De^. l. 8. c. 12. Quod ^tiam
Platonici, licet de uno ve. to Deo been senserint, multis tamen Diis sa^ra
facienda censuerunt.
were, in this point, Authors of egregious Idolatry. Pythagoras, invented, or
rather learned, from Egyptians, Chaldeans, Thracians, Persians, his two Demons
or Principles; the one good, the Parent of Unity, Rest, Equality, Splendour; the
other evil, the cause of Division, Motion, Inequality, Darkness; for such were
the Terms which his School used in representing their nature. And these became
Objects of much hope and fear, which ought to have been moved, not by men's
devices, but by considerations taken from the Almighty Power, Justice and
Goodness of God who is one. Plato seems to have ascribed much both of the
frame and of the government of the World to the Genii next to God: By
Principles whom he esteemed highly divine, but not by such as he judged three
Subsistences of the same supreme numerical Substance. If that had been his
Creed (as some would have it, who can find in him the mysteries of the
Athanasian Articles), the earliest Heretics, who denied the coequal Divinity
of the Son of God, and therefore believed in another kind of Logos, had never
come in such numbers out of his school; the place from whence the Fathers fetch
them. Tertull. de Anima. c. 23. p. 280. Doleo bona fide Platonem omnium
haereticorum condimentarium sactum.
With them agrees Petavius that learned Jesuit, and in this Argument as
learned as in any other. He says it is most evident concerning Arius Petav. de
Trin. l. 1. c. 8. Sect. 2.
, that he was a very genuine Platonist. Plato's principal Idea or Logos, was
distinct in number and nature from his supreme Cause, or God. And those who
follow the Faith of the Nicene Fathers, reason not with consistence, whilst
they suppose this Idea to be the second Person, and yet find in Plato, such
distinctness of Being, and (which to me seems very remarkable) a plain denial
of his Generation. It is true, that Plato, cited by Porphyry Porphyr. ap. S.
Cyr. contr. Jul. l. 1. p. 32.
, does call the second Principle, (...), the Word which is the Workman; (...),
the first Power after the supreme God; (...), the genuine or only Son of God;
(...), the Intellectual Word. And yet he says of the same Power, which he
calls, (...), and (...), an eternal and imperceptible Mind, that it is Id. ib.
p. 31. D. E. in l. 4. Philos. Hist.
(...), unbegotten, and Parent to it self: He likewise calls it (...), a Mind
subsisting by it self. And St. Cyril, who cites Plato out of Porphyry, and is
willing to make the Platonic Triad the same in effect with the Christian
Trinity Cyril. Ibid. p. 34. B. C.
, confesses the third Principle, which should answer to the Holy Ghost, to be
no other than the Soul of the World, which all Platonists understand to be a
distinct substance from the first Cause. Nay, Porphyry himself, in the place
which St. Cyril would serve his purpose on, calls Plato's three Principles,
[(...), Porph. Ib. p. 34. C. D.
] not three Hypostases but three Gods. Plato in Parmen. p. 141. Vol. 3. --
(...), etc. Et ap. Cyy. l. 1. cont. Jul. p. 32. (...), etc.
Of his other Idea's I have little to say, I mean of those properly so called
before the formation of the World. Parmenides is a Book, either so muddy, or so
profoundly deep, that I cannot see to the bottom of it. Therein he discourses
of these matters with infinite subtlety, or rather perplexity of notion. One
would imagine a man of his wit not so absurd as to think them eternal
Substances, and models quite separated from the mind of God, but rather divine
thoughts concerning the fashion of the World which he decreed to make. Yet
Ammonius the Scholar of Proclus ascribes to him that opinion, and follows
him in it: though herein Aristotle deserted his Master, and not without reason.
And he sure, knew his meaning, and had a Key to his Mysteries. Other Idea's
there were which Plato owned, and they were such as are more intelligible, and
more proper for me to speak of in this Argument; they being Angels or Demons.
The uncertain Greek Author Anon. de Vita Pythag. p. 213.
of the Life of Pythagoras, joined to that of Porphyry, discoursing of the
World as consisting of twelve distinct Orbs, places in the first Sphere, God
Almighty. After Him he rangeth the Inferior Deities, which from Plato he
calls Idea's, and from Aristotle, Intellectual Gods. He means the
Intelligences of that Philosopher, though he made them to be but seven
according to the number of the Planets which he set them to move. Of Plato
Tertullian says, Tertull. de Anima, c. 18. p. 276.
That he held certain invisible, incorporeal, supermundial, divine, eternal,
substances to which he gave the name of Idea's, as the causes of visible
things. For his Archetypal Idea, it is manifest to the Reader of his Works, and
particularly of his Timaeus, that he supposed him to be a Being as subsistent
by it self as Matter, and distinct from the supreme Divinity. He speaks of it
as a Thing, Being, or Person, not as a mere pattern of Things; and his [(...)]
or Platform, is held by him to be but the [(...)] or Image of his principal
Idea See Serran. in Arg. Timael Platon. page 6.
. The next Power to his [(...)] or God the pure and unmixed Good, was [(...)]
or Intellect, or [(...)] Existence compounded of Intellect and Unity, and
distinct in substance from the first Cause according to Plato; though [(...)]
was the first according to Anaxagoras (called (...) himself for this his Dogma)
whom Plato outshot by one Principle. The third Platonic Power was distinct
from both the former, and it was [(...), or] the Soul of the World. Nous,
Psyche, Logos, and the like Mystical terms, were but the names of certain
eminent Demons placed by his Fancy at the right hand of God, and used in the
works of Creation and Providence as Authorative Agents, and not as mere
Instruments of the first Cause. They were therefore set up and reverenced with
prejudice to the honor of the true God, who is the only Creator and Preserver
of all things. By Creation the Platonists meant only the disposal of the Chaos
into order: for their Philosophy supposed Matter See Sallust. de Diis and
Mundo. c. 7. p. 15.
to have been as Coeternal with God, as Light is coeval with the Sun. By Plato
God is called [(...)] the Maker and Father of All that is See Serran. in Arg.
Timaei, p. 5.
. But he means not this of Him as of the immediate Cause, but as the Cause of
the higher Principles, Causes, or Powers, which, with subordination to him,
produced in order such as are inferior to themselves. Sallust the Platonist
openly confesses it, and out of him I will transcribe the sense of part of a
Chapter, concerning the modelling and governing of the visible World, by the
power of Demons. He had in his first Chapter concerning the Gods and the World,
discoursed about God, or the first Cause of all things. A while after in his
sixth Chapter, Sallust. de Diis and Mundo. c. 6. p. 13, 14.
[which according to its Title, treats of the Cosmical and Encosmical, or of
the Celestial and Worldly Gods;] he thus pursues his Divine Subject. Of the
Gods, some are Worldly, and others Heavenly. I call those Worldly who make the
World. For the Heavenly, some of them make the substances of the gods, [or
Inferior Demons], some, the Mind; some, the Souls (...).
. Wherefore, of these there are three Orders, and they may easily be found in
the discourses which are made of them. For the Worldly gods, some make the
World [or visible frame of things]; some animate it; some adjust the parts of
it; and some govern or preserve it so composed. Here then being four things,
and each of them consisting of first, middle and extreme; it is necessary that
they who dispose them, be twelve in number. They therefore that make the World
are Jupiter, Neptune, and Vulcan. They who animate it, are Juno, Ceres, Diana.
They who adjust the parts of it, are Apollo, Venus, and Mercury. They who
preserve it, are Vesta, Pallas, and Mars. -- These first possessing the World
before others, [That is, the Pagan Heroes;] we may imagine the others in them:
To wit, Bacchus in Jupiter; AEsculapius in Apollo; the Graces in Venus. We may
also contemplate their [several] Spheres: The Earth, the Orb of Vesta; the
Water, that of Neptune; the Air, that of Juno; the Fire, that of Vulcan. Plato
himself, as he is cited by St. Cyril, Plato ap. S. Cyr. Alex. cont. Julian. l.
2. p. 61.
supposes God to have quitted, as it were, the care of things on Earth, and to
have committed it to the Inferior gods for their diversion (...).
. It is true, that in four places Plato asserteth a divine Providence, taking
care of the things on Earth, even of the least things; and doing it with ease,
and being no way prevented by sloth. He does this in his Tenth Book of Laws
Plato de Leg. lib. 10. Vol. 2. p. 899, 900, 901, 902, 903. 904.
; in his Politicus Id. p. 273*
; in his Epinomis Id. p. 980.
; and in his Phaedo Id. in Phaed. Vol. 1. p. 62, 63.
: But where he asserteth this, he speaks it as much of the gods, as of God.
And in his Phaedo, after Cebes had affirmed in the singular of God, that he
consulted better for man, than man could for himself, and was an excellent
Lord; Simmias and Socrates in some sort consenting to him, turn his sentence
into the plural of Lords and Gods Id. ibid. p. 63. A. -- (...).
. Julian likewise, though he professed the belief of one true God, yet he
assigned several Countries and Cities to the care of several Tutelar Gods Jul.
ap. S. Cyr. l. 4. p. 115.
. So we find in Porphyry Porphyr. de Abstin. l. 1. sect. 57. p. 49.
certain [(...), or] Gods that were conceived to be Presidents of Regions; such
amongst whom the Government of the lower World was parted. The Gentiles indeed
did not wholly exclude the supreme God, but they worshipped him as one who had
not reserved unto himself the greatest share of the Government. Hence is it
that we find among their ancient Inscriptions, many such as that remembered by
Elmenhorstius Elm. in Not. in Arnob. l. 1. p. 23. Jovi Opt. Max. and Geni^ Loci.
; TO JUPITER THE BEST AND GREATEST [Deity], AND TO THE GENIUS [or Demon] OF THE
PLACE. They thought of the supreme Jove, but they seldom thought of him without
his Deputy.

Such Philosophy concerning the Lieutenancy of Demons is at this day on foot in
China. There the Litterati, or those of the Sect of Confusio, own one God Alv.
Simed^ in Hist. Sin. part. 1. c. 18. p. 86, 87.
; and though they do not reverence him with any solemn worship, (as if he were
a kind of unconcerned, Epicurean Deity), yet they have Temples for Tutelar
Spirits. The Sect of the Tausi also acknowledge one Great God, and other lesser
Ones, that is, Vicegerent Demons. The same sort of Philosophy is found amongst
the Benjans, in the Eastern India. The Sect of them called Samarath, though it
believes one first Cause Mandesto's Travels, l. 1. p. 55.
, which created the World, yet it assigns to him Three Subftitutes, Brama,
Buffiuna, and Mais. Brama (they fay) has the disposal of Souls, which he sends
into such Bodies as Permiseer [or the supreme God,] appoints for them;
whether they be the Bodies of Men or Beasts. Buffiuna teaches the World the
Laws of its God: He has also the oversight of Provisions for common life, and
advances the growth of Wheat, Herbs and Pulse, after Brama has indu'd each of
them with Souls. Mais exercises its power over the dead. This looks to me like
a Tale of Jupiter, Ceres and Pluto.

This Opinion of the Gentiles, which ascribes so much of the Government of
this World to Demons, as Gods Commissioners in certain Precincts, and as
Superintendents over Places, Persons, and Things, is manifestly contrary to the
tenor of the Scriptures. They teach, See Isai. 41. 22, 23. c. 43. 11, 12, 13.
c. 45. 5, 6, 7.
That God is the great disposer of Good and Evil in all Cities and Places; and
that his Providence extends to the fall of a little Sparrow, and of a lesser
thing than that, an hair of our head. That shows us how he used great
importunity for the turning of Jew and Gentile from the confidence which they
placed in their Genii. This, says St. Cyril S. Cyr. Alex. cont. Jul. l. 4. p:
124.
, he would never have attempted, if they had been Presidents of his own
appointment. His Angels minister before him, but they do not properly govern
under him, much less is that true of Superexisting Souls. The Angels of Graecia
and Persia were such Spirits, as did at that time serve his will in that
particular employment. But we have no cogent reason (I think) to persuade us,
that they always enjoyed a settled Lieutenancy over those Countries. It was a
rash conclusion which Vatablus drew from those Visions of Daniel Vatabl. in
Dan. 10. 13. singulae Regi^nes habent Presides singulos.
, to wit, that to every Nation was assigned an Angel as President over it. The
whole of that Discourse in Daniel is a Vision, and a representation of Heavenly
things in a Scene upon Earth. And they who make particular application of every
circumstance, without due attention to the main design of it, forget that they
confound Earthly and Heavenly things, and lay their gross absurdities of fancy
at the door of the Spirit of God. Such (for instance sake) would they be who
should think from this Vision, that an Angel touches Gods Prophets with an
hand at what time he inspireth them, because Daniel Dan. 10. 10.
so expresses himself as if it were so done to him; or who should believe that
a good Angel ordained by God to comfort his Prophet, could be detained by an
evil one for one and twenty days Verse. 1^
, until he prevailed against him by the assistance of Michael; because the
Scripture uses such an ^umane Image, and alludeth to the impediments of good
men on earth, who are not equal in power and motion to the ministering Angels,
who are quick and vigorous as Spirits or Winds, and flames of Fire.

On such quickness and vigor God serves his Purposes by the temporary Ministry
of Angels; but by Himself still, and not by them as settled Delegates, He
dispenses favors and severities. Accordingly God inviting the Jews to
renounce their Genii, or inferior Deities and Patrons, [and not merely to turn
from evil Angels, and to apply themselves to good ones;] promises by himself
to send them that worldly plenty which they had sacrilegiously ascribed to
their Idols. And St. Paul endeavoring to draw the Lycaonians from their
Vanities, remindeth them Act. 14. 15, 16, 17.
of the testimony which God had given them, of his Providence in sending them
fruitful seasons. This if it had been done by Commissioned Demons, the Gentiles
might have abated the force of the Apostles argument, which proves the care of
the supreme God by the supplies of outward blessings. The same St. Paul has
left us another Text, most worthy of our attention, in which he confirms the
Government and the Providence of the supreme God; rejects the Lieutenancy of
Demons, and owneth Christ alone as the Substitute of the Father. Though there
be, said he 1 Cor. 8. 5.
, such as are called Gods; though there be many [Superior, and many Inferior
Baalim] Gods or Lords; yet to us [Christians] there is but one God, and one
Lord Jesus Christ. He is the true God, and Eternal life: He is Gods Vicegerent,
who is the Everlasting (...) of the Father; and not the Platonic Demon called
(...), or that of the Valentinians See Iren. l. 1. c. 12. p. 86, 87.
, which together with their Logos made the second Conjugation of their (...),
the first whence they came, being (...) and (...), Mind and Truth Vide Iren.
passim, and S. Aug. de Haer. in Haer. Val. c. 11. p. 33, 34.
.

If then God by his Providence dispenses immediately Good and Evil; if his
care reaches to things below the Moon (whose Orb some made the limits of it,
with equal vanity and boldness; whilst others, with Maimonides Maimon. More
Neb. part. 3. c. 17. p. 381, 382, 383.
allowed a Providence over man, but not over beasts:) If he uses his Angels as
ministering, not governing spirits; as messengers of several kinds, and not as
Commission-Officers of his Court, and administrators of the Affairs of his
Kingdom; as the Attendants ordinary or extraordinary of his Substitute Jesus
Christ, but not as fellow-Viceroys: if he thus far only uses his Angels, and
it may be uses not departed Souls so far as this amounts to; it is plain
Idolatry to worship Demons, as did the Gentiles, in that quality of divine
Lieutenants. For from them they expect good and evil; them they fear, them they
thank. When God sends fruitful Seasons, and by them Plenty, they send up
their acknowledgments to the Queen of Heaven. When God heals them, they
sacrifice to AEsculapius, as to him that removed their distemper from them.
This is a very great Iniquity, and the common grounds or occasions of it are
highly unworthy of the true God. For most of them who believe not his immediate
Providence, do measure his actions by those of worldly Potentates. They
conceive him out of state, to do little by his own person; or out of ease and
softness, to commit the management of his affairs to others, both by temporary
command, and by standing Commission. As if the greatest variety of business
could distract or weary him, who is Infinite in Knowledge, and Greatness, and
Power. Thus St. Cyril S. Cyril. Al. cont. Jul. l. 2. p. 60.
judged of them who substituted lesser Deities under him that was supreme. He
thought that they impeached God of Arrogance or floth, or want of Goodness,
which envieth none the good it can do. And Isaiah tacitly upbraideth those who
distrusted his Providence, of the like vile opinion concerning him, whilst he
says of the Creator Isa. 40. 28.
, that He faints not, neither is weary.

Secondly, The Gentiles were Idolaters through the worship they gave to such
Demons as were evil spirits. It is true, that Plato owned no inferior Deities
but such as were [by him esteemed] good. He maintains this in his Tenth Book
of Laws, and St. Austin confesses it to be his judgment Aug. de Civ. Dei, l.
8. p. 464. c. 13. de sententia Platonis qua definivit Deos non esse nisi Bonos
amicosque virtutum.
. He says in his Phaedo Plato in Phaedon. Vol. 1. p. 82. B. (...), etc.
, That none were to be registered among the gods but such who had studied
Philosophy and departed pure out of this life. When he speaks of Demons who
afflict men, he is to be interpreted rather of good Spirits executing Justice,
than of evil Angels venting their malice. But, whatsoever his opinion was, it
is most evident that the generality of the Heathens worshipped such Demons as
were morally malignant. And such Porphyry Porphyr. l. 2. de Abstin. Sect. 58.
p. 96.
esteemed those Genii who had bloody Sacrifices offered to them. The Gentiles
sacrificed to Devils, to the Powers of the Kingdom of Darkness, which were not
only not God, but enemies and professed Rebels against him 1 Cor. 10. 20.
. They were in Porphyry's account, Terrestrial Demons; such who had gross
Vehicles, and consequently were of the meaner and viler sort of their Genii,
and (as they love to speak) sunk deepest into matter. Psellus and Porphyry
represent them as united to a body of so gross contexture, A p. S. Cyril. Al.
cont. Jul. l. 4. p. 124. See Porph. in l. 2. de Abstin. Sect. 42. p. 85, 86.
(...), [vehiculum aereum, rather than, pars spiritalis, used by the
Translator,] (...), etc.
that they could smell the Odors of the Sacrifices, and be fat with the steam
of human blood. Lucian in his Book de Sacrificiis, abounds with pleasant [or
rather to them who pity the decays of human nature, with very sad] stories of
the Revels of Demons. Whether they were Terrestrial ones or not, I here forbear
to dispute: but I conclude concerning them, that they were evil. Their nature
shows it self by the services which they accepted, by the persons whom they
have favored, and by the appearances and wonders with which they sometimes
encouraged them. The Rites with which they were worshipped were bloody, rude,
unclean; such as an honest man would be ashamed to observe See S. Cyril. contr.
Jul. l 4. p. 129.
. Porphyry, though a Gentile, has recorded many of the bloody Sacrifices
Porphyr. de Abstin. l. 2. p. 93, 94, 95, etc.
offered by the Rhodians, Phoenicians, and Graecians; and he tells of a man
in his time sacrificed in Rome, at the Feast of Jupiter Latialis. The like
barbarity was commonly used in the worship of Moloch, and Bellona. And he must
have such a measure of Assurance as will suffer him no more to blush than his
Ink, who writes down all the Obscenities used in her worship, whom they usually
called the Mother of the Gods. Origin tells Celsus concerning the Christians
Orig. cont. cells. l. 3. p. 133.
, That they had learned to judge of all the Gods of the Heathen as of Devils, by
their greediness of the blood of their Sacrifices, and by their presence amidst
the Nidors of them, by which they deceived those who made not God their refuge.
And in another place, Id. ibid. p. 123.
he proves this truth out of their own Histories: and he instanceth
particularly in their Deity Hercules; and he objecteth against him his immoral
love, and that vile effeminacy which their own Authors record. I will not tell
over again their foolish stories so very often told already; but offer to the
Reader a Relation of fresher date, out of Idolatrous America. In Mexico (says
an Author Gage in his Survey of the West-Ind. c. 12. p. 115.
who had sojourned in that City), the Heathens had dark houses, full of Idols,
great and small, and wrought of sundry Metals: these were all bathed and washed
with blood, -- the blood of men; -- the walls of the houses were an inch thick
with blood, and the floor a foot. -- The Priests went daily into those
Oratories, and suffered none other but great Personages to enter with them. And
when any of such condition went in, they were bound to offer some man as a
Sacrifice, that the Priests might wash their hands, and sprinkle the house with
the blood of the Victim. With such Sacrifices no good Angel could be pleased:
wherefore the worship of such being an honor done not to God, or his
Ministers, but to the Devil and his Angels, who live in perfect defiance of
true Religion, is an Idolatry so detestable, that I have not at hand a name of
sufficient infamy to bestow upon it.

PART 8. Of their Idolatry in worshipping the Images of Demons.
THirdly, The Gentiles were Idolaters in worshipping the Statues or Images of
Demons or Hero's, either as those Powers were reputed the Deputies of God; or
as they were really evil spirits. The Religious Honor given to the Prototype
was Idolatrous, and therefore the Honor done to the Image respecting the
Prototype, was such also. So he that bows toward the Chair of an Usurper, does
give away the honor of the true Sovereign; because the external sign of his
submission is ultimately referred to the Usurper himself.

The Honor which the Gentiles did to their Statues, redounded generally to
their Demons; for their Theology did not set up such Images (whatsoever vulgar
fancy or practice did) as final objects of worship, or Gods in themselves. It
set them up as places of Divine Residence, wherein the Genii were thought to
dwell, or to afford their especial presence in Oracles, and other Supernatural
aids; as the true God was said to dwell amidst the Cherubims. The Egyptians (as
Ruffinus Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
storieth) entertained this superstitious persuasion, amongst a multitude of
others, That if any man had laid violent hands on the Statue of Serapis, the
Heavens and the Earth would have been mixed together in a new Chaos. Olympius
the Sophist Olymp. Soph. ap. Soz. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 15. p. 724. Ed. ^ales.
exhorts the Gentiles still to adhere to the Religion of their Gods,
notwithstanding the Christians defaced their Statues. And he gave them this as
the reason of his counsel, Because (said he) though the Images be corruptible
things, yet in them did dwell (...), etc.
Virtues [or Demons] which from the ruins of their Statues, took their flight
to Heaven. This Opinion Arnobius Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 6. p. 203, etc.
and Lactantius Lact. l. 2. de Orig. Err. Sect. 2. p. 141, 142, 143, 144, 145.
acknowledge to have been common among the Gentiles: and we may still read it in
the writings of the wiser (shall I say, or the subtler and less excusable) sort
of them. Of that number were Celsus and Julian. Celsus demands Cells. ap.
Orig. l. 7. p. 373. (...);
, Whether any man, besides a sottish Idiot who has not a grain of salt in his
mind, can believe Stone, Wood, Brass, or Gold, formed by an Artificer, to be a
God, and not rather a Statue sacred to the Gods? The Excuse of Julian is not
unlike to that of Celsus. We worship Images (said that Julian. in Fragm. inter
Op. p. 537. (...).
Apostate Emperor), not that we think them to be very Gods themselves, but
that by them [as Symbols] we may worship the Gods. This Petavius the Jesuit in
his Note on the Margent, calls a frigid Evasion. I grant it is so; but is not
the like Apology used in justification of Imageworship, by that Society of
which Petavius was a a Brother? So goes the world, even the Learned world: the
same reason is by factious Partiality called a pillar in one man's Cause, and a
straw in another.

But let us return to our Argument from this short digression. In pursuit of
it, it ought to be taken notice of, that the Writers of the Old Testament seem
to speak very differently from Celsus and Julian, in this matter of the Worship
of Images and Statues. They seem to upbraid the Gentiles as the Worshippers of
the very Statues themselves, without further reference unto God or Demons.
There stood in Zion, then a Fort of the Jebusites, certain brazen Images, as
Talismanical Protectors of it See Mr. Greg. Notes on the place.
; in them the people trusted, believing that David 2 Samuel 5. 6, 7, 8.
could not take that Fort till he had removed those divine Guards. With these
David reproached the people, calling them the Blind and the Lame, which his
soul abhorred; that is, such Idols as had eyes and saw not; feet, and walked
not. Other Prophets argue with Idolaters from their own experience; and appeal
to them, whether their Idols could hear, or see, or help them? and whether they
were not the works of men's hands which they adored Isa. 41. 7, 21, 22, 23, 24,
29. and 44. 9, to 20. and 45. 20. and 46. 6, 7. Hab. 2. 18, 19, 20. Zach. 10.
1, 2.
? They mock them as such who prayed for a prosperous Journey, to an Idol that
could not move; and who worshipped one part of a dead Tree, which by the other
part of it, served for fuel; for fuel, not for their Altars but for the
ordinary fires of their Kitchen. They do not deride them as vain men who
trusted in a creature which had no power or virtue in it but what it derived
from God, as a late French Author seems to suggest De la Recherche de la
verite. Tom. 2. live. 6. c. 8. p. 327, 328.
; but as such who depended on an Idol; on a thing which neither in it self, nor
from any foreign cause, supreme or subordinate, contained or dispensed the
virtue they ascribed to it. One would be apt to conclude from such scoffs of
the Prophets, that the Gentiles made their very Images their ultimate Gods.

They did so by interpretation, but not by direct intention of mind, unless
they were the very scum of the scum of the world. Those who had any measure of
understanding discoursed after the manner of Clinia in Plato's Eleventh Book of
Laws Plato de Legibus, l. 11. p. 930, 931.
. Of the Gods (said Clinia) some are seen; to others, which we see not, we
erect Images and Statues. And though these Statues be in themselves without
life; yet we esteem them animated Deities, and believe whilst we worship them,
that they are very favorable to us. The barbarous Americans made the same
distinction with the Philosophical Clinia. They were upbraided by Friar Gage
Gage in Survey of west-Ind. c. 20. p. 391, to p. 398.
for worshipping an Idol of black wood which they had placed in a Cave of the
Earth. But instead of putting them to silence, he received this answer from
them. They told him that themselves believed the Image to be but wood of it
self; but that they knew also by their own ears, that it had spoken to them:
they thence concluded that a God was in it, and that on such a miraculous
voice, they rightly founded their devotion. This excuse then was common, but so
was not such extraordinary operation as the Americans spoke of. If it had been
vulgarly notorious among the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Assyrians, the Prophets
would scarce have appealed to them, whilst they discoursed of the nullity and
vanity of their Images; for then the people might have refuted their Argument
by professing their experience of signs and wonders. But nothing was done
Supernaturally by many of their Statues. Their Priests and Statesmen deluded
them frequently with their Tales and Arts; and they sacrificed many of the
Provisions for their BELLS, to their own stomach. Haly speaks Apud Reicheltum
de Amuletis. p. 36.
of Images in Egypt known to himself, which could move very strangely, as did
the Dove of Archytas. Ruffinus mentions an Iron-Image of Serapis at
Alexandria; and Pliny one of the same metal in the Temple of Arsinoe, sustained
by Magnets See Pincieri AEnigm. l. 1. AEnig. 7. p. 17, 18.
; to the intent that the people might behold them with admiration, as supported
in the air by nothing but Miracles. Dionysius Halicarnassensis Dion. Halicarn.
Romans Ant. l. 8. sect. 10. p. 784, 785.
tells of the Mother of Marcius Coriolanus, and of other Women sent in
Embassy to him by the Senate, when he had made defect to the Volsci; that
prevailing with him to restrain his Forces, the Senate out of the public
Treasury built to Fortune a Temple and an Image, and the Women erected a second
Image at their private charge. Of this second Image he reports out of the
Pontifical Records (Registers of their own cheats under better names and
colors); that it spoke Latin in the audience of many. What it spoke was it
seems to this sense, O ye Matrons! ye, by the Holy Law of the Commonwealth,
have made this dedication of me.

Where there was not this deeper art, much was contributed toward the delusion
of the people, by the solemn worship, the costly and pompous dress, the stately
Processions, the secret Repositories of the Idols of the Heathen. Distance
procured reverence, and the splendour of Gold (of which some consisted, and the
gilding by which others Tertull. de Idol. p. 89. Soccus and Baxa deaurantur,
etc. See Isai. 40. 19.
were made very glorious) created amusement Porphyr. de Stat. Brachman. ap.
Bardes. Sir. p. 283. (...), etc.
in the eyes and fancies of the Vulgar, who have scarce reason enough to
correct their senses. The Statuaries were not masters of much true Art: we see
little of proportion in their Images, or of Ordonance in their Tables. That of
Isis shows an ill hand, and a worse judgment. But of such Art as might amuse
and astonish, either with pleasant or frightful magnificence, there was enough
among the rudest Gentiles. In Goa the Heathens of East India Vincent le Blanc
in his Travels, p. 50.
built a Temple of black stone, and shaped their Pagods, or Idols, in figures
of horror. In Pegu Le Blanc, p. 125.
they abounded with Idols of pure gold, whose Crowns were enriched with
valuable Jewels. One of these was of a prodigious height, and they called him
Apalita, and supposed him to be a Guide to Pilgrims. They had also a statue of
silver in the proportion of a Giant; and he was such a Patron among them as
Mars was among the Greeks and Romans. Peter Della Valle Della Valle in his
Travels, p. 114, 115.
speaks of an Image in Ahineli in the same India, called Virena. It stood (as
he describes it) at the upper-end of a Temple upon a Tribunal, in a dark and
solemn place. It had many Candles set before it in the time of its worship.
They carried it sometimes in Procession, under a rich Canopy, with noises of
Music, with Perfumes, and lighted Tapers. There were other inferior Idols
serving as his Attendants. And they had Diadems like to those of the Images of
Saints at Rome, or like to the Regno or Pontifical Crown of the Pope. He said
it, who was both a Roman, and a Roman Catholic. And his description of Virena
puts me in mind of that of the Virgin of Halla made by Lipsius Lips. Oper. Tom.
3. page 1250, 1251. Ed. Vesal. 1675.
: It stands aloft, it is lighted with Tapers, it is of silver; the Image of
Christ and of the Twelve Apostles are nigh it; an Angel stands on either side,
a silver Lamp hangs by. This pomp amuseth; it is well if it has not a more
Idolatrous effect. The forecited Della Valle describes a Carr in Ikkeri P. D.
Valle, p. 129.
, in which the Idols were carried in pompous Procession; the Carr was exceeding
high, and so very great that scarce any but one of the widest Streets of Rome
would (he says) have been capable of receiving it, and giving it passage.
Arnobius observes concerning the Gentiles Arnob. contr. Gent. l. 6. p. 209.
, That they designed to create Fear by the manner in which they framed the
Statues of the Gods. Hence (as he notes) Sythes and Clubs, and Thunderbolts
were appendages to their Idols. I will end these Instances with a Discourse of
St. Austin's in his fourth Epistle. For Idols, who is there that doubts whether
they be void of all perception? But when they are by an honorable sublimeness,
placed on their Thrones, and observed by them who pray and offer Sacrifice;
those Idols by the likeness of animated members, and of organs of sense (though
indeed there be no life in them) do so affect the minds of vveak people, that
they appear to them to live and to breathe: They do so especially through the
veneration of the multitude, whilst so pompous and so divine a worship is
bestovved on them.

There being then in most of such Idols, no divine virtue, but an artificial
form and motion; they who worshipped them, whatsoever they intended to worship
in them, were truly said to worship them themselves. This I may illustrate by
the confession of Arnobius who was once himself a Pagan Infidel Arnob. l. 1. p.
22, 23.
. I worshipped (said he), Oh my blindness! such Gods as came out of the Smith's
Furnace, and such as were fashioned by the Hammer and Anvil. I worshipped the
bones of Elephants: [for they, as Peireskius Gass. in vita Peiresk. l. 2. p.
90. l. 4. p. 151, 152.
notes, were honored by mistake, for those of Giants.] I adored a smooth
stone, and a Wooden statue. I flattered the Image, as if there were a Deity
present there: I spoke to it, I asked benefits of it, though it perceived
nothing.

The Prophets therefore used an Argument most accommodable to the Gentiles, and
tending the most ready way to their conviction. For if they would not have
been most sottishly credulous See Isa. 46. 8. Remember this [viz. v. 7. that
Idols cannot move, or answer,] and show your selves men, Isa. 44. 19. There is
no understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in the fire.
, if they would not have permitted their fancies to have imposed upon their
understandings; if they would but have examined matters of fact with any degree
of diligence and impartiality, the generality of them might have known
concerning their Images, that they had usually no more of Inspiration or
Divinity in them, than the stones of their streets, or the posts of their doors
See Isa. 46. 1, 2.
. The Fathers in their Disputations with the Heathens, do frequently use this
Argument against their Images, and deride them for worshipping things which can
neither help men nor themselves Arnob. l. 1. p. 22, 23. Beneficia poscebam
nihil sentiente de Trunco. L. 6. p. 200. Amentia Deum credere, quem tute ipse
formaris? supplicare tremebundum fabricatae abs te rei? p. 202. Non videtis'
sub istorum simulachrorum cavis -- mures -- babitare? -- in ore -- ab Araneis
ordiri retia?
. And thence by the way, I take leave to observe that if they believed the
Bread to be Christ's real natural body, they argued with Inconsistence. For then
it would have been an obvious retort, that the object which they themselves
worshipped in the Sacrament could not deliver it self from a contemptible Mouse.

From the importance of this Discourse, some answer may be returned to an
Argument used by the Learned Mr. Thorndike Mr. Thorndike's Epilogue, part 3. p.
298.
, who supposed Idolatry to consist in Polytheism. He would prove the Calf or
Idol of Samaria to have been the ultimate object of them who adored it; because
in Amos Amos 8. 6.
it is objected to them, That the Workman made it, and therefore it was not
God. Here the Prophet only uses an Argument which appealeth to their own
reason, and which they might have used themselves, but did not. Judge among your
selves (said he in effect) whether this Statue thus framed can be a God, what
divine power soever you think to reside in it; yet you do by interpretation,
make it your God, because you worship that which is before you, and there is
nothing but the Image it self; nothing in it, no virtue issuing from it.
Wherefore, notwithstanding your imagination, which your common reason might
correct, the thing it self is your Deity or your Idol. And the Prophet does not
only argue against an Idol as against a thing made with hands, but also as a
Statue which contained in it no more of Celestial influence than a common
Image. For he foretells in the sixth verse, that it was to be broken; and in
the fifth, seventh, and eighth verses, he observes, that it could not save
them from Captivity, but on the other hand, exposed them to it.

PART 9. Of their Worshipping Demons more than God.
LAst of all, the Gentiles were Idolaters by justling out the Worship of the
Supreme God, or very much of it, through their officiousness in the service of
Inferior Deities. They could not but be guilty if they gave away Gods honor,
in whole, or in part. And in part at least, it is certain that they converted
it to the use of Creatures. God who governs the World ought to have received
the honor of their devout Prayers, and becoming Sacrifices; and the greatest
part of these, and sometimes the whole of them was offered to Demons. For who
esteems that Tenant faithful to the honor and interest of his Lord, who
pays the greatest rent to another, and offers him a pepper-corn, though he
has reserved the whole propriety, and the very reception to himself. Diverse
Masters cannot be at the same time observed with equal duty: and Devotion
cannot flow in the same plenty, in diverse streams, as in one. Therefore when
Tarquinius Priscus multiplied Deities, and introduced Statues among the Romans,
their Religion was immediately much debased: when they had many Jupiters, and a
great crowd of other Deities, and every Deity had its Statue, its Altar, its
Sacrifice, its Temple; little time was left, and as little zeal for the Worship
of the God of Heaven and Earth. To him some of them scarce ever said a Prayer,
or offered a Sacrifice. Porphyry thought not such services to be agreeable to
the Supreme God See Porphyr. de Abstin. l. 1. Sect. 57. p. 49. and l. 2. Sect.
34. p. 78. And see upon his words there, S. Cyr. Alex. cont. Jul. l. 2. p. 60,
61.
, but he concluded that men were to adore him, Without words, without
Sacrifices, in silence, with a pure mind. But this was a Worship so abstracted,
that few other Heathens either performed it, or so much as understood it. Yet
some might do both. For Confusio the famed Philosopher of China Alvarez Simedo
in Hist. Sin. Par. 1. c. 18. p. 86.
, acknowledged one Supreme God; but he did not serve him with Temples, Altars,
Priests, or Prayers; though by such worship he Idolized the Heavens, the Earth,
and Man.

Let this then from the Premises be the conclusion of the present Chapter, that
the Gods of the Heathen are Idols and Vanities, and unworthy the submission of
any reasonable creature Jer. 10. 8. They are altogether brutish, the stock is a
doctrine of Vanities.
.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Idolatry of the Jews, and particularly of their
worshipping the Golden Calf. Also of the Egyptian Symbol of Apis, as at that
time not extant. And of the probable Reasons which set up Moses as the Original
Apis.
PART 1. Of the Provisions made by God against Idolatry among the Jews.
THE Israelites by their Constitution were of all Nations a people the most
averse to Idolatry. Their first Commandment prescribes the Worship of one God.
Their second forbids external religious honor to graven Images; which by
the exhibition of that honor, whatsoever they were before, become very Idols.
Wherefore St. Cyprian De Exhort. Martyr. c. 1. p. 378. Non facies tibi Idolum.
thus renders the sense of the Command, Thou shall not make to thy self an
Idol. And the contention about the Translation of Pesel, by Graven thing, Idol,
or Image, is with respect to the design of Moses, an unnecessary Grammar-War.
This second Command against the Worship of Images, the Jews have esteemed the
great Command of all. Their very Moneys have had on the Obvers the name of
Moses inscribed; and on the Revers, that second precept or prohibition
Hottinger. in Cipp. Hebraic. p. 136.
. Their third Command, [Thou shall not take, or bear in thy mouth Grot. in
Decal. p. 50. In Hebraeo, non feres, nempe in ore tuo, quod idem est cum illo,
non sumes in os scilicet.
the name of Jehovah thy God in vain,] may seem also to discountenance Idols,
and to forbid all Oaths of promise made by them in the name of God, by which
they often called their false Deities. It may seem to forbid not so directly
the breach of Neder, a Vow to the Lord, as Schefugnah, (according to the
distinction of the Jews) See Fagius on Numb. 30. 3. and see Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
, a Vow by the Lord, or by his Name, when that Name was used in signifying some
Idol. I say it may seem so to do; for that it does so, I rather guess than
affirm. In this conjecture I am helped by Tertullian: That Father discoursing
concerning the unlawfulness of naming the Gods of the Gentile-world Tertull. de
Idololat. Sect. 20. p. 97, 98.
, makes use of this distinction; he teaches that the bare naming of them is
lawful, because it is necessary in Discourse, but he condemns the naming of
them in such manner as if they were really Gods. After this distinction he
pursues the Argument in this manner: The Law says Exodus 23. 13.
, You shall make no mention of the names of other gods, neither shall they be
heard out of your mouths. This it commanded, that we should not call them gods.
For it says in the first part [or Table] of it, Thou shall not take up the
Name of the Lord thy God in vain, that is, in an Idol Id. ib. -- in van^, id
^ft i^ Ido^ Aquilas (...) verse. Interlin. i^ vanum.
. He therefore fell into Idolatry who hononred an Idol with the name of God.
But if they must be called gods, I should add something by which it may appear
that I do not own them to be Gods. For the Scripture it self calls them gods,
but then it adds [by way of discrimination] their gods, or the gods of the
Nations. In such manner David called them gods, when he said the gods of the
Nations were Devils -- It is a customary wickedness to say, Mehercule. -- And
it proceeds from the ignorance of some who know not that they swear by
Hercules. Now what is swearing by those whom [in Baptism] you have forsworn [or
renounced] but a corrupting of the Faith with Idolatry? For who does not honor
those he swears by? To this purpose are those words in Hosea Hos. 4. 15.
: Though thou Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend; and come not ye
unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, [or Bethel,] now become a house of
iniquity, vanity, or Idolatry, So the vulg. Latin renders Aven in Hosea 6. 8.
Galaad civitas opexa^tium Idolum.
, nor swear the Lord lives. That is, seeing they worship the Golden Calves,
which are really Idols, though they give to them the name of Jehovah, as
setting them up for his Symbol; yet use not you that word there, or the form of
their oath by Jehovah; for thereby you will take up the name of God, and the
name by which he is most eminently distinguished, in vain, or in an Idol. Idols
are Elilim, or vanities: they are very lies, at once to use the terms the
Prophet gives them, and to allude to the Syriack Version of the third Command,
[Thou shall not take up the name of the Lord thy God with a lie.] He therefore
who swears by them without distinction, calling them gods, or giving them any
names which signify Divine Power; He that swears, or voweth by Coelum or
Coelus, that is, the Heavens; by Pluto, or the Earth: such a one does not only
dishonor the Sea Josh. 23. 7. Neither make mention os the name os their gods,
nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow your selves unto them.
See Jer. 5. 2, 7.
name of the true God, but he does also by interpretation forswear himself; for
he swears by an Idol, lie, or vanity; vowing by its help to perform his Oath,
which therefore he cannot by that means perform, because he trusts to an
helpless thing, though by his trust he honors it as a Divine Power.

Further, one great end of the fourth Command was the prevention of Idolatry.
The seventh day was observed as a Memorial of that one God the Creator of the
World, and the God of Israel; and they who kept it holy, kept it holy to
Jehovah, and made profession hereby that they were not Gentiles, who worshipped
many Gods, but the seed of Abraham who served but one, the God of that
Patriarch, and of Isaac, and Jacob. This (says Mr. Mede) was the end of the
Sabbath Mr. Mede's Discourse. 15. of the Sabbath, p. 73.
, that thereby, as by a Symbolum, or sign, that people might testify and
profess what God they worshipped. He ought, it may be, to have spoken this with
limitation, and called it a great end: and that it was such, is evident from
the Text of Moses, than whom, no man better understood the Levitical Economy.
To him God spoke Exodus 31. 12, 13, 16, 17.
saying, Speak thou also to the children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths
ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you, throughout your
Generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord who does sanctify you, [or
set you apart as my Worshippers, distinct from those who worship Idols.] --
Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath
throughout their Generations, for a perpetual Covenant. It is a sign between me
and the children of Israel for ever. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, and on the seventh day he rested [or ceased] and was refreshed, [or was
pleased with that exceeding good and beautiful frame of things, which his
Wisdom, Goodness and Power had made.]

A like end there was of the Levitical Sacrifices. God needed them not; the
Sacrifice of a pure and humble mind was more agreeable to him who is an
Intellectual Spirit. But the Israelites doted on such a gross manner of
expressing their devotion. And seeing they must needs offer Sacrifice, it
pleased God to give them a Law which might at once indulge them in their
inclination, and restrain them from sacrificing unto Idols; whilft it
appropriated that service to God alone, and denied it to Angels and Men. To
this purpose St. Cyril discourses S. Cyril. Alex. contr. Julian. (...). p. 126.
, and this is the sense of the words of that Father. God had no thirst which
was to be quenched with blood. He required not of himself so gross and material
a worship, but one more spiritual, perfected by universal virtue. He required a
life honesty and integrity, and such as shone honorably with good works; a
right contemplation of the Deity, and a true and blameless knowledge, and
practice of that which is really good. But because the feeble and earthly minds
of the Israelites could not without difficulty be brought off from the worship
and ungodly manners, and detestable superstition of the Egyptians; therefore
God by the Pedagogy of the Mosaic Law, gave them a spiritual command against
many Gods, and yet permitted them, after the ancient manner of the worship to
which they had been accustomed, to offer Eucharistical and Expiatory Oblations,
duly and wisely appointed, and as types and shadows of good things to come. --
For the beginnings Id. ibid. p. 126, 127.
of Sciences are imperfect, and by the gradual additions of little and little,
they arrive at their complete stature.

Touching the whole Law of Moses as Mosaical, Maimonides says of it Maim. More
Nevochim. par. 3. c. 29. p. 424.
That the principal design and intention of it was the removal of Idols.

PART 2. Of the Idolatry of the Jews.
IT appears then that God gave the Jews sufficient antidotes against
Idolatry; and it is as manifest that their folly rendered them very often
ineffectual. They by their ritual inclination, by cohabitation, by commerce, by
apish affectation of foreign modes, learned the Egyptian, Assyrian, and
Babylonian Idolatries. Some of this leaven brake out in the Wilderness. There
they began to lean toward the worship of false gods by adoring the true one
(as shall be showed) in the unmeet Symbol of the Golden Calf. Hence God in his
just Judgment, gave some of them up to the direct worship of false gods Act. 7.
39, to 43. Amos 5. 25, 26.
, besides the true one, though not wholly without him. They worshipped Moloch
(as some think See Thorndik. Epilogue, c. 25. p. 298.
by the Tabernacle which the Priests took up, and Remphan by a Star, and the
Host of Heaven. Amongst that Host of orderly Lights, some have placed the
Prototype of Apis, and supposed him to be the Sun. But it seems absurd to
say, that God permitted the people of the Jews to fall into the worship of the
Sun afterward, because they had worshipped him already.

At the entrance of the People into Canaan, that Generation who had seen the
hand of God so remarkably upon their disobedient and Idolatrous Forefathers,
and who by his Miraculous power and mercy were possessed of part of the good
Land, did in pious manner adhere to him. And when Joshuah, under whose wise and
successful conduct they had been brought over Jordan, advised them at his
death, to renounce the Idols of their Fathers, and of the Amorites Josh. 24.
14, to 29.
, they with pious earnestness cried out, God forbid that we should forsake the
Lord to serve other Gods. And they ratified this holy resolution of theirs by a
solemn Covenant betwixt them and Joshuah.

Joshuah being dead, and that pious Generation being gathered to their Fathers,
There arose Judge. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
another Generation after them who knew not [or owned not] the Lord, -- but
served Baal and Ashtaroth. This Idolatrous disposition continued in the people
under their Judges Judge. 2. 16, 17, 18, 19. e 1 Samuel 4.
, insomuch that in the time of Eli (e) the Palladium of Israel, the Ark of the
Covenant, was permitted to fall into the hands of the Philistines. They were a
very terrible enemy to the Israelites for many years: and in order to the
removal of their yoke, and to the regaining the favor of God, Samuel 1 Samuel 7.
3, 4.
spoke unto all the house of Israel, saying, If you do return unto the Lord
with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods, and Ashtaroth from among
you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only; and he will
deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. Then the children of Israel did
put away Baalim [The Idols of the Sun See Grotius on Judge. 2. 13. p. 2002. ap.
Crit. maj.
,] and Ashtaroth, [in the LXX. (...), the Idols in the Groves of Astarte, or
the Earth] and served the Lord only. Such Piety of Samuel their Judge, and of
David their King, and of Solomon also in the former part of his Reign, together
with Gods Presence in that Magnificent Temple built by him, did much promote
the true Religion, and stop the growth of Idolatrous worship. But at length
Solomon himself gave them an unhappy Example of it in his own person, being
seduced to Idols by the charms and softnesses of his many Heathen Women 1 King.
11. 1, to 8.
So fatal an evil is Lust to the best Understandings, which whenever it
posfesseth them, it perfectly besotteth, and reigns over them with
uncontrouled power. This Impiety was manifest in Solomon about the thirtieth
year of his Reign, as Chronologers commonly account. But the more secret
beginning of his defection is by Josephus and other Jews dated from the Images
of Oxen made at his command, as supporters of the Brazen Sea 1 King. 7. 25.
. It is the common opinion of the Arabians, and particularly of Abulfarajus
Abulsarajus, p. 55. Mortuus est [Solomon] sine poenitentia.
, that Solomon died in his Sin without Repentance. Of that God is judge. It is
more certain that before he died, he persisted in it notwithstanding a repeated
appearance of Gods Shechinah 1 King. 11. 9^ 10, 11, 12.
, and that God was highly displeased with him, and threatened to rend the
Kingdom from him after his death. Of that Rent the Instrument was Jeroboam, by
whose means one Kingdom became divided into two, rather Factions than Kingdoms,
those of Judah and Israel. In the latter Jeroboam set up two Golden Calves
which the people worshipped at Dan and Bethel; he being jealous 1 King. 12. 27.
that if they sacrificed at Jerusalem, they would return to their Allegiance
due to the King of Judah. For this and other sins God suffered the Ten Tribes
to be for ever led captive. Judah also polluted it self with Idolatry. It began
under Rehoboam after his three good years of Government, and came to its height
under Athaliah, Ahaz, and Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33. 3, to 7.
; and at length Judah likewise was carried into Captivity. After her return
from Captivity under the favor of Cyrus, many of the Jews were more faithful
to the true God, being sensible that for their serving of Idols he had cast
them out of his most safe Protection; and the Statue of Moses on an Ass, found
by Antiochus in the Holiest, is one of the Tales of Diodorus Diod. Sic. ap.
Phot. Bibl. p. 1150. de Statua Mosis Asino insidentis. Unde Judaei (forte)
dicti Asinarii.
. Yet after this great deliverance, diverse of them relapsed, through that
persecution against them, and that toleration of all Gentilism in Judea, of
which Antiochus Epiphanes was the Author See 1 Mac. 1.
. He set up the abomination of Desolation, the Idol of Jupiter Olympius, on the
Altar of God; and Idol apt to move the pious Jews to forsake the City, and to
leave it desolate. Many of the Israelites 1 Match. 1. 43.
[either through fear, or vain inclination] consented to his Religion, (...),
(as the Seventy) to his worship; and they sacrificed to Idols, and profaned the
Sabbath. But some Verse. 60, 61, 62, 63.
chose rather to sacrifice their own lives than to offer to Idols. The
Samaritans of all others were under this Tyrant the most disloyal to God; they
send Letters of flattery to this impious Monster, of which Josephus in the
Twelfth Book, and seventh Chapter of his Antiquities, has given us a Copy.
They inscribe them, (...), to Antiochus the illustrious God. They feign
themselves to be the offspring of the Sidonians and Persians, that they may
not be taken for Jews, whom he hated. They consecrate a Temple on Mount
Gerazim, to the Jupiter of Greece, and by such vile arts they insinuate
themselves into the favor of Antiochus, who commands that they be esteemed,
and used as Grecians. And yet a while after under Ptolomaeus Philometor, they
abhor Idols, and contend with the Jews themselves about the sanctity of their
Temple, which they preferred before that of Jerusalem it self. The Jews by this
means, and by former commerce with Grecians, in diverse of their Cities and
Colonies, and particularly in their own Jerusalem, [which Alexander himself is
said to have visited;] and in Alexandria, [where the Ptolomies had advanced the
Worship of Greece, and in which Philo in his time numbered exceeding many Jews
Philo Jud. in Flaccum, p. 971, 972, etc.
;] became leavened with the Grecian Demonology See Diod. Sic. ap. Phot. Bibl.
p. 1154. affirming concerning the Jews, that by reason of the Persian and
Mac^donian Victories, they suffered many alterations, (...).
. This Thales learnt in Egypt, and he enlarged and propagated it in the Regions
of Greece. I cannot accuse the Jews of erecting Statues, or of offering solemn
Prayers, or Sacrifices to them. Yet all who mark that Translation of the
Seventy which is commonly in men's hands, may charge at least the Hellenistick
Jews, with a false and dangerous estimation of Demons; with an estimation of
them as Presidents and Tutelar Spirits, who under God did govern the World. He
that runs may read thus much in their Version of the eighth verse of the
thirty-second of Deuteronomy: When the most High divided the Nations Deuteronomy. 32.
8. See R. Sal. Francu, p. 3.
, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the People [(...),]
according to the number [not of the Children of Israel, as the Hebrew Copy
reads it, but according to the number] of the Angels of God; who (they say)
were seventy, and whom they call the Sanedrim above. Such Angels many Jews
imagined to have their Thrones in several Stars, whilst their footstools, or
inferior places of Government were in several parts of the Earth. Hence Aben
Ezra says See Menasseh Ben Israel, in Quaest. 2. in Deuteronomy. p. 222.
, that it appeared by Experiments [he means sure miraculous effects
succeeding the worship of Patrons of Places,] that every Nation and every City
has its particular Planet to which it is subject. But he excepteth the people
of Israel, who being subject only to the Government of God, had it seems no
Planet for their Superintendent. Also with allusion to the Government of the
Nations by Angels in Stars and Constellations, and not by immediate Providence,
the Jews R. Sal. France, p. 2, (...).
in their Liturgy give to God the name of the King of the Kings of Kings; that
is, the King of those Angelical Powers who rule over the Potentates on Earth.
This belief of the Hellenists contains in it a twofold error: That of the
Lieutenancy of Angels, and that of the Innocence of those Spirits which
Christianity calls Demons, in the most infamous signification of that name.
This double error is found in one passage of Josephus, who records it as one
of the Precepts of Moses, [of Thales, he might have said more truly,] That one
Citizen ought not to blaspheme those Heavenly Powers (...).
which other Cities have in esteem as Gods.

The Jews after the coming of the Messiah, had besides the motives of their
Religion, Political Reasons against Images or Idols. For they have been forced
by a just vengeance pursuing such bloody murderers, to live dispersedly under
both Christian and Mohammedan Power. And in Dominions of both kinds the Worship
of Graven Idols, (besides that their zeal against them, and for their Sabbath
was instrumental, as the charracter of a Party, to keep them still in some sort
of body), would have much obstructed their Toleration. The Mahometans would
have been, from the other extreme, averse to them; their Law forbidding all
Statues and graven or painted Images. In pursuance of this Law, their zeal
defaced the Grecian and Roman Coins, which had upon them the Image of their
Emperors. It did so formerly, but since that time it is so much cooled, that
they do not believe the Coin profaned by the Superscription. Nay, they prefer
the Venetian Ducats which have Images upon them, before their own Sultanies
which have none, but are stamped according to the will of their Prophet See
Leonclav. Pand. Hist. Turcic. p. 139.
. But so it is often seen, that the principle of Avarice becomes much stronger
than that of false Religion.

In the days of Julian the Jews were noted amongst the Gentiles as the
Worshippers of one God; and, whatsoever their opinion was concerning Angels,
they were not observed for any external worship with which they honored them.
That Apostate makes this difference betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles of his
Age; that the Gentiles Julian. ap. Cyr. l. 9. 306.
worshipped many Gods [or Demons,] but the Jews one God only. And those
unbelievers pretend, at this day, to the strictest observance of the second
Command.

It may be here taken a little notice of, how the Jews have been often accused
by the Gentiles, and amongst them by Juvenal, Petronius, and Strabo, as
Worshippers of the Clouds. If this reproach had been cast upon that Religion
whilst the Ark remained in the most holy place, I should have thought it
occasioned by that miraculous Cloud which shadowed the Mercy-seat, and toward
which the High Priest did make his obeisance. But the scandal cannot be traced
(so far as my knowledge leads me) beyond the days of Augustus. Mr. Seldom Seld.
de Diis Syris, Synt. 2. c. 17. p. 370, 371.
once guessed that this reproach might arise from a mistake of the Idiom of the
Jews, who called the Majesty of God, Heaven Rabbin. Prove. ap. H. Othon. Lex. c.
Rabbin. in Judic. S. S. in Joh. 20. 4. Omnia ad Coelum, i. e. Omnia ad Gloriam
Dei.
. This Idiom Christ uses, whilst he demands concerning the Baptism of John,
Whether it was of Heaven or of Men; of Divine or Humane Authority. Afterward
he was induced to think that the Slanderers of the Jews mistook them for the
Gnostics, who made so much noise about their Heavens and AEons. At last he
rejected the accusation with scorn, and placed it amongst such groundless and
extravagant forgeries as that of their worshipping an Ass, with which malicious
ignorance had traduced them.

But it is not my purpose to write an entire History of the Jewish Worship, or
to tell how often they served one God, and how often they worshipped many. I
will only insist on one Instance, That Peccatum Maximum (as the Vulgar Exodus
32. 21, ^0, 31.
Latin calls it) their greatest sin; to wit, their Idolatry committed with the
Golden Calf. It is an instance which themselves take especial notice of,
thinking that in every Judgment sent to them by God See Moses Gerund. ap. Seld.
Synt. de Diis Syris, C. de vit Aur. p. 155.
, there is, as they speak, an ounce of that Idol; and it is a subject which
has occasioned a Controversy betwixt the Papists and the Reformed.

PART 3. Of the Worship of the Golden Calf.
THE Golden Calf was, either the ultimate Object of the peoples Worship, or a
Symbol of some Deity which they finally honored. Cardinal Cajetan in his
Commentary on Exodus, supposes the former, and thinks them to speak properly
in that form which they used, These are thy Gods [or this Nehem. 9. 18.
is thy God] who brought thee out of the land of Egypt. As if those
Worshippers, though sufficiently brutish, were as stupid as the very Idol it
self: As if they could believe that their deliverance was miraculously wrought
for them, by a Statue which they saw formed after the time that they were
delivered. Wherefore Cardinal Bellarmine contendeth, that the speech has a
Figure in it, and that the Calf was a Symbol of a Deity, yet not of the true
God, but of the Idol Apis which they had seen honored with singular reverence
in Egypt. That it was not the ultimate Object, but a Symbol or Image, is
suggested by Tertullian Tertull. de Idol. Sect. 3. p. 87.
, who calls it, Simulachrum Vituli, not a God, but the Image or Idol of the
Calf. Neither ought it to be dissembled that Philo Philo Jud. de vita Mosis. l.
3. p. 677. C. -- (...), etc.
, Lactantius Lactant. l. 4. C. 10. de Vera Sap. p. 376.
, and St. Hierom S. Hieron. in Hos. c. 4. v. 15. Tom. 6. p. 20. D.
, believe the Calf to have been the Statue of Apis.

To the great name of Bellarmine I oppose that of Tostatus, who Tostat. in
Exodus c. 32. Quaest. 7.
affirms those words of the people, [These are thy gods,] to carry this sense
with them: O Israel, God who was without Body, and unseen, and who brought thee
out of Egypt, and gave thee a passage through the Red Sea, is he whom thou now
see; that is, his Divine virtue resideth in that Golden body. Nay, I may
oppose to Bellarmine the greater Authority of the Council of Trent: the
Catechism set forth by order of that Council, does teach (though not directly
yet by consequence), that the Calf of Aaron was a Symbol of Jehovah, seeing it
owneth the Calves of Dan and Bethel to have been worshipped as his Statues. Now
this latter it acknowledges, because it owneth them in Israel, who halted
betwixt God and Baal (as also the Samaritans) to have been divided betwixt the
true God and false Deities or Idols Catech. Council. Trident. in 1. Praec.
Decal. p. 388. -- Inter -- Hebraeos, permulti fuerunt, quiz ut Helias iis obji^
ciebat, in duas parts claudicabant: Quod and Samaritae fecerunt, qui Deum
Israelis and DeosGentiunt colebant.
. What Deities then were the extremes betwixt which these unstable and giddy
Israelites did visibly stagger? Did not they stagger betwixt the new Religion
of Baal 1 King. 16. 31, 32.
, learned from the Zidonians? and the more ancient and less corrupt, V. 30.
Ahab did evil above all before him. V. 31. He outsin'd Jeroboam.
yet too much depraved one of the God of Israel, who (as appears by his Name
Hos. 4. 15.
and Rites Amo* 4. 4, 5^
used there) was worshipped by those Symbols taken without Divine allowance,
from the Cherubim on the Ark which were only Appendages of the Shechinah, and
not intermediate Objects of the High Priests Reverence. If these Symbols had
not been used as the Shechinah of the true God, Jeroboam would not have been so
severely blamed for making the lowest of the people Priests of the high Places;
for the vilest and meanest people, the lees and dreggs of the world had been
the fittest instruments in the servicc of Idols. Like Deity, like Worshippers.
Now to this Worship at Dan and Bethel Jeroboam was moved by his Political
interest, which made it necessary for him to continue the Schism, not by
dividing the Israelites from their God, whom they would not wholly renounce,
but by setting apart distinct places and Symbols of his especial presence.
There were in Israel secret Worshippers of God, after a right negative manner,
no less than seven thousand, who served God only. But such as these were not
visible to the Prophet who bemoaneth himself, as if the Church [the Church of
Israel] was confined to his own person. He therefore means not by his halters
such as sometimes worshipped the true God in holier manner than Jeroboam
prescribed, and sometimes Baal, [a name common both to the new and old Idols
Hos. 13. 1, 2. Tobit. 1. 5. 1 King. 19. 18. compar. with Romans 11. 4. (...),
that is, (as Mr. Thornd. in Epil. Part. 3. p. 299.) (...); or, it may be,
(...), or (...).
]: For them he could not openly upbraid of whom he had no knowledge. His meaning
Jehu expounds when 2 King. 10. 23.
he opposes the Priests of Baal to the servants of the Lord: For what other
servants than the Priests of Jeroboam did then publicly officiate in Israel?
For Ahab succeeded his Father Omri who had established the Vanities or Idols 1
King. 16. 26.
of the Calves, and sinned beyond Jeroboam himself Verse. 25.
. And Ahab was so far from restoring Gods pure Worship, that he outwent his
Father Omri in encouraging that which was false and degenerate. So properly may
the AEtas Parentum in Horace, be here applied. Against the Authorities of
Philo, Lactantius, and S. Hierom before-cited, I put into the balance the
words of Aaron. Aaron called the Idolatrous Festival, a Feast to Jehovah,
making use (as Micah Judge. 17. 3.
did afterward) of the most Revered name of God. I argue not here from the
bare imposition of that word, for Idolaters did learn to give to Creatures that
incommunicable Name Wisd. 14. 21. Men serving either calamity or tyranny, did
ascribe unto stones and stocks, the Incommunicable name.
. But I argue from the reverence which is due to Aaron the select high Priest
of the God of Israel. He offends extremely against charity and good manners,
who thinks of such a person, that he would pacify a clamorous people with so
vile a condescension. He had a better design, howsoever the madness of the
people perverted it. It cannot be thought that the God whom he served in so
Sacred an Office, should be so soon forgotten by him, and so ungratefully and
wretchedly dishonored in a base Egyptian Idol, passing under the most separate
name of Jehovah. It was ill enough that he set up a Symbol of Gods presence
where he had not appointed him Deuteronomy. 12. 13. Take heed to thy self that thou
offerest not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou see.
. It was a crime sufficiently high that he had erected an undue Statue, or an
arbitrarious external sign of Gods presence, though not an Image of him; for
such the Cherubims were not. For I suppose he took his Pattern from part of
what he saw in the Holy Mount, when the Shechinah of God came down upon it,
attended with Angels. Of them some were Cherubims, or Angels appearing with the
Faces of Oxen; as I afterward show In Chap. 14.
. Now it was a great presumption to worship God in any other, than in his
proper and allowed Symbol, (as rightly Altis. Sum. l. 1. c. 15. Non in quolibet
signo adorandus eft Deus, sed in proprio; sicut Movses adoravit Deum in Rubo in
quo loquebatur ei, etc. and Abraham in Angelo: unde non est adorandus in
lapide, esset enim Idololatria, de non proprio signo Dei sacere proprium.
Altisiodorus) though it happened to be a Cherub, and not Apis. The Sacrifices
offered in the Worship of the Calf were not agreeable to any Egyptian Idol. For
amongst them at that time the blood of a Bull was as great an abomination as
was the blood of a Swine to the Hebrews. At that time I say, for after the
Macedonian Conquest Secundum Horum ap. Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7. p. 215.
, the Idol Apis it self had in the Suburbs beasts solemnly offered in Sacrifice
to it. Also before those times all the Egyptians sacrificed clean and male
Bullocks, if Herodotus Herod. Euterpt. p. 117, 118.
be an Author of credit. And it appears by the History of Elijah that Beasts
were offered upon the Altars of the Zidonian 1 King. 18. 22, 23, etc.
Baal, or Sun, from whom they had expectation of an answer by fire. But he was
either asleep at that time, with his eye closed by the air, then in disposition
for clouds, or in his journey of Diurnal motion, and did not, or rather could
not mind their Sacrifice. However in those early times, and with reference to
Egypt Exodus 8. 25, 26.
, the Sacrifices of Oxen which the people offered at the Golden Calf, do prove
it to be something else than the Symbol of Apis: unless a man would say that
they honored old Idols with their new Rites, as afterward they did,
worshipping Moloch Act. 7. 42, 43.
with the Rites of the Tabernacle of Jehovah. They did not, as I think,
dethrone God, but joined that false God with him, and corrupted true Religion
with mixtures of Gentilism.

PART 4. Of the Idol Apis.
APis the living Ox, was an Idol of ancient standing; for the Grecians who
lived before the times of Alexander Herod. in Thal. p. 195, 196.
make mention of it. Herodotus is one of them; and he records the Slaughter
of Apis by Cambyses, who was the second Monarch of Persia. He likewise
introduces the Egyptians alleging the Festivity of the Appearance of Apis as
an ancient Holiday Herod. ibid. -- (...).
. They professed it to be a custom, that they might appease that vehement
passion which a mistake had raised in him. For when he found them rejoicing at
the Appearance of Apis, he imagined them triumphing at that defeat of his
Forces which he had newly sustained. By this it is plain, that the Idol Apis
was ancient, but to me it seems not to have existed at all as such before the
death of Moses.

And this I here design to show by reasons allowable in Philological matters,
though I have not the vanity to call them infallible Proofs. If this can be
done, the Controversy will of it self fall to the ground, seeing the very
subject of it will be removed.

There are few stories more uncertain than the Antiquities of Chaldea and
Egypt, of which Kingdoms the former seems to be the more ancient See Is.
Voss. de AEt. Mundi. p. 41.
by about forty years: And all that is said of either of them beyond the days
of Phaleg, is vanity and imposture. Their vain and ignorant Priests, and men
not much unlike them, the Mythologers of Greece, have set the Accounts of time
backward and forward, and given feigned Pedigrees both to their Gods and their
Princes. And they have so confounded Fable and History, that both have been
swallowed by many without distinction. This confusion has happened in nothing
more than in their Historical Theology; and I think the story of the Idol Apis
may serve as a considerable example of it. Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, Ammianus
Marcellinus, all make different descriptions of it: And the Image of that Idol
in the Table of Isis does still differ from each Character in those Writers See
Pignor. de mens^ Isiac^. p. 36, 37.
. In all things I shall not be able at this distance of time, to separate
falsehood from Truth. But in the point of its Antiquity I do not despair of
proving its common date to be fictitious.

Before the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, Oxen were very sacred among the
Egyptians Exodus 8. 25, 26.
. But they were then, if I mistake not, no otherwise sacred than many Creatures
were afterward among the Pythagoreans Hence the Symbol of (...) is interpreted
of not killing or not sacrificing Animals.
, and are at this day among the Brachmans of India. That is, they were not
touched with violent hand, or weapon: They were not used for Food, or offered
in Sacrifice. Hence Strabo speaking of Apis at Memphis Strabo l. 17. Geogr. p.
803.
, and Mnevis at Heliopolis [in times much nigher to us], does say of those
Idols that they were reputed Deities, whilst the Oxen in other places were held
as sacred Creatures, but not as gods See Vattier's Pref. to Muctadi's Prod. of
Egypt, p. 25, 26.
. Whether they were esteemed sacred Animals in memory of Joseph, or from their
use in Tillage Ovid. l. 4. Fast. Bos aret, ignavam sacrificate suem.
, or for some deeper reason, I pretend not to tell: for, it seems, themselves
could not agree about the original of their Superstitions Strab. l. 17. Geogr.
p. 813. -- (...).
. Sacred then they were in some sense, before Moses became a Lawgiver to
Israel. But that there was any one Ox selected so early as an object of
Religious worship, is an opinion taken up without ground from History. My eyes
at least have not been able to epsy so much as an imperfect footstep of it.
Had such an Idol existed, and been imitated also by the Israelites in the
Wilderness, St. Stephen in his Epitome of their History, and particularly in
that part of it wherein he remembers their Idolatry with the Calf, could as
easily have upbraided them with the false Deity Apis, as he did with those Act.
7. 41, 43.
of Moloch and Remphan.

The Learned Mr. Seldom, who refers the Golden Calf to the Egyptian Pattern,
does two ways endeavor to obviate this Objection against the Antiquity of Apis
Seld. de Diis Syris. Synt. 1. c. 4. de vit. Aur. p. 150.
.

First, He contendeth that this Worship of Apis or Osiris is sufficiently
ancient, because it terminateth in the Sun, which was reputed a Divine Power at
the very birth of Idolatry. Now this reason, if it proves any thing, it
proves too much; much more than Mr. Seldom himself will own as truth. For from
hence it will follow, both that the Idolatry of Egypt was as ancient as that of
Babylon, and that the whole almost of the Egyptian Idolatry, which was
exceeding various, commenced at the same time. There was scarce any Idol set up
there, but in one respect or other it was referred to that glorious body. It
scarce shined upon any thing, which was not at some time or other consecrated
to it. The Lion, the Heart, the Hare, the Eagle, the Hawk, the Crow, the Cock,
the Goose, the Upupa; the Pine Tree, the Nile; all these, and many others were
sacred to the Sun, as may to those, who care not to turn the leaves of many
Authors, appear compendiously in the Harpocrates of Cuperus Cuperi Harp^cr. p.
14, 16, 21, 27, 43, 44, 45, 55, 60, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95.
. Yet these Idols were erected upon diverse occasions, and as the humor at
diverse times possessed fanciful and superstitious men.

Secondly, Mr. Seldom Seld. Ibid- de Aur. vit. p. 153:
produces in favor of the Antiquity of the Idol Apis, the Testimony of
Eusebius. Eusebius (he says) affirms of Apis, that in the days of King Aseth,
a Calf was deified and called by that name. And for King Aseth, Mr. Seldom
supposes him to have reigned in Egypt in the days of Isaac.

But he has gained little strength to his Cause, by producing a witness who
contradicts himself. For Eusebius. elsewhere Seld. Ibid. p. 154. Imo in Sec.
post Cataclys. Din. sub Choo Rege, Api^ and Mnevin and Mendesium Caprum, in
Deos relatos, ex Manethone Sacerdote tradit [Eusebius].
relates that Apis and Mnevis were deified under Choos, who is said to have
reigned in the 2d. Dynastie after the Flood. For this he cites Manetho a
Grecising Fabler, who disagreeth with Herodotus, and Diodorus, and fetches his
Relation from pretended Pillars, uncertain both for the place, and the
Inscriptions of them. Little credit is given by the Judicious to his Dynasties.
He makes in them contemporary persons to succeed each other; he makes many
Kings out of the several deputies of one. He makes Egypt no ancient Monarchy,
as the Scripture does. For at the same time that Menis reigned at Thebes, he
sets up Saites as a King over other parts of Egypt Scalig. ap. Voss. l. 1.
de Idol. c. 28. p. 109. Ex hac Din. patet, diversos Reges, eod. temp. in AEg.
diverse. partib. Imperium obtinuisse. Nam quando Saites primus Din. 15. ex
Latrunc. Pastor. circa Bucolia AEg. jam dec. Ann. regnabat (...) part. Theb.
Regn. inivit Menes Theba^us.
. It must indeed be granted, that though Eusebius contradicts himself in
assigning the particular time; yet it serves the purpose of Mr. Seldom, that
in both instances he refers to time ancient enough. He does so in those
Places. But in others which Mr. Seldom has not cited, he sets a more modern
date to the Apotheosis of Apis. In his Book of Evangelical Preparation Eus. de
praep. Evang. l. 9. chapter 27. p. 433.
, he ascribes to Chenephren King of Egypt, both the Deification of their Ox,
and the imposition of the name of Apis. He adds, that thenceforth the people
erected a Temple to that Idol. Now he makes this King Kenephren Contemporary
with Moses, and one who reverenced his person, and received from him the rite
of Circumcision. All this Eusebius has taken from Artapanus in his History of
the Jews. For Artapanus I cannot say much in confirmation of his fidelity. Yet
I think him of weight enough to be put into the scale against Manetho the
Sebennite, a writer so absurdly confident in his Fictions, that he makes Menis
equal to Adam See Is. Voss. de AEt. mundi. p. 36.
. The same Eusebius in his Cronicon, sets down Epaphus, or Apis as born in the
Reign of Chencres, that is, of the abovesaid Chenephren, as may be conjectured
both from the affinity of the names, and the agreement of the time. For he
reports of Chencres (called also (...), or the Rebel against Almighty God)
that he perished in the Red Sea. He was therefore Contemporary with Moses, and
no other than that Pharaoh who bade defiance to the God of Israel, and fell as
a Sacrifice to his Omnipotent Justice. That he was born in the Reign of
Chencres, if it respects the Natural birth of Moses, is a mistake, yet such a
one as is common in ancient Chronology, which is not exact to a day or a year;
for he was about fourscore years old at his going forth from Egypt: but the
time of his Civil birth may be then accounted when he began to head the
Israelites, and to say to Pharaoh, Let the people go that they may serve their
God. Then God said to him in effect, Thou art my Son, a Prince and Lieutenant
under me; this day have I begotten thee, or created thee a Ruler.

If then the person represented by an Ox was not more ancient than the
deliverance by Moses, much less was the Golden Apis extant in Egypt at that
time of his departure. Yet Mr. Seldom will have this Golden Ox Seld. de vit.
Aur^o, in Synt. 1. c. 4. p. 141.
to be the Pattern of the Idolatrous Israelites, and not the living Beast. It
is true, that Plutarch Plutarc. de Is. and Osyr. p. 366, D.
mentions a Golden Ox, and tells how for four days together it was exposed
with great solemnity, during the disappearance of Apis, or, as he expounds
it, at the decrease of Osiris, or the Nile. And in Pliny we read of a Golden
Cat Plin. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 29. p. 144. 22.
worshipped by the Citizens of Rhadata in Egypt. I doubt not but that such a
Golden Image was extant, many years before Plutarch wrote of Isis and Osiris.
He is a grave Author, and a man of singular skill in the more modern affairs of
Egypt. But it is not shown by him, or by any other Historian, that such a
Statue was framed at the beginning of the worship of that Idol. Of this
Herodotus, the Father of Secular History, takes no notice, though he had just
occasion so to do in his Discourse of the disappearance of Apis, if any such
thing had been then in being Herod. in Thalia. p. 195.
. Also in his description of the Palace said to be built for Apis by
Psammitichus Id. in Euterpe. p. 169.
, he drops not a word concerning any such Golden Calf, though he mentions
diverse Types [Hieroglyphical, or Ornamental Figures] with which that Palace
abounded. Nay Lucian denies that any Figures or Statues had place in the
ancient Temples of Egypt Lucian. de D^a Sir. p. 1057.
.

PART 5. Of the Originals of Apis and Serapis.
THE Objections of Mr. Seldom being thus removed out of my way, I proceed in
inquiring after the true and original Apis. Apis was not ultimately the living
Ox, but some Deifi'd Person, of whom the Ox was the Symbol; or (as Diodorus (a)
reports) the g Diod. Sic. l. 1. Bibl. Histor. c. 85. p. 74.
Receptacle into which his soul passed in its transmigration. That he was a man
all Writers agree, unless they be of the strain of Porphyry Porphyr. ap. Eusebius.
de Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 13. p. 117.
. He was unwilling to own so mean and dishonorable a thing of his Heathen
Gods, as to acknowledge them to have been dead men; wherefore he would needs
persuade the world that Apis was sacred to the Moon only. This he would infer
from the white spot on the right side of Apis, in the form of the Moon. That
Mark indeed is mentioned by Pliny and Ammianus Marcellinus; but in more ancient
times the Ox had no such Character on him. Herodotus is accurate in his
description, and he omitteth not his minute marks, of which this of the Moon is
none. The Bullock (says he) called Apis Herod. l. 3. p. 195. C. D.
has these signs: In its body it is all black, [for (...) in the Text of
Herodotus is mistaken for (...):] on its Forehead it has a white spot of a
apiece figure; on its back it has the Image of an Eagle; on its tongue a
Scarabee, and two hairs on its Tail. The Superstition of aftertimes increased
his Hieroglyphical Marks. To the Sun or Moon this Ox might be sacred, and also
to some departed Hero, or Heroess, for so were the Idols of Osiris and Isis.
But Historians are not agreed about the Hero called Apis. Each of them almost
has a several conjecture.

Suidas [in the word (...)] supposes him to have been a King of Egypt, bearing
that name of Apis, and to have obtained after death Divine honor, for his
Liberality to the Citizens of Alexandria, whom he supplied with Corn in time of
Famine. The like confusion of Apis and Serapis is found in Ruffinus Ruffin.
Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
. He mentions the Famine at Alexandria, and the supply by Apis. But
concerning him he knows not whether he were a King of Egypt, or a Father of a
lesser Family at Memphis. Of this Apis, whoever he was, he reports further
out of an uncertain Gentile Historian, that he had a Temple at Memphis built in
honor of him: Also that within the Temple an Ox (the Symbol of a good
Husbandman) was preserved, and honored divinely by the name of Apis. The name
of Serapis joined with that of Apis in Suidas, and that City of Alexandria
mentioned by both of them, do plainly show whence this Fable came, from modern
Greece, not from ancient Egypt. Herodotus and Diodorus knew no such King of
Egypt as Apis; neither is there any such Royal name before the days of Moses,
in the Chronology of Eratosthenes, or Manetho; though the latter had set it
down, time enough, for the name of an Idol. It is true, that in Syncellus the
seventh King of the Inferior Egypt is called Serapis. But the Judicious Reader
of Syncellus will have little regard to him in this point; both because he
finds the third King in his Catalogue set down by the late, and plainly Greek
name of Aristarchus; and because he cannot but know that Serapis came very late
out of Greece to Alexandria. As he was originally a Grecian Deity he was no
other than Pluto, of whom the three-headed Cerberus was the Emblem; he having
dominion (an Empire given him by their fancy) over the Water, gross Air, and
Earth, though principally over the latter of them See Kirch. Oed. Synt. 3. c.
5. p. 194.
. In Egypt he was received with great devotion, as if he had been a kind of
husband to their Isis, when she signified the Earth; and a god proper for their
Nilus, and their fertile soil. To this invention they soon added, and sometimes
they confounded him with their Apis and Osiris; and sometimes they honored him
as the Sun, or Nature, or the Soul of the World. In the Temple of Alexandria
his mighty Image reached one side of it with its right hand, and the other with
its left; and it was made of all woods and metals; and by an artificial window
(as has been said already) it admitted the Sunbeams. In some of its Statues he
represented Jupiter in the Head, Neptune in the Belly, as also Pluto, and other
Stygian Deities; in the Ears, Mercury, and Apollo in the Eyes Id. Ibid. p. 195.
. Thus it fared with this Idol, which when Superstition had dressed it, was the
least part of its former self.

There is something in the name AEsculapius which sounds like Apis, and on
him some have fixed. He indeed is of sufficient Antiquity, if he be (what a
learned man D. Marsh. Chron. Canon. Secul. 1. p. 28, 39.
thinks him) King Tosorthrus the successor of Menis. But I meet with no reason
offered for the proof of these matters. The sound of the name in Latin and
Greek I allow not as a reason: the ancient Egyptian name was neither
AEsculapius, nor (which is further removed) (...), these being apparently of
other Countries. Add to this, that the Greeks in the Stromata of Clemens Clem.
Alex. Strom. l. 1. p. 307. A. and ap. Eusebius. de Praep. Ev. l. 10. c. 6. p. 475.
, oppose Apis to AEsculapius, and make the first the Inventor, the second the
Improver of Physic. Somewhat like to this is said by St. Cyril, who following
the chase of Pagan Mythologers, does make Apis the Inventor of Physic, and the
Teacher of it to AEsculapius S. Cyr. cont. Julian. l. 6. p. 200.
; who thenceforth it seems left Egypt, and traveled the World for the gaining
of Riches by this useful Art, which in aftertimes was said Proverbially to
give them. And to this Tale belongs another of Serapis and AEsculapius, as both
meant by Pluto See Kirch. Oed. Synt. 3. c. 5. p. 195.
, who is conversant amongst Metals, Stones, Roots, Plants, Subterraneous
Treasure, and whatsoever conduces to the health and life of man. You see
toward what Nation, and what times, this AEsculapius, Apis, or Serapis
inclines, and that Moses never knew him.

There is still as little certainty in their opinion who confound the Egyptian
Apis, with Apis the Argive, the Son of Phoroneus; which Apis, Gerard Vossius
Ger. Voss. d^ Idol. l. 1. c. 14. p. 59.
supposes to be that Jupiter who was incestuously familiar with Niobe. Of the
number of them who make the Egyptian Apis the same with the Argive, Hecataeus
is one Hecataeus ap: Clem. Alex. p. 322. See S. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c.
5. p. 1003.
. And he being himself an Argive, is tempted to a vain Fable in honor of his
Country. Arnobius, out of mistake, rather than pride, confounds Times and
Persons Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 1. p. 20.
, whilst he says of Apis, that he was born in Peloponnesus, and called in
Egypt, Serapis. They had spoken righter who called Serapis the [(...), the]
Coffin, or Grave of Apis; if they had meant this of Pluto as the God of the
Earth, who as 'twere swallowed up the Worship of Apis in his own at Alexandria.
Herodotus himself [though he never names the name of Serapis, it being not
then invented,] is yet in a great error Herod. in Euterpe. p. 169. and in
Thalia. p. 195. (...), etc.
when he makes Epaphus and Apis to be the same. For Epaphus, Great Grandfather
to Cadmus, was (as AElian AElian. de Animal. l. 11. c. 10.
notes) some Ages after him. But we owe it to the Pride of Greece, that her
Accounts are so antedated and corrupted. Little truth in the present Argument
may we expect from Aristippus a Grecian Mythologer, in his Arcadian story; or
from Aristeas the Argive Ap. Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. l. 10. c. 12. p. 499. ex
Clem. Strom. prim.
. Of them the first makes Apis the Son of Phoroneus the Founder of Memphis;
the other affirms him to be that very Serapis whom the Egyptians worshipped.

In the mean time Pausanias See D. Marsh. Chron. Can. p. 83.
blotteth the very name of Apis out of the line of the Argives; and AEschylus
will not allow him the place of a King Suppl. v. 266.
. Apollodorus, who owneth him in that quality Apoll. Bibl. l. 2. c. 1. p. 67,
68.
, is so far from transporting him into Egypt, and honoring of him as the
builder of Memphis, (a City built by Menis Herod. l. 2. p. 141.
, whose memory it retains in the very name of it;) that he finds both his
Cradle and Grave in his Fathers Country. His Father left him too deeply engaged
in a quarrel with Telxion and the Telchines Syncellus, p. 126. C.
, to become a Conqueror in Egypt: and it was by their Stratagems Apollod. l.
2. c. 1. p. 68. compared with Syncellus.
that he died so immaturely and without issue in Apia or Peloponnesus. But if
it were granted that the Argive were also the Egyptian Apis, I see not the
advantage which it could give to them who make his Symbol the Pattern of the
Golden Calf. For both Asricanus and Tatianus Ap. Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. l. 10.
c. 10. p. 490, etc. 11. p. 494.
prove it of Moses that he was equal with Inachus, whom Phoroneus the Father of
Apis is said to succeed. The truth is, we are here fallen amongst dark and
uncertain times, and can scarce tread with assurance in any path of Grecian
story, till we are come to the times of Theseus. And so much Plutarch with
singular honesty and truth has openly acknowledged. For Inachus himself, some
think him a Fiction, some a Man, others a River; and amongst these latter is
Pausanias.

The Original Apis adored in Egypt, was no doubt a man; but who he was, it is
hard to discover; so great is the perplexity which the blending as it were of
his Worship with that of Serapis, after the Macedonian Conquest, has occasioned
in this Argument. Bacchus, AEsculapius, and Serapis, each of them See Cuperi
Harpocr. p. 102, 103, 104.
in Coins, Marbles, and Books, have the form sometimes of a bearded or aged
man, and sometimes of a child. And this variety of form teaches us that there
was a more ancient and more modern Bacchus, AEsculapius, Apis, or Serapis,
though under other names. For the Grecian Serapis, whatsoever his Age was in
Greece, his Worship was esteemed modern in Egypt. The Egyptians (says Horus
Horus apud Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 7. p. 215.
, meaning all the people of that Nation) received not either Saturn, or
Serapis, into their Temples, till after the death of Alexander the Great. In
his time they were admitted in his City of Alexandria, of which Pausanias
says, that it was famous for the Temple of Serapis, but could not with color
of reason pretend to the Antiquity of that in Memphis. Of the Naucratitae in
Egypt, Celsus Cells. ap. Orig. cont. Cells. l. 5. p. 254.
himself confesses, that it was not long since they received the Deity of
Serapis. Tacitus gives intimation of the union as it were of Apis and Serapis
into one Idol, where he speaks of a Temple built in Rhacotis [the place it
may be taking its name from the Shrine] to the modern Serapis, in the very
place where one had been anciently consecrated to Serapis and Isis. [That is,
as he ought to have written it, of Apis or Osiris together with Isis.] After
the death of Alexander, the Ptolomies advancing the Power of Greece, the
Superstitions of Serapis were not confined to Alexandria, but were imposed on
all Egypt. In this matter I find a very pertinent place in St. Cyril S. Cyril.
A^ cont. Jul. l. 1. p. 13.
; and I will here insert it. In the 124 Olympiad, Ptolomeus Philadelphus ruling
in Egypt, they report of Serapis, that he was translated from Sinope to
Alexandria; that he was the same, with Pluto; that they built a Shrine to his
Image called by the Egyptians in their native tongue Racotis, by which word
they meant nothing but Pluto; and that they erected a Temple nigh to these
Monuments. But here the Greeks are at odds; some thinking him to be Osiris
rather than Pluto, and others Apis. A mighty feud arising from hence, they
composed the difference by giving to the Statue the name of Osirapis, both
parties having a share in the name. In process of time Osi was disused in
pronunciation, and Sarapis became the common name. Thus were Egyptian and
Grecian matters then confounded, as the Roman were afterward, of which we have
a fit emblem in those ancient Coins Ap. Thomasium de Tesseris Hospital. c. 28.
p. 202, 203.
, one side of which exhibited the Head of Augustus, and M. Agrippa; the other a
Crocodile. It is then no wonder if those who have written in succeeding times,
have not well distinguished betwixt the Egyptian Apis, and the Alexandrian
Serapis, whilst they found their Rites and Titles so interwoven. It is plain
from the Epistle of Julian to the Citizens of Alexandria Julian. ap. Socrat.
Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3. p. 171, 172, 173.
, That he mistook both Deities for one. For he speaks to the Alexandrians, as
to men whom he supposed to be originally Grecians Id. Ibid. p. 173. -- (...).
: And he magnifieth their great God Serapis Ib. p. 171.
, and ascribes to him the Gift of his Empire. And this I imagine to be the
reason why Serapis or Pluto, above all the other gods of Greece, was set up in
Egypt. For the Empire of it was the thing principally valued by Alexander; and
Pluto being the god of this World in their opinion, and the deity that extended
the Macedonian Power to Egypt; did therefore obtain the principal Return of the
Gratitude of the Conqueror. Pluto (I say) or Serapis was by Heathen
estimation, the god of this World: not the Prince of all Demons, but the
Prince of Terrestrial spirits inhabiting the Earth, and the gross Atmosphere
that belongs to it. He was the Beelzebub, the god of dirt or earth; the ruler
of the Terrene Demons, as they called them, and of Subcoelestial places. They
who will not assent to this conjecture, may consult Porphyry Porphyr. ap.
Eusebius. de Praep. Evangel. l. 4. c. 22. etc. 23. p. 173, 174.
, who makes Serapis and Pluto the same Deity; confineth not his Power to the
Earth, but extends it to the air about it, (whieh it seems was vehemently
beaten by his order, for the driving away of Demons, and the introduction of
his presence); and sets him over [(...),] evil spirits, or Demons, who with
gross Vehicles were hovering about the Earth.

PART 6. Of the Egyptian Apis; Whether he were Moses?
WHO the Grecian Apis or Serapis was, I will no further inquire. But concerning
the Apis of Egypt, I will for once personate an Adventurer in Philology, and
see if any new discovery may be made, or rather be guessed at. For in these
Arguments he that looks for Demonstration is in the ready way of having his
hopes deluded. Men here judge by Verisimilitude; and they judge persons in story
to be the same by a few likenesses; such as those of name and place: and they
seldom consider the many particulars in which they differ, but attend to those
few in which they agree. He that has but one mark is sometimes taken for the
person by the Philological Huy and Cry: And it is a wonder that some Smatterer
or other who has read of the Idol Semis in a Promontory nigh Lapland, has not
thence found out Sem and his Offspring in the North. I shall not argue here
from the mere likeness of Names, for I am about to find out Moses in Apis.

The Learned and diligent Gerard Vossius believed Joseph to be Apis Voss. de
Idol l. 1. c. 29. p. 110* 111, etc.
; and before him, Abenezra. Joseph (said he) spoke to Pharaoh on this manner
Abeneph. and Abenez. ap. Kirch. Oed. Syn. 3. c. 5. p. 197.
, Set me over the Treasure of Egypt, for I will be a faithful Steward. And the
King made him keeper of all the Repositories of the Land, and Joseph became in
some sort a King over all the Country, and they called him Apis. I know not
whence he had this Tale, yet fure I am that it makes not much for the honor
of Joseph's modesty. But it is not here my purpose to refute the conceits of
other men; it will be well if I can any way establish my own, and show with
probability that Moses is Apis.

We have heard already from Eusebius, that Apis (miscalled Epaphus) was
Contemporary with Chencres, and that Chencres was the Pharaoh that pursued
Moses. And we may further observe, what is affirmed by Polemo See Eusebius. de
Praep. Ev. l. 10. c. 10. p. 490.
in his first Book of the Grecian Story, That in the time of Apis, a part of
the Egyptian Forces made defection, and going forth, seated themselves in
Palestine, called Syria, in the Neighborhood of Arabia. Now it may seem
probable that Moses was this Apis, and not Apis the Son of Phoroneus, as Polemo
believed; if these three things be jointly considered:

First, That Moses was the ancient Egyptian or Arabian Bacchus.

Secondly, That Bacchus was the Egyptian Osiris.

Thirdly, That the ancient Egyptian Bacchus and Osiris was no other than Apis.

For the first, it may be argued with show of probability, that Moses and
Bacchus are the same persons under differing names, from the parallel
circumstances of their Story. I speak still of the first Egyptian Bacchus; for
concerning the Grecian Dionysius (or rather Dionysus), it is proved by Clemens
of Alexandria, that he was not put into the Calendar of the gods till six
hundred and four years Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. p. 321, 322.
after the times of Moses. Now the Parallel betwixt Moses and Bacchus was drawn
long ago, by our Learned Countryman Mr. Hugh Sanford Sanford. de descensu
Christi adInf. l. 1. p. 28, 29, 30, 31, etc.
, and after him by Gerard Vossius Ger. Voss. de Idol. l. 1. c. 30. p. 116, 117,
etc.
, and after both by the Lord Herbert of Cherbury Herb. de Relig. Gentil. in
Baccho. p. 137, 138, 139.
.

Orpheus in his Hymn of Bacchus, celebrateth the Honor of Mises, whom he
calls Dionysius. He comes we see within a point, as it were, of the name of
Moses.

Pausanias mentions an ancient Tradition concerning Bacchus, plucked in his
Infancy out of the waters. So Moses we know escaped miraculously in his Ark of
Rushes.

Bacchus is by the Poets called [(...)] the Son of a double Mother. As such a
one the holy History represents Moses, to whom the second Mother was the
daughter of Pharaoh.

Plutarch reports it from the Egyptians, that Isis was the Mother of Bacchus,
(or, as Lactantius Lactant. l. 1. defals. Relig. Sect. 21. p. 117, 118, 119.
will have it of Osiris.) Also that Isis being dejected with sorrow, and
drowned in tears, was carried to the Queen by some of her maidservants, and
kindly received, and made Nurse to her Infant-son, whose name was Palestinus.
And the story of Plutarch in his Isis and Osiris is the History in the Bible
concerning Moses and his natural Mother, and the daughter of Pharaoh, in such
little disguise, that the dullest eye (a man would think) might look thorough
it.

Nothing is more common in the story of Bacchus, than his going into Arabia
with a mixed multitude of Men and Women; his flight to the Red Sea; his Wars in
the Arabic India, (for by that name the ancient Europeans called those Regions
which lay beyond the Midland-Sea); his fetching Water out of a Rock; a Miracle
mentioned by Euripides; the Image of a Serpent carried in Procession in his
Worship, and spoken of by Nonnius. All which Particulars seem to have relation
to the Circumstances of Moses, to whom the ancient Bacchus would have appeared
more like, if he had not been disfigured by the new strokes which the
Mythological Painters of the Grecian Bacchus have touched him with.

These Particulars, together with many more, are named to my hand, by Sanford
and Vossius. They insist in especial manner on the Education of Bacchus in a
Mount of Arabia called Nysa, and supposed to be but a kind of Anagram of Sina.
Against this there lies an Argument which I must not conceal, though I remember
not that either Mr. Sanford or Vossius have taken notice of it. This Argument
is grounded on a passage in Curtius. That Historian tells, how Alexander
entering India, came to Nysa, situate at the Root of the Mountain Meron, and
that the Inhabitants of that place did pretend to be a people descended from
Bacchus. Their Mountain (as he continues his story) was all covered with Ivy
and Vines Quint. Curt. L8. p. 203.
. To this Objection I would answer, that the India which Alexander entered was
not the Arabia or Arabic AEthiopia of the ancient Bacchus; and that his Nysa
or Nyssa, was plainly another Town from that in Curtius, being called by
Diodorus (both in his third and fourth Books of History) the Nyssa of Arabia;
and by Herodotus Herod. l. 2. p: 165.
, the Nyssa of AEthiopia; and being said in Homer -- (...).
, to be nigh the Waters of Egypt. It was therefore situate in Arabia Petraea,
called by the Hebrews Chus, which is generally translated AEthiopia. The place
mentioned by Curtius by its name of Nysa, and by the quality of its Mountain,
might fairly pretend to Bacchus, as many Cities did to one Homer; and as some
Parisians do to St. Dennis the Areopagite, though one younger by many years was
more truly their Apostle. And their pretense to Bacchus, especially as dressed
with his Vines and Ivy in the Grecian mode, might the more reconcile them to
the favor of a Conqueror who came from Macedon.

This being said in answer to the Argument taken from Curtius, I will add only
two Remarks to the many of Mr. Sanford. The first, that Bacchus was nursed by
the Hyades, the watery Constellation of Taurus Ovid. l. 5. Fast Ora micant Tauri
septem radiantia flammis, Navita quas Hyadas Grajus ab imbrevocat. Pars Bacchum
nutrisse putat. --
. The second, that he was born (as Orpheus testifies in his Hymn on Mises) [ --
(...),] by the River, or Nilus, of Egypt.

Cuperus speaking in his Harpocrates Cuperus in Harpocr. p. 72.
, of the deities of Egypt, does bid his Reader not expect any concord in
Fables. I pretend not to be a thorough-reconciler, or to adjust all differences
betwixt the Heathen Mythologers. Each City almost had different gods, and a
different Scheme of Theology; and yet they used common names, and thereby
perplexed both the present and the succeeding Ages. Osiris is sometimes Pluto,
Bacchus, Titan, Phoebus, Mithras, Serapis, Apis, Oceanus, Sol, Sirius. Isis, is
Minerva, Proserpina, Luna, Thetis, Diana, Venus, Ceres, Juno, Bellona, Hecate,
Rhamnusia See Pignor. Men's. Isiac. p. 4, 5. and Kircheri Oed. Synt. 3. c. 4. p.
189.
. Yet in this parallel betwixt Bacchus and Moses, so much concord appears,
that a Philologer may be inclined to take them for the same, notwithstanding
the disparity which has been occasioned by the intermixture of Grecian and
Egyptian Superstitions.

Be it then supposed as probable in the first place that Bacchus is Moses. I
proceed in the next place to show the less learned Reader, that Osiris is
Bacchus.

Osiris is a name big with ambiguity, and has been applied to vary many of the
Heathen gods; and eminently Diod. Sic. l. 1. c. 11. p. 10. Macr. Sat. l. 1. c.
21. p. 302, 303.
to the Sun, (as also was Apis Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 21. p. 305.
and Serve. ad AEn. l. 3. Ipse enim est Sol, and Liber Pater.
Bacchus); and sometimes supereminently, as I may so speak, being used to
signify a superior god, whose eye the Sun was reputed Macr. Sat. Ib. p. 303.
. Apis himself is referred by some, in Lucian Lucian. de Astrolog. page 540.
, to the Celestial Bull, after the manner of the Modern Heathens, who being
upbraided by the Fathers as Worshippers of dead and wicked men, reformed or
disguised their ancient Theology, and explained their Superstitions by natural
things. But the proper Egyptian Apis was a Prince. And so was their Osiris, or
as Orpheus calls Bacchus, [(...),] a Legislator, and no other than Bacchus.
This Herodotus testifies in express words Herod. l. 2. p. 165.
. Osiris (says he in his Euterpe) is Dionysus, in the Appellation of the
Greeks. Diodorus Siculus does Diod. Sic. l. 1. c. 11. p. 10.
after the same manner give the name of Dionysus to Osiris; and he does it upon
the Authority of the ancient Greek Poets, Eumolpus and Orpheus. And he affirms
a while after Id. ib. c. 13. p. 12.
from ancient Tradition, that Osiris was Bacchus. And a man would guess as
much, whilst he reads of the escape of Bacchus out of the Waters, and of his
Education in the Arabian Nysa before remembered; and then compares with these
particulars, the Ark in which Osiris was cast into the River, by the Tanitick
Plutare. in Is. and Osir. p. 356. C.
mouth of Nilus; and the Education of Osiris in the same Nysa, according to
Plutarch and Diodorus Diod. Sic. l. 1. c. 15. p. 13, 14.
. To these particulars a third may be added, of the Serpent in the Tables of
Osiris and Bacchus Pignor. de Men's. Isia. p. 23.
. Now these particulars seem also to relate to the Ark, the Holy Mountain, the
Rod of Moses.

It remains that I show in the third place that as Moses is Bacchus, and
Ogygia me. Bacchum vocant, Osirin AEgyptus putat. Auson. See Plutarc. de Is.
and Cuperi Harpocr. p. 70.
Bacchus Osiris, so also that Osiris is Apis.

Apis has been said to relate to the Sun, as did Osiris, but both were a deity
sometimes of another kind. And in Memphis it self Herod. Euterp. p. 101.
there were Priests of Vulcan, or the Sun, distinct from those of Apis. He was
an Hero, and the same with Osiris. The Bull Apis is affirmed by Diodorus Diod.
Sic. l. 1. c. 21. p. 18.
to be sacred to Osiris amongst the Egyptians. And again Strabo says directly
Strabo Geog. l. ^7. p. 807.
, that Apis is Osiris. And to them we may add Plutarch, who asserteth, both
that Osiris and Serapis are the same; and that the Bull Apis was worshipped as
the animated Image of Osiris. And to this agrees the story of the solemn
mourning in Egypt at the disappearance, and the solemn joy there at the
reappearance both of Osiris and Apis Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 21. p 303. Annot. 4.
Pontani Satyr. etc. Exclamare libet populus quod clamat Osiri -- Invento --
Clamatum a^tem uti invenio in Glossis vetustis, (...). De Ap. vide Herod. in
Thal. p. 195, 196. de Osir. and Ap. vide Tibull. l. 1. Eleg. 8. p. 271. Te
canit, atque suum, pubes, miratur Osirim, Barbara, Memphitem plangere docta
bovem.
. It is further observable, that Bacchus is said Anton. Liberal. Meta. c. 10.
p. 422.
to have appeared in the form of a Bull. That Mnevis the second Apis was called
Bacis See AElian. l. 12. c. 11. and Pignor. men's. Isiac. 48, 49.
. That Moses in Manetho See Marsh. Chron. Can. p. 196.
, cited by Josephus, has the name Osarsyphus, which seems but a great
depravation of Osiris, and scarce a greater one than that in Macrobius Macrob.
Sat. l. 1. c. 21. p. 305.
, of Neton for Mnevis. That in the Coins of Elagabalus and Gallienus, Serapis
carries a measure adorned with a Vine-leaf; and is therefore as Tristan
concludes, the same with Bacchus. Last of all, that Phylarchus in Plutarch
Plutar^. de Is. and Osir. p. 362.
reports of Bacchus, that he first brought out of India (or Arabia) two
Bulls, the one called Apis, the other Osiris. In this last citation, some
Goropius Becanus would confidently say, that the truth shines so fairly
through the Fable, that we may discern in it Moses, Bacchus, Osiris, Apis, to
be one man under four several names. Other Particulars might still be added in
this Argument; as that some Heathens imagined Bacchus to have been worshipped
in the Temple of the Jews Seld. de Diis Syris Synt. 2. c. 17. p. 372.
, under the Emblem of the Vine; and that Osiris, as well as Harpocrates, is
described Cuper. Harpocr. p. 33. Pignor. de mensa Isiaca. p. 4.
with his finger upon his mouth, representing (as some would guess), the slow
speech of Moses.

But enough (I think) has been said already to render it probable that Moses
was Apis; the thing which by such proofs and reasons as Philology admits in
other cases, was to be evinced.

PART 7. Why Moses might be Idolized among the Egyptians.
I Have been long already in this disquisition, but I am not yet at the end of
it: For the curious may further offer to me with pertinence, these following
Questions.

First, How Moses came to obtain such Divine Veneration among the Egyptians on
whom he drew very grievous plagues, and from whom he removed a great Army of
their necessary servants?

Secondly, Why Moses was honored by an Ox?

Thirdly, Whence that Symbol received the name of Apis?

Fourthly, At what time this Idolatrous Worship of the Symbol of Moses
commenced in Egypt?

Fifthly, When, and for what reason, it was divided into the Worship of Apis
and Mnevis?

I shall return something in answer to each Query; but I do not sooth up my
self with the vain hope of giving such an answer as shall fully satisfy
others, or so much as my self.

This caution would have been the less necessary if all the other Queries had
been as easy to be resolved as the first, concerning the Worship given in
Egypt to the Symbol of Moses.

It is not my opinion alone that he was there honored after death, with
Religious Veneration. Saint Cyril of Alexandria said the same many ages ago.
And it was not his bare opinion, but he proved it by the Authority of Diodorus
Siculus. The place of St. Cyril which I here refer to is this S. Cyr. Alex.
contr. Julian. l. 1. p. 15, 16.
: Moses was well known to the Greek Historians. -- For Polemon in his first
Book of Grecian History, makes mention of him. So do Ptolemaeus Mendesius,
Hellanicus, Pholochorus and Castor, and many others. Diodorus who inquired very
curiously into the affairs of Egypt, says, he heard of him from their Wisemen;
and of him he thus writes: After the ancient way of living in Egypt, that
(which they talk of) under their Deities and Heroes; the people (as they
report) were first brought to live by written Laws, by a man of a very great
mind, and of a most memorable new way of life among the Jews; one Moses who was
called a God Diod. Sic. ap. S. Cyr. ibid. p. 15. E. -- (...).
. For (as St. Cyril proceeds to note on this place of Diodorus) when they saw
Moses most accomplished with every virtue, they called him a God, and, as I
think of some of the Egyptians, they gave him divine honor, being ignorant
that the supreme God had said thus to him, Behold I have given thee as a God to
Pharaoh.

Here we have it asserted that Moses was highly honored in Egypt. And there
were reasons enough for the honoring of him, and they might prove the
occasions of making him an Idol. For Idolatry is veneration overmuch strained.

Moses was born and educated in Egypt; he was reputed the Son of Pharaoh's
daughter; he was learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians; he shined in
that Court as the Moon amongst the little and confused Lights of the Galaxie.
He was the Instrument of God in doing mighty wonders; mighty beyond the power
of Natural, Artificial, or Diabolical Magic. And these wonders God wrought by
him in the eye of the African World. The holy Scripture reports of him Psalm.
78. 12.
that He did mavelous things in the fields of Zoan, or Tanis, the Metropolis
of the lower Egypt. Also, that Exodus 11. 3.
that he was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaohs
servants, and in the sight of the people. The Son of Syrach Ecclus. 45. 1.
calls him, The beloved of God and man; and shows the favor of God toward
him, in making him glorious in the sight of Kings Ver. 2.
. And though he fled out of Egypt, he was even then a benefactor, removing a
people whom the Egyptians dismissed with gifts; and causing their Plagues when
himself disappeared to vanish away. And though he had no way proved a
Benefactor, his very power of sending Plagues had been enough to deifie him
with that people, who scarce distinguished as we do betwixt good and bad
Angels; but looked on them that wrought temporal evil, as Ministers of Justice,
and not as envious and malicious spirits. Power to do hurt was reverenced by
them, and they worshipped Typhon as well as Osiris.

At the Red Sea he astonished Egypt with a Miracle too great and difficult for
the united power of all their gods, who could neither oppose it, nor do any
thing equal to it. And though hereby he conveyed Israel out of Egypt, yet
that deliverance of them could not but represent him, to all that heard the
fame of it, as a kind and compassionate man, who saved his own Nation from the
tyranny of a Prince, whose rage swelled more than that of the waves in which he
perished. Pharaoh certainly oppressed his own people as well as the Israelites.
For a proud and cruel Prince is like a Wolf, who has no kindness for any beast,
though he be fiercest toward the sheep. And the fall of a Tyrant makes an
agreeable sound in the ears of all the slaves which he has bored, whatsoever
the hand be by which he is humbled.

Moses still grew in Eminence by his conversation with God, by his conduct, by
his delivery of the Law, by the success of his arms (which Philo Philo Jud. de
Praem. and P^n. p. 918. D.
esteems very extraordinary, whilst he warred without money the nerve of
War), and last of all by the power of his Miracles.

He was so eminent a person, that R. Josua the Son of Sohib R. Jos. ap. Com. in
Main. de Fundam. Leg. p. 9.
has exalted him, not only above the Patriarchs, but even above all Creatures
in Heaven and Earth, placing the very Angels at the feet of this Prophet.
Artapanus likewise relates concerning him Artap. ap. Eus. de Praep. Evang. l.
9. c. 27. p. 432. -- (...).
, that he was in singular favor with the people, and obtained the name of
Hermes, and honor equal to their Deities. From the same authority of
Artapanus, Eusebius reports Id. ibid. p. 435.
, that in memory of the Rod of Moses, a Rod was preserved with veneration in
every Egyptian Temple, and particularly in the Temple of Isis.

Egypt then never enjoying so great a person as Moses, (if I except the
Messiah, carried thither in the days of his Infancy, and there obscured); It is
not exceeding strange that a Nation so apt to multiply her gods, should
Canonize him. Neither is it on the other hand to be admired that in latter Ages
their Reverence should be abated. In the days of Diodorus Siculus the Egyptians
reviled Moses, so far were they from adoring him as a god. The cause is
manifest. They were a new and mixed generation who either preferred the new
Serapis before the ancient Apis; or mistook both whilst they were blended in
one. And in the time of Diodorus Siculus, Ptolomaeus Auletes had less regard
for Egypt than for Rome, a place where the Jews and their Legislator were then
sufficiently despised.

If now so fair an account could not have been given concerning the occasions
which rendered Moses an Idol in Egypt; yet that had not been a wa^antable reason
for the denial of the thing it self. For Isis was worshipped amongst the Suevi;
yet Tacitus professes that he knew not the way by which that foreign Religion
did travel thither.

PART 8. Why Moses might be honored by the Symbol of an Ox.
FOR the second Question, why Moses was honored by the Symbol of an Ox; I must
not dogmatize in the resolution of it. Idolatrous Priests were extremely
fanciful, both in the names and in the Images of their Gods. And who can at
this distance of time, and after so many revolutions, search every fold in
their imagination? They described the Junior Bacchus with the face of a Bull De
Bacch^ (...). See Ion. P -- in Athen. Deipn. l. 2. p. 35. and Casaub. Not. p.
78.
, having respect to the strength of Wine, of which he was said (though falsely)
to be the inventer. And who knows whether the Egyptians might not in such sort
labor with their fancy, in bringing forth the Image of their more ancient
Bacchus, whom we suspect to have been Moses. To him learned men have ascribed
the Fable of the invention of Wine. And they think it might have occasion given
to it by the clusters of Eschol, imperfectly understood. He that would indulge
his fancy might still be fruitful in reasons: And he might say amongst other
things, that the rays from the face of Moses might move them to the choice of
this Symbol of the Ox. For they resembled Horns of strength, which were common
Ensigns of Kingly Power, both in Egypt and Phoenicia See Pignor. de Mensa
Isiaca. p. 30.
.

Artapanus Artap. ap. Eus. de Praep. Ev. l. 9. c. 27. p. 433.
ascribes to Moses the Invention of Tillage by the help of Oxen. And thence
may again be offered a conjecture about the cause of this Symbol. And it is but
a conjecture. For it is strange if from the time of Cain, till the days of
Moses, so obvious and useful an invention should be unknown to the world. But
if it was so long unknown, the discovery of it was of less advantage to Egypt
than to most Countries of the World. For (to use the words of Monsieur Vattier
M. Vatt. P^to Prod. of Egypt, p. 7, 8.
, in the Months of July and August the Fields of Egypt are changed into so many
Seas, and the Cities and Villages, into so many Islands, by a fortunate
Inundation, which spares the Inhabitants that trouble of Tilling and manuring
them, which is elsewhere necessary. For the Egyptians have no more to do but to
sow the seeds, when the waters are fallen away, and slightly to stir the slime
which was spread on the Earth, that they might not lie uncovered. And this they
did of old, [not by Oxen, but] as Herodotus relates, by herds of Swine driven
after the sowers. And yet some Heathen Writers ascribe the invention of Tillage
to Osiris See Natal. Com. p. 482.
; and they make Isis Diod. Sic. l. 1. c. 13. p. 12.
to be Ceres; and the ancient Isis called Ceres, and said by Lactantius to be
the mother of Osiris, seems no other than the Mother of Moses. If any thing
of this nature be applicable to him, I should think it rather some way of
getting the corn out of the ear by the help of Oxen, than the invention of
Tillage it self by them; for to that use Oxen served in his time, and his Law
forbids the muzling of such serviceable Creatures. It may be, not
withstanding the aforesaid guesses, that the story of Moses sacrificing Oxen to
his God, and of Aaron making the Golden Calf; and again of Moses conducting the
Israelites toward Palestine, the then Granary of the World; being received in
Egypt, or in some other place of Commerce, in a confused and imperfect
narration, after the manner of reports at distance of time and place, might
give occasion to the worship of him in the form of a Bull.

But if I attribute this form to him, as the Emblem of his diligence and
victorious strength, (for the Horn, as was just now said, served for such an
Emblem;) I shall bring the nigher together, the reasons of his Symbol, and of
the name of it, about which latter I am to say something in answer to the third
Question above propounded.

PART 9. Why Moses might be called Apis.
SOmething I would say concerning the name of Apis as relating to Moses; but
what I have to produce is very little, and very uncertain. And nothing is more
uncertain than the reason of the first imposition of names. It is at the
pleasure of men, and they are often humoursome; and often a just occasion taken
by them is worn out through time and new uses, which create new names. In an
Egyptian word it is no wonder if men be at a loss, seeing the Language is
perished. The Learned Gerard Vossius Voss. de Idol. l. 1. c. 29. p. 110, 111,
etc.
thinks Joseph to be Apis, and deriveth the name from [(...), or] A B in the
Hebrew Language, which was possibly, but a distinct Dialect from the ancient
Egyptian Tongue, as the Coptick, written from the left to the right hand, is
but a Dialect of the Greek. Now (...) does not only signify a Father, Author,
or Inventer; but is also attributed to Kings, Princes, and Lords, and is
therefore a title not improper either for Joseph or Moses. My Conjecture
fetches the name of Apis from [(...), or] Abir, which signifies strong and
valiant, and is used by Synechdoche, for an Ox, a creature of strength Psalm.
22. 13. Psalm. 50. 13. LXX. (...).
: Nay, it imports strength with such Emphasis, that it is applied to God
himself Genesis 49. 24. Abir Jagnakob. In our Translation, the mighty God of Jacob.
. Upon supposition that this were right, it ought to be added that the S in
Apis, as in Mnevis, Memphis, Serapis, Osiris, Isis, is from the Greek, and not
the Original Egyptian. But enough of a word concerning the derivation of which
we are so much in the dark, and likely so to continue.

PART 10. When the Worship of Apis commenced.
TOuching the subject of the fourth inquiry, the Commencement of the Worship of
Moses or Apis, we must still be contented with conjecture.

Much of the fame of Moses could not well arrive at the land of Egypt till
after his death, the very manner of which might contribute much to his
Deification. Of that it appears they had some kind of notice, by the story of
Osiris Strab. Geogr. l. 17. p. 803.
, whose body was in vain sought for, after his soul had left it. The relation
of this, and of many other particulars in the Wilderness, might come to Egypt,
after the possession of Canaan, by the Merchants at Tire or Joppa, or some
other such Coasts as were frequented by Egyptians. Their Priests having had
before them, by some such way, the Memorials of this great man, though in a
rude and confused draught, might thenceforth advance him to the degree of an
Heavenly power, and on earth appoint a fit Symbol by which he might be most
solemnly reverenced.

This Symbol for many years was but one, the Ox at Memphis: but afterward it
was doubled, at Memphis the Ox Apis was worshipped, the Ox Mnevis at Heliopolis
Plutarch. d^ Is. and Osir. p. 364. C. See D. Marsh. Cron. Can. p 59. Diod. l.
1. c. 21. p. 18. Strab. l. 17. p. 805.
. Macrobius Macrob. l. 1. Sat. c. 21. p. 305.
speaks of a third Ox worshipped at Hermuntis in the Temple of Apollo, and
called Pacis. A name differing very little from Apis, it being its plain
Anagram after the casting away of a single letter. But this Pacis is mistaken
for Bacis, a name by which, as was said already, Mnevis was called; and it is
no other than Bacchus more gently pronounced. So that this third Ox is the same
in effect with the first and second.

PART 11. Of the Idols Apis and Mnevis, and the Commencement of their Worship.
Now in answer to the last Query, I am to say something about the time of the
division of this Symbol of the Ox. Egypt, as a learned D. Marsh. p. 59, 60, etc.
man observes, was of old divided into two parts, the upper and the lower, of
which the first (he says) had Memphis, the other Heliopolis for its chief
City. [Though Heliopolis be said by Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 29. p. 144.
, to have been built by the Arabians, and was therefore of no very ancient
foundation, compared to Memphis. And Egypt was naturally divided into three
parts, the upper, in which was Thebes; the middle, in which was Memphis; the
lower in which was Heliopolis, and now Cairo, or Masre, nigh the place where
Heliopolis once stood.]

Before the Invasion of the Pastors there was but one King over all Egypt, who
would scarce have permitted so open a faction, and so plain an emulation of the
glory of his Imperial City. If now I had a mind to make the multiplication of
this Idol almost equal with that of the division of the Kingdom (a thing no way
proved) I would refer this to the times of Amosis, called Tethmosis corruptly
by Josephus, and supposed to be the Contemporary of Shamgar. Amosis was that
Prince who first recovered Heliopolis from the Pastors, imagined to be a sort
of Arab-Egyptians. He is reputed a Theban, and from him Manetho begins his
order of the Theban Kings. He set himself industriously to improve Heliopolis,
and he might grace it in the quality of a Rival of the ancient Memphis, which
he had not such personal reason to be fond of. He might on this occasion set up
Symbol after Symbol; for one part of his care, and a very great one, is said to
be Religion. He it was who purged Heliopolis of the barbarous custom of
sacrificing men; in the room of which he substituted three Images of Wax, [the
Symbols it may be of Apis, in the three places of Memphis, Hermuntis, and
Heliopolis; which rendered him properly a threeheaded Pluto.] What I said of his
purging Heliopolis, is by Porphyry Porphyr. dt Abstin. l. 2. sect. 55. p. 94.
related from Manetho, who, where he speaks of it, does mention Calves in the
plural; for he says that men were offered to Juno, and proved after the manner
of the selected, pure, and marked Calves of Egypt.

The truth is, there is little certainty in the story of Amosis, and least of
all in the time of it. And I might say the like of that of the Pastors. And for
the Bulls at Memphis and Heliopolis, I cannot but think them much later than
the times of Jeroboam. If they had been extant long after; Herodotus who knew
Egypt so well, and spoke so often of Apis and of Heliopolis, whose Traditions
he went to compare with those of Memphis Herod. Enter. p. 101. c. and p. 103.
, could as easily have mentioned Mnevis too, as Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch and
Strabo, in aftertimes.

PART 12. Whence the Original of Apis might be obscured.
IF now at length a new Question should be started, and I should be asked by any
curious man, how this discovery of Apis as Moses has not been made before? how
it should come to pass that a Symbol so known in Egypt, should at length
everywhere be mistaken? I would answer him thus: The Priests of Egypt were
very reserved in the grounds of their Theology; and they had great opportunity
of concealing their Mysteries, whilst the Priesthood belonged only to some
certain Families. Hence Herodotus Herod. l. 2. p. 101. (...), etc.
is so sparing in his Relation of the state of Religion after inquiry made by
him both at Memphis and Heliopolis. And we learn from Strabo how very shie the
Egyptians were of communicating their Arts, much more of their Religion. And he
tells us Strab. in 1. 17. Geog. p. 806. C.
that of the Thirteen years which Plato and Eudoxus spent at Heliopolis, much
time was consumed, not so much in learning Astronomy, as in prevailing with the
Priests to teach them something of their Mysteries.

Also they mixed the names and rites of their Deities; and when the Religion of
Greece came in with its Arms they quite confounded them. Such confusion in part
happened before, for Cambyses made alteration in their Rites. And time has
been so injurious to them, through the Invasion of Arabians, Persians and
others; through the burning of the Ptolomean Library, and other such accidents,
that the very names of their Princes, as well as their Gods, are either
perfectly forgotten, or very imperfectly and indistinctly remembered. Their
grand Tyrant is to few known by his name, but called Pharaoh, a title of Regal
power common with him, to the rest of the Egyptian Princes. Of them who speak
of his name, some call him Chenephren, and others, Chencres, Chencheres, or
Cenchres; others Arenasis See Heylin. G^og. in Egypt. p. 934.
; others, Bocchoris; others, Achernes; others, Petisonius; others, Tuthmosis,
Philastrius Thammuz See Seld. de Diis Sir. Synt. 2. c. 2. p. 338.
.

But of this Argument enough, and too much it may be for the men of this Age;
in some of which the love of ease, in others the pursuit of the appearances of
nature, has prevented the cultivation of Philology; which howsoever it be now
the most neglected, is not the most barren and fruitless part of the field of
Learning.

If any learned Philologer shall think all this a device of fancy, he may
please still to abound in his own sense. There is not a more unjust tyranny
than the imposition of Notions upon a free judgment. And for this notion of
Apis as the same with Moses, I propose it only as my present conjecture, and
not in the quality of my fixed persuasion. I will not contend about it, or
immodestly contest it with any learned Opponent. I shall rather follow the
advice of the Arabians in that Proverb of theirs Erpen. Prove. Arab. p. 3.
, which forbids me to shoot my soft Quills at a statue of Iron.

CHAP. VII. Of the Idolatry of the Mahometans.
MAhomet was descended of the Koreischites, a Tribe of the Arabians. The
Arabians were great Idolaters De Idol. Arabvide Abul Farajium de Orig. and mor.
Arab. and not. Pocock. p. 89, etc.
, and it does not appear that he embraced any other Religion for some years,
than that to which his Education led him. With the Arabians then he worshipped
Statues and Demons. The Statues of the Arabians are those three mentioned in
the Alchoran, Allath, Alozza, and Menath Alkor. Sur. 51.
, Idols of stone. What the two latter were, is not so well understood; but most
agree that by the former, or Allath, was meant a Deess like Venus, or Urania
See Seld. de Diis Sir. Synt. 2. c. 2. p. 253.
. She had also among them the name of Cabar, or Cubar Hotting. Hist. Oriental.
l. 1. c. 7. de Rel. vet. Arab. p. 153.
. Herodotus remembers this Arabian Urania by the name of Alilat, in his Thalia
Herod. l. 3. p 185. D. (...).
, though in his Clio Id. l. 1. p 62. D. (...).
he had called her Alitta.

Neither did they worship Statues alone, but they worshipped Demons too, of
which such Statues were generally the Symbols. There is mention in the
Alchoran, in Surata Noachi, of Vodda, Seraha, Jaguth, Jauk, Neser. Beidavi
Hotting. Hist. Orient. p. 156.
tell us, that these were the names of good men who lived betwixt Adam and
Noah; that after death Images were made of them, that from them a benediction
might be obtained; that in process of time they began to be worshipped. That
Vodda was represented in the figure of a Man; Seraha of a Woman; Jaguth of a
Lion; Jauk of a Horse; Neser of an Eagle; and that this kind of Idolatry was
translated to the Arabians. Other Authors make mention of their worship of
Bacchus. Hesychius calls him (...), Tertullian, Tertull. in Apolog. sect. 24.
p. 24. Ed. Par. 1664. Unic^ique etiam Provinciae and Civitati suus Deus est, ut
Syriae Astartes, ut Arabiae Disares, etc.
Diasares, or Disares, as it is read in the late Edition of Paris. That name
may be but the corruption of Osiris, though it is thought to be taken from a
mountainous place in Arabia, called Dusares, and mentioned by Stephanus, de
Urbibus.

The Arabians also worshipped Angels as well as Heroes, calling them
Proverbially, the Daughters of God. The Alchoran charge them with this
Idolatry, in Surata de Bestiis, saying, They joined Genii (that is Angels) as
Companions to God.

Mahomet growing weary of this false worship, about the fortieth year of his
age, and perhaps of all real Religion, invented a new one of his own, which
has grown exceeding rankly since the first planting of it, as is the manner of
many deadly and poisonous weeds. In this new Religion of his he applaudeth
himself as the Restorer of the Worship of one God, and declameth vehemently
against Idols. And no wonder, for he took to him a Nestorian Monk as his
Assistant, and he was himself the Son of a Jewess, to whose Religion he might
have some respect, by reason of that Relation, though his mother died too soon
to instill her Principles into him,

This Impostor in the Alchoran calls the Gentiles Associators, [or such as
join others with God as sharers and fellows in his government], because they
worship Angels and men, in the place of Gods. He gives the like name to the
Jews, because of their high veneration for Ezra, whom in his uncharitable
opinion they had set up as the fellow of the Deity. He also calls the
Christians Associators, by reason of the Trinity which they worship: His
blasphemous pride dethroning Christ, and setting up himself as a greater
Prophet.

He perpetually inculcated the worship of one God; and this is one of the forty
conditions on which he promised Paradise to his Disciples. If they bear
witness, that there is no God but the one supreme God, and that he is his
Apostle Muha^ed Ben Abibecher, (who received as is said, the forty Apothegms of
Mahomet, from his mouth,) in Hott. de Pseud^ Mah. Initlo. l. 2. c. 3. p. 249.
. His Ministers when they call the people to prayers, cry Alla, Achbar Alla;
that is, God, the Highest God; not Alla oua Kubar Alla, God and Venus their
Deity, as some have imagined Ap. Sold^ de Diis Sir. Syntag. 2. c. 4. De Venere
Syriac. p. 286, 287.
; as if they had worshipped their Gentile Allath, Cabar or Cubar, after they
had become the Disciples of Mahomet. Elmacinus Elmacin. Hist. Saracen. l. 1. c.
1. p. 3.
summing up the precepts of Mahomet, begins in this manner: Mahomet in the
forty-fourth year of his age published his Call, [his pretended commission from
God]; for before that time he had secretly invited the people to his Religion.
In the publication of it, First, he taught them to believe in God alone.
Secondly, to worship and adore him. Thirdly, he destroyed the worship of Idols.
In the forty-first Surata of the Alchoran, he condemns the worship of Angels.
And this worship (says Beidari Ap. Hott. de Rel. vet. Arab. p. 158.
) he abolished first at Mecca. For Images he was so severe against the worship
of them, that he forbad all Statues and Pictures; a Law by which the Grand
Signior loses much glory and ornament in his Empire. He brake in pieces
Pocock. in Abul Phar. p. 98.
with his own hands a wooden Dove found in Caaba; he sent Chaledus to destroy
the Idol Alozza Id. ibid. p. 91.
Chaledus pulled down the house [or Temple], and burnt the Image or Tree with
fire. Thence a Daemoness issued out with great exclamation, and he smote her
with his sword; which when he had reported to Mahomet, he assured him that that
Daemoness was Alozza, whose worship should thenceforth cease.

Notwithstanding all this, his Disciples are accused of a double Idolatry.

First, They are accused as worshippers of their Prophet in the quality of the
highest Lieutenant of God. And Mahomet himself gave the occasion of this
worship, by teaching them this Creed, That there is one God, and Mahomet his
Prophet: setting himself as it were at Gods right hand. It is most notorious
that they pray frequently to him; and they pray not only to him to intercede
for them with God, but to give them present assistance by virtue of the
commission which he has received from God. For this it seems is one of their
Forms in which they pray for the Grand Signior M. Guilla^ier's Voy. to Athens,
p. 165.
: God make you victorious over your enemies, and may our good Prophet pour down
his blessing into your heart. And in this worship they offend two ways, for
they give the honor to Mahomet of a power which God has not bestowed by
commission upon him, and which he has not in himself as he is a creature of
his kind. And they give this honor not merely to an Hero, but to the wicked
soul of a vile Impostor.

Secondly, They are accused as worshippers of the Tomb of their Prophet. I have
not read in any good Author that they bow or kneel to it as to an object of
worship. And yet I find it said of them by Cornelius Curtius, Curt. de Clavis
Dominicis. c. 12. p. 131. Mahumetani Prophetae sui urnam -- colunt.
, That they worship the Urn of their Prophet. He (I confess) is not a competent
witness, for a little before having asserted a summus cultus, that is, sure,
supreme worship, to be merited by the Nails of the Cross; Id. ibid. Ai^ atque
iterum ai^, Sacratissimos Red. nostri Clavos cultum and eum summum mereri. Ita
Hebraei olim virgam Aaronis, etc.
; he says of the Jews, that they in such manner venerated the rod of Aaron,
the two Tables of stone, and the Ark of the Covenant. Yet this, methinks, may
be pronounced against them as a righteous sentence: That if they expect (as
they appear to do) some extraordinary blessing at the Tomb at Mecha, by virtue
of the commission of their Prophet, and of the Mohammedan Religion, they
exercise a religious trust in that which is a lie; and they are tempted, as
often as the event prayed for succeeds their Pilgrimage and Devotion, to give
thanks to an Impostor, for whose sake God does not, will not hear them. And
such trust and thanks are highly dishonorable to the true God, who dwells not
in any Shrine, and delights not in any false Prophet. Such Idolatrous trust
some of them seem to put in the Magical coins or gems which are used by them.
Many of them are mentioned by Hottinger, Hotting ci^. Hebr. p. 150, 151, 152,
153, etc.
, and amongst them one which contained the names of twenty Surata's in circular
form, and a prayer, of which the following words are a part. Show me -- that
which is hidden in thy bosom, Oh thou who art indu'd with majesty and honor.

I see nothing of moment to be further said by me in this Argument; and
therefore I here conclude it. And happy were it for the world if the
superstition of Mahomet might have as speedy an end. The like may be said of
that kind of Idolatry which has infected many who profess the true or
Christian Religion: And that false worship is my next Subject.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Idolatry with which some are charged, who profess and ^all
themselves Christians. And first of the Idolatry of the Gnostics and Manichees.
PART 1. Of the Idolatry of the Gnostics.
WHen Christ was incarnate, he soon weakened the visible Empire of the Devil,
removing his Idols, and putting his Oracles to silence. One of his great
designs in coming in the flesh, was to persuade the World to leave Idols, and
the Atheism of many gods, as Maximus speaks Maxim. al. Orig. in Exhort. ^d
Martyr. p. 193. -- (...). Origin. contr. Cells. l. 1. p. 5. -- (...).
. He manifested the one true God in Trinity, declaring that there were three in
Heaven, and that they Three were One. He revealed much of the nature of the
Demons which had been worshipped in the World, and decried them as wicked and
malicious spirits. God in him gave to the World the greatest help against the
worship of Demons and Idols; as shall afterward be showed at large, if God
permit. His Apostles and followers spoke and wrote with zeal against Idols; and
God be thanked, not without admirable success. Amongst them was St. John the
Beloved Disciple. And he having shown the Son (in one 1 John 5. 20, 21.
of his Epistles) to be the true Image of the Father, and very God of very God,
does thence proceed to exclude all other Symbols in this dehortation, Little
children, keep your selves from Idols. And with that as with advice of moment,
and fit to be reserved for a word to take leave with, he closes his Epistle.
Idols also were with zeal declaimed against, after him by diverse Christians; of
whom some were converted Jews, who had lived under an express Law against
Images; and others were converted Gentiles, who bent themselves quite another
way from their former Rites. And these expressed their detestation of Idols in
such severe manner, that they looked upon Statuaries and Painters as men of
unlawful Callings.

Others there were Christians by profession, who though they worshipped not
(unless by fear or stealth, as Epiphanius Epiphan. Her: 27.
notes), the same Statues and Deities with the Gentiles; yet did they set up
afresh an Idolatrous worship, which was in truth but disguised Heathenism. Such
were the Scholars of Simon Magus, Menander, Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates,
or according to Epiphanius, Carpocras; Valentinus, Cerdon, Marcion, Secundus,
Ptolomaeus, Marcus, Colorbasus, Heracleon, Lucian, Apelles, and very many
others, who from their arrogant boasting of a (...), or sublime and
extraordinary sort of knowledge, obtained the name of Gnostics. These I will
consider as worshippers, firft of Demons, and secondly, of Images.

The worship of Demons they learned from the Cabala of Thales, Pythagoras, and
Plato. It was the Dogma of Menander, and after him of Saturninus, that S. Aug.
Cat. Hoeres. c. 2. p. 6, 7. etc. 3. p. 8, 9.
this outward World was made by Angels; that is, that it was framed and
composed by those Encosmical gods formerly mentioned, and spoken of by Sallust
the Platonist. Alcinous a Disciple of the same School, in his Introduction to
the Philosophy of Plato Alcin. de Doctr. Plat. c. 14. p. 35.
, professes the same Doctrines. He teaches it as a Dogma of his Master, That
God did not properly make, but rather adorn and excite the Soul of the World,
awakening it as it were out of its profound inactivity: that thenceforth (as an
awakened man who stretches out his arms) it extended it self far and near, and
joined and conserved Alcin. Ib. p. 35, 36. -- (...). --
the whole of Nature. And to this eternal Soul of the World, a principle which
in some sort comprehended in it the inferior Angels, the Gnostics perhaps
alluded in their (...), or fullness of the Godhead, to which St. Paul opposes
the true principle, by which God made all things, his eternal co-essential Son.
Beyond the Demons Alcinous does not extend the care of God, but sets them
as his Sons Id. ib. c. 15. p. 38. -- (...). --
over other things. And he ascribes the formation of Animals, and even of man
himself, to Junior Demons Id. ib. c. 16. p. 39, etc.
.

Basilides was an Alexandrian where the Pythagorean Cabala had gotten deep
footing; and it appears by the Errors of Origin, that the very preaching of
St. Mark had not worn out the prints of it. Some of them are easily discerned
in the writings of that Father, and especially in his Book which has the Title
of (...). Basilides enjoined silence to them to whom his Mysteries were
revealed Iren. l. 1. c. 23. p. 120.
, both in imitation of the silence in the School of Pythagoras, and as a means
to avoid the trouble which might arise by the more open publication of them.

Carpocrates and Valentinus, both of them were professed Pythagorean
Platonists. Valentinus places his Bythus, or Profundity, and Siges, or
Silence, as the first conjugation of his (...), or Fullness. And by this he
might mean the Soul of the World awakened out of that deep inactivity, which
just now we heard of in the Jargon of Alcinous.

Marcion expressly maintained the two Principles of Pythagoras; and he taught
that they were distinct, and without beginning, and infinite Orig. D^al. cont.
M^rc. Sect. 2. p. 43.
.

These Heretics worshipped a Deity under the mystical name of Abraxas, [or
Abrasax, according to the inscription See Pigno Men's. Isiac. p. 93.
on some Basilidian Gems.] This name, some think, they took up with respect to
the imposition of that of Abraham. By it they understood a supreme Power, and
seven subordinate Angels, the Presidents of the seven Heavens, together with
their three hundred and sixtyfive Virtues, answering to the number of the days
of the year; and by Basilides in Epiphanius, set over so many members of the
body of man.

By the name as one word they understood their one Deity, and under it the
Eighth Sphere, which the Platonists called the highest Power, by which all
things were circumscribed Alcin. c. 14. p. 38. (...).
. By the seven Letters of that one word they understood the seven Angels, and
under them the seven Orbs. And therefore Gassendus (if the Printer has not
injured him) commits a mistake Gassend. in vita Peireskii. l. 1. p. 16. Ed.
Hagae-Com. 1655.
in writing it ABRSAX, as sometimes he does. He spoileth their Mystery by the
diminution of one Letter. Such injury the Engravers have done them in their
Gems, unless they designed by false Letters to render them still more
mysterious See the Basil. Gem in Cuperi Harpocr. p. 14. ABPACA. -- ZCIGI. If
the disjoined Z belongs not to the first word: for Sigi needs it not.
. By the Numeral Powers of their seven Letters in Greek (they amounting to the
sum of 365 days), they understood the abovesaid Virtues, Members, and Days of
the Year See Epiphan. Haer. 24. and Haer. 26. Th^od. de Haer. sab. l. 1. in
Basilide. Et Iren. l. 1. c. 34. p. 134, 135.
. St. Austin in his Catalogue of Heresies, seems in this matter to commit a
mistake S. Aug. Cat. Haer. c. 4. p. 10, 11.
, for he represents Basilides as one that held, 365 Heavens, and affirmed
them to be the makers of this World. Whereas Basilides and Saturninus ascribed
such power to the several Virtues of the seven Angels Id. ibid. c. 3. in
Saturnino. p. (...), 9.
. St. Hierom S. Hier. Tom. 6. p. 99.
judged that this Abraxas was the Sun, or the Mithra of the Persians, because
its Annual course does make up the abovesaid number of days. But a good Reason
ought to weigh down his Authority; and there is a reason sufficient to persuade
us that they meant some other supreme God. For in the seven Spheres they
included the Sun as one of the Planets, and therefore did not intend him as the
Deity that was above Saturn himself, but their (...), or Logos Iren. l. 1. c.
12. p. 88.
, or Artist of all, or (...) himself. For he in Epiphanius Epiphan. Haer. 36.
possesses the place of the highest Orb. And in many of the Basilidian Gems,
particularly in that in the custody of Baronius Baron. Annal. Tom. 2. p. 72.
, that name of (...) is inscribed, though the Omega be misrepresented in the
form of a W.

They who consider this Systeme of their Deities will be apt to think them
those Coelicolae which the Emperors condemned; their Religion being a sort of
Astrological Magic.

Now this their worship of the Heavens or Angels, came (as I said) from the
Schools of Thales and Plato; together with some tinctures from the Heathen
Poets, and particularly from Hesiod in his (...). But the Systeme of it was
much further enlarged, and varied also with Mystical signs and interpretations.
And they ran a kind of Enthusiastic descant upon a more natural or Geometrical
ground. He that fixes his attention on the Platonic Scheme of the World,
observing the several proportions which Plato fancied in the adjusting of its
parts when it was first framed: He that reads in Timaeus Locrus Timaeus Locr.
de An. Mundi, p. 7.
, of the hundred and fourteen thousand, six hundred ninety and five divisions
of the Soul of the World; and in Alcinous Alcin. de Doct. Plat. c. 13. p. 31,
etc.
of the Octoedral, Icosaedral, Duodecaedral figures in the composing of the
Universe: He that reads further in Irenaeus Irenaeus adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 1.
p. 1, etc. c. 12. p. 85, etc. l. 2. c. 24. p. 178, etc. c. 38. p. 190.
of the Principle called (...), or the Divine fullness, and of the
Quaternations, Octonations, Decads, Dodecads, and numberless Conjugations of
the AEons of the Gnostics, who began their Fancies very early, though the
Scheme of them was successively varied, as likewise the very wording of it, the
Simonians changing their Masters (...) into St. John's Logos See Doctiss. Vind.
Epist. S. Ignatii, par. 2. c. 6. p. 59, etc. p. 70, etc.
, after his Gospel became public; such a one will guess without the gift of
Prophecy, what Doctrines did set their imaginations on work. He will not
wonder that the Disciples of Simon Magus worshipped in private the Image of
Pythagoras S. Aug. de Haer. c. 7. p. 22. Iren. l. 1. c. 24. p. 122, 123.
. They will not think it strange that the Valentinians in Irenaeus called their
first Tetrad, the Pythagorick Tetractys.

Celsus mistaketh these Gnostics for true Christians, and compares Cells. ap.
Orig. l. 6. p. 290.
their Mystical scale of things with that of the Mithriacs, or Persian Divines.
Origin Orig. contr. Cells. ib p. 291.
supposes those whom he points at to be the Sect of the Ophians, a kind of
spawn of the Gnostics. And he mentions a Diagram of theirs Id. ib. p. 292.
which had fallen into his hands; and in which they described the Soul of the
World penetrating all things, under the name of Leviathan. If that Diagram had
been preserved, it might have been compared with other Pythagorick and Magic
Systemes; and a Torch might have been lighted from it, for further discoveries
of that nature than can now be made. For the Ophites they were manifest
Idolaters, worshipping a living Serpent for Christ See Epiphan. Haer. 37.
. And the Gnostics were no better whilst they worshipped their Angels as
Rulers of the World. Hence Marcus the Gnostick is reproached expressly in
Irenaeus Iren. l. 1. c. 12. p. 88. (...), etc.
, after the mention of the AEons, as a maker of Idols. Neither is St. Hierom of
another mind; for on the third Chapter of Amos thus he discourses: Every
Heretic feigneth what pleases himself, and then he worshippeth his own
fiction. Thus did Marcion with his idle Deity, Valentinus with his thirty
AEons, Basilides with his god Abraxas S. Hieron. Tom. 6. op. p. 99.
.

As these were the sink of Heretics, so were they the principal of Idolaters,
giving to the Devil himself by way of honor, the title of Cosmocrator Iren. l.
1. c. 1. p. 24. See Feuardent. Annot. p. 47.
, or Ruler of this World: As if he had been such by the Commission of that
Demiourgus, whose creature (they say) he was, and not by the consent of wicked
men.

Idolaters then they were in the first place, with respect to the Demons whom
they worshipped. And in the second place I am inclined to think them such with
respect to the Images of their Deity and his Demons. Some such things were
the Gems See Joh. Macar. de Gemmis Basilid. cum Commentar. Joh. Chiffletii, 4.
Antv. 1657.
of the Basilidians, preserved till these late times. Joseph Scaliger had one
of them in his possession See Epist. 119. to Is. Casaub.
, and the excellent Peireskius very many Gassend. in vita Peir. l. 1. p. 16.
. Amulets they were See the Charm of Q. Serenus Sarmonicus a Disci. of Basil.
in Baron. Annal. Tom. 2. A. C. 120. p. 72, 73.
, and Symbols too of their Deities, whose names of Abraxas, Michael, Gabriel,
Ouriel, Raphael, Ananael, Prosoraiel, Yabsoe Consider well what is said (in
Marian. ap. Card. Raspon. de Basil. Later. l. 2.) of the original of the Popes
Agnus Dei's: The Masons digging in the Vatican, found a Lamb of Wax in a Golden
Case, on which these words were engraved, Maria nostra florentissima, Michael,
Gabriel, Raphael Archangel, and Uriel. Simon, itseems, has been at Rome.
, (names of their god, and their seven Angels the Presidents of their seven
Heavens) were inscribed on them, together with the Figures of Men, Beasts,
Fowls, Plants, Stars; the Schemes of which may be seen in Pignorius Pignor. de
Mensa Isiaca, p. 92.
. Abraxas is represented with humane body, with buckler and whi^, or sword in
hand, as Ensigns of Power; and with Serpents, as feet. Of a like abuse of
Magical Gems the Jews and Mahometans themselves have been guilty See Hotting.
Cipp. Hebratc. p. 138, 150, etc.
. And what are such Gems but Idols, when there is an expectation from them of
supernatural virtue, which God has not communicated to them?

Irenaeus reports of the Gnostics Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 24. p. 122, 123.
, that they had Pictures and Images, and particularly one of Jesus made by
Pilate; also that they crowned them and set them with the Images of Pythagoras,
Plato and Aristotle, and other Gentile Philosophers, observing or worshipping
them after the manner of the Heathens. The like is said by Epiphanius in his
Twenty-seventh Heresy; and by Theodoret, in his first Book of Heretical
Fables, where he informs us, that Simon's Statue was like to that of
Jupiter's, and Helen's like to that of Minerva's; and that they were worshipped
with Sacrifice and Incense. The same is written by St. Austin S. Aug. Cat.
Haer. c. (...). p. 1:
, who further mentions Id. ibid. c. 7. p. 22. de Carpocr.
the Idolatry of Marcellina, one of that Sect, who worshipped together with the
Images before remembered, the Statue of Homer. I will end this Discourse of the
Idolatry of the Gnostics, with the following words of the very learned Mr.
Thorndike Mr Thorndike's just weights and measures, c. 2: p. 10.
. For the Idolatry of the Gnostics (which I am confident is mentioned in
diverse Texts of the new Testament) it may well be counted the Idolatry of the
Pagans, though pretending to be Christians. Because they did not stick to
exercise the same Idolatry when occasion was offered; though they had their own
Idolatries besides; whether peculiar to their several Religions, or as
Magicians.

PART 2. Of the Idolatry of the Manichees.
WIth the Gnostics I will join the Manichees, both agreeing in obscene
Superstitions Leo Max. Ser. 2. de Fest. Pent. Sect. 6. p. 75. Manichaeus --
magister fals^tatis diabolicae and conditor superstitiouis obscaenae, etc.
, and in the worship of the principal evil Demon; and both being branches from
the same Magical Trunk of Pythagorean Philosophy. Cubricus or Manes took the
occasion of his Heresy from his Marriage with the Widow of Terbinthus, who
died in exercising his Magical Tricks. Terbinthus, who also disguised himself
in Persia under the name of Budda, derived his folly from his Master Scythianus
a Saracen in Egypt. Scythianus was learned in the Writings of the Grecians, and
wrote four Books of Pythagorean Magic. And Lucas Holstenius rightly observes
Lucus Holst. de vita and Script. P^rphyr. p. (...)*
, that the twofold (...) of the Pythagoreans which comprehends [(...)], the
contrary combinations of the principles of unity and division, was the root of
the two contrary Manichaean Powers. These Pythagoras learned from the
Egyptians, who besides a good principle owned Typhon (called also Seth, Bebon,
and Smy) a principle of Evil and Tyranny.

For Manes, he strained the conceit of the Pythagorean Soul of the World to
such a degree of extravagance, that he placed a perceptive spirit, (as
Epiphanius notes) in every Creature. He would not so much as break his Bread,
or cut a Pot-herb, though he had cruelty enough to eat them. For certainly if
Bread were still alive after grinding and baking, it remained so in the broken
pieces of it. But how wild a flight does man's fancy take, when it moves it self
only upon its own wings!

I do not recall any passage in History which shows concerning this monstrous
Heretic, that he either prayed or sacrificed to this principle of evil. If he
did neither, he yet made an Idol of it by exalting it in his mind, to that
undue supremacy. And on the other hand, he turned the Author of all good into
another Idol. For as we are instructed by Theodoret in his first Book of
Heretical Fables, he confined that Principle to three quarters of the World,
bestowing the Southern parts upon Matter, the dark Principle, or the Devil. He
likewise sacrilegiously robbed God of that part of his Providence which
dispenses righteous judgments. Further, as the same Theodoret relates, he
sometimes called the Sun and Moon his Deities. Sometimes he called the Sun,
Christ; and proved it as Enthusiasts prove their Dreams, by the Eclipse it
suffered at his Crucifixion. Sometimes he maintained them to be two Ships which
conveyed the Souls which depart hence, from Matter to Light. With reason then
did St. Austin S. Aug. l. 4. Confess. c. 7. Vanum Phantasma and error meus,
erat Deus meus.
thus confess his Manichaean impiety; My vain fantasm and my error was [then]
my God. But of the Gnostick and Manichaean extravagance enough. I I come in the
next place to speak of people much more sober, and yet not without a mixture of
madness.

CHAP. IX. Of the Idolatry with which the Arians and Socinians are charged.
PART 1.
THE Honor of God under Christianity can be by none secured but by such who
acknowledge the Godhead of his Son. The Gentiles not understanding this truth,
but looking upon Christ as in the flesh, without any Personal union of it to a
subsistence in the Godhead, reproached the Christians for their worship of him.
And they made this to be the cause why the Heavenly Powers were angry with
them, (as they judged) and afflicted them with persecution; because they put up
daily prayers to one that had been a man, and one that died on a Cross Arnob.
adv. Gent. l. 1. p. 19. 20, -- Quod hominem natum, etc. Quotidianis supplicat.
adoratis.
; though the objection held against their Hercules, and many other of their
Deities, who once were men, and died in pain and shame Arnob. Ib. p. 20. --
Quinam sunt hi dii -- etc. -- Hercules -- flammis concre-matus Oetaeis.
. What else was AEsculapius whom their Jove (themselves confessing it) smote
with his Thunder Orig. contr. Cells. l. 3. p. 123. (...).
? Had they known Christ to have been a Divine person incarnate, they would have
worshipped him themselves, and owned him as the only substitute whom the Father
could have so used without diminution of the Divine honor. Hence St. Paul
makes the confessing of Jesus to be the supreme Lord, to whom all things in
Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth are to do obeisance, to be a duty that
promoteth the glory of God the Father Phil. 2. 10, 11.
.

This glory the Arians and Socinians are said to diminish; and they are the
persons whom I am next to consider.

Arius the Lybian, a Priest of Alexandria is accused by the Fathers, both as an
Heretic, and as an Idolater; and his Idolatry is charged upon him as the just
^onsequence of his Heretical opinion. And Irenaeus has observed concerning
most Heresies Iren. l. 1. c. 19. p. 114.
, That the maintainers of them do acknowledge one God, yet by their corrupt mind
do so alter the notion of him, that they become ungrateful to him that made
them, as did the Gentiles by their Idolatry. Arius heated by the Dispute
betwixt Bishop Alexander and himself, maintained at length with obstinacy and
uproar, that Christ had a beginning of his existence: That there was a time
when he was not, though he was before the world: That he was not (what Origin
or Maximus Maxim. in Dial. contr. Marcion. sect. 1. p. 3. See Socr. Hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 5, 6. p. 9, 10, etc. Ed. Vales, and Soz. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 15.
p. 425.
called him) the [(...), or] Consubstantial Word of the Father: That he was
therefore not the one Deity, the God of Israel, but a made or created God: And
that the Father, or true God, did by him, as by his instrument create all other
things. Servetus, if I well remember his opinions, was a man yet much more
extravagant than Arius, for he conceived Christ to be a Divine Light M. Serve.
l. 2. de Trin. p. 87.
which God used as his Instrument in making the World; and his flesh to be made
out of the very substance of God Servet. Resp. ad Artic. Joh. Calvini. ad Art.
9. p. 221. Plane dico carnem Christi de coelo esse secundum essentiam Deitatis.
Id. de Trin. l. 2. p. 87. Non solum in Anim^ sed and in carne Christi est
substantialis Deitas.
. And by that which I have seen of his, I judge him fitter to have been chained
up as a madman than burnt as an Heretic. Arius had his flaws too, but with
much more consistence. He having thus degraded Christ into the condition of a
creature, was for that reason condemned as an Heretic. And because he still
worshipped Christ with Divine incommunicable honor, he was also accused of
Idolatry. Amongst his Accusers See Procl. Episcop. C. P. ad Armen. de Fide. p.
24, etc.
Athanasius is one of the principal, and he is frequent and earnest in his
declamations against him.

In his first Oration against the Arians Athanas. Or. 1. cont. Arian. p. 296. B.
, there is a discourse which appertains to the present occasion; and this is
the meaning of it: The Apostle rebukes the Gentiles for worshipping the
Creation (...), using promiscuously Worship and Latria.
, saying, That they served the Creature besides [or, as the Translator renders
it Servierunt creaturae prius quam Creatori.
, before] God For Athan. reads it, (...), though (...) be not in our Copies of
the N. T.
the Creator. And these [to wit, the Arians] affirming of the Lord that he is a
creature, and serving him [or giving him (...), etc.
Latria] as a creature, how differ they from the Gentiles? How can it be, if so
they think, that the accusation of St. Paul before cited shall not also
appertain unto them?

Such again is his discourse in his fourth Oration Athan. Or. 4. cont. Arian.
Tom. 1. p. 468, 469.
, and this is the scope of it: If there be not such a Logos [or, co-essential
Word] as we speak of; if, from not being it came into being, and was made a
creature; it is either not true God (seeing it is in the number of created
Beings); or, if by the power of Truth in Scripture they are forced to confess
it to be true God, then they acknowledge two Deities, the one the Creator, the
other a Creature: Then serve they two Masters, the one uncreated, the other
created: Then have they two Creeds, one in which they profess to believe the
true God, the other in which they own a Deity made and formed by themselves,
and called God. It further of necessity follows, that whilst in this blind
manner they worship the uncreated God, they contend against him that is
created; and that [on the other hand] whilst they turn to the Creature, they
forget the Creator. For it is not possible, by reason of the different natures
and powers of these two, to discern the one in the other. They therefore who
are of this opinion, do plainly join [or confound] many Gods together. For this
is the wickedness of them who depart from one God. Why then do not the Arians
whilst they are of the same mind, number themselves among the Greeks [or
Gentiles]? for they as well as these worship the Creature above [or besides]
God who created all things. But they in order to the circumventing of the
simple, avoid the name of Gentile (...), which the Translator has improperly
rendered, Vocabulum AEthnicorum.
, yet are of the same mind with them. For that common Sophism of theirs, We
profess not Two Uncreated, is plainly a delusion of the vulgar. For whilst they
say, they do not maintain two Uncreated, they set up two Deities: Two of a
different nature, one Uncreated, and one Created. Now if the Heathens worship
one uncreated Deity, and many created ones; and these [Arians] one uncreated,
and one created; neither is there in that respect any great difference betwixt
them and the Heathens; whilst he that is thought by them to be created, is one
of the multitude of the Heathen-gods; and the Heathen-gods are of the same
[finite] nature with that one of theirs, and in like manner Creatures. The like
Argument is maintained by this Father in that short Oration against the Arians,
which we find about the beginning of his second Volume S. Athanas. p. 22. Tom.
2. B.
. But the Transcription of every thing of this nature which occurreth in his
Works, would be a burden both to the Reader and my self; and a burden so much
the heavier, because the same sense is repeated so very often, though in
variety of phrase.

The charge of Idolatry has been likewise drawn up against the Socinians,
called the Modern Arians, the Ariano-Baptists (a), and the Arians of Poland.
Both Arians and Socinians herein consent, that they deny the natural Divinity
of Christ, though in other Doctrines they differ very widely; and very much in
their explication of that opinion in which they principally agree. For Arius
maintained the praeexistence of the Logos (b) before the foundation of the
World; whilst Socinus dateth the very being of Christ from the Conception of
the Virgin. Some Arians maintained a likeness in the substance of Christ to
that of Gods; though others called him [(...),] one of a different substance.
Sandius Polon. Consens. in Corp. Confess. p. 230.

Christ. Sand. l. 1. Hist. Eccl. Enucl. p. 219. Ed. 1.


thinks that Arius himself believed the Son and Spirit to be specifically
(...) with the Father. That is his mistake, and it is not the only one which he
has committed. We read otherwise of him in Socrates the Historian. In him
Alexander Alex. Alexandriae Episc. in Gelas. Hist. conc. Nicaen. p. 145. --
(...), etc.

Socrat. l. 1. Eccl. Hist. c. 6. p. 11.


reports this to be the Dogma of Arius, that Christ was not (...). Also that
the Son of God had liberty of sinning. This latter he might sometimes speak,
when the heat of disputation inclined him to rave. But it was his fixed
opinion, that the Essence of God was perfectly invisible; and that the Essence
of the Son was visible, being created. [though in that he erred too, no spirit
being so, nor the essence of the grossest body]; and consequently that his
Essence was not of the same species with that of the Father See Hilar. de Syn.
Advers. Arianos, p. 359, 360, etc.
. Generally the Arians held it to be an Angelical, rather than a Divine nature.
But Socinus does degrade it further still, and will have Christ be a mere man,
or innocent Prophet. And how wide soever the distance was betwixt Alexander or
Athanasius, and the Heretic Arius; yet of this I am confident that they would
all have joined, had that new Scheme of pretended Christianity been then
extant, in suppressing or burning the Racovian Catechism. Arius had much the
better Creed, Socinus somewhat the better temper, and the greater command over
his passions. But both have much disturbed the Christian Church, and both have
been accused of Heresy, Schism, and Idolatry.

That this last crime was charged on Arius, has been showed already. And I
will further show that Socinus also has been accused of it. This being done, I
will then consider of the justice of the charge, with respect both to Arius and
Socinus.

When I speak of the Idolatry of the Arians and Socinians, I mean not the
worship of Statues, or of Demons; unless the Logos, as they have fashioned
him, be to be reputed as one of them: For most true is that saying of St.
Austin Quisquis talem cogitat Deum qualis non ^st, alienum and falsum Deum
cord suo portat.
in his Questions on Joshuah: Whosoever feigneth in his mind such a God as is
not God, the same carries in his heart a strange and false God. And this I
have called negative Idolatry, in the definition of that false worship.

The Socinians are so far from the worship of Hero's, their Christ excepted,
that they maintain the sleep of the Soul; and Brenius some-where makes its
Dormitory some Particle of the Blood. The Author of the little Book called
Disquisitio Brevis Disquis. Brev. c. 8. p. 41. Credunt[Evangelici] reipsa
mortuos vivere. ^o nimirum modo, quo Petrum, Paulum, aliosque demortuos in
Coelis vivere asserunt; hoc autem fundamentum est, non tantum Purgatorii, sed
and nesandae istius Idololatriae quae in sanctorum demortuorum invocatione apud
Pontificios cernitur.
, proposes the Doctrine of the Souls Insensibility as a means of removing
those of Purgatory, and of the Invocation of Saints. And for the practice which
conformeth it self to this latter Doctrine, he calls it a very wicked
Idolatry. In that crime if they offend, it is upon their account of the
Invocation of Christ; whilst from a God they have changed him into a Saint of
the highest order. And this is the Particular wherein Socinus is accused by
Franciscus Davidis, who having swallowed the first error, which rejects the
Essential Divinity of Christ, did in pursuance of it (for one false way does
mislead to many others) deny the lawfulness of his worship. And though Socinus
has against him very firmly proved the lawfulness of adoring Christ, yet for
his consequence [that Christ being but a Creature by essence, is not to be
worshipped as they pretend to adore him], he has only evaded the force of it
by the subtlety of his wit: A wit so able to turn it self into all shapes and
figures See Socin. de Invocat. Christi, in vol. 2. oper. p. 713, etc. and his
Disput. with Christian. Franken. p. 767.
, that it could scarce be held fast by demonstration it self.

PART 2. Of the Idolatry of the Arians.
WE see then that the Arians both ancient and modern have been accused as
Idolaters. But because every man would be guilty if accusation were a crime; it
will in the next place be a piece of justice, to inquire into the grounds upon
which the Accusers usually proceed. And here I will first consider apart, the
things with which they are severally charged; and then those things together in
which they are together blamed; and declare the grounds and reasons on which
they are in all these respects condemned.

That which seems to me in this point criminal in the Arians, and not in the
Socinians, is the worship of Christ as Creator of the World. They took those
places of Scripture which ascribe to the Son of God the making of the Universe,
as they plainly sound; and either wanted such confidence as the Socinians, or
rather such Grammatical subtlety, by which they wrested them to a very
different sense. The places of Scripture which I mean, are such as these: All
things were made Joh. 1. 3.
by[the Word], and without him was not any thing made that was made. Christ is
the Image of the invisible God Col. 1. 15, 16, 17.
, the firstborn of every Creature. For in[or by] him were all things created
that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they
be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers. All things were created
by him, and for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things
consist. These words, together with all other places of a like nature, the
Socinians do industriously and violently draw to a scope, at which they were
never aimed Comp. Socin. C. 1. Sect. 7. p. 53. -- Creatio -- Christo tribuitur.
Resp. Illic agi de secunda, non de prima rerum creatione, h. e. Mundi
Innovatione, quoad Religionem and Regnum Christi.
. It is true that the aim of St. Paul in the place now cited, has not been so
particularly and critically discerned by some of the most Catholic
Commentators. But in general all of them well understood that these
Expressions, [The Worlds; Things visible and invisible; all things that were
made; things in Heaven, and things on Earth], were such as no Jews or
Christians commonly used, in speaking of the founding the Christian Church, and
making the new world of the Gospel. And where it is said, That every house is
built by some man, but he that built all things is God Heb. 3. 4.
; there to interpret it after this fashion, of Gods revealing the Christian
Economy, as they may if they please; (for the same Key may serve for all such
places), is an absurd Comment which has no need of confutation. But with them,
who have denied first the Satisfaction of Christ, and for the sake of that
error, his Divinity; and then for the sake of that second error, his
Praeexistence and Creative power; The beginning of the Logos is at the
beginning of the Gospel; and the Creation of all things is the new Creation in
Evangelical truth and righteousness; how harshly soever these Interpretations
sound to the ears of the Judicious. Why go they not on, and say, that God is
called the Creator of Israel, and therefore may mean the first words of the
Book of Genesis of that people, and not of the Material World? Why do not they
Comment in this manner on the words in the Acts, God that made the World Act.
17. 24.
, and all things therein, [that is, the Gospel with all its appurtenancies],
seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, [that is, of the new Evangelical
Heaven and Earth, wherein dwells righteousness], dwells not in Temples made
with hands.

They err who think the Apostle in that place to the Colossians, did in
Allegorical manner allude to Moses. No, he plainly opposes himself to
Gnosticism, which was then on foot, though put afterward into many new
dresses; and to the Simonian Scheme of the world, more like to that of
Pythagoras than that of Moses; though Moses has been thought to Platonize, as
some speak; which to me does not so plainly appear from the words he has left
us. St. Paul calls Christ, the [(...), or] Image of God, and the [(...), the]
firstborn of every creature; not thereby affirming, that Christ was not very
God but his first creature of a different substance; but opposing him to [the
(...), and to the (...)] the Images and the Beginning of the Platonic
Simonians See of the Gnostic (...) Iren. l. 1. c. 1. etc. 10. p. 76. and of the
(...) of Megithius the Marcionite in Orig. Dial. con. Marc. Sect. 1. p. 3, 4,
14. And of (...) see Iren. l. 1. c. 10. p. 78. where of the (...) of the
Elements of Marcus.
. He therefore seems to me to speak to this effect. You boast of I know not
what first-borns and Beginnings, which created other things. Behold here the
true Firstborn and Beginning, who indeed made the World. [Thus Ignatius Ign.
Epist. Interpol. ad. Philadelph. p. 180. Ed. Voss.
opposes to the (...) of the Gnostics, the Son of God; affirming that there
was one God of the Old and New Testament, and one Mediator betwixt God and Men,
(...), for the creating and governing of all things: and those who believe
otherwise, he in the following Page condemns as the Disciples of Simon
Magus.] The Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, mentioned in the next
Verse, are in like manner opposed to the Principles or Angels, which those
Heretics fancied to be subordinate Creators and Governors of the visible
World. Epiphanius in his Twenty-third Heresy of the Saturnilians -- (...), etc.
, declares their odd opinion concerning one Unknown Father, and the [(...),]
the Virtues, Principalities and Powers, made by him; and of the inferior
creatures made by them. And in his Twenty-sixth Heresy of the Gnostics, he
sets down the order of their [(...), or] Heavenly Principalities: How little
now do these names differ from the [(...), or] Dominions; the [(...), or]
Principalities; the [(...), or] Powers, of St. Paul the Apostle? And that
Apostle does no more assert in this place the creation of such Orders, than he
does the making of the Gnostick AEons in the first Chapter to the Hebrews,
where he affirms of Christ that he made (...). In such places he said in
effect that the Logos was the true Principle which they mistook in their
notion, and miscalled by other names, though they were in a kind of pursuit of
him, but in the dark, and in false ways: That it was he that made the World
visible and intellectual, by what names soever they called it, or into what
Classes soever they had disposed it; and that this was not the effect of any
such powers as they dreamed of, they having no existence but in the shadows of
their own imagination.

In the following Chapter Col. 2. 8.
, he opposes the Principles of Christian Religion to the Elements of their
Philosophy. And in the next Verse Verse. 9.
, he opposes to the (...) of the Simonians, the fullness of the Deity which
dwelt in Christ. And after that Ver. 10, 15.
he twice mentions his Headship over all [(...) and (...)] Principalities and
Powers: And thence he most aptly proceeds to the condemnation of the worship
of Angels Verse. 18.
: For of them the Gnostics made egregious Idols.

I am the more confirmed in this Discourse upon St. Paul's words by those of
Irenaeus: God (said he in his refutation Irenaeus adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 9. p. 114.
of the Gnostick Heresy) did make all things, both visible and invisible,
sensible and intelligible, -- not by Angels, or other Virtues, -- But by his
Word and Spirit. -- This God is neither Beginning, nor Virtue, nor Fullness:
That is (as I suppose it was read in the Greek Copy, which the Learned world
much wants) neither (...), nor (...), nor (...), no Gnostick Principle, but
true and very God. Neither am I concerned at the Objection of those who ascribe
these Terms to Valentinus; for it is plain he was not Iren. l. 1. c. 5. p. 58.
(...), etc.
the Inventer. It appears by the studiousness of Socinus, in order to the
eluding of the force of such places, that he believed an acknowledgment of
Christ as Creator, was in effect a confession of his Godhead. This then being
by Arius granted, and by Socinus denied, that Christ created the Natural World;
it is that single point in which Arius apart from Socinus, is chargeable with
Idolatry. And certainly he is not accused upon slight and idle suspicion, if
the charge be drawn up against him, either from Scripture or Reason.

In the Scripture God himself does prove himself to the World, to be the true
one God, by his making of all things. In what other sense will any man, whose
prejudice does not bend him a contrary way, interpret the following places? Who
has measured out Isa. 40. 12, 13. See also Verses 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27,
28.
the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out the Heavens with a span;
and comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure; and weighed the Mountains
in scales, and the Hills in a balance? Who has directed the spirit of the
Lord, or being his counselor has taught Him?

Thus says Isa. 42. 5, 8.
the God, the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and stretched them out; He
that spread forth the Earth, and that which comes out of it. He that gives
breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein. I am the
Lord, that is my name, and my Glory I will not give to another. -- Thus says
Isa, 43. 1, 10.
the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and formed thee, O Israel! Fear not. --
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

The Lord Jer. 10. 10, 11, 12.
is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King, [or, the King
of Eternity.] -- Thus shall ye say unto them, [the Nations,] The gods that have
not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and
from under these Heavens. He has made the Earth by his Power; he has
established the World by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his
Discretion.

Thus speaks the Scripture: In the next place let it be considered whether
Reason can dissent from it. What notion will Reason give us of the true God, if
it supposes such wisdom and power in a creature as can make the World? For
does not Reason thence collect her Idea of God, conceiving of him as of the
mighty and wise framer of the Universe? thus the very Americans themselves, I
mean the Peruvians, did call their supreme God by the name of Pachaia Chacic
See Gerard. Voss. de Idol. l. 1. p. 14.
which signifies as they tell us, the Creator of Heaven and Earth.

In this then Arius is particularly to be condemned, in that he supposes the
Creator a Creature, and yet professes to worship him under the notion of the
Maker of all things.

It is true, that Arius gave not to Christ the very same honor he did to the
Father. And his Disciples in their Doxologies, were wont in cunning manner, to
give Glory to the Father by the Son Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 10. c. 4. ad fin.
p. 388. -- (...).
. And such a Form Eusebius himself used Id. contra Sabell. l. 1. p. 22. Ed.
Sirmond.
; and we find it at the end of one of his Books against Sabellius: Glory be to
the one unbegotten God, by the one only begotten God the Son of God, in one
holy Spirit, both now and always, and through all Ages of Ages, Amen.

Neither do the Arians give any glory to Christ, but that which they pretend to
think enjoined by God the Father. But if Christ had been a Creature, the
Creator would not by any stamp of his Authority have raised him to the value of
a natural God; and such a God they honor, whatsoever the terms be with which
they darken their sense; for he is honored by them as Creator and Governor,
and dispenser of Grace.

PART 3. Of the Idolatry of the Socinians.
THe point in which Socinus offends by himself, is the Worship he gives
Christ whilst he makes him but a man; and such a man as is but a machine of
animated and thinking Matter: for though he declineth not the word, soul or
spirit, I cannot find at the bottom of his Hypothesis, any distinct substance
of a Soul in Christ. If that Principle had been believed by him, why does he
suppose the Lord Jesus bereaved of all Perception as long as his Body remained
lifeless in the Grave Compendiolum Socinianismi, c. 8. Sect. 7. p. 142. -- Hinc
colligunt animas post mortem nihil sentire aut agere, imo ne quidem in se
reipsa subsistere ut personas: atque hoc esse quod passim dicitur in V. T.
mortuos non habere memoriam Dei. -- Item hunc esse descensum ad inferos, cum
quis in Statum mortuorum redigitur.
? Why do his Followers maintain that the dead do no otherwise live to God than
as there is in him a firm purpose of their Resurrection Vind. Conses. Eccles.
Polon. p. 150.
? for so the Vindicator of the Confession of the Churches of Poland, written by
Shlichtingius, is pleased to discourse: We believe (said he) not only that the
Soul of Christ supervived his Body, but also that the Souls of other men do the
like. But if Cichovius thinks that the dead do otherwise live to God, than as
it is always in the hand and power of God to raise them up, and restore them to
life; let him go and confute Christ, where he says, I am the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Now Reason
(the great Diana of Socinus, though he often took a cloud of fancy for his
Goddess) cannot but judge it a disparagement to the Idea of a God, to suppose
such Divinity as can govern the World, and hear and act in all places at once,
(as Christ is by Socinus confessed to do); in a portion of living Matter, not
six-foot square, reserved in the Heavens; and perceiving by the help of motion
on its organs. Arius advanced the Idea of Divinity to a much higher and more
becoming pitch; for he, overcome with the plain evidence of Scripture,
maintained the Praeexistence of the Logos, and supposed him to be a distinct
substance from Matter. And he might consequently affirm with consistence to his
Principles, that Christ could know without the mere help of motion, and be
spread in his substance to an amplitude equal with that of the Material World.
For the Material World is but a Creature, one Body of many Creatures; and it
implies no contradiction to say of God, that he can make one Creature as big
as the collection of all the rest. But notwithstanding such amplitude, there
would still be wanting infinite Wisdom. For in the Idea of God we have no other
notion of it than as of such a Wisdom as suffices to frame the World, and to
govern it after it has been framed.

Now this latter Point is that in which both Arius and Socinus are together
condemned, whilst both worship Christ as one who under God disposes and
governs all things. It is true, that he is such: but such he had not been if
he had not been consubstantial with the Father. In that sense he is the
Father's Wisdom: and whilst Arius and Socinus adore him as Gods Wisdom, yet not
as God; they ascribe to the Creature, the Attribute by which the Creator is
known. For the Scriptures, they in opposition to all other gods, do as well
ascribe the Government, as the Creation of the World, to that one God of
Israel. Hear them speaking in this matter, with so loud and plain a voice, that
he who is dull of hearing cannot mistake them, unless he by obstinacy make
himself deafer still, and will not distinctly hear them. In them we find this
Prayer made by the pious King Hezekiah, when he was distressed by Sennacherib
Isa. 37. 16, 1^, 18, 19, 20.
. O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, that dwell between the Cherubims! Thou art
the God, even thou alone of all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Thou have made
Heaven and Earth. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear, open thine eyes, O Lord,
and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib who has sent to reproach the
living God. Of a truth, Lord, the Kings of Assyria have laid wast all the
Nations and their Countries, and have cast their Gods into the fire; for they
were no gods but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have
destroyed them. Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all
the Kingdoms of the Earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou only.
Other places there are to the same purpose See Isa. 41. from 1, to 29. etc. 43.
1, to 6.
, and amongst them these: Let them [the Nations or Gentiles] give glory unto
the Lord Isa. 42. 12, 13.
, and declare his praise in the Islands. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty
man; -- He shall prevail against his enemies.

I have declared Isa. 43. 12, 13.
and I have saved, and I have showed, when there was no strange god among you:
therefore ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. Yea, before the
day I was he, -- I will work, and who shall let it?

Thus says the Lord Isa. 43. 14, 15, 16.
the Redeemer, -- I am the Lord your holy one, the Creato^ of Israel, your
King. [He that raises you out of mean estate, and rules over you.] Thus says
the Lord who makes a way in the Sea, and a path in the mighty waters.

Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations Jer. 10. 7, 8, 9.
! The stock is a doctrine of vanities; but the Lord is the true God, he is the
living God, and an everlasting King.

Ask ye of the Lord rain Zach. 10, 1, 2.
, in the time of the latter rain; so the Lord shall make bright clouds, and
give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field. For the Idols have
spoken vanity. -- The eyes of the Lord Zach. 4. 10.
run to and fro through the whole Earth. [The King of Chaldea] Hab. 1. 9, 10,
11, 12.
shall gather the captivity as the sand, and shall scoff at Kings. -- Then
shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend imputing this his
power unto his god. Art thou not he from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy
One? we shall not die: O Lord, thou have ordained them [the Powers of Chaldea]
for judgment; and, O mighty God! Thou have established them for correction. Who
has (f) directed the Spirit of the Isa. 40. 13, 14, 15.
Lord, or being his counselor has taught him? with whom took he counsel? and
who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment? -- Behold the
Nations are as a drop of a bucket.

See here the Spirit of God asserting the Divinity of the one God of Israel,
against Idols, by displaying his Wisdom and Power in the Natural and Political
Government of the World. But lest the evidence of these places should be
weakened by any, as Scriptures of the Old Testament, relating to times before
our Lord was actually made by the Eternal Father, the King of the World; I will
add a few more which may tend to the preventing of such an Evasion. Isaiah Isa.
40. 9, 10, 11.
prophesying of the Baptist, and of the blessed times of the Gospel,
introduces that voice thus crying out to Jerusalem and Judah: Behold your God.
Behold the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him.
-- He shall feed his flock like a shepherd.

In the same Isaiah (for I scarce seek further than that Evangelical Prophet)
the God of Israel repeateth this profession Isa. 43. 10, 11, See Chapter 44. 8.
: Before me there was no God framed, neither shall there be after me. Thus Isa.
44. 6. and 48. 12.
says the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am
the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God.

And yet of the Logos, the Socinians will profess as did Nathaniel, Thou art
the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel; and as does the Book of the
Revelation, that he is, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.

The God of Israel had said also in the foregoing Chapter, I, even I, am the
Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. -- Is there a God besides me? yea,
there is no God. I know not any. See Chapter 43: 11. and Chapter 45. 5.
Yet, of the Logos, Socinians and Arians make confession in the words of St.
John, saying, That he was in the beginning with God the Father.

The design of all these places ought not in reason to be baffled, by saying
with confidence Confess. Schlicht. Vind. c. 1. p, 54. Multorum Deorum cultores
non sumus. -- Christum, enim colimus, tanquam a summo potestatem Rerum Omnium
adeptum, and, sicut nomine illius, sic ad gloriam illius, imperantem.
these two things: First, That the Power which Christ had was given him by God,
and in order to his Glory. Secondly, That it is not unlawful, but our duty, to
worship a Creature by Gods command, though without his permission it be
Idolatry. If Christ had not been more than a creature, God would not have
enjoined us so high a Worship of Him: neither would it have been consistent
with his incommunicable Omnipotence and Wisdom to have given him all power in
Heaven and in Earth. This (as S. Athan. op. vol. 2. p. 581. A.
Athanasius speaks) were to turn his Humane Nature into a second Almighty.
The Logos was so before all Worlds, and ceased not to be so by assuming the
Humane Nature into Unity of Subsistence.

To say then that Christ is a Creature, yet made such a God who can hear all
Prayers, supply all wants, give all Graces needful to his Body the Church, know
all the secrets of all Thoughts not directed to him, govern and judge with
Wisdom all the World, and to Worship him under this Divine Notion; what is it
else than the paying an homage to a presumed Creature, which is due only to the
one very God? for what apprehensions greater than these do we entertain
concerning the true God, when we call upon him, confide in him, or revere him?

He then that meets such an Inscription in Racovia as he may find often In
Templo Afrano. ap. Nath. Chytraei Monumenta Misnica. p. 362, 363.
in Misna, in this manner, D. O. S. and at length, Deo Omnipotenti Sacrum, and
meant of Christ, to whom, in the Verses set Victor Cbriste. -- In te Credo
unum. --
underneath, the application is particularly made; How must he expound it? He
must either interpret it of Christ Transubstantiated as 'twere by their fancy
into the Father, or worshipped like Neptune Ap. Saubertum de Sacrificiis. c. 2.
p. 27. D. M. [i. e. Deo Maximo] Neptuno Sacrum.
in the D. M. at Rome, in the quality of the true God, whilst he is confessed
to be but a Creature. For they will own but one God in nature and person, and
yet will give to Christ, not acknowledged as a coeternal Subsistence, that
which belongs in eminent manner to his Idea. His Idea sure it is; for that
Being appears to our mind as the best and greatest, which with such mighty
Goodness, Power and Wisdom, governs the insensible, sensible, rational, and
Christian World.

I end this Chapter with the sense of St. Cyprian's words in his conclusion of
the Book de Bono Patientiae S. Cypr. de bono Patientiae, Sect. 14, 15. p. 368.
Hic est qui cum in passione tacuerit, etc. Hic est Deus noster, etc.
: [Jesus] Is he who was silent in his sufferings, but will not be so afterward
when he executes vengeance. This is our God; not the God of all, but the God
of the Faithful, and of them who believe. -- Him, most dear Brethren, let us
expect as our Judge and Avenger. -- God the Father commanded this his Son to be
adored. And Saint Paul the Apostle, mindful of his command, says, That God
has exalted him, and given him a name above every name; that at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow; of things Celestial, Terrestrial and Infernal.
And in the Revelation, the Angel forbids John who was willing to worship him
Rev. 22. 9.
, and says, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants and of thy
Brethren. Adore the Lord Jesus Jesum Dominum adora. So S. Cyprian reads the
Text, We, (...) worship God.
.

CHAP. X. Of the Idolatry with which the Roman Catholics are charged; and how
far they are justly, or unjustly accused.
PART 1. Of the Charge which is drawn up against them.
BY Roman Catholics, I mean those who pretending to own the Doctrine of the
Universal Church, and to submit to the Discipline of it, as it is derived from
the supposed Fountain and Head of it, the Bishop of Rome, do confess the Faith
of the Council of Trent.

These also are guilty of worshipping Idols, if the multitude of Accusers
creates guilt; to omit as yet the Arguments which move so many to that
accusation. Mr. Thorndike supposes them accused, when he affirms Mr.
Thorndike in just Weights and Measures, c. 1. p. 6, 7.
, That they who separate from them as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics
before God. As also when he says Ch, 2. p. 11.
, They who charge the Papists to be Idolaters, -- let them not lead the people
by the Nose, to believe that they can prove their Supposition when they cannot.

Accused then they are; and their Accusers are neither few, nor of
inconsiderable quality. I mean not here the Mahometans and Jews so much as the
Christians, who are of this judgment. The Mahometans are the professed enemies
of visible Idols; and in some places where they have unhappily succeeded in
their Invasions of Christendom, they have been as fierce and zealous
Iconoclasts Leonclav. Pandect. Hist. Turc. p. 139.
as any to whom that name has been given. And of such zeal the Jews would give
external signs, if they had equal power. Of both the learned Grotius says
Grotius i^ Annot. ad Co^sult. Cassand. p. 314. -- Et Jud^i ac Mabumetistae
earum [h. e. Imaginum] aspect^ multum avertantur a Christianism^.
, That they are much diverted from Christianity by the Images which they see
cast in the way before them.

The Christians of the Greek Church use painted Tables. But many of them [if
many there be of the same faith with their late Patriarch of Alexandria, S.
Cyril] do think of the Images of Roman Catholics, as of so many Idols. That
Patriarch being asked what the Grecians thought of Images, returned this Answer,
not as his private opinion, but as the Faith of the Oriental Church See the
Preface of St. Cyril to his Conf. ap. Hotting. p. 399. (...), etc.
, the members of which he personateth in that Confession. We do not reprobate
S. Cyr. in. Res^ad Interrog. 4. p. 531.
the noble Art of Painting. So far are we from that [extreme] that we allow to
such as please, the Pictures of Jesus and his Saints. But for the adoration and
worship of them, we detest it, as contrary to the Scripture, and lest, instead
of God, we should ignorantly worship Color, Artifice, Creatures. He indeed
uses the word (...), which I rend'red Adoration; but he joineth it with the
word (...), which I translate Worship; and which St. Paul uses in setting
forth the Idolatrous adoration of Angels by the Gnostics Col. 2. 18. (...).
. And it is certain by his scope, that he means the Worship of Rome Modern;
and he elsewhere Ap. Hotting. p. 550.
, calls it superstitious and that which smells rank of Idolatry.

Touching those Christians who are known by the Title of the Reformed, they
judge it one great part of their Reformation, that they have purged their
Churches of Romish Idols.

The Confession of Helvetia Conf. Helv. in Corp. Confess. c. 4. p. 5. --
Rejicimus itaque non modo Gentium Idola, sed and Christianorum simulachra.
rejects as Idolatrous, not only the Idols of the Heathens, but the Images
also of those who have taken upon them the Christian name.

The general Confession of Scotland Scot. Consaff. ap. Synt. Conf. p. 126, 127.
, to which the Royal Family, and many others of condition, subscribed, calls
Transubstantiation a blasphemous opinion; meaning thereby that blasphemy, which
says, a Creature is God, and supposing that the Object, under the shows of
bread, is bread, though set apart to a Religious use.

The Confession called the Consent of Poland Polon. Conf. p. 169, 168.
, having declamed against many of the Usages of Rome, and imputed much of the
Turks success in Christendom to Gods displeasure at them; proceeds to an
Address to Christ, by a Prayer, in which he is beseeehed to blot out Idols,
Errors, and Abominations.

The Confession of Strasburg Consessio Argentin. [id est Civ. 4. Imper. Arg.
Conf^. Mem. Lindav.] c. 22. p. 196, 197.
rejects that Worship of Images which is practiced in the Roman Church, as
contrary to the Scripture, and to the sense of the ancient Church; citing to
this purpose the Epistle of Epiphanius, and its Translation by St. Hierom, as
also the Authorities of Lactantius and Athanasius.

The Augustan Confession Confess. Aug. c. 21. p. 22. Hic mos gloriam soli Deo
debitam transfert ad homines, etc.
condemns the Invocation of Saints as a custom which transferreth to men the
honor which is due to God only; and which ascribes Omnipotence to the dead,
by attributing to them the knowledge of the Heart.

The Confession of Saxony Conf. Saxon. p. 87, 88. (...) hanc corrupt. ^am
athnicam, etc.
says, of the Invocation of Saints, both that it leads from God, and that it
ascribes Omnipotence to the Creature. And it seteth, upon the Worship both of
Saints and Images, the reproachful brand of an Heathenish corruption.

The Confession of Wirtemburgh Conf. Wirt. de Euchar. p. 115. de Invoc. Sanct.
p. 121, 122.
, though being mindful of the difficulties of its own absurd Consubstantiation,
it condemns not the Worship of Christ under the shows of Bread in the Church
of Rome as an Idolatrous practice; though it grants that it is possible with
God to change the Elements into the Body and Blood of Christ; yet it does not
express such favor toward their Worship of Saints. It condemns the
Invocation of them according to the Roman Litanies, as a practice which
ascribes to them such ubiquity and such knowledge of the Heart as belongs to
God only.

The Confession of Bohemia Conf. Bohem. Art. 17. de cultu Sanct. p. 201. --
Insuper docent honorem and cultum De^ debitum, non esse ad Sanctos, nec eorum
Imagines transferendum, etc.
allowing some public Festivals in memory of the Virgin and other Saints, does
yet suppose that Worship of them which is used in the Church of Rome to be an
honor and adoration due to God.

The Confession of Basil Conf. Bas. Art. 11. de illicitis permiss. Papanis,
atque in specie de cultu Rel. Sanct. etc. p. 18, 19
speaking of such precepts and permissions under the Papacy as it esteems
unlawful; does number the Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of Images
amongst those things which by virtue of the second Commandment are prohibited
by God.

In the French Synods of the Reformed, there is frequent mention of Romish
Idolatry See Synod de Lion. A. 1563. de Rochel. A. 1571. de Gergeau. A. 1601.
in the Book of J. d Huisseau. called la Discipt. des Eg^ises Refformees de
France. c. 12. p. 308, 309.
.

For the Church of England, she designed in her Articles briefness, and
avoidance of disputes; and having professed the Faith of one God, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, she does not insist particularly on the Invocation of Saints, or
the Worship of Images. Yet in her twenty-second Article concerning Purgatory,
she says of that and of the Romish Doctrine, touching Pardons, Worship and
Adoration, as well of Images as of Relics, and also of Invocation of Saints,
That it is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the Word of God. Now what can we judge of
that Worship which has for its object something else besides God, and is
contrary to the Scripture? We cannot but think it not a mere impertinence, but
a wicked act; an act which by contradicting his Authority, diminishes his
honor: and being an act of Worship, nothing less than one degree of Idolatry.
Again, in its twenty-eighth Article it teaches concerning the consecrated
Elements, That they were not by Christ's institution or ordinance, reserved,
carried about, lifted up and worshipped. By which words it notes the Adoration
of the Host in the Church of Rome, not as an innocent circumstance added by the
discretion of that Church, but as an unlawful worship; though it does not
expressly brand it with the name of Idolatry.

In the Rubric after the Communion, the Adoration of the consecrated Elements
is upon this reason forbidden, Because the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain
still in their very natural substances. And it is there added, That they so
remaining, the Adoration of them would be Idolatry to be abhorred by all
faithful Christians.

This Rubric does in effect charge the Church of Rome with gross Idolatry; for
it supposes the Object which they materially worship, to be in its natural
substance still a creature, and a creature disjoined from Personal union with
Christ, and not (according to the words of their St. Thomas Missal. Romans in
Orat. post Missam. Ador^ (...) devote latens Deit as! Quae sub his Figuris vere
latitas.
inserted into their Missal) a Deity latent under the accidents of Bread and
Wine. And it concludes that the worship of such a substance is such Idolatry
as Christian Religion abhors.

It does not indeed affirm in terms, that the worship of such a substance by a
Romanist who verily thinks it to be not bread, but a Divine body, is Idolatry;
but it says that, whence such a conclusion may be inferred. It says that the
bread is still bread in its substance, and if it be really such whilst it is
worshipped, the mistake of the worshipper cannot alter the nature of the thing,
though according to the degrees of unavoidableness in the causes of his
ignorance, it may extenuate the crime. Upon supposition that still it is very
bread in its substance, Costerus, and it may be Bellarmine himself, would have
condemned the Latria of it as the Idolatrous worship of a Creature, even in
Paul the simple, of whom stories say that he was extremely devout; but withal,
that he knew not which were first, the Apostles or the Prophets. And here it
ought to be well noted, that there is a wide distance betwixt this saying, That
Idolatry is a damnable sin; and this assertion, That Idolatry in any degree of
it, and in a person under any kind of circumstances, actually damneth.

I would here also commend it to the observation of the Reader, that the Church
of England speaks this of the worship of the corporal substance of the
Elements present in the Eucharist after consecration; and not of the real and
essential presence of Christ. And for this reason it left out the terms of Real
and Essential, used in the Book of King Edward the sixth See L'estranges
Alliance of Div. Offices, p. 207, 208. c. 7. -- Not -- that any adoration is
done to the Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto any real or essential
presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and blood. 2. Book of E. 6.
, as subject to misconstruction. Real it is, if it be present in its real
effects, and they are the essence of it so far as a Communicant does receive
it: for he receives it not so much in the nature of a thing, as in the nature
of a privilege Juellus in Apol. Eccl. Ang. Sect. 14. p. 50, 51 -- Christum enim
asserimus vere se praesentem exhibere in Sacramentis suis: in Baptismo, ut eum
Induamus: in caena, ut eum fide and spiritu comedamus, and de ejus cruce ac
sanguine habeamus vita^ aeternam.
. But I comprehend not the whole of this Mystery; and therefore I leave it to
the explication of others who have better skill in untying of knots.

In the Commination used by the Church of England, 'till God be pleased to
restore the Discipline of Penance, a curse is denounced against all those who
make any carved or molten Image to worship it. And it is the curse which is in
the first place denounced on Ash Wednesday. It is true that it is taken out of
the Book of Deuteronomy Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
, and it is the sense of a verse in that Book used at large in the former
Common Prayer Book, in these words, Cursed is the man that makes any carved or
molten Image, an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of the
craftsman: and puts it in a secret place, [to worship it.] That is, though
it be done without scandal to men, and in such private manner as to avoid the
punishment which the Law inflicteth on known and public offenders. But the
Church of England repeating this Law in its Commination, does thereby own it to
be still of validity, and to oblige Christian men.

The Homilies which are an Appendage to our Church, do expressly arraign the
Roman Catholics as Idolaters in the learned Discourses of the peril of
Idolatry.

Also English Princes and Bishops have declared themselves to be of the same
persuasion.

King Edward the sixth in his Injunctions Ed. 6. Injunct. A. 1547. ap. D.
Epise. Nordov. Ed. 1. p 9.
, reckons Pictures and Paintings in the Churches of England [as adorned by
the Romanists] amongst the Monuments of Idolatry. Of the Injunctions of Queen
Elizabeth this is the Thirty-fifth Q. Eliz. Injunct. A. 1559. p. 73.
, That no persons keep in their houses any abused Images, Tables, Pictures,
Paintings, or other Monuments of feigned Miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry and
Superstition. Of the Articles of Inquiry in the first year of her Reign Art. of
Inquiry, p. 238.
, this is one, and pertinent to our present Discourse. Whether you know any
that keep in their Houses any undefaced Images, Tables, Pictures, Paintings, or
other Monuments of feigned and false Miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry and
Superstition, and do adore them; especially such as have been set up in
Churches, Chapels, and Oratories.

This likewise is one of the Articles of Visitation set forth by Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the second year of Edward the sixth: Whether
Parsons, etc. have not removed and taken away and utterly extincted and
destroyed in their Churches, Chapels, and Houses, all Images, all Shrines, --
Pictures, Paintings, and all other Monuments of -- Idolatry and Superstition --.

Bishop Jewel's opinion is so well known, that his words may be spared: And
that Confession of Faith which he penned, and which makes a part of his
Apology for the Church of England [and in which he calls Corp. Confess. 1.
part. p. 95. and Jewel's Apol. Eccl. Anglic. Sect. 18. p. 56. Turpe autem and
plane aethnicum est quod in istorum Ecclefiis videmus, etc.
the Invocation of Saints in the Church of Rome, a practice vile, and plainly
Heathenish] is put into the collection of the Confessions of the Reformed,
under the Title of the English Confession Confessio Anglica ap. Synt. Conf. p.
89, etc.
. But the Churches Confession it cannot be called with respect to her
Authority, which did not frame it; whatsoever it be in its substance, and in
its conformity to her Articles.

For others of the Church of England, a very Learned person, the Hannibal and
Terror of Modern Rome Dr. Stillingfleet in Pref. to his Disc conc. the Idol.
pract. in the Church of Rome.
has named enough. T. G. has indeed excepted against many of the Jury: but
whether he has not illegally challenged so many of them, remains a Question;
or rather it is with the Judicious out of dispute.

The sentences of private men spoken on this occasion, both here and beyond the
Seas, either broadly Auth. Queremoniae Europae p. 230. Roma Babel quondam, sed
nunc es facta Bethaven, etc.
, or indirectly, are scarce to be numbered. Amongst them beyond the Seas I will
name only Danaeus and Hottinger.

Daneus in his Appendix to the Catalogue of Heresies written by St. Austin,
recounteth the Heretics who had offended, as he thought, in particular manner
against the several precepts of the Decalogue. And under the second Commandment
he places the Simonians, the Armenians, the Papists, and some others, as
notorious violaters of it. Hottinger Hottinger. in Dissert. 1. de Necess.
Reform. p 39.
distributeth the false worship of the Papists into six kinds of Idolatry,
under the Greek names of (...), or Breadworship; (...), or Marian-worship, to
wit, that of the Blessed Virgin; (...), or Saint-worship; (...), or
Angel-worship; (...), or Relick-worship; and lastly, (...), or the worship of
Images.

PART 2. Of the mitigation of the charge of Idolatry against the Papists.
THE learned Hugo Grotius, especially in his Annotations on the consultation of
Cassander, in his Animadversions on the Animadversions of Rivet, and in his
Votum pro Pace; The learned Mr. Thorndike in his Epilogue, and in his Just
Weights and Measures; Curcellaeus in his Epistle to Adrian Patius Curcell. Ep.
ad Adr. Pat. inter Epist. Ecclesiast. p. 859.
: These three, together with some others have pronounced a milder sentence in
this cause, though they approved not of such Invocation of Saints, and worship
of Images, as is practiced in the Church of Rome. But it is not my design to
decide the controversy by the greater number of modern Authorities, but rather
to look into the merits of the cause.

And this I purpose to do so far only, as Angels, or rather Saints and Images,
are the Objects of this Disquisition.

Of Relics, and the Sacramental bread, I forbear to say more than that little
which follows.

For the first, that which will be said concerning the worship of Images will
help us sufficiently in judging of the worship of Relics. If they be made
Objects of Religious adoration; if they be honored as pledges of Divine
protection; if they be trusted in as Shrines of Divine virtue; at adventure,
and in all ages; they become as the Manna which was laid up for any other than
the Sabbath Day, useless to the preservers, offensive to God, and unsavory to
men of sagacious Noses. Concerning that substance which after Sacramental
consecration, appears as Bread, that excellent Church, in whose safe
communion I have always lived, does still call it Bread. For the Priest, after
having consecrated the Elements, and received the Communion himself in both
kinds, is required by the Rubric of that Office, to administer to others, and
when he delivers the Bread to any one, to use this Form, The Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul to
Everlasting life. Now a Discourse concerning the worship of that Substance
which appears as Bread, will in effect be a Discourse about the Corporal
presence of Christ under the shows of that creature, and run the Disputant into
another Question which has been industriously sifted by Thousands. Neither are
the printed Volumes touching this subject few or small. There is a great heap
of them written by the learned Messieurs, Arnaud and Claud; and Monsieur
Aubertin has obliged the World with a very large and laborious work, about
Transubstantiation, in which may be seen the sense of the Ancients.

Forbearing then any further Discourse about the Worship of Relics, or the
Sacramental bread, I proceed to the Worship of Saints, Angels, and Images;
inquiring how far the Church of Rome does by her Veneration render them Idols.

At the entrance of this Inquiry, the trueness of her Faith in one God and
three Persons, is to be acknowledged and observed. The Creed which is formed by
order of the Council of Trent, begins with the Articles of that of Nice;
though it ends not without Additions. And Dr. Rivet in his Reflections on
those excellent Notes with which the acute Grotius adorned the consultation of
Cassander And Riv. in Animad. in Annot. H. Grot. p. 2.
, does in this point, own the Orthodoxy of the Roman Faith. In the Article of
the Divine Trin-unity, there is nothing (says he) controverted betwixt Papists
and Protestants. And thus much is true, if spoken of the generality of them;
for they herein adhere to Catholic Doctrine. Thus do the Protestants of the
Church of England; but all do not so, either here, or beyond the Seas, who
commonly pass under the name of Protestants. Curcellaeus, for instance sake, is
called a Protestant, yet may seem no other than a Tritheite, as may appear by
the first of those four Disputations which he wrote against his sharp Adversary
Maresius.

The Romanists then professing the true Catholic Faith in the Article of the
blessed Trinity, and owning the second Synod of Nice, (which though it favored
Images so very highly, yet it ascribed Latria to God only Verba Anast. Episc.
Theop. probata a Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 4. p. 758. C. D. Nemo autem. offendatur in
Adorationis vocabulo. Si quidem and Homines, and Sanctos Angelos adoramus, non
autem quod (...), hoc est, divinum cultum exhibeamus. Inquit enim Moses, Deum
tuum adorabis, etc.
,) they seem injurious to them who do not only charge them with Idolatry, but
also aggravate that Idolatry as equal to the false Worship of the most
barbarous Gentiles. They seem unjust, I say, in so doing, unless this be their
meaning, that the least degree of that crime under the light of Christianity,
be equal to the greatest under the disadvantages of Heathenism.

It is certain that the Romanists who worship the true God, do not worship
Universal Nature, or the Sun, or the Soul of the World in place of the Supreme
Deity, as did millions of Pagans.

Also for the Angels which they worship, they justify only the adoration of
those Spirits, who persisted in their first estate of unspotted Holiness: and
they renounce in Baptism Rituale Romans de Sacr. Bapt. p. 28. Inter. Abrenuntias
Satanae? Resp. Abrenuntio. Int. Et omnibus operibus ejus? Resp. Abrenuntio.
Int. Et omnibus pompis ejus? Resp. Abrenuntio.
the Devil and his Angels, after the manner of the Catholic Church. And when
an Heathen is by them baptized, the Priest Rit. Romans ib! p. 29. Horresce Idola,
respue simulacra.
after having signed him, first on the Forehead, and then on the Breast, with
the sign of the Cross, does exhort him in this Form: Abhor Idols. Reject
[their] Images. But the Gentiles sacrificed to Devils, and to such who by the
light of nature, might be known to be evil Demons; because they accepted of
such Sacrifices as were unagreeable to the justice and charity, and piety of
mankind; Sacrifices vile and bloody; such whose smoke might be discerned by a
common nostril, to smell of the stench of the bottomless pit. Yet some of the
Heathens expressly denied the practice of such worship, and made to the
Christians this following profession S. Aug. in Psalm. 96. Non colimus mala
Daemonia: Angelos quos dicitis, ipsos and nos colimus, virtutes Dei magni, and
ministeri^ Dei magni.
: We worship not evil Demons. Those Spirits which you call Angels, those we
also worship; the Powers of the Great God, and the Ministeries of the Great God.

For Hero's, they worship those only whom they believe to have professed
Christian Religion, and to have been visible Members of the Catholic Church:
For into that (whatsoever particular communion it was which afterward they
visibly owned) they were at first Baptized. Whereas the Gentiles worshipped
many who had been worshippers of false gods. Such worshippers were Castor,
Pollux, Quirinus, among the Romans. These first worshipped false Deities, and
were afterward worshipped themselves with the like undue honor.

For Images, they venerate (for so the Council of Trent loves to speak rather
than to say adore or worship, with the second Synod In Conc. 2. Nic. Act. 4. p.
247. Sic Tharas. Omnes qui sacras Imagines se venerari confitentur, adorationem
autem recusant, a sancto Patre [h. e. Anastasio Episc. Theopol.] tanquam
hypocritae redarguuntur.
of Nice) those of Christ the true God, and of such as they esteem real Saints
in Heaven; and not the Statues of the Sun, or of Universal Nature, or of the
Soul of the World; or intentionally those of Devils, or damned spirits.

In the Worship of Angels, Saints, Images, they forbear Sacrifice, as proper to
God: Whereas the Heathen did not appropriate it to Him; for some of them
offered only their Minds to the Supreme Deity, and their Beasts to inferior
gods. And the greater number offered Victims, and their (...), or Prayers used
in sacrificing, both to God and Demons Hor. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 3. -- Prudens
placavi sanguine Divos.
. Yet it must be confessed, that thus far the Church of Rome has gone toward
Sacrifice to Saints. It has appointed Masses, which it esteems proper
Sacrifices or Offerings of the Body of Christ to the Father, in honor of her
Saints: Insomuch that such Masses bear the names of their Hero's; and nothing
is said more commonly than the Mass of St. Anthony; the Mass of this or the
other Saint. But in this case the Council of Trent has given caution; and
would not have it believed that the Sacrifice is offered to the Saint, but to
God only Council: Trid. Sess. 22. c. 3. de Missis in Hon. Sanct. p. 853. Quamvis
in hon. and mem. Sanctorum nonnullas interdum Miss as Ecclesia celebrare
consueverit, non tamen illis Sacrificium offerri decet, sed Deo soli qui illos
^oronavit.
.

Now that which I have hitherto showed, is the fair side of the Church of Rome,
in reference to the Idolatry with which she is charged. Neither has my Pen
dawbed in the representation; it has done her but justice.

But there is, besides this already exposed to view, a cloudy side of that
Church which calls her self the Pillar of Christian Truth. This that we may
the better discern, let us first view it in the Council of Trent, (or in any
later Popish Synods), and then in its own subsequent Acts; and see how far
[first in the point of Invocation of Saints, and next of Images] it does
directly, or by plain consequence, and not merely by accidental abuse, usurp
any honor which belongs to God.

PART 3. Of the Idolatry charged on the Papists in their Worship of Saints.
FIrst, touching the Invocation of Saints, the Council of Trent determines
Council. Trid. Inter Conc. Max. p. 895. See the Bull of Pius the 4th. p. 944.
that the spirits of holy men reigning with Christ, are to be venerated, and
invoked: And that they offer Prayers to God for us. Also, that it is good and
lawful to pray to them, and to fly to their Prayers; their help and aid
through Christ the only Savior and Redeemer of men.

In pursuance of this Decree, the Church of Rome has continued her practice of
worshipping Saints according to certain Forms of words prescribed in such Books
as her Breviary and Missal, which the Popes by virtue of another Decree Conc.
Trid. de Indice Librorum, etc. p. 918. See Conc. Aqu. p. 135.
of the same Council have revised, and for common use established.

Now the forms and signs of Worship used in that Church are of such a nature,
that they seem at first view at least, to give to the Saints, if not that
honor which is incommunicable, yet that which God, though he might have given
it, has reserved to himself. It may suffice to illustrate this matter, if I
select some Forms used in the Officium Parvum of the holy Virgin, which makes
a part of the Romish Breviary, set out in pursuance of the Decree of Trent, by
Pius the fifth. In that Office the Virgin is worshipped in these Forms Offic.
Parv. B. M. p. 89. Ed: Antverp. Anno 1583, and p. 96, etc.
.

Establish us in peace. -- Unloose the bonds of the guilty. Bring forth light
to the blind. Drive away our evils. Make us, absolved of our faults, meek and
chaste. Vouchsafe us a spotless life.

Thou art most worthy Ib. p. 90.
of all praise. -- Let all who commemorate thee, have experience of thy
assistance. --

Vouchsafe Ib. p. 102, and 107.
that I may praise thee, O Sacred Virgin, give me power against thy Enemies.

Let Ib. p. 103.
the Virgin Mary bless us, and our pious offspring.

Mary, Mother of Grace Ib. p. 107.
, Mother of Mercy! do thou defend us from the Enemy, and receive us at the hour
of death.

We also find in that little Office this Exhortation ascribed to Bernard Ibid.
p. 94. Lect. 3. Men's. October.
: Let us embrace, my Brethren, the footsteps of Mary, and let us cast our
selves at her blessed feet with most devout supplication. Let us hold her and
not let her go till she bless us; for she is able.

These Forms are agreeable to many others in the former part of the Roman
Breviary, out of which I will transcribe only the following Suffrages.

Holy Mary Brev. Romans in Commem. de Sancta Maria, p. 103.
succor the miserable, help the weakhearted, refresh the weeping, pray for the
people, mediate for the Clergy, intercede for devout women. Let all who
celebrate thy Commemoration, feel Thy Aid See this Form with Additions in Sermon.
2. de Annun. which some ascribe to St. Austin.
.

Hail, O Queen Brev. Romans ad Completor. p. 107.
! Thou Mother of mercy, life, sweetness, and our Hope, we salute thee. To thee
we the banished children of Eve, do make our supplication. To thee we sigh,
mourning and weeping in this valley of tears. Go to therefore our Advocatress;
turn toward us those thy merciful eyes; and show us after this our banishment,
Jesus, the blessed fruit of thy womb: O mild, O pious, O sweet Virgin Mary!

Many of these Suffrages taken in their plain and common meaning, do manifestly
entrench upon the Prerogative of God. And of this kind also are those Romish
Prayers which are mentioned by Mr. Thorndike in the last part of his Epilogue
Mr. Thornd. Epil. part. 3. p. 356, 357.
, in which he treats of the Laws of the Church. The third sort (said he) of
[the Prayers of Romanists unto Saints] is, when they desire immediately of them
the same blessings, spiritual and temporal, which all Christians desire of God.
There is (as he proceeds) a Psalter to be seen with the name of God [or rather
Lord] changed, everywhere into the name of Virgin. There is a Book of Devotion
in French with this Title, Moyen de bien Servir, prier, and adorer la Vierge
Marie: The way well to serve Servir answers to (...).
, pray to, and adore the blessed Virgin. The [Prayers of this] third [sort]
taking them at the foot of the Letter, and valuing the intent of those that use
them by nothing but the words of them, are mere Idolatries. As desiring of the
creature that which God only gives, which is the worship of the creature for
the Creator, God blessed for evermore. And were we bound to make the Acts of
them that teach these Prayers the Acts of the Church, because it tolerates
them, and maintains Consider whether the Church of Rome does not make such
Prayers it self, by making th e foregoing public Forms.
them in it, instead of casting them out, it would be hard to free that Church
from Idolatry, which whosoever admits can by no means grant it to be a Church.

The Letter then of Romish Forms being very scandalous, those who justify the
use of them must show some other words wherein the Romish Church has so
explained her self to the World, that men may plainly know she never intended
them in their common and native acception, but in a sense agreeable to the
tenure of Scripture; and of such a sense Mr. Thorndike in the place before
cited, has judged them capable.

If such an Interpretation be by her promulgated to the World, the force of the
Objection against such Forms will be abated: abated I say, but not quite
removed. For still such Forms are perilous amongst the vulgar, who follow the
received sense of words notwithstanding their contrary Interpretations. There
may indeed be a very arbitrarious use of signs; and if an Humorist will give
this caution to his neighbor that when he uses the word, black, he must be
interpreted as meaning, white, he shall not lie to him when he tells him that
the Snow is black, and that the Crow is white; or when he writes himself
Blacklous instead of Thomas Albius. But amongst others, to whom such caution is
not given, and who understand nothing of this absurd humor, his reserved
meaning will not salve the veracity of his word.

Now let it be examined, Whether the Church of Rome has made before the world,
a plain interpretation of the abovesaid Forms, in such sort, that men cannot,
without breach of charity, put upon them any other than this or the like
construction, avowed by many Doctors See S. Cressy's Exomolog. Sect. 3. c. 3.
p. 438. Ed. 3. This is only that they would intercede for us, etc.

In his Answer to Dr. Pierce's Sermon. c. 16. of the Invoc. of Saints, p. 196.
this only accord, to Card. Perron, Prier pour Prier. i. e. to desire them to
pray for us.


: Holy Mary, pray for us in order to the obtaining these or other blessings
from the alsufficient God. Otherwise that Church is answerable for the common
and scandalous meaning of the Latin words, which are not now proper to Rome,
but the language of the World.

If such an Interpretation be divulged we must look for it either in the
Council of Trent, or in some following Synods, or in the Decrees of the Popes,
or in the Catechism, Breviaries, Missals, or some other such Books which are
publicly authorized by that Church.

For the Breviarie and Missal, their Forms have been already produced; neither
have I omitted any Antecedents and consequents which may decipher some hidden
meaning in them. It is true, some Litanies subjoin the (...), or, Have mercy,
only to the Persons of the Sacred Trinity; using to Saints and Angels, the Form
of Orate pro nobis, or pray for us. But they who in one Prayer desire the
Saints only to pray for them, do not barely by that one Prayer manifest to the
World that they still mean no more than the requesting of their Intercessions,
when in an hundred other Forms they call upon them to bestow this and that
benefit upon them; and sometimes a benefit which is not to be expected but from
the Almightiness of God.

For the Council of Trent, such Forms, in the ratification at least of their
common use, following by virtue of its Decree, they seem rather to be
Explications of the sense of the Council, than to be by it explained. For that
were to make the Key first, and the Lock which it should open afterward. But
if the Breviary and Missal be explained by the Council, they receive a very
dark Interpretation, and therefore next to insufficient. For the common sense
of its Forms is naturally, or by custom plain; and therefore their Explication
in a forced sense, though exceeding open, will scarce be admitted by the
vulgar, who judge by that which is just before them. They like ordinary
Travelers plod on in the common road which is before their eyes, and mind not
the directions which are engraven or written on Pillars which stand on their
right or left hand. That Church should have been careful of the scandalous
sound of Idolatrous Forms, considering how tender Religion is of the Honor of
God: and it should have taken further care against the peril of that Idolatry
which attends them; considering the weak capacities of the people, who will
construe Idolatrous Forms in an Idolatrous sense. If the Pope shall set forth a
thousand Declarations concerning the Worship of one true God, and yet shall
pray in this Form, (...), Baal have mercy, instead of this ancient one, (...),
Lord have mercy; the World would judge of him as of a well-wisher to Baal,
though the name does signify no more than Lord; because the common acceptance
of it has rendered it the sign of a false god. In such manner the World would
judge, if he should call on God by the name of (...), though it be but the word
DEUS, or God, with a very little alteration.

It appears then that in some Forms a forced Interpretation does not
effectually show the sense which is veiled under the Letter, or rather where
the Letter looks a contrary way. And for the Forms of the Church of Rome, the
Council of Trent does not give any open Interpretation of them, or so much as
suggest that nothing is meant by them but an Ora pro nobis.

For the Council where it treats of the Invocation of Saints Conc. Trid.
Sess. 25. Decr. de Invocat. etc. Sanct. p. 895. -- bonum -- atque utile -- ad
eorum Orationes, opem, auxiliumque consugere.
, it does not only mention the usefulness of their Prayers, but also of their
help and assistance; which assistance if it be no other than that of their
Prayers, the addition of the words, Help and Aid, to that of Prayers may seem
very superfluous.

Something else that Church means, and it is elsewhere expressed by
Patrocinium, the aid of a Patron, or rather of a Guardian; for that it
intends. In the little Office of the blessed Virgin this Collect is
prescribed Offic. parv. B. Virg. p. 97.
, We pray thee, Lord, let all thy Saints everywhere help us, that whilst we
celebrate their merits, we may feel their Patrocini^, [or Protection.] I here
interpret Patrocinie by Guardianship, aid, and protection, not only because the
word will bear that sense [for in Festus, Patrocinium, is, Tutela and defensio;
and in Cicero, Patronus, is, Custos and defensor Coloniae], but because those
prayers refer to their Saints as to Patrons and Patronesses of persons, places
and things; of which more at large, in the pursuit of this Argument. In the
sixth Council of Milan Conc. Milev: 6. c. 3. de cultu Sanctorum, p. 717.
, it is said, To be agreeable to pious Reason, by Divine Offices, and Litanies,
to implore the Intercession or Patrocinie of the Patrons of Cities and
Provinces. From such Patrons they expect other aids besides those of their
prayers; and they tell how they appear in times of danger, and how active they
are in effecting their deliverance. In the Catechism of Trent Catech. ex Decr.
Conc. Trid. p. 392.
, that Church owneth Christ as the only [that is, as they mean it, the
principal] Patron. And as it intends not to signify by that word that Christ
does no otherwise give aid to his Church than by his Intercession; so neither
does it mean the like by the Patrocinie of the Saints. The Council of Trent
mentions their Aids, besides their Prayers, and accordingly the people pray for
them in such Forms as these: O holy Mary In the Manual of John Heigham in our
Ladies Litany for Saturday. p. 380.
-- stretch abroad the hand of thy mercy -- graciously Ibid. p. 382.
hear us in all our needs and necessities, and leave us not comfortless, nor
alone without help in that dreadful day and hour, when our souls shall go out
of our bodies, but assist and help us, that we may then safely come and enter
in at the gates of Paradise -- To thy Ibid. Prayers for Women traveling with
child. p. 519, 520.
help, O Virgin, Mother of God, poor women laboring in childbirth do fly:
refuse them not in their necessities, but help them in all their distress, O
blessed Virgin.

Verse. In all our Tribulations and Anguishes.

Resp. The blessed Virgin Mother succor us. [Where we have a Miserere, not an
Ora.]

Sometimes indeed the Romanists call the very prayer of the Virgin a
protection, as in this form Ibid. the Lit. for Saturday, p. 386.
: We beseech thee, O Lord, that the glorious Intercession of the ever-blessed
and glorious Virgin Mary may protect us, and bring us to everlasting life. But
it is certain that they generally mean some further assistance than that of
fupplication when they call for it; for they are taught that the Saints are
endued with such a power. Hence John Heigham in his Popish Manual J. H. Man.
Pr. at S. Omers, An. 1620. p. 584.
, has this Advertisement as preparatory to Confession. Commend thy self unto
Almighty God, to his blessed Mother, and to thy good Angel, praying, that thou
may no way be seduced, or deceived by the fraud of the Devil. Also to St.
Mary Magdalene, and to St. Barbara: who as it is written, have obtained most
effectual grace and favor of God to assist in confession, all such as pray
unto them for their help and assistance.

If we proceed to other Councils later than that of the Council of Trent,
inquiring in them for interpretations of Romish Offices; they are not in
pretense any more than Provincial or National Synods, not general Councils.
Wherefore the Interpretations of such Synods (if any be found in them) are not
sufficient for the enlightening and manifesting the sense of the whole Church.
But so far as my observation in the perusal of them, may be of validity, I
avouch that there is not in them such an interpretation as refers the sense
of the abovesaid Forms, merely to a praying to the Saints to pray for us. In
many of them Council. Rhem. sub Pio Quarto, p. 139. Tolet. p. 757. Rothom p.
823. Rhem. sub Greg. 13. p. 886. Burdig. p. 946. Turon. p. 1005. Biturg. p.
1069, and p. 1075. Aquens p. 1122. Mexic. p. 1351. Tolos. p. 1380. Mechlin. p.
1542. Narbon. p. 1576, 1580.
the Doctrine of Trent, in this Article is owned and reinforced but not, that I
know of, further explained.

That which I find most opposite to the thing in hand, amidst so vast an heap
of Decrees, is a certain place in the Synod of Cambray: a Synod held, somewhat
more than an hundred years ago Council. Camer. Ann. 1565. p. 176.
under Maximilian a Bergis, Archbishop and Duke of Cambray. The place which I
mean is in the third Chapter, under the Title, de sanctis; and thus it runs:

Let the Prayers of the Faithful follow the analogy and proportion of Faith.
Wherefore let the less learned Populace be admonished, that when they visit the
Memorials of the Saints, and implore their aid, and according to Christian
custom, repeat the Lords-prayer, that they understand that they direct them not
to the Saints but unto God; the Saints being joined with them as Comprecators.

This sounds somewhat like a Plea from the Roman Churchmen to the Populace of
Cambray, if care be taken that they be instructed according to that Decree of
their Synod. But that being a Decree enacted in a corner of the world, and in a
private Synod, it cannot suffice in all those places where the Roman Offices
are enjoined, and where the use of them is continual. Further, two things are
here to be observed in reference to this Decree: First, That the Invocation of
Saints as Patrons contradicts not the analogy of the Roman-Faith. Secondly,
That the bringing of the Forms of Invocation to the Analogy of Faith in this
Decree does not so much respect the Prayers in the Missal and Breviarie, as the
Lords-prayer repeated more privately in the Litanies of the Saints See Modum
recitandi Oratdomin. una cum memori^ and veneratione sanctorum; in Horst.
Parad. Animae. Sect. 2. c. 4 p. 107. etc.
.

Proceed we next to the Roman Decretals. In the new Decretals, which make the
seventh Book in the body of their Canon Law, I can find nothing after the Creed
of Trent urged upon all their Ecclesiastics, in the Bull of Pius the fourth
Corp. Jur. Can. l. 7. c. 4. p. 3.
, besides the pressing of the same Form or Oath anew by Pius the fifth, upon
the Doctors and Professors of all Faculties L. 7. Decret. c. 3. Tit. 5. p. 126.
.

For the Catechism of Trent, I meet indeed with such an Interpretation of the
forementioned Offices, as sounds to them that do not well attend, as if all
were meant of requesting the Prayers of Saints on our behalf. The place of that
Catechism Catech. ^x Decr. Conc. Tridpart. 4. c. 6. Sect. 1. number. 3. p. 512.
is this which I am going to mention. We do not after the same manner pray to
God and to the Saints. For we pray to God, that he would give good things, and
deliver us from evil; but we beg of the Saints, because they are gracious with
God, that they would take us into their Patronage, and procure of God the
things we need. Hence we use two different Forms; for we say properly to God,
Have mercy on us, Hear us: to a Saint, Pray for us: though upon another account
we may pray to the Saints themselves to have mercy on us, for they are very
merciful.

On this place it may not be amiss if I bestow these Animadversions.

First, When it is said that Roman Catholics pray not to the Saints for the
bestowing of good, or the averting or removing of evil, this is meant of
absolute Prayer, (to use the terms of Cardinal Perron) by which we address our
selves to the first Cause, who is God; not of Relative supplication, by which
they call on the Saints as subordinate conveyers of good, and averters of evil.
So in the Hymn, Ave Mari's stella, the Virgin is desired to give light to the
blind, and to drive away our evils Brev. Romans in Fest. Pur. p. 721 In Offic. B.
M. p. 89, etc.
.

Secondly, When Papists desire the Saints to pray for them, because they are
gracious with God, they mean not this only of their desire that the Saints
would use their interest as Saints in their present case, for the procuring of
Gods immediate help; but they also entreat them either to procure of God
commission to be their Patrons, or to continue his Grace to them in executing
the commission formerly given them. This, I suppose, is meant in those
Collects, where they desire God to protect his people who trust in the
Patronage of Peter and Paul, and other Apostles Offic. B. M. p. 97. See Miss.
Romans in Oct. ^mn. Sanct. p. 527. Fac nos, quae sumus, etc.
. And this Horstius means in this form of Prayer to the Virgin Horst. Par. An.
Sect. 2: p. 105.
: I beseech thee by that mighty favor granted thee by Christ, that thou will
obtain for me more grace to please God.

Thirdly, Though in the Litany where the Trinity is invoked with the form of,
Have mercy; the Saints are called on with that of, Pray for us; (for the same
form so nigh would have sounded ill, as if the Saints were equal with God); yet
when the Saints are addressed to in distinct Collects or Hymns, the form is,
Help us, as well as, Pray for us. Thus in the Hymn, Alma Redemptoris Matter.
They (a) pray to the Virgin in the form of, Peccatorum miserere.

Fourthly, Here is owned a request both for Patronage and Prayer.

And further, in that Catechism (b), the Saints are e Catech. Conc. Trid. Lugd.
1569. p. 390.
called Mediators and Patrons; and there is mention (c) of their Aids; and
their Worship Brev. Romans ad Complet. p. 106, 107.
is confounded f Ibid. p. 392.
with that of Angels under the name of Angelical g Ibid. p. 389.
Spirits. And of them it is there affirmed, that God has appointed them to be
his Ministers; that he uses their Ministration in the Government, both of his
Church, and of other things; and that by their help we are daily delivered from
the greatest dangers of Soul and Body.

For the Books of public Offices, their Forms have been already produced;
neither can I see where the Comment of any Rubric removes the scandal of
their Text.

Concerning Manuals, they are usually composed by private Doctors, or devout
Students, who often intermix the Glosses of their own Reason. But nothing less
than the Church it self can authentickly explain its Universal practice. And
for such Manuals as are authorized by the Church, to me they seem to transcend,
rather than to come short of, the Forms of the Missal and Breviarie. Such a
Manual is that of the Hours of of the Blessed Virgin, in which if there had
been any such Explication of the Forms used to her, it had been shut up
together with other Manuals, from the common view of the Christian world, by
the Interdict of any vulgar translation of it Council Mediolan. 3. p. 379.
Tolos. c. 11. de llb. prohib. p. 1423. Aven. p. 1440, 1441, comp. with Council.
Trid. Decret. de Edit. and usu Sacr. Libr. p. 747.
. For to every Country has not been granted the Sclavonian privilege See
Council. Aqu. p. 1482. of the Books permitted in the Illyrican Tougue.
: That people have been allowed the Books of their Religion in their vulgar
tongue, with advice notwithstanding, to embrace the Latin, though to them an
unknown language.

In the Province of Mexico it was decreed by the Synod Syn. Mexic. p. 1201,
1203, 1204.
, That no Books of Religion should be read without the permission of the
Ordinary. And the Manuals which were appointed for the use of the people,
whether Spanish or Indian, were not likely to expound to them the meaning of
the Roman Forms; for their Contents were these: The Lords-prayer; The
Salutation by the Angel; The Apostles Creed; The Articles of Faith, [those in
the Creed of Trent]; The Precepts of the Decalogue; The Precepts of the Church;
The seven Sacraments; the seven deadly Sins; and the Salve Regina.

This Antiphona called Salve Regina, has been already repeated; and it is one
of the higher Forms of the Worship of the Virgin. And Father Paul did in some
measure show his dislike of it Fulgentio in the Life of Father Paul the
Venetian, p. 43.
, in forbearing to repeat it, as did his Brethren at the end of the Mass. But
it is true, that he colored his aversness with such an excuse as this, that he
was not to observe a Decree of Thirty Friars against the Order of the whole
Church. Now in the abovesaid Synod of Mexico Syn. Mexic. Sect. 12. p. 1298.
, there is a special inforcement of the singing of Salve Regina daily, and with
all solemnity, during a great part of Lent. And the Bishops are there much
pressed to procure in this manner, with all solicitude, the increase of pious
devotion toward the holy Virgin.

The English Romanists have had often in their hands the Manual of Godly
Prayers, published at St. Omers by John Heigham. In the sixth Edition of that
Book, I find no Explication of the Worship of Saints, but much which seems to
advance it to a degree too high for it. Under the first (or in our account the
second Commandment) the Penitent is there Manual of J. H. p. 596.
taught to confess this as one breach of it, that he has not daily recommended
himself to God and his Saints. In the Litany of our Lady he has these Forms:

O holy Mary Man. of J. H. p. 380.
, stretch abroad the hand of thy mercy, and deliver our hearts from all wicked
thoughts, hurtful speeches, and evil deeds. -- O holy Mary Ibid. p. 381.
we worship thee, we glorify thee. Words which are a part of that Religious
Thanksgiving which the ancient Church offered to God, and called the Angelical
Hymn.

Horstius in his Manual called the Paradise of the Soul, reprinted lately at
Colen, and adorned with Sculptures, seems as devout as Heigham now cited; for
thus he prays Horst. Paradis. An. Sect. 7. Sect. 7. de B. Virg. p. 446.
, or comments on Gratia Plena: O blessed Virgin, be graciously pleased to pour
forth that Grace of which thou art full; that the vein of thy benignity
overflowing, the guilty may receive absolution; the sick, medicine; the weak in
heart, strength; the afflicted, consolation; those that are in danger, help and
deliverance. O that I could but deserve one drop of such great fullness, for the
refreshing of my dry and parched heart!

For the private Oral Instructions of the Romish Ecclesiastics concerning the
use and intent of such Forms, I pretend not to be well acquainted with them.
But as to their public Preaching I am not ignorant of one very common and no
less scandalous usage. For the Preacher after a short Preface which introduces
his Text or Subject, exhorts the Congregation to say Ave Maria, in order to a
blessing upon that holy business about which they are assembled. And this the
Reader may see not only in the more private Sermons of Monsieur de Lingendes,
but likewise in the more public one of John Carthenius a Carmelite, at the
Provincial Synod of Cambray Council. Camer. p. 225. Et vos Reverendissimi Domini
mei, and Patres optimi, und mecum, obsecro, summi Patris filiam speciosam,
summi filii matrem formosam, summi Paracleti sponsam gratiosam, totiusque
coelestis ac terrenae Ecclefiae Reginam, Gratiae ac misericordiae matrem,
salutare dignemini, dicsntes, Ave Maria, etc.
.

By this Discourse it plainly appears that the Letter of the Roman Forms in
the Invocation of Saints, does to the most vulgar ears, sound as Idolatrous: as
also that that Church has not provided any public, direct, clear
Interpretation of them, in its subsequent Synods, Missals, Breviaries,
Catechism, Decretals, Authentic Manuals, or what I likewise may add, in its
Bullarium, which (as shall anon be showed) exalts the Canonized into the
condition of Patrons and Guardians of men.

There then remains this only to be said by the learned of that Communion:
That they who hear the Church professing plainly its Faith in one supreme God
in Trinity, cannot think it means by any words whatsoever to give to the
Creature the supreme Honor of that Trinity which it so solemnly acknowledges.
And indeed seeing all the Romanists believe the Apostles Creed, seeing many of
them appropriate all Latria to God; seeing they teach in their Manuals Abridg.
of Christ. Doctr. in the Expos. of the Mass. p. 294.
that therefore all Prayers are ended with [Through Jesus Christ our Lord] to
signify that whatsoever we beg of God the Father, we must beg it in the name
of Jesus Christ, by whom he has given us all things; some allowance is to be
made them in the Exposition of those Forms, which sound as if the Saints were
invoked with Latria. But yet it may be demanded, whether the Forms and practice
of a corrupt Church may not contradict their general Rule of Faith? Whether the
Roman Forms be applied to that Rule of Faith by any but prudent Ecclesiastics
and Laics, who are not the greater number? Whether amongst them they take not
away some honor from God, though not that which is absolutely incommunicable?
And whether a Church which calls it self Christian and Catholic, should not
be more careful of public Forms of speaking in Prayer, (such as may render the
Supplicants Idolaters, in themselves in the ignorant use of them; and to others
by the external scandal) whatsoever license the world takes in phrases of
common speech. And here it were well if those who so often alledg Mr.
Thorndike, in favor of their cause, would weigh the words of a Letter of his,
said to be written about a year before he died Dr. H. M. of the Idol. of the
Church of Rome, p. 321, 322.
. To pray to the Saints (says he) for those things which only God can give, as
all Papists do, is in the proper sense of the words, Idolatry. If they say,
their meaning is by a figure only to desire them to procure their requests of
God, how dare any Christian trust his soul with that Church which teaches that
which must needs be Idolatry in all that understand not that figure? They who
believe not that these are his words, are sure unacquainted with the writings
of the Author See the like sense in Mr. Thornd. Epil. part. 3. p. 356, 357.
cited here c. 10. part. 3.
, and the great Integrity of the Reporter. It is certain that among our selves
in our more ordinary conversation, such forms of speech are used toward men,
which in their extent are applicable to God. We say that such Students had
their Grace in the Senate House; or that there they have been created Doctors,
[a phrase it seems too crude for the digestion of some Ass. Annot. in Genesis 1.
1. The Hebrew word Bara is a word in its proper sense, proper and peculiar to
God: and therefore should not be attributed to men, how great soever. Yet it is
a familiar phrase in the style of the Court to say, such a one was created Earl
or Marquess, or Duke, etc.
nice stomachs.] When the weak are pursued by a savage Beast, or by a man cruel
as such a creature, they run into the arms of kinder persons, and desire them
to save them and deliver them. And because these Forms are used to men by those
who own nothing but what is humane in them, and because the matter of their
request is apparently such too, and in the power of man; these equivocal
phrases are by general acknowledgment, determined to one sense. But were civil
Forms more liable to mistake, a Church, sure, should exercise a more tender
care in those of Religion; and choose such as might be apter to edify than
mislead the meanest in her Communion.

Now in such Forms of common speech as I have mentioned, though there is not
any proper worship of men, yet there is more desired of them, than that they
would pray to God for us. When Esau beseeched his Father to bless him, he did
not merely request him to pray for a blessing, but to pronounce over him that
sentence of Benediction, which he as the Father of that Family had commission
from God to pronounce with authority and to effect. And when an importunate
widow does by her repeated cries for vengeance, or public justice for
deliverance and safeguard, render the very ears of an unjust Judge attentive;
she entreats more of him than that he would speak for her to the King. She
supposes him in commission, and endued with power to help her, though she
knows him in this very point of his assistance to be subordinate to his Prince.

There is more in the Forms of the Roman Church than the bare indiscretion of
them. And though the incommunicable honor of God be not by their measure, the
rule of Faith, devolved on the creature (for a Papist so interpreting those
Forms, should by that Church be condemned as an Heretic, and a violater of the
fundamental Article of one God in Trinity;) yet still to me it seems, that
the honor which God has not actually communicated, is by them misplaced on
Angels, at least on Saints.

I do not, in saying this, ground my persuasion barely on the common Argument
of that Ubiquity which many conclude to be ascribed to Saints and Angels in the
Invocation of them Confess. Wirtemb. p. 122. Talis -- Petitio exigit, ut is qui
rogatur, sit ubique praesens, and exaudiat pelitionem. Haec autem Majestas soli
Deo competit; and si tribuitur Creaturae, creatura adoratur.
. The foundation of that Argument is laid on a matter which is disputed. For
they who contend that the Angels hear or know what is done on Earth, do
expressly deny Ubiquity to them. Though some private Romanists have mentioned
appearances of the person of the Virgin in distant places at the same time; and
others have represented her or some other Saint as dwelling in a particular
statue. And to such it is proper to put the question of Arnobius: Let us
suppose (said he) that there are ten thousand Statues of Vulcan in all the
world, can that one Deity b Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 6. p. 204.
be in so many thousand habitations at one time? But others infer this knowledge
in the Saints and Angels, partly from the perfection of their spiritual nature,
by which (says Holden in Div. Fid. Analy^i. l 2. c. 7. p. 294.
Dr. Holden) they know all the natures, motions, and actions of Corporeal
things; partly from their personal presence as Guardians of men, and as Gods
Retinue in Religious Assemblies; and partly from the Revelation of God, and
from what they call the Glass of the Trinity, [a mirror of which I profess my
self very ignorant, and which my curiosity desires not to look into; and which
the inventers might in reverence have spared, rather than to have exposed the
essence of God as a substance reflecting all visible Ideas]. They gather this
also in part from the Intelligence given by some Angels unto the rest, who are
of the same community.

This they say plausibly concerning Angels; for of Saints they have much less
ground thus to speak. Only this may be allowed them concerning both; that being
spirits, we know not whether such distance as that of this world does hinder
communication. For if it be not done by motion, they may (possibly) as well
understand at the distance of an hundred miles, as at that of a furlong. This
only I observe by the way as an Objection, That the Ancients, who are said to
Platonize, held neither Angels nor Souls departed to be uncloathed Spirits, but
united to Bodies of Ether or AEr. Wherefore it seems that their knowledge of
external, material objects, must depend on Physical motion, which by distance
is scattered or diverted from the streightness of its lines, and consequently
from the exact truth of its intelligence.

It is most probable that Angels are often absent from grown men, especially
whilst they remain in ordinary circumstances. And the Scripture speaks of the
Angels as being, on this or the other occasion, sent to men, and then removed
from them. This is manifest in the known cases of Abraham, Daniel, S. Peter, S.
John, and the blessed Virgin her self. More probable still it is, that the same
Angel has not intelligence, not only of all the affairs of the world, but of
all the prayers that are addressed to him. For many such Addresses being very
improper, and sometimes immoral, we must not think that God or other good
Angels are concerned in telling him the news of them, unless it be in order to
punishment.

And for the Saints whom God has not (that we know of) made ministering
spirits; who are not, before the Resurrection and final Judgment, in complete
glory; of whose appearing after death, the Scripture has given us, in the Old
Testament, but one instance, and that a very doubtful one (it not being certain
whether it was the Apparition of Samuel, or of the Devil, or the Imposture of
the Witch of Endor speaking inwardly:) And, in the New, but that one (as I
remember) of Moses and Elias when Christ was transfigured. It is not so much as
by probable arguments yet evinced, that they know our particular estate, though
it is evident that they wish well to the world of mankind, and especially to
the body of the Christian Church. For sure they lose not their affection in
Heaven, where, whilst some other Graces cease, Charity is eternal and in
perfection.

Wherefore, though the praying to Saints and Angels may not necessarily infer
their Ubiquity; and for that reason be called Idolatrous; yet if they hear us
not, it may be called an unwarranted, impertinent, idle labor. It is, as Saint
Paul Col. 2. 18.
speaks, an intruding into the things which we have not seen. And certainly
when we pray not only to those that do not hear us, but to such as have no
existence but in fiction; it is emphatical impertinence. What else are the
seven sleepers, considered as such? And yet in the institutions of a spiritual
life Instit. spirit. l. 2. c. 2. p. 54. -- Visum fuit memoriam instituere
sanctorum, non omnium sed quorundam, quos selegi, majore quadam devotione and
cultu prosequendos, etc. p. 58. S. Bernardin. Alex. SS. Sept. Dor^ient. S.
Placid. etc.
published with Elogy, by Sfondratus (afterward a Pope by the name of Gregory
the fourteenth), and composed by a nameless Virgin, those seven are selected
together with a few othere, as Saints to be venerated with especial devotion.
What else are S. Sulpitius, and S. Severus, considered as distinct persons? and
yet in an ancient and fair Romish Manual Ms. ap: M. R. W. de S. J.
, I find this to be part of a Litany: Holy Sulpitius, pray for me: Holy
Severus, pray for me. Also, Holy Faith, pray for me: Holy Hope, pray for me:
Holy Charity, pray for me. The learned Bishop Montague Bish. Mont. in his
Treatis. of the Invoc. of Saints, p. 98.
does call the Romish Invocation of Saints a Point of Foolery: It being (he
says) at least uncertain, whether they are, and in what manner they can be
acquainted with our wants, seeing their condition is not to attend us, and they
are removed far above our reach and call. He entertained the like opinion of
praying to such Angels as are not Guardians. But of them that are such, he
supposes them to be ever in procinctu, nigh at hand to men, and in attendance
on them all their days. Hence he sees no impiety in this Address Bish. Mont.
Ibid. p. 97, 98.
, Sancte Angele custos ora pro me, Holy Guardian-Angel pray for me. [He had put
the matter more out of doubt, if he had supposed the Angel appearing, and
certainly known to be an holy spirit of that quality.] But for the Invocation
of other Angels he thinks it as foolish and ridiculous, as his praying to a
friend at Constantinople to help him, whilst he himself is at London.

Others have gone further in their censure, and they have called the Invocation
of Saints more than an impertinent, that is, a sinful, though not an Idolatrous
practice. And indeed so plain a misuse of a man's reason cannot but be offensive
to the Creator, who gave it not to man that he should trifle with it. But this
is not their manner of arguing. They tell us such Invocation is not of Faith;
and that whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But what Art of thinking teaches
them to draw consequences on this fashion? Whatsoever is done by man against
the present persuasion of his Conscience, which admits it with great reluctance
as irreligious, is in him sinful: Therefore the Invocation of Saints or Angels
by Papists, who desire them to pray for them when they do not hear, though they
in their Conscience believe they do; is a wicked practice, because it arises
not from faith or persuasion. Had they said every thing in such weak and
unconcluding Logic, they had wounded their own cause more than that of their
Adversaries.

If now there were nothing in this Romish Invocation besides their desire of
Angels and Saints to pray for them to God Almighty, I should forbear to call it
Idolatry, and give it the softer names of misperswasion, impertinence,
irrational or fruitless beating the air. For they amongst them who are the more
prudent, suppose the Saints to hear them by other means than by Divine
Omnipresence, and infiniteness of Understanding; and they call upon them for
such an Office as a good man on earth would do for them, much more a Saint or
Angel in Heaven. For what Christian will deny the Petition of his Neighbor,
when he desires him only to pray to God for him? unless perhaps he neglects
Prayer himself, and appears to have sinned a sin unto death, of which they
are scarce guilty, who beg the Prayers of others; such piety being seldom
discerned either in presumptuous Christians, or in Apostates.

But in the Romish Invocation there is much more than a praying to Saints and
Angels to pray for us. It is not indeed intentionally the worship of any of
them under the notion of a supreme God, how high a note soever does sound in
their Forms; for that their own Church renounceth as Idolatry. And the
Churchmen teach the people Abridg. of Christ. Doctr. in Expos. of 1. Command.
p. 123.
, That it is lawful to worship Angels and Saints with Dulia, or inferior
honor, proportioned to their Excellency, but not as God, or with Gods honor.
They give not to them Gods incommunicable honor, if they understand the Rule
of their Faith; but to me they seem to give them honor beyond the proportion
of their Excellency, even that which God has to himself reserved. This is
plain by the natural construction of their Forms, which they have not otherwise
interpreted, but confirmed this meaning of them by their Doctrines, and by
their daily practice. This is that which I here mean, and think I shall evince:
That though they make not any Saint or Angel the supreme Governor of the
World, yet they constitute the Spirits of either kind, Deputies or Lieutenants
under God, and suppose him not only as occasion serves, to use their Ministry,
but to make them Guardians, Patrons, and Patronesses; and to allow them for
such upon the choice of Worshippers on Earth. They instruct the people in their
Manuals, not only how to address themselves to their Guardian-Angels Horst.
Parad. Animae, de cultu and Ven. SS. Ang. and Praecip. Ang. Cust. Admon. Sect.
2. c. 2. p. 94, etc.
, but also to choose and worship their Guardian Saints Instit. Spirit. l. 2. c.
2. p. 58. -- Cum iis quos mihi in Patronos and Patronas elegi, singularis,
quantum quisque posset, totis viribus, cultus and rever. debeatur, etc. Horst.
Parad. (...). Sect. 2. (...). 3. de Patronis e Sanctorum num^ro ^ligendis and
indies peculiari devotione colendis. p. 100, 101, etc.
. They teach them (c) in their daily Exercises to remember such Saints, that
for every office of life they may take to them particular Assistants; that so
they may pray with this Saint, and sleep with that: That one Saint may be
present at their Canonical Hours when they read; that another may be by when
they hear a sacred Lecture; when they work, when they dine, when they sup. They
teach them Horst. Parad. An. Sect. 2. p. 100. Patronum e Sanctorum numero, etc.
to select one or more out of the number of the Saints as their Patron; to love
them, to imitate them; through their hands to offer daily all their works to
God; to commend themselves to their protection morning and evening, and at
other times, especially in difficulties and tentations; to use them as
witnesses and directors of their Actions.

They give to this Spirit this precinct, and that to another. They give to some
Authority over this disease, to others over that. They substitute some over one
part of nature, and others over another part of it; though I think they do not
quite tie them from intermedling in one another Diocesses or Precincts. And
St. Paul the Patron of Mariners may be called upon in a Fever; and St. Luke the
Patron of Physicians, may have his aid implored in a Tempest Instit. Spir. p.
63. Docebar Sanctorum, etc.

See Cardin. Perron. in res. Resp. Reg. Ja^obi. l. 5. c. 3.


.

This is an opinion maintained by them without imputation of Heresy: This they
conceive to be consistent with the Worship of one supreme God; to this they
conform their daily practice. This Lieutenancy of Saints if they do not really
hold, their Church is a very Roma Subterranea, and there is nothing of its
meaning to be discerned above ground.

This opinion and practice had been the more tolerable if they had restrained
it unto Angels, of whose presence, knowledge, ministration, the Scripture has
spoken; but they extend it to Saints, and for the holy Virgin, their devotion
is greater toward her, than toward the highest Angel; she being called the
Queen of those Heavenly Powers Horst. Parad. p. 101. Sancta T^in. miserere
nobis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis. Sancte Michael, Arch angele, Ora.
. The Authoress of the Spiritual Institutions Instit. Spir. P. 55.
prays not only to the Angels, to the Angel-Guardian of her Person, and to the
Angel-Guardian of her Religion, [that is, of her Order], but likewise to St.
Bernardine, St. Placidus, and other Saints Ead. ibid. P. 58.
, as to her selected Patrons. And Horstius (a man of rank devotion toward
Spirits, and often to be remembered by me) treats first of the Worship of
Saints, and of them as Patrons; and then of the Worship of Angels and
Angel-Guardians. Concerning Angels he shows that holy men, such as he so
esteems, did both pray to their Guardian-spirit Horst. Parad. An. Sect. 2. P.
95, 96.
, and to such Angels as were Presidents of Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns,
with solioitous zeal; and he names St. Xavier, St. Aloysius, and St. Francis;
and calls to mind the singular devotion of the last toward St. Michael the
Archangel.

Then for the Saints he celebrates them as such Horst. ib. in Dedic. ante Sect.
2. p. 87. Fideles olim servi -- nunc constituti super omnia bona domini in
terra viventium.
, Who being formerly servants and stewards, are now set over all the Goods of
their Lord in the land of the living. He says Ibid. p. 90. -- ut invocentur in
auxilium, and in necessitate nos protegant.
that it belongs to their praise and glory that their Aid be invoked, and
that they protect us in necessity. And he teaches his Reader thus to worship
the Virgin: Holy Mary, Mother of God, and Virgin, I, though unworthy to serve
thee, yet trusting in the clemency of thy Motherly heart, choose thee this day
before my Guardian-Angel and the whole Court of Heaven, for my Mother and
peculiar Lady, Patroness, and Advocatrix. And I firmly resolve henceforth to
serve Tibi and filio tuo, worse than Ego and Rex meus.
thee and thy Son, with fidelity, and perpetually to adhere to you. I beseech
thee by that love by which thy Son when he was giving up the Ghost upon the
Cross, commended himself to his Father, and thee to his true Disciple, and him
again to thee; to take me into thy care and protection; and be thou with me in
all the straits and dangers of my whole life; but especially help me in the
hour of my death. Amen.

I have said that it is more tolerable to pray thus to Angels, than it is to
Saints; but I can find little ground in Reason or Scripture thus to worship the
Angels themselves. Reason teaches that God who made the World is the Governor
of it. The Scripture teaches that there are distinct Orders of Angels, but it
disalloweth of such Lieutenancy under God, as men have ascribed to them. It
mentions Thrones, and Powers, and Dominions, and Principalities; yet rather
in allusion to the Gnostics (as was above conjectured) than by way of
assertion of such Orders. Those Heretics Irenaeus provokes to tell what Iren.
l. 2. adv. Haer. cap. 54. p. 212. Dicant nobis quae sit Invisib. not. etc. Sed
non babent dicere.
is the nature of Invisible Beings, what is the number and order of Angels,
what are the Mysteries of Thrones, and the diversities of Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, Virtues; and he assures us they were at a loss. So
ignorant was the Christian World in his time of the Nine Orders of the feigned
Dionysius the Areopagite. That there are distinct Orders of Spirits; that there
are Angels and Archangels, I firmly believe. But it does not thence follow,
that the Government of the World is shared amongst them, though they have a
Ministerial part in the affairs of it. Archangels seem no other than the seven
Spirits typified by the seven Lamps in the Temple Rev. 4. 5. and 8. 2.
. Their Office was as elect and eminent Spirits, to minister before the Throne
of God, and on solemn occasions to be sent in Embassy to the World. Such a one
was Gabriel, who stood in the Presence of God; and was sent to the Blessed
Virgin. Nothing of this infers their distinct Provinces committed to them,
but it shows only the dignity of their station, and their occasional
Ministry. Neither does it follow from the seven Angels mentioned as Presidents
of the seven Churches of Asia, that they, as some have taught, were under the
Charge and Patronage of seven Spirits. For St. John is required to write to
these Angels Rev. 1. 19, 20. and 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
, and to reprove their faults, [as the abatement of Love in the Angel of
Ephesus and his Church.] And he makes distinct mention Chap. 3. 1.
of the seven Spirits, and the seven Stars, which latter he had showed to be
the Angels of those Churches Chap. 1. 20.
, and who were therefore no other than the Bishops of them, called by a name
which is given the High Priest, in the Prophet Malachy Mal. 2. 7. -- (...).
, and by the Jews in Diodorus Diod. Sic. ap. Phot. Bibl. p. 1154.
.

Christian Religion owneth but one proper Substitute under God, one Paraclete
or Patron, (for so See Doctiss. D. Outram de Sacrificiis. l. 2. c 7. p. 360,
361, etc.
that title signifies) one proper Mediator, the glorified Jesus; the Spirits
under him are but Angels or Messengers, though sent abroad on different
Embassies, Wherefore I know not how to approve of the expression of a late very
grave and learned Author, who Contemplat. Divin. and Mor. 2. part. p. 98.
speaks of the Invisible Regiment of the World by the subordinate Government
of good and evil Angels. It is true that the good are a Community [and so in
some sort are the bad] but their diverse Orders concern their own society most;
and they are not to be construed as the Orders and Powers in the frame of Gods
Government of the whole World. It is also to be confessed that Elisha's servant
(to reflect a little on his instance) saw fiery Chariots and Horsemen in the
Mount: and that this was a representation of Gods Angels in the scene of a
Camp. But no other Argument ought to be fetched thence, besides that which
concludes that there is a greater power in God and his Celestial Ministers
than in the Armies of the World. He that will torture this Vision, and make it
confess commission-Officers amongst them, ought also to make them ride on
Horses and Chariots. For evil Angels, their dominion is oftener mentioned than
that of the good. But certainly, though they are called in Scripture,
Principalities and Powers, no man that carefully attends to his words, will
call them also subordinate Governors of the World. For they are professed
Rebels against God, who does not own or treat them as his subjects; but he
being provoked by the perverseness of wicked men, permits those rebellious
Demons to exercise great power amongst the children of disobedience, who are
in indirect Covenant with them.

It is worse still to say, that God rules the World by Saints, than to affirm
so much of him in reference to his holy Angels: yet this the Romanists openly
maintain Bellar. l. 1. c. 18. de Beat. Sanct. endeavors to prove, non solum ab
Angelis sed etiam a spiritibus beatorum hominum regi and gubernari fideles
viventes.
, and some also who have not only disputed, but even raved against the Church
of Rome. For so it is said by Thomas Goodwin in his Sermon of the fifth
Monarchy T. G. on Rev. 5. 9, 10. p. 6. Land. 16 54.
, That the Saints on earth have by their Prayers an influence in the managing
the affairs of the World, and into the accomplishment of all the great things
that Christ does for his Church. That though it may be, and it is certain, they
have not in all Ages known (according to what is in the Prophecy of St. John)
what Jesus Christ will do next; yet that still by the spirit of Prophecy, as
it were, the Saints have been guided to seek for those things at the hands of
God and Christ, which he was about to accomplish. Also, that the Saints in
Heaven, before the day of Judgment, have a share and an hand in Christ's
government of the world: and that they have a knowledge T. G. p. 8.
(by the Angels that are continually Messengers from Heaven to Earth) of the
great things that are done here. And he that writes the Epistle to the Reader,
makes this Application of Mr. Goodwins Doctrine: Now (says he) what may we
think the Saints in Heaven (who within these ten years last past, lost their
lives in the Cause of Christ [he means the Army-Saints, from the year
fortyfour, to that of fifty-four, who died in maintenance of the Bad Old
Cause]) are EMPLOYED ABOUT at this time; they understanding by the Angels what
great -- [changes] are come to pass on our Earth?

Those of whose Saintship we have better assurance, though in a state of rest
and light, are esteemed by the Fathers but a kind of Free Prisoners, not being
acquitted by the public Sentence of the General Judgment See Iren. l. 5. c.
31. p. 431. -- Animae abibunt in invisibilem locum, -- and ibi usque ad
Resurrectionem commorabuntur, etc.
. And their opinion who give them a Lieutenancy under God in the Government of
the World before that day, does recall to my mind the Argument used by that
truly great man Sir Walter Raleigh, in his own unhappy Case: He pleaded that
the grant of a Commission from the King, did argue him to be absolved; and that
he who had power given him over others, was no longer under a sentence against
his own life. Abraham and Isaac do not now rule us, and it may be, they are
ignorantt of us: which whilst I affirm, I do not wholly ground my Assertion on
the Text in Isaiah Isa. 63. 16.
. That sounds otherwise, whether we take it in its positive or hypothetical
sense. Its positive sense may be this: Doubtless thou art our Father,
notwithstanding we live not under the care of Abraham or Isaac, but are by many
generations removed from them, who therefore knew us not LXX. (...).
, or owned us not, we being not men of their times; we are their seed however,
though at a great distance; and to such also was thy promise made. And for the
Hypothetical sense it may be this: Be it supposed that Abraham knows nothing of
us, yet certain we are that thou art the God of Israel whose knowledge and care
of thy people never fails.

I admit here, that the Saints pray for the Church in general, that Angels are
concerned in particular Ministrations; but that Angels and even Saints have
shares of the Government of the World, though in subordination to God, so as to
be Commission-Officers under the King of Heaven, and not only Attendants on his
Throne, and as it were Yeomen and Messengers of his Court, (the general
condition of the Angels) I cannot admit without peril of Idolatry.

This in my conceit is the great resemblance betwixt the Romanists and the
Gentiles: Both of them suppose the World to be ruled under God, by several
Orders of Demons and Heroes; though I have confessed already that they are not
so exactly alike but that Rome-Christian may be distinguished from Rome-Pagan.
For the Gentiles, so much has been shown already; and it may appear further,
from the place of the Greek Historian cited in the Margent Dion. Hali-carnass.
l. 8 -- (...).
. And for the Romanists, that too has already been manifested in part, and
shall be further decl^red: and Rivallius in his History of the Civil Law, or
Commentary on the Twelve Tables Ay^. Rivallii Hist. Jur. Civ. 1 2. p. 45.
Christian^ similem huic Religionem servant, nam Deam immortalem colunt, and
virtute praeditos miraculisque fulgentes magna pompa and inquisitione, primo in
in Divos reserunt, deinde venerantur, post Templa eis construunt; ut de divis
Joanne, Petro, Catharina, Nicolao, Magdalena, and aliis videmus.
, does very honestly confess it. He having commented on that Law which orders
the worship of the Heathen gods, both Demons and Heroes, lets fall words
not unfit to be here gathered up by us. Christians (says he, meaning those of
the Roman Communion) retain a Religion like to this; for they worship God
immortal: and for those that excel in Virtue, and shine with Miracles, first
with great pomp and inquisition they register them among the Deities [or
Saints] and then they worship them, and after that they erect Temples to them;
as we see in the case of S. John, S. Peter, S. Catherine, S. Nicholas, S.
Magdalen, and other Deities.

In this point, then, let us join issue, and offer on our side the
manifestation of these particulars.

First, On what occasions this worship of Ruling-spirits came into the Church.

Secondly, How it derogateth from the honor of God as Governor of the World.

Thirdly, How it derogateth from the honor of Jesus as the Mediator and King
ordained by God.

First, For the occasions of this Worship, I conceive them to be especially
these two; The Celebration of the Memory of the Martyrs at their Tombs; and the
compliance of the Christians with the Northern Nations when they invaded Italy
and other places, in hope of appeasing them, and effecting their conversion.

First, I reckon as an occasion of this Worship, the celebration of the memory
of the Martyrs at their Tombs, and Monuments, and Relics, and in the Churches
sacred to God, in thankfulness for their Examples. The thankful and honorable
commemoration of the Martyrs, was very ancient and innocent at the beginning.
For, as the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, concerning the Martyrdom of St.
Polycarp, testifies Ep. Ec. cles. Smyrn. ap. Eus. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. p.
134, 135.
, They esteemed the bones of the Martyrs more precious than Jewels; They kept
their Birth-days [that is, the days of their Martyrdom on which they began most
eminently to live]; they pursued them with a worthy affection, as Disciples and
Imitators of Christ, but they worshipped none but Christ, believing him to be
the Son of God -- (...). p. 134. D.
. But laudable Customs degenerate through time. And this, in the fourth
Century, began to be stretched beyond the reason of its first institution, as
appears by the Apostrophe's of St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and others
of that Age. Afterward the vanity of men ran this Usage into a dangerous
extreme; and those who had been commemorated as excellent and glorified
Spirits, and whose Prayers were wished, were directly invoked and worshipped as
the subordinate Governors of Gods Church.

This Veneration of the Martyrs, which superstition thus strained, was
occasioned by the Miracles which God wrought where his Martyrs were honored.
Times of Persecution at home, and of Invasion from abroad, required such aids
for the Encouragement of Catholic Christians, and the Conversion of Infidels
and misbelievers. Thus in the days of St. Austin, [in whose Age the Getae or
Goths sacked Rome, and many of the barbarous people imputed the present
misfortunes of Italy to the Christian Religion See Ludov. Viv. Praes. in Comm.
suos in Civ. Dei. p. 22, etc.
,] God pleased to work Miracles at the Bodies of the Martyrs, Protasius and
Gervasius S. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. De miraculis quae, ut mundus in
Christum crederet, facta sunt, etc. p. 1339.
, in the City of Milan. Thus (as is reported by Procopius and Egnatius) he
miraculously saved those Christians at Rome, and Pagans also S. Aug. de Civ.
Dei. l. 1. c. 1. p. 34. Testantur hoc Martyrum loca, and Basilicae Apostolorum,
quae in illa vastatione Urbis ad se confugientes suos [h. e. Christianos]
alienosque [h. e. Paganos] receperunt.
, both in the time of Alaricus and Theudoricus, who fled to the Churches of St.
Paul, and St. Peter. And he did it, says Grotius Grotius in Append. ad
Comment. de Antichristo. p. 126, 127.
, by a Providence like to that by which they were saved in Jerusalem, who had
kept the Law, which was signified by the Letter Thau [that is, Thorah the Law,]
written on their foreheads, as is said in Ezekiel. They went out of Babylon, or
Rome, to the holy places which stood without the City, and there remained in
undisturbed peace, more by Gods protection, than the Gothic Clemency; though
by the Edict of Alarick, such Churches were made the Sanctuaries of Christians
See Lud. Viv. Praes. in Com. suos. de Getis seu Gothis. p. 27, 28.
.

This Instance, no doubt, heightened the veneration of many toward the Martyrs,
though God wrought such things, not as testimonies of the power of the Martyrs,
but as supports to the Christian Religion. And this being an Instance in the
Gothic story, it reminds me of

The second occasion of the worship of Spirits as Rulers of the World in
certain Precincts, especially in this Western Church; to wit, the Invasion of
the Northern Nations, who sought their preferment by quitting their own
Country. In Rome it self a great number of the Senators worshipped Idols in the
very reign of Theodosius the Great. And many worshippers of false gods, upon
the Sack of Rome by the Goths under Alaricus, did, says St. Austin in the
Argument of his Book of the City of God, charge the calamity on the Christian
Religion, and blaspheme the true God with bitterer words than it was their
custom to use. And this (as he declares) stirred up his zeal, and moved him
for the stopping of their ungodly mouths, and refuting their Errors, to write
that Book. For the Goths themselves, the general body of them was barbarously
Idolatrous, (though some of that people had received betimes the Christian
Faith; for Theophilus a Gothic Bishop was at the Council of Nice) and the
Vandals were wholly Pagans. Neither were there under Heaven a people more
zealously devoted to Demons than the Scythians, Getes, or Goths See Adam
Bremensis de de superstit. Sueon. among the Elogia of Grotius before Hist.
Goth. p. 104.
, Of the Thracian Getes, Pausanias says in his Baeoticks, that they were a
more acute Nation than the Macedonians, and -- (...).
by no means so negligent in the worship of their gods. Schedius in his
Dissertations concerning the German-gods, has remembered very many Gothic
Deities* and there is a Learned man of our own Nation Doctiss. Sheringh. de
Angl. Gent. Orig. Discept. p. 320.
, who tells us that he has not numbered the half of them. Of Herald the first
King of Norway, it is reported by Crantzius Crantz. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
, that he offered two of his own Sons unto his Demons, for the obtaining at
Sea, such a Tempest as might disperse that Armado of Herald the sixth, King of
Denmark, which was prepared against him; and that he obtained that for which he
had bidden so dear and bloody a rate.

After the further Conversion of those Northern people none more corrupted
their worship, than they with the observance of Tutelar Saints. In the
Chronicle of Swedeland, the inferior Deities of that place exceed the number of
the Villages; and I need no further instance than that which I find in Felix
Faber Fell. Fab. Hist. Suev. l. 2. c. 17. p. 315.
a Monk of Ulma. A Town (says he) night to Ulma is Seflingen, in which is the
Blessed Virgin presiding in the Garden of Virgins, and keeping on the West the
Walls of that City. On the South is situate the Village of Wiblingen, in which
St. Martin armed both with the Temporal and Spiritual Militia, is the Patron of
the Church, and the Guardian of the Ulmenses. Nigh also is Schuvekhofen, an
ancient Town, where at this day stands a Church in which S. John the
Evangelist watches over Ulma. On the East is the Village Pful, where stands
the Mausoleum of the Blessed Virgin in the public street. There she
demonstrates by certain Miracles, that she dwells in that place. Thence she
looks upon Ulma with the eyes of mercy, and defends it. In that Village S.
Udalricus is Patron of the Church; an excellent Guardian of the Citizens who
implore his Aid. On the North, on the Royal Mountain of Elchingen is placed a
lofty Throne of the Blessed Virgin, to the terror of all that have evil will at
Ulma. He further mentions St. George, St. Leonard, all Saints with the Virgin
in the midst of them, St. James, and St. Michael, as Patrons and defendants of
that place. And for St. Michael, he is placed on a Mountain on the West Side,
as a Watchman looking over the whole City, and in Armor as the Protector of it.

Now the Northern Barbarians being so inclined to the worship of Tutelar
Demons, it is no wonder if many Christian- Romans, to mollify their
savageness, and to induce them to Christianity, so far complied as to offer
them Tutelar Saints and holy Angels instead of their evil Guardian Spirits.
This, I suppose, they did, because I find the Concurrence of their Invasion and
stay in Italy, and of the rise and growth of Daemonworship there, both
happening in the fourth and fifth Centuries. And it may not be unworthy the
Observation of the Reader, that in the fifth Century, St. Michael the
Archangel, a most eminent Patron (as we just now heard from Felix Faber) among
the Northern Christians, was first Commemorated in the Western Church, by a
solemn Feast Baron. Annal. Tom 6. A. C. 493. Sect. 43, 44. p. 537.
. I would here further note, that Woden (not the Mercury, but the Mars of the
Northern Idolaters) was in highest esteem among them: That Michael answers to
him, being, as the Roman Litanies Lit. de Sanct. Ang. op. Horstii Paradis. An.
Sect. 2. p. 96: S. Michael Princeps coelestis exercitus. --
style him, the Prince of the Heavenly Host: That this Feast of St. Michael was
then instituted when Peace was desired betwixt Odoacer King of the Heruli, (who
came first from Scandanivia, and were called afterward Lombards); and
Theodorick the first King of the Goths in Italy.

Having thus aimed at the resolution of the fiast Inquiry, the occasion of
Daemon-worship in the Church; I proceed to show in the second place, That this
worship derogateth from the Honor of God as Governor of the World by his
immediate self, though also by a Substitute; for he is likewise the same
Essential God.

It is both by the Romanists and the Reformed acknowledged, that God is the
Governor of the World; That in him we live, and move, and have our being: That
he gives us life, and breath, and all things: That to him all glory is to be
referred. Neither has he anywhere declared that he has divided the Regiment
of the World into several Lieutenancies of Angels or Saints. He has nowhere
showed us, that he has given to this Angel, and that Saint (not to a Saint
especially) a Commission to rule in such a Precinct; or a Patent to practice as
a Supernatural Physician, in such a City or Town, or any-where, in the cure of
such a disease; or Orders to assist at this Mass, and that Confession. If
therefore such effects of Protection, Health and assistance follow, and are
believed Becan. Compend. Man. Controv. l. 1. c 7. de Invoc. Sanct. p. 290.
Quotidie sructum inde experimur, nam multi, invocatione bujus vel illius
Sancti, consequuntur, sanitatem corporis, alii donum castitatis, etc.
to comefrom this or the other Saint, though as subordinate to God the supreme
Governor, and infinite Physician; yet a degree of Trust is put in them Canis.
Man. Cathol. p. 258. ad Beat. Mich. Archang. Precatio. Coelestis Militiae
Princeps -- veni in adjutorium populo Dei, and militantis Ecclesiae contra
Impios procura victoriam, nosque simul odversus Diabolicos insultus in vit a
and morte Patrocinio tuo desende and sub. leva.
as Plenipotentiaries or Substitutes of the King of the World; and a degree of
thanks is given to them as to such Delegates. And God seems robbed of the
honor of dispensing particular favors, though the general Grant be derived
from him. Whereas it may be in many cases God himself has done all without so
much as the Ministry of an Angel, much less of a Saint; and consequently ought
to have received the whole honor, of which good part being (though by mistake,
a mistake soon rectified by them who examine things) ascribed to the Creature,
is therefore in that degree Idolatrous. A good part is in these cases generally
ascribed to Saints; and it is well if some look up any higher at the time of
their deliverance. We see, in the administration of political affairs, that
Subjects, though owning, notionally, the supremacy of their Prince, yet go,
often, no further, in their trust, or thanks, than to those men, who by their
Place, and Office, and deputed Authority, can, very effectually, dispatch their
affairs without higher Application. And he that is protected as a servant to a
Senator, pays all his acknowledgment to his Master who received him, kindly,
into his service; and not to the King who is but the more remote, though the
supreme Author of this privilege. And it is plain, from Romish History it self,
that the pay goes to that Saint who is believed in Commission, whilst God is,
by supine inadvertence, scarce remembered. So the Liber Festivalis Lib. Fest. in
die Annunc. B. M. p. 234.
tells us, That when S. Gilbert was afflicted with a soar Throat, The Virgin
took her, feyre pappe, and milked on his Throat, and went her way, and anon
therewith he was hole, and thanked our Lady ever after. I will clear my meaning
a little further by proposing more instances, of which the first shall be made
in the Annalist Baronius, and applied unto the present occasion. This laborious
Writer is looked upon as the very Champion of the Papacy. His Twelve Tomes of
Ecclesiastical story are reputed so many Pillars of the Roman Cause. That Great
man in the Papacy, Sixtus Quintus, gave great encouragement to the Author and
his work. The Archbishop of Gnesna in Poland, as likewise other great and
zealous men, who were Bygots for the Papacy, thought it fit to be translated
into all languages; and set on foot a Polonian, Italian, and German Version. If
he speaks not like a true Roman Catholic, from whom shall we hear the words of
a son of that Church? Hear him, then, at the end of his several Tomes, and you
will find him, owning indeed the supremacy of God, for that was an Article of
his Faith: But withal you will find him zealously asserting a delegation of
considerable power to the Blessed Virgin; as also making very thankful
remembrances of her favors, in the guidance and success of his Pen. And these
remembrances are in such manner expressed, that if, by them, nothing is meant
of Assistance from the Virgin, besides the help of her prayers for him, I must
search out some new Dictionary for the Interpretation of his Latin.

At the end of the first Tome of those his Annals, he does, as it were, hang up
a Table, in acknowledgment of those powers who had conducted him through that
vast Sea, (as he rhetorically calls it) of the matters of the first Age. His
Doxology Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. p. 817. Ed. Colon.
is offered to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and likewise to the
most holy Virgin, under the Title of the Conciliatrix of the Deity. For to her
(says he) as we refer all these our works, they being received from her; so
likewise to her we offer them: That the same -- ut ipsa Eadem, qualiacunque
sint, dilecto filio suo porrigat, ut impartita benedictione sanctificet;
illamque pro munere gratiam poscat; ut Ipse sit nobis portio in Terra viventium.
Virgin may offer them, how mean soever, to her beloved Son; That she may
sanctify them with the vouchsafe of her blessing, and obtain that favor for
the oblation; that he may be to us a portion in the Land of the living. And
over the words of this Address she is pictured Crowned, and with her Son, as an
Infant, in her Arms, and with a Retinue not only of Angels in General, but of
Cherubims, the Attendants on Gods throne.

For his Second Tome, this is a part of the Conclusion of it. Here then Bar.
Annal. Tom. 2. p. 863.
let our Discourse, wearied with a longer journey, opportunely repose it self:
And, being mindful of the benefit, let it thankfully cast it self (as is our
custom) at the feet of the most holy Mary the Mother of God: That it may offer
to her, from whom it acknowledges the whole to be received, whatsoever it
understands it has obtained of God by her Prayers. And let it cast into her
as into a most holy and living Treasury, after the manner of the Widow, two
mites, collected in poverty, with great labor; the two Tomes, I mean, of the
Annals now finished. Let that very Virgin be to us the most safe Ark in which
our labors may be kept, and in safe custody protected; lest a thief breaking
thorough (to wit, the appetite of vainglory), steal them away; or the moth and
rust adhering to them (to wit, vain and fallacious hopes) corrupt them, or eat
through them. For she is the true and divine Ark made of Shittim-wood, which
preserves from corruption, those things which are committed to her care. --

In his third Tome this is his Peroration: Seeing now Baron. Annal. Tom. 3. p.
894.
(as says Ecclestastes) Rivers return to the place whence they came, that they
may flow again; it is plainly fit that to that Fountain, whence all our labors
have flowed, they be recalled as to their proper Original, and by reciprocal
flux be thither refunded; that thence they may be poured forth upon us in
greater plenty. To her therefore by whom the whole of this gift comes to us
from God; to the most holy Virgin (I say) Mary the Mother of God, we offer very
humbly this third Tome of Annals, as we have already done those other which we
have published.

His Peroration in his fourth Tome, thus begins: Now Baron. Annal. Tom. 4.
p. 787.
by your Aid (Virgin Mary, Mother of God) pay we down the fourth part of our
Task; and to you we pay it, from whence we received it. For you have found it
Wool and Flax, and wrought it with the counsel of your hands. Wherefore, for
the rest of the work, perform it your self; and weave those threads, whatsoever
they be (and in your hand undoubtedly they will be golden) into those
Sacerdotal garments, of which David thus speaks: Let thy Priests be clothed
with righteousness. -- I will deck her Priests with salvation. I beseech thee
make for us those two Garments; for those of thy Family are said to be doubly
clothed.

The fifth Tome has a like conclusion, to this sense. This Baron. Annal. Tom.
5. p. 771.
fifth issue, Mother of God, received from your favor, conceived by your
Prayers, I [here] bring for a thankful acknowledgment, as Anna did Samuel to
you the living Tabernacle of God. --

The sixth Tome ends thus: We are now in the Haven Baron. Annal. Tom. 6 p.
772.
in which men sail not. We contract our sails, and we fasten our Cable to a
solid Rock; intending in due time to set sail again. Now then what remains
but that we betake our selves by humble supplication, to that Temple of God
which is always open, the very Mother of God; giving thanks to God by her, and
paying our vows for the victory we have obtained over the waves that opposed
us. And as Mariners are wont to offer their Oar; so let us offer to her our
Pen, that it may obtain that rich benediction from her, by which (after the
manner of the rod of Aaron which devoured the rods of the Magicians) it may
resist all the endeavors of gainsayers, and like to that, flourish; whilst
the other rods, brought by rebellious Controvertists, wither away: Lastly, That
like that in the Tabernacle of the Covenant, it may be perpetually preserved in
the Church, as a witness of the truth of God. These very ample blessings
bestowed on the Rod, we ask of thee (O Virgin) coming to thee Magna fiducia
accendentes [for accedentes, sure by mistake of the Press.]
with great affiance; for thou performing these things, crownest no other than
thine own gifts.

The seventh Tome ends on this fashion.

Go to now Baron. Annal. Tom. 7. p. 812.
let us give thanks to God, as we are wont, for the finishing of this seventh
Tome of Annals; and let us offer the work in like manner to Mary the Mother of
God; that by whose help it was begun and perfected, by the merits of the same
it may be rendered spotless, worthy the Divine aspect; it being justly refusable
in respect of the imperfection of the Author that offers it. [Having said this,
and added a complaint of his troubles and interruptions in the writing of this
Volume, which he calls his Benoni; he thus proceeds.] One thing more only I
have to ask; that seeing these very unquiet, sad, lamentable, fearful and
dangerous things have happened to me, O Mother of God, not without Non nisi te
curante.
your Providence; you your self would daily bring help to me, journeying in a
slippery path, exposed to great danger, and every moment in hazard of losing
eternal salvation; and give protection to an unsettled man. --

In the Conclusion of the Eighth Tome, he gives thanks to some Martyrs,
together with the Virgin Baron. Annal. Tom. 8. p. 753, 754. Jure ergo nos
iisdem, quos nacti sumus Ducem and Comites, omnia ista pro gratiarum action
rependimus, imperdinusque nosipsos simul.
; offering to them all his Tomes in gratitude, and which was much more, his
very self.

Of the ninth he says Baron. Annal. Tom. 9. p. 935,
That he brought it to an end by the favor of God, and the aid of the Virgin
who helped him by her Prayers.

In the end of the Tenth Id. Tom. 10. p. 964.
, he prays to God for eternal happiness by the Intervention of the Mother of
God with the Father for him; further beseeching him that she which always
helped him in his work, might be the Conciliatrix of eternal reward in the
glory of the blessed.

In the end of the Eleventh Tome Id. Tom. 11. P. 758.
, he acknowledges that the entireness of his net, after his having cast it so
often, that the continuance of his strength fresh and green in his old age;
that all this was from the grace of Abisag, their Shunamite, cherishing his
aged bones; to wit the most holy and pure Virgin, favoring the work begun and
taking care of, and happily promoting all his affairs. --

Last of all he ends in a like note, but a little lower and sweeter than that
with which he begun and continued his Perorations; for he concludes his whole
work of Twelve Tomes Id. Tom. 12. p. 916.
with an humble supplication to the "Blessed Virgin: and therein he beseeches,
That by her means he might be made worthy to obtain that benediction from the
Father of Lights by which he might be partaker of an eternal inheritance
through the Grace and Mercy of Jesus Christ.

The whole of this which I have cited, and cited at such length, by reason of
that credit which this Author has obtained under the Papacy; the whole, I say,
of it, both beginning, middle, and end, represents the Virgin as a Patroness;
and as one who had prevailed with God to commit to her care Baronius and his
Labors, as her especial Province. He owneth God and Christ as the Fountains of
Grace; but he supposes her the Conduit, conveying them to himself. On her he
trusts; to her he offers solemn, and repeated thanks. And though he often
mentions her Prayers for him; yet it appears by the tenor of his other
expressions, and of the common Roman Doctrine, that he means not barely them;
but the Guardianship which by them she had from the beginning obtained of God
in behalf of the Annalist.

If then according to his own belief he was divinely assisted in this great
work, these Twelve Labors of the Roman Hercules (which others, considering the
partiality of the Author, believe to have been undergone more by the aids of
the Court of Rome, than those of Heaven); if, I say, he was assisted from above
(which is his own persuasion); and God, who is wont to dictate to Christians,
rather by his Spirit, than by his Angels, much less by his Saints, did give him
immediately the understanding, memory, strength, and other abilities by which
he wrote; has he not then sacrilegiously kept back a very great part of that
Honor which was wholly due to God, and ought to have been devoted to Him, and
then paid it in wrongful and idolatrous manner unto the blessed Virgin?

Now what think you was the occasion of this excess of Marian-zeal? Why, the
Mother of Caesar Baronius Aug. Wichmans in Sab. Marian. C. 6. p. 62.
(as they tell us *) going when big of him, to the Temple of the Virgin, felt
the Babe, like a second John the Baptist, leap in her womb. As soon as he was
born, she offered him to the Patronage of the same Blessed Virgin. When he was
two years old, and afflicted with a very dangerous Disease, she prayed to her
three days, and then received him restored from the very article of death,
together with a voice saying to her, Be of good comfort, your son shall not
dye. Baronius mindful of this benefit, always honored the Virgin with singular
observance; and he marked his Books, his Tables, his Images, every thing with a
device, which signifies Caesar servus Mariae? And at his death (which it seems
was on Saturday, our Ladys weekly day) he expressed much devotion toward her;
and in his last agony kissed her Image with the greatest piety of mind.

The Devotion of Lipsius is so like to that of the Cardinal Baronius, that I
may not improperly here subjoin it.

In the first chapter Lips. Virg. Hallens. c. 1. p. 1243. Op. Ed. in 8vo.
vesal. A. 1675.
of his Virgo Hallensis, he calls Blessed Mary the tutelar goddess of Halla;
that is, of Halle in Heinalt, seated on the Seine; and he professes, that from
his youth he had devoted himself to her Worship, and chosen her as his
Patroness and Guide in all the dangers and molestations of his whole life.

In his second chapter Id. ibid. p. 1245.
he makes to his Patroness this supplication: Grant to me, O my Goddess, whom
I contemplate as present in my mind, That what I have piously designed, I may
happily accomplish.

In his sixth chapter Id. ibid. p. 1254, 1255.
he mentions a miraculous victory obtained by that City over her enemies, who
had with powerful arms entered into her. And this deliverance he supposes to be
wrought by the Patronage of the Virgin, who was invoked. And he accordingly
takes notice of the Praises of Heart and Voice Quis non tum lauds gratesque
sacrae Virgin Cord, Ore, plausu, dixit?
, which every preserved Citizen did offer to that Goddess.

In his eleventh chapter Id. ibid. p. 1260.
he tells how a man possessed with the Devil, was, by this Tutelar Deity (as
he there calls her), delivered from so wicked and dangerous an Inhabitant. And
after having told his story, he falls to his Prayers in this manner: O
powerful, O merciful Goddess! defend us also from this subtle Serpent. And
thou, who did once bruise his head in thy Conception, assist us so
effectually, that his tail may neither scourge us, nor throw us on the ground.

Then, after having ended his Legend consisting of diverse Miracles wrought at
her shrine, he falls again to his Prayers in his thirty-sixth or last Chapter;
and this is the form of his Address Lips. Op. p. 1288.
.

O Goddess! thou art the Queen of Heaven, of the Sea, of the Earth, above whom
there is nothing but God. Thou Moon (next to him the Sun) whom I implore and
invocate; Protect and take care of us both in public and private. Thou have
seen us these forty years tossed in a public storm: O Mary! calm this
tumultuous Sea --

He concludes with a Poetical Consecration of a silver-Pen -- Hanc Pennam tibi
Nunc, Diva, merito, consecravit Lipsius. Nam Numine Isthaec inchoata sunt Tuo,
Et numine Isthaec absoluta sunt Tuo.
to her, who had (as he believed) been the author and finisher of his studies.

Now then, such kind of Worshippers do in part revive one degree of the
Idolatry of the Gentiles, who divided Places, Persons, Things, Actions, subject
to the Supreme God, amongst Sempiternal or Canonized Spirits. The chief
Architect of the Egyptian Pharos, put upon his Workmanship this Inscription,
Sostratus of Gnidos, the Son of Dexiphanes, to the Gods Protectors for the
safeguard of Sailers. What, now, is the difference betwixt this Inscription and
one made by a Papist in honor of S. Nicholas, upon the little Church nigh the
Wurbel in the Danube? None sure, unless it be this, that the first is in
veneration of a Christian Saint, the other of good Genii: For we are told by
those whose credit is as unquestionable as their Learning D. B. in his second
Vol. of Travels, p. 69.
, and who have been upon the place, that the Church is dedicated to S.
Nicholas, That he is the supposed Patron of that dangerous Whirlpool in that
River; that he is believed to take peculiar care of such as pass that way; and
that a little Boat comes to you as soon as you are out of danger, and receives
what acknowledgment you please, or what perhaps you may have promised to give
when you were in some fear. It may be God alone calmeth those waves, at least
without a Saint; and S. Nicholas receives much of the acknowledgment; the
whole, possibly, from the common men of the Vessel, whom danger teaches to
pray, whilst superstitious ignorance misleadeth them from praying aright.

Martinus de Roa, though a learned Jesuit, and a Spaniard, does openly declare
the nature of this Romish practice; he does not seek to give a false color to
it, but he shows it as a Practice which plainly agree^th with the worship of
the Gentiles. He speaks out, saying Martin. de Roa de Die Natali Sacro and
Prof. p. 11 -- acclamato Tuteiari aliquo Gentis Divo, ut B. Jacobo apud
Hisparo^, praelia committuntur, etc.
that it is a Rite amongst them to call upon the tutelar Deity of the Nation
(as upon St. James in Spain,) at the beginning of their Battles. And this
custom he parrallels with that of the Macedonians in Justin, who in their
battles called sometimes upon Alexander, and sometimes upon Philip, as upon
Gods; invoking their aid for the success of their Arms. And then he subjoyneth
the practice of the Germans, who (as Tacitus reports) joined not in fight
with their enemies, 'till they had solemnly prayed to Hercules.

This kind of worship the Pope continues to encourage, by setting up new
Saints, as Tutelar Spirits, in his Canonizations of them. Thus for inscance
sake, Pope Clement the Tenth confirmed the decree of Pope Clement the ninth, in
which St. Rosa is created Patroness of the City Lima Bullar. de Can. B. Rosae.
p. 499, etc.
, the chief Town and the Archiepiscopal seat in Peru; and principal Protectress
of the same Kingdom of Peru, and of all the Provinces and Kingdoms of the Terra
firma of all the Peruvian America, and of the Philippine Islands. And this it
seems was done to this end Bullar. ib. ut venerationis fiat accessio, etc.
, that an addition might be made to the veneration of that Saint: and that
through her intercession the People of those parts might the more strongly hope
for Patronage or Protection. So S. Thomas de Villanova is canonized by
Alexander the seventh Bullar. de Can. S. Thomae de villanova, p. 278.
, who whilst he registreth him in the Calendar of his gods, uses this
Exhortation: Wherefore let us go with boldness to the throne of the Divine
mercy, praying with heart and voice, that S. Thomas may preside over Christian
people by his Merit and Example; that he may assist them with his Prayers and
Patronage; and that in the time of wrath he may become their Reconciliation.

Such Deities the Papacy sets up; and nothing is more common than for the
people of that Church to fall down and worship them in that quality. Neither
can Travelers shun such Statues and Inscriptions, as give them advertisement
of this worship of Tutelar Saints. Such an Inscription is that at Brussels
betwixt the Quire and the Sacristy of the Cathedral D. Br. Trau. 2. part. p.
169. D. O. M. Intem^ratae Virgini Mariae, Sancto Lamberto, Eccles^ae and Patri^
Divis Tutelaribus, Max* Henr. etc. po^bat. A. 1658.
: The Monument is dedicated by Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and Archbishop and
Elector of Colen, to the immaculate Virgin, and to S. Lambert, as to the
Tutelar Deities of that Church and Country. S. Michael also is the special
Protector of that City, and upon the top of its Townhouse stands his Statue in
brass. Who can go into Lentini, and not have notice of the three French
Brethren and Martyrs, Alsio, Philadelfo, and Cirino, venerated there as its
Patrons and Guardians See Peter della Valle's Travel. p. 307.
? Who travelleth to Utopolis or S. Veit, and sees not the four Chapels on the
four Hills of S. Veit, S. Ulrick, S. Laurence, S. Helena? or hears not of St.
Veit, or St. Faith, as of one that cures the Dancing-sickness known by the
name of Chorea sancti viti? Who enters Paris and hears not St. Geneviefve
celebrated as the Protectress of it? And is not she called the Guardian of
France, and the North-star See Garnerius's Hymn de Saint Genevi^sve Patron
de Paris. Par. A. 1603. and before it, by Morrell. these Verses. Tu flos
siderei chori, -- Francorum Imperii pii Regum tibi cura assidua, and Franci
populi probi. And in it these p. 2. -- Etoile singuliere Sous qui la Nef de la
ville premiere Vogue sans crainte. --
of her Imperial City? Who understands the ancient estate of England, and is
ignorant of the Veneration which it has had for its presumed Patron St.
George? So great it was, that when certain Holy Days were abrogated in the
Reign of Henry the Eighth, the Feast of St. George Ann. 1536. See Bishop
Sparrow's Collect. p. 225, 226.
was excepted, as well as those of the Apostles and our Lady. Who crosses the
Ocean, and visits the Mexican America, and observes not that St. Joseph is
made the Patron of new Spain? The Synod of Mexico confirmed at Rome, has
declared him to be such Syn. Mexic. Stat. par. 1. c. 14. p. 1354.
, and given particular order for the celebration of his Holy Day.

I am not able to recount to how many places, persons and things the Protection
of the holy Virgin is said to extend Aug. which. in Epist. ad omnes Marianos
Cultores. -- Urbs Antverpia, cui tu praesides, ut sacra Marchionissa, seu medio
Regina foro --
. The fancy of the eloquent Jesuit Rapine has made her Ren. Rap. Ecl. Sacr. in
Virg. Assump. Eclo. 13. p. 41, 42, 43. Ed. Lug. Bat. An. 1672.
to preside over Clouds and Tempests Postquam illam coeli Tempestatumque
potentem esse de-dit. --
, over Tillage and Pasturage -- Virgo -- Respice nos facilis. -- Interea largo
proventu plenior Annus Contingat, veniatque suo seges ampla colono. Da Gleba
Agricolis faelices ^ere campos. Pascua da Greglbus, pingues da matribus Agnos.
Et qua tuta dabas Pastoribus otia, serva.
, over Flocks and Herds. To her as Queen of Heaven, the Author of the Monument
of Galeacius Caracciolus Chytr. Monumenta Neopol. p. 50. Tibi Regina Coeli, etc.
, dedicateth it in the quality of a Marble-Chappel, in thankful acknowledgment,
of the many favors she conferred on that Marquis, and of the many evils from
which she secured him. At Rome in the Church Mariae S. Angeli, the Inscription
seems to install the Virgin into that Presidency over it, which before was
held by some god of the Gentiles Chytr. Mon. Roman* p. 20. Quod ^uit Idolum,
nunc Templum est Virginis, Auctor est Pius ^pse pater: Daemones aufugite.
. A like change is insinuated in the Inscription found in the AEdes Martis,
turned into the Temple of St. Martina Id. ibid. p. 22. Martyrii, Virgo,
gestans, Martina, Coronam; Ejecto hinc Martis nomine, Templa tenet.
. Now what seems all this but refined Heathenism? When men trust in St.
Hubert as the Patron of Hunters; do not they the like to those who trusted in
Diana the Goddess of that Game, and the Patroness of Forests? upon which
account she was of old the celebrated Deity of this Island, which then was a
kind of continued Wood Gildas Poeta Brit. ap. Pont. Virunnium. l. 1. c. 1. p.
1. Diva potens nemorum terror sylvestribus Apris, -- etc.
. When they apply themselves in a strom to the Virgin Mary; do not they the
like to those who in perils by water called on Venus Grot. ad Johan. Reigersb.
ex vero navigantem. Epigram. l. 2. p. 301. -- At Pelago Venus orta, metu
desistite, dixit, non erit in nostris tam grave crimen aquis. --
? When they put confidence in St. Margaret, or the Virgin Mary See J. H.
Manual. Prayers in Travel. p. 519, 520.
as the Patronesses of Women in Travail, and Children in Infancy, do they not
follow their pattern who relied on Diana Hence they called her (...), quasi
partus Arbitra.
, Statina See T. Bartholin. de Puerperio vet. p. 72.
or Cunina See Pignor. de Servis. p. 380, 381.
in such cases? When they pay their Vows to the Virgin for the safety of their
Children, do they not like Bassa or Sulpitia in the Inscriptions of Gruter
Grut. Inscr. p. 24.
, who paid theirs in the same case to Lucina or Juno; and to Castor and Pollux
Id. ib. p. 98. Cast. and Poll. Diis Magnis Sulpitia, etc. ob fill. saluti
restitutum.
? And is there so vast a difference betwixt the devotion of a Heathen
Conqueror who offened his Sword to Mars; and of Henry of Valois, who obtaining
a great Victory over the Rebels in Flanders, consecrated to the Virgin the
Horse on which he charged, and the Arms with which he so successfully fought?
On both sides here is confidence in a Celestial creature as a substitute of
the supreme God, and thanks most solemnly paid to it. Only for the Objects, the
one sort of them is Christian, the other Pagan; but both kinds were reputed
Divine, and worthy, by their Adorers; both were judged Celestial Magistrates
Catech. ex Decr. Conc. Trid. p. 389: Quod si Reges, per quos Deus mundum
gubernat, tanto honor afficiuntur: Angelicis spiritibus, quos Deus ministros
suos esse voluit, etc.
and Senators Hor. Par. An. Sect. 2. Hymn: Commun. in Festo cujuscunque Sancti.
p. 118, 119. Gaude Felix N -- Inter Coeli Senatores jam locatus, fac exores
Christum mundi Judicem: ut quam sontes, beu, timemus, Te Patrono declinemus,
Iram Dei vindicem. Culpas lava, carnem froena, etc.
, as the Saints are called by Horstius, and the Catechism of Trent. And by the
Intercession of such Senators, is often meant in the Church of Rome, their
prevalence with God in executing the office of their Patronage. Hence they
sometimes pray to God J. H. Manual, p. 386.
, That the glorious Intercession of the ever-blessed and glorious Virgin Mary
may protect them, and bring them to life everlasting.

The particular Instances of the Romish Patrons and Patronesses are too many to
be here Historically spoken of. I find enough of them together in the learned
Homily against the peril of Idolatry, and with them I will at present content
my self. What, I pray you, says that Homily Third part of the Hom. against
Idol. p. 46, 47, 48.
, be such Saints with us to whom we attribute the defense of certain Countries,
spoiling God of his due honor herein, but Dii Tutelares of the Gentile
Idolaters? such as were Belus to the Babylonians and Asfyrians; Osiris and Isis
to the Egyptians; Vulcan to the Lemnians; and to such other. What be such
Saints to whom the safeguard of such Cities are appointed, but Dii Praesides
with the Gentiles Idolaters? such as were at Delphos, Apollo; at Athens,
Minerva; at Carthage, Juno; at Rome, Quirinus, etc. What be such Saints to
whom, contrary to the use of the Primitive Church, Temples and Churches be
builded, and Altars erected; but Dii Patroni of the Gentiles Idolaters? such as
were in the Capitol, Jupiter; in Paphus-Temple, Venus; in Ephesus-Temple,
Diana; and such like. -- When you hear of our Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of
Ipswich, our Lady of Wilsdon, and such other; what is it but an imitation of
the Gentiles Idolaters; Diana Agrotera, Diana Coriphea, Diana Ephesia, etc.
Venus Cypria, Venus Paphia, Venus Gnidia? -- Terentius Varro shows that there
were three hundred Jupiters in his time. There were no fewer Veneres and
Dianae. We had no fewer Christophers, Ladies, and Mary Magdalens, and other
Saints. -- They have not only spoiled the true Living God of his due Honor in
Temples, Cities, Countries and Lands, by such devices and inventions as the
Gentiles Idolaters have done before them; but the Sea and Waters have as well
especial Saints with them, as they have had gods with the Gentiles; Neptune,
Triton, Nereus, Castor and Pollux, Venus, and such other; in whose places be
come St. Christopher, Clement, and diverse others, and specially our Lady to
whom Shipmen sing, Ave Maris stella. Neither has the fire escaped the
Idolatrous Inventions; for instead of Vulcan and Vesta, the Gentiles gods of
the Fire, our men have placed St. Agatha, and make Letters on her day for to
quench fire with. Every Artificer and Profession has his special Saint, as a
peculiar God. As for example, Scholars have St. Nicholas, and St. Gregory;
Painters, St. Luke; neither lack Soldiers their Mars, nor Lovers their Venus,
amongst Christians. All Diseases have their special Saints, as gods the curers
of them. The Pox St. Roche, the Falling-evil St. Cornelis, the Toothach St.
Appolin, etc. Neither do beasts and cattle lack their gods with us; for St. Loy
is the Horseleach, St. Anthony the Swineherd, etc. Where is Gods Providence and
due Honor in the mean season? Who says, The Heavens be mine, and the Earth is
mine, the whole World and all that in it is. I do give victory, and I put to
flight. Of me be all counsels and help, etc. Except I keep the city, in vain
does he watch that keeps it. Thou Lord shall save both men and beasts. But we
have left him neither Heaven, nor Earth, nor Water, nor Country, nor City,
Peace nor War, to rule and governn, either men nor beasts, nor their diseases
to cure. -- We join to him another helper, as [if] he were a Noun Adjective;
using these sayings: Such as learn, God and S. Nicholas be my speed. Such as
neese, God help, and S. John. To the Harse, God and S. Loy save thee --

The Papists have read such Discourses as these; and they endeavor to abate
the force of them by the following evasion: The reasonableness of making
addresses to one particular Saint T. G. Cath. no Idol. pax. 3. chapter 2. p. 364,
365, 366, 367, 368.
rather than another in some particular occasions, will appear from the
consideration upon which it is usually done: And that is not a division of
Offices among the Saints, every one of whom may equally intercede without
entrenching upon the propriety of another; and their intercession may be
implored by us in all kinds of necessities whatsoever: But it is grounded upon
a reflection which the Suppliant makes either upon some signal Grace which
shined in that Saint above others, as Patience, Humility, Chastity, etc. (for
which reason the Church says of every one of them, Non est inventus similis
Illi, there was no other found like to him) or upon the particular manner of
his suffering Martyrdom, or some particular Miracle, or such like remarkable
passage in his life and actions, which may serve to excite the hope of the
Suppliant to obtain redress by means of his intercession, in a case which he
conceives to bear a sutableness and conformity to something acted or suffered
by him. Now the efficacy of Prayer being grounded on hope, and it being natural
to us to hope for redress where others have found it, or where it may more
reasonably be expected, by reason of some particular qualification we apprehend
in the person to whom we address; it is manifest, that as the abovesaid
reflection serves to erect our hope, so also it conduces to the end of Prayer,
that is, the obtaining of what we pray for. Hence it is, that although all the
Divine Attributes are really one and the same indivisible Perfection in God;
yet for pardon we fly to his Mercy; for knowledge, to his Wisdom; for
protection, to his Power, etc. And S. Paul assigns the remission of our sins to
the Passion of Christ; but our Justification (by which we rise to newness of
life) to his Resurrection. He was Romans 4. 25.
delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our justification. The
reason whereof he gives in the Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 2. v. 18, where he
says, That it behoved Christ to be made like his brethren in all things, that
he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people: For, says he, in that he
suffered himself, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted:
That is, by what he suffered himself, he is made prompt and ready to succor
those who are in affliction and temptation. For it was true even of his most
Sacred Humanity, what the Poet out of the very nature of humanity made another
say, Hand Ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco; that by his own sufferings he
had learnt how to compassionate the sufferings of others. And this was laid
down by S. Paul as a powerful argument to persuade the Hebrews to put their
hope in him for their reconciliation with God, because he was so particularly
qualified and fitted for that work, by what he had suffered. Why then may not a
like consideration of the fitness or qualification of one Saint above others,
as so conceived by us (either for his eminent perfection in such a particular
virtue, or some other remarkable passage in his life), be taken as a motive to
invite us to address for the obtaining what we stand in need of, to his
intercession before others? The Scripture, we know, to persuade us to patience
in adversity, bids us James 5. 10.
reflect upon the sufferings of Job; and why may not his eminence in that
virtue, as it serves for an example of our imitation, be also taken as a
particular motive of our having recourse to his intercession? And when Jacob
blessed the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses, among so many Angels
whose assistance he might have implored, he begs for that Angel in particular
to be their Guardian, who had delivered him out of all his troubles Genesis 48. 16.
. The Angel (said he) who delivered me from all evils, bless these children:
And why, but because he thought that he who had been so careful to deliver him,
would be as careful to deliver them? And upon this account, were I in danger of
being shipwrackt, I should sooner fly to the Intercession of S. Paul, who had
saved by his prayers all his fellow-passengers in the ship from being drowned,
than to another who had never been in the like danger. Behold here, then, the
crime of Catholics in calling particularly upon the Angel Raphael when they
travel, because he protected young Tobias in his journey; upon S. Roch against
the Plague, because his charity was signal in assisting those who were infected
with it; upon S. Nicholas against Tempests, because he saved some by his
prayers, who in a storm at Sea invoked him, while yet alive; upon S. Apollonia
for the Toothache, because all her teeth were struck out for her free
confession of Christ; and upon S. Michael and S. George against Enemies,
because the latter was by profession a Soldier, and a most valiant Martyr; and
the former is recorded in Scripture Dan. 10. 21. and 12. 1.
to be the Protector of the people of God.

This excuse has much more of ingenuity in it, than that of Alexander Hales
Alex. de Hales, sum. part. 4. quaest. 26. memb. 3. Art. 5.
. Because (said he) we miserable men, or some of us at least, are more affected
sometimes toward some certain Saint, than toward our Lord himself; therefore
God, having compassion on our misery, is pleased that we should pray unto his
Saints.

As if God would indulge us in so unworthy and irreligious a passion.

The former excuse (I say) is much more plausible, yet it is invalid, and may
be shown to be so, by these following Considerations.

First, It is acknowledged that Christ's sympathy is one motive of our trust
when we pray to him; but it is the Divinity which he possesses, and not the
infirmity which he suffered, which inviteth us at this distance to call upon
him.

Secondly, If there were as much ground to think that the Saints know our
particular states, as there is to believe their charity for the Church in
general, it might not be improper to apply our selves to such, whose former
circumstances do best befit our present ones.

Thirdly, Though the sympathy of the Saint be a direction to him or her, how
does this direct Mariners to the Virgin Mary in a Tempest? She was never, that
they are assured of, in peril by Sea; neither know they that she ever crossed a
greater Water than that of Jordan or Nilus. If they take their ground from the
derivation of the Name Mary, as signifying (says Xaver. Hist. Christi Pers. p.
18.
Xaverius) Ruler of the Sea; on what an uncertain foundation do they build?
Nothing is more apt to deceive us, than fanciful Etymology. And for this word,
Xaverius confesses it may signify High, or the bitterness of the Sea also.
And L. de Dieu has showed, De Dieu in Animadvers. in excerpta ex Hist.
Christi. p. 540.
that it may as well denote a drop of the Sea.

If they answer with this Author, That not only the sympathy of the Saint, but
some miracle wrought after supplication, exciteth our hope, and encourages to
pray; That subterfuge shall be anon considered. In the mean time I only put
this short question, What was it that excited the first man that prayed to such
a Saint? Not a miracle in answer of prayer; for the first prayer is sure before
its answer.

Fourthly, Though many Saints have a like sympathy, and may by license of the
Roman Church be allowed to be prayed to apart or together Yet herein T. G.
contradicts Gabriel Biel, who says in this matter, Nou omnia possumus omnes;
meaning that every Saint cannot give that aid which some other can. G. Biel in
Ca^. Missae, Lect. 32. N.
: though they do not shut these Celestial Patrons out of one another
Provinces, but suffer St. James to be prayed to in England, and St. George in
Spain; yet this does not hinder the impiety of praying to any of them as
subordinate rulers under God. They are still Patrons, though some of them be a
kind of joint-Patentees; and one or other of them has in all cases such power
by commission, that little motive is left for immediate application unto God;
and much trust and gratitude due to him is paid to these Delegates.

Fifthly, The Angel whose protection Jacob implored for the safeguard of
Ephraim and Manasses, as having had himself experience of his aid, was a
Diviner Spirit than either Michael or Gabriel, even the Logos of God. This is
the opinion of Novatianus, declared once and again in his Novat. de Trin. c.
27. p. 725. ad Calc. op. Tertull.
Book of the Trinity. This is the opinion of many of the Fathers, whose
Testimonies shall be produced in my Fourteenth Chapter. At present it may
suffice to bring forth that plain one of St. Cyril of Alexandria in his
Thesaurus S. Cyril. Alex. Tom. 5. par. 1. p. 116, 117.
. An Angel is said to have striven with the Patriarch Jacob, and this Divine
Writ testifies; but the holy man retaining him, said, I will not let thee go
unless thou bless me. Now this Angel was God; which the words of the Patriarch
show, whilst he says, I have seen God face to face. Him (appearing to him as
an Angel) he desires to bless the Children.

And a while after he thus discourses.

When Esau his Brother designed against him, he did not invoke an Angel, but
God, saying, Take me, O Lord, out of the hands of my brother Esau, for I stand
in fear of him.

Sixthly, The story of Raphael protecting Tobias is not found in Canonical
Scripture. But if it be, notwithstanding, a true report, this being a peculiar
favor of God in an extraordinary case, it does not encourage men in all
emergencies to pray for the like, without a promise from God. He sends not
all to be our guides, who may sympathize with our estate. The Angels who never
sustained infirmity, do not so; neither does the ministration of an Angel argue
that of a Saint. Nor does it follow that God does use such ministrations so
frequently and visibly under the Gospel, as under the Law, in which
dispensation his Shechinah, in which the Angels attended, was shown often on
Earth.

Seventhly, If St. Roch once assisted the infected, it is not proved thence
that God sends him wherever he sends that heavy judgment. And how appears
it that he ever helped at a distance in that dreadful sickness, which requires
a Domine Miserere? Why, because (say they) the infected prayed to him, and were
healed. But the event is not always the effect; and God in pursuance of his own
greater and mysterious ends, does often answer the matter of the requests of
the superstitious and the wicked. And often there are other ordinary second
Causes, which men fancy by the event to have been more extraordinary and
divine. They who among the Heathens prayed to Lavina for her assistance in a
cleanly cheat, might impute the effect unto their Goddess, though she never
understood them, and their own cunning brain and slight of hand brought the
couzenage to pass with such undiscovered Art. S. Austin will furnish us with a
better instance, a matter of fact. In his Eleventh Chapter de Cura pro mortuis,
he tells of one Eulogius a Master of Rhetoric in Carthage, who was perplexed
with a knotty place in the Rhetoricks of Cicero, which he was next day to
interpret to his Scholars: And in that night, says the Father, I interpreted
unto him in his dream, that which he understood not. Nay, not I, but my Image,
I being wholly ignorant of this affair, and being so far beyond the Sea, doing
or dreaming some other thing, and being wholly careless of his cares. The man's
brain was heated, and amongst other Images that of S. Austin came in his mind,
he being then the famed Scholar in Africa; and his dreams (as often it
happens) were luckier than his waking thoughts; and he imputed to St. Austin
that which followed his Apparition in the brain, though that was not the cause
of it.

Eighthly, if St. Michael was once sent to succor the Jews, it is not to be
thence concluded, that Saints do the like, or that he himself has always the
same Office, in reference to the quality or the object of it; or that Angels
appear alike under the dispensation of the Logos substituted without union to
manhood, and that of him incarnate, and installed King of the World; nor do all
the Learned think that by Michael is always meant an Angel.

In sum, the Romanists are not so much charged with Idolatry, for praying to
such Saints as most sympathize (in their conjecture) with their present
conditions; as for trusting in them as such whom God has empowered to succor
all Christians in equal circumstances and like places; and for returning the
thanks to them which are oftenest due to the immediate Providence of the
Omnipresent God. If they do not apply themselves to them as such, why do they
use such Forms in their Prayers? Why do they give them the name of Patron, and
Guardian-Saints? Why do they as well call on the Virgin, as on the highest
Angel for Guardianship? Why do the Popes in their many Bulls declare them to be
Patrons of such places, and helpers in such particular cases? Why are the
people directed in the choice of them, and advised to an especial affiance in
them Horst. Par. An. Sect. 5. p. 294. Sanctos, maxim Patronos, invoca, etc.
? Why is there mention in their Authors, of their appearance in person to their
Supplicants, with present aid, and further assistance? This is done by
Bernardin de Bustis, and recited in a Manual Printed at Paris with approbation
L'office de la vierge, etc. ou sont adjoutees -- Allegresses de la vierge, etc.
A Paris, 1659. p. 340, 341, etc.
, in a Discourse of the seven Joys of the Virgin; to wit (in their account) her
Annunciation by the Angel; her Visitation by Elizabeth; the glorious Birth of
Christ; the Adoration of the Magi; the Retrieve of her Son in the Temple; the
appearance of Christ after his Resurrection; and her happy departure and
Assumption into Heaven. With these Joys, says Bernardin, St. Thomas of
Canierbury, a devout servant of the Virgins, did every day salute our Lady. To
him (as he proceeds) she one day appeared when he was at his Prayers; and she
assured him, that his saluting her with her seven Joys on earth [which
sometimes were In lib. Festiviali. in Annunc. B. M. p. 233.
said to be but five] was very agreeable to her; but that the saluting of her
with her seven Joys in Heaven, [to wit, her Exaltation above the Angels; her
illuminating Paradise as the Sun does the World; the reverence paid her by
Angels, Archangels, Thrones and Dominions; her being the Conveyer of all the
Graces which Christ bestows; her sitting at the right hand of her Son; her
being the hope of sinners in such sort, that all who praise and reverence her,
are by the Father recompensed with eternal Glory; the augmentation of her
graces and favors in Paradise until the Day of Judgment] was acceptable to her
in a higher degree. And she promised to him, and to others also who should
daily repeat these Salutations, adjoining to each an Ave Maria, that she would
be present with them at the hour of death; and that for her sake they should be
saved. In which instance we have the Patronage of the Virgin asserted, and also
a proof of the Imposture of such Appearances, from the Story it self, which
represents not a blessed Saint ascribing all Glory to the great God, but a
vain perfon delighted with the unjust flatteries of her self.

This, then, is the way in which I conceive the Church of Rome gives away a
degree of the Honor of God the Father; to wit, by her disposal of the
Government of the World, though in subordination to his Supremacy, unto Angels
and Saints, without any sufficient declaration from him, that he has been
willing so to prefer them; and by her worshipping of them in that quality which
her own imagination has enstated them in.

I am next to consider how the Church of Rome does by such estimation and
worship, entrench on the Divine Honor with respect to Christ as Mediator. God
has not owned any Substitute besides his Son, who has all power given to him,
being as God-man most capable of it. And though the Church of Rome does
acknowledge Christ to be the Author of Salvation, and the Supreme Patron and
Mediator; yet still it does entrench upon his Honor, in its worship of Saints,
three several ways.

First, More particularly, in that Worship which is given to the Virgin.

In the second place, More generally, in the worship given to so many Saints
and Angels.

Thirdly, In the frequency of the worship given, both to the Virgin, and to the
other Heavenly spirits.

First, The Honor of Christ is particularly abated in the customary worship of
the blessed Virgin. Abated, I say, not quite removed. For the Prayers to her
are still per Dominum, through Christ her Son [though it seems sometimes to
be intimated (as in the Monstra Te esse Matrem, Show thy Mother-hood, in the
Hymn Ave Maris stella) that she can command his Answers]. And when God is
invoked by her Merits, her Merits are supposed to be derived from his Ex. gr.
in Miss. Romans in F^st. Praes. B. M. p. 532. Deus, Qui B. Mariam -- hodierno die
in Templo praesentari voluisti; praesta, quaesumus, ut ejus Intercessione in
Templo gloriae Tuae praesentari mereamur per Dominum nostrum --
. But an abatement there is of Christ's Honor, by that supereminent Advancement
which is given to her by the practice of that Church, without any declaration
contrary to it. For that Church does set her, as Solomon did his Mother, in the
Throne with himself, though on that hand which signifies that he is still the
Supreme. Now it is manifest that Honor is diminished, both where it is equally
shared, and where a second keeps not distance, but does obtain a point next
to the first. For from degrees of Power and Distance, arise degrees of Honor;
and a Prince that sits alone in the Chair of State, is thereby in possession
of higher Honor, than he who has a Second sitting next him, though on the
less honorable hand. And accordingly it was esteemed a defect in Policy, both
through the occasion given by it of being supplanted, and through the
diminution it made of Supreme Honor (of which each degree is a degree of
Power), when any Princes in the Roman Empire [such as AElius Adrianus, and
Antoninus the Philosopher] admitted Seconds to sit with them in the Throne of
Government, though themselves reserved still the first Place, and remained, as
it were, the Heads of the Empire.

Now it is the practice of the Church of Rome to celebrate the Virgin as a kind
of Co-Ruler with her Son; to salute her (as we heard but now from the Office of
her Seven Allegresses) as a Queen on the right hand of Christ in his Throne.

The Scripture has in it this Prophecy of the Messiah Isa. 11. 1.
, There shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jess, and a branch, or
flower, shall grow or rise out of his roots. Hierom Xaverius has wrested this
place, even from the sense of the Vulgar Translation; and he thus reads it in
his Persic Gofpel Xaver. Evangel. Pers. p. 33.
: A true branch shall rise out of the root of Jesse, and out of that branch a
flower shall be born: Misapplying the first to the Virgin, and the second to
Christ, whilst both are spoken of him. To this misinterpretation he might be
led by the Hymn in the Breviary Brev. Romans Ave Regina -- Salve Radix Sancta. Ad
Completor. p. 107.
, which saluteth her by the Title of the Holy Root. And it is evident by the
Psalter of Bonaventure, which is known to turn Lord into Lady, throughout the
Psalms (not omitting to Travest that place of, The Lord said unto my Lord;
into, Our Lady said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand); and by Salazar,
who in his Commentary on the Proverbs interprets Wisdom of the Virgin; that
the Marians would scrue up the sense of the Old Testament into the assertion of
a kind of coequality of the Virgin with Christ. Hence Baronius himself calls
her the Ark, in one place Baron. Annal. Tom 2. p. 863.
; and in another Bar. Tom. 5. p. 771. Wichm. Sab. Mar. p. 192. Ecquod istud
Tabe^naculum (Levit. 26.) nise Illa de Qua Psaltes (Psalm. 45.) sanctificavit
Tab^rnaculum su^m Altissimus.
, the Tabernacle.

The things relating to Christ under the New Testament, are equally perverted
by this inordinate devotion to that Virgin, who cannot give those a welcome
reception, who with such affront to her Son, make their Court to her.

As the Scripture mentions the Nativity of Christ celebrated by a Quire of
Angels, so does the Roman Church observe the Nativity of the Virgin, from a
story of melody heard from Heaven by a devout man in a Desert, on her
birthday. Hierom Xaverius Xiv. Hist. Christi. par. 1. p. 20, 21.
has set down this Story for Gospel among the Indians; and Innocent the
fourth, upon that report, caused the dav to be Sacred.

As Christ's triumphant Ascension is spoken of in the Scripture, and observed in
our Church; so in the Legends of Rome there is frequent mention of her
Assumption, and it is in that Church celebrated with pomp. Before that Office
she is pictured, in the Missal lately Printed at Paris Missal. Romans Par. 1660.
p. 473.
, ascending with a glory about her head, in equal show of triumph with Christ.

As Christ is said in the Te Deum, to have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers; so is the Virgin called by them, the Gate In Hymno, Av^ Maris
stella. -- Coeli Porta.
and the Hall-gate of Heaven J. Heigham in his manual. p. 384.
. As he is called Gods beloved Son, so is she called Gods beloved Daughter
Horst. Par. Animae. in Dedic. ante Sect. 7. p. 415. -- Dilectae. aeterni Patris
Filiae.
.

As Christ is said to be exalted above all things in Heaven and Earth; so is
the Virgin called the Queen of Heaven, and sometimes the Queen of the Heavens,
in reference to the Angels Missal. Romans in Miss. Sacratiss. Rosarii B. V. M. p.
120. Ave Regina Coelorum, matter Regis Angelorum, etc.
, and sometimes the Queen of Heaven and Earth Horst. Par: An. p. 415. Angelorum
dominae; Hominum Tutrici; Coeli Terraeque Reginae.
. Nay the Jesuit Rapine has enstated her in that Empire without any mention of
the King her Son as above her R. Rapin. Eclog. Sacr. Ecl. 13. p. 41, 42.
Postquam illam Coeli potestatumque potentem esse dedit, summoque Deus praefecit
Olympo.
.

As Christ is acknowledged by Christians to be the Head of the Church, and the
only Mediator and Advocate; so the Virgin is styled in the Synod of Mexico
Council. Mexic. Romae Confirmat. An. 1589. l. 3. Tit. 18. Sect. 12. p. 1298.
Quid omnes speciali devotione gloriosissimam Virginem Mariam universalem
Patronam and Advocatam prosequi debemus, etc.
, the Universal Patroness and Advocatress.

As the day has been divided into several portions in which devout people have
prayed to God and Christ; so seven Canonical Hours have been appointed for the
worship of the Virgin Genebrard. A C. 1088. Cum jam esset statutum ut Clerici
Sept. hor as' canon. quotidie dicerent; totidem jussit in concilio apud
Claromontem A. C. 1096. recitare quotidie in laudem Virginis, and instituit
ipsius officium in Sabbathis. See Hotting. Hist. Eccl. c. 11. vol. 2. p. 376.
.

As God and Christ have the Sunday sacred to them, so in the Roman Church the
Virgin has Saturday Horst. Par. An. Sect. 7. p. 417. Diem Sabbathi Deiparae
Virginis Honori peculiariter dicavit Ecclesia. etc.
. On that day therefore, says Augustine Wichmans In Sabb. Marian. c. 6. p. 63,
64.
, more Requests of miserable mortals are sealed by her the Chancelaress of the
greatest King, in the Court of Heaven, than on all the other days of the week,
though put together, [the Lords day not excepted.]

On that day [rather than on our Lords,] Martin Navarre, and Lewis the Eleventh
of France, desired to die Wichm. ibid. p, 61.
.

As it is said of the Father, that no man comes to Christ except he draw him.
So it is said of the Virgin, by Augustine Wichmans Id. ibid. c. 13. p. 191.
, who calls her the Treasuress of Graces, that no man comes to her Son,
unless she draw him by her most holy Aids. As in the Litany, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Three Persons and one God are invoked; so in the next place,
they pray thrice to the Virgin, saying Offic. B. M. p. 133, 134. S. M. ora, etc.
, Holy Mary pray for us; Holy Mother of God pray for us; Holy Virgin of Virgins
pray for us. Other Saints, as also Angels, have there but one compellation.

The Jesuit Canisius in his Manual for Catholics P. Canis. Man. Cath. Antv. A.
1588. p. 332. Aug. Which. in Sabb. Mar. c. 13. p. 193. Si Maria non oraret,
mundus totus non diu staret.
, has made up his fifteenth Exercise of three Litanies, of which the third is
that of the Missal. But the first is the Litany of Christ, who in it is
addressed to in fourty-four compellations: And the second is the Litany of the
Virgin, who has just so many, and these amongst them: Thou cause of our joy!
Thou seat of Wisdom! Thou Ark of the Covenant! Thou Gate of Heaven! Thou Refuge
of Sinners! Thou Comforter of the afflicted! Thou help of Christians! Thou
Queen of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, All
Saints.

As in the Bible the Lord has one hundred and fifty Psalms, so (says the
Pope's Bull Bulla Sext. 4.
) the Lady has an hundred and fifty Salutations in her Rosary, which was
therefore at first called her Psalter.

As Christ is the Lord in whom the Church hops; so the Virgin is called in
the Roman Offices Octav. Romans Edv. Antv. A. 1628. infra Octav. Fest. B. M. V.
p. 50. -- Tu es spes unica peccatorum, etc.
, The only hope of Sinners.

As Christ is said to be in Scripture, the Life; so the Virgin is called by the
Marians, the Mother of Life Horst. Par. An. Sect. 7. p. 417. Non mireris si
Matrem vitae, etc.
. As devout Christians commend their souls, when they leave this world, into
the hands of Christ; so these Marians commend theirs into the hands of the
Virgin, being taught a form of so doing Maria matter Gratiae, etc. and hora
mortis suscipe.
. And they tell us, that upon this account Horst. ibid. hoc potiss. nomine
cult. V. Deip. Commend. quod Clientibus suis in mortis agone fidelis semper
Patron^ and matter adsistat. etc.
the worship of the Virgin is chiefly to be commended, that she is always
present with her Clients in the agony of death, as a faithful Patroness and
Mother. This is said by Horstius, who immediately cries out thus in a pang of
Marian devotion, "O how many has she snatched out of the Jaws of death! O how
many has she restored to "the favor of her Son, and unto Heaven! Such another
Suppliant was the late Jesuit Labbee, who when he was dying, applied those
words to the Virgin, which are used of Christ Labbe in Carm. in Praef. ante Op.
Mar. Market p. 28. Ad Virg. Orat. Hic te ad sider^ spiritus sequatur, in terris
fuit usque qui secutus, Mariam Ducem and Auspicem Mariam.
.

I need not here add the Litany added to the Psalter of Bonaventure Psaltet of
our Lady published with license, in F^ench at Paris, by C. Chappelet, A. 1601.
, in which our Lady, instead of God, is desired to have mercy, to deliver us
from all evil, and from particular evils in such Forms as this: From the anger
of God, from despair, pride, luxury, good Lady deliver us.

That which I have mentioned before this is such hyperdulia, or excess of
Veneration, that by ascribing too much to a particular Saint, it diminishes
the Honor of our common Savior. Thus it was not from the beginning; but the
superstitious world has departed from the first measures of the reverence due
to the Virgin, and run into this insufferable extreme. And how this has come to
pass, one of that Church, and one of the most judicious and disinteressed
amongst them, has faithfully told us Father Paul in his Hist. of the Conc. of
Trent. l. 2. A. 1546. p. 170.
. After that the impiety of Nestorius had divided Christ, making two Sons, and
denying him to be God, who was born of the Blessed Virgin; the Church, to
inculcate the Catholic Truth in the minds of the Faithful, made mention of her
in the Churches as well of the East as of the West, with this short form of
words, in Greek, (...), in Latin, Maria Matter Dei; that is, Mary the Mother of
God. This being instituted only for the Honor of Christ, was by little and
little communicated also to the Mother, and finally applied to her alone. So
when Images began to multiply, Christ was painted as a Babe in his Mothers
arms, to put us in mind of the worship due unto him even in that Age: But in
progress of time, it was turned into the worship of the Mother without the Son,
he remaining as an Appendix in the Picture. The Writers and Preachers,
especially those that were contemplative, carried with the torrent of the
Vulgar, which is able to do much in these matters, leaving to mention Christ,
invented with one accord new Praises, Epithetes, and Religious services;
insomuch that about the year 1050, a daily Office was instituted to the Blessed
Virgin, distinguished by seven Canonical hours, in a Form which anciently was
ever used to the honor of the Divine Majesty: And in the next hundred years
the worship so increased, that it came to the height, even to attribute that
unto her, which the Scriptures speak of the Divine Wisdom. And amongst these
invented Novities this was one, her total exemption from Original sin; yet this
remained only in the breasts of some few private men, having no place in
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, or amongst the Learned. At last about the year 1136,
the Canons of Lions dared to bring it into the Ecclesiastical Offices.

Secondly, The Honor of Christ is diminished by that Veneration, though of an
inferior nature, which is given to so many Angels and Saints, as Presidents and
Patrons in the Government of the Church. It is true, that the Honor of a
Prince is increased by the multitude of his Attendants: Our Church therefore
reverently declares of Christ, That ten thousand times ten thousand minister
unto him. But delegation of Power to many by commission as Presidents, and not
as Angels and Messengers, Ministers and Attendants, is a diminution of Honor
by cantonizing of Power. And he is most absolute, and reserveth most of
dependence, and thanks, and trust, and reverence, to himself, who dispatcheth
all things by his immediate Authority. For Commissions cut power into many
channels, and import either love of ease, or want of power to execute in
person. The Roman Emperors were, in their Dominions, high and mighty
Potentates, and their Vassals flattered them as Deities in flesh. But they
would have appeared greater still, if they had not cut their Empire into its
Eastern and Western parts, and administered affairs by Prefects, Vicars, Counts,
Dukes, Consuls, Correctors, Presidents and others, executing power by
subordinate Lieutenancy. And doubtless the Praefectus Praetorio of Italy had
many thanks paid him for his favors, without any acknowledgment made to the
Emperor, though the fountain of his Power. In such cases, men look not beyond
the State-officer, who befriends them, by virtue of his Patent and his derived
Authority. But they would look to the Prince, if he immediately dispensed all
honors and favors, though attended with a numerous guard, and employing many
messengers and ministering Spirits.

A Caviller would, here, say, that by this Argument it may be concluded, that
all Governors in this world, Ecclesiastical and Civil; all Princes and
Magistrates; all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Superintendents and
Presidents, are so many Idols, and Ordinances dishonorable to God and his Son.
But judicious men will consider, that the Governments on earth are not the
patterns of the invisible world. Here God rules, in this manner, not for his
own sake, but for ours, we being mortal men, and needing the aids of men like
our selves, whilst we sojourn in this body: and for him to administer
immediately to our outward infirmities in this world, were for him to be always
grossly incarnate.

This conceit of the invisible world as modelled like the visible, has brought
forth that excuse of a voluntary humility in the Romish Suppliants, who, as if
the Court of Heaven were like that on Earth, dare not presume to come
immediately to the King, but apply themselves to him by the mediation of some
of his Officers. A King is but a man, and cannot hear all complaints in person,
and redress all grievances. Could he do it with the Power, and Wisdom, and
Grace, and easy operation of a Deity, all might then have immediate access to
him, or to him by the Prince his Son, supposed to be of a like nature and
quality. And who, on earth, when he is invited by the Monarch himself to apply
himself to him immediately, or to him by his Son; addresseth himself to
neither, but to some meaner Favorite, of whose interest, for the dispatch of
his Affair, he has no assurance given him?

Thirdly, should we lay aside this consideration of that Presidentship and
Patronage, to which the Romanists entitle so many Saints; yet the very
frequency used in addresses to them, though by mere request of their Prayers
for us, would, not a little, tend to the diminution of the honor of God and
Christ. It is notorious to those who pass the Seas in the same Bottoms with
Romish Mariners, that those Seamen, in a storm, apply not themselves
immediately to God, but repeat the Hymn, to the holy Virgin, of, Hail, Star of
the Sea! To this purpose is that which Lipsius tells Lips. Virg. Hallens. p.
1261. Op.
of Thirteen men in peril by a Tempest, in their passage to Antwerp. Amongst
them, the Master, conceiving no hope of saving the Vessel, or the lives of the
Passangers, exhorted them to submit themselves wholly to God, and so to pass to
a better state, after the loss of this. But, it seems, one amongst them
suggested Vows and Invocations to the Lady of Halla; and his counsel is
embraced. Straightway (says he) a light shone on the Vessel, and the Tempest
ceased, and the Vessel arrived at the Haven, with loss of goods, but not of the
Passengers, who repaired to Halla, and profesled themselves to owe their life
to the Virgin, and paid with faithfulness, the Vows they had made. It had been
more pious, surely, to have thanked God and the Virgin, or rather God alone,
who, it may be, by other means, or by himself, was their deliverer. But
superstitious men judge of Causes by the concomitancie of the effects, and not
by the virtue which produces them. And this is not only the fruit of
superstition in the rude and ignorant, but in the politest of the
Ecclesiastics. The very Jesuits (for so did Father Garnet See Proceed. ag.
Traitors. page ult. crossing himself, he said, In nom. Patr. etc, then Maria
matter Gratiae, etc. then in manus tuas, etc. then per crucis hoc signum fugiat
procul omne malignum. Then he concludes with, Maria matter Gratiae, etc.
at his execution) afford God the less of their Application by being so busied,
at their last hour, with their aforesaid, Mary, Mother of Grace, Mother of
Mercy, defend us from the enemy, and protect us in the hour of death: which
Versicles (say the composers Confess. Saxon, in corp. Confess. p. 88. de Invoc.
Hom, Pior. etc.
of the confession of Saxony) we heard a Monk, a Professor of Divinity,
inculcate, very often, to a dying man, without any mention of Christ Jesus. And
it has been commonly observed, as a great blot in the Romish devotions, That
they use many Ave Maria's to one Pater Noster. [Which Collects, by the way,
being repeated by them with such careless haste; the jabbering of any thing, in
an indistinct, heedless way, is by us called patering]. Labbe a learned
Jesuit, though in his sickness he was not forgetful of Christ his Savior, yet
he mentions the frequency of his addresses to the Virgin, during the rage of
his Fever See Garnerius in his Pref. to M. Mercator. p. 27, 28. Orat. ad Virg.
Nec tu non mihi sae. pius vocata, Ardores faebris inter aestuosae, etc.
. This a stander by, not knowing his principles, would have judged to have been
the effect of his distemper. Thus, then, this new Marian devotion much
diminishes, and sometimes quite justleth out, the ancient and unquestionable
worship of Jesus; as they say, S. Ambrose is almost forgotten, already, at
Milan Spalatens. de Rep. Eccl. l. 7. c. 5, p 93. Carolus prosecto M^diolani
Ambrosii nomen ferme extinxit.
, through the newer veneration of S. Charles Borromee.

Two things now may be, perhaps, jointly pretended toward the disabling the
foregoing Discourse; and I will return a brief answer to them.

First, It is taken for confessed, That those to whom the Romanists pray as
unto Patrons and Patronesses, are real Saints in Heaven.

Secondly, The Romanists pretend to prove that God has declared himself to
have conferred such honorable office, place, and power upon these Patrons; by
the miracles they have wrought for the behoof of their Clients.

For the first suggestion; It is confessed that they worship none but such as
have been thought professors of Christianity, and such who are reputed to be
exalted above either Hell or Purgatory. Notwithstanding this, I dare not avouch
the eminent Saintship, and glorified estate of all that are canonized. They who
read, without partiality, the History of S. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,
will be inclined to think him put into the Calendar by as much mistake, as many
other things are put into our vulgar Almanacks. I see that, even some of the
Roman Communion, do impute his saintship Essais de morale vol. 3. des d^faults
des Gens de bien. Sect. 17. p. 318. Il y a g^ns de bien Qui examinant la vie de
S. Thomas de Cantorbie, etc Dieu jugera de ce dif^erent plutost par la purete
du coeur Du Saint, and par la mechan. cete de son Adversaire, que par la fond
de la ^se.
rather to the fervor of his zeal, than to the ground of his Cause.

What can a man that reverenceth God, think of the Saintship of St. Bernardin
of Siena, when he considers of his Doctrine, apt to give pain to the modesty
of the Virgin, almost in Heaven it self? This Saint, after a logn comparison
betwixt God and Blessed Mary See A. Rivet. l. 2. Apol. pro S. V. M. and Car.
Drelinc^rtium de Honor B. V. M. debito.
, thus (thus blasphemously) concludes. If then we give to each their due, in
that which God has done for man, and which the Virgin has done for God
himself; you see for your comfort, that Mary has done more for God, than God
for man; whence God for the Virgins sake, is much obliged to us. Methinks by
these words he is just such another Saint as the Author of the Conformities See
He^r. Apol. for Herod. l. 1. c. 25. p. 205.
, who writes the parallel of Christ and St. Francis, and gives to St. Francis,
the pre-eminence. What can a peaceable Christian think of the Saintship of Pope
Hildebrand, or St. Gregory the seventh? Was it not he who imbroiled the World;
who taught Greg. 7. l. 8. Ep. 21.
that Kings and Dukes had their original from those who not knowing God, did by
pride, rapines, perfidiousness, murders, and by almost all manner of
wickednesses (through the instigation of the Devil, the Prince of this world)
affect to domineer over their equals, or other men, with blind ambition, and
intolerable presumption; who deposed Henry the fourth King of the Germans, and
absolved his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and who endeavored to set
up a Papal Monarchy to the disquiet of all Nations? Neither is it for the
Honor of the Gospel of Peace to Saint either Pope Victor, or Pope Stephen, who
first took upon them to be Bishops, or rather Censurers, out of the Diocese
that belonged to them. Nor did the ancient Church own them as Saints or
Martyrs, as does the modern one of Rome See Consid. touching the true way to
suppress Popery; in the Hist. acc. of the Reform. p. 81, 82, etc.
.

Interest of State has oftentimes exalted them to the Honor of Saints, who
had never obtained that high Title by their mere piety of life. It happened
tolerably in respect of the person, when Thomas Aquinas was registered among the
Saints; for he was a man of great Scholastic Learning, and of a mighty zeal in
the Roman way. But for the true reason of his being Canonized, it was secular
enough. For Pope John the Two and twentieth, to depress the Franciscans, who
did for the most part adhere to the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, Excommunicated
by him Father Paul in Hist. of Counc. of Tr. p. 170, 171. l. 2. Ed. ult.
, did canonize that Doctor and his Doctrine directly opposite to that of the
Followers of St. Francis, in the Article of the Virgins Immaculate Conception.

Money also makes such gods, being first made one it self. And who knows
whether it has not sometimes Canonized evil men? For they whom it thus
bribeth, are not usually beyond the outward color and pretense, respecters of
Saintship. Canonization (they say) secureth Christians from worshipping the
damned instead of the blessed. I wish (says the Archbishop of Spalat: de
Repub. Eccl. l. 7. c. 5. p. 94.
Spalato) that it brings not to pass that very thing which they think it
preventeth. In this (as he goes on) are the faithful safe, if they reduce their
worship to the sole worship of God. And here it is worthy our observation, that
Gregory the ninth complained on his deathbed of that vicious easiness of his,
whereby he listened to the dreams and visions of such who pretended to great
sanctity, and occasioned great schisms and disturbances in the Church See
Gerson. de Exam. Doct. par. 2. Cons. 3.
. He means this in all likelihood, of Catherine of Siena, by whom he was
deluded, and thereby drawn into a desperate schism; yet she is St. Catherine,
and her Clients are many. It is a strange infallibility with which the Pope is
invested, if he can judge without error, of the manners of such whom he has
seldom in his eye, and who want not their flatterers, whatsoever is their
party. It is therefore much safer to own the ancient Saints, such as St.
Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose, whom the whole Church Canonized by its consent,
than such Modern ones as St. Catherine, and St. Thomas of Canterbury, whom the
Authority of the Pope has put into the Calendar. Of some then the Saintship is
doubtful; and of some the very existence. For are not the three Kings of Colen
as such, a very fiction? yet are they worshipped in the Roman Church, as
Guardian-Saints Horst. Par. An. Sect. 2. p. 103. Commend. and Ubl. ad Sanctos
tres magos and Reges, quorum sacra corpora religiose asservat and colit Agr.
Colonia. O sancti magi, etc.
. And Horstius prays them to obtain for him the frankincense of devout
Prayer, the myrrh of Mortification, and the gold of Charity. Is not think you
St. Almachius a substantial Patron? yet such a one there is in some Roman
Calendars Baron. Mart. Romans 1. Jan. p. 1.
, the title of Sanctum Almanacum, being first by mistake written too low
against the first day of January; yet a Saint he must be. And Baronius is loath
to part with him, and in his Martyrology he will have him to be the same with
St. Telemachus Bar. ibid. p. 5.
.

But secondly, They will prove their Saints to be both Saints and Patrons by
the miracles they work upon Invocation See Syn. Nicen. 2. Act. 4. p. 249, etc.
. Thus the Popes in the Bullarium, recite the many miracles wrought by their
Saints, and then they decree them a place in the Calendar. Thus the Catechism
of Trent proves the honor of Patrocinie Cat. ex Decr. Conc. Trid. ad Parochos.
in 1. Praec. p. 392.
to be due to the Saints, by the wonders seen at their Sepulchers and Relics.
Thus Baronius Baron. Ann. A. C. 1085. N. 13. p. 612. Tom. 11.
tells of the Saintship and Miracles of the abovesaid Gregory the seventh,
and of a virtue in his Garments equal to that in the handkerchers of the
Primitive Christians, mentioned in the Acts. Thus Mr. White T. W. (under the
borrowed name of Fran. Covent) in his Enchiridion of Faith, at the end of his
Catechetical Dialogue.
boasts of the restitution of a leg (cut off and buried four years) to a
young man who prayed to our Lady of Pilar; affirming the story to be sufficient
to convert the whole world.

To this second Allegation many things may be returned.

First, When God wrought Miracles at the Tombs of the Martyrs, he wrought them
not as answers to them who invoked Martyrs, (for in those times they were
honored as Saints, and as Soldiers dying in Christ's cause, and not invoked as
Patrons); but he thereby encouraged Christians in times of Persecution, and
honored their Religion in the sight of the Heathen.

Secondly, There is no reason to expect such Miracles in the settled Ages of
Christian Religion, though there might be at the first planting of it. And,

Thirdly, We have had a long time, a fixed rule from whence we may learn the
practical truth and duties of our Religion, the Word of God. Neither has God
left so great a part of his Worship as Prayer, to be derived from the dreams of
the Melancholy, or the delusions of Satan, or the Tales of men who write
Legends for the advantage of their cause, or other tricks of politic persons.
He has required us in Scripture to call upon him through Jesus Christ: and he
has confirmed this and his whole Gospel, by the real Miracles of his Apostles,
after those of his Son; and the Gospel being thus fixed, we are not to expect
any new discoveries of Evangelical duty by the voice or miracle of an Angel
from Heaven, who if he should be in such manner sent to us, with any new
Doctrinal or Moral Revelation, ought to be looked on by us as one that tries
our Faith, and not as one from whom a new rule of faith or manners is to be
received.

Fourthly, Many Romish Miracles are events not effects. A Popish woman is
extremely sick in body, she causes an Image of the Virgin, as is the fashion
now among some Romanists in England, to be hanged within her curtains, at the
feet of her bed. She invoketh the Virgin, and uses Physic; she recovers by
Art, by strength of nature, by any other way of Gods Providence; and the Virgin
is entitled to the Cure, because the event followed their Invocation of her.

Fifthly, Many of the Miracles, are too light to be ascribed to the Saints of
Heaven. The credulous Lipsius confirms the Invocation of our Lady of Halla by
stories, some of them very strange, and some very ludicrous. He tells of a Boy
raised by her from the dead after three days Lips. Virg. Hall. c. 19. p. 1264.
. Of a Tailor whom she helped to his needle and thread Lips. ibid. c. 25. p.
1272.
, after they had been swallowed down by him. Of a Soldier who by Miracle lost
his nose Id. ibid. c. 7. p 1256.
, having threatened to cut off that of her Image. So Cantapratanus and Antoninus
See Aug. Wichmans Sab. Mar. P. 73.
tell at large, how the Virgin mended the hairy shirt of Saint Thomas of
Canterbury.

Sixthly, Many of them are mere cheats performed by cunning men under the
notion of pious frauds. A Priest skilled as much in Physic as Divinity, knows
the sick Romanist to whom he is Confessor, to need a vomit. He exhorts him to
invoke the holy Virgin; he bids him view well her Image which he has put
into an Antimonial cup; he advises him to drink of that liquor into which her
Image and her blessing has infused virtue, and to repeat his devotions to the
Virgin his Patroness. The sick ignorant man obeys, believes him, discharges
his stomach, and is presently eased. He cries out, a Miracle, a Miracle; he is
constant to his Aves all his days.

There are some who know this to be an History, though I have told it in the
form of a supposition.

Seventhly, Many Wonders and Apparitions are the delusions of the Devil, and
dangerous snares in which he entangleth the commonalty of that Church. By this
means he often reconciles himself to their favor, and they take him in this
disguise for a real Angel of Light. What other construction can a wise man make
of the story in Matthew Paris concerning the Specter said to appear to the Earl
of Cornwall Mat. Paris in A. C. 1100.
? The same hour, says the Reporter, that William Rufus fell by the hand of Sir
Walter Tyrrell, the Earl of Cornwall being alone in the Forest, met with a
great hairy black Goat, carrying the King black and naked, and wounded through
the midst of his breast. He adjuring the Goat by the holy Trinity to tell what
this meant, the Goat made him this reply: I carry to his doom your King, or
rather your Tyrant, William Rufus. For I am an evil spirit, and an avenger of
that malice of his with which he raged against the Church of Christ; and I
procured his murder.

They who believe these Legends, and take such Apparitions as measures of their
Faith, will think the Devil good-natured toward Christianity, and an executor
of vengeance on the enemies of it; though in truth he himself is its greatest
and most inveterate foe, and wounds it deepest when he strikes at it in the
disguise of a friend.

The stories concerning the appearance of the Virgin to her Clients are very
numerous, and of them too many represent her in unbecoming postures. And such
appear^nces should rather move the dread and abhorrence, than encourage the
Invocation of the Romanists, being either the Images of an unclean brain, or
the Specters of impure Devils.

Lastly, Let not the Papists prove their worship of Saints, as the Heathen did
their worship of Demons.

And here I end my Discourse concerning the Worship of Saints in the Roman
Church, as Patrons, and Patronesses, as Presidents and Lieutenants in the
Government of the World, with the sense of the judicious and moderate
Archbishop of Spalato Spalat. de Republ. Ecclesiast. l. 7. c. 12. p. 287.
.

This in my judgment is the great objection against the Invocation of Angels,
the Holy Virgin, or other Saints whose souls are with God in Heaven, that it is
in the nighest degree of peril to become Religious Worship; for it is out of
doubt that the ruder people do religiously invoke the Saints; and that many are
internally more affected with religious passion toward the Virgin, or some
Saint, than toward Christ himself. For they invoke not a Saint as one that
prays for them, but as the principal Helper. Neither say they, Pray for me;
but help me; Come to my Aid; Save me. Nor do they express it in words, or
understand it in their minds, that these things be done for them by the Saints
praying for them; but that the Saints themselves do immediately perform these
things. And in invocating of them, many wholly devote themselves, all their
soul, and and spirit, to the Virgin Mary and the Saints; and subject themselves
wholly to them in Spirituals: which is a kind of formed Idolatry.

Now though by this Discourse, I may have given offense unto the Marians; or
rather said that which will be made an offense by their misconstruction; I am
not jealous that I have at all offended those blessed spirits, if they have
knowledge of that which I write. For they are not covetous of undue honor; but
cast those Crowns with high indignation under their feet, which are set on
their heads to the dishonor of God, by the Idolatrous flatteries of foolish
men.

CHAP. XI. Of the Idolatry Charged on the Papists in their Worship of Images.
And first of the Worship of an Image of God.
IT still remains that I speak of the Worship of Images in the Roman Church,
and of that degree of Idolatry with which it seems to be stained.

And for Images I will briefly consider, those of the Trinity, of God, of
Christ, of the Saints, and under that of Christ's, the statue of the Cross.

For the Image of the Trinity we must not charge either the making or the
worshipping of it upon the very constitution of the Church of Rome, though men
of that Communion have often done both, and the Missals, Breviaries, and
Manuals Printed with license in these times See the Front. of de Sales of the
Love of God, etc.
abound with such Pictures. Formerly that Church was very severe against such
practices. And Pope John the 22d Aventin. Annal. Bojor. l. 7. p. 751. See
Epist. 32. Alexandri P. 3. ad Soldanum Iconii baptizari cuplentem. ap. Council.
Max. Tom. 10. p. 1214. B. -- Licet nihil invenire possimus, quod expressam
babeat unitatis, quae in Deo est, and summae Trinitatis Imaginem, etc.
arraigned certain people in Bohemia and Austria, who had painted God the
Father as an old man, and the Son as a young man, and the Holy Ghost as a Dove,
as violaters of Religion: And he pronounced them Anthropomorphites, and
condemned some of them to the Fire. It seems the modern Popes are not so
strict: neither did the late Printers of the Missal at Paris, or of the Manual
of Horstius at Colen, dread their Fire; they having adorned the Copies of those
Books with such dangerous Sculptures. And it should seem by what Mr. Baxter
has said Mr. Baxter in his Commonwealth, c. 13. p. 457.
, That some among our selves have had a zeal for such Pictures; for he tells of
a Tumult raised where he had dwelt, upon a false rumor, that the Churchwardens
were about to obey the Parliaments Order, in taking down the Images of the
Trinity about the Church. But most probable it is, that the zeal of the
multitude was ready to defend such Images, or paintings in windows, rather as
the ornaments of the place, in general; than, distinctly, as Pictures of the
mysterious Trin-unity.

Concerning the Image of God, I find not now, as in former times, in the
public Books of the Church of Rome, any forms of Benediction, by which it
should be consecrated; though there be forms enough of the consecration of
Crosses, and of the Images of Christ and his Saints. Neither does the Council
of Trent ordain, either the making, or the veneration of the Image of God,
though it supposes that it is, sometimes, painted in sacred story, for the use
of their people. For it gives order Conc. Trid. de Invocat. vener, etc. p.
896. quod si aliquando Historias, etc.
that the people be instructed so far, as not to take such a Picture for
Divinity figured. Nay the Catechism, by Decree of that Council, speaks thus,
in the explication of their first Commandment Catech. ex Decr. Conc. Trident.
p. 394.
. Moses, when he would turn the people from Idolatry, said to them, You saw no
similitude, on the day in which the Lord spoke to you in Horeb from the midst
of the fire: which that most wise Lawgiver, therefore said, lest, being seduced
by error or mistake, they should make an Image of the Divinity, and so give the
honor due to God unto a creature. Yet that such Images are made, and honored
in the Roman Church, is very notorious. And it is not long since, here in
England, some Protestants saw a silver Image of God the Father, carried in
Procession, in the Passionweek, and venerated with shows of high devotion. The
Learned, who are cautious, forbear the open defense of such Images; yet they
call them Judaizers who esteem the worship of God, by them, to be Idolatry.
And, in their discourses, they seem to favor this Practice, so far as the
tenderness of that subject will suffer it to be touched, by saying there is no.
express Text against it See T. G. Catholics no Idolaters. c. 3. P. 33, etc.
, together with other very kind expressions, which discover their inclination.
Also the frequency and allowance of such Pictures, which under their strict
Discipline is scarce to be imputed to the liberty of Painters and Engravers,
she weth many Ecclesiastics to be well-willers to them; [though not as true
representations; the heresy of the gross Anthropomorphites being, as such,
renounced by them]. I instance only in that frontispiece which is put before
every of the three parts of the Roman Pontifical, Printed at Lions. There, on
the Top, in a very wooden cut, is pictured an old man with a Globe in his hand,
and a glory streaming from all parts of him. On his head there is a Triple
Crown, or Miter, and over it this Motto, Holy-Trinity, one God, have mercy upon
us. At the bottom, the Pope is placed, in a like Garb, with Miter, and Key; and
a glory about his head.

I do not say that the worship of such Images is Idolatry, by virtue of the
first (or, with us) the second command, considered as a Mosaical precept. The
Tables of stone themselves have, long ago, been broken in funder in that sense;
even by the very finger of God: For we are not under the Law of Moses, but
under the Covenant of the Gospel. But if there be any natural reason in that
Law, it is eternal and unalterable, like the great Author of it. By virtue of
that precept, it was (as many think) unlawful for any Jew to make any
protuberant statue, either of God, or Demon; or Man, or Animal; and much more
to exhibit signs of reverence before them. For the very making of Images would
have induced that ritual people to the worship of them; they wanting little
besides an outward object to receive the signs of their inward inclination.
And, if they had exhibited such signs before an Image, the Gentiles would have
expounded them as a compliance with their worship. Of these things God was
jealous, and therefore gave command that the Monster of Idolatry should not
ex^t, so much (...) in any seed or Embrio of it. And when^ever men are in such
circumstances, that an Image is a snare to themselves, and to others an
apparent scandal, or a confirmation of them in their evil way; this command
does oblige them by parity of Reason. And, in the days of Tertullian Tertull.
de Idol. Sect. 15. p. 94. at (...) ^cent Tab^ and Januae (...) strae, etc.
The Christians seem to have been nigh such circumstances, being ^ngled amongst
the Heathen, and so prone to their works, that (as he, in an holy indignation,
professes) there were more lights hung out at the doors of the Christians,
then at those of the Heathen themselves: Lights, not for the direction of the
passengers, but for the honor of Idols. He, therefore, sutably to the exigence
of that time, urged the second command with a kind of Mosaic strictness; and
declamed against all Statuaries and Painte^, as Artists of the Commonwealth of
darkness.

But, a Reason there is, in that command, which does always oblige, and the
force of it reaches to mankind. Two things, I suppose, are perpetually
forbidden by it.

The first is, the making of any Image of any false God, and the honoring of
it, in that quality, when it is made. I say in that quality, for it is not
unlawful to carve or paint the Images of false gods, by way of story, or in
order to the exposing of them in the particulars in which they are ridiculous;
or to value them, if they be ancient, and done by good hands, as rarities of
price; and he has little of judgment or charity, who condemns every Antiquary
as an Idolater. The Genevians have, usually, here, in their Houses, the
Pictures of Calvin and Luther, and such others, together with those of the Pope
and the Devil, spending vainly, their breath against the Light which they had
set up. And we suffer, in England, the Pictures of false gods in the Ovid of
Mr. Sandys, as well as they do, in Italy, the Images of Cartari.

The second thing is, the attempting the representation of the true God, and
the worshipping of it as his Image. I say the attempting of it, to avoid the
Cavil of the Author of (...); for he mocketh at this ground of the command I.
V. C. (...). Stilling^leeton. p. 45, 46.
, namely, because Gods infinite essence cannot be represented, as a reason
which idly establishes a Law from the impossibility of the breaking of it. And
he, profanely, compares it to the reason of the Monsieur, who forbad his Bowyer
to make him shafts of a Pigs Tail, because no shafts could be made of it. And
yet it is a reason insisted on by the very Catechism of the Council of Trent
above cited Cat. ex decr. Couc. Trid. p. 394. cited here p. 265.
. But who knows not that such an Image was forbidden not properly to be made or
perfected, but to be attempted to be made; because the workman would fail in
his attempt, not only to his own shame, but the dishonor of the true God?

The Idols of the Heathen might be represented: For being nothing but creatures
of God, or Phantasms, the creatures of their brains; they were capable of some
resemblance. They appeared to the eye, and in a Picture in the fancy; and,
consequently, might be imitated by man's Art. But the essence of God is like
nothing that is finite; neither like Man, nor like the Heavens, which latter
Diodorus most falsely and irrationally makes to be the God of Moses; adding
that therefore he forbad all Images of him in humane figure Diod. Sic. ap.
Photii Biblioth. p. 1151.
; whilst he forbad the likeness of any thing in the Heavens, Earth, or Waters.
Nor can Gods essence so appear by it self, as to show its very self. We have a
notion of God, but no proper Idea of him, for that imports in the force of
the word, an object with its Imagery perceived in the brain. Hence the Synod of
Nice it self did not favor any Images of the Divinity Syn. Nic. 2. Act. 3. p.
184, 185. a Theodoro Patr. Hierosol. -- (...) h. e. (...).
.

But ere I proceed further in this Argument, I think it necessary to premise a
distinction of Images, and to consider how much or how little of the Idol is in
each of them.

Of Images then I consider four sorts, taking the liberty to call them Images
of Analogy, of Memory, of Representation, of Presence.

By Images of Analogy, I mean such Objects as bear some Metaphorical proportion
to some excellencies of God, though they be not the proper Images, Statues, or
Pictures of them. Such an Image was that of Jupiters, remembered by Vignola in
his Discourse of the five Orders in Building. He mentions there a Capital, in
which were the Images of four Eagles instead of Stalks; and instead of Fruits
and Flowers, four Jupiters faces with Thunderbolts under them. A Representation
this may be judged of the power, piercing eye, quick execution of will, in
their own Jove, in the four Quarters of the World. Such an Analogical Image of
the true God do some Papists T. G. Catholics no Idolaters. c. 4. p. 61.
esteem, the Statue or Picture of an aged man, whose years and experience, are
apt to signify the Eternity and Wisdom of God; and that of a Dove, to signify
his purity and simplicity, in a manner suitable to our conception. In both
these Instances, I think they are mistaken. Daniel (as shall be showed in the
last Chapter) did not mean the Godhead, or the Father, by the Ancient of Days.
Neither ought his transient Vision which had something humane mixed with it, be
made a standing-pattern in Religion. Such Visions being impressed on the fancy,
could not be there represented without some earthly Imagery, which the
enlightened reason of the Prophet could separate from the Diviner part, which is
the thing principally intended. Now to bring the whole scene with its glory and
its imperfection, before the eyes of the people, in Gods standing-worship, is
to confound in their Imaginations, things sacred and secular, and to adulterate
their Devotion. Then for the Image of a Dove, the Text in the Gospels proves
no more, than that the Spirit imitated the gentle hovering of that Bird: And
the learned think it did so in the appearance of a bright cloud, hovering with
gentle motion over the waters, and the Person of our Lord baptized in them.

It is plain by the words of St. Austine S. Aug. de Fide and Symb. c. 7.
, that he thought it Idolatrous to contemplate God in our mind, according to
the extent of those expressions which we use in speaking of him. And the like
certainly he judged of contemplating God according to Dreams and Visions, which
are partly humane, and partly divine. Thus then that great Light of Africa
discourses: We believe -- that [Christ] sits at the right hand of the
Father. Yet thence are we not to think that the Father is circumscribed with
humane form, so as to occur to our mind contemplating of him as one that has a
right and a left hand, or as one sitting with bended knees; left we fall into
that sacriledg for which the Apostle condemns those who turned the glory of
the Incorruptible God into the similitude of corruptible man. Such a Statue is
not without impiety, erected to God in a Christian Temple, much more in the
heart, where the Temple of God is truly situate, if it be purged from earthly
concupiscence and error.

St. Austin then (as Spalatensis Spal. de Republica Eccles. vol. 3. l. 7. c.
12. p. 293.
reflecteth on these words) would have advised that the Visions of Daniel, and
other of that nature, produced by Bellarmine, should be contemplated with the
mind, and not be pictured, especially in Churches; that they should be resolved
into their true signification, and not impressed upon the brain; lest through
the Picture of an Old man, or Dove, the defects of Age, wings and bill, possess
the imagination.

There is danger in using any Images of Animals, as Statues or Pictures of God;
for they will be made not Images only of Analogy, but of representation, by the
ignorant; whilst shape and life are personally set forth. But there is not so
great danger in the Images of things without life, especially if they be flat
Pictures, not Protuberant Statues, nor Pictures which the Artist has expressed
with roundness. The worse and the more flat the work is, the less danger there
is of its abuse. Titian has painted the Virgin and the Child Jesus so very
roundly, that (as Sir Henry Wotton a very good judge both of the pictures and
dispositions of men, says Sir Hen. Wottons Letters. p. 315.
of it) a man knows not whether to call it a piece of Sculpture of Picture.

In some kinds of Pictures, if there be found analogy, and that analogy be
discreetly expressed [as by the name Jehovah, or according to the Jewish
modesty, Adonai, incircled with clouds and rays of glorious Light;] I know no
sin in the making of it, or contemplating in it, in a Metaphorical way, some of
the Perfections of the infinite God, in such manner expressed. A devout man
would not put a Paper with such an impression, to vile uses: He would think it
fitter for his Closet than for his Chamber of Grimaces; though he would not
think it the representation of God, or give it Divine honor, by inward
estimation, or outward signs.

By Images of memory, I mean such Objects as contain in them no analogy to the
Divine Perfections, nor any pretended representation of them; but yet are apt
to put us in mind of God, being erected as Pillars or Monuments in places where
he has done some great and excellent work. Such was the Pillar of Jacob; and in
the making of such there is no unlawfulness; nor in exhibiting before them such
signs of honor as are proper to be showed before a monument of Divine Wisdom,
Power, or Goodness; unless in times and places where other such Statues are
erected to false gods, and the erection and honor of them, is by common
construction, the mark of their Worshippers. Such Images of memory are often
exhibited by God himself. Such was the pillar of Salt, into which the body of
Lots Wife was converted; a pillar of Remembrance of Gods justice, and of
admonition to them who look back toward the pollutions which they have
escaped. Such was the adust earth which Solinus speaks of, in those places
where the inhabitants of Sodom were destroyed by Sulphurous flames from
Heaven: though it was no pillar, yet was it a monument of Divine power, and
severity toward their unnatural lusts. And he that carves, engraves, or paints
these holy Histories, may be an useful Artist.

By Images of Representation, I mean Statues or Pictures made by art, with
intent to exhibit the likeness of the person. The making and worshipping such
Images of him, God himself condemns; appealing to the world, whether there be
any thing in nature to which he can be resembled. Such a Representation is
undue, though made according to the best pattern in the visible world; and much
more if it be made in viler, and as the Heathen were wont to do, in the Images
of Priapus and Attis See Pign. de Magn. Deum. Matr. etc. p. 1.
, in immoral figures. And the Worshipper who gives to it veneration as to an
Image of God, does highly dishonor him, by changing his essential glory into
such similitudes. And it is not so ignominious for Caesar to be painted in the
similitude of an Ass, or of the worst Monster in the Sculptures of Licetus, as
for God to be represented in the pretended likeness of his Deity, by David or
Solomon. Such Images, therefore, the Council of Trent expressly disowneth,
professing the spirituality, invisibility, and infinity of God, which nothing
visible can represent. By such Images (as rightly S. Athan. Vol. 1. op p. 15:
S. Athanasius) the mean Arts of the Painter and Statuary are exalted above the
Maker of this beautiful Universe. Remarkable, here, is that of Pliny, as the
sense of a very Atheist. It is a weakness (said he) to search after the
Effigies or Form of God Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 7. p. 2, 3.
. Whoever is God (if there be any other than Nature) he is everywhere, all
sense, all sight, all hearing, all soul, all spirit, All Himself.

By Images of Presence, I mean Pictures or Statues framed and honored as
places of the especial residence and nighness of the Divine Power. Such I have
showed the Statues of the Heathen to be. I know not whether they judged them to
resemble Jupiter or Juno, Mars or Venus (for the resemblance has been generally
such as pleased the Statuary or Painter): but it is certain that they esteemed
them Shechinah's of God, or Demons. The Poet Excessere O^nes adytis arisque
relictis, Dii quibus Imperium hoc steterat --
describes the Roman Empire as forsaken by its Celestial Patrons, when he
represents them flying from their Altars and Temples. And the Ambrachienses
(in Livy Tit. Live. Hist. l. 38. See Herald. Annot. ad Arnob. l. 6. p. 252.
) complaining in the Senate against Fulvius Nobilior, who had spoiled their
Temples and Images; protest with lamentation, That they had no Gods left them
whom they might adore, and to whom they might present their requests. And the
Oracle at Delphos confessed to Augustus, That it was a vain thing for any
thenceforth to repair thither, because Me P^er Hebraeus -- Cedere sede jubet --
Aris ergo dehinc Tacitus discedito nostris.
an Hebrew Child had commanded the Demon back to Hell. And sometimes in their
superstitious folly, they chained down their Statues, that their gods might not
remove.

Now such Images are condemned by S. Paul, who, by telling the Gentiles, that
God dwelt not in Temples made with hands; did both intimate that they thought
them his Mansion-houses, and plainly reprove their erroneous practice.

The making of such Houses or Statues of Presence to the Infinite Godhead,
which fills all things, and operateth when and where it pleases See Arnob.
l. 6. p. 203, 204.
, is an high presumption; a confinement of the Deity, or his operation, by our
will and fancy. Wherefore the worship of them, being the worship of an object
for Gods Shechinah, which is not his Shechinah, is idolatrous, or a robbing of
the Creator, by paying homage to the Creature.

Of the like Idolatry are they guilty, who pretend to some kinds of natural
Magic. They think God has put certain signatures on his creatures, or suffered
such to be put on them by Art, as tokens of his miraculous operation by them.
Thus did the Author of that Book which the credulous Camillus Camill. Leonardus
de Lapid. l. 3. c. 17. p. 223.
believes to be Solomon's. He thought that a stone, with the figure of a man
sitting on a Plough with a little neck, and long beard, with four men lying in
his neck, and a Fox in one hand, and a Vultur in another; being hanged about
ones neck, would be efficacious to the fruitfulness of Plantations, and the
finding of Treasures. Now by what other name can we truly call that Trust he
placed in such Figures, than that of Superstitious and Idolatrous Hope, whilst
God was no more present at them, than at the most formless stone in the
streets, unless by his Malediction?

And Protestants have a suspicion of some such Trust (though not put in an
Image of the Godhead, forbidden at Trent) yet put in the creatures consecrated
in the Roman Church; whilst they set them apart in such forms as this: Bless
and sanctify this creature, that See Bened. Cruc. Sal. Aqu. Alt. portat. etc.
by it [that is, sure, by thy virtue in it] Devils may repelled, and Tempests
scattered.

CHAP. XII. Of the Idolatry charged on the Papists in the worship of Images.
PART. 1. Of the worship of the Image of Christ.
THUS much, then, of the Image of the Godhead, or of God the Father and its
worship. I pass to the consideration of an Image, the making and veneration of
which, admits of more apology, That of the Word Incarnate.

This Image has been made, sometimes by way of Analogy, and sometimes by way of
Representation. An Analogical Picture of Christ was made by Paulinus, who
caused him to be figured in the form of a Lamb, as a type of his meek and
innocent sufferings. A Picture harmless in it self, as the creature whence
'twas taken; yet apt to beget, in weak and foolish minds, not the mere notion
of Christ's humility and innocence, but a phantasm of him in the form of a
beast. Wherefore, though this way of painting Christ was most usual before the
sixth Synod, or third Council of Constantinople; yet the Fathers of that
Council saw reason to forbid it Council. 3. Constable. in Can. 82. ap. Conc.
Quinisext p. 1177. vol. 5. c. Max. See Consult. Cass. de Imag. etc. p. 165 and
Taras. in Syn. Nic. 2 p. 165. Act. 3. C. D.
, and to require the Governors of the Church to take care for the future, that
the Image of Christ might be expressed in human portraict.

And, in such Form, some Pictures of Christ might have place in Churches in the
Sixth or Seventh Centuries. But Statues, it may be, were not so soon received
as Pictures; and it is manifest, that in the earlier times of St. Austin, they
were no part of the Inventory of the Church. For after this manner it is that
he argues against the Heathens, where he Commenteth on those words of David,
The Idols of the Gentiles are silver and gold the work of men's hands. They
(says he) worship that which themselves made of Gold and Silver. For our
selves we indeed have many Utensils of this matter or metal which we use in the
celebration of the holy Sacraments. And being consecrated, they are called holy
in honor of him, whom to our souls health we serve by them. And we must
confess these instruments or vessels are the work of men's hands; but have they
mouths and speak not, eyes and see not? do we pray to them; though in the use
of them we supplicate God?

However, seeing Christ was made in the form of a man, I know not why that form
which appeared to the eye might not be painted by St. Luke himself without any
immoral stain to his Pencil. He that found no fault with the Image of Caesar
stamped on his Coin, has said nothing which forbids his own representation;
with respect, I mean, to his state of manhood here on earth. For that is not
pretended to be the picture or image of God-man, any more than the image of any
of the Caesar's, is pretended to be the picture of their souls; but it is the
external resemblance of so much of his person as was visible in flesh.

The Controversy then is not so much about the making as about the worshipping
of the Image of Christ, either as his Image in his state on earth, or which
seems very absurd, as his portraict now in Glory. For though the signs of his
Passion may prepare us for Prayers, yet the addresses themselves are made to
him as he is glorious in the Heavens, where his estate is unduly typified by a
Crucifix which represents him in Golgotha, and not in triumph at Gods right
hand, where his brightness cannot be expressed by a pencil of light it self;
though one very lately reviving the error of the Manichees, has made the Sun,
his Throne, and the right hand of God R. O Man's Mortality. Amstera. 1643. p.
33, 34. Without doubt Christ must be in the most excellent, glorious, and
heavenly part of [Heaven] which is the Sum. -- Fitly may that be called the
Righthand of God, by which through Christ in him we live, and move, and have
our being, etc.
.

The Crucifix was made of old, and admitted into private houses, and at last
into Churches. But it was first used as a Picture for the help of memory, not
as a statue in formal place, on a Pedestal, at which it might be worshipped.
Hear in this matter St. Gregory the great, a man of some insight into the
practice of the Church. This is part of his Letter to Secundinus Greg. Mag. 17.
Ep. 53.
. We have sent to you Images, -- and we do not amiss, if by visible things we
represent things not seen. -- I am persuaded that you desire not the image of
Christ with intent to worship it as a God, but that by remembrance of the Son
of God, you may be more warmed in his love whose image you think you look upon.
And for our selves, we are not prostrate before it as before a God, but we
worship him whom we call to mind by his Image, not as born or crucified, but as
sitting on his Throne. And whilst the Picture, like a writing, brings to our
memory the Son of God, it either rejoices our mind with the Resurrection of
Christ, or asswageth it by his Passion.

The same St. Gregory S. Greg. M. Ep. 109.
, when Serenus Bishop of Marseille, had in an holy zeal broken those Images
which he saw adored, does wish he had not broken them, but that preventing the
worship of them, he had still retained them as Historical Monuments helpful to
the memories of the vulgar. I am not against any thing which may be serviceable
as an help to devotion. Men stand enough in need. But there are better helps by
far than these: And in the Church which is the house of oral and living
instruction, they serve not much further than for ornament, unless the
Lay People come and view them attentively before the beginning of public
service. After that, the Objects which cause the eye to gaze, prevent too much
the attention of the ear. And yet to say with men who run into extremes, that
Devotional Pictures are no helps to excite memory and passion, is to forget
that they are called mute Poems; to speak against common sense; and to impute
less to a Crucifix than to the Tomb of our friend, or to a thread on our
finger. They may be useful as Monitors in a Christian Commonwealth where their
worship is plainly and frequently forbidden, and by all understood to be so
prohibited. And it was high superstition in those who in our late unhappy
Revolutions, defaced such Pictures and brake down such Crosses as Authority had
suffered to remain entire, whilst it forbad the worship of them; and was in
that particular so well obeyed that none of them (it may be) ever knew one man
of the Communion of the Church of England to have been prostrate before a
Cross, and in that posture to have spoken to it.

In the Church of Rome there is greater pretense for that violence which vulgar
Reformers presume to be holy. For the Council of Trent retains Images in
Churches, as Objects of Veneration, and the practice both of Priests and people
does strangely dilate the words of that Council. The Article of the Creed of
Trent is this: I most firmly Conc. Trid. Symb. p 944.
profess, that the Images of Christ, and of the Mother of God, always a Virgin,
as also those of other Saints are to be had and retained [especially in
Churches Decret. Conc. Trid. de Invoc. etc. p. 895.
]: and that due honor and veneration is to be given to them.

Due honor and veneration are in themselves modest words: and where we admit
the Pictures and Images of Christ, we refuse not the honor which is due to
them. We do not choose to put them in vile places, we do not use them in vile
offices; we esteem them as ornaments; we value them as the Images of persons
more honorable than our Prince or our Friend: We use them as Remembrancers of
the great mystery of man's Redemption which we cannot too frequently be reminded
of. We condemn the indiscreet zeal of our late pretended Reformers, who judged
him worthy sequestration who had kept a Picture of Christ in his Parlour, and
confessed it was to put him in mind of his Savior Cent. 1: of Scand. Min.
Sect. 82. p. 38.
.

We honor such Pictures in a negative sense, by being unwilling to have them
contemned. We think them not fit to be placed in the Pavements of Churches,
where (as St. Bernard in his Apology to Guilielmus Abbas complains) they are
trodden under foot. Where people spit into the mouth of the Image of an Angel,
and tear the face of the Image of a Saint, with their clouted shoon. We observe
and commend the discretion of many Romish Synods, since that of Trent Council.
Mechlin. p. 801. Turon. p. 1019, Mexic. p. 1297. Tolos. p. 1400. Aven. p. 1450.
Mechl. p. 1556. Narbon. p. 1581.
, which have made Laws against lascivious, improper, fabulous, absurd Images.
We inveigh not against the first Council of Milan Conc. Milev. 1. p. 251.
for requiring the Ordinary to summon Statuaries, Engravers and Painters; and
to require them to use their art to the dignity of the Prototype. We condemn
those Zealots among the Albigenses (if such there were) who are said, in scorn,
to have framed deformed Images, and to have dishonored the Virgin in a
monstrous statue with one eye Lucas Tudensis l 2. cont. Albig. c. 9. and
Cornel. Curtius de Clavis Domin. c. 5. p. 75.
. The zeal of the Church of England has been much more temperate and discreet,
and so (God be thanked) it continues at this day. It is not rude to any thing
set apart for Gods service: it would not have a consecrated Chalice quaffed in
as a common Bowl; it abhors the memory of Julian Prefect of the East, and
Uncle to the Apostate, who showed his irreverence toward the Eucharist, by
spurning and sitting upon the Communion-Plate of the great Church of Antioch.

But the Council of Trent seems to mean something more than all this, by its
due honor and veneration. It does not indeed mean absolute Latria, or direct
Divine honor to be exhibited to the Image it self. It has otherwise explained
it self; and it condemns such worship of them. It would not have the people
believe Conc. Trid. Decret. de Invoc. etc. p. 895.
that there is any Divinity in them, or virtue for which they should be
worshipped; or that any thing is to be asked of them; or that trust is to be
put in Images after the manner of the Gentiles. A like caution is given by the
Synod of Cambray Council. Camer. de Imag. c. 3. p. 178.
. Let the people be taught, says a Decree of that Synod, that there is no
worship due to the Image, either for the matter, or the beauty, or the price
and value of its work, or for any other thing which may be in the Artifice or
substance of the Image, but to the thing signified to which this worship and
honor is especially referred. In like manner they are to be admonished, that
the mind of the person that prays, or worshippeth, is to be carried to the
thing signified, and not to the sign which neither hears, nor sees, nor
perceives.

And some of the Church of Rome do pursue this caution in their Manuals of
instruction which they give to the people. And it would be very strange if they
should herein have been defective; seeing the very Heathens were not. We
worship not (said they) the very Images themselves Lact. l. 2. Div Instit. c.
2. p. 141. See Arnob. l. 6. p. 203. Non (inquiunt) materias AEris, Auri, etc.
per se Deos esse, etc. sed cos in bis colimus, etc.
, but those whom they represent, and to whose names they are sacred. H. T. in
his Manual called the Abridgment of Christian Doctrine, proposes this Question
H. T. Abridg. of Christian Doctr. in Expos. of the 1. Command. p. 118, 119.
to his Disciple: Is it lawful to give any honor to the Images of Christ and
his Saints? And then he teaches him to make this Answer: Yes; an inferior or
relative honor, inasmuch as they represent unto us heavenly things; but yet
not Gods honor, nor yet the honor due to his Saints.

The same Author a while after, propounds this Query: Do not Catholics pray
to Images and Relics? And then to this he answers: No, by no means: We pray
before them indeed, (to keep us from distraction, and to help our memories in
the expression and apprehension of Celestial things) but not to them; for we
know well that they can neither see, nor hear, nor help us.

There is some measure of sobriety in these words; but some other of their
writers ought to have had their Pens removed from them, with as much reason as
we take away the swords of madmen. Amongst them I reckon Cornelius Curtius the
Augustinian. This Romanist thus spends some of the heat of his zeal Curtius
de Clavis Domin. c. 12. p. 130, 131.
. I care not at all for Luther, Calvin, Wickliff, and that most filthy
Magdeburgian sink of impudence and blasphemy. I say it, and say it again, that
the most sacred Nails of our Redeemer do merit worship, even the highest
worship.

But we have heard better things from the Council of Trent, and some who follow
it. And by such declarations their Church denies to the Image it self the
worship of the heart in Prayer, Thanksgiving and trust; and teaches us to
interpret the Forms used in their Letter to them, as not to them directed De
Lingend. vol. 3. Conc. de doior. Christi. p. 627. -- Flagitemus auxilium e
coelo, and sanctam Crucem adoremus. O Crux Ave.
. Such a Form is that of, Hail In Brev. Rominfra Hebd. Quart. Quadr. p. 317.
And in the Litany of the Cross. p. 100, etc. Ed. Paris. 1642.
holy Cross, our only hope -- the scepter of the Son, -- the Bed of Grace. --
Increase righteousness in the pious, and to the guilty vouchsafe pardon. All
this it seems, howsoever it sounds, must be meant not to the very matter and
form of the Cross, which Dr. Bilson of the full Redempt. of mankind by Christ's
death, page 4. The Church of Rome has wedded a great part of her Devotion to
the Cross of Christ; but under that name she adoreth the matter and form of the
Cross.
Dr. Bilson will have to be adored in the Church of Rome, but only to Christ
crucified. And this also I suppose they would suggest by the Cross pictured in
their Books of Devotion, and particularly in the front of their Missal of Paris
Miss. Romans Par. 1660.
, together with these words of the Apostle, God forbid that I should glory save
in the Cross of our Lord. Where St. Paul intended not to magnify the wood of
the Cross, but the Sacrifice upon it. And this way of speaking used by the
Apostle is followed in our Litany, in which we desire of Christ deliverance by
his Cross, explaining it by his Passion.

But still there are outward signs of Veneration given to the Image it self for
Christ's sake; not indeed as brass, or silver, or gold, or wood, or stone, or as
a piece of excellent Art; but yet as it relates to him, and is his image. Given
however they are to the image, though they are ultimately referred to Christ.
Due honor, says Conc. Trid. Decr. de Invoc. etc. p. 895. and Leont. in Syn.
Nic. 2. p. 243. B. -- (...).
the Council of Trent, is to be given to them, -- and the honor which is given
to them is referred to the Prototypes. We Christians (said Leontius in the
Synod Leont. in Syn. Nic. 2. Act. 4. p. 235, 236. -- (...). --
of Nice) adoring the figure of the Cross, honor not the nature of the wood,
but the sign, and ring, and image of Christ. And again, Id. ibid. p. 245.
he that fears God honors and adoreth Christ as the Son of God, and the
figure of his Cross, and the images of his Saints. In Images (says (g) the
Synod of Bourges) we worship not the matter, but him that was represented. As
if it were one Act, and the Image were worshipped together with Christ's
Godhead, as is the Humanity, by reason of its Personal union with it. They that
speak thus, have deprived themselves of the usual Evasion that the Church of
Rome owneth one God only, and therefore cannot by her own principle, worship an
Image with absolute Latria. For in the worship of that one God, or the Divinity
of Jesus Christ, God-man, they take in the worship of the Image or Relick, as
of a body made one with him. To that effect there are dangerous sayings in the
second Synod of Nice, related by Photius. It was there said by Adrian from
Epiphanius Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, that a King having his Statue or
Image is not presently two Kings, but one together with his image Conc. Nic. 2.
Act. 4. p. 261, 262. There the Image says to the King, (...), etc.
. It was there affirmed (though not particularly, and in those words decreed)
That by the worship of Images -- (...).
, which seems divided, we are carried up undividedly unto the indivisible
Deity. And again, that in such worship (...), etc.
, we are carried up into a certain unitive and conjunctive vision. As if we
adhered to God by clinging with devout embraces to an Image made by humane Art.
Yet this in effect is said by many of their Doctors, who tell us that Latria is
given to the Image not absolutely, but relatively, not by it self See L^ le
Blanc's Theses. Tb. de Ec. To. Doct. circa cult. Imag. p. 342.
but by accident, as they are considered in conjunction with the Prototype, and
making one thing with it. Suarez himself Tom. 3. in 3. Thom. disp. 54. Sect. 3.
is one of these rash men, and affirms that the Prototype in the Image, and
the Image for the Prototype may be adored with one interior and exterior Act.
But amongst the Honourers of Images and Relics, there are not many sure who
fly higher in their devotion than Cornelius Curtius. He does not say things we
hear every day, and therefore let us listen to him a while in this present
Argument. Let us now see (says that Idolizer of the Nails of the Cross Corn.
Curtius de Clovis Domin. c. 12. p. 133, 134, 135. Ed. Antv. 1670.
) what kind of Veneration we owe to these Nails: Divines distinguish three
kinds of Worships which are wont to be expressed by the Greek words of Latria,
Hyperdulia, and Dulia; which because they terminate either in God, or in
intelligent natures, therefore none of these do properly belong to the Nails,
as being things without life or reason, and consequently not capable of such
worships. Wherefore to speak to them as such, and to ask any thing of them,
would be a sign of madness and superstition. So all Catholics unanimously
conclude Here he cites D. Thom. 22. q. 91. a. 3, etc.
. Notwithstanding this, because we may, and we usually do adjoin the Nails to
Christ in our cogitation Here he says vide Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
, hence it comes to pass that by reason of this connection, we may give them a
certain right [or direct] worship: for if we contemplate his Humanity, we then
give to the Nails the worship of Hyperdulia: If we think of his Divinity, we
owe to them the Honor of Latria. But for Dulia we bid it keep its distance, as
being less worthy. Neither ought it to seem a wonder to any man, that we give
that Honor to Iron, which we acknowledge to be proper to God alone; for this is
not given to this metal in respect of its nature, but in regard of the person
by whose contact [or union into oneness of object] it deservedly obtains that
high honor. This is strange language from the Provincial for Belgium: But the
Fathers of Trent spoke more modestly, and we will take their words into further
consideration. They allow external signs of worship both before, and to an
Image. The external signs mentioned by them Council. Trid. Sess. 25. p. 895. --
Imag. quas osculamur, and coram quibus caput aperimus, and procumbimus, etc.
, are saluting, uncovering the Head, kneeling, bowing or prostration. And the
Synod of Cambray teaches Council. Camer. de Imag. c. 1. p. 177.
that the external signs of that Honor, Worship, and Invocation which they
refer to the thing signified, such as are bending of the knee, and other signs
of the like kind, are given rightly to Images. And it would not have this seem
absurd or impious to any man, whilst by the signs they worship the Prototypes.

This declaration of honoring the Image it self Mr. Thorndike taxes Just
weights and measures. c. 19. p. 128.
as an idle thing; he might also have proceeded, and called it perilous, and a
means of scandal. For the external honor of Christ is his honor, though not
the only honor which is due to him: And sometimes Hypocrites promote his
Honor in the world by the mere shows of it; and sometimes men blindly devout,
betray it by exhibiting the signs of it where they are not due.

It is true, that salutation is both a Civil and a Religious ceremony.
Coecilius in Minutius Foelix, pointing to the Image of Serapis, Kissed his
hand, in token of his devotion to that Idol. And the Romans were wont, when
they complemented one another, first to reach forth their hand, and then
drawing it up to their mouth, to kiss it, and this was called, adoring, and
venerating of them. So Tacitus says of Otho Tac. Hist. l. 1. c. 36. Nec.
deerat Otho protendens manus, adorare v^lgum, jacere Oscula, etc. And elsewhere
of Nero. -- Coetum -- man^ veneratus ^st.
that he stretched out his hand and adored the people, and threw his Kisses
among them: And of Nero, that he worshipped or venerated the Assembly with his
hand. Also Bowing, Kneeling, Prostration are equivocal signs: and as we use
them toward God, so we do the like toward Princes, and before their empty
Chairs of State. Before them, I say, for to bow to them, though it be not
Idolatry, yet it is a debasement of our reasonable persons. For that external
sign is the sign of an homage not due to them, but to the absent Prince of whom
they put us in mind: and the Ceremony interprets and declares that inward
homage and submission to them whose Chairs they are.

Now, though such signs are thus equivocal, yet they are so determined, by
their Objects, and Circumstances, to their particular sense; that a weak
capacity can scarce commit an error in their interpretation. He that sees a
Cross made by a Shepherd on one of his Sheep, does not think it signifies alike
with the Cross impression which a Priest, or metaphorical Shepherd, makes at
the Holy Font on the Forehead of a Child whom he has just incorporated into
his Flock. He that sees another saluting him by pulling off his Hat, and
bowing, and crying, God save you; cannot think he is, thereby, made a God or an
Idol; but he interprets all this as a sign of respect according to the usage of
his Country. But if he sees a second James Naylor riding on an Ass in triumph
into Bristol, and hears the women cry Hosannah, and sees them bow their knees;
he has cause to believe that they are both mad and idolatrous: so much there
is of Idolatry, in that which the Quakers judged Religion; and so little of it
in that civility which they think is irreligion, and the worship of the
creature.

He thas sees an Artist in the Shop of a Statuary, kneeling before the Image of
Hercules, and finishing his Foot, will look upon him as a man employed in his
mechanical Trade. But if he finds him in a Church, at the hours of Prayer,
kneeling, or prostrate, with uncovered Head, with Beads in his Hands, and Tears
in his Eyes, and Kisses from his Mouth, at the Pedestal of a Crucifix, or of an
Image of Christ; [an Image set up for that use; an Image consecrated Rit. Romans
p. 244, 245. Council. Bitur. Tit. 11, Cant. 2. p. 1080.
, and perfumed with consecrated Incense; and rendered illustrious with
consecrated Tapers Missal. Romans in Sanc. Sabb. p. 187, etc.
;] he will not then think him at his ordinary work, but at his earnest devotion.

Now it may here be properly demanded of a Romanist, whether the sign of
bowing, kneeling, or prostration, be exhibited to the Image alone, to God
alone, or to both of them? and if to both, whether in equal or unequal degrees?

It cannot be said that it is done only to the Image, as a sign of civil
respect, and not to God, because the man is exercising himself in such
devotions as have God only (the Romanists confessing it) for their ultimate
Object. He is at his Prayers to God, or some person in the Trinity; and
kneeling, or bowing at such a time is as much the external part of worship, as
the submission of the mind is the part internal.

It cannot be said by a true Romanist, to be done to God only, because the
Great Synod, and the Rituals of that Church, declare such external Ceremonies
to be addresses to the very Images as Images of Christ Such Ceremonies the
Synod of Nice seems generally to mean, when it presses the (...), worship or
adoration of Images, i. e. the veneration of the body of which men only can
take cognizance. Such veneration the Council of Trent (as has appeared
already) does give by her decree, to the very Images, with regard to their
divine Relation, though not in respect to their matter or form. The Missal
commands the Priest, after having fixed the Cross in a place prepared for it
before the Altar Miss. Romans Feria 6. in P 1. rasc p. 182.
to pull off his Shoos and adore the Cross, [that is, not orare ad (the old
derivation of adorare) to pray to it, for it prescribes no form there, but to
bow to it], and then to kiss it. The Pontifical indeed, speaks sometimes of
worshipping before an Image Po^t. Romans Lug. 1542. part. 2. p. 166. in Bened.
Imag. Sanct. -- and presta ut quicunque coram illa ipsum gloriosissimum
Apostolum tuum, vel martyrem, vel confessorem, etc.
; but, in other places, it r^quireth the worship of it. For so, in the
benediction of a n^w Cross Pontif. fol. 164, 165. Tum Pontifex, flexis, ante
crucem, genibus, tpsam devote adrat, etc.
, the Bishop is required, once and again, to bow his Knees before it and to
adore it devoutly. Nay, once Po^tif. part. 3. fol. 204. Ord. ad recip. process.
Imperat. -- Crux. Legati, quod debetur ei Latria, ^rita dextris.
it declares that the worship Latria is due to the Cross.

It cannot be said by a Romanist, who regards his Cre^d, that this external
address is made to Christ and his Image in ^qual degree; for that were to give
Honor properly Divine unto a Creature; a sign of Honor being Honor: An Act
of acknowledgement in our selves, and a means of procuring it amongst other
persons.

They must then say, if they will speak with show of consistence, that the mind
does apply the act of incurvation to the Image as a sign of inferior honor,
and to Christ as a sign of that honor which is supreme. That the Case is like
to that of Naaman before his conversion unto Judaism: for then he worshipped
the Idol of Rimmon with religious worship, and yet by the same act of external
adoration or bowing, he did testify his civil respect to his Master that
leaned on him. But their worship is not so circumstantiated as that of
Naaman's. He doubtless did some other homage separately from his Master, to
show his supposed Religion: and they have none leaning on them, (unless by
accident;) by complement to whom they may interpret the sign, in part, of a
civil respect.

But how does one external sign split, in each single exhibition of it, into
two significations, appear to signify doubly, to the common spectators? That
no mistake may be committed, the Roman Assemblies had need be so many
Conventions of great Clerks and wise Schoolmen. But, in all Assemblies, how few
are good Judges? And how many Spies are there Jewish, and Mohammedan, and
Heathen, to whom it is morally impossible to know their distinctions? And how
many of the same Communion have gross and stupid minds and devotions begotten
of ignorance? And what uncharitableness is it to make a Ditch in the daily
walks of the Blind, and the Weak, and the inadvertent? and what a scandal is
this in India, or China, where the Gestures are seen, and the Books that
explain them are not understood or handled by one of a thousand? And where
their own worship of Images makes them think the Christians not far from their
Religion?

They who use Images in their devotions, and are as discreet in their devotions
as that usage will give them leave; these profess that they bow not to the
Image at all, but only to God before it [for thus S. Gregory, Durandus, Halcot,
Biel seem to profess]. And it is honor enough to the Image, that our devotion
is on choice, done at the foot of it. They ought to profess that when they kiss
the Image, though the external sign of worship touches it and adheres to it,
yet it does not so adhere to it in the quality of an object which it
terminateth on, but as a kind of restingplace in the way, whilst it cannot
reach its journeysend by the body, but by the mind only. That being moved by
holy passion toward the blessed Jesus, they salute the Image of Christ, not
being able to reach his person: and they may illustrate their meaning by the
wish of Thomasinus, who passionately breaks into this language Thomas. de
vita, Bibliotheca, and Musaeo Laur. Pignorii. p. 82.
; O that there were any man to whom I might be beholding for the Images of
Molinus and Pignorius, men to be by me eternally honored; that I might kiss
the Portraict of those whom I cannot embrace in person. They may further thus
far apologize for the Heathens, and say, that when they worshipped the Sun by
the kissing of their hand, they did not so much kiss their hand as the presumed
deity whom they could not reach. They may add, that when they kiss the Image of
the Son, they exhibit this Ceremony, not only as an effect, but as a sign of
their love to him. For so a man that kisseth the Hemm of a Garment, does in
truth, but touch the Hemm, and offer it as it is a sign of observance unto the
person. The materiality of the Act reaches the Image, the formality the
Prototype.

In England, in the days of Henry the Seventh, some Romanists spoke not so
rashly as Bellarmine, who without necessity imposed on him by the Decree of
Trent, asserted a proper veneration of Images Bell. de Eccl. Triumph. l. 2. c.
21. See Spal. de Rep. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12. p. 294, etc. where he resuteth the
Arg. of Bell. for the Rel. worship of Images.
, as objects terminating that worship in themselves, and not as sustaining the
place of the Prototype. Amongst them I find an ancient Author who has written
in Folio an Exposition of the Ten Commandments in the way of a Dialogue betwixt
Dives and Pauper. And because he speaks soberly in this Argument, and is not in
many hands, I will here transcribe some places out of him First precepte. chap.
1.
. Dives. Whereof serve these Images, I would they were brent all. Pauper. They
serve for three things; for they be ordained to stere mannys mind to think on
cristes incarnation, and on his passion and on his lyvinge, and on other
seintes lyvinge. Also they ben ordained to styre man's affection, and his heart
to devocion. For often man is more steryd by sight than be herynge or redynge.
Also they be ordained to be a token and a book to the leude people, that they
may read in Ymagery and painture, that Clerks read in in the Book, as the
Law says. de consecra. distinct. 3. prolatum. where we find that a bishop
destroyed Images as thou would do, and forfendyd that no man should worship
images. He was accused to the Pope Saint Gregory, which blamyd him gretely for
that he had so distroyed the images; but utterly he prised him for 'he
forfendyd them to worship images.

The 2. chaptre.

Dives. How should I read in the book of paynture, and of ymagery. Pauper.
when thou see the image of the Crucifixe, thynk on him that died on the
cross for thy sin -- Take heed by the image how his head was crowned with a
garlonde of thorns -- Take heed by the image how his arms were spradde abroad
-- in token that he is ready to halse and clyppe the, etc. on this manner I pray
the read thy Book and fall down to ground, and thank thy God that would do
so much for the; and worship above al thing, not the image, not the stock,
stone, ne tree, but him that dyed on the tree, for thy sin and thy sake. So
that thou knele if thou wylt before the image. not to the image. make thy
prayer before the image. but not to the image. for it sees the not, herythe
the not. understondeth the not. make thyn offrynge if thou will before the
image, but not to the image. make thy pilgramage, not to the image, ne for the
image. for it may not help the, but to him and for him that the image
represents to the. For if thou do it for the image, or to the image, thou
doste ydolatry.

The 3. chaptre.

Dives. me thynkith that when men knele before the image, pray and look on
the image, with weepyng teres, bunche or knock their brestys, with other such
countynaunce, they do all this to the image, and so wenyth much people. Pauper.
If they do it to the image, they sin greatly in ydolatry agenst reasone and
kind -- Dives. how might they do all before the image, and not worship the
image. Pauper. Often thou see that the Priest in the Chirch has his book
before him. he knelyth he, stareth, he looks on his book, he holds up his
hondes, And for devocion in case he wepith, and makes devout prayers; to whom
wenyste thou the Priest does all this worship? Dives. To God and not to the
book. [This instance, by the way, is not so proper: for the Book, though it
relates to Christ, is not an object which represents him; nor does the
Priest speak to it as he does often to the Crucifix. And that is the next
Objection of Dives in the fourth Chapter.

Dives. On Palm Sunday at Procession the Pressed draws up the Veil before the
Rode, and fallith down to ground with all the people, and says thries, Ave
Rex noster, Hayle be thou our King, and so he worshipeth that image as King.
Pauper. Absit. God forbede. He speaks not to the image, that the Carpenter
has made, and the Peyntour painted, but if the Priste be a fool, for that
stock or stoone was never King, but he speaks to him that dyed on the Croce
for us al, to him that is King of all thing.

The xiii Chaptre.

Pauper. The Law clepith images venerable and worshipful, for there should no
man dispyse them ne defoul hem, brenne them ne break them. De Consecrat. di iii
Venerabiles; and for this manner of Veneration and worship, says the Law in
the same place, and sum doctoures, that Images, Book or Vestment, and
Chalice, may be worshipped with Dulia. But they take that Dulia fulle largely,
and full unproperly, for such worship and veneration is ne service, ne
subjection, as I said before.

For them who can instruct their minds, help their memories, excite their
passions, and fix their fancy, by praying before an Image, they are at liberty
to use such helps in their private Closets. In public let them consider
whether the scandal of others be not a greater evil than this kind of help can
be a good. And to me it seems that what help soever it may be to dispose and
prepare us, yet in the very act of devotion, it is an impediment: for then we
exercise the heart and mind rather than the eye and the imagination; which
latter when it has an Idea of God-man, it apprehends him as in glory. And in
this point Thomas a Kempis himself was not determined in his judgment; for in
one place Tho. a Kempis Oper. p. 723.
he commends the use of a Crucifix in praying to God; and yet in another
place Id. Oper. p. 696. Oration ut liberetur men's a corporali Imagine.
he prescribes a form of Prayer in which God Almighty is entreated to free the
mind from bodily fantasms. For St. Austin, He thought that no body S. Aug. in
Psalm. 113. Neminem [puto] O^are vel adorare sic intuentem simulacra, qui non
assiciatur, etc.
could worship or pray with his eyes fixed on an Image, but he must be so
affected as to think it hears him, and will give him the aid which he implores.
He says in another place S. Aug. in Psalm 114. Hoc facit and quodammodo
extorquet illa figura membrorum, etc.
, that the figure of the parts of an humane body does even extort this, that
the soul which lives in the body shall thereby be the apter to think that body
perceives which it sees like to its own. And that Images avail more to the
bowing down of the unhappy mind, in that they have a mouth, eyes, ears, and
feet; then to the correcting of it by their not speaking, seeing, hearing, or
walking. Bellarmine himself confesses Bellar. de Imag. c. 22.
that they who adore God in an Image or Creature, do expose themselves to great
peril, and are compelled to use the most subtle distinctions which the Learned
scarce understand, much less the vulgar.

Let them see to it who lay such snares in the way of the people; whatsoever
they intend, they may plainly foresee that their feet will be taken in them;
and that many thousands have been so caught, they may know from History and
Experience. Most unhappy have been the consequences of the second Synod of
Nice, which decreed the relative worshipping or bowing down to Images Zonar. in
Can. Conc. 7. p. 284. -- (...). --
: which by its President Tarrhasius, and its defender, Adrian the first, owned
a Transition of the worship through the Image to the Prototype [like an arrow
which first passes actually through the Medium e're it hitteth the mark]: and,
which (in the opinion Mr. Thornd. just Weights. c. 19. p. 127.
of Mr. Thorndike) brought in and authorized Addresses to solitary Images of
Saints. Since that time, Gods worship has been exceedingly depraved, and such
bold men as Naclantus Bishop of Clugium, have openly declared that the same
Latria or Divine honor is due to the Image which is due to the Prototype. And
it has been showed a while ago that the Pontificale it self affirms Latria
to be due to the Cross, without distinguishing of it into absolute and
relative. But I would not misconstrue one unadvised passage as the constitution
of the whole Church of Rome, and a condition of its communion; though I cannot
but from the premises conclude the danger of its communion, or the peril of
Idolatry in it.

Further, there is another kind of Idolatry toward the Image of Christ,
visible in the practice of many Romanists, though not enforced by the Decrees
of their Church. I mean that diverse make it a Divine Shechinah, or Image in
which Christ eminently dwells, and miraculously operates See the Enumer. of
miracles done at Images, in order to the promoting of their worship in Syn.
Nicen. 2. Act. 4. p. 249, etc. p. 251. Sancta Synodus dixit, gloria Deo, qui
etiam per sacras Imagines miracula perficit.
. It was the custom of Asclepiades the Philosopher (as in the 22d. Book of
Ammianus, we are informed) to carry with him whithersoever he journeyed, a
little silver-Image of the Goddess Coelestis. It Is probable that he hoped
amongst other things, for the fairer weather; for she was Urania the Goddess of
the Clouds See Steph. Baluz. Not. ad Salviani. 18. p. 410. and Sulp. Sever. in
V. D. Mart. -- Quia esset haec Gallorum rusticis consuetudo, simulachra
Daemonum, candido tecta velamine, misera per Agros suos circumserre dementia.
. And a late King of France is said to have carried about with him, as his
Celestial Guardian, a Crucifix of Lead. If other Roman Catholics wear it
about their necks as a Remembrancer, and not as an Amulet; they have the
greater protection from God for their removing a superstitious defensative. And
it is great pity that such things should be laid before the people as
instruments of Enchantment, by the literal sound at least of the Ritual Rit.
Romans p. 297. Dom. Jesu -- praesta ut ho^ signo Sanctae crucis * omnis discedat
saevitia Tempestatum.
and Pontifical Pontif. Romans fol. 168. -- Ipsorum -- Reliquias bumiliter
amplectentibus; contra Diabolum and Angelos ejus; contra fulmina, fulgura and
tempestates, etc.
, which bless Crosses and Relics as weapons of defense against evil Spirits,
Tempests, malignant air, Thieves, Invaders, hurtful beasts. And he does not
dwell within many doors of a Prophet, who cannot guess at the proneness of the
people to superstitious usages. The Rebels of Devonshire in the Reign of Edward
the sixth D. Heyl. in Hist. of Ref. in A. 3. R. E. 6. p. 76. See the Consecrat.
of St. Dominick's Beads in Arch. Caraccius de Rosar. p. 3. c. 5.
, in their march to the siege of Exeter, carried before them (as the Jews did
the Ark of God, in the times of old) the Pix, or consecrated Host, born under a
Canopy, with Crosses, Banners, Candlesticks, Holy-bread, and Holywater, and
other things; though the walls of Ex^ter fell not down before this false Ark,
as Dagon did before the true. And it is commonly known what virtue is ascribed
to the Pope's Agnus Dei's, and how the people use them as holy Statues in which
Christ's Divine Virtue so resides, as by its glorious presence and power to
expel all enemies ghostly and bodily. Here trust is put in a Creature as a
Shechinah of Christ, which is not such, and consequently that trust is no
better than a reliance on an Idol.

PART 2. Of the Idolatry charged on the Romanists in the Worship of the Images
of Saints.
Touching the Images of the Saints, and the Veneration of them, it is fit I say
something; but the Premises being considered, I have the less need of being
voluminous.

It is a question whether any such Images can be made with any suitableness to
the Prototypes. Christ indeed has raised his own body long ago, and it is
contained in the Heavens. But of Saints who are yet in an imperfect estate,
whose bodies are yet asleep in the dust; what Praxiteles or Titian, can give us
fit Statues, or Pictures of them? What they were we may by Images and Pictures
conceive. But what they now are in the present heavenly condition, with
relation to which the Romanists worship them, who on earth can reveal to us,
whilst eye has not seen it, neither has ear heard it?

But for the Images or Pictures of the Saints in their former estate on earth;
if they be made with discretion; if they be the Representations of such whose
Saintship no wise man calls into question; if they be designed as their
honorable Memorials; they who are wise to sobriety, do make use of them; and
they are permitted in Geneva it self, where remain in the Quire of the Church
of St. Peter Lassels's Voyage to Italy, p. 46.
, the Pictures of the twelve Prophets on one side, and on the other those of
the twelve Apostles, all in wood; also the Pictures of the Virgin and St. Peter
in one of the Windows. And we give to such Pictures that negative honor which
they are worthy of. We value them beyond any Images besides that of Christ; we
help our memories by them; we forbear all signs of contempt toward them. But
worship them we do not, so much as with external positive signs: for if we
uncover the head, we do it not to them, but at them, to the honor of God who
has made them so great Instruments in the Christian Church; and to the
subordinate praise of the Saints themselves.

They who worship such Images, do either worship them as the Statues of such
invisible Powers as do under God govern the world; or of holy Spirits who hear
them in all places, and pray to God particularly for them; or who only pray for
them in general; or as so many Shechinahs of ruling, or interceding Saints.

And, First, If they worship them as Representations of ruling Demons, they
are Idolatrous. For they thereby give away the honor of Gods reserved power,
to a Creature: They honor as Clients the statue of a Saint, whilst God is by
right their Patron.

Secondly, If they worship the Images of Saints, only as holy spirits who pray
for them, and hear them in any place, by the help of that God whose essence is
everywhere, and who enabled the Prophet to know the actions of Gehazi, when he
was out of his sight; they are still thereby in peril of Idolatry: for if God
does not enable them to hear, and they pray with confidence in them as hearing,
they rely on a power in the Creature, which God has not communicated to it.

Thirdly, If they honor the Images of Saints only as holy spirits who in
general pray for them, they are not to be thence condemned as Idolaters: for
should they so far debase their reason as to give to the Image the same honor
which is due to the Saint, they honor but a creature that is inferior, with
the honor of a creature, superior to it, who prays for them in the mass of
mankind. And if they bow to such an Image, that external sign of worship cannot
reasonably be interpreted by the beholders as a sign of Divine honor; because
they bow to that which appears no other than the Image of a Saint, and not a
Crucifix or Image of Christ (the eye sufficiently distinguishing these); and
therefore it has no higher honor than the Prototype, which is a Creature. I
except here such bowing and kneeling to the Image of a Saint as is in use in
the Roman Church; and is accompanied with a form of Prayer proper to be
addressed to God, and particularly that form which Christ has taught us. For
though the Catechism of Trent requires the Parish Priest to let the people
understand, that Catech. ex Decr. Conc. Trident. p. 513. immo vero cum ad
Imaginem sancti alicujus quis Dominicam Orationem pronuntiat, etc.
when any one pronounces the Lords-Prayer to the Image of a Saint, he should
think only that he joineth his Prayers with those of that Saint to God for him.
Yet the people are not so apt to receive the instruction, and to be free from
mistake: and this the Catechism it self supposes, whilst it speaks of the
need there is of the greatest caution Catech. ibid. Quo loco illud maxim
cavendum est omnibus, ne quod Dei proprium est, cuiquam praeterea tribuant, etc.
in this matter: need of it, not only for the moment of the thing, but for the
easiness of erring in it.

Fourthly, If they worship them as Shechinahs of ruling Demons, they honor
that as the presence of a power which God is pleased everywhere to exercise;
and which he has not fixed in such Statues, in order to any eminent operation.
Wherefore they give the honor of Gods Schechinah to that which is not such,
and their trust is in an Idol. And here the practice of the Church of Rome is
scandalous, if its constitution be not. There is a common persuasion among that
people, that Prayers are more effectually heard, and that Miracles are sooner
done before an Image than in the absence of it: That one Image is a more
excellent Shechinah than another; that our Lady will perform things at Loretto,
which she will not do at Rome it self. And they who desire blessing of St.
Winifred, think they soonest attain it at her well. The Liber Festivalis (as
they called it) in use here in England, in the time of Henry the seventh Lib.
Fest. in S. Nicolai Narrat. 6. See in Wichmans Sabb. Mar. c. 14. p. 225, of a
Schedule which a young man had sealed to the Devil, dropped into his hands,
whilst he was kneeling at the Image of the Virgin of Loretto.
, abounds with stories of Divine power working in Images; and amongst other
tales, it tells of the power of the Image of St. Nicholas, in keeping men's
Goods in safety; and how certain Thieves who were permitted for a time to steal
a few Goods committed to its care, were by St. Nicholas forced to speedy
restitution. We read in Krantzius Krantzii Saxon. I. 9. c. 10. p. 236.
, that Count Gerhard, Uncle to Waldemare of Sleswick, went to battle against
the Danes with the Image of the Virgin about his neck; after the manner of
Sylla the Dictator, who used in such emergencies, certain little statues of
Apollo or Jove, one of which after his escape in a very dangerous Fight, he
kissed, saying, O Jupiter! I had almost fallen with you this day, and you with
me. And the Books of the most learned Papists are full of Legends, which by
telling of the motion of the Images themselves in wonderful manner, or of the
miraculous events succeeding the Addresses made at them, do incline the people
to come thither with confidence, as to the Shechinahs of God. Curtius, the
Provincial of Belgium, is one of these writers, and I find this story in him:
There was a certain poor man F. C. Curtius de Clav. Domin. c. 5. p. 42.
, who in extreme need beseeched our Savior to preserve him, from perishing, by
some small Alms. At this Prayer, the Image, or rather Christ in the Image,
bowed himself, and gave to the beggar his right shoo as a help in his need.
Away went the man with this new prize, but the neighbors hearing of it,
redeemed the shoo with the equal weight in gold. But that shoo to this day,
could never be fitted again to the foot, but is supported with a Chalice. It
seems this Crucifix was made of Cedar by Nicodemus himself Curt. ibid. p. 38,
39.
; but methinks with no good fancy; the Artist having carved a Crown of Gold,
instead of one of Thorns, upon the head of our holy Lord. Lipsius (a man rather
learned than wise) tells Lips. Virg. Hall. c. 5. cui Tit. sanguinis fudor in
statua. p. 1303.
of the many drops of blood which distilled from a certain wooden Image of the
Virgin at Halla. And on this he looked as on a miracle, either declaring her
resentment of the present Wars, or foretelling the cessation of them by her
means. The Eyes of Venantius Fortunatus were cured of their pain, after having
been anointed (as they say) from the Lamp of Saint Martin; and Baronius Baron.
Annal. Tom. 9. A. 825. n. 35. p. 796. Ad marg. Cultus SS. Imaginum miraculo
probatus. See Spal. de Rep. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12. p. 296.
hence proves, as from a certain medium, the worship of Images.

But how if God does this by Nature, or sometimes by miraculous Power, for the
trial of our Faith? Or what if such things should be done by Gods just
permission, by the Devil himself, to men that have renounced their Reason? Why
then, the Devil has their trust and praise instead of God; an Idolatry not to
be mentioned without religious fear and indignation. And does not the Devil
sometimes work such wonders? How then come the Books of the Heathens to be
filled with stories of Miracles wrought in or at their Images, as well as those
of the Romanists? If it be told by the Romanist Lipsius, That an Image of the
Virgin bled; it is also storied by the Heathen Porphyrie Porphyr. in Fragm. de
Styge. p. 284.
, That when a certain King endeavored to pull an hair from a Statue of the
Brachmans, the blood gushed out against him. Moreover, that the Statue did
sweat so exceedingly in the heat of the weather, that they were forced to
refresh it with perpetual fanning.

Lastly, If the worshippers of the Images of Saints, do honor them only as
Shechinahs, where the Saints hear better than in other places, and as their
Chambers of mere Request that they would pray for them; they commit a mistake,
and they think them present when they are not: but they give not away Gods
Honor, which is not infringed by this mere thought, that his Saints are in
certain places; seeing that belongs to their finite condition. But if wise
men look for them in any certain place, they look for them rather in some space
of the clear air, than in an Image, or a Cave, where there may be suspicion of
Imposture.

Now, though men by this last way of venerating Images, do not idolize them as
Supreme Gods, or as ruling-Daemons; yet they offend in the other extreme, and
disparage them as Saints, whilst they make them to choose such mean and
unbecoming Apartments. This was the belief of Arnobius, with part of whose
Confession I will end this Chapter. I very grievously Arnob. adv. Gent. l. 1.
p. 23.
reproached those whom [in my state of Heathenism] I thought to be Divine,
whilst I believed them to be Wood, Stone, Bone, or to dwell in the matter of
such things.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Idolatry charged, without any tolerable color, on the
Church of England.
IT was the wisdom of our Legal Reformers, to purge the Church of all manifest
Corruptions, and particularly of those which had crept in about the Invocation
of Saints, and the Worship of Images.

But there arose men of a worse temper, and such who usurped Power. And these
thought that nothing of the old Building was again to be used. They were not
for sweeping and repairing of Gods House, but for razing the very Foundation,
and sowing the Place with Salt. Among our selves (says the Learned Mr.
Thorndike Mr. Thorndike in his Epil. par. 3. c. 25. p. 282.
, meaning not the Sons of the Church, but the giddy people of England) it seems
yet to be a dispute, Whether any Ceremonies at all are to be used in the
public Service of God. The pretenses of this time having extended the
imagination of Idolatry so far, as to make the Ceremonies and Utensils of Gods
Service, Idols; and the Ceremonies which they are used with, Idolatries.

Nay, it was the way of the Fanatical people in the late Civil Wars, to give
the name of Idol to any thing to which their fancy was not reconciled. Some
called the most excellent Father of our Country Trial of Regicides, p. 160. H.
Peter's to one who prayed for the King, Old Gentleman, your Idol will not stand
long.
, the Idol of the people. With some, the Liturgy Mr. Case in Sermon. of the
Covenant, p. 65, 66. The Dagon of the Bish. Service Book brake its neck before
this Ark of the Cov^t.
, the Surplice Molin. Defens. Verit. p. 15. B^za vocat, Albam Vestem Baali^,
Sacerdotum Insigne, etc.
, a Church, a Steeple, was an Idol. Neither did there want those who bestowed
that title upon that necessary Doctrine of the Gospel which requires
conditions and qualifications of Holiness in order to acceptance with God
through Christ Anna Trapnel in her Lega. cies for Saints, Land. 1654. P. 3, 4.
.

I should run a strange and endless course, if I should pursue all their
Extravagancies; but a few of the most colorable amongst them, I will a little
consider. Those I mean, are the three following. The first is, the bowing
toward the Altar Molin. in Specim. cont. Durell. p. 67. L^dus -- ad Idol^m (h
e. Altar) a se erectum, primus in Anglia procubuit ad modum Adorantis, etc.
.

The second is, the kneeling at the holy Communion.

The third is, the Reverence at the name of Jesus.

The first of these, the bowing toward the Altar, is no Command of the Church,
nor the common practice of it in Parochial Assemblies, nor so much as the
Couns^l of any of its Canons, besides the seventh of those which they call the
Canons of Bishop Laud Constable. and Can. A. 1640. Can. 7.
. And in that Canon the true spirit of Christian meekness and charity is thus
expressed. The reviving -- of this ancient and laudable custom, we heartily
commend to the serious consideration of all good people; not with any intention
to exhibit any Religious worship to the Communion Table -- but only for the
advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him alone that honor and glory that
is due unto him, and not otherwise. And in the practice or omission of this
Rule, we desire, that the Rule of Charity, prescribed by the Apostle, be
observed, which is, That they which use this Rite, despise not them who use it
not; and that they who use it not, condemn not those who use it.

And little reason there is, that those who use it not, should condemn those
who use it, as Idolaters, when they publicly declare that they bow not, as
others Lips. Ode ad Divam Hallensem. Op. p. 1244. Sacram pronus ad aram flecto
corpus -- Miss^l. Romans in Ord. Miss. p. 210. Sacerdos paratus cum irgreditur
Altar, facta Illi debita reverentia, etc.
, to it, but toward it, to God alone; who there exhibits that high favor of
renewing, by visible tokens and pledges, our Covenant with him. Our sign of
Reverence must be some way exhibited; and what Idolatry is there in the
exhibition of it this way, when it is but the way, not the object of our
Religious veneration? It is against the common sense of the sign of
Incurvation, to interpret it as the worship of every thing in a Church, before
which the sign is made: It must be the circumstance of the object, and the form
of address, and the application made to it, which determines its worship. Few
therefore there are so injudiciously uncharitable as to accuse the Minister of
adoring the Church-bible, or Common Prayer Book; though he often bows, and
kneels, and prays before them. Few I say there are that do so: for I think his
madness singular, who in the late Revolutions in England, maintained in a
public Pamphlet, (well worthy sure an Imprimatur) that This Author is
mentioned by Dr. H. Hammond of Idol. p. 359. of vol. 1.
Words in a Book were Images, and consequently that to pray before a Book, or
to use a Book in Prayer is Idolatry, or Imageworship.

It is true, concerning the second Ceremony, the kneeling at the holy
Communion, that it is enjoined by our Church; but enjoined it is in the quality
of a decent circumstance, and not as an essential part of the Lord's Supper. But
we are by no Rubric or Canon enjoined to kneel to the Sacramental bread, which
is declared still to be bread (though not the bread of common Tables) and not
the natural body of Christ: Also before the Administration of it, which is done
in a form of Prayer, which requires our Reverence, the people are generally on
their knees in devotion to God. If any begin then to kneel, their kneeling is
by the Church declared to be at the Sacrament, not to the Elements of it, (as
they of Rome do Miss. Romans in Can. Missae. p. 226. Sacerdos prolatis verbis
consecr. statim Hostiam consecratam genuflexus adorat.
toward which she allows not so much as a Prosopopeia in her Prayers; and
which are neither the Statues nor the Pictures of Christ's Person; though they
be apt memorials of his Passion; and are more safely received in their ordinary
form than with such Figures as the Roman Church impresseth upon them; of which
great variety is to be seen in the Electa of Novarinus.

Further, The Church of England to avoid all pretense of cavil and exception,
has besides her Article against the Corporal Presence, given to the world an
express declaration of her design in the injunction of Kneeling. She declares
that this is done in reverence and humility to Christ, and not to the shows or
substance of the Elements, or to the natural body of Christ under the shows of
Bread.

They who are acquainted with the writings of Monsieur Daille, have no more
reason to think him a Romanist, than they have to take Bellarmine for a zealot
amongst the Reformed. Now this is the acknowledgment of that grave and learned
person, in his Apology for the Reformed Churches. Whilst the Church of England
Daill. Apol. p. 85.
declares, as it does, against the adoration of the external Elements, their
kneeling at the Communion cannot be taken for the worshipping of the Bread, nor
be thought any thing else but the worship of Christ himself reigning in the
Heavens.

In this external Adoration of Christ, the Church of England follows the
ancient Church, which, though it often adored by bowing, and not kneeling; yet
sometimes it used that gesture, and was never wanting in some sign of
Reverence. Such Adoration is mentioned by St. Chrysostom; and particularly the
gesture of kneeling or prostration in some places; though Monsieur Larrogne
has not pleased, when he had just occasion so to do Larrog. Hi. stoire de
l'Euch. 1. party. c. 10. p. 218, 219.
, to take notice of it. That eminent Father in his third Homily on the Epistle
to the Ephesians, thus upbraideth the irreverent and indevout Communicant
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in c. 1. E^. ad Ephesians. p. 887. (...). --
: The Royal Table is prepared, the King himself is present, and stand thou
gaping about? Thy Garments are unclean, and art not thou, at all, concerned at
it? But they are pure, [that is, the Royal Table and the King of that
Marriage Feast,] wherefore fall down and communicate.

For the third Ceremony, the bowing at the name of Jesus, it is also enjoined,
not as duty in its nature, necessary to salvation, but as a decent sign of our
inward esteem of that inestimable benefit, which that name brings to our mind
See Injunct. of Q. E. 52. and Can. 18. in Can. and Constable. An. 1603.
. Of that just esteem, and not merely of the outward Ceremony, I hope that
zealous Gentleman spoke, who is reported to have wished that every knee might
rot which would not bow at the Name of Jesus White's Cent 1. of Scand. Min. p.
21.
.

By bowing at this Name we advance not the Son above the Father, but adore the
whole Trinity, whilst by the cue or sign of this name we are reminded of the
greatest mercy that ever God vouchsafed; the Name of Jesus displaying the
wisdom and mercy of God beyond those of El, Jah, Adonai, or Jehovah. And for us
to bow whenever we hear that Name solemnly pronounced, is no more to commit
Idolatry than is our crying out at the reading of the Gospels, Glory be to
thee, O Lord, or, O the depth of the riches of Gods mercy in Christ. For these
words, and that gesture, are but external signs of the same inward
acknowledgment and adoration. And they who think we worship the very name
Melinaeus de Mon. Tempor. Pont. Romans p. 343, 344. hodie salutantur Syllabae.
when we bow at it, are as grossly mistaken as the ignorant people in Athenaeus:
for some there mentioned Athen. l. 2. c. 25. p. 66. and Casaub. Not. p. 137,
138.
, when they heard others cry out, (...), God save you; or (...), God grant you
life, at the sneezing of any; conceited that they adored either the very
sternutation, or the brain of man which then discharged it self of the fumes
which oppressed it.

The Church of England does not enjoin men to bow to the Name of Jesus as to an
Object, but only at it, as at a signal by which they are admonished of the time
of paying Reverence to God. Neither is there any such form used in our Church
as in the Church of Rome, which to the Priests traveling into England Missale
pro Sacerdot. Itinerant. in Ang. A. 1615. In Missa de nom. Jesu. p. 108, 109.
Deus -- concede -- ut omnes qut hoc nomen Jesu devote venerantur in terris, etc.
, prescribes this out of the Missal of Sarum. O God who have made the most
glorious name of our Lord Jesus Christ thy only begotten Son, amiable to the
faithful, with the highest affection of suavity, and terrible and dreadful to
evil spirits; mercifully grant that all they who devoutly worship this name on
earth, may perceive in this present life the sweetness of holy consolation; and
obtain in the life to come the joy of exultation and endless Jubilee, by the
same Lord. It is my opinion that the Judicious of that Church mean by that
Name, our Savior himself as Redeemer of the World: but the Church expresses
it self in such manner that to the people the Name of Jesus sounds like some
distinct adorable object. For it speaks of worshipping that Name; it has the
Mass of the Name of Jesus; the Litany of the Name of Jesus See Horst. par. An.
Sect. 6. p. 402. c. 7. de Cultu and honor SS. nom. Jesu and in Man. Pietat. p.
39. Litaniae de nom. Jesu.
; and suchlike Forms which are apt to entangle common Hearers.

St. Ludgard Al. Gazaeus de Offic. B. M. p. 99.

Aug. Wichmans in Sabbatismo Mariano. c. 7. p. 74, 75.


would have such honor done, not only to Christ's Name, but to that of the
Virgin; and he advises that when these words in the Tc Deum are repeated, When
thou tookest upon thee to deliver man thou did not abhor the Virgins womb;
that then we bow down to the very ground. And it is said (d) of St. Gerard
Bishop of Canadium (that is, of Chonad in Hungary) that by his zeal for the
honor of the holy Virgin, he brought it at length so to pass in that Country,
that when they heard the Name of our Lady pronounced, they straightway fell on
their knees, and bowed their heads toward the earth. And indeed nothing
stoopeth lower than Superstition. But in the Church of England the bowing is
neither that of Superstition nor Idolatry, but of Religious Reverence, at the
hint of a word which sets forth to us all the dimensions, or rather the
infinity of the Divine Wisdom and Love See in this Arg. Dr. Twysses Letter in
Mr. Mede's Works. p. 1038 and Mr. Mede's Answer, p. 1041, 1042.
.

Lee not then the ignorance or malice of men who make Court to nothing but
their own Diana, accuse that excellent Church of Idolatry, which has so
carefully purged her self of Idols, though not of all manner of Rites: That had
been to have swept away the convenient Ornaments of Gods house together with
the dirt of it, the name which the Jews give to an Idol.

Of some in England who have rent themselves from the safe Communion of that
Church, there may be juster reason for such complaint. What can judicious men
think of the true original Quaker, but as of one who by believing that God is
not distinct from the Saints Foxe's great Mystery, p. 16. is not that of God,
which comes out of God? Is not that of his being the soul, etc.
, and by worshipping that which he calls his Light or Christ within him,
rejects the Person of our Redeemer, and commits Idolatry with his own
imagination? must not they make a like judgment of such as Anna Trapnell A.
Trapnells Legacy for Saints, p. 36.
, who believed for a while, that God dwelt essentially in his Saints? must not
they also judge of Lodowick Muggleton as of a madman, or of an Impostor,
selling his Blessings at a very profitable rate; or of an Idolater worshipping
nothing for the one true God, but a confined person of flesh and bones. For he
owneth no other Godhead than that which was conceived in the womb of the Virgin
Paradis. Dialogue betwixt Faith and Reason, c. 2. p. 14, 15, 16, etc.
, and circumscribed by it for a season; and as he blasphemously continues to
speak Ibid. p. 24, 25.
, such as lost it self for a while, both in honor and knowledge; not knowing
till he was glorified, that himself was God the Father, but that Elias was his
God and his Father. For that also is one of his Blasphemies, That God not
finding it safe to trust the Angels Paradis. Dial. p. 22.
upon his descent from Heaven, he committed his place to the safer trust of
Moses and Elias Ibid. c. 3. p. 21, 22, etc.
. A blasphemy worse, if possible, than that in Irenaeus Iren. l. 1. c. 12 p.
86, 87.
, of the extravagant Gnostics, who supposed the place of the Logos to have
been on earth supplied by the Angel Gabriel.

But I forbear any further repetition of his abominable Fancies, which will
cause as great pain in the ears of pious Christians, as the Justice of the
Magistrates has lately done in his own.

I shut up this Chapter with the Prayer of that Learned Frenchman Isaac
Casaubon Is. Causaub. in Ephemeridibus suis, Ann. 1610: Call. Novembr. ap.
Molin. def. Verit. p. 7.
: Thou, O Lord Jesu, preserve this church of England, and give a sound mind to
those Nonconformists who deride the Rites and Ceremonies of it.

CHAP. XIV. Of the means which God has vouchsafed the World toward the cure
of Idolatry; and more particularly, of his favor in exhibiting, to that
purpose, the Shechinah of his Son.
PART 1. Of the Cure of Idolatry.
THE Notion of Idolatry being stated, and also illustrated by the practice of
it amongst Gentiles, Jews, Mahometans, and Professors of Christianity; I
proceed to show the means which God, in pity of our weakness, has given us
toward the Cure of this Evil.

Against all manner of false Gods, and ruling-Daemons, he gave to all the world
a Principle of Reason, which teaches that there is one Supreme Being, absolute
in Perfection; and by consequence, that he, being everywhere, by Almighty
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, is everywhere to be adored and trusted in as the
only God.

The same Principle of Reason teaches them, that God can neither be
represented by an Image, nor confined to it; neither knows it much more of
the inferior Powers of the invisible World, save that they are; and
consequently it has no ground for addresses to them.

For the Jews, they had an express command for the worship of one God without
Image; and many declarations of God, as governing the world by his immediate
Providence.

Also Christian Religion shows plainly, that the gods of the Heathens were
Doemons, or evil spirits; and that there is but one God, and one Mediator, to
be by Christians adored. It establishes a Church or Corporation of Christians
who agree in the worship of one God in Trinity. In Baptism, or the Sacrament of
admittance into that Society, it prescribes a solemn Renuntiation of the Devil
and his works, of which a part were the Pomps, or Processions, in honor of
Idols. In the Sacrament which is a memorial of the Passion of Christ, the Head
and Founder of this Society, it offers to us the Cup of the Lord, in
opposition to the cup of Devils. On the First Day of the Week set apart for
public worship, it makes a Remembrance of the Creation of the world, by the
Son, by whom the Father made all things, and not by any Doemons; as also of the
Resurection of Christ from the dead, by which he conquered the powers of
darkness. In the Form of Prayer which our Lord taught the Church, it prays
for deliverance (...) Nicol. Drabitius in Epit. Revelat. Divinar. p. 535. -- ab
isto maligno malorum omnlum Authore Satana.
from that evil one (from Satan the destroyer, as Rabbi Judah was wont to
petition); and, in the Doxology, it ascribes not (with the Heathen world which
then lay in maligno illo, under the Power of the God of this world in general
Idolatry;) the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, to the Devil; but to that one true
God, who was the Father of Jesus Christ.

But upon most of these Subjects, I have already enlarged: It remains,
therefore, that I speak of the means which God has specially vouchsafed in the
case of Images; a Subject not commonly discoursed of, and hinted only in the
former Papers.

This Disquisition I will begin with the notion of the Invisibility of God;
proceeding thence, to the condescension he vouchsafes, toward the very eye and
fancy of man, in the Shechinah of his Son.

There is, in the very Creation, a great part of invisible matter and motion.
Many things, besides God Almighty, are not immediately subject to man's sense,
though his Reason can reach them, after a Philosophical consideration of their
palpable effects. God, indeed, could have made that matter, which is now
invisible, to have been seen by man, in all the minute and curious Textures of
it. For what should hinder that omnipotence which formed the light, and created
the soul, from framing the Fibers of the Nerves in such delicate manner in this
life, [what possibly he may do in the celestial body] as to give to man a kind
of natural Microscope. But, for his own Divine substance, which has neither
limits, nor parts, nor Physical motion [which is the division of Parts,] nor
figure [which is inconsistent with immensity]; nor color [which is an effect
of figure, and motion upon the brain]; it is certain, that in this body, we
cannot see it; and there is great reason to doubt whether we can do so in any
other, which, though it be celestial, is still but body. For this sight, then,
we are not to hope, unless we mean it of the fuller knowledge of Gods will; and
interpret the antecedent by the consequent in that place of Scripture S. Joh.
1. 18.
, which says, No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has revealed him. St. John in that place
denies expressly actual sight, as also he does again in his first Epistle 1 John 4. 12.
: Tertullian Tertull. Advers. Prax. Sect. 14. page 507, 508.
in his refutation of Praxeas, discourses of the invisibility of God, and the
visibility of the Son of God [illustrating his sense by the appearance of the
Sun, which is not seen in its very body, but by its rays]. And he further
notes of St. Paul, that he had to this purpose denied 1 Timothy 6. 16.
both the actual and potential sight of God. No man (said that Apostle) has
seen God, nor can see him. No man whilst alive can see God as he is, as he
dwells in Heaven, the Palace and Throne of his most eminent Glory. He cannot
behold that now (unless in such a glymps as St. Stephen enjoyed) which he shall
see after the Resurrection, when the vail of this gross body shall be removed;
for to the meek in heart, it is promised that they shall see God. To them shall
be revealed that secret of faces, which the Jews so often speak of, and adjourn
to the future life See Maimo. de fund. Leg. c. 1. sect. 9, 10. p. 5, 6, 7, etc.
. But for the substance of the Godhead, it is for ever invisible, the infinity
of it [which Tertullian Tertull. cont. Prax, p. 507.
seems to call the fullness of the Deity, and denies to have been seen by
Moses] can no more be taken in by man's eye, than a whole circle of the Universe
can be taken in at the same moment by the glass of a Telescope. And for the
Essence of it, it seems indiseernible, even to the very Angels. For although
Angels be spirits, yet they possessing a space, are of a far differing nature
from the divine substance, which fills and pierces all things. The Ranters,
Ranters Epistles, p. 24, 25, 28.
indeed, professed to see in this life, the very Essence of God; but the true
God was not every thing which they dreamed of.

Now man, in this earthly state, receiving knowledge chiefly from the senses, he
is exceeding covetous of sensible helps in his research after the most
abstracted notions, which inclination being vehement in the vulgar, who are
generally of very gross apprehension; they pursue not the object of their minds
[be it the most Divine and Spiritual God himself] with pure and unmixed reason;
but they at best, blend it with some bodily phantasm, and often dwell wholly
upon such an Image, and the external object of it; insomuch that their
imagination worshippeth that which should be entertained only as the help and
instrument of their mind. So that although the natural desire of a visible
object be not the necessary cause, yet it is the occasional root of all that
proper Idolatry, or Image Worship, which divided it self into more kinds, than
there are Nations in the world.

PART 2. Of the Cure of Idolatry by the Shechinah of God.
GOD knowing well the frame Let this difficult Argument, about the Shechinah,
be read with caution; even where I have not interspersed words of Caution.
and infirmity of man [though himself did not erect it so as now it stands,
with much decay, and many breaches], was pleased to condescend to the weak
condition of his nature, and to vouchsafe him a kind of visible presence, lest
in the entire absence of it, his fancy should have bowed him down, even to such
creatures, to which man himself being compared, is a kind of subcaelestial
Deity. It pleased then the wise and merciful God, to show to the very eyes of
man, though not his spiritual and immense substance, or any statue or picture
of it, properly so called; yet his Shechinah, or visible glory, the symbol of
his especial Presence.

This divine appearance, I suppose to have been generally exhibited in a mighty
luster of flame or light, set off with thick, and, as I may call them, solemn
Clouds. Nothing is in nature so pure and pleasant, and venerable as light,
especially in some reflections, or refractions of it, which are highly agreeable
to the temper of the brain. By light God discovers his other works, and by it
he has pleased to shadow out himself; and both secular and sacred Writers have
thence taken plenty of metaphors, dipping as it were their pens in light when
they write of him, who made Heaven and Earth. "Jamblichus in his book of the
"Egyptian Mysteries, sets out by light, the Power, the Simplicity, the
Penetration, the Ubiquity of God. R. Abin Levita supposes it to be the garment
of God, it having been said by David, that he cloatheth himself with it.
Maimonides supposes the matter of the Heavens to have a risen from the
extension of this vestment of Divine Light. Eugubinus supposes the Divine
Light to be the Empyrean Heaven, or habitation of God. And this he thinks to
be the true Olympus of the Poets, so called, quasi (...), because it shines
throughout with admirable glory.

S. Basil calls the Light of God not sensible, but intelligible; and
conceiteth that, after that first uncreated, the Angels are a second and
created light. Such sayings, though they have in them a mixture of
extravagance, yet in the main, they teach the same with the Scripture, that God
is light; or that there is nothing in the Creation so fit an Emblem of him, and
so fit to be used in his appearance to the world. Thus therefore is the
Shechinah of God described in the Prophecy of Habakkuk Hab. 3. 3, 4.
: God came from Teman, and the holy One from Mount Paran, Selah: His glory
covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of his praise: And his brightness
was as the light, he had horns [or beams] coming [or streaming] out of his hand
[or side].

Whether the Shechinah of God ever appeared (out of a vision) in light
organized in man's shape, I am not certain; though such a Representation be apt
to excite the veneration of mankind. For even when Herod spoke from his Throne
of Majesty, and the light was with singular advantage, reflected from his Robe
of silver, the amused people were the more readily induced to celebrate him as
a God on Earth. But of the figure of the Shechinah, I profess my self
uncertain; and often ruminate upon the Chaldee Oracle, which advises us, when
we see the most holy Fire shining without a form or determinate shape, then to
hear the voice of it Orac. Chald. ap. Psellum, p. 81. (...).
: that is, to esteem it then the true Oracle of God, and not the imposture of a
Demon. And such a fire Psellus the Scholiast on this Oracle, affirms to have
been seen by many men. And I might show somewhat like it in the Instances of
Abraham and Moses. But there has been seen a false Fire also: and the
Massalians, whom Epiphanius calls (...), bending down their head to their
navel, professed they saw a divine fire, and received the ardor of a divine
spirit, being either deluded by the Devil, or deceived into this conceit, by
some odd fantasms which arose from the nerves extended in an uncommon posture.

Now for the Shechinah or visible glory of God in this world [for whether it
appeared to any as in the other, till the daybreak of the Gospel will bear a
dispute]; it was in all likelihood effected, not by the Father whom no man has
seen Just. Martyr in Dial. cum Tryph. p. 357.
, but by the second Person in the Trinity, the King and Light of the World, who
was afterward Incarnate. Both the Orthodox and the Haeretical have maintained
the visibility of the Son, and the invisibility of the Father, though upon
different reasons. This did Origin Orig. in St. Hieron. Ep. ad Avitum. Arrap.
S. Chrysostom. in 1 John 18. and Athanas. vol. 2. p. 575, 576. See Novat. de Trin.
c. 25. and 31.
, this did the Arians. Thus Bisterfeldius (in that very Treatise Eisterf.
contr. Crell. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 30. p. 298, etc.
in which he defends against Crellius the natural Divinity of the Son of God)
does maintain that the Father is invisible to the very Angels; and that Christ
even in the Ages long before the Gospel was the visible Image of the Father.
Now the reason why true Catholics affirm the Father to be invisible, and the
Son to be visible, are exceedingly different from those of the Arians.

For the Arians degrading the Son to the condition of a Creature [another, a
lesser, a second God, as Eusebius See Eusebius. in Them. and Petav. de Trin. p. 792.
of Caesarea is bold to call him.] They suppose him to consist of a visible
substance. So Maximinus the Arian, remembered by St. Austin, makes the Son
invisible only as the Angels, by nonappearance; and the Father invisible by
reason of his superior and immutable essence. In the mean time this was the
Creed of the Catholics, that the whole Trinity was invisible in one Divine
substance S. Aug. Epist. 112. c. 8. Invisibilis est enim natura Dei, non tantum
Pater, sed and ipsa Trinitas, ^nus Deus.
. It was also their belief that the Son appeared, and not the Father, not from
any difference of nature, but of order only; the Father being as it were the
root or head of the Trinity, and therefore not so fitly appearing as his
Substitute the second Person. And they could perceive no more mutability in the
Logos when he appeared, than in the Father, when he not in shape, but by voice,
did own him as his only begotten Son. And by this reason Saint Austin S. Aust.
l. 2. de Trin. c. 9, 10, 11, 17. See G. Nyss. lib. 1. advers. Eunom. and Cat.
conc. Trident. p. 394.
might have answered the Arians without asserting as he does, that in the Old
Testament the whole Trinity appeared. For the manner in which this Appearance
of the Son of God was effected, I conceive it to have been done by the
Assumption of some principal Angel upon the greatest and most solemn occasions
[without any vital or personal union]; and by the ministry of some other holy
spirits; together with an extraordinary motion, sometimes in the air, and
thence in the brain; and sometimes in the brain only. And in this opinion I
have been the more confirmed, since I found the concurrence of the very learned
and judicious Mr. Thorndike in great measure Mr. Thornd. Epilog. l. 2. c. 13.
p. 90, 91.
. If I were now to guess what Angel was assumed, I would fasten my conjecture
on Michael the Archangel, whom the Hebrews call the Prince of Faces, or the
Prince of the Presence. By the Son the Father made the World Ign. Ep. Interpol.
ad Philad. p. 186. (...), instead of, (...) in Hebr. 1. 2.
, and what if I say he governed it also, as by his (...), or Word? For in God
we do not distinctly apprehend his way of working, but conceive of it under the
more general notion of his will and command. If I declare that the Son always
acted in the Father's name, I make but the same Profession which Tertullian did
many ages ago Tertull. l. 2. contr. Marc. Profitemur Christum semper egisse in
Dei Patris nomine. and advers. Prax. Sect. 16. p. 509. Filius-visios est
semper, and filius conversatus est semper, and filius operatus est semper, ex
auctoritate Patris and voluntate.
, and avoid the Anathema which Marcus Arethusius Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 30.
p. 122, 123.
, (or rather which others in the Council of Sirmium See the mistake of Socr.
and Soz. conc. the Symb. of Marc. Areth. in notis H. Valesii. p. 29.
) denounced against all who confess not that the Son ministered to the Father in
the Creation of all things, and who maintain that when God said, Let us make
man, the Father said it not to the Son but to himself.

Accordingly, where God is said in the Old Testament to have appeared, they
seem to mistake who ascribe it to an Angel Personating God, and not to the
second Person, as the Shechinah (or as Tertullian Tert. advers. Prax. Sect. 24.
p. 515.
calls him) the Representator of the Father. To this purpose it has been
often noted by others, and ought by me in this argument to be again brought to
remembrance, how often there is mention in the ancient Paraphrases of the Jews
of the Word of God. Neither does it enervate the force of this observation,
that what we translate the Word, does often signify, I, Thou, or He. Both
because several of the places will not admit of that other sense; and because
the Jews themselves so commonly own this; and so often mention the Logos or
Word of the Father. Philo is very frequent in speaking of the Divine Logos as
the Substitute and Image of the invisible God, both in his Book of Dreams, and
of the Confusion of Tongues. It is (said Philo in that latter Book) a thing
well becoming those who so join together fellowship and science to desire to
see God. If that cannot be, they must content themselves with his sacred Image,
his Word. A saying which Eusebius esteemed worthy of an Asterick, and
accordingly transcribed it into his Book of Evangelical Preparation Eusebius. de
Praep. Evang. l. 11. c. 15. p. 533. de secundo Principio ex Philone.
. The same Jew gives to the Logos the title of the shadow or Portraict of God;
adding that God Almighty used him as his instrument in framing the World. It is
true that by the Logos Philo does often Philo (in lib. de Profugis. p. 466. B.
C.) says the High Priest is not a man, but Gods Logos clothed with the four
Elements, etc.
understand the World, which by the greatness, order and beauty of it,
declares naturally the Power, Wisdom, and goodness of God; and pleads with
him in the quality of the Workmanship laid before the feet of the Workman. But
it is as true and manifest that he speaks also of the Logos of this inferior
Logos, as the maker and governor of it. In his Book de Mundi Opificio Philo de
Mundi Opificio, p. 6. C.
, he calls (...), the Divine Word, or the Word of God, (...), the Image of
God. And he says further of it, that it is, (...), a super-coelestial Star; the
fountain of all the sensible [or visible] Luminaries. And he had said in the
former Page Id. p. 5. C.
, That the World was the Image of the Image, or Archetypal Exemplar, of the
Logos of God.

PART. 3. Of the Shechinah of God from Adam to Noah.
THis Substitute and Shechinah of God made Adam, and he that gave him his Being
gave him most probably the Law of it. For so the Fathers interpret that in St.
John, The Word was God. That [or He] was the true Light that lights every man
that comes into the world See Origin in Com. in S. Johan. p. 25.
. And in this sense we are to expound St. Justin the Martyr, where he speaks
of the Knowledge of God in Socrates by the Word J. Mart. Apol. 1. p. 48. Apol.
2. p. 56.
. He means not that he was naturally a Christian; but that so far as he was
endued with such principles of Religious reason as Christianity owneth; he had
derived it from the Logos or Word of God, who made the World, and in it man, a
reasonable Creature. To him he appeared as well as to others, who sprang from
him, helping the mind as soon as it was seated in this thicker region of bodily
fantasms. And to Adam the Logos appeared, I know not whether I should say in
the shape of man or in the way of a bright cloud moving in Paradise when the
wind began to rise Genesis 3. 8, 9,
, and asking with a voice of Majesty, after his rebellious subject. And that
this was the Son of God is insinuated by the Targum of Onkelos in the eighth
verse of the third of Genesis. The Text of Moses is thus translated, And when
they [our first Parents] heard the voice of the Lord God. But this is the sense
of the words of Onkelos, And they heard the voice of the Word of the Lord God.

And amongst Christian Writers I may alledg Tertullian Tert. adv. Prax. Sect.
16. p. 509.
, and St. Hilary of Poictiers Hill. Pict. de Trin. l. 12. p. 315.
, who abounds in this Argument; as also Theophilus Antiochenus Theoph.
Antioch. ad Autol. p. 99, 100.
, whose words are so pertinent that I cannot forbear the enlarging of my
discourse with the translation of them: You will object (said Theophilus) that
I teach, that God cannot be circumscribed; and yet that I say too, that God
walked in Paradise. Hear the answer I make to this Objection. God indeed and
the Father of all things is neither shut up in a place, nor found in it. For no
place is there in which God can [in such manner] dwell. In the mean time his
Word by which he made all things, being the Power and Wisdom of the Father
himself, personating the Father who is Lord of all, came into Paradise in his
Person, and spoke unto Adam, who in the Scripture is said to have heard the
voice of God. Now Gods voice, what is it else but the very Logos (or Word) of
God, which is likewise his Son. After Adam was driven out of Paradise, the
Logos appointed a kind of Shechinah in the appearance of Angels to guard the
way of the Tree of Life. These I conceive were a Cherub and a Saraph, and that
the latter (an Angel in the opinion of Maimonides himself Maimon. More Neb.
Part. 1. c. 49. p. 73. per Lahat ibi intelligitur Angelus qui est instar
flammae.
) was meant by the flaming-sword turning every way; the versatile tail of a
Saraph or flame-like winged Serpent, not being unaptly so called. And this
conceit when I come to explain my self about Urim, and the brazen Serpent, will
seem less extravagant than now it may do in this naked Proposal. And yet as
it is thus proposed, it is not so idle as that of Pseudo- Anselm Anselmi
Elucidar. c. 15. p. 461. Gladius fuit igneus murus, etc.
, who will have this guard to be a Wall of Fire incompassing Paradise. In
process of time, when Cain and Abel offered to God their Eucharistical
Sacrifices, the Son of God again appeared as Gods Shechinah; and testified it
may be his gracious acceptance of the Sacrifice of Abel by some ray of flame
streaming from that glorious visible Presence, and re-acting to it; whilst he
showed himself not pleased with the offering of Cain by forbearing (as I
conjecture) to shine on his sheaves, or to cause them to ascend, so much as in
smoke toward Heaven. And with this conjecture agrees the Translarion of
Theodotion in these words, (...), and [the Lord] had respect to the oblations
of Abel, and set them on fire. That seems to be the most ancient way of
answering by Fire, some obscure characters of which we may discern in that lamp
of fire which passed betwixt the pieces of Abraham's Sacrifice Genesis 15. 17.
. And much plainer footsteps of it are to be seen in the contest of Elijah with
the Prophets of Baal, whom that true Prophet of the God of Israel vanquished by
that sign, triumphing also thereby over that false Deity which they so vainly
and with Battologie invoked See Hom. 1l. 2. V. 353. of. Jove lightning on the
righthand in token of his favor. (...).
.

I doubt not but God vouchsafed to men many other appearances of his glorious
Shechinah, besides those granted to Adam and Abel, before he expressed his high
resentment of the immorality of the world in the Flood of Noah. But we have no
large Registers of the Transactions of those times.

PART 4. Of the Shechinah of God from Noah to Moses.
THis eminent declaration of God as a God of judgment, by sending such a
deluge, not having its due effect on Cham: God with great justice withdrew (as
I conceive) this glorious Shechinah from him and his Line, which continued his
wickedness as well as his name. From them he withdrew it especially; though to
the rest it appears not to have been a common favor. Cham and his race being
thus left to the vanity of their own brutish minds, that race in the first
place worshipped the Sun as the Tabernacle of the Deity; that being the object
which next to Gods Shechinah, did paint in the brain an Image of the most
venerable luster, and perhaps likest to that glorious flame of Gods Shechinah
which had formerly appeared; for so glorious was that Planet in the eyes of the
very Manichees in aftertimes, that they esteemed it the seat of Christ after
his Ascension and Installment in Heaven.

I have guessed already, that this kind of Idolatry was exercised and with
design promoted at the building of the Tower of Babel. Now toward the
prevention of that impious design the Shechinah of God appeared on the place.
For so Novatianus argues from those words in the Eleventh of Genesis Genesis 11.
7.
, Let us go down. It could not (said he Novat. de Trin. cap. 25. p. 723.
) be God the Father, for his Essence is not circumscribed; nor yet an Angel,
for it is said in Deuteronomy Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
, That the most high divided the Nations. It was therefore he that came down,
of whom St. Paul says, He who descended is he who ascended above all Heavens.
So that the Arabic Version [the Angels came down Genesis 11. 5, etc.
] must be interpreted of that part of the Shechinah which is made up by their
attendance on the Son of God.

Whilst God was thus angry with the race of Cham, it pleased him to vouchsafe
(though not in the quality of a daily favor) the appearance of his Shechinah
to that separate or holy seed from whence his Son, not yet incarnate, was to
take the substance of his flesh. A great Instance of it we have in the
appearance which he vouchsafed to Abraham, who often saw the Shechinah of God,
and in that manner communed with him: so great was the ignorance of the Jews,
and causless their malice when they raged against the Son of God, because he
professed himself to have existed before that ancient Patriarch. Such fall
under the heavy sentence of the Council called at Sirmium, a City of the lower
Pannonia, where the Eastern Bishops concluded on a Creed against Photinus, who
Haeretically maintained, That Christ appeared not before he was born of the
Virgin. Of that Creed this is one of the Decretory clauses Socrat. l. 2. c. 30.
p. 123. and Hilar. Pict. de Syn. p. 373. and Athan. de Syn. p. 693.
, Whosoever says that the unbegotten Father only was seen to Abraham, and not
the Son, let him be accursed. The second Chapter of the Ecclesiastical History
of Eusebius is wholly spent in the proof of the Pre-existence of Christ. And in
that place, as also in his Book of Evangelical Demonstration Eusebius. de Them.
Evang. l. 5. c. 9. p. 233, 234.
, he insisteth, amongst many other Examples, on that of Abraham, to whom
Almighty God did once by his Son show himself a while in the common similitude
of a man at the Oak of Mamre; the Shechinah in its especial luster being for a
short season intercepted.

That Place, from this occasion, was for many ages esteemed sacred; so high a
respect there is in man for the visible presence of a Divine Power. But such
things being apt to degenerate into abuse, the same place by degrees became
sacred in the sense of the Heathens; that is, polluted with many idolatrous
superstitions Id. ibid. p. 234.
. At length the Piety of Constantine Sozom. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. p. 447, 448.
the Great, did there erect a Church for the worship of Christ, who had
appeared in that place in a like form (they say) to that which he afterward
assumed with personal union. Another appearance was vouchsafed to Abraham, when
the Judgment of Fire was imminent over Sodom. Moses witnesses, That he who
revealed this overthrow to the Patriarch, was truly God, whilst he introduces
Abraham using toward him the Divine style of the Judge of all the earth; and
that this Lord and Judge was the Son of God (whom the Father has appointed to
judge the world), Eusebius Eusebius. in Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 2. p. 7. And Just.
Mart. in Dial. cum Tryph. p. 375: C.
thinks he has warrant to say from the words of the same Moses. For so the
Father interprets the Prophet when he speaks Genesis 19. 24.
of this Lord [the Word, the sensible descending Shechinah] raining from the
Lord (or invisible Father) fire and brimstone out of Heaven [or the Region of
the Clouds]. And in this particular the Council of Sirmium Socrat. l. 2. c. 30.
p. 132.
is so peremptory and so severe, that it anathematizeth all who affirm those
words [The Lord rained from the Lord] to have been spoken, not of the Father
and the Son, but of the Father raining from himself that dreadful fire and
brimstone.

This Lord then, is the same with him of whose appearance we read in the Chap.
17. of Genesis. It is said in the 22 verse of that Chapter, That God went up
from Abraham; so runs the Hebrew Text. But the Chaldee Paraphrast calls him
who ascended, Fulgur Dei; that is, the luster of the Divine Shechinah drawn up,
as it were, toward the firmament of Heaven.

Of the appearance of Three in human shape to Abraham, St. Hilary of Poictiers
discourses at large Hill. de Tr. l. 4. p. 66, 67, 68, 85, And Eusebius. in l. 5.
c. 9. Them. Evang p. 234.
. And in that Discourse he contendeth, That the person to whom Abraham did
particularly address himself, calling him his Lord, was the Son of God,
attended then only but with two visible Angels. And this interpretation seems
more probable than that of S. Cyril of Alexandria Cyr. Alex. contra Julian. l.
1. p. 20.
, who because three appeared, and Abraham spoke as unto one, concludes thence
an Apparition of the Trinity in Unity. The same S. Hilary De Trin. p 66
conceives the same Lord to have formerly appeared to Hagar, whom he observes
to give to him the like titles of Lord and God Genesis 16. 13.
; and to have received from him k Genesis 16. 10.
the promise of a numberless offspring. Moses himself, before he mentions
these titles given by Hagar, had indeed called him who appeared to her l Ver. 7.
by the name of an Angel, or the Messenger or Officer of the Lord. But even
that name, if spoken with emphafis, is not improperly ascribed to the second
Person or Logos, who was the Shilo (that is, as Grotius does interpret it) the
sent of God See Grot. on Genesis 49. 10. Silob (...), etc.
. Of the name Angel there given to the Shechinah, S. Hilary delivers his
opinion after this manner H^l. l. 4. de Trin. p 66. and Novat. c. 26. p. 724.
: To Agar (says he) spoke the Angel of God. And he was both God and Angel, God
of God; and called Angel, as being the Angel of the Great Council See J. Mart.
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 301. and Isa. 9. 6. for this, there, is the reading of the
LXX. followed by the Fathers. (...). See Cy^. Alex. Thesaur. Tom 5. p 116.
.So he is called (says Tertullian Tert. de Carne Christi. sect. 14. p. 319.
dictus est quidem magni co^silii Angeius, idest nuncius; officii, non naturae
vocabulo.
and styled a Messenger, not as a name designing his Nature, but his Office.
And they are superficially skilled in Philo the Jew, who know not that he calls
the Logos both Gods Image and his Angel See Philo de Somn. etc. and J. Mart.
dial. cum Tryph. p. 357. and his Apol. 2. p. 95.
. Jusiin Martyr also shows to Trypho the Jew, that the God who appeared to
Abraham J. Mart. dial. p. 356.
, was the Minister of the Universal Creator; and he afterward Id. ib. p. 357.
gives this as the reason why the Word is called an Angel; to wit, that he may
be known to be the Minister or Substitute of the Father of all things. Justin
Martyr might here have respect to the words of St. Paul 1 Cor. 8. 6.
, who teaches that all things are of the Father, and by the Son.

The Son was that Angel of God who strove with, and blessed the Patriarch
Jacob. Hence Jacob in grateful memory of that blessing, called the place
Peniel, having there seen the Face, that is, the Shechinah or Image of God,
personated by the Logos his Son. That Shechinah, though it appeared without
human figure, might not unfitly be called the Face, because it was that Divine
Presence, to the Majesty of which (as to the Face of a Prince) the religious
subjects of the true God, made their application. This, again, is the opinion
of Eusebius Eusebius in Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 2. p. 7. and in Demonstr. Evang. l.
5. c. 10. p. 235. etc.
, and St. Hilary Hill. de Trin. l. 4. p. 69, 70.
, and Justin Martyr J. Mart. dial. cum Trypb. p. 355, 356, 358.
; our three former witnesses. This last-named Father tells Trypho the Jew,
That it was the Son of God who appeared both to Abraham and Jacob; and that it
was absurd to think the Immensity of the Godhead, leaving the Heavens, should
it self appear in a narrow and limited space on earth. And the forementioned
Fathers of the Council of Sirmium Symb. Syrm. ap. Hill. de Syn. p. 373 and Socr.
Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 30. p. 123.

See Novat. de Trin. c. 27. p. 725. And Genesis 31. 11, 13. the Angel said, I am
the God of Bethel, etc.


, denounced in their Creed a solemn Curse against those who should maintain
that it was the unbegotten Father, and not the Son, who strove with Jacob.

Whilst God by such appearances as these, encouraged true Religion in the holy
Line, the ungodly Race, especially of Cham, did further blot out the Image of
God, by receiving the impressions of numberless Idols, of which some excelled
others; but none were worthy the veneration they paid to them. The Idols which
admitted of much better apology than many of their fellows, and which
approached nighest the Shechinah of God on earth when figured, were mighty
Potentates and Benefactors. And so the Author of that Book de Mundo, which has
been commonly ascribed to Aristotle, represents God Auth. lib. de Mundo inter
op. Aristot. p. 860.
as some Puissant King of Persia, sitting in his Royal Palace at Susa or
Ecbatane, and giving Laws to all Asia, and receiving intelligence of all its
affairs. Besides this more generous Idolatry, there were many other kinds, and
those so apparently ridiculous, that barely to repeat them were in effect to
deride the Nations guilty of them.

Amongst other places Egypt was the nursery of these Follies. There every thing
which could help or hurt, or represent, and be assumed by a Demon, or acted by
one of his Impostures, was conceived to have in it a Divine power, and received
Religious worship. The Rains of AEthiopia swell their River, and break over
into fruitfulness; and the Nile is straitway a God. Some natural or political
cause preventeth or removes some annoyance, and the effect is ascribed with
Divine Praises, to the vain and insufficient See Reyn. de Idol. Eccl. Romans l.
2. c. 3. p. 476, 477, etc.
Talisman [for as Jamblicus speaking professedly of their Mysteries, does
inform us, They conceived a Divine Power, able to procure or prevent good and
evil, did straightway adjoin it self to that piece of matter, which was
congruously chosen and figured according to some Celestial aspect]. The
Constellations are by fancy (and such as is sometimes injudicious enough)
formed into the shapes of certain Creatures on earth; and those Creatures are
worshipped after having been supposed either eminently to contain the virtues,
or with singular perception, to be sensible of the operations of such knots of
Stars.

The seed of Abraham sojourning in this Land, which abounded with Idols, and
with a great number of external rites, and being by custom very prone to them,
and as it were molded into a ritual temper; it pleased that God who
condescendeth sometimes as an indulgent Father to lisp with Infants, to
consider their infirmity when he led them out of bondage by the hand of Moses.
He therefore by the same Moses gave to that people such an Economy [a
dispensation containing a visible Shechinah, and a great many Ceremonies] as
might innocently gratify their busy tempers, and sensitive inclinations, and
divert them from the worship of false gods, and from those abominable
formalities with which in Egypt those Idols were observed. This if it needs
to be avouched by authority, after a serious view of the state of Egypt and
Israel, in their parallel and disparity; I may cite to my purpose that
excellent Interpreter of the Scriptures St. Chrysostom. S. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Op.
in diem not. Christi. p. 422.
At what time (said he) God delivered the Hebrew people from the Egyptian
troubles, and barbarous tyranny of Pharaoh; seeing them still to retain the
Relics of Impiety, and to be addicted even to madness, to all things which
fall under the senses; and to be struck with the admiration of beautiful
Temples; he himself commanded that a Temple should be made for them, excelling
and obscuring all others, not only in the magnificence of the matter, and
variety of art; but also in the form of its structure. And as a good Father who
has at length received a Son returning to him after much time spent in
dissolute company, does with honor and safety, put him into circumstances of
greater abundance, lest being reduced to any straits, he calls to mind his
former pleasures of debauchery, and be afresh affected with a desire of them:
So God perceiving the Jews infected most sottishly with propenseness to
sensible things, does in these very things make something for them highly
excellent, that they might never for the future linger after the Egyptians, or
after the things of which they had experience, whilst they sojourned amongst
them.

PART 5. Of the Shechinah of God from Moses to the Captivity.
BEfore this Temple was built or shown, so much as in the model of it to Moses,
the Word of God See Just. Martyr in Apol, 2. p. 95.
assuming an Angel, appeared to him in the luster of flame in a bush on Mount
Horeb. Moses calls him in the second verse of the third of Exodus, the Angel
of God; and God in verse the fourth; and in the sixth verse he styles himself
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and in the eighth verse he is said to
have descended. "Now he (says Justin Martyr Id. ibid. p. 96. and in his Dial.
cumTryph. p. 356. B.
) that called himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was not the
Universal Creator, but the minister of his will. With him agree Eusebius Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 2. p. 7, 8.
, St. Hilary S. Hill. de Trin. p. 70, 71.
, and St. Ambrose S. Ambros. Tom. 4. Op. p. 222. See Athan. contra Arianos.
Orat. 4. p. 467. A. B.
. The words of St. Ambrose are to this sense: The God himself who was seen by
Moses, says, my name is God. This is the Son of God who is therefore called
both Angel and God, that he might not be thought to be he of whom are all
things; but he by whom are all things. Philo the Jew himself Philo de vit a
Mosis, p. 594, 595.
calls the Voice to Adam, to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses from the Bush, the
effect of the Logos of God.

This Lord afterward when the people of Israel had under the Conduct of Moses,
begun their Journey from Egypt, did miraculously direct them by the continued
Shechinah of a Pillar Exodus 13. 21, 23.
of cloud by day, and of fire by night. This we read in the 13th of Exodus. He
who in that Chapter is called the Lord, is in the following Chapter Exodus 14.
19.
called the Angel of God, who as formerly he had gone before the Camp for their
Guidance, so now the Egyptians pursuing, he stood behind it as their defense.
With allusion to this appearance Eusebius having first proposed it as the Title
of his Chapter Eusebius. de demonstr. Evang. l. 5. c. 14. p. 241.
, That the Logos of old appeared, and then began the Chapter with some places
of Scripture relating to the cloudy Pillar: he proceeds in making this
demand, Who was he that spoke, but the Pillar of Cloud which had formerly
appeared to the Fathers in the figure of Man? And indeed whilst Moses is not
contented with the promise of an assistant-Angel See Exodus 33. 2, 5, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. compared with Chap. 23. v. 21, 22, 23.
, but expressly petitioneth for the continuance of Gods Presence; he leaves not
us in want of a Commentator to tell us what kind of Angel was present with him.
That Angel no doubt it was who is called by that name in the Hebrew of the 6th
Verse of the 5th of Ecclesiastes, but by the Seventy Interpreters, the Face of
God Eccl. 5. 6. -- (...). --
. Lactantius will have this Angel to have gone before the Israelites, and
divided the Waters Lactant. de vera Sap. l. 4. p. 374.
. His Power might do it, but that his Shechinah did so, is contrary to the
Sacred Text Exodus 14. 19, 20, 21, 22.
.

The people being arrived nigh Mount Sina in Arabia, Moses especially beheld
the Shechinah of God, whilst the Word assuming, it may be a principal Angel,
and being attended (as Jupiter by his Satellites, if I may compare small things
with great) by a numerous retinue of other blessed Spirits, did with solemnity
Psalm. 68. 17.
and terror deliver the Law.

Where the Psalmist alludeth to that Solemnity in which God appeared with many
Chariots of the Heavenly Host; he in the very next verse uses the words which
the New Testament interpret of Christ, Thou art gone up on high, thou have led
captivity captive. As if both at Sinah and Sion, and the Mount of the Messiahs
Ascension, God had triumphed in the Shechinah of his Son. He (says Tertullian
Tertull. Adv^rs. Judaeos, p. 194. B
) who spoke to Moses, was the Son of God, who was always seen. That is,
whenever the Divinity vouchsafed a visible appearance, it was not by the Father
but by the Son. This Pamelius reckons as one of the Errors of Tertullian; but
by doing so, he perhaps ran into one himself. Tertullian does not only affirm
this, but secondeth his Authority with a reason. For Jesus, said he, not Moses,
was to introduce the people into Canaan. Theodoret in his Commentary on the
second to the Colossians, mentions certain defenders of the Law, who induced
others to worship Angels, saying that the Law was given by them. They had been
much more in the right if they had urged the worship of Christ the Angel of
that Covenant. The Law was given by Angels in the hand of a Mediator Gal. 3. 19.
, which whether it be meant of Moses or of Christ, is a dispute amongst many;
though the margent of some of our English Bibles In Quarto, Land. 1610.
interprets it of the former. That Title might have been as well applied to
Christ, not yet God-man, yet the Minister of the Father. And so St. Chrysostom
and Theophylact do apply it. And St. Chrysostom teaches that therefore Christ
gave the Law, that he might have Authority, when it was convenient, to put an
end to it. And they who stiffly oppose such Ministration of the Logos, give
suspicion to jealous heads, as if they looked toward Racovia. For if there
were a second Person, he surely must be fit for that great Office. But I
forbear to urge a place of uncertain sense, and choose rather to consider what
the same Apostle says in his first Epistle 1 Cro. 10. 9.
to the Corinthians. He there says, concerning the Israelites, that they
tempted Christ in the Wilderness. And this Christ whom they tempted, is in the
Old Testament called Jehovah. Hence therefore it follows, that he who
appeared to the people in the Wilderness was the Logos of God.

This opinion which ascribes to the Logos the delivery of the Law, is by the
learned Hugo Grotius in his Notes on the Decalogue, branded with the name of a
grievous error. And it is not the manner of that great Wit to rail at Opinions
without offering reasons for his contrary judgment: and here he offers two.

The First he takes from those first words of the Epistle to the Hebrews: God
who at diverse times, and in diverse manners spoke to our forefathers by the
Prophets, has in these last times spoken to us by his Son.

The Second he takes from the second and third verses of the second Chapter,
in which the Holy Author prefers the Gospel before the Law, because the Law
was given by Angels; (that is, says he, by the Angel sustaining the person of
God, and for that reason mentioned by St. Steven Act. 7. 38.
in the singular number, and by many more such spirits making up that glorious
train:) but the Gospel by the Lord Jesus the Son of God. Upon the seeming force
of such Reasons, I find Curcellaeus Curcell. Institut. p. 40, 41.
and others Tentam. Theol. p. 289.
agreeing in the sentence of Grotius.

Now for the first Objection, I may remove it out of the way by saying no more
than that God spoke formerly by his Son as his Logos or Minister, and in the
latter times by him, as his Son Incarnate, or as begotten by the Holy Ghost of
the substance of the Blessed Virgin. The same Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews says of the Throne of Christ, as Gods Logos, that it was from
everlasting; and yet we well know that his Kingdom as Messiah, Mediator
Incarnate, or the Word made flesh, was but then at hand when his Harbinger John
took upon him the Office of Baptist: And Justin Martyr thought not himself in
an error, when he said Just. Mart. in Apol. 1. p. 48, 49.
, That the Logos both spoke by the Prophets things to come, and also by
himself, being made subject to like infirmities with us. The Word was Gods
Minister Tertul. de Resurrect. Carn. Sect. 51. p. 357. Jesus -- Adam
novissimus, etsi sermo primarius. And advers. Prax. p. 509. -- Constat eum
semper visum ab Initio, Qui visus fuerat in fine, etc.
before and under the Law, but not in the same quality as under the Gospel. In
those times he spoke not himself immediately; for how can a Divine Subsistence
be, merely of it self, corporally vocal? But he spoke (I conceive) by some
principal Angel, assumed (as has been said) without personal union, assisted
by him in a miraculous motion of the air or brain. Under the Gospel he spoke
with his own mouth, as having assumed human nature into unity of Person [This
word Person (if I may make a digression of two or three lines) deserves not
the clamor with which Socinians hoot at it; especially when we consider it, as
now we do, with relation to Christ as the (...), Face, or personating Shechinah
of God]. They then that rightly distinguish betwixt Christ as Gods Word and
Shechinah under the former Covenants, and as Mediator and Gods Son incarnate,
under the Gospel, will not much be perplexed with such places of Scripture as
speak sometimes of Christ's Praeexistence, and oftener of his coming into the
world in the fullness of time. And thus much Monsieur le Blanc himself takes
notice of Le Blanc in Thesi an Christus sit med. sec. not. hum. and div. sect.
23. p. 812.
in his Theological Theses: He there favors the opinion of Christ's
praeexistence. He owneth him as the Minister of God of old, but not properly as
Mediator; which (he says) including Christ's Priestly Office, did of necessity
require not only a mission of one Divine Person by another, but a Divine Person
incarnate.

Now from that which I have suggested in this answer to the first Objection of
Grotius, it will be a matter of small difficulty to infer a Reply unto his
second. For an assumed Angel being used by the Divine Logos as the immediate
Minister of himself to the people, and Christ speaking with his own mouth under
the Gospel as God-man; and the great mystery of the Gospel consisting in the
manifestation of God in the flesh; the Apostle had sufficient reason to prefer
the Gospel before the Law. We have before us a matter of lesser astonishment,
when we think of Divinity speaking by an Angel to which it is not vitally
united, than when we contemplate it as manifesting it self in the quality of
God-man, in unity of Person with human nature. Such were the thoughts of St.
Hilary of Poictiers Hill. Pict. de Trin. l. 4. p. 856
, who in our present Argument thus discourses: Then God only was seen in [the
show of] man: He was not born. Now he who was seen, is also born. For
Athanasius S. Athan. op. Vol. 1. p. 86. and p. 537. B.
, he contendeth that Christ was called the Son long before he was incarnate;
and that Moses himself knew of the future Incarnation, as well as he saw the
present Appearance of the unincarnate Logos.

I conclude then, notwithstanding these Objections, That there is almost as
good warrant for reading the Preface to the Decalogue in this manner [Christ
spoke all these words, and said] as the ancient Saxon Prefacer Praef. ante
Leges Aler. di ad calcem Eccl. Hist. Haymonis.
had thus to read, as he does, that part of the fourth Commandment [For in six
days Christ made the Heaven and the Earth]. God, who by his Logos gave all
Physical Laws to Nature, did also by the same Word give the Moral Law to
Israel. In the beginning of that Law (says St. Austin Aug. Epist. 119.
God prohibited the worship of any Image, besides one, the same with himself;
that is to say, the Logos his Son, whom Moses saw; it being promised to him
Numb. 12, 8.
, that God should apparently converse with him, and that he should behold the
similitude or Image, or, as the Seventy render it, (...), the Glory, or
glorious Shechinah of God.

Whether, at the giving of the Law, Moses saw the Shechinah in human figure,
his Text does not inform us; yet it does not necessarily follow, that Moses or
Aaron saw no figure, because the people did not. For there was much more danger
in them who had had the education of slaves, and who labored under gross and
sensitive apprehensions, than there was in Moses a Learned and Prudent person,
of abusing such similitude in the framing of Idols: and one would think that at
the receiving of the Tables Exodus 33. 23.
he saw something in human figure; for he is said to have seen the backparts of
God, or his Shechinah, or the show of a man inverted, or rather a less degree
of luster in the Shechinah; neither he nor any man living being able to behold
the face or full luster of it, which perhaps might then appear to the
attending-Angels. So that the desire of Moses was, in effect, like that of
Eudoxus, who desired to see the Sun just by him. If it should have been
granted, he must have paid down his life as the expense of his curiosity. And
indeed the seeing of the Face of God in that sense, was, at that season, the
less necessary, because God had, just then, made a promise of his Shechinah, or
presence, in the Tabernacle Exodus 33. 14
to go along with him, and to support him against the incredulity of the
people, to whose eyes, such a Shechinah as they could bear, was in wisdom to be
accommodated.

Whilst Moses was beholding this Pattern in the Moant, and receiving Laws from
the Presence of God, the people seeing neither, as at his departure they had
done Exodus 24. 16, 17.
; the Glory of God in Clouds and Flame; nor, as in the Wilderness, the Pillar
of Fire and Cloud; nor himself whom they judged a cause of the Shechinah of God
with them; and remaining forty days and forty nights in this forsaken estate,
as they were apt to think it, importuned Aaron for some symbol of Gods
Presence, with which he might conduct them, as Moses had done in former times.
Aaron wearied with their Cries, made them a Golden Image after the manner of
some part of Gods Shechinah which he had seen with Nadab and Abihu, and the
Seventy Elders, in a certain ascent of the Mount Exodus 24. 1, 9, 10, 11. comp.
with Exodus 19. 21, 23.
. He saw thenthe God of Israel, that is, as the Seventy expound the Hebrew
sense, (...), the place, or the Throne; or as the Targum of Onkelos renders it,
the Glory, or Shechinah of God; not, as Oleaster affirms, the Pavement only,
which is mentioned afterward. And in the Shechinah there was an appearance of
Angels; the Author to the Hebrews, where he opposes the Gospel to the Law in
diverse particulars Heb. 12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
, mentioning an innumerable company of Angels, in opposition to a smaller
company on Mount Sinah. The attending-Angels were usually Cherubim Ezekiel. 9. 3.
, and the Cherubim appeared with heads like those of Oxen; and because the head
only was of that likeness See Ezekiel. c. 1. and. 10.
, therefore (if I conjecture aright) Lactantius Lactant. de vera sap. l. 4. p.
376. Aureum caput bovis figuratum.
and St. Jerome S. Hieron. Commen. in 4. Hos.
called this Golden Image the Golden head of a Calf. This I conceive to have
been the figure of a Cherub, though it pleases not the Painter, who describes
it by the Face of a young round-visag'd man. Thus much I collect from the
Prophet Ezekiel. That Prophet, in the vision of the wheels Ezekiel. 10. 14. See R.
Sal. Franco's Truth springing out of the earth, p. 15.
, says of them, That every one had four Faces. The first Face was the Face of
a Cherub; and the second Face was the Face of a man; and the third the Face of
a Lion; and the fourth, the Face of an Eagle. If then the Face of a Cherub was
the Face of a man, then each wheel had not four differing Faces, but one had
two Faces of human Figure, the second being said to be the Face of a man, as
the first was said to be the Face of a Cherub. But if these two had been alike,
the Prophet would then have altered his style, and said, The first two Faces
were the Faces of a man. But it is evident, by comparing this place in Ezekiel,
with the tenth verse of the first Chapter, that Ez^k. 1. 10.
the Face of a Cherub is the Face of an Ox. For there he mentions the three
latter Faces, as he does here, calling them the Faces of a Man, a Lion, an
Eagle: but for the other Face, called here the Face of a Cherub, he calls it
there the Face of an Ox. And the comparing of these places, induced the Learned
Critic Ludovicus de dieu Lud. de dieu. in Epist. ad D. Guil. Eos. well, inter
Op. doctis. Medi, p. 704.
to be of this opinion, that Cherub signified an Ox, and was derived from the
Chaldee word Cherub, He, or It, has plowed. Now by the worshipping of this
Figure of the Face of a Cherub or Ox, the sottish people changed their Glory
(b), the glorious Image or Shechinah of God (called, as was even now said,
(...), by the Seventy, in the 12th of Numbers) into the similitude of a man,
though useful creature; whose likeness could, at best, be but the symbol of an
Angel, which was no more to the Shechinah of God (nor so much by a great deal),
as one spoke of a wheel is to an Eastern Emperor in a triumphant Chariot. They
turned their Glory (says Jeremiah Pfal. 106. 19.

Romans 1. 23.


) into a thing which did not profit them, in Idolum, into an Idol (as is the
version of the Vulgar Latin); a helpless statue. They turned the Truth of God
(as it is in St. Paul Jer. 2. 11.
into a Lie: The true Shechinah of God, into an Idol, which is vanity, nothing
of that which it pretends to be; having no Divinity attending on it. Aaron
made it as Gods symbol, which in truth it was not; and the people worshipped it
beyond his intention, and after the Egyptian manner; and in their hearts
wishing they were again in that Land of Ceremonious Idolatry. This folly
kindled the wrath of God and Moses; yet it did not quite remove his favor: for
Moses was a second time called up into the Mount, and thence he brought the
renewed Tables and the Statutes of Israel, and the pattern of the Tabernacle;
and at his descent, Rays of glorious Light did stream from his face, as if he
had been a second Shechinah, reflecting the borrowed beams of the first.

The Tabernacle which God had now discovered, and which Moses was ready to
frame, was but a model of the Temple built many years after by the Magnificent
Solomon. And in it God gave the people, instead of the more aenigmatical and
idle Hieroglyphics of the World in Egypt, a more excellent Scheme of it in
this great and typical Fabric, representing, in the three spaces of it, the
three Heavens, which the Jews so often speak of, the Elementary, and Starry,
and Supercoelestial Regions. St. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. in Hom. de Nativ. vol. 5.
op. p. 422. (...).
speaking of this workmanship of God, calls it the Image of the whole World
both sensible and intellectual. And he attempteth the justification of his
Notion, by the 9th to the Hebrews, and particularly by the 24th verse, in which
the holy places made with hands, are called the figures of the true or heavenly
places.

In this manner, then, God pleased to help the imaginations of the Jews, by a
visible scheme of his throne and footstool. It were endless here to take
particular notice of all things relating to the Tabernacle or Temple: but if I
take not the Ark into my especial consideration, I shall be guilty of greater
negligence than any foolish Astronomer, who in his description of the Heavens
should leave out the Sun.

This Ark of the Covenant considered in all the appendages of it, God
vouchsafed to the Jews in place of all the Statues, or Creatures, or
appearances of Demons, which their fancy was apt to adore, and in which
Demons did already, or might afterward counterfeit some shows of the glorious
Shechinah of God. Men (says Maimonides Maim. in More Nev. par. 3. c 45. p. 475.
) built Temples to the Stars, and placed in them some Image dedicated to this
or the other Idol in the Heavens, and gave it unanimous worship. Hence God
commanded that a Temple should be built to himself, and that the Ark should be
put into it, and that in the Ark should be deposited the Two Tables of stone,
in which it was written, I am the Lord thy God; and thou shall have no other
Gods besides me. The whole of it was in singular manner typical of God-man, who
came to destroy the works of the Devil. This virtue of Christ appearing on the
Ark was manifested in the miraculous conquest of it over Dagon I Sam. 5. 4.
, a Sea-god worshipped in Palestine in the City of Ashdod. He fell before the
Ark, and laid on the ground a handless and headless Idol, without more show of
Majesty, Power or Wisdom than the Trunk of a Tree.

This Ark was not in it self properly an Image, but a Chest over-laid with Gold
as a Conservatory of the precious (...) of the Two Tables. Yet thereby God by
way of Hieroglyphick, though not of Image or Picture of representation, did
offer himself to the eye as a supreme Governor ruling the Commonwealth of
Israel by a written Law. This Moncaeus Moncaeus in Aar. purg. ap. Crit. maj. p.
4428.
would have to be taken from the (...), the Chest or Coffin of Apis, mentioned
by Plutarch Plutarc. de Iside, p. 362. C.
. But that was a thing of later date, and not known to the ancient Egyptians.
It belonged to the Greek Serapis, who is said thence to take his name.

The whole of the Ark seems to some the Triumphant Chariot Philo de Profugis.
p. 465. B. C -- (...) [i. e. (...), etc.
of God moved by Angels, set forth by the form of Beasts, who drew the Chariots
of the Eastern Kings: whose Pomp the Poets exalted into Heaven in the Chariots
of their gods. This of the true God is represented as moving by Angels in the
Clouds, not as any fixed Throne in it self: the Power and Providence of God,
whose Chariot has Wheels with Eyes, making all the World its circle; though
often it took its way to the Tabernacle and Temple. Why Cherubims were added,
the cause has been often intimated already; to wit, by reason that the Logos
appearing as Gods Shechinah, was attended with Angels, and especially with
Cherubim. Though Maimonides Maimon. de Fund Leg Sect. 8. p. 18. and Sect. 9. p.
20.
reckons the Cherubim to be of the lowest order excepting those which he
calls Ischim; such in his conceit as spoke to inspired men, and were by them
seen in Prophetical Visions. For the entire Figure of the Cherubim, I am not
desirous to inquire with nice and accurate diligence, whether it were such as
the Angels usually appeared in, or whether it were a mere Emblem of their
Properties. The Scripture shows that they move swiftly, as flame and wind, and
all understand that wings are the instruments of a quick motion. The Scripture
also represents them as dazzled at the Glory of God, and therefore needs no
further Comment on the Faces of the Cherubim as covered with their wings. But
curiously to interpret each particular spoken of them, and of the Ark in which
they were placed, is the ready way to create such significations by our fancy,
as the wisdom of God did never intend. Of this kind sure is that conceit of S.
Greg. Nyssen Greg. Nyssen. de vita Moysis, ^om. 1. Op. p. 225.
, who will have the Rings of the Ark to signify the Angels sent as Rings or
pledges of favor to the Heirs of Salvation. It is enough if we look upon the
Ark as an holy vessel representing Gods Majesty with his Celestial Retinue,
and the Rule of his Law, and as a Type of Christ, without forcing every staff,
and ring, and pin, into unnatural Allegory. And for some such reason Mr. Calvin
In 2. Praec^pt, p. 209. minime -- sequitar, etc.
did on purpose forbear to pry too critically into the Ark.

Betwixt the Cherubims, and upon the Cover of the Ark appeared as in a Chariot
of Majesty, the Divine Logos in admirable luster, yet tempered with Clouds. So
he appeared to the people when Moses was taken up into the Mount. So Ezekiel in
his Vision Ezekiel. 1. 4, 5. etc. 9. 3. etc. 10. 3, 4.
saw him in a cloud with brightness about it; and this he calls the Glory upon
the Cherubims. And doubtless that Vision was in part a Vision of the Temple,
though not wholly after the pattern of the Tabernacle, but as furnished by the
voluntary devotion of Solomon, who added Oxen and Lions to the Brazen-Laver.
These some think to have been steps to his future Idolatry: as if he began to
allude to the Lions under the Chariot of the Sun See Cuperi Harpocr. p. 15, 16,
17. And Porphyry, who calls the Sun, (...).
, mentioned by Horus Apollo. But these Images being of servile use there was
the less danger in them. Touching the appearance of the Logos in a cloud of
brightness, we may further observe, that the Glory of God was said to have
appeared in or at the Tabernacle: That in the Psalms Psalm. 78. 60, 61.
the Ark is called Gods Glory, or his (...), (the word of the Seventy) his
beautiful luster; that the same David speaks of having seen Psalm. 63. 2.
(...), (the word of the Seventy for Gods Shechinah) the Glory or radiant
Presence of God in the Sanctuary. And lastly, that the Cherubims on the Ark are
in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews called Cherubims of Glory. Now it further
appears, that it was the Logos whose Glory shone on the Ark, by the many
places of Scripture which speak no otherwise of the Ark than as of the Type of
God Incarnate. Christ before his Incarnation sitting on the Propitiatory as his
Throne, with the Ark and Law at his feet, (for that holy Vessel is in Scripture
called his footstool Psalm. 99. 5. and 132. 7. Isa. 60. 13.
), seems to show himself beforehand in the Offices of King, and Prophet, and
Priest. As King, whilst he sits on his Golden Throne, and exhibiteth the Law;
as Prophet, whilst he answers when consulted from between the Cherubims; with
relation to which Oracle the Hebrews called the Sanctuary the house of Counsel
Author excerpt. de Trad. Hebr. in. Parali^. inter op. S. Hieron. Tom. 3. p. 261.
; and as a Priest establishing his seat as a Propitiatory or Mercy-seat. When I
come in due place to speak of the Word made flesh, it will be proper to insist
on those citations of Scripture which point him out to us as the true Ark of
God. In the mean time I will content my self with that one of the Apostle, who
speaking of the Mysteries of the Divine Wisdom and Love in the Incarnation of
Christ, alludeth manifestly to the Ark, and to the Faces of the Cherubim turned
toward the Shechinah: Which things (says he 1 Pet. 1. 12.
the Angels [called as before was noted, the Cherubims of glory, or of the
glorious Presence of God] with flexure of curiosity look into. This Ark of the
Mosaic Covenant is in the Psalms Psalm. 24. 6. and 42. 2.
called the Face, that is, the Shechinah of God. Nay the Scripture elsewhere
Numb. 10. 35, 36. 1 Samuel 4. 7. and 6. 20. 2 Samuel 7. 6. Psalm. 24. 7, 8. Psalm.
68. 8, 25.
gives to it, taken entirely and together with the Presence of the Logos, the
very name of God.

God having condescended to his so eminent Shechinah, it was thenceforth
certainly the more unlawful for the People to frame, without Divine permission,
any Statues of a true or a false God. And thereby the second Command newly
given, was much enforced: for how could they be confident in setting up any new
Shechinah, when one was provided them by God himself. A Shechinah which did not
lessen Gods Majesty as Images would have done in the opinion of Clemens of
Alexandria Clem. Alex: Strom. l. 5. p. 559.
, and in the judgment of truth it self. For this was not any Representation of
the Godhead, but only a very glorious visible sign of Gods invisible presence
and ready assistance.

The Ark then being neither God nor his Image, was never to be worshipped,
though it had no doubt a very high respect paid toward it, and was separated
from the uses of common vessels. It was a sacred Chest, yet not to be adored,
like that of the Mammonist, for a God. It is true (what Volkelius Volkel. de
vera Relig. l. 5. c. 24. de Idol. p. 582.
observes rightly against Bellarmine, who alleges the instance of the Ark in
favor of Images) there is great difference betwixt such an Image or Emblem as
was constituted by the express command of God, and to which he was by his Word
eminently present; and those which he neither commands, nor consecrates with
his Presence. But here it ought not to be imagined, that the Ark or Cherubims
were by Gods appointment objects of worship. The Heart was only to worship the
Immense God, appearing in the Shechinah; though in that act the Reverence of
the Body could not but pass toward the Ark; and the Mind it may be did not
always use nice abstraction, any more than we now do, when with civil reverence
we bow to the King, not considering just then his clothes and chair of state
apart from him; yet then it is to the Prince, and not to his Robes or seat that
we bow. It is therefore absurd to say with Bellarmine Bell. d^ Imag. l. 2. c.
12.
, that the Cherubims over the Ark were of necessity worshipped with the Ark it
self; for neither were adored, no not the luster of the Shechinah it self; it
not being immediately assumed by the Logos, but only used as a sign of his
gracious Presence; but God only, who was the object of the worship, whilst they
were but circumstances and appendages of his Glory, toward, and not to which
the external sign of adoration used by the High Priest was directed. For we
must not here conceive of the Typical Ark, as of the real Ark, the Lord
Incarnate; in whom the Humane and Divine Nature are so united, that the
Christians have worshipped him always as God-man, though as St. Cyril
professes in his first Book of Answers to Julian, they had all (...), or
Man-worship, in abhorrence. I know that very often See T. G. Cath. no Idol. p.
205, 206.
the words of David are alleged for the worship of the Ark; but with as little
ground, as other Scriptures are often produced by men who first take up
opinions, and then seek color for them in the Bible. We read the words Psalm.
99. 5.
after this manner: Fall down before his Footstool, for it, or he, is holy; and
we have amended the Translation with Reason; it being read of old, Worship the
footstool of his feet: a Reading indiscreet as that of lifting up the hands
unto thy holy Ark most high, in the singing Psalms Psalm. 28. 2.
which are rather permitted than allowed. The Divine Poet intended no more in
that place to urge the Israelites to a precise adoration of the Ark it self,
than any other Poet Kircher in Carm. ded. Ars magna lucis and umbrae -- cadit
ad Genua orientis solis.
designs to worship the very knees or feet of the King, or Pantofle of the
Pope, when in his raptures of humility he speaks of falling prostrate before
them. Genebrard himself thinks David to make allusion to such Rites. And the
Hebrew reading La-hadhom is surely to be interpreted at his footstool, unless
the Lamed signifies nothing; which Dr. Vane either did not, or would not
observe when he Dr. Vane in his lost sheep returned home c. 21. p. 304.
so magisterially accused the Protestants of translating falsely. A greater
Doctor by far has reckoned together the Brazen Serpent and the Cherubims
Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 2. c. 22. p. 392. Sic and Cher. and Ser. aurea in Arca
figuratum exemplum, certe simplex ornamentum, accommodata suggestui, long
diversas habendo causas ab Idoiolatriae condition, ob quam similitudo
prohibetur, etc.
, as other things than Images of worship: so far he is from that, that he calls
the Cherubim on the Ark a simple ornament accommodated to that Throne or Chair,
whence Oracles were dispensed. But St. Hierom it seems establishes the worship
of the Ark in these words: The Jews in time past did worship or reverence the
Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubims, the Propitiatory, the Ark. So
T. G. T. G. Cath. (...) Idol. p. 20^.
translateth him citing his 17th. Epistle ad Marcellam. But if he had pleafed,
he might have left out the word Worship, and used that of Reverence only. The
holy Father indeed in that Epistle In Tom. 1. Op. S. Hieron. p. 123, 124.
penned by him for Paula and Eustochium, owneth a reverence due to them. So do
we very readily an high honorary respect, but not a (...), (the word of the
Seventy) a giving them the homage of the external sign of bowing in a Temple,
and in our time of devotion; for that so circumstantiated belongs to God. So
did putting off the shoos; it was a giving as 'twere to God by that sign
possession of that place; although a forbearing to trample rudely there might
be also a relative respect to the consecrated place. Neither did St. Hierom in
that place, design such reverence or worship; for in the following part of the
Epistle which T. G. did forbear to cite, the Manna, the rod of Aaron, the
Golden Altar which the High Priest did not worship, although he reverenced
them, and separated them from vile use, are reckoned in the same Classis of
things to be revered with the Ark and Cherubims; as also the Sepulcher of
Christ, which the Primitive Christians no more adored than they in Socrates
Socr. Eccl. Hift. p. 191. l. 3. c. 18.
worshipped the body of Babylas the Martyr, who danced about his Coffin singing
Psalms, and deriding the worship of Idols, whilst they removed it into the City
of Antioch from Daphne See Epist. S. Hieron. ad Ripar. Presbyt. op. Tom. 2. p.
118.
. But in this Argument I need not abound. Others have said a great deal in it,
and I will not transcribe them, but rather refer to them See Bishop Whites
Orthod. Faith. p. 111. Capit. Caroli Magni. c. 26. p. 271. Dr. Still. against
T. G. p. 710, 711, etc.
. I will note only here an odd assertion of Grotius In Vot^ pro Pace, p. 41.
, which I wonder how it dropped from the Pen of that great man: Whilst (said
he) the Catholics (meaning the Papists) profess that they exhibit the signs of
honor to Christ, whom many Protestants acknowledge to be present in the
Sacrament, they are no more (...), Bread-worshippers, then the Jews were (...),
worshippers of the Ark when they exhibited the honor of God at it. But the
Jews did not worship the Ark at all, much less as the body of the Logos, whilst
such Catholics worship not only Christ as present, but that very substance
which is under the show of bread as the natural body of Christ; and therefore
if it prove bread, they worship bread, whatever they think it; for the false
opinions of men change not the nature of things; and bread is bread, and the
worship of that which is bread is certainly Bread-worship; though it be judged
of, and honored as another thing. And Barnabas and Paul were no other persons,
though the Lycaonians thought one to be Jupiter and the other Mercury, being
induced to that misbelief, and an inclination to offer sacrifice to them, by
perceiving a miracle wrought by a word of their mouth Act. 14. 8, t^ 13.
.

This Ark which I am speaking of as the instrument of the Shechinah, but not as
an object of worship in it self, was a while placed in Shiloh; but it was not
till David's, or rather Solomon's time properly, fixed in one certain place of
the Holy Land: God causing his favor to be valued by the suspense of it, and
showing thereby that he was not confined to any particular place.

Besides the Shechinah in the Tabernacle, and afterward in the Temple, God
vouchsafed the Jews another especial Presence of his Logos by the High Priest,
and the Sacerdotal Appendages of the Ephod and Breastplate. Of the appointment
of these we read in the eight and twentieth Chapter of Exodus. And in that
Chapter it is said concerning the Breast Plate of the High Priest Exodus 28. 30.
[called also the Breast Plate of Judgment] that the Urim and the Thummim,
should be put into it. Our English Bible has retained these words in their
Original; and where they are translated, in other Versions, the Reader is still
left uncertain of their meaning, and sometimes led into a mistake. Such is like
to be the fate of those who are guided merely by the vulgar-Latine Version
[Doctrine and Truth]; or that of the Seventy [Demonstration and Truth]; or that
in the Syriack[the Lucid and the Perfect]; or that in one Reading of the
Samaritan Translation [Elucidations and Perfections]; or lastly, that of the
Arabick[Dilucidations and Certainties]. Our English Translators, and Arias
Montanus, and Onkelos, spoke e'n as intelligibly, when they only transcribed
the very Hebrew words of Urim and Thummim. I beg leave of the Reader, in this
dark and disputable subject, to interpose my conjecture; and it is at his
pleasure whether he will favor or reject it. If he shall do the latter, he
will not be offensive to me; for I pretend not, in this Argument, to
Demonstration.

Thus, then, I conceive of this Levitical appointment. I suppose the
High Priest, considered especially as a Type of Christ, to be the
walking-Temple of God. His Garments and Breast Plate, together with the Urim
and Thummim, I take to be the apparatus of this Shechinah, in imitation of that
other whose Instruments were the Ark and the Cherubims. Of the High Priest
Philo confesses Philo Jud. de Prosugis, p. 466 B.
, that they esteemed not of him as of a mere man; but they looked on him as [a
(...), or] the Divine Word. And for that reason (says Dr. Jackson in vol. 3.
p. 803.
Dr. Jackson) the Breast Plate was called (...). For his Ornaments, Grotius H.
Grotius in Exodus 28. 4. And Munster in v. 5. p. 653. Crit. Maj.
does parallel them with those of the Temple. The Four colors (said he) are
the same. The Seven Garments Exodus 28. 5, 8. a Breast Plate, an Ephod, a Robe,
a broider'd Coat, a Miter -- a Girdle, v. 36. a Plate of gold.
, if you reckon in the Plate of Gold, answer to the seven Lamps; the Twelve
Jewels to the Twelve Loaves; the inner-linings of the Ephod, to the vail and
six Curtains. And it is observable, that in Hosea Hosea 3. 4.
the more fixed, and this walking Shechinah, are joined together. The place to
which I refer, is that in which God threatens, That the children of Israel
shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a
Sacrifice, and without an Image [or a Standing or Statue, as the Margent
reads it; without a fixed Shechinah, such as that of the Ark] and without an
Ephod; and without LXX. (...), i. e. sine urim.
Teraphim [or Urim]. Christopher Castrus judged these to be the same: and a
very learned and excellent person of our own Nation Doctiss. D. Spenc. in
Dissert. de Urim and Thummim, c. 5. sect. 2. p. 251, 252, 253.
, with whose leave I publish this Discourse, has given us Arguments to
persuade to the belief of that which Castrus just hinted without proof or
illustration. To him I send the doubtful Reader, taking it my self for a most
probable opinion, That Urim were Teraphim; and also, that Teraphim were
Seraphim; of which the Sin might be first mispronounced as Zain, and
afterterwards as Tzade, and at last as Thau. And both Urim and Seraphim have
the same signification of Burnings S. Hier. Tom. 3. ad Dam. p. 117. Seraphim.
sic^t in interpret. nom. Hebr. invenimus, Ardor aut Incendium --
interpretantur. Tom. 5. p. 29. Seraphim interpretantur (...) [not the LXX, who
in Isa. 6. 2. use (...)] quod nos ^e poss^, Incendentes seu comburent^s.
. By Thummim I mean something of a very different nature; and, in due place, I
shall show my opinion concerning it, and offer to the Curious a new, and I hope
an inoffensive and probable notion. But order requires that I first speak of
Urim, Seraphim, or Teraphim. Where I would build something new also, though
upon an old foundation.

I cannot here assent to the opinion of Grotius, who In Judic. c. 17. v. 4. p.
2123. ap. C. M.
is inclined to think the Teraphim of the same form with the Cherubim. He
cites, for this, the Authority of St. Hierom ad Marcellam; and there I find
that Father S. Hi^ron. ad Marcell. Tom. 3. op. p. 72, 73.
so expounding the Theraphim in the third of Hosea, as if they were [not the
Statues, but] the Pictures of Cherubims upon the Ephod, in allusion to those on
the vail of the Tabernacle Exodus 26. 31. With Cherubims shall it be made. Verse.
Arab. With Pictures.
, And he further observes, that where the word Cherubim, in Exodus, is written
without the Letter Vau, it signifies Pictures; but where it is written with
it, it generally signifies living Creatures. The Text, sure, in his time was
written otherwise than now it is; for now the Cherubim on the Ark and on the
Vail are written alike. Whether those on the Vail were entire Pictures or
Figures of Cherubim, as Onkelos calls them, or [Opus Plumarium] a kind of
Feather-work, according to the Vulgar and Samaritan Versions, or representation
of the Wings of the Cherubs, may deserve the further consideration of
Philologers. But whatsoever the opinion was which St. Hierom had of Teraphim,
it is certain that he supposed the Seraphim to be distinct from the Cherubim.
The Cherubim he represents, as the more immediate Attendants on the Throne of
God; the Seraphim, as Angels dispatched on lower Ministrations S. Hieron in
Isa. 6. p. 29. Tom. 5. op. In Cherubim ostendit^r Dominus; ex Seraphim ex part
ostenditur, ex part celatur. Idem. Tom. 3. op. ad Damasum Papam. p. 121. Super
Cherubim sedere Deum, scriptum est -- super Seraphim vero sedere Deum, nulla
script. commemorat, and ne ipsa quidem Seraphim circa Deum stantia, excepto
present. loco (viz. Isa. 6.) in SS. -- invenimus.
. And he shows it to be the custom of some in his days, to use in their
prayers this compellation, Thou who sit upon the Cherubim and Seraphim. And
though in his Comment on the sixth of Isaiah, he disliketh that form; yet that
displeasure was not conceived against the distinction of Cherubim and Seraphim;
but at the insinuation, by those words, of this Doctrine, which he esteemed
false, that the Seraphim were the Angels appertaining immediately to the
highest Shechinah, or Heavenly Throne. If Cherubim had been the same with Urim
and Seraphim, Moses would scarce have changed their name in the pursuit of the
same discourse; first calling them Cherubim no less than seven times in the
space of five verses Exodus 25. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
, whilst he speaks of the Mercy-feat; and then giving them a new title of
Urim, whilst he describes the Breast Plate, which was but the lesser and more
exposed Ark. Teraphim he might well lay aside, because of their private use, or
rather their abuse; for which reason the name of Baal was never applied to the
God of Israel, though in it self proper enough. But let us come nearer to the
point, from which we have, as yet, kept at some distance.

Urim and Thummim, whatsoever was their mysterious importance, were, in
themselves, material things, and things distinct from the Gems; for they were
to be put into the Pectoral Levit. 8. 8.
. Who the Maker of them was, it is not distinctly reported. They are not found
in the Inventory of Bezaliel's Workmanship, unless they are included in the
general name of the Pectoral, used for it self and its Contents.

In enquiring into their nature, we must consider them with some relation to
Gods Shechinah on the Ark. For the High Priest was, here, a Type of the Logos;
and the Pectoral, a Quadrangular hollow Instrument with Rings, and wrought
without like the Veil of the Holiest, was a little model of the Ark of the
Covenant.

Wherefore, for Urim, Teraphim, or Seraphim, I conceive that they answer, in
part, to the Cherubim, which were Images of Angels. In part, I say; for it is
my conjecture concerning these Seraphim, that they were Images or Symbols of
Ministring-Angels in the form of fiery flying Serpents; as Cherubim were such
Symbols with the Faces of Oxen. And toward the probability of this new and odd
conceit, I offer the following Conclusions, which I desire the Reader jointly
to consider ere he derides it.

First, The word Saraph it self, is used in signifying a fiery flying Serpent.
This is its signification in the Book of Numbers Numb. 2^ 6, 8.
, where it is said, That the Lord sent Seraphim, or fiery serpents among them.
And again, it is there remembered, how God said to Moses, Make thee a Saraph,
and set it upon a Pole. To which I add that in the Book of Deuteronomy Deuteronomy. 8.
15.
, a Burning Serpent is called Nachash Saraph.

Secondly, There were in Egypt, Arabia, Lybia Herod. l. 2. p. 132. ^ic. de Not.
Deor. l. 1.
, and other places, flying fiery Serpents. The Prophet Isaiah mentions such
creatures Isa. 14. 29.
; and Kimchi, on the place, says they are found in Ethiopia; meaning, it may
be, the Arabian Ethiopia. They were called Fiery, not only because of the heat
of their venom, causing extraordinary inflammations and thirsts in the body
bitten by them; but also because they appeared such when they flew in the Air,
being a kind of animated Meteors. Hence Abarbanel says of such flying
Serpents, that they were reddish, after the color of brass Abarb. Com. in Leg.
fol. 305. ap. G. Moebium de AEneo Serpente. Exerc. 2. c. 2. sect. 11.
: If that was their natural color, great addition might be made to it by the
swift motion of their wings, and the vibration of their tayls, in the bright
Atmo-spheres of Arabia and Egypt.

Thirdly, In the earliest Ages and inhabited Countries of the world, the
creatures on earth principally reverenced, were Oxen and Serpents. That Oxen
were so, has been already showed; as likewise that the Cherubim, Appendages to
the S^echinah in the most holy Place, had the faces of such Beasts. Serpents
were lately worshipped in America, as appears from Acosta, and the Discoverers
in Hackluit. And we read in Mr. Gage Gages Survey of the West-Indics, p. 117.
, of the great Golden Snakes adjoin'd to the Idols Tezcatlipuca and
Vitzilopuchtli. And, of old, Serpents were sacred in Egypt. Herodotus
mentions the (...) Herodot. in E^ter. p. 132.
or sacred Serpents about Thebes, which when they were dead, were buried by the
superstitious in the Temple of Jupiter. We see no Table of Isis, or Osiris, or
Bac^hus, without a Serpent See Pignor. de M^a Isiaca. p. 23.
. The sacredness of that Beast is said, by Pignorius, to have prevailed among
the Arabians, Ba^ylonians, Carthathaginians, Baeotians, Epirots, Sicyonians,
Epidaurians, Romans. He might have added the Indians, with Maximus Tyrius Max.
Tyr. dissert. 38. p. 373.
; and with Erasmus Stella Eras. Stel. ad Init. l. 1. de Antiq. Boruss. and
samog.
the Borussians and Samogetes. And the Heretics, called Ophitae or Ophiani,
have not escaped the notice of any who have looked into the History of the
Christian Church See Tertullde paescrip. Her. c. 47. p. 220.
.

For the worship both of Serpents and Oxen together, it is represented in the
Egyptian Hieroglyphick Kircher in Oedip. synt. 18. p. 508, 509. c. 1.
of a winged Ox with humane face, vomiting flames, having a Globe on its head,
and under its feet, an undulated Serpent.

Serpents were thus honored for many reasons. Because they could twine
themselves into all figures Wisd. 16. 5* (...).
. Because there was a mighty Energy in their venom See Porphyr. de Abstin. l.
4. p. 155. giving the like reason for the worship of the Eg^ptian Hawk. --
(...), etc.
. Because of their mighty Bulk, by which some of them were able (says Diodorus
Diod. Sic. l. 3. c. 10. p. 143. See Max. Tyr. diss. 38. p. 373.
) to conquer Elephants. Because (says Vossius Voss. de Idol. l. 9. c. 11. p.
234.
) they live to great Age; are of quick and piercing sight; renew their youth by
putting off their skin. Last of all, by reason (says Pignorius Pignor. de
mensa Isiaca. p. 24.
) that the Heathen were overpowered with the craft, malice and pride of the
Devil who deluded man in that shape, and would, as it were, redeem the loss he
sustained in the curse of that creature, by turning it into a venerable Idol.

Fourthly, Serpents, thus sacred, were not the ultimate objects of worship, but
the symbols or shrines of some Angels or Demons. Thus the Serpents of Thebes,
spoken of by Herodotus Herod. l. 2. p. 132. A.
, are said, by him, to be sacred to Jupiter. And the Symbol of Cneph, was the
Symbol of an Agatho-demon Eusebius. de praep: l. 1. c. 10. p. 41.
.

Fifthly, There were, not only such living Symbols and shrines, but also Images
made by men's hands. Such we see in the Tables of Isis, and in the Images of
Cartari. Such we read of in the Scripture, under the name of Teraphim, which
were much in use in the world a while after the flood. In the Ramessean Obelisk
Kirch. Oed. Tom. 3 p. 160, 199.
, a good Demon is represented by an Asp sitting next Osiris. And a Dragon, a
creature of the Serpent-kind, is usually annexed to the statue of AEsculapius
Macrob. l. 1. Sat. c. 20. p. 295.
.

Sixthly, Such good Angels as made up a part of the Shechinah of the Logos, and
also ministered in the world, seem to have given some occasion to such Symbols
and Images by their appearance, as in the form of winged Oxen or Cherubim; so
by their appearance as of the most eminent sort of winged Serpents, with
beautiful faces, it may be, of men as had the Harpies, though they had the tail
of a Serpent See Cartari's Imag. p. 156.
, or rather of Eagles, if they appeared not with Serpentine heads. The sacred
One in the Sphinx of Kircher Kirch. Sphinx. mystagoga. p. 57.
had the head of an Hawk or Eagle: so had the famous (...) in Egypt, as
Eusebius relates from Zoroaster Eus. de praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. de Phaen.
Theol. p. 41, 42. (...), etc.
. The Egyptians called him Cneph, the Phenicians, a good Demon.

Now, if the Seraphim had not appeared in some such form, it would be very
difficult to give any tolerable account of the temptation of Adam and Eve by a
Demon in the shape of a Serpent. That Serpent is ridiculously painted in the
form of a creeping one before the fall: and it is impossible to conceive our
first Parents so stupid, as to have entered into Dialogue with such a creature
without any astonishment. But being used to the Shechinah of the Logos, and to
the appearance of ministering Angels, showing themselves in some such winged
form (for that they abode not Elucid. Pseudo- Anselmi. l. 1. c. 15. p, 461.
Disc. Quamdiu suer^nt in Paradiso? Mag. Septem[al. Sex] horas.
one night in Paradise, is by many judicious persons esteemed a groundless
fancy); it is easy to conceive, upon that supposition, how they might
entertain some familiar discourse with a creature assuming that Image in very
splendid and glorious manner. The Text assures us that the form is now changed
by Gods curse; and sure the change was more considerable than the alteration
spoken of by Mr. Mede Mr. Mede's Works, p. 292.
, who thinks that the Serpent went formerly on the ground, though with his
head and breast reared up and advanced. It seems a more probable opinion by
far, that the change was made from the form of a splendid flying Saraph, to
that of a mean creeping Serpent, not moving aloft in the air, but licking the
dust. And much more probable, doubtless, it is than that dream which Kircher
Oedip. Egypt. Synt. 3. c. 4.
charge on Maimonides; as if that Rabbi had affirmed, that the Devil deceived
Eve in the shape of a Camel. But Maimonides Maimon. More Nevochim. par. 2. c.
30. p. 280.
says only from the Rabbis in Medrasch, that the Serpent was rode on, and was
as big as a Camel; and that he who rode on him was Samael, or Satan.

Methinks a part of the punishment of Adam and Eve declares the shape of the
Serpent or Demon, by whom they were tempted. For it is said that God guarded
Paradise against them by a Cherub and a Flaming-sword, which (as has been
noted already) was esteemed by the Jews a second Angel; and may be aptly
imagined a Saraph, or flaming-Angel, in the form of a a flying fiery Serpent,
whose body vibrated in the air with luster, and may be fitly described by the
Image of such a sword. And whereas Maimonides Id. ibid. par. 1. c. 49. p. 73.
interprets this Sword of the property of an Angel, of which the Scripture
speaks as of a flame of fire; he says nothing distinctly applicable to the
second Angel, but what was common also to the Cherub; whilst something is
pointed at in the Text as peculiar to the second Angel called a flaming-sword.

It may be further noted to our present purpose, that the word Saraph or
Seraphim is used in Scripture both to denote (as was said) a fiery flying
Serpent, and also an Angel of a certain order whom Isaiah represents Isa, 6.
2, 6.
as having wings, and flying to him with a coal from the Altar. Accordingly
Buxtorf in his little Lexicon in the word Saraph, thus discourses: Saraph
signifies a fiery and most venomous Serpent. Seraphim is likewise a name of
Angels, who from the clearness and brightness of their Aspect are seen as it
were flaming and fiery. But there is an authority in this Argument to me more
valuable, not for the notation of the word, but for the sense so accommodate to
my notion. It is that of Tertullian in two places. The first place is in his
Book de Praescriptione Haereticorum; There he suggesteth from others, That
Tertull. de Praescr. Haer. p. 220. C. -- Iftum suisse serpentem cui Eva, ut
filio Dei, crediderat.
Eve gave attention to the Serpent as to the Son of God. The second place is in
his Book against the Valentinians. There he says Id. adv. Val. c. 2. p. 251.
Illa [i. e. Columba] a primordio, Divinae Pacis Praeco. Ille [i. e. Serpens] a
primordio, divine Imaginis Praedo.
, That the Serpent from the beginning was one that sacrilegiously usurped the
Divine Image. This sounds as if the Devil in Serpentine form, had represented
part of the Shechinab of the Logos, and that Eve conceived him to be an Angel
appertaining to his glorious presence, and a minister of his pleasure; and now
come forth from him.

Now I here suppose the Seraphim or Urim to be two Golden winged Images, not
from the number of the word Urim (for the Jews use that number frequently of a
single thing or person) but from that of the Images called Cherubim, which were
two Symbols placed on the Ark which is typed in the Pectoral. And I do not
think so much (as does Maimonides Maim. More Nev. par. 3. c. 45. p. 476.
that the Cherubim were therefore two, lest the form of a single one should
have been mistaken for the Figure of the one God; as that these two (like the
Model of the Temple) had reference to Earth as well as Heaven, and, besides
Angels, represented Moses and Aaron as the Ministers of the Logos under the
Law; as the four Creatures in the Vision of Ezekiel typed out the four
Evangelists as Christ's servants under the Gospel. Neither did the number of the
Cherubim prevent misconstruction. For St. Hierom reports of some, that by the
two Seraphim [Cherubim he meaneth] they understood the Son and the Holy Ghost
S. Hier. in Isa. c. 6. Tom. 4. p. 29.
.

In the Pectoral I suppose Seraphim, and not Cherubim; this being an Oracle for
Civil affairs See Doctiss. D. Spenceri Diss. de ur. and Thum. p. 16, 17, 18.
, and not properly the Oracle of the Temple; and the Cherubim being according
to St. Hierom before cited, the seven Spirits about Gods Throne, and according
to David the Chariots on which he rides; and the Seraphim of inferior
attendance (though Appendages of the Shechinah) and of more frequent
ministration abroad in Temporal matters; such as that of the Captivity of
Judah, in the declaration of which to Isaiah, a Saraph assisted.

For the Answer of God by Urim, I suppose it not to have been conveyed through
the mouths of these Images, which were to be put into the Ark Levit. 8. 8.
, whilst nothing is mentioned of the taking them out. But it seems most
probable that as the Logos spoke with a voice out of the Glory above the
Cherubim, and not by them, their mouths being turned from the High Priest; so
the High Priest, who here was the Logos of the Logos, the Substitute and Type
of Christ, spoke by Inspiration over the Pectoral and Saraphs. Neither is it
fully proved from the Book of Samuel I Sam. 23. 11, 12. The Lord said, [by the
Ephod] he will descend, -- they will deliver ye up.
, that God spoke Viva voce; as the Annotations published out of the Library of
the Archbishop of York, would have it to be: for it may well be said, that God
spoke when through miraculous inspiration he spoke by the mouth of his Prophets
or Priests See, notwithstanding Dr. Spencer. Dissert. de ur. and Thum. p. 34,
etc.
.

The Urim or Seraphim were put into the Pectoral, and not set upon it, as the
Cherubim were on the greater Ark; not so much for the concealment of them from
the eyes of the people prone to Idolatry, as; for some other cause; for the Ark
was often carried in Procession with the Cherubims on it: unless we shall say
that the upper cover of the Ark, or Mercy-seat, which is mentioned in Scripture
as a distinct piece of Artifice from it Exodus 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
, was not taken along with it.

But to me this seems one reason: the High Priest was here the Type of
Christ-Incarnate, who in the days of his flesh, though he had Angels ministering
to him, did not often please to occasion their appearance.

It may be here objected, That this Notion of the Seraphim in the Ark,
ascribes to God the setting up as part of his Shechinah, the Image proper to
the Devil, for such is that of the Serpent.

I answer, that the contrary is here true; for the grovelling Serpent doomed by
God is such a Symbol; and such a one the Heathens worshipped. Neither was any
other distinctly used in Egypt, or (so far as I have read) in any other Country
of the world. For though the Egyptian Cneph had wings, yet he was not a winged
Serpent, but a compounded Symbol, of which the tail of the Serpent was but a
small part adjoined to the breast, wings and head of an Hawk or Eagle. And
Eusebius relates from Philo Byblius, that the Egyptian Hieroglyphick of the
World was a Circle, of which the Serpent (the Symbol of a good Demon as they
conceived) was but the Diameter; the whole figure being almost like to the
great TH of the Greeks. And by that it appears that the sacred Egyptian Serpent
was the creeping one, and not the winged one of Arabia, whose company they so
detested, that they deified the Bird Ibis for destroying it.

But now the glorious winged Serpent was the Symbol of a good ministering Angel.
And accordingly God used such a one in the Wilderness; and it is known by the
name of the Brazen-serpent, or Saraph Numb 21. 8. Ar. Mont. verse. Fac Tibi
Saraph.
.

Of that inferior kind of Shechinah it is proper to speak here; it being to be
understood from the Contents of the foregoing Discourse.

This then seems no other than a winged Saraph, put on a Pole Numb. 21. 8.
Lxx. (...). Ar. Mont. super vexillum.
, or standard like a Roman Eagle; and constituted as a Symbol of the presence
of the Logos, so far as concerned his Divine Power and Goodness in healing them
by miracle, who were bitten with fiery Serpents. That this was some sort of the
Presence of the Logos appears from himself in the New Testament, where he
opposes to it as Antitype to Type, the natural body of himself crucified. As
Moses (said he Joh. 3. 14.
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted
up. It Is the Son of Man here plainly made the Antitype, and not the old
Serpent, (as a learned man D. Jackson, vol. 2 p. 916, 917, etc.
would have it) destroyed indeed on the Cross, but not said by the Scripture to
be lifted up upon it.

And though the Saraph was not Christ, yet it was the Symbol Marius ap. Moeb.
de AEn. Serp. Ex. 2, e. 2. Sect. 15. -- Atque ita lignum ^oc Crucis gessisset
figuram, sicuti Christi (...) Typum gessit hic S^rpens.
by which he appeared; and by its stretched-out wings it may seem to the Fancy
at least, very aptly to express Christ's Crucifixion with arms extended.

If it be here said that to make this Serpent a Saraph, and a part of Christ's
Shechinah, is to overthrow that which was suggested before of the concealment
of the Seraphim in the Ark, and of the Cherubim behind the Veil, from the eyes
of the people prone to Idolatry, this being exposed to their daily sight: I
answer in two Particulars.

First, It was agreeable to the Wisdom of God to give some Type of Christ as
crucified, that being one great part of that substance of the Gospel of which
the Law was a shadow; though he pleased not to do it too plainly in the shape
of an humane body on a Cross. And no other Type (I think) occurreth under
Judaism, but this of the brazen Saraph.

Secondly, Here was not such occasion of Idolatry, as might have been taken
from the Ark; for that was an Oracle, and a Divine Light shone forth, and a
Divine Voice was heard, and signs of Adoration to God were there commanded. But
this was no Oracle: It does not appear that at this symbol any extraordinary
cloud or glory shone; that hence any Celestial thunder was heard. Only men
were helped in thinking on God by the symbol of an Angel, which executes Gods
will on Earth, whilst a secret virtue from the unseen God made them whole. He
that turned himself toward it (says Wisd. 16. 7. See Chald. Par. in Number. 21.
8. He shall recover if he direct his heart to the Word of the Lord. Targ.
Hieros. -- If he lift his face to his Father in the Heavens.
the Book of Wisdom) was not saved by any thing that he saw, but by Thee that
art the Savior of all.

And if the people had been then prone to Idolize that Symbol, it had not
remained undefaced till the days of Hezekiah.

This then is my conjecture (and I offer it no otherwise) about the Urim; and
likewise about the Brazen Serpent.

For Thummim, I imagine it to be a thing of a very differing nature.

So do they who take it to be derived from the Jewel in the Breast Plate of the
High Priest of Egypt, called (...). It is true, such a Breast Plate there was in
Egypt, and it is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus Diod. Sic. l. 1. Bibl. c. 75. p.
66.
, and AElian AEl. var. Hist. l. 14. c. 34.
. And Diodorus supposes it to have consisted of many Gems; but AElian calls
it an Image made of a Sapphire. It is also confessed that the Seventy
Interpreters See LXX, and Scalig. de Emend. Temp. l. 7. p. 654.
do render Thummim by (...).

But here two things are to be observed:

First, This Egyptian Pectoral (deserving the name of truth, it being put on as
an ornament for the Bench in the execution of justice and maintenance of truth,
as we learn from Diodorus and AElian; and not in order to the delivery of
Oracles) may as well have been taken from the Breast Plate of the High Priest of
the Jews. There is no mention of it in Herodotus, and before the Grecian
times. And Diodorus when he speaks of it, he refers to those days when
Heliopolis, Thebes and Memphis were the three head-Cities in Egypt, out of each
of which ten Judges were chosen; and for On, or Heliopolis, it had a public
Temple built in it for the Jews, with the consent of Ptolomy Philadelphus, by
Onias the High Priest, who was then by the power of Antiochus deprived of his
Authority and Office in Judaea. And concerning the Egyptian Pectoral, its name
of (...) is plainly modern.

It may in the second place be observed that upon supposition that this
Pectoral was originally Egyptian, it does not follow that the Seventy meant the
same thing by their (...) that the Egyptians did by theirs. It may be rather
guessed, that those Interpreters translating diverse words and phrases, which
grated on Egyptian matters, in such prudential manner that Ptolomy might not be
offended (as is manifest that they did in several places of their Version);
they made use of this name of (...), as of a name which would at once recommend
them to his favor, and well express the sense of Scripture, or the meaning of
Thummim.

Now if Urim be Images in the lesser Ark of the Pectoral, answering in some
sort to the Cherubim on the greater Ark; what possibly can Thummim be but a
copy of the Moral Law put into the Pectoral? a copy written in some Roll
Consider Exodus 24. 7.
, or engraven in some stone according to the pattern of the Tables brought down
from the Mount? for what else was there in the other Ark? nothing sure; though
some Rabbis, and after them the learned Hugo Grotius believed otherwise Grot.
in Heb. 9. 4. p. 4268. in M. C.
.

Josephus Joseph. 8. 2.
thought nothing else to be there; and he had ground for his opinion from the
holy Scriptures. For it is said in the first of the Kings King. 8. 9.
, That there was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables of stone which Moses
put there at Horeb. And this is repeated in the second 2 Chronicles. 5. 10.
of Chronicles. And to say as some adventure to do, that the Manna and the Rod
of Aaron were there in the time of Moses, and taken out in process of time,
lest the Manna should putrify, and the Rod be worm-eaten, (as if they could
any-where have been so long preserved without miracle) sounds very like to a
Rabbinical whimsey.

For the places of Scripture alleged by Grotius in favor of his opinion, they
answer themselves. For in Exodus Exodus 16. 33.
it is not said that Moses commanded Aaron to take a pot of Manna and to put it
into the Ark, but that he required him to lay it up before the Lord, or before
the Ark where the Lord by his Shechinah then dwelt. Also in Numbers Numb. 17.
10.
, it is not said that God commanded Moses to put the Rod of Aaron into the Ark,
but that he required him to bring it before the Testimony, that is, the Ark of
the Covenant. Wherefore that of the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 9. 3, 4.
, [In the Holiest of all was the Ark of the Covenant, wherein was the Golden
pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod that budded, and the Tables of the
Covenant], must be interpreted as if in signified both in and by. So (says
Capellus upon the place) it is usual for them who live by Rome, to say they
live in it. So in Cariathjarim in the Book of Judges Judge. 18. 12.
signifies, nigh it. They pitched (says the Text) in Kiriath-jearim in Judah:
wherefore they called that place Mahaneh-Dan unto this day: behold it is behind
Kiriath-jearim. Neither does Gorionides say (as Grotius makes him) that the
Manna and Rod were in the Ark; for he speaks of the Holiest, and says they
were there, not determining in what part of it they were placed.

Thummim was not an Image as the Urim were; neither does the Scripture ever say
that God answered by Thummim. It says not 1 Samuel 28. 6.
that God did forbear to answer Saul by Urim and Thummim, but only that he did
not answer him by Urim. For the Moral Law was a standing Rule, and not an
Extemporary Oracle. And we may observe from Diodorus Siculus, that the Egyptian
Judge whom he speaks of, when he put on his glorious (...), sign or image,
called (...), had also the Law in Eight Books laying before him, [AElian and
Diodorus tell this story in differing manner; and it may be the thirty Judges
were so many of the seventy Elders, and the Eight Books of Law were the Ten
Commandments; and the Sapphire or Gems in the Pectoral were the twelve precious
stones according to the number of the Tribes; all used by the High Priest of
the Jews at Heliopolis, where was Schismatically aped the worship and judgment
of Jerusalem. For in such matters the blunders of Historians are often more
shameful than these. Nay, what if the Book containing the worship of the gods,
and bound about with scarlet-threads, mentioned by the same Diodorus Diod. Sic.
l. 1. c. 87. p. 76.
, should be the Copy of the Moral Law in the Ark, whose outside was wrought
with gold, with blue, with purple, with scarlet, and fine-twined linen? This
is none of my Faith; yet many such imperfect Narrations are to be found in him
and other Historians, who write of things in such ancient and dark times. For
the name (...) (though that was given to the Pectoral, or to the illustrious
Gem or Gems on it, and not particularly to the Law) yet to the Law of God it
well agrees; David saying concerning it, (...), Thy Law is Truth Psalm. 119.
142, 151.
. As congruous is the name of Thummim, or Perfections, the same Royal Prophet
saying Psalm. 19. 7.
, Thy Law is perfect. It Is perfect and without blemish in it, though the Laws
of men are stained with diverse spots and imperfections. It is perfect as a
straight Rule, it bends not to men's corrupt wills. It is a complete Rule
extending to all our needful cases. It is exceeding broad, whilst there is an
end of all other pretended Perfections Psalm. 119. 96.
. Of the perfection of this Law the Son of Sirach speaks, saying Ecclus. 33.
3. Sec. Verse. LXX. c. 36. 3. -- (...).
, A man of understanding trusts in the Law, and the Law is faithful unto him
as an Oracle; or [(...), in the reading of the Alexandrian Copy of the
Seventy], as the asking of [or the answer to the Interrogatory at] Urim. In
which words let the Reader well consider whether the Author does not oppose the
Law to the Oracle as the Thummim to the Urim, saying in effect, The Law laid up
in the Ark is as certain a Rule to go by in the Moral course of a man's life; as
the Oracle from above the Ark where the Urim was an appendage of Gods
Shechinah, was a direction in extraordinary cases. And whereas Urim is only
mentioned, why Scaliger should say Scal. de Emend. Temp. p. 654. -- (...). h.
e. tanquam urim and Thummim.
, the meaning is, The Law is faithful to him as Urim and Thummim, he himself
best knows. But it may be thought from the force of the Premises, that he has
in effect rendered the saying such a kind of Tautology as this, The Law is
faithful as the Law.

Another place there is worthy our observation in this Argument, and the
rather, because it is a more Canonical portion of Scripture. It is that of S.
John Joh. 1. 17.
who says, that the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. These words, if I will serve my Hypothesis, I must thus Paraphrase. The
Thummim or (...) of the Law was received from Gods substitute the Logos, by
Moses, who delivered it to the people; but the (...) of the Christian Law, of
the Gospel of Grace, came, not only from, but by, Jesus Christ, the Logos made
flesh, as was said, a verse or two before; and he, even God-incarnate, did
publish it with his own mouth. If this notion has any truth in it, then that
Prayer of Moses, or blessing of Levi Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
[Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy One] may be thus expounded; let
thy Law [the ordinary Rule preferable before any extemporary Oracle] and also
thy extraordinary inspiration, together with thy blessing, be present with the
lineage of Aaron consecrated to the Priesthood, though thou were angry with him
for his carriage at the waters of Meribah or Massah; and, for that reason,
deniedst him an entrance into the land of Canaan.

But I will plainly acknowledge, that notwithstanding all here said by me, that
may be true which Munster said Munster in Exodus 28. de urim and Thummim Quales
fuerint Res, nemini mortalium constat.
, That no mortal man can now tell what the Urim and Thummim were. But, in
aiming, with our conjectural Bolts, at Truth, as in shooting, if the white be
not hit, it is some kind of felicity to come nigh the Mark.

Now though the Logos appeared on the Ark, both in the Tabernacle and the
Temple, and though he was, also, present, with this lesser Ark the Pectoral;
yet he did not limit himself to these holy Instruments, and the places of them.
He appeared, elsewhere, sometimes, when the emergent occasion was remote from
these Arks, and when the privacy of the Revelation to those who were not
Highpriests, was expedient, or necessary; unless we should say, that the less
solemn, and less majestic Apparitions were made by Angels.

That it was the Logos who showed himself to Joshuah Josh. 5. 13, 14, 15.
, giving to him a promise of defense, is the joint opinion of Justin Martyr,
Eusebius, and Theodoret See Hen. Valesii not. in Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.
p. 7.
, and likewise of one more modern, yet not unworthy to be named amongst them,
the most learned Archbishop of Armagh Usher in Annal. vet. Testam. p. 21. Ed.
Paris.
. But a fragment of an ancient and venerable Greek Scholion, produced by
Valesius, will have it to be Michael, and not the very Son of God. Be it the
one, or the other, I hold ^ot my self much obliged to concern my self, as a
party, in the dispute. Only I am inclined to think it the Logos, because the
place of the appearance, was sacred; Joshuah pulling of his Shoes, in token of
a Divine, rather than of an Angelical presence.

Little is recorded of Gods Shechinah from the time of Joshua to David. But
David in his Psalms, is very frequent in celebrating Gods presence in the
Sanctuary on Mount Sion. And of his being there where God was present by his
Image or Shechinah (in the Temple, though not in the holiest place of it),
after deliverance from his enemies, who stood in his way both to the holy City
and holy Temple, some See Bisterfeld. contr. Crell. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 30. p.
298.
interpret these words of his in the 17th Psalm Psalm. 17. 15.
; As for me, I will behold thy face (or Shechinah) in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Or (as I find it expounded in the
Septuagint (...).
) when I shall see thy glory, or glorious presence: Thy Temunah (the word in
the Hebrew) thy Image, of the Logos. In Solomon's time the Ark was placed in a
most magnificent Temple, which when it had received the holy Vessel, a Cloud,
and the Glory of the Lord 1 Kings 8. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
, a most venerable mixture of light and darkness filled the holy House. It is
called in the Book of Kings 1 King. 8. 12, 13.
thick darkness, i. e. such whose solemnity hindered the sight of any other
object but the (...) or glory of the Shechinah, which dazzled the eye, rather
than enlightened the medium. In the first Book of Kings this is omitted by the
Lxx, but in the 2d of Chronicles 2 Chronicles. 6. 1.
it is mentioned. And by those Interpreters it is called barely (...), or
darkness. But they had before 2 Chronicles. 5. 13.
called it (...), the cloud of the Glory of the Lord; a cloud like that which,
in S. Matthew Matt. 17. 5.
, is called a bright one, and said to overshadow the Apostles, when Christ was
transfigured and owned as Gods Son, by a voice out of the Cloud. After the
dedication of this House, God appeared in a dream, a second time, to Solomon 1
King. 9. 2.
, having done so once before at Gibeon 1 King. 3. 5.
, and made a promise to him that his eyes and heart, that is, his especial
presence, should be in that consecrated House.

In the time of Ahab, Elijah being in Israel, and not in Judah, though he
worshipped not God in the Sanctuary; yet the Logos of God, when he was fled as
far as Horeb, Gods Mountain 1 King. 19. 8, 10, 14, 15.
, instructed him in a still small voice, after his spirit was made solemn, by
wind, earthquake, and fire; for it was the Lord (says the Text) that spoke
then to him, not a created Angel. But that God ever spoke at Dan or Bethel, or
appeared in any Glory, we neither read nor believe. So that the setting up the
Symbol there was presumption, and the trusting that God was present there,
Idolatry: for that was an act due to Gods true presence, misplaced on his false
one, and such as was not only false, but, in terms, forbidden. In the times of
Isaiah S. Hierom S. Hieron. Tom. 5. oper. fol. 211. D.
observes that the Idolatries of the people were exceedingly increased; yet
himself saw the Shechinah Isai. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.
in a vision: And St. John John 12. 41.
shows that it was a vision of the Logos, saying that Isaiah saw Christ's
glory.

The Israelites rather increasing, than repenting of, their provocations, it
pleased God to withdraw his presence, and, as he is represented in the visions
of Ezekiel See Ezekiel. 10. 18. c. 11. 23.
, to go up from the earth; and to permit the powers of Babylon to destroy the
holy Temple, and to suffer the glory of it, the Ark, to depart, and never to
appear again in its former condition; for the 2d Temple did, in this particular
especially, come short of the first. And I know not what to make of a passage
in the Jew Cippi Hibraici. p. 24.
, whose Cippi Hebraici are translated by Hottinger; and who there mentions a
part of the Ark extant in Sion in his time; unless I esteem it (for sure it is
no other) a Jewish fable. That it may not go alone, I will add a story of equal
credit out of the Elucidarium ascribed to S. Anselm. There Pseudo. Anselmi
Elucidar. c. 24. p. 476.
the Disciple asking what became of the Ark of the Covenant, the wise Master
answers thus: It was hid, at Gods command, by Jeremiah, in the Sepulcre of
Moses, when Jerusalem was ready to be destroyed by the Babylonian forces.
And, in the last times, it will be brought out by Enoch and Elias; God
revealing it to them.

PART. 6. Of the Shechinah of God, from the Captivity to the Messiah.
Such Jews as had true apprehensions of the God of Israel, and sincere devotion
to his service, did in such sort honor his Shechinah, that when the Holy Chest
and the Temple were no more to be seen, they worshipped God toward the plaoe
where they formerly stood. Thus in Chaldaea, did the Prophet Daniel. Both the
Jews in banishment, and the Jews in the land were, that way, to direct their
faces in Prayer. And the Rabbis say See Othon. Lex. Rabbin. p. 476, 477.
that a devout Jew had, on purpose, a Chamber with a window that way, and that
the Babylonian Jews prayed with such direction in the Chamber of Daniel, an
ancient House of stone. To Daniel (as to one highly favored of God, and to a
Prophet living in the dawning of the Gospel) God discovered his presence in a
more ample and distinct manner than (so far as we read) he had formerly done;
more eminently than to Isaiah or Ezekiel. Damiel in a vision Dan. 7. 9, to 15.
beheld the Shechinah of God, as it were in Heaven. The Father and the Son were
personated in this Scene, or, rather, the Godhead and the word Incarnate. This
I find to be the opinion of St. Hierom S. Hier. in Dan. p. 587. Also Eusebius. in
l. 1. c. 2. Eccl. Hist. p. 10.
, who expounds Daniel by St. Paul where he speaks of the Logos, as equal
with God, yet taking upon him the form of a Servant.

In those days God vouchsafed such plain visions to the Prophets, and such
plain Prophecies of the Messiah, that the two Tribes, the issue of the true
worshippers in Judah where Gods Shechinah dwelt, though they returned from
Chaldea, a soil as fertile in producing Idols, as Egypt it self, yet they had
them in greater abhorrence than before. They looked back, many of them, on
their punishment of exile and bondage for former Idolatries: They looked on
their present miraculous restitution by the Power and Mercy of the God of
Israel; and they looked forward toward the Messiah, the Image of God, whose
Kingdom was at hand; and these thoughts preserved them, in great measure, from
pollution with Idols; though the Ark was perished, and Prophecy ceased See Jos.
Scal. de Emend. Temp. l. 7. p. 654. and 1. Match. 9. 27.
, and the Holy Pectoral (said to be worn, even out of the City, by the
High Priest in his meeting of Alexander) was rather an Ornament than an Oracle.

At length, after the ceslation of Prophets for more than 400 years; after the
apparition of an Angel to Zachariah in the Temple (a sign that the Oracles, of
the Ark, and Urim, had ceased); it pleased him to * See Light. Harm. 1. 35.
come in the flesh, whom Daniel saw as in Glory, and to be, for a season, on
earth, as it were the eclipsed Shechinah of God. Such an appearance, for a
time, our infirmity, and the Economy of the Gospel required See Greg. Nyss.
contra A. pollin. op. Tom. 3. p. 287. and Procl. ad Armen. p. 17, 18. (...)
etc. (...).
.

To this Messiah, as God-man, the things in the ritual Law of Moses had
especial respect, though a vail was upon them. And, indeed, it would seem to
derogate from the Wisdom of God, and the nature of his worship which is chiefly
spiritual, to conceit that all the Apparatus of the Temple reached no further
than the amusement of the eye. They, therefore, that will reach the sense of
the Law, must suppose a mystery in it. Thus did St. Stephen Act. 7. 44.
and St. Paul Hebr. 8. 5.
those excellent Interpreters of Moses. These the Christian Fathers have
followed as their patterns. Clemens Alexandrinus Clom. Alex. strom. 4. p. 528.
alluding to those words in the seventh of Isaiah, Nisi credideritis non
intelligetis, adds words to this purpose; Unless ye believe in Christ, ye
will not understand the Old Testament, which he by his own presence expounded.
And S. Gregory Nyssen G^g. Nyssen. Tom. 1. d^ vita Moysis, p. 225.
concludes from the material Cherubims covering with their wings the mysteries
of the Ark (how strongly from thence, I will not say;) that there is a more
deep sense of the Text of Moses.

PART. 6. Of the cure of Idolatry by the Image of God in Christ God-man.
AMongst the Mosaic Symbols, the Ark certa^nly was none of the meanest. This
Holy vessel, without peradventure, had most singular reference to Christ as
God-man, who, at least from his Baptism, has been in that quality of
God-incarnate, exhibited to the World as the Divine Shechinah.

At Bethlehem the Son of God was Born, the Town where the settled place for the
Ark of God was discovered to David. So much we learn from the words of Solomon
Comp. Psalm. 132. 8. with 2 Chronicles, 6. 41:
in the sixth verse of the Hundred and second Psalm. He, there, repeateth a
saying of David his Father, concerning the Ark; Lo we heard of it at Ephrata.
Castalio plainly confesses Castal. in Psalm. 132. 6. hujus loci sententiam non
Intelligo.
that he understood not what that expression meant. For my part, whilst I am in
pursuit of the present Argument, I cannot think the Text to be tortured by St.
Hilary, Hilar. Picta. in Psalm. 131. 1. e. 132. p. 1051.
who will have it to confess Christ as the true Ark of God, discovered,
typically, at Bethlehem, to David, and afterward manifested in the flesh, to
the World, in the same City of David. It is heard of in Ephrata, Ephrata (says
he) is the same with Bethlehem, where our Lord was born of the Virgin Mary.
There, therefore, the rest of God is heard of, where, first of all, the only
begotten God inhabited a body of humane flesh.

This is the Ark which rested in the Tribe of Judah 2 Samuel: 6.
; for out of that Tribe our Lord sprang Heb. 7. 14.
.

To this Ark, as soon as he came into the World, the very Princes or Wisemen of
the Gentiles bowed down in the Cave at Bethlehem, the star, or miraculous
meteor, as an appendage of the Shechinah, standing above it.

This Ark tabernacled among men Joh. 1. 14. (...), and (...) is the same in
sense and almost in sound with Shachan he dwelt, whence Shechinah.
and they saw his Glory, when Baptized; when transfigured.

This Ark gives, through Jordan, or the Baptismal Laver Comp. Josh. 4. 7. and
Matt. 3. 13.
a passage into the mystical Canaan. On this Ark, or Holy vessel of Christ's
body, when he was Baptized by John in Jordan, the glory of the Shechinah
appeared: a mighty luster (as Grotius hinteth) hovering, after the fashion of a
Dove, upon these waters of the second Creation.

On him the Holy Ghost dwelt, or rested Joh. 1. 32, 33.
as God was said to do in the Tabernacle. In him, as the Law of God in the Ark,
and the Will of God known from the Oracle of the Shechinah, were deposited all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge See Daill. de Dion. Ar. p. 165.
. He is the great Oracle of God, whom, by a voice from Heaven out of a bright
Cloud, or Gods excellent Glory Matt. 17. 5. Mark. 9. 7. 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17. 18.
, we are commanded to hear. In him was the sum of the Law and the Prophets: and
he was the light of Israel, of the Gentiles, of the whole world. To this Logos,
Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. strom. 7. p. 702. C.
ascribes the mysteries of the Jews and Gentiles, as to the great Teacher of
them, before his Incarnation. So that, he, as a Divine subsistence, and
substitute of the Father, giving the Law of Reason to Adam; the Jewish Law, to
that people, by Moses; and to all the world the Christian Law, or Will of God;
no Title could be more proper for him, than that of the Divine Word. And this
Logos was not only the Wisdom but the Power of God, and meriteth the name of
the Ark of Gods strength Psalm. 132. 8. and Psalm. 105. 4. seek the Lord and his
strength. al. his Ark, or Face.
. In him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The Deity sojourned in an Ark
of flesh, or within the vail of it Heb. 10. 20.
. And in this sense I think some of the Ancients are to be interpreted, who
called Christ so often (...), See Cyr. Alex. Sc^l. de Incarn. ap. Council.
Ephesians. prim. c. 17. p. 960.
a God-carrying-man, as our Language may truly, though harshly, render the
Greek word; though Nestorius abused the signification of it so far as to make
it intimate a duality of persons in Christ.

This Ark was the face or visible presence of God, and he that had seen him as
Messiah, had in that sense seen the Father See Hill. Pictav. de Trin. l. 4. p.
152, 153, 154.
. This body was not the very Godhead as Muggleton blasphemeth, but the Godhead
did in it show forth it self to men in signs of mighty Power, Holiness, and
Wisdom.

This Evangelical Ark was the Image of the invisible God; not indeed the very
picture or statue, but (as St. Hilary styles him Hill. Pi^. p. 154. See Council.
Max. Tom. 5. p. 349. c. d. Tom. 1^ p. 361. e.
) the Personator of his Essence. It is true he says of some of the Jews Joh.
5. 3^.
, That they had never seen the shape of the Father, his (...), or Appearance.
And this he says truly in two respects, though him they saw when he thus spoke
to them. For first there were none of them who saw him baptized or
transfigured; for in the same place he denies that they ever heard the voice of
God. And then these were unbelieving Jews, and therefore saw him as mere man,
as one of the worst of men in their conceit, an Impostor and Magician, and not
as the Messiah, the Son, the Incarnate Shechinah of God. To such therefore as
under those misapprehensions of him, he says elsewhere, Why call you me good,
there is none good save one, that is God.

However Christ in truth, though not to the eyes of Infidels, was the Image of
the invisible Father; and one whose design was to put all the Idols and Images
of the Superstitious world Vide Council. Max. Tom. 7. p. 310. e. p. 875. a. Tom.
1. 619. b. 622. a. S. Athan. v. 1. p. 53. d. p. 90. d. p 94. c. p. 72. d. p.
619. b. p. 622. a.
under his feet. Of this the Prophets foretold Isa. c. 2. v. 18, 20. Zeph. 2.
11. Zach. 13. 2.
, and this the world has seen fulfilled; Oracles by degrees ceasing, and now
scarce any footsteps remaining of that Triumvirate of gods, (for their gods had
been men, and those some of them no Heroes in virtue), Jupiter See Athan. vol.
1. p. 102. e.
the god of the Heavens, Neptune of the Sea, Pluto of the Earth. It is said by
the Arabic Author of the Prodigies of Egypt Prod. of Eg. p. 65, 66.
, that when Noah named one God, Idols fell prostrate. It is more true of him
who began the new world of the Gospel, that when he appeared as the Image of
the one true God, Idolatry vanished before him S. Hieron. Tom. 5. fol. 158. a.
. And the Fathers will have it, that when in his Childhood he went into Egypt,
and was brought to Memphis, the Egyptian Idols fell at his feet Athan. vol. 1.
p. 89. c. and p. 165. a.
. And St. Hierom (whose manner is as much to cite in his Commentaries, the
opinions which he had collected, as to set down his own) does tell of some S.
Hieron. in Isa. p. 6.
who applied to Christ and the Virgin those words of Isaiah Isa. 19. 1.
, Behold the Lord rides upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and the
Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his Presence.

From this Image of God in his Son Incarnate, this Ark of flesh, Divinity often
shone on earth before his Instalment at Gods right hand. The mighty power of
God in his Life, Miracles See Hilar. Pict. l. 1. de Trin. p. 154. a. b. c.
, Preaching; and sometimes in his Attendants the Angels; and in his very bodily
appearance. Thus at his Transfiguration his raiment shone as the light, he
being (...) Hebr. 1. 3.
, the brightness of the Glory or Shechinah of God. And afterward such Heavenly
Majesty showed it self in him, that those who came to apprehend him as a
Malefactor, fell at his feet as before a God.

This Jesus was the Ark of the new Covenant and of the Testimony of God; the
witness of God faithful and true, as he is styled in the Revelation Revel. 1.
5. c. 3. 14.
of Saint John. Jesus was in effect the whole house of Gods especial presence;
the (...), (the name which Philo gives the Tabernacle) or the (...), (or, it
may be, if it were rightly printed, (...) (as Josephus calls the Zodiac or
the Sun moving in it) the portable, the walking Temple, who (like the rolling
Sun which dispenses his influence far and near) went about doing good; having
no resting place for his Head, till he was fixed on Mount Sion above.

This is the Ark of God, exalted first on the Cross, and then to Heaven. Whence
God commands his blessing, sending him by his Spirit and Gospel to bless Act.
3. 26. compared with 2 Samuel 6. 11, 12. and Psalm. 133. 3.
, and to turn all of us from our iniquity.

This Ark is the true Mercy-seat See Greg. Nyssen. de vita Moysis. Tom. 1. p.
225.
; the (...), or Propitiatory, as he is called in the Epistle to the Romans Romans
3. 25.
, and the (...), as St. John calls him 1 John 2. 2.
, that is, the Propitiation for our sins. St. Hierom Commenting on those words
in the Version of Ezekiel S Hier. in Ezekiel. Op. Tom. 5. p. 540.
, in the 43d. Chapter and 14th. verse, [from the lesser settle to the greater
settle], and observing them to be rendered on this wise by the Seventy
Interpreters, [From the lesser to the greater Propitiatory Seventy in Ezekiel. 43.
14. -- (...). --
]: He applys the lesser Propitiatory to Christ in the form of a servant, and
the greater to Christ glorified in the Heavens. Here is then both the Aaron and
Aharon, the true Ark and Priest of the most high God.

This Ark, or rather this entire Temple of God S. Joh. 2. 19, 21.
like the Tabernacle in Shiloh 1 Samuel 4. 10, 11.
, seemed for a time forsaken, possessed by the great Philistin, [for what is
stronger than death?] and laid in the dust; but God raised it up after three
days in greater glory, and so as that it is never to fall again. This Ark was
after a few days taken up into the true Sanctuary of God, where it remains
till the restitution of all things; and whither our eyes and hearts are to
direct themselves in all Religious worship.

From that Sanctuary he appeared in a glorious light to his first Martyr St.
Steven when well awake, and whilst he directed his countenance toward Heaven,
whither his spirit was ready to take its way. He being full of the Holy Ghost
(or divine energy Acts 7. 55.
looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing
on the right hand of God. Thence also he appeared to Saul in a light so
vehement, that for a time it took away the use of his eyes. Thence he sent the
Holy Ghost at Pentecost, become now as it were the Substitute and Shechinah of
the Glorified Jesus. This hovered as a glorious flame over the heads of the
Apostles, declaring them thereby the Representatives of Christ on earth. Under
this notion Christ is worshipped by true and intelligent Christians. This was
the meaning of the Fathers in the Council of Constantinople Conc. Constable: 7.
Oec. ap. Cap. Caroli Magni. p. 47.
, who denounced Anathema against those who professed not that Christ ascended
was Intellectual flesh, neither properly flesh, nor yet Incorporeal, but
visible to them who have pierced him without grossness of flesh. They believed
it a great point of Christianity that Jesus God-man sat in the Heavens in
illustrious visible glory. And this St. John saw in a Vision, in which the
Logos Rev. 19. 13.
, the God Omnipotent Ver. 6.
, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Ver. 16.
, or Lamb, God-man V. 11, 12. See c. 22.
appeared on his Throne, Crowned, and with eyes like flames of fire. To this
effect is a saying of Eusebius cited by Bishop Andrews on the second Command. I
suppose he means Eusebius Dorylaeus, for he refers to the second Ephesine
Synod, though I have not met with it in the Acts of that Council. Eusebius it
seems, tells Constantia, That she must not any longer desire an Image of
Christ as he is infirm man. For now (said he) his Glory is much greater than it
appeared on the Mount, which if his Apostles were then dazzled with, how can it
now be expressed? This visible Glory of Christ the Ancients supposed situate in
the Eastern part of the Heavens: and it occasioned (as I think) their directing
of their worship toward the East. The Gentiles who worshipped the Sun differed
much from this external direction of their Faces. For they respected especially
the East-point by reason of the Sunrising thence Virg. AEn. 12. Illi ad
surgentem conversi lumina Solemn. --
. And often at other parts of the day they altered their posture. They
sometimes vall'd themselves, says Plutarch, and turned themselves about with
respect to the Heavenly motions. And Trismegistus (in Asclepio) relates, that
it was a custom of some of the Gentile-Devotionists at midday to look toward
the South, and at Sunset to look toward the West. It was at the rising of the
Sun when Lucian was turned toward it by Mithrobarzanes Lucian in Necyom. p.
159.
the Chaldaean Priest, who mumbled his Prayers in a low and indistinct tone at
the rising of that false God. They respected not always the Eastern Angle,
though they had especial regard to it, when the Sun appeared in it. They
respected also the South and West-points in their worship. Hence Harpocrates a
child represented amongst them the Sun in its rising See Cuperi Harpocrat. p.
101.
; Orus a young man, the Sun in its Meridian; Osiris an old man, the
Sunsetting. This was also the way of the Manichees who supposed the Sun to be
the Tabernacle of Christ. Of them St. Austin says S. Aug. cont. Faustum. l.
20. c. 5. Ad Solis gyrum vestra oration circumvolvitur.
, that their Prayers rolled about with the Sun.

But the Ancients thought the Shechinah of Christ more fixed, and therefore did
not in such manner alter their Quarter. And that Quarter they esteemed proper
to the Shechinah, having read of the Messiah in the Old Testament under the
name of the East; and following the Translation of the Seventy LXX. in Psalm.
68. 33. (...). --
, which thus reads, Psalm 68. 33. [Sing unto God who ascends above the
Heaven of Heavens on the East.] They also esteemed Jerusalem the middle of the
Earth, and the parts which lay Easterly from thence they called the East, and
amongst them Eden about Mesopotamia. And they had a Tradition that Christ was
Crucified with his face toward the West, but that he ascended with his face
toward the East, and went up to a place in the Heavenly Paradise, standing as
it were over that of the Earthly See Damase. de Fide Orth. l. 3. c. 13. p. 311,
312.
. But whatsoever men may conceive of the space possessed by Christ's mere body,
they ought not to think of his Shechinah as of a confined light in some one
Quarter of the Heavens; but as a glorious luster filling all Heavens, and
shining toward this Earth as a Circumference of Glory on a single point. They
ought to lose their imaginations in an Abyss of Light. One says (and not
amiss) upon this subject P. Sterry in Sermon. on Rev. 1. 7. p. 11.
, That as Earth heightened unto a flame, changes not its place only, but form
and figure; so the person of our Savior was raised to a greatness, a glory
vastly differing from, and surmounting any Image, all Images of things visible
or invisible in in this Creation. So it is fitly expressed (says he) in Heb. 7.
29. He was made higher than the Heavens. He was heightened to a splendor,
enlarged to a capacity and a compass above the brightest, beyond the widest
Heavens.

From this Heavenly Throne Christ will come at the day of Judgment in a
Shechinah of Clouds and flaming-fire: the mention of which fire sometimes in
the Scripture, and in the Commentaries of the ancient Fathers, without express
addition of that great day, has (as I conjecture) accidentally led part of the
Christian World into its mistakes about Purgatory; in relation to which place I
must yet confess my self to be one of the Nullibists.

This Shechinah in milder, but most inexpressible luster, I suppose to be that
which the Schools call the Beatifick Vision; and which the Scripture intends
in the promise of seeing God face to face.

PART 7. Of the Usefulness of this Argument of Gods Shechinah.
THis Argument of Gods Shechinah may be many ways useful, if Intelligent
persons draw such inferences from it as it offers to their judgment. I will
hint at some of them; for to insist on any unless it be those which concern the
worship of Angels or Images, is beyond my scope.

And first of all by due attention to the premises, an Anthropomorphite may
blush at his rude conceit about the humane figure of the Divine substance,
whose spiritual and immense amplitude is incapable of any natural figure or
color; though God by his Logos using the ministry of inferior creatures, has
condescended to a visible Shechinah.

Hence, secondly, those people who run into the other extreme, the
Spiritualists and abstractive Familists, may be induced to own the distinct
substance of God, and the visible person of Christ; and not to subtilize the
Deity and its Persons, and all its appearances into a mere notion, or into some
quality, act, or habit of man's spirit; or to bow down to God no otherwise then
as he is the pretended light or love in their own breasts.

Thirdly, If this consideration had entered with sobriety into the minds of
those German Anabaptists Ap. Cloppenburg. Gangren. Anab. p. 281, 282.
, who with zeal contended that the very essence or substance of the Father was
seen in the Son; and the very substance of the Spirit in the Dove; their
disputations would have been brought to a speedy issue, or rather, they would
never have been begun. They would have known how to have distinguished betwixt
the invisible God, and the visible face or Shechinah, not as the very shape,
but as the emblem and significative Presence of the Divinity.

Fourthly, For want of some such notion as this, many other men of fanatic
heads (such as were most of the Heretics who introduced novelty and tumult
into the Church about the Persons of the Trinity and nature of Christ) have
plunged themselves into unintelligible conceits. Of this number were the
Basilidians, who called the body of the Dove the Deacon; and the Valentinians,
who styled it the spirit of cogitation, which descended on the flesh of the
Logos; thereby darkning the understanding with phrases. If they had apprehended
the Logos in his Praeexistence or Incarnation, as the Shechinah of God, and
would have expressed that notion without fantastical or amusing terms, they
might have instructed others, and seen the truth also better themselves when
they had clothed it in fit and becoming words.

Fifthly, This notion may not be unuseful for the unfolding the Scriptures,
which speak of the Praeexistence of Christ before he was God-man; and explain
them naturally, and not with such force and torture as they are exposed to in
the So^inian Comments. He that says Abraham saw the Shechinah of the
Praeexisting Logos, and thence infers that Christ was before that Patriarck,
speaks plain sense. But he that says Christ was not till more than 2000 years
after Abraham's death, yet that he was before him, because he was before Abraham
was Abraham, or before all Nations were blessed in his seed, the Gentiles not
being yet called; such a one speaks like a Sophist, not an honest Interpreter;
and forgets that Christ's answer (before Abraham was, I am) follows upon this
Interrogatory of the Jews, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen
Abraham?

Sixthly, This notion may further show the error of those Semi-Socinians, such
as Vorstius and his Disciples, who confound the Immensity of the Godhead, and
the visible Glory of the Shechinah, which God has pleased as it were to
circumscribe. They will allow this King of the world no further room for his
Immense substance than that which his especial Presence irradiates in his
particular Palace See Vorst. de De^. Disp. 3. p. 22. and Not. ad Disp. 3. p.
215, etc. and Elucid. Pseudo-Ans. c. 3. p 458. D. ubi habitat Deus? M. quamvis
ubique potentialiter, tamen in Intellectuaii Coelo substantialiter:
. Which conceit though in part it be accommodable to the Shechinah; yet is it a
presumptuous limitation of the great God, when it is applied to his substance
which Heaven and Earth together cannot contain.

Furthermore, it is from hence in part, that we see and pity the blindness of
some of the modern Jews See Mr. Mede's Works, p. 438.
, who notwithstanding they are the professed enemies of Divine Statues and
Images, and have reason enough to believe that the Ark of God has dwelt among
us in a body of flesh, and now shines in the Heavens; do yet hope (some say)
for an especial presence of God by furnishing with a Chest and Roll of their
Law, the places of their Religious Assemblies.

Again, by considering with St. Chrysostom the Temple of Solomon as a Type,
not only of the sensible but also of the invisible world; and by considering
further the Shechinah and Ark of God more especially in the Holiest of all than
in the Sanctuary and more exterior Courts and spaces; we may illustrate that
very useful and most probable notion of the degrees of Glory, and of the
several Mansions prepared for several Estates in the Kingdom of Glory; where
notwithstanding every part will be so far, though inequally, filled with
luster, that all may be said with open face to behold the Glory of God, and not
those only next the Celestial Ark or Throne in the most holy place.

But these things (as I said) are beyond my scope; though appertinencies to my
Argument; and therefore I will no further pursue them, but proceed to those
uses of the notion which lie more directly in the way of my design. The first
of them concerns the worship of Angels, the second of Images.

PART 8. Of the Usefulness of this Argument of Gods Shechinah, with relation to
the Worship of Angels and Images.
FIrst, The Worshippers of Angels plead for their practice, from those places
in the Old Testament, which seem to speak of high Veneration used toward them.
T. G. Cath. no Idol. p. 367.
argues from the Prayer [which indeed is rather the wish] of Jacob, where he
says, The Angel who delivered me from all evils bless these Children Genesis 48.
16.
. The Manual called the Abridgment of Christian Doctrine Page 123. in Expos. of
1. Command.
would prove the Worship of Dulia to belong to Angels, from the falling of
Joshua flat to the ground when the Prince of the Host of God appeared to him.
The like proof is produced by the Catechism of Trent Catech. ad Parochos, in 1.
Praec. p. 390.
from the blessing which Jacob obtained of the Angel with whom he strugled. If
Christ were considered as the Angel of the great Council appearing in cases of
moment under the Old Testament, and receiving the veneration most due to him;
the Worshippers of Angels would either change their weapons, or quite lay them
down.

Then touching the Worship of Images, this notion is very serviceable in that
controverted point; as likewise in the point of making either Religious S^atues
or Pictures. If any thing of the Divinity be to be portraied, we learn from
hence what it may be, not the Godhead but the Shechinah: That is visible, and
the expressing of it with the best lights and shadows of Art may therefore be
not unlawful, though I know not whether I ought to plead for the expediency of
it in common use. There was it seems in a Frontispiece of our Common Prayer
Books Land. 1642.
some such Emblem. The word Jehovah and a three cornered radiant light and
clouds, and Angels. He that took notice of this in Print, and might have
observed the like before some of the great Church-Bibles, and somewhat worse,
the picture of a Dove with rays of glory before the Biblia Polyglotta, did not
well to call it a representing of God T. G. Cath. no Idol. p. 59.
, and to charge that upon the Church which was the fancy of the Engraver and
Printer. I have already noted a much worse Frontispiece in each of the three
parts of the Pontifical, where God is pictured as man. And in those days in
which the Bishop of Rome ruled in England, there were Emblemes apt to suggest a
very dangerous fancy to common brains; Pictures of the Trinity in three
conjoined heads of human Figure. And so ordinary they were that they served as
Signs to the Shops of Stationers, as now do the Heads of a King or a Bishop.
And he that printed the Pupilla Oculi of de Burgo, was pleased to stamp his
Sign in that manner on the Title Page of the Book. Nay, in the late Missal
reprinted at Paris Miss. Romans Par. 1660. p. 222.
there is none of the best faces of an Old man pictured amongst Clouds and
Angels over the Crucifix before the Canon of the Mass. And though I know not
how to commend these things, yet I will not blame them as acts of their whole
Church.

It does not any-where appear to me that the Jews of old pictured the Ark or
the Temple, though now they make models of the whole. How near they come to the
Original I cannot tell; but it is certain, that in picturing the Sanctuary
above, we create a Phantasm, which needs much to be helped by our Reason and
Faith; it being in it self not equal in glory to those of the Sun and the
Rainbow.

It is true that Pictures are but signs, and that words are so too; but it is
not expedient to describe all things by the pencil which come from the voice.
Words are Signs without Imagery in them, and they are transient Crell. Eth. p.
329. de Idol. minor est rerum auditarum aut lectarum, quam visarum vis.
. Ye heard a voice only, but ye saw no similitude, says God Almighty to the
people, to whom he forbade Images Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
. Words are properly the symbols of the conceptions of the mind, and not of the
external object. They are notes of memory, and helps of discourse. They are in
themselves a kind of spiritual and immaterial marks. And though sometimes,
especially in Poetic characters, they bring to the fancy some present
representation, yet they thereby fix a notion rather than a proper constant
phantasm (unless where fancy is indulged); and they do not so grossly impress
upon the brain the Image they convey, as a material Picture, which having also
some tangible substance to sustain it, is apt to be transformed into an object
of worship, distinct from the Prototype, in dull and sensitive minds. Besides,
when by words we convey to the mind a representation of Heaven, or the
Shechinah of God, we rest not there, but following the pattern of the Holy
writers, we offer to the mind what the Painter cannot to the eye, this further
document, that we have not by far reached the original, and that it is indeed
beyond all expressions but those of admiration. When any such Pictures hang
before us, we should in this manner exalt the phantasm into mental
astonishment, and not dwell on the mean portraict, but refine and exalt it by
the assistance of the words of Scripture which call the Shechinah, the
excellent Glory, the Throne before which the Cherubims fall down with veiled
face, the light inaccessible in which God dwells, The Throne of the Lamb who is
brighter than the Sun: words by which the Pen assisteth us beyond any Pencil of
Angelo or Titian; yet neither are their devotional pieces (where they mix not,
as Angelo does in his portraict of the Judgment, Heaven and Christian Images;
Charon and Christ) to be despised either as ornaments, or hints of memory.

In the Catechism of the Council of Trent, the Parish Priest is required to
take care Cat. cont. Trid. in 1. al. 2. praec. p. 396.
that Images be made, Ad utriusque Testamenti cognoscendam Historiam, for
procuring the knowledge of the History of the Bible. And well it had been if it
had stayed there: but it proceeds in requiring the Priest to teach the people
that Images of Saints are placed in Churches, ut Colantur, that they may be
worshipped: either the Images or the Saints by them. Better sure, it were, to
remove Images quite out of the Church, than to leave them as such
stumbling blocks for the commonalty who are Children in understanding. When
they see them only at a distance with their eye, they may sometimes instruct
them, and afford them hints of very good meditations: but when they are
directed to bow down before them, and to them also, though with distinctions
which the vulgar understand not, they, then, are, if Laymens Books, Books of
Magic, rather than of Christian Piety.

God, you see, has provided a better remedy for mankind. His Son has taken
our nature into unity of person, and he offers himself to us as an object
shining with glory and power in the Heavens, though not there, in his Godhead,
confined: and therefore to use any Image of him otherwise then to be a hint to
us of his more glorious one at Gods right hand, is to direct our devotion to
the light of rotten Wood, or Gold, or Pearl, when we have the Sun in the
Firmament. If we worship Christ's Image as apart from him, we do, in effect,
divide Christ. If we worship it together with him, we, in effect, multiply
Christ, joining a second lifeless body to his glorious one; and by that means
adoring it, as if it were in personal union with him. They are safe who say
with S. Jerome, S. Hieron. in Ezekiel. c. 16. p. 425. Nos autem -- unam v^neramur
Imaginem. Quae est Imago invisibilis and omnipotentis Dei.
"We venerate only one Image [to wit Jesus Christ] the Image of the Invisible
and Omnipotent God. When the Father brought this brightness of his glory Heb.
1. 3, 6.
and the express Image of his Person into the World, he said, let all the
Angels of God worship him. And now he has installed him as God-man and King of
the world at his right hand, let us and all the world adore him. Let them
worship him as God-man, and neither worship an undue Image on earth as joined
to his person, nor yet his heavenly body as apart by it self. That, as joined
in unity of person, and now in glory, is our object; and a Crucifix ought not
to be looked upon in prayer, as the present Image of Christ: for he is in
Heaven glorious, and not on the Cross. And though the Revelation of S. John
speaks of him as in Garments rolled in blood; it mentions them not as miserable
apparel, but as the Purple of the King of Kings. The Capitular of Charles the
Great Cap. c. Magni. p. 767.
would have the Picture of Christ's Resurrection as frequent as that of his
Cross: but by both of them we look back; and if any be proper, in helping us,
not merely in our preparation, as the Crucifix may be; but in our immediate
Religious addresses, it is, surely, a picture of him in Glory, if that could be
well made: but neither is this to be worshipped, but made only an help to
excite our mind; nor is the humanity or body of Christ to be adored by it self;
yet in the manuals of the Roman Church I find addresses to the very body; and I
fear that upon the Festival of Corpus Christi, and in the object under the
shows of bread (shows united in their act of devotion to Christ's body), our
Lord is divided. We have a form of Prayer to his body in the little French
Manual Pet. Cat. p. 119. Orais. devote en Oyant la Mess. -- o Corpse sacre de
Jesus, -- jevous adore avec tant de reverence qu'il est possible -- etc.
called Petite Catechism, and in the Litanies of the Sacrament Les. Litan. de
S. Sacr. p. 295. Panis Omnipotentis verbi verbo caro factus miserere nobis.
. And the Learned Bishop Usher, in his Sermon before the Commons Bp. ush. Ser.
p. 38, 39.
, mentions the Epistle Dedicatory of the Book of Sanders concerning the Lords
Supper, thus superscribed. To the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
under the forms of bread and wine, all honor, praise, and thanks, be given for
ever. A Judicious Christian would rather ascribe all praise and honor to
Christ God-man. Whole Christ let us supplicate and honor, helping our
Imagination by his Shechinah in Glory, and remembering the words of St. Austin,
noted as remarkable by Agobardus Agobar. in libr. contra Eor. superstit. Qui
Pict. and Imagine. Sanctorum adorationis obsequium deferendum putarunt. p. 221.
Archbishop of Lions, a man zealous in his Age against the corruptions of
Image Worship, and ill requited in his memory by them, who, (as Baluzius notes
Baluz. not. ad Agobard. p. 88, 89.
) esteem him the less Catholic for it. In the first Commandment (says S.
Austine) [that is in the whole of that, which himself, elsewhere, in his
Questions of the Old and New Testament, divides into first and second] each
similitude of God is forbidden to be made by men; not because God has no
Image, but because no Image of his ought to be worshipped but that which is the
same with himself, nor that, for him, but with him.

God assisting us with this Image, why should any religious Acts have any lower
object total or partial? Images set up as any sort of objects of our inward or
external devotion, are a sort of Anti-Arks. And we ought not to touch them; not
because they are sacred, but because they are unhallowed objects. And worse
still they are rendered, too often, by impious Art, which makes the lifeless
Image (as in the Rood of Bockley) by help of Wiers, and other instruments of
Puppetry, to bend, to frown, to roll the eyes; to weep, to bleed; to exhibit
signs of favor or displeasure. This indeed, is not the constitution, but it is
the frequent practice of some in that Church: and hereby are framed so many
snares for the people who turn such Images into Christ's Shechinah. For if
certain Monks (who were also shepherds, and people of low conception) became,
through their rusticity, absurd Anthropomorphites, by reading the bare words of
Scripture, where it says, that God created man in his own Image; how much more
will mean people have corrupt fancies begotten in them by false Images, which
their eyes may see, and their hands may handle. Such will turn a common Chest
into an Ark; and a wooden Engine into the Divine Shechinah. Of the Sindon at
Besanson, Chiffletius a Papist reports, That great numbers met twice a year
on a Mountain nigh the City, to adore that cloth with Christ's Image on it. Of
it, he further says, that it always shines with a Divine presence [that is,
in effect, that it is a Shechinah of God], and that in great emergencies it is
carried in procession like the Ark, being yet more holy than that Mosaic
Vessel. How shall the people not fall into Idolatry, when such false Shechinahs
or Idols are laid in their way? How much more would it tend to edification to
direct them to the Image of God, who sits in Glory at Gods right hand, and
whom our minds the less behold in our devotions, the more our eye is fixed upon
an Image of wood or stone. In the City or Church of God, described in the 21st
chapter of S. John's Revelation, There was no Temple no material fixed place of
Gods visible Shechinah [though there must be Synagogues or Places for public
Assemblies]; but Christ himself was the Light or Shechinah: and therefore to
him, as to the only true Image of the invisible God, it is proper to direct our
Cogitations and Prayers. And let not any man think that because the Shechinah
is in Heaven, and not visibly in a Church, as the Shechinah was in the Temple
of the Jews; that therefore Christians have less assistance than Gods ancient
People: for they have that which is much more excellent. The Glory on the Ark
was only a mixture of shapeless lights and shadows: and in the Temple, the
people seldom saw it, but being assured of it, did view it in their
imagination. And few of them had other apprehensions of it, than as of the
presence of God the deliverer and Protector of that Commonwealth.

But Christians (a people under a more spiritual dispensation than the Jews)
though they see not the Shechinah with their eyes on earth, yet, from the words
of Scripture, they can excite their minds to behold it, even in the Sanctuary
of Heaven. And they behold it in the figure of God-incarnate; an Image, not
confused, but of a distinct person: an Image which brings to their mind the
greatest and most comfortable mystery of the means of Salvation; aptest to
encourage our Prayers, and to inflame our Zeal, and to raise our Admiration.

Some objects indeed, are, on earth, exposed to the eyes of Christians, by the
Institution of our Lord; the elements of Bread and Wine. And the (...), or
place on which they are consecrated is, at this day, called, in the Greek
Church, See de statu Eccl. Grae. hod. p. 41, 44, 45.
(...), the Propitiatory or mercy-Seat. And a late Author Ogilby in Africa. p.
654
reports of the Abassine Priests, upon the Authority of Codignus, (though in
Codignus I could never find it See Codign. de Rebus Abassin. l. 1. c. 35. de
Sacram. Abass. p. 212, etc.
) That they blessed a certain Shrine or Coffer of the Sacrament, understanding
by it the Ark of the Covenant. But Christ has ordained no Cherubims on this
Ark: He has not used any Images, but pledges of his dying love. These pledges,
with safety, call his passion to remembrance without any Image on the Table,
which the Gallican Church, of old, forbad, in the Council of Rhemes, even after
some corruptions had crept in Regin. l. 1. de Eccl. Disc. Constable. 60. p. 53.
observandum est ut mensa Christi, id est, altar ubi corpus domini cum
consecratur, etc. cum omni veneratione [not cultu] honoretur, etc. nibilque
saper eo ponatur nisi capsae cum sanctorum Reliquiis, and Quatuor Evangelia.
Baluz. not. ad L^c. Regin. p. 549. videtur ergo prohibere ne Imagines super
altar ponantur in quo Corpus dominicum consecratur.
. Neither should we detain our Fancy amongst those Pledges; but obey the sursum
Corda of the Ancient Church. It seems incongruous to rest on the Symbols, or
to bow down to them; they being, as it were, the dishes in our sacred
Commemoration, or Festival of Christ crucified; but it more becomes us to lift
up our heart, and eyes, and hands, and faith, with humble reverence toward the
Heavens, and to worship God-man in Glory: To adore our great Master and
Benefactour Jesus, not as suffering on Calvary, but as triumphing in the
Sanctuary not made with hands.

CHAP. XV. A REVIEW and CONCLUSION.
A. I Have read over your Discourse of Idolatry, and if you please I will spend
a few Animadversions upon it.

B. With all my heart. I take such liberty sometimes, and therefore I have
reason to give it. The truth is, I am not wondrously pleased, my self, with
what I have done. And I believe the performance of few men does answer to the
Idea which they had formed in their heads.

A. I neither frame Models, nor work by them; but I make bold to animadvert on
those that do. And if they will talk to the world, they must expect that the
world will talk again. As to your Performance, my Remarks in the general are
but Two; But the particular ones are enough to weary you, though you were a
second Fabius.

B. Pray try what stock of Patience I am Master of: Though that is usually very
small when men are to hear of their own faults.

A. They may be mine; for no body offends oftener than he who censures. At least
he runs the hazard of offending; this being as true as most Proverbs, That he
who kicks at others is himself half way to a fall. But let us come to the
Points.

I observe, first, That you have chosen a very beaten Argument, and never more
beaten than at this time. And next, that you will nauseate the nice Readers of
this Age with your numerous Citations, which are in truth so many that they
make the Book seem the less your own.

B. It Is true, the Argument is a beaten one; a subject handled by Maimonides,
Viretus, Vossius, Reinolds, Seldom, and many others of great Learning. But I
cannot say that it was wholly of my own choosing; nor can I tell you all the
occasions of it, unless I break open the seal of Confession. But be the
Argument as beaten as it will; I hope there may be something said in it, not
said before; as in a Mine which has been wrought in for many years, some mean
Labourer may find a new vein of Oar. However, there must be new Books for them
whose curiosity will not incline them to look back upon the old ones. And there
must be many upon every useful subject, that the differing Genius of each
Reader may be gratified by an innocent compliance with it. And the very
concurrence of many at this time in this one subject, does show that they
judged it highly useful for this age; though it may be some would have spared
their pains had they had a window into the Studies of others, and seen what
they were a doing. And further, I assure you upon the observation of others as
well as upon my own, that the very newness of the fashion in any Book upon a
weighty subject, is some way instrumental in carrying on the Trade of Learning.

For the Citations, an Historical and Philological Argument cannot be managed
without them. Ancient customs and matters of Fact are not to be invented but
remembered. And though I fetch many Materials from the Ancients, I lose no more
my property in this writing (were that worth the contending for) than a
Hollander does in any of his Vessels, whose Timber was imported from Norweigh,
and grew not at home.

A. I agree with you, adding this to what you have said, that the Margent is as
often left clear out of Ignorance and laziness, as it is garnished out of
Pedantry.

I have done with my general Remarks. Now for those which are more particular.

In Chap. 2. p. 15. you seem to commit a little mistake about Zaradsas, or
Zaratas, said by Plutarch to be the Disciple of Pythagoras. He was not
therefore what you would make him the same with Zoroaster, who was at least as
much before him as Socrates before Plato and Zenophon.

B. Plutarch himself does not say it. The Translator (rather sure out of
misattention than ignorance) renders him thus Plutarch. de Procreat. Anim. p.
1012. Ed, Franc.
, Zaratas Pythagorae Discipulus. Whereas this is the Original, (...), Zaratas
the Master of Pythagoras.

A. In the same Page, in page 76, as likewise in many others, you mention the
two Principles of Pythagoras; but you do not any-where tell us distinctly what
he means by them.

A. It Is not an easy matter to do it. The ancient Philosophers (especially
those whose Heads were touched with Magic and Enthusiasm) understood diverse
things by the same names. But these two Principles are most literally expounded
of the Demiourgus, or Soul of the World; and Hyle, or matter, his (...), or
fatal original of Evil See Plutare. de Placit. Philos. l. 1. c. 3. p. 876. and
Plotin* l. 8. Enn. 1. and Chalcid. in Tim. p. 396. juxta Platone^ bona sua Dei,
tanquam patris liberalitate, collata sunt: mala vero matris sylvae viti^
cohaeserunt.
, which he and his followers ascribed to the untameable nature of it.

A. I go on. In Chap. 5. p. 55, etc. you are very brief in your proof of the
acknowledgment of one Supreme God amongst the Gentiles; and well it is you are
so. That Argument has been considered at large by others with great Learning.
And of these some have appeared since your Papers were under the Press. So that
in your brevity you are either discreet or lucky.

B. What you please. I could wifh that I had been more brief than I am; and
then I had been guilty of fewer mistakes. I find that I have cited some words
of Plato's as acknowledgments of one supreme God, which he spoke not of him but
of the Soul of the World. Such are those cited by me in page 57. where he is
said to call God the Maker and Father of every thing. That Is the proper
Platonic Title of the Soul of the World Plat. Tim. p. 33. Min. in Octav.
Platoni, in Timaeo, Deus est ipso nomine mundi Parens.
, to which the frame of the visible Universe, and its generation is ascribed.
And the context so plainly inforceth that sense that I wonder it needed my
second thoughts. He speaks of that third principle in many other places which
are frequently misapplied to the [(...), or] one Supreme God.

A. You have company in your mistake, though perhaps you will be singular in
your Retractation. But to proceed. In Chap. 3. page 35. you insinuate that the
Platonists judged the Soul of the World to be rather a Form assisting than
Informing. Whereas they held this World to be one mighty Animal.

B. Nothing can be more absurd than that which some Platonists held. But Plato
himself, though he said the World was Plato in Timaeo. p. 30.
[(...),] a living Creature endued with a Soul; yet he meant not by the
Animation of this World, either the vital union of the highest Psyche to all
matter; or (as some have conceived, whilst they have pleased to measure him by
the doubtful phrases of Plotinus) of a secondary Soul of the World to the
formed Subcoelestial Hyle which the Chaldee Oracles Chald. Or. p. 70. under the
seven Planets is (...). Psell. Summar. Dogm. Chald. p. 111. -- (...).
call the Throne of Matter, [to which (as they speak) there is a descent by the
seven steps of the Planets] and the Fund of it. But by this Plato understood
See Timaeum de An. Mundi, p. 95. Ed. Serr.
the vital union of Souls to some part of it, the Presential union of inferior
Demons to certain Statues in it See Jamblic. de vit a Pythag. c. 28. p. 138,
139. -- (...), etc. (...). There stop, if you will read that place right, and
then for (...) read (...), not with Arcerius, (...).
; and the Order, or (as he calls it, (...)) the Temperament of all the parts
adjusted by Psyche.

A. In Chap. 5. page 57, 59. You seem to make (...), Jehovah, and Jove the
same; which was not always your opinion.

B. I do but seem so; I think as I did. For Jupiter, I believe as Varro
believed, and do think it comes a Juvando. For Jupiter (or, as the English
often pronounce it Jubiter) or Juviter are the same; p. b. v. being frequently
used for one another. Nor can I approve of the Etymology of Juvans Pater; for
ter in Jupiter is a mere termination; and Jupiter is no more Juvans pater, than
Accipiter is accipiens pater.

Concerning Jehovah I still think that the word is the same in effect with
(...), though not the pronunciation of it: a sound (some believe) so very
modern that it is said to have been first heard from the mouth of Galatinus.
The ancient (...) now pronounced Jehovah, was in all likelihood sounded,
Jahveh. So the Samaritans pronounced it, of whose (...), (or Jave, the Vau by
the Greeks being as in (...), turned into Beta) we read in Theodoret's
Questions on Exodus. And from them (who changed not their ancient Letters, nor
received the Judaic Oral Cabala) we are more likely to understand the
Pronunciation, than from the Jews misled by the Pharisees, who in and after the
Maccabean times, began or promoted very many Superstitions about the words of
the Bible. They did so particularly about the Tetragrammaton, whose Original
sound being softly pronounced, and as is related by Rabbi Tarphon R. Tar. ap.
Capell. in Orat: de Nom. Jebad calc. Crit. p. 698.
, supped up as it were by the mumbling Priest, was by degrees perfectly lost
amongst most Jews and their Scholars: Insomuch that Origin in the Fragment of
his Hexapla mentioned by St. Chrysostom, as also many others read it, Adonai.
So does the vulgar Latin in Exodus 6. 3. though in all other places it renders
it by Dominus. The Seventy turn it by (...), St. Hierom by Dominus; though
somewhere (as Mercer Mercer in Genesis 11. 4.
notes) he calls it Jaho. That it ended in Omega, as in (...), was a
corruption apt to happen to all names which are taken out of one Language into
another. The occasion of it might be this: The power of the Samaritan Heth
answered by the Greek (...) or (...) See Bochart. in Can. l. 1. c. 20. p. 491.
which by negligence was perhaps sometimes written, and thence in process of
time pronounced as (...) which is as I may so say, but a kind of Epsilon laid
on its back.

A. It may be so for ought that comes now into my mind. I pass on to another
Note. In Chap. 5. page 62. you tell us that the Heathens used the Form of
(...), but you give us no greater Authority for it than your bare word.

B. You may if you please take it upon the word of Arrian in his second Book on
Epictetus Arr. in Epict. l. 2. c. 7. p. 186.
.

A. In Chap. 5. page 77. you seem to approve of the opinion of Petavius, who
makes Arius a genuine Platonist: whereas it is manifest (and the Learned have
taken notice of it) that Plato made his second Principle eternal; whilst Arius
said, There was a time when he was not at all.

B. I only cite his words, I do not justify them. The Logos of Arius is not so
like to the Nous, as to the Psyche of Plato; to the Demiourgus who framed (as
he fancieth) the visible World. Yet thus far Petavius is in the right. He
asserteth upon good grounds that Arius was infected with Platonism, and that
with Plato he made the Principle that framed this World to be a distinct
substance, which was not very God; though he did not affirm with that
Philosopher, that it was coeternal with the self-originated Deity; and for that
it was not a privilege in Plato's judgment very extraordinary, for he allows
it to Matter it self; I mean the unformed Hyle.

A. We Will examine these things anon. In the mean time I would ask you, why, in
this 77th page, you observe it as a thing worthy an Asterisc, that the
Platonists call the Nous, unbegotten, and, Parent to it self? For they mean no
more than that the Nous was from the TO Agathon by eternal emanation, and not,
as this World from Psyehe, by temporal Generation or formation.

B. They mean no more. Neither did I think it a deep remark, but I the rather
observed it, because holy Writers have declined such terms; not adhering to
them so very much as some Imagine they do. And when they use them, they do it
not so much to countenance the Platonic notions, as to oppose them. So when S.
John says, In the beginning was the Logos, etc. he means it not either of
the Logos or Demiourgus of Plato, but, rather, in opposition to them: as if he
had said; Christ, not your fictitious, but the true Logos, was ever with God,
and God also; and the maker of all things.

A. I perceive by this, and by that which I find in many other Places, that you
have not forgotten the old saying; Plato is my friend, but Truth is more. Nay,
you seem to have a kind of Pique at Platonism, and will, I fear, provoke the
Ficinus's of this age.

B. I do not with design oppose, or challenge any of them: And I think they are
men of better temper then to make every light notion so much their Mistress, as
to Duel me for it. And I heartily wish that the indecent and irrational way,
used by some Writers, of hitting one another, fiercely, in the Teeth, with
their little barren speculations, were as much laid aside, as is the custom of
fighting with Sandbags. But, what are the particulars (I beseech you) in which
I may seem to offend the Platonists?

A. They are many. And (not to hover in generals only) I tell you particularly,
that you are irreverend toward their Triad; a notion as dear to a Platonist,
as Diana to an Ephesian. It is true in Chap. 5. p. 79. You take notice of the
three Platonic Principles, as distinct substances; and they themselves do so
likewise: but, then, you say not a word of that Union, whereby those Three
substances, of the same species, though numerically differing, become but one
God.

B. Suppose that to have been Plato's mind: How would it have agreed to the one
God of the Christians, whom S. Paul opposes to Gods many, or many superior
Spirits, and Lords many, or many inferior Spirits, though of the same species
in each order? But I see not, any-where in Plato, that this was his opinion,
though Plotinus, who lived where Christianity was planted, does, sometimes,
express himself in that manner. At other times, the same Plotin, (who is a kind
of Platonic Familist) does no otherwise unite his three Principles then by the
union of a Center Plotin. Ennead, 5. l. 1. c. 6.
, a lesser, and a greater circumference, which no man can conceive, exactly in
one another. When he says that the TO Agathon, Nous and Psyche, are joined, he
means rather that there is nothing betwixt them, than that, by mutual
penetration, and vital union, they are one. He interprets himself, in that
Chapter, by saying of the three Principles, that there is [(...).] nothing that
interveneth. No more does any Planet come betwixt Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, and
yet they are three Planets, not one. And this seems to be the [(...) or] the
Indistant Distance of which notion he darkneth the sense by his obscure
Phraseology. If he meant much more; Plato did not; nor could he, with
consistence.

That the (...) or TO Agathon of Plato was the supreme God, I have already
owned. To him agrees that description of God, that he is [(...) and (...)]
without Cause, and the Cause of every thing else: Though I find also that
Nature, or the indefinite Power of matter and motion, the Venus of the
Lucretians, is said to be without Cause, and, in Phurnutus, called (...), the
Cause of all things; that is, of all the modifications of matter, and the
Phenomenon of the visible Universe.

But that Plato's Nous or Demiourgus contain in them the Idea of a God, or a
Being absolutely perfect, is most contrary to the general Air of Platonism,
whatsoever little independent sayings may be, that way, misapplied. Wherefore,
in Chap. 5. p. 79. I have called Nous and Psyche, eminent Demons, See M.
Thorndike's Epil. part 3. p. 291.
and not Divine Persons, though (...) is often used to signify the supreme God
See Arrian: in Epict. l. 4. c. 4. p. 387.
, as in that place where the Philosopher affirms, that [(...)] or the
Divinity, is not [(...)] an envious Being. In the Oracles of Zoroaster Pletho
in Orac. Mag. p. 49. (...).
it is affirmed, that the supreme God withdrew himself from the world: By which
is not meant that he sequestered himself wholly from all the affairs of it, but
(as Pletho notes) that he did not communicate his Divinity, either to the
Nous, or to the second God, by which is understood, in those Chaldee Oracles,
not the Logos, but the Demiourgus or Psyche. For the Nous, It is not one single
principle, but a kind of Pantheon, a Collection of many Ideas or Spirits, as
Aristotle, who lay nigh to the bosom of Plato, does truly construe him. It is
such a thing as Christophorus Sandius (in whose brain Paradoxes naturally
flutter) does fancy the Spirit of God to be. For, in a distinct Treatise C. C.
S. Tract. de Sp. Sancto. p. 4. Sp. S. -- tota collectio spirituum Sanctorum.
he endeavors to prove, that it is the Body of the Good Angels. Hence,
sometimes, the three Principles are called TO Agathon, Ideai, and Psyche. Hence
he find it called the Exemplar, or rather that which afforded an Exemplar (they
distinguishing nicely betwixt the form, and the thing formed); that is, the
Intellectual World, according to whose pattern this sensible World is said to
be made. They who wholly blame the later Platonists for such Ideas, excusing
Plato; are very unjust: For they drub the feet when the Head was first in
Fault. The Exemplar, says Plato Plato in Tim^o de An. Mundi. p 95. -- (...).
is all the Intelligible Animals in it self, as this World is the circle of
such as are sensible. In another Book Plato in Timaeo. p. 30. -- (...), etc.
he says, that the Intellectual World contains in it all Intelligent
Animals; as this sensible world contains us, and all living creatures. The
same Philosopher, in the Conclusion of his Timaeus Plato in Timaeo. p. 92.
(...), etc.
, asserteth that this sensible world is the [(...) or] second Image of the
Intellectual God. Also, in the conclusion of the Book of the soul of the world
De An. Mundi. p. 105.
he thus discourses. The Ruler of all (he speaks of Psyche) has committed the
Inspection and Government of the world to Demons. He made this world full of
Demons, and Men, and other Animals, after the pattern of the best Image, of
the ungenerated eternal (...) or Form; meaning that of the Nous. And he had
said before that Plato in Timaeo. p. 33.
this world was [(...)] the generated Image of the eternal Gods; of which,
therefore, the Collection made up the Nous or Intellectual world.

Plato thus expressing himself, it is no wonder that it is said in the Chaldee
Oracles Orac. Mag. Zor. p. 46 -- (...).
, that the supreme God delivered to the second God (or Psyche) all the
Intelligible Ideas. Nor need we think it strange to hear Philo speak of an
Intellectual Sun and Stars.

A. If it be thus, That the Nous is an Intellectual world, and that this world
is a kind of second Temple made after the fashion of that first, though
inferior to it in Glory, why do you (in Chap. 5. page 79.) call the Nous, one
Thing, Being, or Person?

B. A Thing, it may be called, as this world is, being one Collection of
things: And a Person (a public Person) being a Collection of Intelligent
Beings, of which the principal Nous or spirit, seems to answer to the visible
Sun; Plotin mentioning it by it self, and then speaking of the beauty of the
Ideas which he there Plotin. Enn. 5. l. 1. c. 7.
calls [(...),] All the Intelligible Gods. Thus we call the Collection of evil
Spirits, and the Prince of them, by the name of Devil: And, in the Evangelical
History, the Principal spirit in a man possessed, answered in the singular,
though he said, his name was Legion.

Plato himself calls this visible world Plato in Timaeo. p. 92. and de Anima
mundi. p. 94.
(...), a sensible god, and (...), a generated god, though it be a Collection
of innumerable Things and Persons: and, by the same reason, he may call the
Intellectual world (as indeed he does) (...), an Intelligent god or Nous,
though it be not a single principle. The like may be said of Logos, which Philo
so understood, or else he would not, sometimes, have called this world, Logon,
as I have showed him to have done In Chap. 14. of Shech.
.

The Chaldee Oracles call the Demiourgus, the second God; and he is more
properly so than the Nous: yet neither has that principle in it, the true Idea
of God.

A. How does that appear?

B. Two ways; for, First, it contains not, in it, Infinite Wisdom, but
stands in need of a Pattern to work by, an external Exemplar: for Psyche is
represented as an under-Artist, not having the Idea or Model in its own mind,
but following one exhibited by his superior Master. He made the world (says
Timaeus De Anima mundi p. 105. See Plut. de An. Procr. p. 1014.
) after the eternal form. Secondly, It contains not in it Omnipotence. For
though it framed the world very excellently, yet it is said to have been, in
part, resisted by the stubbornness of Hyle, and not to have done all it
desired, but all it could. Plato says, in his Timaeus Plato in Timaeo. p. 30.
and p. 53.
, that God (or Psyche) designed all things to be good, and nothing to be evil,
(...), as far as nature would suffer him; and again, as far as it was (...), a
possible thing. It seems the matter was not such pliable wax as would receive
the impression in such manner as Psyche would have been pleased with. To this
effect there is a remarkable place in Hierocles who thus repeateth the opinion
of certain followers of Plato Hierocles de Providentia. p. 6.
who questioned both the Infinite Wisdom and Power of Psyche. They think not
that there is [In the Demiourgus] sufficient power, whereby, through its own
wisdom (by which it makes things, out of eternal matter) [for so I construe
(...), and not, with the Translator, Qua ab omni eternitate Res efficit, which
contradicts the scope of the place,] the world may perfectly be ordered; but
that (...) (...), by the mutual aid of unbegotten Hyle, and by using extrinsick
nature exhibited before it, it may accomplish its work. It is true, the common
Copy Reads it, (...), and (which surprizeth me) Grotius translateth it Grotius
in Sent. Philos. de Fato. p. 20.
generatae materiae ministerio. But it is directly contrary to the tenor of the
Platonists there cited, and to the following Discourse: which is such, that
Hierocles believed Hierocl. de Prove. p. 8.
they held matter to be [(...)] ungenerated, not only [(...)] as being before
time, which they say, began with the sensible world; but, likewise, [(...)] as
being without all Cause; in which sense the TO Agathon only is to be called
unbegotten. By this, it should seem, that the Demiourgus is but [(...)] the
servant of matter, as the Egyptians in Herodotus do style him. And this
Plutarch Plut. de Procr. An. p. 1014.
also teaches, saying, The essence of Matter out of which this World was made,
was not generated, but laid always (as far as it could) before the Workman, to
be disposed and ordered by him according to his Exemplar or likeness [(...)
(...)] as much as possible might be.

A. This puts me in mind of what you affirmed before, that Matter was by Plato
made to be eternal. So did Theodoret before you Theodo^. l. 2: de Cur. Graec.
Affect.
, as well as Plutarch. But is this manifest from Plato himself?

B. It is. Insomuch that by some Platonists Hyle is called the Sister of Psyche
See Hierocli^ l. de Provid. p. 8.
. Plato in Timaeus Plato in Timaeo de An. Mundi, p. 94* (...), etc. Ibid. (...).
, of the Soul of the World, does expressly call [(...), or] Matter [(...)]
eternal, and [(...)] unbegotten. And again he says in the same Page, that
before the Heaven was made (by which in that place he means this World) there
existed in the Logos, (or Intellectual World) Idea, and matter; to which he
adds also in that Discourse, the Demiourgus.

A. What then is the meaning of the making of the World, and the novity of its
essence, so often mentioned in the School of Plato?

B. There is meant by it not any Temporal Creation of the very substance of
Matter, but the production of this form Plato in Timaeo, p. 30. of the
Demiourgus, that (...).
out of formless Hyle, which they called (...) Plut. de Procr. An. p. 1014. B.
, or shapelesness. God (says Plato Plato in Tim: de An. Mundi, p. 94.
, meaning Psyche) made this World [(...),] of all the Praeexistent Matter. He
made it [(...)] out of the things not seen Heb. 11. 3. Wisd. 11. 17. -- (...).
, (out of simple Matter void of Phenomenon), but not (say they) [(...) 2 Mac.
7. 28. -- (...). LXX. The saying of the Hebrew Mother of the seven Sons to the
youngest of them ready to suffer by Antiochus.
] out of very nothing.

Matter, therefore (the most simple Hyle) is with them eternal; and makes up a
fourth thing in the first Quaternio of the Pythagorick Tetractys; the three
first being TO Agathon or Aitia, Nous or Logos, Psyche or Demiourgus.

A. I had thought with some in Drusius on the name Jehovah, that the Tetractys
was the Tetragrammaton, that secret and mysterious name of God most high, which
Pythagoras revealed to the Gentiles.

B. By no means. Had it been in his time so superstitiously reverenced, and a
name above all other names, a Jew would never have cast such a Pearl before a
Gentile (and especially before such a one, a kind of Magical Gentile) whom he
had in abhorrence as much as a swine. This name was no mystery among the
Greeks, as is evident from the mention of Jerombalus [or Jerombaal] a Priest of
the God (...), in Sanchuniathon: of Jaho in St. Hierom, and the Sibylline
Oracles: of Jaoth, or Jaoh in Irenaeus: of the Hebrew-God called (...) by the
Gnostics, in a Manuscript of Origin Cited by Fuller in Misc. 1. 4. c. 13.
, (...): of (...) in Clemens Alexandrinus: of (...), the first Principle of the
first Gnostick Heaven in Epiphanius: the God of Moses in Diodorus Siculus: the
God Bacchus in the Oracle of Apollo Clarius; and lastly (as was said) of the
Samaritan God (...), in Theodoret. And certainly the Jews before the Captivity
knew well enough how to pronounce this name; nor does it appear in all the
Bible that they feared to reveal it.

A. What means that place in Exodus 6. 3. But by my name (...) was I not known
unto them?

B. It means that Go^ having actually given defense and plenty to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, was already known to them by the names of El, Almighty; and
Schadai, Alsufficient. But that having not fulfilled to them his Promise Exodus
6. 3, to v. 9.
of giving to them or their seed, the Land of Canaan; was not yet known to them
by his name Jehovah or Jahveh, which comes from [(...)] Hajah, which signifies
to Be and Exist; and imports a God constant to his word, and the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever.

A. If the Tetractys of Pythagoras be not the Tetragrammaton of Moses; what
other thing is it?

B. I can judge it no other thing than that which Plutarch thought it Plut. de
Iside. p. 381, 382. (...).
, The Pythagorean World. This World (as the same Plutarch Plutarch. de Animae
procr. p. 1027. F.
observes) consists of a double Quaternary. The Quaternary of the
Intellectual World is TO Agathon, Nous, Psyche, Hyle. The Quaternary of the
sensible World (which is most properly the Pythagorean (...)) is Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth; The four Elements H^sych. (...).
called by the name of (...), (the Roots or Principles of all mixed Bodies) in
these ancient Greek Verses: (...) Plut. de Plac: Phil. c. 3. p. 878 Sext.
Empir. cont. Math. p. 367.
(...). That is, Jupiter the Fire, Juno the Air, Pluto the Earth, and Nestis,
or the womb, the Water, are the four Roots of all Things.

The like we find in the Form of the Pythagorick Oath, in these words See
Jambl. de vita Pythag. c. 28. p. 138. Macr. de Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 6.
: (...) (...) in Hier. A^r. Carm.
(...).

A. This to me is a Pythagorick Riddle. How do you expound it?

B. I construe the Dystich thus: No [or yea], By Him from whom we learned the
Tetractys (for they swore by their Master See Hier. in Carm. Pyth. p. 231. and
Sext. Empir. adv. Mathem. c. 20.
) a fountain containing in it the Roots (or Elements) of everflowing Matter For
so I interpret (...), See Not. in Hier. Carm. Pyth. p. 377.
not as some of eternal Matter, of which the Elements are not the Roots, and
which is not here spoken of; but of the second Matter which perpetually
changes its shapes; the first being neither this or that, but ingenerable and
incorruptible Hyle.

Now if I am mistaken in this notion of the Tetractys, I err with company. For
Hierocles in a place little observed, does seem to say the same thing. The
Tetrad (said he Hier. in Carm. Pyth. p. 229, 230.
) is (...), the framer of all things; and (...), the cause, [or the TO Agathon,
frequently so called by the modern Platonists;] and (...), the Idea or
Intellectual World; (...), The cause of the Heavenly [that is of the ethereal
first) Matter, and of that which is sensible.

A. This Interpretation of the Tetractys seems not wide of the scope of
Pythagoras and Plato. But for the Triad, methinks you are more severe than you
need to be in explaining, or (to express your humor more properly) in exposing
of it. There must surely be somewhat more Divine in that Notion than you allow,
seeing it has spread it self very widely among the Gentiles, and thereby seems
the dictate of that reason which is common to them all.

B. You argue upon an usual mistake. Many such Doctrines are spread very far,
but often they come from one only root; and that is not true reason, but the
authority of some one famed Master in Learning. The Bellweather goes first, and
a numerous flock follow him upon no other motive oftentimes, but because they
see him go before them. Orpheus is followed by Pythagoras, and he by Plato and
thousands of others in successive Ages.

A. There is no effect without its cause. What (I pray you) did move Orpheus,
or Pythagoras, or Plato, or him whoever he was that was the Beginner to take up
at first this Doctrine of the Triad?

B. The other extreme opinion of those Philosophers who were mere Atomists.

A. How could that be? they were the followers of Moschus or Mochus, that is
Moses, whom Orpheus and Pythagoras, and Plato, rather follow than contradict.

B. That Moschus was Moses, Mr. Seldom, Arcerius in his Notes on Jamblicus, and
diverse others seem to believe, for no other reason that I know of than because
the names are a little like one another. But Mochus or Moschus was plainly a
Phaenician of later times, and one who opened a School at Sidon See Strab. l.
16. Geograp. p. 757. Athen. Delpn. 1. 2. p. 44. l. 7. c. 5. p. 278. Jambl. de
vita Pythag. c. 3. p. 32, 33. Sext. Empir. adv. Mathem. p. 367.
. He is the same with (...) in Laertius and Suidas. Laertius Laert. in Proaem.
p. 1. (...) etc.
makes him a Phaenician, and one of those Barbarians as he calls them, from
whom Philosophy had its birth, e're it was propagated in Greece. And he numbers
him with Zamolxis the Thracian, Atlas the Libyan, and Vulcan the Egyptian.

But it is not of any moment, here to inquire any further about him. I know not
whether he were such an Atomist as I am here speaking of; to wit, a perfect
Materialist, denying the Existence and the very notion of Incorporeal
substance. In opposition to such the Pneumatists framed the Platonic Triad
after this manner: The Swmatists or Materialists supposed nothing to be in the
world but Body, and all body to exist eternally of it self, in its essence
though not in its modes, without all cause. The Pneumatists opposed this Dogma
by asserting one supreme Incorporeal substance, the Aitia or cause of all
Beings besides its own: the TO Agathon, or fountain-good whence all Essence
flowed. The Materialists supposed that this visible World was the only World,
and that all Ideas and all pretenses of Incorporeal Beings, were but so many
impressions of motion on the brain. This Dogma the Pneumatists opposed by
asserting separate Ideas and an Intellectual World; a Nous or Logos.

The Materialists supposed the frame of the visible World to have been made at
adventure, and by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms. The Pneumatists opposed this
Dogma, by affirming two things: First, that there was not only Matter and
Motion, but a Demiourgus, an Incorporeal workman, governing the disorderly
motion of the Chaos, and disposing of the rude Materials in it into a Regular
System. Secondly, That this Artificer did not work at adventure, but accorrding
to an excellent Exemplar, laid before him.

A. I perceive you still so explain this Triad, that you will not allow Plato
to Christianize. Nay I find elsewhere Ch 9. p. 165.
that you do not think him so much as to Mosaize; which is very hard measure,
and such as others have not meted to him.

B. I do not say that he did not Mosaize, but that to me it was not manifest
that he did.

A. When he says in his Timaeus, Plat^ in Timaeo, p. 37.
That the Father having made the World was exceedingly transported at the work
of his hands; does he not borrow from Moses, who said Genesis 1. 31.
, That God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.

B. It is not manifest that he did. It is natural for any man to say after the
description of an excellent and an agreeable performance, that the Artist was
pleased with what he had done. Further, it is here to be observed, that Plato
in that place speaks not as Moses of God, the supreme self-originated Father,
but of the third Principle, or Demiourgus, whom he styles emphatically the
Father and Genitor of the visible World. For to the TO Agathon Plato ascribes
not such Fatherhood and Generation; but says, of all things flowing from him,
that they were unbegotten; that is, not formed, as he says this World was, out
of praeexistent Matter by Psyche.

A. Though the Demiourgus of Plato may not be the Mosaic maker of the World,
yet he may seem at least to be the Spirit of God, which (as Moses teaches Genesis
1. (...).
) moved upon the face of the waters. For Plato makes his Third principle to
agitate the Chaos.

B. Neither is that evident; for the Text may be interpreted of a Wind of God,
that is, according to the Jewish Idiom, of a mighty wind so moving. The Winds
of God (says the Arabic Version) blew upon the face of the waters.

A. Though you evade this, yet I hope you will grant something in favor of
Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato. You will grant sure that they received the
Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul from the Cabala of Moses, and were
thereby great Benefactors to the Gentile-world, and predisposed it for the
reception of the Christian Faith.

B. That kind of Immortality which they held was not agreeable to Christian
Doctrine. They asserted indeed the Incorporeal and indissoluble nature of the
substance of man's soul; but by the Dogma of its Circulation through several
Bodies, they taught a false and uncomfortable Faith which our Lord never
justified. He taught not only that the Soul was not a concretion of separable
Atoms, and that it was a substance not to be killed, a substance subsisting
after death; but that it was, if righteous, immortal in unchangeable
blessedness. He did not dishearten the virtuous by saying (as did Pythagoras)
that the Soul after having attained the height of the Heavenly state, might
come down again from the top of the Circle, and be happy and unhappy in eternal
Rotations and Vicissitudes. For this reason St. Austin in the first Book S.
Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. Ed. Par. 1677. Iturus, autem, quam Rediturus,
dixissem securius, propter eos qui putant Animos humanos pro meritis peccatorum
suorum de coelo lapsos sive dejectos, in corpora ista detrudi.
of his Retractations, speaking of the Souls ascent into Heaven, thinks it
had been safer to have expressed himself by the word Going, than that of
Returning; lest any should believe he favored the Platonic notion of its
being thrust down from its seat in Heaven.

A. Of Platonism, enough. I will trouble you again, as I did at the beginning,
with a few Remarks of another kind; and then I will suffer you to be quiet.

B. Pray let us hear them.

A. In Chap. 5. page 52. you make Pagods to be the Statues, whereas they are
only the Temples of Idols.

B. I use not my own words, but Vincent le Blanc's, and with him many others
agree; though I do not remember that either in Sir Thomas Roe's Voyage to the
East Indies Sir T. Roe's Voyage, p. 440.
, or in Monsieur Tavernier's Travels Tavernier's Voy. part. 2. p. 166.
, Pagod is otherwise used than for a Temple. But why may it not signify both
the Statue and the Temple? At Rome they do not think it absurd to call, the
Saint, the Church, the Image, Sancta Maria.

A. It may be so. I pass to another Note. In Chap. 6. page 97, 98. you expound
the second Commandment, or prohibition of a Vow forbidden to be made to an Idol
or Vanity, in the name of El, Elohim, Jehovah, or (if you will have it so)
Jahveh; or in any other name of the God of Israel. So far the Novelty, perhaps,
is passable. But then to obviate an Objection which may be made from our Lords
Interpretation, [Thou shall not forswear thy self,] you add this, That he who
voweth by an Idol, seeing he cannot be enabled by it to perform his Vow, is
therefore in effect forsworn. And this looks more like an Evasion than an
Answer.

B. It does so. Nor will I go about either to defend that, or the Exposition
which occasioned it. Thus much only I choose to subjoin: That a Jew or a
Christian vowing by an Idol though colored with some Name of the true God, is
actually forsworn; because he breaks either the Mosaical, or Evangelical
Covenant, an especial part of which is the renunciation of the worship of all
Demons See Mr. Thorndike's Weights and Meas. Chap. 23. p. 168.
.

In speaking to the first Commandment, in p. 97. I am guilty of a fault of
omission which you take no notice of.

A. What may that be?

B. I ought to have observed that the Jews did generally interpret that
Prohibition, against the worship, not so much of any other supreme god, as of
the middle powers, or supposed Mediators, betwixt God and Man.

A. There needs no command against the worship of many supreme gods; that being
a contradiction to the sense of mankind.

B. True; when you use the words, many supremes. But the common people think
not of the World, as one Body necessarily placed under one Governor; but they
may be brought to think of the Kingdom of Heaven, as they do of the kingdoms in
this world, where there is no Universal Monarch. They may think there are
several coequal gods, in their several Precincts. Nay, generally the Barbarous
in several Countries, may be apt to think their Topical god superior to all
others. The ignorant Friar thought the French King his Master, the greatest on
earth, when he irreverently compared him to God the Father, and called our Holy
Lord the Dauphine of Heaven. And some poor Peasants believe there is scarce one
higher on earth than the Lord of the Manor.

A. I have met with such in my time. But, I go on. In Chap. 6. p. 122, and in
other places, you much disparage the Ancient Histories of Greece.

B. Plato himself Plato in Timaeo. p. 22. -- (...). --
speaking of the first Phoroneus, Deucalion, and others, suggesteth that their
stories are fabulous. And that which he there remembers of the Discourse of the
Priests of Sais to Solon, about the Antiquities of Egypt and Greece, and of
Athens as an Egyptian Colony, is, at first hearing, so Idle a Tale, that I
wonder the Philosopher, or any discreet Reader of him, has had any reverence
for it.

A. I confess, I have not. Give me leave to trouble you with one objection
more. In Chap. 7. p. 146. You say Two things concerning the Idolatry of the
Mahometans which will not pass. First, You affirm that they pray to Mahomet:
whereas they are forbidden to do any such thing by their great Article, of
Faith in one God. Secondly, You say, it is most notorious that they do so;
whereas some judicious Persons who have lived amongst them, and such who are of
better credit than the Author you cite, do profess they could never observe
them doing it.

B. To your first exception, I thus answer. Their Article, of Faith in one God,
was not so much designed against the worship of subordinate powers, as against
the acknowledgment of three coequal Subsistences in the God of the Christians.
It is one of the Dogmata of the Moslemans (says Gabriel Sionita Gabr. Sion. de
Urb. and Mor. Orient. c. 14. p. 76, 77. Hanc ult. partic. direct contra
Christianos protulit, etc.
), That God is One; and that there is no other equal to Him. And this last
Clause Mahomet added with direct design against the Christian Trinity. And he
would not have been so vehement, in his charge of Idolatry against the
Christians, if they had worshipped Christ and the Holy Ghost with subordinate
honor, and not as very God.

For your second Exception, I must confess that the words [most notonious] may
seem a little too bold; they relating to a matter which is under dispute: as
likewise that, on your side, there are Authors See T. S. of the Relig. of the
Turks, p. 53.
of better credit then Monsieur de la Guilliotiere whom I have produced. I have
not much relied upon his word since I was taught by a person of great integrity
Mr. Vernon in his Letter from Smyrna, in Oldenburg's Transact. N. 124. p. 579.
, that his Book of Athens to his knowledge was wide of the truth.

But Monsieur de la Guilliotiere is not my only Author. I am told by others
that the worship of Heroes, and trust in their Aids as Patrons under God, is to
be charged on Mahometans, if not on the constitution of Mahomet who taught
expressly Gabr. Sion. ubi supra.
the Intercession of Saints.

Busbequius relates Busbequius, Epist. 1. p. 53.
that the Turks believe their Hero Chederle (a kind of Mohammedan St. George) to
be propitious in War, to all who implore his Aid. He further tells that the
Dervi, or Turkish Monks, showed him the Sepulchers of the Relations of
Chederle; and would have gladly persuaded him that many benefits were daily
conferred from Heaven on those who at those chres petitioned them for
assistance.

Francis Barton a learned English man, and no stranger in Turkey, discoursing
of the manners of that people, gives this as an instance of their Veneration
of Saints. The Admiral (says he) of the Imperial Fleet, during fourteen days
before he set sail, was obliged to go once a day to the Sepulcher of Isuppus,
an eminent and fortunate Warrier, and there to pray for success.

Septem-Castrenses was detained many years among the Mahometans. And he (in the
fifteenth Chapter of his Book, de Turcarum Moribus) is large in mentioning
their Guardian-Heroes, in whom they put subordinate trust.

One (it seems) is called Sedichast, which they interteth, Holy Conqueror, or
Victorious among the Saints. And of him (he says) it is the common opinion,
that no man was ever sent away unanswered, who in any necessity prayed to him
for succor, especially in any emergency of War. He is (as he proceeds) as
famous among the Turks, as St. Anthony among [some] Christians. Another is
called Harschi Pettesch, which they interpret, The help of Travel. He is (he
says) much invoked and reverenced by strangers and pilgrims, and (as they
report) not in vain. A third is called Ascick passa, as much as to say, Patron
of love, and he is invoked in Matrimonial cases. A fourth is called Gotvel
mirtschin, and is a kind of Patron of Cattle. To him (says Septemcastrensis)
my Mistress prayed, and vowed to make him a yearly present of Butter for the
Custody of her Kine, which also she performed. And (as he goes on) she would
have persuaded me to have invoked him, that the Sheep I kept might by him have
been protected from the Wolves that infested us.

If all this be true, and the Mahometans invoke so many other Heroes; methinks
they should not forget for ever to call on Mahomet himself, the Prince of their
Saints, and their chief Intercessor Patricides ap. Hott. Hist. Orient. p. 254.
with God.

For the honor they do to the Relick of his Sandal preserved at Mecha Tavern.
Rel. of the Seragl. c. 12. p. 64.
: For their worshipping of the place where they supposed Abraham to have dwelt
Benj. Itiner. p. 60. -- religiose colentes. --
: For their embracing and kissing the stone Brachthan, on which they say
Abraham accompanied with Hagar Euthym. Zigab. p. 14.
: Lastly, for their moving round about a statue of stone, erected in the midst
of the Temple at Mecha, with stooping shoulders, one hand lifted up, and
another on one of the ears, till a Vertigo lays them on the floor (a thing it
seems told Zigabemus Zigab. ibid.
by a Turk turned Christian) I forbear to enlarge upon them, and leave the
whole to the Perusers of such Authors as Tavernier, Benjamin, Zigabenus,
Busbequius, Barton.

A. I must needs be satisfied with the authorities you have brought. There
remain diverse Animadversions yet behind; but I will neither tire you or my self
any further: I see it is easier to raise Cavils than to write any thing that is
not liable to them. I beg your pardon for the rude Interruption I have given
you, and think my self obliged in common civility to bid you Adieu.

B. You have not offended, unless you have done so by your Complement. And
because I perceive you are falling into a vein of Ceremoniousness, which is so
idle a thing in private conversation, and amongst old Friends, I will be
contented for this time to part with you. So, Fare you well.

FINIS.
An ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
A
AArons seeing the God of Israel, what, page 337 Abel's and Cain 's Sacrifices
how accepted or rejected, 324 Abraham ignorant of us, Exp. 216 Before Abraham
was, I am, Exp. (324, 380. Abraxas of the Gnostics, who, 151 Absolution
Romish, after death, 7 Egypt, whence the confusion of its Rites, 122, 123
AEons 166 African Idol of stone, 48 Agnus Dei's Original, 154 (...), whether
Thummim, 360, 361, 364 St. Almachius, Sm. Almanacum 259 Alla of Mahomet, what,
145 Amulets, Mohammedan, 147 Gnostics, 154 Angel, Christ Emphatically such,
328, 331 -- To whom Jacob prayed, who, 242 Angels, thought by some Hellenists
Governors under God, 105 -- Ministering not Governing Spirits, 212, 213, etc.
-- Of the Seven Churches 213 -- Of Graecia and Persia 83 -- Of their Worship
under the Old Testament, 382 -- Orders of them, 165, 166, 212 Archangels, what,
212, 213 M. Antoninus's unknown God, who, 62 Ancient of days, the Son, 270, 369
Ancilia, what, 72 Animation Platonic of the World, what, 394 Apis, its golden
Image, 117 -- Its marks, 118 Anthropomorphites, 379, 388 Aquinas, why
canonized, 258 Ark of the Covenant when it failed, 368, what, 340, 341, 343 --
What in it, 362, 363 -- How instead of all Statues, 339, 340 -- Not it self
worshipped, 344, 345, 346 -- How meant of Christ, 342, 343, 370, to 379 Arius,
how a Platonist, 77, 396 Arians, their Doxology, 168, 169 Arabians, worshippers
of Demons and Statues, 143, 144 Assembly of Divines, of the word Create, 203
Astarte in Judge. 2. what, 103 Astrology Judicial, whence, 70 Athanasius his
Translation mended, 160 Ave Maria used as a Prayer before Sermon, 201, 202 St.
Augustine appears to one in a dream, 243
B
BAbel, Its Tower an high Altar, sacred to the Sun, 42, 43, 44 -- The name the
builders designed, what, 44, 45 -- Gods coming down to it, what, 323, 324
Bacis, Bacchus, 131, 139 Bacchus Egypt. Whether Moses, 126, to 131 St. Barbara,
assistant at Confession, 196 Baronius, his high devotion toward the H. Virgin,
224, to 228 -- The occasion of it, 229 Basilidian Gems, what, 154 Beatifick
Vision, what, 378, 379 Beelzebub, who, 124 Benians, their Buffiuna, Brama,
Mais, what, 82 S. Bernardine's odd saying, 257 Dr. Bilson's charge of Idolatry
on Papists, 283 Bleeding Statues, 300, 301 Blind and Lame, in 2 Samuel 5. what,
89, 90 Body of Christ, Prayers to it, 387 -- Worship of it, 305 Bones of
Elephants mistaken for those of Giants 94 First Born of every Creature, how
Christ so called 165 Of Bowing toward the Altar, 304, etc. -- To the Elements,
390 -- At the name of Jesus, 307, 308 Branch in Isa. 11. 1. misinterpreted of
the Virgin, 247, 248
C
CAllicratidas his (...), 68 Of the Golden Calf, 108, etc. and 337 -- Why some
Fathers called it the Head of a Calf, 337 Cambray, its Synods declaration about
prayer to Saints, 196, 197 Cambyses, his killing Apis, 112 Canonization modern,
its abuse, 258, 259 Is. Casaubon 's Prayer for the Church of England 310 Cath.
of Siena, of her Saintship, 258 Golden Cat, 117 Celsus 's error concerning Gods
Image, 74 Cerberus, how Pluto 's Emblem, 119, 141 Chencres, who, 116, 142 A
Chest, a presence, Jewish Ark, 381 Cherubim, what, 337, 338, 341, 342, 343,
349, 350 -- Of their Faces like Oxen's, 337, 338 China, its Idol-temples 20
Christ, Gods Image, 373, 376, 386, 387, 388, 389 Clouds, Why the Jews said to
worship them, 107, 108 Command, first, its meaning, 411 -- Second, what Pesel
in it, 97 -- What it forbids, 267, 268, 343 -- Third, a new expos. of it, 97,
98, 99, 410 Confessions of Scotl. Pol. Engl. etc. about Romish Idolatry, 178,
etc. Conical form of some Idols, what it meant, 42, 48 Crocodile, Hieroglyph.
of God, 25 Crucifix, of what use, 278, to 280 -- Not the present Image of
Christ, 277, 278, 386 Cup, by which Joseph divined, what, 17, 18 Confusio a
Philos. of China, what he held, 96
D
Demons, twelve Egyptian 76 -- Twelve Grecian ones, 80 -- Of the Gentiles,
evil spirits, 85, 86 -- Of Mexico, very bloody, 87 -- Terrestrial, 86, 125
Daille 's defense of kneeling at the Sacrament in the Church of England, 206
Dan and Bethel, no Shechinahs of God there, 367 Davis 's Voyage to the
Northwest, 21 Degrees of Glory 381 Distraction by Image Worship in the act of
it, 293, 294 Dives and Pauper, a Dialogue about the worship of Images, 291,
292, 293 Dove, whether the Holy Ghost ever assumed that shape, 270, 372 (...)
of God, what, 325, 335, 338, 342, 366, 367, 374 Demiourgus of Gnostics 165 --
Of Plato, not very God, 40, etc.
E
EAst, of worshipping toward it, 377, 378 Ephrata, we heard of the Ark there;
what it means, 371 Enoch 's Prophecy, valued by Tertullian, 38 Enos, falsely
accused of Idolatry by Maimon. 41 Epaphus, mistaken by Herodotus, 121 External
Worship, 22
F
THe Father invisible only: how true; and in the Arian sense how false, 317,
318 Faith, what not of Faith, sin; whether against Invocation of Saints, 200
Flesh Intellectual in Counc. Constable. what, 376 Fire, Gods answer by it, 324 --
Of a formless one, 317 Forms of Prayer in the Church of Rome, how scandalous in
their common sense, 189, to 191 -- Whether expounded in a better sense, 192, to
202 Frauds pious, 31, 32, 261, 388 Flaming-sword in Genesis what, 324, 355.
G
St. Geneviefve Patroness of Paris, 233 Geneva, Images remain there, 297 St.
George 's day, 233. Turkish St. George, 413 Gnostics, worshippers of Demons,
149 -- Of Images, 154 -- Their (...), 150, 152, 166, 167 T. Goodwin of the
Government of the Saints departed, 215 T. G. Papist of the same, 237, to 240 --
Answered, 241, to 244 God, whence that name, 27 Gothic superstition, 219, 220
Government subord. of the world by Saints departed, a dangerous opinion, 222,
223, 301 -- Agreements in it of the Gentiles and Romanists, confessed by de
Roa, 232, by Rivallius, 216, 217 Greece its fabulous Antiquities, 412 Creek
Church, what Images in it, 177 Gregory 7th. of his Saintship, 257 H. Grotius,
answered about the delivery of the Law by the Logos, 333, etc. -- About the
worship of the Ark, 346, 347 -- About Cherubim, 349, 350 -- About the things in
the Ark, 362, 363 -- He mistranslates Hierocles, 402 Guardian-Saints, Romish,
211, 212 Giants, the congregation of them (in the Proverbs) what it means, 34
H
Al. HAles, his idle defense of Saint-worship, 240 Harpocrates, why supposed
the emblem of Moses, 131 Herodotus 's Text mended, 118 St. Hierom's mistake
about Abraxas, as the Sun, 151 Herald of Norweigh, his barbarous Sacr. 22
Hochal in Genesis 4. 26. what, 40 D. Holden of the Knowledge of Saints, 205 Horns
of Moses, what, 136, 339 -- Of the Logos, what, 316 Horstius 's Paradise of the
Soul, 201, etc. 211, etc. Hosea 's taking to him an Adulteress, what, 67
I
JAmblicus mended, 394 Jaovas, Priests of the Sun so called, 44 (...), Jove,
Jehovah, 59, 152, 395, 396, 404. Jahveh a righter pronunciation than Jehovah,
395 Jehovah, God not known by that name in Exodus 6. 3. what it means, 404, 405
Ibis of Egypt, 32 Idea of God, what, 1. how turned to an Idol, 23 Idolatry, its
notion, 13, 14 -- Two kinds of it, 12 -- Why called uncleanness, 13, 14 --
Three degrees of it, 14, 15 -- Its general cause, 25, 26 -- Its blockishness,
50, 51 -- Not before the Flood, 39, 40 Idols fall before Christ, 340, 373, 374
-- renounced in Romans Rit. of Baptism, 187 Images, their glorious or horrid
forms, to what end, 92, 93 -- Why in SS. said to be the ultimate objects of the
worship of the Gentiles, 90, to 95 -- Of the true God, what, 64, 65, 72, 73, to
75 -- Of the Divinity, 268, 383 -- Of the Trinity, 265, 266, 383 Pope John 22.
against them, 264 -- Of Christ, joined by some into personal union with him,
283, 284, 386 -- Of the Shechinah, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387 -- Of our Lady at
Halla, 93, 300. at Guadalupa, how found, 31, 32 -- Of Analogy, 269. of Memory,
272 Of Representation, 272, 273. Of Presence, 273 -- Abused as Shechinahs of
God, 295, to 301 -- Their use, 280, etc. -- On Coins how far scrupled by the
Turks, 107 -- Visible, more dangerous than signs of words, 384 -- Hist. of two
speaking ones, 90, 91 Immensity of God, against Vorstius, 381 Invisibility of
God, 313, 314 St. Joseph, a Patron in America, 234 Isaiah saw his glory; what
it means, 368 Isis, her rod, what, 17, 135. her Image, 113. Isis, all, 52, 53.
Isis and Ceres, who, 137 Julian when Apostate owned the God of Abraham, 66 --
His mistake about Apis, 124 -- His Apol. for the worship of Images, 89 Jupiter,
how the one true God, how an ill Demon, 60, 61, 62, 81 -- Whence the name
derived, 395
K
KIrcher mistakes Maimon. 355 Kissing, an ancient Ceremony in Religious
worship, 22 Kneeling at the Sacrament, 305, 306, 307
L
LActantius, a mistake of his, 331 St. Lambert, Patron of Brussels, 233 A Lamb
forbidden as Christ's Image, 276 Law of Moses, given by the Logos, 331, etc. --
Mystical, 370 A Lie in Romans 1. 23. an Idol, 338 Light, used by God in his
Shechinah, 315, 316 Lipsius 's excess of devotion toward the Virgin, 229, 230,
231 Logos, why the Son so called. -- The Substitute of the Father, 319, 328,
329, 330, 332, etc. -- He is thought to have appeared to Adam, 320, etc. to
Abel, 322. to Abraham, 324, etc. to Agar, 328. to Jacob, 325. to Moses, 330,
etc. to Isaiah, 368. to Daniel, 369. to Joshuah, 366. to David and Solomon,
366, 367. to S. Stephen, 376 (...), by whom taken instead of (...), 153 Logos
sometimes signifies the world in Philo, 320, 401 The Lord that rained on Sodom
from the Lord, who, 325
M
MAhomet, his one God, 145 Mohammedan Saints trusted in as Patrons, 146, 412,
413, 414 -- Of the worship at his Tomb, 146, 414 Manicheism, degenerate
Pythagorism, 155, 156 Mary, the signification of that name, 241 Mass, the fraud
of the late Translator of it into English, 5, 6 Masses of Saints, how to be
understood, 188 Matter, the first Hyle eternal according to Plato, 79, 402,
403, 404 -- Its generation, what, 394, 402, 403 -- Its stubbornness against
Psyche, 402, 403 -- The principle of evil, 393 Mr. Mede 's notion of the form
of the Serpent doubted, 355 Michael, the Original of his Feast, 221 Miracles,
Romish, some false, some ludicrous, 259, 260, 261 -- Upon Invocation of Saints,
259, to 262 -- At Images, 300, 301 -- Why to be suspected, 260 Miracle of a Leg
restored, 259. Of a Shoo, 300 Moschus, or Mochus the Atomist, not Moses, 407
Moses, his fabulous statue, 104 -- He seems not to Platonize, 165, 408 -- Saw
God, what it means, 335, 336 -- Whether Osiris, Bacchus, Apis, 125, etc. Bishop
Montague, his opinion about praying to Saints, Angels, Guardian Angel, 207, 208
Mountains, British Islands, 28 Moon, Its character on Apis not from the
beginning, 118 Muggleton 's gross Deity, 221, 309, 310
N
NAils of the Cross worshipped with Latria, by C. Curtius, 147, 284, 285
Nature, Pliny 's and Spinosa 's Goddess, 26, 27 -- Called (...), 399 Negative
honoring of Images, 280 Neton in Macrobius is Mnevis, 131 Nice, Council
second, what it means by adoration of Images, 288 S. Nicholas made a
Guardian-Saint, 231 Nocca, a kind of Northern Neptune, 16 Nous of Plato, the
Intellectual world, 399, 400, 401 Numa 's Temple, and fire in it, what, 48, 53
-- His zeal against Images, 59 -- The fire in his Temple, why renewed each
March, 53 Nysa, what place, 128
O
ONion, of what kind the Idol of Egypt was, 28 Ophites, their Diagram, 153 Of
Orders of Angels, 165, 166, 167, 212 Origin, of the power of words, 4 Orpheus
's one God, 56 Osiris, Bacchus, 129. Apis, 130. Moses, 131. Osarsyphus,
Disaris, 131, 144 Oxen, how sacred, 111, 112, 113, 114, 136, 353. with their
faces Cherubim appeared, 337, 338
P
PAgod, what, 410 Pamelius, a false charge of his against Tertullian, 332
Patrocinie of Saints, 194, to 256 Pectoral, a lesser Ark, 351 Permiseer of the
Benians, 58 Of Petavius 's calling Arius a Platonist, 77, 396 Pictures of
Christ crucified lawful, 277 -- None of Saints departed, as such, possible,
296, 297 -- Of Gods Shechinah, 383, to 387 Pillar of Fire and Cloud, what, 331
Pix carried as the Ark, 296 Plato he owned one God, 57, 58 -- Yet he was an
Idolater, 69, 76, to 81 -- His Triad not the Christian Trin-unity, 77, 78, 398,
399, etc. -- Whence it came, 407, 408 -- His Ideas, what, 78, 79, 399, etc. --
His Demons, what kind of spirits, 85, 86 -- How far he owned Providence, 81
Platonism, an occasion of Gnosticism, 149, 150 Plutarch's Translation mended,
Poets, how causes of Idolatry, 36, 37 Polytheism, what kind possible, 411
Pluto, who, 124 Porphyry, his reason for the worship of God by the image of a
man, 74 -- His Translation mended, 86 -- His abstracted worship, 96 -- His not
owning the Gods to have been men, 118 Prayer, our Lords: said to Saints, 197 Of
Socrates, and Simplicius, 63 To Saints, if only to pray for us, 192, to 196,
etc. -- To fictitious persons, 207, 259 -- To some of suspected Saintship, 256,
to 258 Real Presence, 94, 181, 185, 346, 347 Profit, that which did not profit,
in Jer. 2. 11. meant of an Idol, 338 Providence, its extent acc. to Maimon. 84
Purgatory Fire, one probable occasion of the belief of it, 378 Pyramids, what,
42, 43 Pythagoras, his two Principles, 15, 76, 155, 156, 393 -- His Image among
the Gnostics, 153 -- His Dogma of the Imnortality of the Soul, not like
Christ's, 409, 410 -- The form of the Oath of his Disciples, 405, 406 -- His
Tetractys, not the Tetragrammaton, a double Quaternary, what it was, 404, 405,
406.
R
RApine's excess of devotion toward the Virgin, 249 Representations of God,
unmeet, 272, 273 Reprisal of all things at last into Gods substance, the Cabala
of the Pendets, 36 Resora an Indian- Idol, 29 Revel. 22. 9. its various
reading, 175 Rites of worship, their indecence, and great number taxed, 5, 6,
7, 8 Romans, their Religion when corrupted, 59 S. Rosa made a Patroness, 232 W.
Rufus, his Apparition, 262
S.
SAbbath designed against Idolatry, 99, 100 Sacrifices enjoined as a means
against Idolatry, 100, 101 Saint-worship, two occasions of it, 217, 218, 219,
220 Saints, little mention of their appearing, unraised, in SS. 206 Solomon 's
beginning of Idolatry, 103, 342 Sanedrim above, what, 105 Saturday, where, and
how, sacred to the Virgin, 249 Sandius his conceit about the Holy Ghost, 399
Scarabee, the Hieroglyphick of the Sun, 19 Scaliger, a mistake of his, 364 Not
Seen his shape, what it means, 373 Mr. Seldom answered about the Antiquity of
Apis, 114, to 117 Semis a Northern Idol, 125 Serapis, Pluto, 119, 124, 141 --
His image, 91, 120 Seraphim, what, 351, to 360 Serpent which seduced Eve, what,
and in what form, 354, 355 -- Of the Brazen-serpent, 359, 360 Serpents sacred,
352, 353 -- Of the fiery flying kind, 352 Servetus his Frenzies, 158 Signs
external, Idolatry by them, 286, to 290. what allowed at Trent, 285 Sleep of
the soul, 162 Sneezing, Prayer at it, 10, 307 Socinians make Christ a kind of
thinking Machine, 169, 170 Sons of God in Genesis 6. 1, 2. what, 39 Sophocles 's
one God, 56 Soul of the world, an assistant form, 35, and 394, 395 -- Varro 's
God, 54 -- called the Father in Plato, 394, 408 -- Not very God as explained by
Plato, 401, 402, 403 Spalato, his judgment concerning Saint-worship, 263
Spirit, moving the Chaos, whether a mighty wind, 409 Spirits, whence their
worship, 34 Squango, an Enthusiast of New England, 75 Statues of Idols, what,
30, 69, 88, 89, 90, 91 Sun and Moon the first Idols, 47, 48 Sun, a statue, 68
-- Several Hieroglyphics of it, 115 -- Called the divine Harp, 71 -- And the
seat of Christ, 278, 323, 377 Superstition, described, 3, 4, 5 -- Of the
Pharisees, what, 9 Syncellus refuted, 119 Shechinah, whence, 372
T
TAbernacle of Moloch, what, 102 Holy Table, by some called the Ark, 389, 390
Temple of Solomon, what, 339. whence occasioned acc. to S. Chrysostom. 329. and
Maimon. 340. -- Christ the Temple, 374, 375 -- Prayers toward the Temple, 369
Teraphim, Seraphim, Urim, the same, 349, 350 Tertullian 's opinion of Idolatry
in Seth 's time, 38 Tetractys of Pythagoras, 405, 406. of the Gnostics, 153
(...), what, 373 S. Thomas of Canterbury a devout servant of the Virgins, 245
-- His shirt said to be mended by her, 261 -- His Saintship doubted, 256 Thorn,
a German Idol, 27, 28 Mr. Thorndike his opinion of worshipping Idols as
ultimate objects, 95. of Romish Forms of Prayer, 190, 191. of Idolatry as
unjustly charged on the Church of Rome, 176. of the peril of Idolatry in it,
203 Throne and Fund of Matter, what, 394 Thrones, Principalities, Powers, etc.
in S. Paul, what, 165, to 167 Tillage of Egypt, 136, 137 Truth by Christ, in
Joh. 1. 17. what, 365 Trinity, of its appearing under the Old Covenant, 318,
328 Triad Platonic, how one, 398 Thummim, what, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 361,
to 365 Two, why Seraphim in the Pect. Two, 356
V and U
VAtablus 's exp. of Bama, 43 -- Of the Angel of Greece, 83 Ubiquity, whether
ascribed to Saints and Angels by the Worshippers of them, 204, 205 Tho. de
Villa Nova a Guardian-Saint, 232, 233 Ulma, its many Guardian-spirits, 220, 221
Viretus 's mistake about Plato 's Image of God, 73 H. Virgin. Forms of Prayer
to her, 189, 190, 195, 198, 201, 211, 212, 225, 227, 230, 231 235 By some
Romanists paralleled -- with Christ, 248, 249, 251 -- Origin of her worship,
251, 252 -- A general Patroness acc. to R. Rapine, 234, 235. and acc. to the
Synod of Mexico, 249 -- Her seven joys on earth, and seven more in Heaven, 245
-- Her Miracles in recovering Baronius, 229. raising a boy from the dead, 261.
saving men in a tempest, 254. curing S. Gilberts Throat, 223 -- Of bowing at
her name, 308 St. Veit, 233 Visions of God, what, 270, 271, 380 Vitzilopuchtli,
an American Idol, 15 Urim, what, 347, to 358. -- How the Answer by it was made,
357
W
WIckmans high devotion toward the Virgin, 249, 250 Will Worship, what kind to
be allowed, or condemned, 10, 11 Witch of Endor, 206 Word, Christ why so
called, 372 Worship of Romish Saints and Pagan Heroes compared, 234, 235, 236,
237 World, made out of things not seen, what, 403
Z
ZArasdas, or Zaratas, who, 15, 393 Christ the true (...), 84
FINIS.

