TEN MATTERS WORTHY OF NOTE: I. The Declaration or Resolution of the Officers
in the County of Essex, to the Earl of Warwick, L. Lieutenant of that County.
II. The Lord Willoughby of Parham his Letter to an Honorable Member of the
PARLIAMENT. III. His Majesty's Letter to the Lord Willoughby of Parham. IIII.
The Lord Willoughby of Parham his Letter, in answer to His Majesty. V. With
the Message of the Lords to the House of Commons upon the said Letters. VI.
Also the Lord of Warwicks, Letter to his Brother the Earl of Holland; VII.
With the Approbation of both Houses concerning the same.
Die Iovis, 9. Iunii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That these several Letters and
Resolutions shall be forthwith Printed and Pulished.

Ioh. Brown, Gler. Parliament.

VIII. And also a Proclamation by the King, proclaimed in London the Ninth of
June, 1642. concerning Sir John Hotham, and the Militia. IX. And a Declaration
of the Lords and Commons in Parliament concerning the said Proclamation. X.
With the Statute of the 7. Edward 1.


LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Tho: Banks. 1642.

The Declaration or Resolution of the Officers in the County of Essex, to the
Earl of Warwick, Lord Lieutenant of that County.
WE the Captains and Lieutenants with the full consent of the trained bands
and Volunteers of the said County now assembled, having before the access or
this present Parliament seen our Religion, our Laws, our liberties and
estates brought to the brinke of ruin anr subversion by the results of most
desperate and wicked Counsels, could not but with exceeding joy behold the
assembling and continuance of so great and faithful a Council (he
representative body of this Kingdom) and with most certain confidence commilt
thereto all that was dear unto us.

And having also seen the late hellish designs and actings of a Malignant
party of this kingdom, and the bloody rebellion in Ireland, all working to
retard the progress, or subvert the being of this worthy Parliament, and
therein to bereave us of all our hopes of Reformation, or future peace or
happiness to this Church or Kingdom. We cannot but ascribe all glory and
praise unto the Lord of Lords, and express most hearty thankefullnesse unto
his blessed Instruments that great assembly, for their undanted resolutions,
unparalleld endeavors, and happy proceedings for the common good. And herein
(as not the least means of our safety) for the most necessary and seasonable
Ordinance of theirs touching the ordering of the Melitia, whereby we art put
under the command and guidance of so Noble a Lord, and such worthy Gentlemen,
whereunto we humbly desire this present day and meeting may be an evidence and
pledge of our free and willing obedience.

And in having trusted our religion, and laws, and all into the hands of that
great and most faithful Council the Parliament, whose care and fidelity we
have so abundantly found, we even bleed to see the heart and actions of our
Royal King (contrary to his own Royal expressions) declining from the
Councels of His Parliament, and carried after other Councels, whom, as the Laws
and constitutions of this land have not known, nor reposed upon: so we (for
our own parts) neither will nor dare entrust with our Keligion or Laws. And
whom we verily believe, could they prevail against that highest Court (under
God our chiefest Bulwark and defense) would soon deprive us both of Religion
and Law, and (notwithstanding all their specious pretenses) reduce us to a
condition no less miserable then slavish.

From the deep apprehensions of all which we do freely and heartily promise
and tender our persons and estates to assist and defend (to the uttermost) the
high Court of Parliament now assembled, the members power and privileges
thereof, and therein His Majesty's person and authority; and the kingdoms
peace, (according to our late Protestation) against all contrary counsels,
power, and force of Arms whatsoever, which shall be reard up, or attempted
against them.

And this our humble acknowledgement and resolution (which we doubt not will
be accorded unto by all good subjects) we humbly desire your Honor and
Worships to tender on our behalf unto that most Honorable Assembly of
Parliament

For whose happy progress and success we shall daily pray.

The Lord Willoughby of parham his Letter to an Honorable Member of the house
of Parliament.
My Lord,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, in which the House is pleased to do me
a very great Honor, far above any desert of mine, and little expected by me:
for my Lord, I well know my obedience ties me to fulfill their Commands, and in
that I have done, but my duty, and that which every honest man ought to do,
and owes of right to the Parliament; and whosoever has that principle in him,
it will dictate to him as much, and keep him from other by-waies: And for my
own part my heart ever was and shall ever he, both forward and ready to obey
their Lordships command in all things, both with Integrity and industry, and
Gods curse light upon him and his, that carries any other heart about him. My
Lord, it is too mean a way for me to express my acknowledgement in paper, to
the House, for this high favor which I have received by your Lordships Letter.
I hope to make it appear by my actions that their Lorships see, I am not an
ungrateful servant. It is a great encouragement to these parts, their
Lordships Resolutions, in giving their Commands to have the rest of the Militia
put in present execution; and truly, my Lord. it was out of that regard that I
did intimate it to my Lord of Essex, as holding it a thing much conducing to
the public good, and the only remedy to cure these distractions which the
Kingdom is in, not out of any regard to my self; for I know, if I suffer in
executing their Lordships commands, it must be against their wills, and when
that day comes, I will not give a straw for all I have, were I but a looker on.
My Lord, as I was this day at Lincoln where I appointed to begin to Muster,
there came a Messenger from his Majesty, with this Letter, which I held it my
duty to acquaint the House with, and likewise my answer, and am for Lincoln,
where, as in all other places, I shall be ready to serve your Lordship.

As your most humble servant, F. WILLOUGHBY.
MY Lord, ere my Letter was sealed up, I could not but give your Lordship an
account, in how good a Posture I found the trained Band of Lincoln, which was
far beyond my expectation considering the unhappiness in the sickness being
dispersed in the Town, which hindered the appearance of some; But truly my Lord
that was fully supplied by a Company of Volunteers, equal in number and
goodness of Arms to the Trained Bands.

Lincoln, 6. June. 1642.


CHARLES REX.

RIght trusty and welbeloved We greet you well. Whereas We understand, That you
have begun to assemble, Train and Muster the Trained Bands of our County of
Lincoln, under pretense of an ordinance of Parliament, whereto We have not
given Our consent; Which is not only contrary to Law, but to Our Command and
Pleasure signified by Our Proclamation sent to the high Sheriff of that Our
County: Wherefore That you may not hereafter plead Ignorance of such our
prohibition; We do, by these Our Letters, Command, and charge you, upon your
Allegiance, to desist and forbear to Raise, Muster, Train Exercise, or Assemble
together any part of the Trained Bands of that Our County, either by your
self. or by any others employed under you or by Warrant from you. And because
you may, for what you have already done, concerning the Militia of that Our
County, plead that you had not so particular a Command, We shall pass by what
you have already done therein, So as presently upon your receipt hereof, you
shall desist and give over meddling any further with any thing belonging to the
Militia of that Our County; But if you shall not presently desist, and forbear
meddling therewith, We are resolved to call you to a strict Account for your
Disobedience therein, after so many particular and legal Commands given you,
upon your Allegiance to the contrary, and shall esteem and proceed against you
as a disturber of the peace of Our Kingdom.

Given at our Court at York, the fourth of June. 1642.
SIR,
AS there can be nothing of greater unhappiness to me, then to receive a
Command from your Majesty, whereunto my endeavors cannot give so ready an
obedience, as my affections: so I must confess the difficulty at this time not
a little, how to express that duty which I owe to your Majesty's late
Commands, and not falsify that Trust reposed in me by your high Court of
Parliament; through whose particular directions I am now come into this Countey
to settle the Militia, according to the Ordinance of Parliament which by the
Votes of my Lord Littleton and others in the House of Peers, better versed in
the Laws then my self, passed as a Legal thing; and has since been confirmed
(if I mistake not) by his example, and your Majesty's Chief Justice, Sir John
Banks, both in accepting their Ordinance, and nominating their Deputy
Lieutenants; how much farther they proceeded, I know not.

But Sir, if the opinions of those great Lawyers drew me into an act unsuitable
to your Majesty's liking: I hope the want of years will excuse my want of
judgment. And since the Command of the Parliament, I am now so far engaged in
their service as the sending out Warrants to summon the County to meet me this
day at Lincoln, and afterward in other places: I do most humbly beseech your
Majesty not to impose that Command on me, which must needs render me false to
those that rely on me, and so make me more unhappier then any other misery can
fall upon me.

These things, Sir, I once more humbly beseech your Majesty may be taken into
your gracious consideration, and that you would never be pleased to harbor any
misconceit of me, or of this action, since nothing has yet passed by my
Commands here, or ever shall; but what shall tend to the honor and safety of
your Kingdom, and to the content (I hope) of all your Majesty's Subjects in
these parts; amongst which I remain.

Your Majesty's Most humble and dutiful Subject and Servant. F. WILLOUGHBY.

The Approbation of both Houses.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, being advertised by the Lord
Leivtenant, and Deputy Leiutenants of the County of ESSEX, of their ready,
full, and forward meeting of the Trayn-Bands of that County; and of a
cheerful access, of a very considerable number of Volunteers at their first
appearing; Have thought fit, to express unto them, the good sense they hold
of their proceedings, so much conducing to the General safty of this Kingdom;
And having likewise received from them a Declaration full of affections, and
good inclinations, to maintain our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and priveledges
of Parliament; Which they observe to be invaded by pernicious Council, as in
deed they have been of late, in a more dangerous, and high manner then any age
can parrallell: And having very prudently observed, in a right understanding,
That the Kingdom, and the Kings authority and Person, can be no ways
maintained, but by the upholding the power and privisedges of Parliament; as by
the late Protestation they acknowledge themselves bound unto, against all
contrary Counsels, Power, and force of Arms whatsoever. This just and
faithful resolution of theirs, to the public good; The Lords and Commone do
not only approve, but commend, assuring them, that as their endeavors have been
for the peace and happiness of the King and Kingdom; So they will persist, in
discharge of the great and public trust, which lies upon them; to go through
all difficulties which may oppose the public peace and welfare of this
Kingdom: And will upon all occasions, be ready to express particularly, to
those persons from whom they have received such assurance of their affections
and fidelities.

By the King.
A Proclamation proclaimed in London the ninth of June 1642. concerning Sir
John Hotham, and the Maiitia.
WHereas by the Statute made in the seventh year of King Edward the first, The
Prelates, Earls Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm affirmed in Parliament,
That to the King it belongs and his part it is by his Royal Segniority
straightly to defend wearing of Armor, and all other Force against the Peace,
and all times when it shall please Him, and to punish them which shall do
contrary, according to the Laws and usages of the Realm; and hereunto all
Subjects are bound to aid the King, as their Sovereign Lord at all seasons
when need shall be. And whereas We understand, That expressly contrary to the
said Statute and other good Laws of this our Kingdom, under color and
pretense of an Ordinance of Parliament, without Our consent or any Commission
or warrant from Us. The Trained Bands, and the Militia of this Kingdom have
been lately, and are intended to be put in Arms, and drawn into Companies in
a Warlike manner, whereby the Peace and Quiet of Our Subjects is, or may be
disturbed: We being desirous by all gracious and fair admonitions to prevent,
That some malignant Persons in this Our Kingdom do not by degrees seduce Our
good subjects from their due obedience to Us and the Laws of this our
Kingdom, subtly indeavoring by a general Combustion or Confusion, to hide
their mischievous designs and intentions against the Peace of this our
Kingdom and under a spetious pretense of putting Our Trained Bands into a
Posture, draw, and engage Our good Subjects in a Warlike Opposition against Us,
as Our Town of Hull is already by the Treason of Sir Sir John Hotham, who at
first pretended to put a Garrison into the same, only for Our security and
service.

We do therefore by this Our Proclamation expressly charge and Command all Our
Sheriffs, and all Colonels, Lievtenant-Colonels, Serjant Majors, Captains,
Officers, and Soldiers belonging to the Trained Bands of this Our Kingdom,
and likewise all high and petty Constables, and other Our Officers and Subjects
whatsoever, upon their Allegiance and as they tender the peace of this Our
Kingdom Not to Muster, Levy, Raise, March, or to summon, or warn upon any
Warrant Order or Ordinance for one or both Our Houses of Parliament, (whereunto
We have not, or shall not give Our express Consent) any of our Trained Bands
or other Forces to Rise, Muster March, or Exercise, without express Warrant
under Our Hand, or Warrant from Our Sheriffs of the County, grounded upon a
particular Writ to that purpose, under Our great Seal. And in case any of Our
Trained Bands shall rise or gather together, contrary to this Our command; We
shall then call them in due time to a strict account, and proceed legally
against them as violaters of the Laws, and disturbers of the Peace of the
Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at York the 27. day of May, 1642.
The Message of the Lords to the House of Commons.
THe Lords have thought fit to let you know, how much they value and approve
the service so much importing the safety of this Kingdom; and they doubt not
of your readiness to concure with them, upon all occasions to manifest the
sense they have, and shall retain of his deservings, which appears the
greater, by how much the difficulties (by those circumstances you have hear
read) have been greater. And as my Lord resolves to make his interest their
own, in this service. for the public good, and safety of this Kingdom, so
they desire you to join with them in so good and necessary a work.

Resolved by the House of Commons to join with the Lords in this vote, and do
make the like resolution for the deputy Lieutenants for the County of Lincoln,
and desire the Lords concurrence therein.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That they agree with the House of Commons,
for the resolution concerning the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Lincoln.

To my Noble Brother the Earl of Holland
Brother,
IN obedience to the order of both Houses of Parliament, I this day repaired to
Burntwood (where about one four parts of the Trained bands of Essex, were
appointed to meet) for the putting of the ordinance for the Militia of this
Countyin execution. I saw five Companies drawn out, being of the ordinary
trained Bands (and all that were designed to this place) whose numbers I found
full^, and their Arms complete. For though about threescore Arms had been
formerly taken out of each company for the late service about Scotland, yet a
full supply was made by Volunteers, and one of the said five Compaines (being
under the conduct of Sir William Mashams, son) was double to the usual list.
A sixth Company was drawn out, which consisted of near five hundred able men,
who came as Volunteers under the command of Sir Thomas Baringtons younger
son. I caused the Declaration of both Houses made for their indemnity, to be
read at the head of each Company, And required the Captains, Officers, and
Soldiers to be obedient to such directions as should be conveyed to them from
me, or my deputy Lieutenants, according to the said ordinance for the service,
of his Majesty and his Parliament, in defense of the Kingdom. To which they
did unanimously manifest a resolution and respect, and a cheerful readiness,
therein to spend their lives and fortunes. Hereof I thought fit to give your
Lordship this brief account praying you to communicate the same to their
Lordships, I having desired my deputy Lieutenants to do the same to the House
of Commons. I have this day received a petition from the Captains and
Leiutenants of the several companies here assembled, in the name of all the
persons belonging to the said trained bands, and with their full consent
expressed upon the reading of it, by their general acclamations, and applause,
in their several Companies, whereof I send your Lordship a copy here
enclosed. And so dessiring from God a blesing upon all your counsels, I rest.

Burntwood the 7. of June, 1642. Your Lordships affectionate Brother WARWICK.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, concerning his Majesty's
Proclamation.
THe Lords and Commons having perused His Majesty's Proclamation forbidding all
His Majesty's Subjects, belonging to the Trained-Bands or Miltia of this
Kingdom to rise, march, muster, or exercise, by virtue of any Order or
Ordinance of any one or both Houses of Parliament, without consent or Warrant
from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the Laws.

Do thereupon declare, That neither the Statute of the seventh of Edward the
first therein vouched, nor any other Law of this Kingdom does restrain, or
make void the Ordinance agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, for the
ordering and disposing the Militia of the Kingdom, in this time of extreme
and imminent danger, nor expose his Majesty's Subjects to any punishment for
obeying the same, Notwithstanding that his Majesty has refused to give his
consent to that ordinance: but ought to be obeyed by the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom.

The Declaration of 7. Ed. 1. Quoted in His Majesty's Proclamation, runs
thus.

THe King to the Justices of His Bench sends greeting: Whereas of late be
fore certain Persons deputed to treat upon sundry debates, had between Us,
and certain great men of Our next Parliament, after provision shall be made by
Us, and the Common Assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, That in all
Parliaments, Treaties and other assemblies which should be made in the Realm
of England for ever, That every man shall come without all force and Armor,
well and peaceably to the Honor of Us, and the peace of Us and Our Realm. And
now in our next Parliament at Westminster, after the said Treaties the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of Our Realm there assembled, to
take advice of this busine have said, That to Us it belongs, and Our part is
through Our Royal Seigniority straightly to defend force of Armor, and all
other force against Our peace at all times when it shall plase Us, and to
punish them which shall do contrary according to Our Laws and Vsages of Our
Realm.

And hereunto they are bound to aid Us, as their Sovereign Lord at all
seasons, when need shall be. We command you, that you cause these things to be
read before you in the said Bench, and there to be Enrolled.

Given at Westminster the 30. day of October.
THe occasion of this Declaration was for the restraint of Armed men from
coming to the Parliament, to disturb the peace of it, and is very improperly
alleged for the maintenance of such Leavies, as are now raised against the
Parliament. The title of the Statute being thus, To all Parliaments, and
Treaties, every man shall come without Force and Arms. So that the Question is
not, whether it belong to the King or no to restrain such forces; But if the
King shall refuse to discharge that Duty and Trust whether there is not a power
in the two Houses, to provide for the safety of the Parliament, and peace of
the Kingdom, which is the end, for which the Ordinance concerning the Militia
was made, and being agreeable to the scope and purpose of the Law, cannot in
reason be adjudged to be contrary to it; For although the Law do affirm it to
be in the King, yet it does not exclude those, in whom the Law has placed a
power for that purpose: as in the Courts of Justice, the Sheriffs, and other
officers and Ministers of those courts. And as their power is derived from the
King by his Patents, yet cannot it be restrained by his Majesty's command, by
his great Seal, or otherwise, much less can the power of Parliament be
concluded by his Majesty's command, because the Authority thereof is of a
higher and more eminent nature, then any of those Courts.

It is acknowledged, That the King is the Fountain of Justice, and Protection;
But the Acts of Justice and Protection, are not exercised in His own Person nor
depend upon His pleasure but by His Courts, and by His Ministers, who must do
their Duty therein, though the King in his own Person should forbid them; And
therefore, if Judgments should be given by them against the Kings Will and
Personal Command, yet are they the Kings Judgments.

The High Court of Parliament, is not only a Court of Judicature, enabled by
the Laws to judge, and determine the Rights, and Liberties of the Kingdom,
against such Patents, and Grants of His Majesty, as are prejudicial thereunto;
although strengthened both by His Personal Command, and by His Proclamation,
under the great Seal: But it is likewise a Council to provide for the
necessities, prevent the imminent dangers, and preserve the public peace and
safety of the Kingdom, and to declare the Kings pleasure in those things as
are requisite thereunto; and what they do herein, has the Stamp of Royal
Authority, although His Majesty seduced by evil Counsel, do in His own
Person, oppose, or interrupt the same. For the Kings Supreme Power, and Royal
Pleasure, is exercised and declared in this High Court of Law, and Council,
after a more eminent and obligatory manner, then it can be by any personal Act
or Resolution of His Own.

Seeing therefore the Lords and Commons, which are His Majesty's great and
Highest Council, have ordained, That for the present and necessary Defense of
the Realm, the Trained Bands, and Militia of this Kingdom should be ordered
according to that Ordinance, And that the Town of Hull should be committed to
the custody of Sir John Hotham, to be preserved from the attempts of Papists
and other malignant persons, who thereby might put the Kingdom into a
combustion, which is so far from being a Force against the Kings peace, that
it is necessary for the keeping and securing thereof, and for that end alone is
intended: And all his Majesty's loving Subjects, as well by that Law as by
other Laws, are bound to be obedient thereunto, and what they do therein is
according to that Law to be interpreted to be done, in aid of the King, in
discharge of that trust which he is tied to perform; And it is so far from
being liable to punishment, that if they should refuse to do it, or be
persuaded by any Commission or Command of his Majesty to do the contrary,
they might justly be punished for the same, according to the Laws and usages
of the Realm for the King by his Soveraigntie is not enabled to destroy his
people, but to protect and defend them: And the High Court of Parliament, and
all other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers ought to be subservient to that
power and authority, which the Law has placed in his Majesty to that purpose,
though he himself in his own person should neglect the same.

Wherefore the Lords and Commons do declare the said Proclamation to be void
in Law, and of none effect, For that by the constitution and Policy of this
Kingdom, the King by his Proclamation cannot declare the Law contrary to the
Judgment and Resolution of any of the inferior Courts of Justice, much less
against the High Court of Parliament; for if it were admitted that the King by
his Proclamation may declare a Law, thereby his Proclamations will in effect
become Laws, which would turn to the subverting of the Law, and the Rights,
and Liberties of the Subjects.

And the Lords and Commons do require and command, all Constables,
Petty-Constables, and all other his Majesty's Officers, and subjects
whatsoever, to muster, Levy, Raise, March, and Exercise, or to Summon or Warn
any upon Warrant from the Lievtenants, Deputy-Lievtenants, Captains, or other
Officers of the Trained badns, and all others according to the said Ordinance
of both Houses; and shall not presume to Muster, Levy, Raise, March, Exercise,
by virtue of any Commission, or other Authority whatsoever, as they will answer
the contrary at their perils; and in their so doing, they do further declare,
That they shall be protected by the power and Authority of both Houses of
Paliament; And that whosoever shall oppose question, or hinder them in the
execution of the said Ordinance, shall be proceeded against as violaters of
the Laws, and disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom,

FINIS.

