A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting OF THE Clergy-mens Sons, IN THE
Church of St. MARY-le-BOW, December 3. 1691. By THOMAS TENISON, D. D. Lord
Bishop Elect of LINCOLN.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

To my HONORED FRIENDS and BRETHREN, THE STEWARDS Of the Late Anniversary
Meeting of Clergy-mens Sons. Admiral Hen. Killegrew, Richard Burch, John
Jackson, William Pocklington, Joseph Bentham, Robert Hodson, Edmund Godwin,
John Cradock, Robert Clements, Nathanael Baldicke, Thomas Herskins, Francis
Archbold, Anthony Palmer, Benjamin White, Fitz-Norris Wood, Edward Tregenna,
STEWARDS.
My Honored Friends and Brethren,
I Should think my self much wanting to the Duty I owe both to Our Corporation,
and to your Selves, if I should wholly ascribe the publishing of this Sermon to
your Importunity. I am so very senfible of the excellent Ends and Methods of
this Establishment, that I am not willing to omit the least thing which may, in
your Judgments, conduce to them. It has, this present year (besides the Charity
for putting forth Apprentices) provided Five hundred and twelve Pounds toward
the support of Widows of poor Ministers, and their Children. I fear the Needs
of the next year will be greater than those of this; but cannot but hope that
the Supplies will grow in proportion to them.

That God will prosper both Givers, Managers, and Receivers, is the hearty
Prayer of,

My Honored Friends and Brethren, Your Faithful and Humble Servant, THO.
TENISON.

THE Bishop of LINCOLN's SERMON BEFORE The CLERGY-MENS SONS, December 3. 1691.

Imprimatur.

Dec. 17. 1691. Ra. Barker, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Johanni Archiep. Cant.
a Sacris Dom. etc.

A SERMON Preached before the Clergy-Mens SONS.
1 TIMOTHY V. 21. Last words. -- doing nothing by partiality.
ST. PAUL, who had the care of many Churches, being higher in Power, and
greater in Spiritual Gifts, and more advanced in years and experience than
Timothy, who had also, from his youth, been by his Mother commended to his
oversight and instruction; does, in this Chapter, give him advice in matters
appertaining to the Church of God.

He teaches him how to behave himself toward Elders, such as were so, either
by Age, Verse. 1, 2.
or by Function: especially toward Elders by Office, who fulfilled both senses
of the word (...), Verse. 17.
which signifies both to feed, and to rule; who were laborious in Doctrine, as
well as in Government: He surther shows him his duty toward Widows who
received Alms from the Church, Verse. 3, etc.
for their attendance on some inferior Offices in it; toward those who were
represented and accused as Offenders, in order to Judicial Censure; lastly,
toward such as were either to be ordained Ministers, Verse. 22.
or, as Penitents, to be absolved.

For his direction in these Matters, he lays before him two Rules; Not to be
hasty, Not to be biassed, in his Proceedings.

First, To act without preferring one before another; (...), without prejudice;
without such a criminal haste as precipitates the Judgment before both sides
are attentively heard; and then, in the words of the Text, which make up his
second Canon, to Do nothing by partiality.

Three Heads of Discourse will contain under them, that which (by Gods
Assistance) I purpose to say upon this Text, and this Occasion.

First, In General, Nothing is to be done by partiality.

Secondly, In Special, No Charity is to be partially administered.

Thirdly, In Particular, The Charity of this Corporation is not to be disposed
otherwise, than, God be thanked (so far as I understand) it uses to be; that
is, without Partiality, or Respect of Persons.

First, In General, nothing is to be done by Partiality; concerning which I
shall consider.

1. What the Nature of it is. 2. How prone Mankind is to suffer it to put a
bias upon its Actions. 3. Why Impartiality should be the Rule of all our
doings.
First, For the Nature of Partiality, it is a vicious Principle, which
inclines Men to act, not according to the merit of the Person or Cause, but
out of private and sinister Ends.

It is here, by the Apostle, and by Clement also in his first Epistle Clem. Ep*
1. ad Cor. Ed. Colom. p. 56, 110.
to the Church of Corinth, called (...), which is as much as to say, Siding,
accepting of Persons, or Declining from the reason of the Case, through the
influence of by-respects.

In Persons acting by themselves, we call it Partiality; when they act in
Confederacy with others, it has the Name of Sedition in a State, of Schism and
Division in a Church; of Faction in both Id ibid. p. 8. (...)
. And it sometimes takes place even where the Constitution is good; for the
best of Causes may be factiously espoused, and partially managed, whilst
evil-minded Men adhere to a Church or State, not as such, but as a Party, and
in order to the strengthening and defending themselves against the Side they
hate, and with which they can no more live than Fire with Water. Such
Partialists were the Pharisees, who took very great pains to make Proselites,
converting them to their way, rather than to the Jewish Religion, to the end
that Number might support them, when Reason was wanting.

2. Now, Secondly, This Partiality in acting, either by our Selves, or in
Conjunction with a Party, is that by which Mankind is very apt to be leavened.

If St. Paul had not discerned, that even Timothy himself had had the Seeds of
this Corruption in his Nature, he would not have given him Caution against it
in so very solemn a manner as he did, charging him as in the presence of God,
and his blessed Son, and his Elect Angels (those ministering Spirits whom God
approves of) to do nothing out of this Principle.

The same Apostle found it breaking out in his time in the Church of Corinth,
See Clem. Epist. 1. ad Cor. p. 110. 1 Cor. 1, 12. c. 3. 4.
where all pretended to love the Gospel, but one had a partiality for Paul,
another for Apollos, and another for Cephas or Peter, or (perhaps) for some
other Teachers, whose Names the Apostle thought fit to spare, transferring
their Parts to himself and his Brethren. This went not then so far as the
dividing them into distinct Communions; C. 3. 3
but, however, it raised a strife amongst them about the pre-eminence of their
Pastors, whilst they affected them severally, not as Christian Ministers, but
upon Personal Accounts, and did this with Exasperation of Mind, and with open
Animosity.

And if Christians were so partial and contentious, as if Christ himself was
divided in that Primitive State, when the Blood of Christ was yet almost warm
upon the Cross, when he was just risen from the Dead, and ascended into the
Heavens, when Miracles (like that constant one of the Sun) were daily before
Men's eyes; when Christianity seemed to be taken up in good earnest, being
professed with peril of Life; certainly it can be no surprise to us to find
Partiality in the Men of this Generation, in which, too many of the external
Members of Christ's Church (like those of the Natural Body that lie remotest
from the heart) are chill and cold, as living at such distance from the first
Fountain of Evangelical Tradition; and many find a way to their worldly Profit
through the breaches of Unity. It is in the few that Reason and Grace rule; and
what Equity can be expected where the Passions of Men give the Law? Daily
experience shows how narrow-minded, how unjust, how biassed Men are, how they
judge by their Affections; and that instead of doing nothing by Partiality,
they scarce do any thing otherwise; in such sort that where there are many
Competitors for any Place, every one of them finds his Friend, and perhaps the
most unqualifi'd Person does at length prevail.

3. But, Thirdly, every Christian should walk by a straighter Rule: considering
1 st. What is the corrupt Original: And 2 dly, What are the sad effects of
siding and partiality.


1 st. For the Cause of it, It has its Original in the brutal Part of Man,
which ought not to give Law, but to be mortified and subdued. St. Paul Gal. 5.
19, 20.
numbers fierce Zeal and Seditions amongst the works of the Flesh, and
expostulates with those who raised the forementioned difference about the
Persons and Gifts of Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, saying, Are ye not carnal, and
walk as Men? Do ye not proceed after the common fashion of the Men of this
World, who have scarce a grain of the Salt of Wisdom in their Bodies, whose
Imaginations are false Glasses, distorting the Images of Truth and Goodness,
whose Eyes are the Windows of Vanity; and whose Ears let in delusive Report,
and are charmed with Flattery; whose Anger is a short madness; whose Lusts are
blind and impetuous, whose very Stomach is such an Enemy, and yet such a God,
to the rest of the Members, and whose Heart is full of haughty Thoughts and
earthly Desires.

Of these evils Partiality is made up, but especially of the latter, Pride and
Covetousness.

Partial men resolve all into their own private Humor and Inclination. They
move about their own Center, and wind in all they can, as if they were a World
by themselves; so that in all they design, and in all they do, they have an eye
to that recompense of Reward which may accrue to themselves, in the gratifying
of some peculiar Fancy, Appetite, or Passion.

2. The Effects of Partiality answer the Cause of it.

And 1 st, Hereby Men are alienated from God, who governs the World by the
Rules of Equity, who is no respecter of Persons, who accepts of no Man whose
Cause is Evil; who punishes and rewards every Man according to his works, who
gives this Command in Exodus 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, LXX. -- (...).
neither shall thou speak in a Cause to decline, after many to wrest Judgment
[or to pass Sentence merely upon a popular motive.] See v. 6. and v. 20. Thou
satest, etc.
The same Just God in Psalm. 50. 16, 17, 18. reproves those wicked and partial
men, who would take upon them to declare his Statutes judicially, and to do it
in favor of Offenders. When thou saw a Thief, thou consentedst with him [
did judge in favor of him] Comp. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
and have been partaker with Adulterers [or become guilty of their Crime by not
punishing of it.] Nor did he out of Arbitrary will, accept of Abel, and reject
Cain, but had regard to the Principles of their Hearts, and according to them
their Sacrifices were pleasing or displeasing to him.

This is the Spirit of that God that made us, whom we ought to imitate; but it
dwells not in the heart of the selfish, who are governed by Favor and
Affection; by Sides and partial Friendships, and yet presume oftentimes to
entitle the Righteous Lord to their own interested Declensions from the merit
of Persons and Causes. So the Congregation of the Children of Israel, Numb. 16.
41.
called those, who were in a wicked Confederacy with Corah, The People of the
Lord. And Persons of like Temper fall into the like presumptuous Expressions;
and when they kill others out of Revenge, they pretend they do God good
service, or offer a Sacrifice which needs not Frankincense to make it grateful
to him. Tho every offering that is good in it self, is to him an Abomination,
when it comes from an unsound and blemished Heart.

And 2 dly, as Partialists are not followers, but dishonourers of God, so are
they injurious to the World.

1. To the Justice. And 2. To that which is the consequence of Justice, the
Peace and Order of it.
1. They are Enemies to common Justice, passing Sentence, and proceeding
according to the Affection that is predominant in them.

What Antinomians ascribe rashly to God, is true of Partialists in their
Actings. They can see no Sin in their own People [though one would think, the
dearer the Child were, the more offensive would be the disobedience.] But
Partiality blinds them, and with such, to be among them is merit.

From the Injustice of this Principle it was, that S. Austin, was so ill
treated by the followers of Donatus: They made the Division, and then charged
him with it, and reviled him (says Posidonius) as a Wolf who ought to be
killed in defense of the Flock: Posid. de vita S. Aug. c. 9. p. 830.
In the mean time, he was a holy and humble Man, and stood on the just
defensive part; but they were fierce and factious, and would not allow a Man to
be a Christian, if he said, I am baptized, I embrace the Catholic Faith,
unless he added, I am of the Party of Donatus.

The Partial likewise, construe the Sufferings of others, as perversely as they
do their Lives. They would persuade themselves, or at least the World, that
Heaven it self testifies against the Persons whom they affect not, by every
misfortune which befalls them. If Men of another way live piously, and fall
into some great affliction, or die a sudden death, they rashly call this a
Judgment. If some of their own way live immorally, and either suffer in the
World, or in a moment are taken out of it, they will say, God by chastening
them, deals with them as the Children of his Love and his Bosom; or, that as
Righteous, they are taken away from the evil to come. God has forsaken him,
said the Enemies of David, when he had but afflicted him for a Season. The
Heathens imputed all the Plagues which befell the Empire, to the guilt of the
Christians as Innovators; not calling to mind the provocation of their own real
Superstition and Idolatry. And the Christians, who were against Theodorit,
Ibas, and Theodorus, See Baron. Annal. Tom. 7. An. 566. N. 21.
imputed all the Wars, Famines, and Pestilences in Italy, to the favor showed
to them in the Fifth Synod. And the Miseries, under which the Greek Church
groaneth to this day, are, by the Friends of the Papacy, ascribed to the
distance it has kept from their Usurpation.

Good God! That Partial Men should pervert God's Judgments, as well as their
own, and thereby oppose the Justice; And,

2. That which would otherwise have been the Fruit of it, the Peace and Order
of the World.

None are oftener complaining of the times than Partial Men, and none occasion
greater evil in them than they. They are, therefore, not unfitly compared to
the foolish Pignor. Tab. Isiac. p. 36. Demersum serio ipsi ridendi lugebant.
Egyptians, who first drowned their Idol Apis, and then made solemn
lamentation for him.

That which preserves the order of Societies, is the equal administration of
Justice, in private Dealing and public Judgment. But it is from the swerving
of Men of corrupt Minds, who prefer the private before the public Good, that
Churches, States, Families, and other Bodies, come to desolation.

For (I beseech you) from whence come Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Envyings,
Strife, Divisions and Disorders? Come they not hence? from the doing of so many
things with Partiality. That Temper gives the pre-eminence to such, who can
take the Profit, without doing the Duty of their Places: It respects Persons in
Judgment, minding the Ring and the Apparel, which S. James speaks of, S. Jam.
2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9.
more than the Cause: It puts the bribe into the Balance, and turns it by the
overweight of it: It takes the small Offenders in its Net, and lets great and
powerful Malefactors escape: It prefers an ignorant, wicked, and slothful
Relation, before one who is knowing, pious and diligent, but a stranger to our
Blood: It feeds the slow Bellies that fawn, and starveth those who know how
to be dutiful, but not to flatter: It indulgeth, with unreasonable fondness,
some one of the least deserving among the Children, to the discouragement of
the rest of the Family: It regards Nepotism, and overlooks the Interest of
the Church. This is it which makes a ferment in Societies; by this means the
Public suffers through Power too often put into improper, unskilful, and
unfaithful Hands; this disobliges Persons of merit, and sowres them into
discontent, and enrages those who have relation to them. Reason therefore have
we for advancing the General Proposition, That nothing is to be done with
Partiality.

The Second Observation is more Special, No Charities are to be partially
administered. Clem. Ep. 1. ad Cor. p. 56. --


(...).

Charities must be done. For seeing the God of Order has not set all Men upon
the same Level, because he would not put them into a state of Competition and
War; and that the Poor shall be always with us, there is a necessity of
supplying them; and seeing they have not an Estate, which might enable them to
do it; and Age and Accidents prevent labor in many of them; therefore Charity
must keep them from perishing: And for the Public Supplies, as they are
managed, they seem not to be sufficient for these things: At least they extend
not to many of Condition, who are brought low, and can neither dig nor beg, nor
decently receive from the common Rates.

But though Charity must be done, and a Man who is tied by the Laws of the
Land, to Measures of Justice, is by them left free in his Charity, and may do
what he will with his own; yet he is obliged to set himself Rules by Christian
Prudence, and to remember that he is God's Steward, and must not suffer
Partiality to warp him in the dispensing of his Goods.

It is true, where the Needs and Merits of two Persons are equal, and there is
but one Place or Office, or enough only for the Relief of one, it is not
Partiality to prefer a Relation or a Friend, who is often nearer than a Brother.

Again, to do good to all Men as we have opportunity, but especially to those
who are of the Household of Faith; to deny small transient Alms to many (unless
they are perishing), to make up a Fund which may do a considerable good, as the
Apprentizing of helpless Orphans, or the increasing the Stock of a charitable
Foundation, or the giving to the Public such a Building as may be both a
Prison and a Workhouse, as certainly most Prisons ought to be; all this is not
Partiality, but Wisdom; in such Cases there are Circumstances which turn the
Scale on the right-side.

But, to support with Alms one that can labor, and to deny another that
cannot; to let no Manna fall in the Wilderness, but all in Canaan; to fatten
the Rich, and to do nothing for the Poor; to supply a vicious poor Man, and to
starve a virtuous one; to give to a bold Vagrant, and to turn away the face
from an honest or laborious Neighbor; to uphold Pride, and to depress
Humility; to misapply the Revenues of Charity allotted for good Uses, to those
which are either not good, or not designed; to burden others to whom we are
equal in all respects, and to ease our selves in Contributions to the Poor; to
have no more consideration of the Aged than of the Young; of the Sick than the
Healthful; of those who have spent their Days in Diligence, than those who have
consumed both Time and Substance in Sloth; of those who have been persecuted
for Righteousness-sake, than of those who have failed with all Winds, and been
safe; of the Children of Enemies, than those of Benefactors; of those who have
numerous Families, than those who are single; of those who are fit by their
Genius to be educated for Public Service of Church and State, than of such who
are fit only for low and servile Works: This is to act by an inequality, which
a Man cannot answer to the Reason of his own Mind.

And as this is true, in special, of Charity, so does it hold,

3. In the Third place, in particular, of the Charity of this Corporation,
which would never have flourished, if Partiality had been at the Root of it.

There are two Reasons, among others, which should prevail with the Members of
this Society, for the excluding of sinister Respects.

1. First, The Persons administering are supposed to be such, who have been by
their Parents consecrated to God, who have been shown good Examples from the
beginning; who have imbibed early the Principles of Religious Wisdom. Better
and more equal Measures, are in probability therefore, from them to be
expected, in distributions of Charity, than from such who have not had those
advantages in their Youth.

2 ly, The Persons receiving, are Objects relating to such who have ministered
in Holy Offices; and Religion it self suffers in the World, by the meanness and
necessity of those who more immediately attend on the public Service of it, or
nearly belong to them; for the World judges according to appearance, and by the
despised estate of the Religious, is tempted, if not to scorn, yet the less to
reverence, God and his Worship; so that for Religion sake (which ought to be to
us the greatest of Motives) the Objects of this Corporation, ought to be
treated with such impartial Charity, that in every one (so far as there is a
sufficiency for the doing of it,) some becomingness of Figure may, for the
honor of the Holy Function, be preserved.

Now, for the Conclusion of this Discourse, (that it may be suitable to the
method of the Body of it) it shall consist of a threefold Exhortation.

First, I address my self to all, of what Relation or Condition soever,
beseeching them in all their Capacities, and in all Causes, to proceed with a
Righteous indifference: To render to all their Dues, and not to suffer
Affection to supplant Equity.

The Discourse which Pythagoras used in all Places and Companies, and by which
He is said to have promoted Peace in Italy and Sicily, is this. Jambl. de vita
Pythag. c. 7. p. 47.
By all means, and with all diligence, Disease is to be removed from the Body,
Ignorance from the Mind, Luxury from the Belly, Sedition from a City, Faction
from a Family, and from all, (...), study of Parts or Sidings.

This is one of the hardest of Lessons to Flesh and Blood; and as it is
impossible, for Men to part with the individualness of their Persons; so it is
most difficult, for them to strip themselves of all their Partialities whilst
they are on Earth. Nay, if a Man would take his Faith from certain Romish
Guides, he would believe they carried some of them into Heaven it self; for
(for Example sake) the Carmelite, Paul of Saint Ubald, P. of S. Vbald's Souls
delight, part 1. p. 112.
directs the Dying, to crave the assistance of the Saint of their Name; as if,
for Names-sake, aid would be given them.

But the more difficult the Duty is, the more earnest application must be used,
seeing it must be done in some competent degree; for no Man who refuses to
deny himself, can be Christ's Disciple. Study therefore, with all diligence, to
move uprightly in all your ways, and particularly in the Duty in which you are
now engaged, that of hearing the Word of God. Have not Men's Persons in such
admiration, as to break the Unity of the Church, for the sake of their private
Gifts. They are ill hearers, and too much of the Corinthian humor, who being
curious, are, contentiously, of them who can surprise with novelty of Conceit,
though they do not edify with useful Truth. Who, being morose, are of them who
make severe Reflections upon the Times, though they attempt no Reformation at
home: Who, being warm in fancy, and affecting gayness more than solidity, are
only of them, who take more care about a fine Sentence, than a good Argument.

Always follow the measures of the Prince of Peace, S. Matt. 22. 16.
S. Mark 12. 14.
who was true, and taught the way of God in truth, and cared not for any man,
nor regarded the Person of men. He cared for all Men so far as to die for their
Good; but he cared not so for any Man's Person, as to accept it against the Rule
of Equity. He had a particular regard to St. John, his beloved Disciple; but
his Care was founded on some especial Reason; probably a degree of Divine
Charity in his Temper, in which he might exceed the rest.

And be the rather moved to this impartiality, by the Consideration of the
Time; the Time of Advent; which sets before us the Judgment of the great Day,
on which all Men shall receive, not according to what they have been in their
Fortunes, and what they may vainly pretend to; but according to what they have
done in the Flesh, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

2. I apply my self both to those whom God has prosper'd, and who dispense
Alms with their own Hands, and to those who are entrusted by others of large
Hearts and Fortunes, in the Administration of Charity.

What you do, do with Integrity, that the Ends of Charity may be attained to.
Be not swayed by the mere importunity of indigent Persons, or by the mere
recommendation of those, who, for the avoiding the giving an Alms, are free of
their Hands and Testimonials, which are of little labor or charge to them.

Discourage not the Living by the misapplications of the Charity of the Dead;
which are such and so many, that every Commission for Charitable Uses, is ready
to put a damp upon the Benevolence of the Executors of it.

And after all your Care and Proceeding, in Number, Weight and Measure, expect
Approbation not from Men, but from the Righteous Judge of the World. For the
necessitous will have their Eye evil, St. Matt. 20. 15.
because yours is good; they will, out of their own partiality, raise clamor
against all Dispensers of Charity, as doing unequal things. For they consider
only their own Cases, and cry out, That there was never Poverty, never Grief
like theirs; that they are the greatest Objects of pity; and that others, whose
Needs and Merits are not so great, are preferred before them, though in truth
they are much greater. But it should not move us to any degree of Resentment,
to be cited before Man's Judgment; to our great Master we shall stand or fall.

3. Last of all, For you my Brethren of this Society, whilst I am exhorting you
to Impartiality in Acting, I have reason to praise you for being influenced
already by so excellent a Principle.

Go on in the Name of the Righteous God, in the straight way, in which you have
made so many laudable Steps; Go on and Prosper.

Observe particularly, the Words of the Apostle in the, 3 d, 5 th, and 10 th
Verses of this Chapter. (3.) Honor Widows that are Widows indeed. (5.) Such as
being desolate [or alone and unencumbred] trust in God, and continue in
Supplications and Prayers night and Day. (10.) Such as are well reported for
good Works; such as have brought up Children, and lodged Strangers, and
relieved the Afflicted [when they had ability] and diligently followed every
good Work.

If we walk after such Rules, that Seed of Charity, which was but so lately
sown in this Constitution, and has already attained to some considerable
growth, will shoot up further till it become a Tree, under the Shadow of which
the Poor and Miserable may sit down with great refreshment.

If Equity and Charity meet together, Peace will come down from Heaven, as the
present Reward of Righteousness.

And in the End, when we shall appear before God the Father, and our impartial
Mediator Jesus Christ, and the innumerable Company of Elect Angels, we shall
receive that Blessing which the Son of Man shall then pronounce to all the Just
and Charitable, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, I was naked and ye
clothed me, hungry and ye fed me, thirsty and ye gave me drink, a stranger and
ye took me in; Well done good and faithful Servants, enter ye into the joy of
your Lord.

To that Supreme Lord and Benefactor of Mankind, who came not to destroy, but
to save; Together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed Glory and
Dominion, and Praise, this day and for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR. TENISON (now Lord Bishop of Lincoln) His Sermon of Doing good to
Posterity. -- His Sermon concerning Discretion in giving Alms. -- His Sermon
against Self-Love, before the House of Commons. June 5. 1689. -- His Conference
about Religion with Pulton the Jesuit. -- His Sermon before the Queen,
concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's Service, Feb. 15. 1690. -- His
Sermon before the Queen, of the Folly of Atheism. February 22. 1690. Dr. FOWLER
(now Lord Bishop of Gloucester) his Sermon before the Queen, March 22. 1690.
The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon, at the Funeral of the Lady Brook, Feb. 19. 1690.
-- His Fast Sermon before the King and Queen, April 29. 1691. Dr. FREEMAN (now
Dean of Peterborough) his Sermon at the Assizes at Northampton, before the Lord
Chief Justice Pollexfen, Aug. 26. 1690. -- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the
House of Commons, November 5. 1690. Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical
History of the Ancient Churches of PIEDMONT. By PETER ALLIX, D. D. A
vindication of their Majesty's Authority, to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops, in a Letter out of the Country, occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells. 4 to V. CL. GULIELMI CAMDENI, and Illustrium
Virorum ad G. Camdenum EPISTOLAE. Cum Appendice varii Argumenti. Accesserunt
Annalium Regni Regis Jacobi I. Apparatus, and Commentarius de Antiquitate,
Dignitate, and Officio Comitis Marescalli Angli^. Praemittitur G. Camdeni vita.
Scriptore Thoma Smitho' S. T. D. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero, 4to. MEMOIRS
of what past in Christendom from the War begun 1672. to the Peace concluded
1679. 80. Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
the ALBIGENSES. By PETER ALLIX, D. D. Treasurer of the Church of Sarum. 4 to.
will be shortly published. A Sermon Preached at White Hall, on the 26 th. of
November, 1691. being the Thanksgiving-Day for the Preservation of the King,
and the Reduction of Ireland. By GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM, 4 to. A
Thanksgiving Sermon before the Lords, on the 26 th. of November, 1690. for the
Preservation of their Majesty's, the Reducing of Ireland, and the King's safe
return. By SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.
ADVERTISEMENT.
PROPOSALS will be shortly published by Richard Chiswell, for Subscription to a
Book (now finished) Entitled, ANGLIAE, SACRAE PARS SECVNDA; five Collectio
Historiarum, antiquitus Scriptarum, de Archiepisco, is and Episcopis Angliae, a
prima Fidei Christianae Susceptione, ad annum MDXL. Plures antiquas de Vitis
and Rebus gestis Praesulum Anglicorum Historias sine certo ordine congestas
complexa.


