A DEFENSE OF Dr. TENISON's SERMON OF Discretion in Giving Alms. Written in a
LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF THE Apology for the Pulpits.

A DEFENSE OF Dr. TENSION's SERMON OF Discretion in Giving Alms, etc.
SIR,
I Have here sent you, according to my promise, The defense of my Printed
Sermon: you may please to use it as you see occasion.

Though I have been a Preacher many years, yet, not perceiving any want of
Printed Sermons, I never was prevailed with to publish more than one. It was a
Sermon preached at St. Sepulchers Church in London, instead of the Spitall,
upon Wednesday in Easter-Week, April the sixth 1681. It was then a Thing in
course to print such Spitall Sermons at the request of the Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen: and with their Request I complied. I was the more inclined to do
it, because I had seen little upon that Subject [Discretion in giving Alms;]
and yet I had very often observed, that Alms, by a careless and unskilful
distribution of them, fell unprofitably to the ground. And I did believe it to
be one part of Charity to give caution to the Rich for the Advantage of the
true Objects of their Liberality. I am not surprised at the offense which some
have taken at this Sermon; for it touches a very tender part, when it touches
their gain.

Those who have appeared against it are two persons of the Roman Communion; The
Author of the Advice to Pulpits, and Mr. A. Pulton, Jesuit.

The first of these, the Author of Advice to Pulpits (who is of the number of
those forward Men who give Counsel when they stand in need of it) has picked
out the following passage, which, by the mention of Indulgences (which tempt
loose men to say to their Souls; Souls take your Ease, you have pardons laid up
for many Years;) is become very grievous to Him and his Follower. Good Advice
to the Pulpits, p. 39. Tho. Tenison at S. Sepul. 6. Apr. 1081. p. 16.
There is great boast made of Alms in the Romish Church, they sound the trumpet
of them perpetually in our Ears. But what is the End to which a great part of
this Charity tends? -- The Scope they too often vainly aim at, is the
Blessing of a presumed Saint, who is ignorant of them; Security from the
External force of Evil Spirits, by the charms, and spells of Monkish
Conjuration, a sort of Ecclesiastic Magic, which those very Spirits invent and
encourage -- Nay sometimes the Scope is that very wicked one of compounding
with Heaven by their liberal Alms, for their unforsaken Sins. And here in this
Nation (whilst the Island was enchanted with Popery) there were granted
Indulgences even for what they call Deadly Sins, for many thousand Years to
come.

Here these Remarks may (I think) be made, without impertinence:

1. He first leaves out these Words [frequently the Motive which persuades them
is extremely selfish, and the means they use are extravagantly indiscreet] then
he drops those betwixt encourage, P. 16.
and Nay. -- Avoidance of those causless Curses and Anathema's which are with
Terror denounced from their Seven hill'd counterfeit Sinai; Preservation from,
or deliverance out of, the imaginary flames of Purgatory, blown on purpose by
Jesuitick breath for the melting of the Treasures of credulous people;
Canonization, as scandalous as it is chargeable, P. 17.
and performed in such manner, that, according to the Note of Cardinal
Bessarion, the making of their New Saints does move some skeptical Men to
question the Old ones.

He leaves out these Words; which are not far from those he cited.

The things they purchase as conducive to these ends, P. 17.
are the Wares of dark imposture; namely, such as these. Shrines, Images,
Lamps, Incense, Holy Water, Agnus Dei's, Blessed grains, Roses, Pebbles, Rings,
Beads, Relics, Pardons, Masses, Diriges, and Soul-Obits; the goodly Inventory
of Superstition.

This, it seems, was too particular for the purpose of Men who deal in generals
which admit of less discovery.

2. Whilst he recites the Charge [of Indulgences granted even for what they
call deadly Sins for many thousands of years to come] he leaves out the Proof
of it; Printed in the Margin in these words, Horae B. M. ad us. Sar. Fol. 66.
Who that devoutly say [these three Prayers] shall obtain ten hundred thousand
years of Pardon for deadly Sins, granted by our Holy Father John 22d. P. of R.

3. He allows, that the Practice with which the Church of Rome is hoar charged
is, in its Nature, very wicked. Otherwise, why does he bring this part of my
Sermon as an instance (under his third Caution) of exposing the Roman Church,
P. 30, 31.
and laying on blacker Colors than justly belong to her?

4. There remains then, nothing but the Proof of this Charge; and that is
Printed with the Charge, but left out by this Censurer; that his party who read
on one side only, may believe my words to be malicious Slanders, without any
ground for their support.

For Mr. Poulton, either he had Read my Sermon, or he trusted to the Book of
the Adviser. If he trusted to him, he was deceived by him; and he ought not, at
adventure, and with a mixture of credulity and confidence, to have accused me
falsely; much less in Public. If he read my Sermon himself, then the words he
used in reproaching me, and in discouraging people from hearing of me, are a
Demonstration of a wilful Malice: for these are the Expressions he used in his
Afternoons-Exercise at the Savoy-Mass-House, on November the twenty seventh
last past; of which the Effects have been, a further discovery of his rash and
insincere dealing, and the People's Contempt of his useless Admonition.

Mr. Pulton's Avice. -- Therefore, I say, if there be any of your Preachers
tell you in their Sermons, that the Roman Catholics do believe and do those
things, which it is evident We do not, you ought to have the greater Care of
them: I shall not mention the Names of any; they are done in an excellent Book
lately published, Entitled Good Advice to the Pulpits, which I would have
every one here read and have by them; wherein you will find an Eminent Doctor (or
one that is so thought to be) in his Sermon taking occasion to lay this Calumny
on the Church of Rome, viz. that the Pope has oft-times granted his Bulls of
Indulgence for many years sins unrepented of; and that it has been, and is a
common Practice: Now I say, that this is notoriously false; for I would sain
have this Doctor discover by whom these Bulls have been granted? what time? in
what place, etc? Or else it is a palpable imposture, and abuse both to us and
his Auditory; and there when he goes thus to misinform six hundred, or more,
that come at a time to hear him Preach the truth of the Gospel, they ought to
have a Care how they trust him for the future. 1. Now here Mr. Pulton has added
both to the words in the Adviser's Book, and to those in my Sermon. I say
sometimes, and He makes me to say that it has been and is a common Practice. I
did not say it; but how nigh I should have come to Truth, if it had been said
by me, will by and by appear.

2. The Reader has here a farther Exemplification of Mr. Pulton's Method in
disputing or managing a Conference. He has Proofs given him, and he takes no
notice of them, and goes on asking, Where are they, etc.? I had cited the Book,
the Indulgence, the Pope that granted it; and he cries out, by whom was it
granted? at what time? and what place? this it is to have been refined by
Travel, and to have staid eighteen Years out of the dull Air of England.

3. But, seeing Mr. Pulton is so much upon Inquiry, I will give him my first
Proof more at length; and then several other Instances, (though not, all of
them, of so high a strain) out of the same Authentic Book, in which the
Rubricks, which mention the Indulgences, are printed in English; but the
Prayers are in Latin. For some believe them to be, in this, like Charms, which
have the more Virtue, the less they are understood.

Horae B. Virginis Mariae ad usum Sarisburiensem, Fol. 66. Paris. 1526.

THese 3. Prayers be written in the Chapel of the Holy Cross in Rome,
otherwise called Sacellum sanctae Crucis septem Romanorum: who that devoutly
say them, shall obtain 1000000. of yers of Pardon for deedly Sins granted
of our holy Father Ihon 22. Pope of Rome.

Pater Noster Ave. Oration.

Domine Jesu Christ, etc.

TO all them that before this Image of Pity devoutly say 5. Fol. 54. 1.
Pater Noster and 5. Abes, and a Credo, pytuously beholdynge these Arms of
Crysts Passion are granted 32755. years of Pardon. And Sixtus the 4th Pope of
Rome has made the fourth and fifth Prayer, and has doubulled his foresaid
Pardon.

Adoro te Domine Jesu Christ in Cruce pendentem, etc.

THis Epistell of our Savior sends our holy Father Pope Leo to the Emperor
Carolo Magno, Fol. 66. p. 1.
of the which we syndest written, who that bears this Blessing upon him and
says it ones a day, shall obtein forty year Pardon, and 80. Lenttyge. And he
shall not peryshe with soden death.

Crux X. Christi sit mecum.

Crux X. est quam semper adoro, etc.

OUr holy Father Pope John the 22. Fol. 58. p. 2.
has granted a hundred days of Pardon to all them that say this Prayer at the
Elevacyon of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Oration.

Ave Caro Christi Chara immolata Crucis ara, etc.

OUr holy Father Innocentius Pope of Rome, Fol. 59. p. 1.
has granted seven year of Pardon to all them that say this Prayer devoutly
at the Elevacyon of our Lord in the Mass.

Oration.

Salve lux mundi: Verbum Patris, etc.

THis Prayer was showed unto St. Augustine by Revelacyon of the Holy Gooste,
Fol. 62. p. 2.
and who that devoutly say this Prayer or hyre read or bears about them shall
not perish in Fire or Water another in Battil or Judgment and he shall not die
of sodyn Death, and no Venym shall poysmn him that day; and what he asks of
God he shall obtein, if it be to the salvation of his Soul; and when thy Soul
shall depart from thy Body, it shall not enter to Hell. Pater Noster. Ave Maria.

Deus propicius esto mihi, etc.

THese 5. Petitions and Prayers made by St. Gregory, Fol. 65. p. 1.
and has granted unto all them that devouted say these 5. Prayers, with 5.
Pater Noster, 5. The Maria, and a Credo, 500. years of Pardon.

Oration.

Ave Manus Dextera Christi etc.

THis Prayer shall ye say in the Worship of all the blessed members of Christ
devoutly: Fol. 65. p. 2.
and ye shall have 300. days of Pardon for every Salve.

Oration.

Salve tremendum cunctis potestatibus Caput etc.

THis Prayer is made by our Holy Father the Ihon the 22. Fol. 66. p. 2.
and he has granted unto all them that devoutly say this Prayer beholding the
glorious visage or vernakell of our Lord, 10000. days of Pardon: and they that
kann not say this Prayer, let them say 5. Pater Noster, 5. Abes, and 5. Credo
in Deum.

Salve Sancta facies Nostri Redemptoris etc.

AN other Oryson to the blessed Vernacle of our Lord, Fol. 67. p. 2.
who that says it devoutly shall have 3. yers of Pardon, granted by our Holy
Father the Pope Innocentius.

Oration.

Ave facies praeclara etc.

WHo that devoutly beholds This Arms of our Lord Jesus Christ, Fol. 68. p. 2.
shall obtain 6000. yers of Pardon of our Holy Father St. Peter the first
Pope of Rome, and of 30. other Popes of the Church of Rome successors after
him, and our Holy Father Pope Ihon the 22. has granted unto all them very
contryte and trewly confessed, that say these devout Prayers followinge in the
Commemoracyon of the bitter passion of our Lord Jesus Christ 3000. years of
Pardon for deedly Sins, and other 3000. for venial Sins, and say first a
Pater Noster and The Maria.

Oration.

Dirupisti Domine Vincula mea etc.

THis Prayer made the holy Doctor St. Ambros of all the Artycles of Crystus
passion, Fol. 70. p. 1.
and our holy Father Anastasius the Pope has granted to all them that
devoutly say it five hondreth days of Pardon.

Oration.

Domine Jesu Christ etc.

OUr holy Father Pope Innocentius the 2d. has granted to all them that say
this Prayer devoutly in the Worship of the wound that our Lord had in his
blessed side when he was deed, Fol. 71. p. 2.
hanging in the Cross. 4000. days of Pardon. Pater Noster. The Maria.

Oration.

Ave Vulnus Lateris Nostri Salvatoris etc.

Oration Sancti Bernardi de Senis Ordinis Minorum.

THis most devoutly prayer said the Holy Father Saint Bernard daily knelying
in the Worship of the most holy name Jesus. Fol. 72. p. 1, 2.
And it is well to believe, that through the Invocation of the most Excellent
name of Jesu St. Bernard obtained a Syngulare ward of perpetual consolacion of
our Lord Jesu Christ. And this Prayer is written in a thabell that haunged at
Rome in St. Peter's Church nere to the high Awter there as our holy Fader the
Pope evely is wounte to say the office of the Mass; and who that devoutly
with a Contryte heart daily say this oryson, if he be that day in the state of
eternal damnacyon, than this eternal pain shall be changed him in temporal
pain of purgatory, it shall be forgotten and forgyven throw the infinyte mercy
of God. Pater Noster. The Maria.

Oration.

O bone Jesu. O dulcis Jesu. O Jesu fili Mariae. etc. Fol. 79. p. 1.


ALexander the 6th Pope of Rome has granted to all them that say this Prayer
devoutly in the worship of St. Anna, and our Lady and her Son Jesus 10000. yers
of Pardon for deedly Sins totiens quotiens.

Oration.

Ave Maria gratia plena Dominus tecum etc.

ANother devout Prayer to be said before the image of St. Anna, Fol. 79. p. 1.
Maria and Jesus: of the which Raymundus the Cardinal and Legate has granted
a 100. days of Pardon totiens quotiens.

Oration.

Quotquot Maris sunt guttae and arenae, terrae grana etc.

A After all this, Mr. P. may, perhaps, offer at an Evasion, and allege, that
Prayers, without Money, procure Indulgence. Be it one way or other, they have
found out an easy method of comforting Sinners. My Sermon speaks of the Money
under the name of Alms. But Pope Leo called it a Tax; and the Council of Trent
in one place calls it Alms, and Gain in another Sess. 22. c. 9. p. 230. Sess.
25. decret. de Indulgentiis. p. 388.
They take it under the name of Alms; but, no Penny, no Indulgence, if the
Penny be to be had. And when a Pope grants one, he grants to the dispensers, as
great a temporal benefit as if he had given them a Toll, a Fair, or a Market.

The Jesuit Escobar (in his Book taken from the works of 24. Jesuits, and
printed 37 times in Spain, and thrice at Lions and once at Brussels,) says
something of this nature, but elsewhere more is told. Escob. Mor. Theol. Tract.
7. Exam. 5. de Indulgentiis, p. 1055. Indicitur Eleemosyna ad indulgentiae
lucrationem: sufficit quaelibet? sufficit obolus si non indicatur fieri cum
proportione ad facultates. Quid si pauper vel obolo careat? Commutandam
Eleemosynam in aliud pium opus aliqui asseruere. Ast Ego cum Antonio Fernandez
de Corduba part. 3. c. 7. 8. n. 3. affirmo mentem esse Pontificis, quod qui
Eleemosynam exhi^ere non potest, absque ulla Commutatione indulgentiam
consequatur.


Is an Alms exacted for the gaining of an Indulgence: does any suffice? A
halfpenny suffices, if it be not declared that it is done proportionably to
the fortunes of the Giver. But what if a poor Man has not so much as an
halfpenny? Some have asserted that in such a case there should be a Commutation
of the Alms into some other pious work. But I, with Anthony Fernandez of
Corduba part. 3, c. 7.. 8. n. 3. do affirm that it is the mind of the Pope that
he who is not able to give an Alms, may obtain an Indulgence without any
Commuting.

It should seem by this Casuist, that Money is the principal matter aimed at.

But much more Money has been designed and procured than Escobar's Halfpennys
would amount to. For Pope Boniface the ninth made, by his Agents, in one
Province above a hundred thousand Florens by selling of Pardons; and he had so
great Custom for them, because he gave Indulgence for All Sins without
Repentance. So an Author of their own assures us. Theod. a Ni^m Pontif. seriba
and Epise. Verdensis de Schismate, etc. l. 1. c. 68. p. 73. Bonifacius
hujusmodi Offertoriis non contentus, etc. ad diversa Regna misit Quaestuarios
vendendo dictam Indulgentiam offerentibus tantum, quantum essent expensuri in
via si propterta ivissent ad urbem. Et hujusmodi Exactores seu Questuarii etiam
maximas summas pecuniarum a simplicibus seu Barbaris subtiliter extorserunt,
ita aliquando in uno regno seu in una provincia hujusmodi venditionibus ultra
centum millia Florenorum reportarunt, quia Oinnia peccata etiam Sine
poenitentia Ipsis Confitentibus yelaxarunt. Super quibuslibet irregularitatibus
dispensarunt interventu pecuniae, etc.


It is true, other Alms are sometimes required, but together with them there
goes Money for the special Masses, as in the following Example, which I have
transcribed from the End of an Ancient Roman office in MS.

What Man or Woman, that causes or makes thies Messes folouing devoteli to be
saed for themself or for any other special friend in whatsoever tribulacion.
need. Sekenes. or dises that thai be in. thai schal be delivered with the grace
of God within. X. daes. And in the sam form the Saul of there Friend, schal be
pardoned and relesed. of their panes in Purgatori.

First schal be said of the Sondai. a mes in the worschippe of the Trinite.
being light. iij. candels. and that dai feed. iij. pore men. or do. iij. alms
dedis.

The Moundai a mes in the Worschip of St. Michael and all the Angels. and light
nine candels, and feed nine pore men. or do. ix. alms dedis.

The Tisedai a mes of Saint John Evangle. and light iiij. candels. and feed
iiij. pore men, or do iiij. alms dedis.

The Weddonsdai a mes of Saint Peter and other Apostels. and light. xii.
candels. and feed xii. pore men. or do xii. alms dedis.

The Thorisdai a mes of the holy ghost and light vii. candels, and feed vii.
pore men. or do vii. alms dedis.

The Fridai a mes of the holy cross. and light v. candels. and feed. v. pore
men. or do. v. alms dedis.

The Saterdai a mes of owr Ladi and light a candel. and feed a por man. or do
a alms deed.

And at ich on of thies messes aforsaid must be, offerde after the power and
devocion of them that causes thies messes to be said. and verali through goddis
merci this praer within short time shall be hard of God, and sai this holy ympe
Ueni sancte spiritus within vii. Verses and this versicul. Emitte spiritum tuum
and creabuntur. And this Collet following. S. Deus qui corda fidelium.

If this be too ancient and out of Date, I will offer one, which is more
Modern; in which, though the gaining of Money is not proposed, yet great
Superstition appears, and the easiness of Penance.

Indulgenze che la santita' din. Signore Clemente Papa K. concede all Corone,
Rosarii Imagini, Croci, e Medaglie benedette, in occasion della Canonizatione
de Santi Confessori Gaetano, Francesco Borgia, Filippo Benizio, Lodovico
Beltrando, e di Santa Rosa Vergine del Peru.
CHi sara solito dire, una volta almeno la settimana, la Corona del Signore, o
della Madonna, o'l Rosario, o la sua terza part, o l' Officio Divino, o
piccolo della Madonna. o de' Morti, overo i set Salmi Penitenziale, o
Graduali, overo haver a per usanza di visitare i carcerati, o di souvenire i
poueri, o di far per un quarto d'hora almeno, orazion mentale; se confessandosi
da Confessore approvato dall' Ordinario, e communicandosi in qualsivoglia delle
Feste del Signore, e della B. V. che celebra la S. Chiesa, cio e Nativita,
Circoncisione, Epifania, Resurrezione, Ascensione, Pentecoste, Trinita, e
Corpus Domini; Concezione, Nativita, Presentazione, Visitazione, Annunziazione,
Purificazione, and Assunzione della B. V. o nel giorno della Nativita di S.
Gio. Battista, o de SS. Apostoli Petro, Paolo, o dell' uno de sudetti cinque
Sancti Canonizati, o de tutti i santi, o della dedicazione della propria
Chiesa, o del Padrone, o Titolo di essa, devotamente pregara Dio per
l'estirpazione dell' Eresie, e per la Propagazione della Feed Cattolica, e per
altre necessita della santa Madre Chiesa, ogni volta conseguisca Indulgenza
plenaria.

Chi digiuner a la vigilia di ciasche duno de' sudetti cinque santi, e
confessato si communichera nec giorno della sua festa, e preghera come sopra,
acquistera ogni volta Indulgenza plenaria.

Chi dira messa, overo confessato, e communicato l' udira, all' Altar dove sia
l' imagine, o'l corpo, o qualche reliquia d'uno de' Sudetti Santi, in un giorno
di ciasche dun mese a sua elezione, pregando come sopra, acquisti Indulgenza
plenaria.

Chi pentito de' suoi peccati, con proposito d' emendarsi, visitera in
un'istesso giorno set chiese a sua elezione, e dove set Chiese non sieno,
visitara tutte quelle, che vi sono, and essendovene solo una visitara tutti gl'
Altari di essa; similmente pregando per l'esterpazione dell' Eresie, etc. una
volta l' anno guadagni l' Indulgenze delle set Chiese di Roma.

Chi pensera devotamente a qualche Mistero della Passione di Nostro Signore,
and a riverenza della medesima Passione baciera humilmente la terra set
volte, in quel giorno acquistera l' Indulgenza della Scala santa, e cio una
volta l' anno.

Chi fara un' atto di pentimento vero de suoi peccati, confermo proposito d'
emendarsene, o ch'sercitera qualche atto di virtu ad esempio de' sudetti Santi,
guadagni ogni volta set anni, and altretante quarantene d' Indulgenza.

Chi leggera qualche Capitolo della Vica de sudetti Santi, o visetera il loro
Altar, o venerera la loro immagine, pregando per l'estaltazione di santa
Chiesa, e per la conversione de peccatori, guadagni ogni volta cento giorni de
Indulgenza.

Chiunque si eserciter a nella divozione del Santissimo Sacramento dell'
Altar, o della Vergine meditando quel Mistero, e i beneficii, che a not ne
dirivano, overo compatendo a i dolori, che senti la Beatissima Vergine per la
Passione, e morte del Figlio, o in altra forma vener ando il Santissimo
Sacramento, e pregando per i visogni della Santa Chiesa, guadagni ogni volta
cento giorni d' Indulgenza.

Chi fara qualche limosina a' poveri, overo compatendo a i dolori giistruira
nelle cose della Feed, o buoni costumi, o pure operera, che cio si faccia da
altri, ogni volta guadagni cento giorni d' Indulgenza.

Chi stando in Roma, o nel suo Distretto per lo spazio di venti miglia per
legitimo impedimento non potria essere present alla Beneditione solenne, che
il sommo Pontefice suol dare nel giorno di Pasqua, e dell' Ascensione, se
confessato, e communicato, preghera per l'estirpazione dell' Eresie, etc.
acquistera l' Indulgenza come se fosse present: la quale Indulgenza conseguira
parimente chi stara fuori di Roma, e di tal Discretto, in qualunque luogo si
sia, benche egli non sia impedito, facendo le cose sudette.

Chi raccommandera devotamente a Dio in articolo di morte l'anima sua, and
insieme ricorrera all' intercessione de sudetti Santi o d' uno di essi con la
bocca, o, non potendo, col cuore, essendosi confessato, e communicato, o, non
potendo, almeno contrito, conseguisca plenaria Indulgenza de suoi peccati.

Che ciascuna delle soprad. Indulgenze si possa applicare all' anime del
Purgatorio per modo di suffragio.

Per acquistore le sopradette Indulgenze basta havere una Corona, o Medaglia,
etc. benedetta da sua santita con le medesime Indulgenze, facendo gl' atti
prescritti, come sopra, benche per altro si douvessero fare per obligo.

Commanda sua Santita, che nella distribuzione, and uso di queste Medaglie,
Corone, etc. si osserui il Decreto della fe. mem. di Alessandro VII. stampato
sotto li 6. Febraro 1657. cioe, che le Medaglie, Corone, etc. benedette con le
sopradette Indulgenze non passino la parsona di quelle, a quali sar anno
consedute, o a quali da questi saranno distribuite per la prima volta; e che
non possano prestarsi ad altri, o darsi precariamente, altrimenti perdano
l'Indulgenza, che anno; e che per dendosene una, non se ne possa sostituire in
suo luogo un altra, non ostente qualunque concessione, o priulegio in
contrario. Sua santita prohibisce la stampa di queste Indulgenze in ogni altro
luogo, fuori di Roma.

Michel Angelo Ricci Secr.
In Roma, Nella Stamperiadella Rev. Came. Apost. 1676. Con licenza de'Superiori.
Indulgences which his Holiness our Lord Pope Clement the X. grants to Crowns,
Rosaries, Images, Crosses and Medals, blessed upon the Occasion of Canonizing
the Saints and Confessors Gaetano, Francesco Borgia, Philippo Benizio, Lodowico
Beltrando, and of St. Rosa a Virgin of Peru.
WHosoever shall use to say, at least once in the Week, the Crown of our Lord,
or of our Lady, or the Rosarie, or the third part of it, or the Divino Office
of our Lady, or of the Dead; or else the seven Penitential Psalms, or the
Graduals, or shall use to visit Prisoners, or to relieve the Poor, or to make
mental Prayer for at least a quarter of an hour, confessing himself to a
Confessor, approved by the Ordinary, and communicating upon any of the
Holy Days of our Lord, and of the Blessed Virgin, which Holy Church does
celebrate; that is to say, Christmas, the Circumcision, Epiphany, the
Resurrection, Ascension, Pentecost, Trinity Sunday, and Corpus Christi; The
Conception, Nativity, Presentation, Visitation, Annunciation, Purification, and
the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, or on the day of the Nativity of St. John
Baptist, or of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul; or of one of the abovesaid
five Canonized Saints, or of All Saints, or of the Dedication of his own
Church, or of the Patron and Title of it, shall devoutly pray to God for the
rooting out of Heresy, and for the Propagation of the Catholic Faith, and for
the other Necessities of Holy Mother Church, shall every time obtain Plenary
Indulgence.

Whosoever shall fast the Eve of every one of the abovesaid five Saints, and
having confessed, shall communicate upon their Holy Day and shall pray, as has
been directed, shall every time obtain Plenary Indulgence.

Whosoever shall say Mass, or being confessed and communicated shall hear it at
an Altar where the Image or Body, or some Relic of one of the abovesaid
Saints shall be, upon any day of every Month, at his own choice praying, as
above, shall obtain Plenary Indulgence.

Whosoever repenting of his Sins, with purpose of Amendment, shall visit in one
day seven Churches at his own Choice; and where there be not seven, shall visit
all that there be; and where there is but one, shall visit all the Altars of
it, praying likewise for the Extirpation of Heresy, etc. once a year, shall
obtain the Indulgences of the seven Churches of Rome.

Whosoever shall think devoutly upon any Mystery of the Passion of our Lord,
and in Reverence of that Passion, shall humbly kiss the Ground seven times,
shall obtain upon that day, the Indulgence of the Scala Sancta, and that once
every year.

Whosoever shall do an Act of true Repentance of his Sins, with true purpose of
forsaking them; or shall stir up some Act of Virtue after the Example of the
aforesaid Saints, shall every time obtain seven Years, and as many Quarantains
of Indulgence.

Whosoever shall read some Chapter of the Life of the aforesaid Saints, or
shall visit their Altar, or shall Venerate their Image, praying for the
Exaltation of Holy Church, and for the Conversion of Sinners, shall every time
obtain an hundred days of Indulgence.

Whosoever shall exercise himself in the devotion of the most Holy Sacrament of
the Altar, or of the Virgin, meditating that Mystery, and those Benefits, which
are derived to us from thence; or else having a feeling of those Griefs which
the Blessed Virgin felt for the Passion and Death of her Son, or in other form
adoring the most Holy Sacrament, and praying for the Needs of Holy Church,
shall every time obtain a hundred days of Indulgence.

Whosoever shall give an Alms to the Poor; or having Compassion of their
Sufferings, shall instruct them in Matters of Faith, or good Manners, or shall
cause the same to be done by others, shall each time obtain a hundred days of
Indulgence.

Whosoever being in Rome, or within the space of twenty Miles of it, and cannot
be by reason of some Lawful Impediment, present at the solemn Benediction,
which the Pope is wont to give upon Easter Day; and Ascension-day; and having
confessed and communicated; shall pray for the Extirpation of Heresy, etc.
shall obtain the same Indulgence, as if he were present; which Indulgence he
likewise shall obtain, who being out of Rome and out of the said distance in
any place whatsoever (though he be not hindered) provided he do the abovesaid
things.

Whosoever shall devoutly recommend the Soul to God in the instant of Death,
and together shall have recourse to the Intercession of the abovesaid Saints,
or to any one of them, with his Mouth; or not being able to do so, with his
Heart, having confessed and communicated, or not being able to do so, being at
least Contrite, shall obtain Plenary Indulgence for all his Sins.

That every one of the abovesaid Indulgences may be applied to the Souls in
Purgatory, by the way of Suffrage.

To obtain the abovesaid Indulgences it is sufficient to have a Crown or Medal,
etc. blessed by his Holiness with the same Indulgences, doing the Acts
appointed, as above, though they were otherwise to be done by Obligation or
Duty.

His Holiness commands, That in the distribution of these Medals, Crowns, etc.
That Decree of Alexander the VII. of happy Memory be observed, which was
printed February the 6th. 1657. viz. That the Medals, Crowns, etc. blessed with
the abovesaid Indulgences, may not pass from the Person of those, to whom they
shall be granted, or to whom they shall be by them distributed for the first
time; and that they cannot be lent to another, or given by entreaty; for
thereby they lose the Indulgence they have; and one of them being lost, another
cannot be substituted in its Place, notwithstanding any Grant or Privilege to
the contrary.

His Holiness prohibits the printing of these Indulgences in any other place,
except Rome.

Michel Angelo Ricci Secretary.
Rome, In the Printing House of the Reverend Apostolical Chamber, 1676. With
License of the Superiors.
This is an Indulgence granted by a Pope; And any English Man may see some such
thing in his own Country, and granted by a Bishop of a lower Chair: I mean the
Inscription containing the Lord Beauchamp's Indulgence. It is written in a very
fair Saxon Letter, at the South-East Corner Pillar of the Quire at Windsor upon
a large Tablet, and underneath a Niche in the Wall or Pillar, in which the Book
therein mentioned, is supposed to have been put; as also the Cross: It being
almost in the manner of one of their smaller Altars. The Inscription is this:

Who leyde this Book here.

The Reverend Fader in God Richard Beauchamp Bishop of this diocyse of
Sarysbury (...) And wherefore (...) to this intent that Priests and Ministers
of Goddis Church may here have the Occupacion thereof seying there in their
divyne servyse and for all other that lystyn to sey thereby there devocyon.

Askyth he any spiritual mede (...) ye asmoche as our Lord list to reward him
for his good intent praying every Man wos Dute or Devoycion is Cased by this
Book they woll sey for him this Commune oryson^ Domine Jesu Christ, knelying
in the Presence of this Holy Cross for the which the Reverend Fader in God
aboveseyd has grauntid of the Tresure of the Church to every Man, XL. dayys
of Pardun.

This Beauchamp was a Doctor of Law; Afterward Archdeacon of Suffolk: then
Bishop of Hereford, Anno 1448. Thence he was translated to Sarum, Anno 1450.
and twenty seven years after this was made Dean of Windsor, viz. Anno 1477.
17th. Edward 4th. He was the first Chancellor of the Garter, he was nearly
related to Edward the Fourth.

These Pardons so easily obtained cannot but occasion in the People who procure
them looseness of Manners; which if it be so offensive to Mr. Pulton's Church
and Person, how comes it to pass, that in his Remarks M. P. Rem. p. 14.
he uses these loose Words? The Fathers there Assembled [that is at Nice in the
Second Council] said, as they ought, That an Oath made to the Devil, could not
oblige; and that it would be less Sin to be naught with a Woman (it being a
Personal and private Trespass) than by denying the Respect due to holy Images
(at that time wickedly oppugn'd by the most Impious Iconoclasts) to give
occasion of public Scandal and Heresy.

I thank God I do not familiarly know one ClergyMan of our Church (either
married or unmarried) who would have written this Case with so unchaste a Pen:
or who would, with such presumption, have advanced the unjust Opinion of a very
weak and partial Synod above the most reasonable Law of God.

I do not doubt but this immodest Case is as offensive to your self, as it is
to me and many others. I will, therefore, lay it aside, and put an end to your
Pain and this tedious Letter together.

S. M. Jan. 11. 87. Sir, I am Your most faithful Friend and Servant, THO.
TENISON.

FINIS.

