A DISCOURSE Concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission, 1689.

LICENSED, October 29. 1689.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE Ecclesiastical Commission, OPENED IN THE JERUSALEM
- CHAMBER, October the 10 th, 1689.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission, etc.
THough I never entertained a good Opinion of the late Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; yet concerning This (which is of a very differing
Nature, and has differing Ends) I stand thus persuaded: I. It is agreeable to
the Laws of the Land. II. It is not prejudicial, but useful to the Convocation.
III. It tends to the well-being of the Church. IV. This is a fit Iuncture for
the putting the design of it into execution.


I. This Commission is agreeable to the Laws of the Realm.
It is founded upon a Legal bottom; for it is undoubtedly a Right of the King
to call any number of his Subjects together to advise concerning such things as
He shall think fit to propose to Them. And here is no Acting required by this
Commission, but only the Giving of Advice.

It is further justified by several Presidents since the Reformation.

It was by a Commission that the Common Prayer Book was Compiled See the Names
of the Compilers, in p. 24. of the Appendix.
in the third year of King Edward VI. the Commissioners meeting at his Castle
of Windsor Full. Chapter Hist. p. 386.
. And both the Parliament and Convocation readily approved of it, as is
manifest by the Preamble of the Act See part of the Act, in Append. p. 22, 23,
24.
.

It was by Queen Elizabeth's Order, that the Second Book of King Edward (which
had passed in Parliament in the fifth and sixth years of his Reign, and been
repealed in the days of Queen Mary) was Reviewed in the first year of Hers
Cambd Eliz. p 23. An 1558. See the Names of the Reviewers in Append. p. 25.
: Which Review being made, and upon it some Emendation, the Book was again
authorized by Act of Parliament.

In the Year 1559, it being resolved that the Doctrine of the Church should be
set out, as it had been done in King Edward's time, the Articles of it began to
be prepared Hist. of Ref. part 3 p. 405.
. After much deliberation, they were compiled by Dr. Matthew Parker, Archbishop
of Canterbury, in conjunction with Two and twenty Bishops See the Names of the
Compilers, in Append. p. 25.
. This being done, they passed in Convocation in the Year 1562. and were
confirmed by Parliament in the Year 1571. Mr. Fuller believed they were Full.
Chapter Hist. b. 9. p. 72. Heylin Hist. Ref. p. 158.
composed in Convocation; but Dr. Heylin did not.

In the Proclamation of King James the First, entitled, A Proclamation for the
Authorizing an Uniformity of the Book of Common Prayer to be used throughout
the Realm See part of that Procl. in Append. p. 26.
; there is mention of a former Proclamation giving notice of the Conference at
Hampton Court about Religion, betwixt Conformists and Dissenters.

I will not insist on this, or on the Translating of the Bible, and sundry
other Ecclesiastical Matters done without a Convocation in that King's Reign:
My purpose not being to dispute nicely about the Authority of All Things that
have been done, but only to show, that greater Things have, without offense,
and without prejudice to the Church, been formerly done, either by private
Order, or by public Commission or Proclamation, than giving MERE ADVICE
concerning such things as are fit and proper to be laid before a Convocation;
which is the present Case.

At the Return of King Charles the Second, the Liturgy was reviewed by His
Commissioners, who sat at the Savoy. Reference is had to that Commission in
the last Act of Uniformity; and it is, by that Act, approved See part of the
Act in Appendix, p. 26, 27.
. Since that time no Law has been made derogatory to that Power by which the
King has granted this Commission.

II. Neither is A Commission, nor THIS Commission, prejudicial to a
Convocation, but useful to it.
A Commission, before a Convocation meets, is not prejudicial to it: For
(besides that it has been hitherto found beneficial by experience) the very
Nature of it shows its Usefulness.

That which Commissioners do, is only by way of preparation, which saves Time
and Labor, and provideth something ready for the Convocation to go upon. In
all Assemblies, that which is not to be completed without the Major part of
them, is begun by a few.

It is certain, that the Methods of the Two Houses of Parliament are not
exactly the same with those of the Convocation, which by using its own, does
not (as a late Quaerist A Letter to a Friend, containing some Quaeries about
the New Commission, p. 4, 5.
does seem to insinuate) presume to prescribe to Them. But though the Two
Houses have not that Method by a Commission, yet no Member of Parliament, who,
either by Himself, or by the Advice of private Friends, prepares an useful
Bill, is by either of the Houses reprehended when he asks leave to bring it in.

For the Convocation, the first beginning of any thing that is to be done
there, cannot be made by a Committee appointed by it self. For though the
Members can meet by virtue of the King's WRIT; yet, since the Act concerning
the Submission of the Clergy An 25 H. 8. Revived 1 Eliz. See Append. p 21.
without the King's WARRANT, they cannot legally deliberate upon any one
Ecclesiastical Matter. It is therefore by some Spring without the Houses, by
which the King moves, both with respect to the granting a WARRANT, and to the
Matters which are debated upon the Authority of it.

And if the King, who might have proceeded upon His own Judgment, or upon very
private Advice in this Affair, is pleased to do it by so public and solemn an
Act as That is, of issuing forth an Ecclesiastical Commission, the Preparation
is the more likely to be well made.

And this being but Preparation, the Convocation is not prejudged or limited by
it. It is the subsequent WARRANT that limits or enlarges their Powers, as it
pleases a King, and not the Commission it self. The Things which by virtue of
it, are prepared, are Proposals only, not Impositions.

And as a Commission in general, is not a just Grievance to a Convocation; so
neither is This present Commission to be so esteemed.

Either with respect to the Power given, or to the Persons named in it.

The Power given in this Commission, is no more than that abovementioned, of
Deliberation, Preparation and Proposal, expressed in these words, -- So that
the Things by you so considered and prepared, may be in a readiness to be
Offered to the Convocation at their next meeting, and when Approved by them,
may be presented to Us and our Two Houses of Parliament; that if it shall be
judged fit, they may be established in due Form of Law.

The Persons employed in it, See their Names in Appendix, p. 27, etc.
are not such as may probably injure either Church or Convocation; whether we
consider, Their Office and Rank in the Church. Their Personal Qualifications.
Or, Their Number.


By Office, they are all Churchmen, and so the more likely to be skilled in
the Matters of their own Profession.

By Place, they are, for much the greater part, such men as will sit in
Convocation, whenever it meets; they being Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons.

Their Personal Qualifications are such, that I may presume to say, indifferent
Judges will not think them incompetent for this Affair.

It is true, they have been publicly traduced in a late Paper of Quaeries A
Letter to a Friend, containing some Quaeries about the New Commission, p. 1, 2,
p. 4.
as ASSUMING men, as men who will think themselves BOUNDIN HONOR to defend
what they shall have done; as men who have Tenderness and Moderation enough to
part with any thing but their Church=Preferments. As Men who have a Latitude to
conform to a Church de Facto, which has Power on its side.

These are very hard words, whosoever gave them, and proceed from a Temper
ASSUMING enough, to say no worse of it.

There is a great deal of Spite in them, but not a grain either of Truth,
Justice, or Charity. So far are they from Assuming, that I have ground to say,
They have declared among themselves, That notwithstanding the offer of their
present Opinions, they would not conclude themselves, but reserve a liberty of
changing their minds, if in Convocation any cogent Reasons which they had not
yet thought of, were brought before them. If they were such as that Paper
represents them, yet why is it a Point of Honor to defend mere Proposals? And
then I would know, by what Instances it appears that they are truly such as
they are there represented, MEN Quer. p. 4.
who conceal their own inclinations till it is time to show them. MEN likely to
do the Church of England a good turn when opportunity serves, and which perhaps
they imagine now they have: Men ready to sacrifice their Consciences to their
HONORS and PREFERMENTS? They must needs have a great defect in their Memories,
who have forgotten the time when these very Men with true Christian Courage,
hazarded all that was dear to them in this world, in order to the support of
this Church, and the true Religion professed in it, by refusing to read a
Declaration, which was (I believe) on purpose framed for the overthrow of our
Establishment.

As to the LATITUDE with which they are charged; they did not show it when they
were tried; and now (God be thanked) they have no Temptation to it; and I fear
there may be in those who are, without cause, their Enemies, a sort of
NARROWNESS that is not more commendable.

They have indeed this LATITUDE in them, That provided Good be done to the
Church, they would rejoice in it, though even those who are their Adversaries,
should happen to have the doing of it.

For their NUMBER, it is again Quaer. p. 4.
said falsely and absurdly, as well as spitefully, That, as it may happen, our
Church may be changed and altered, and transformed by NINE men. That number of
the Quorum does, by one, exceed that of the entire Body of those who by Order
reviewed the second Book of King Edward the Sixth in the first of Queen
Elizabeth; for, as Cambden (where above cited) does assure us, there were
joined with Dr. Parker no more than seven Persons; but six, says Mr. Fuller
Chapter Hist. b. 7. p. 386.
, forgetting Dr. Bill; though after consultation with these H. of Ref. Coll.
vol. 2. p. 330.
, the consent of others was to be desired.

Neither is it at all probable, that the Nine of the Quorum should at any two
Meetings be but just Nine, and those the very same Men.

But supposing the Commissioners to be Men of ill Design, yet neither have the
Quorum of NINE, nor yet the whole Thirty together, Power given Them to Change,
Alter, or Transform any thing, but only to offer what, in their present
Opinion, is fit to be offered to the Convocation, to be there debated; and
after such debate, to be approved or rejected.

I confess there are some Great and Excellent Men who are not named in this
Commission; Neither have we such Hopes as we most earnestly wish we could have
had of their appearing in Convocation.

But whatsoever the Cause of that may be, (for it becomes not me to judge
Them), and whatsoever the Suggestions of the Quaerist are Quaer. p. 5.
, the Commissioners design nothing so unreasonable, as to fear it would not
pass in a Free Convocation, if Those Reverend and Judicious Prelates were
present. For those Reverend Fathers of the Church have declared Their Opinions
in Conversation, That Great Improvements might be made both in our Offices and
our Discipline, and ought in due time to be so; and particularly toward
Dissenters, They solemnly told King James, That they wanted no due Tenderness
toward Them, but were willing to come to such a Temper as should be thought
fit, when that Matter should be Considered and Settled in Parliament and
Convocation. And I am confident, They All sincerely meant the same thing they
so publicly declared.

In the Commission it self, unreasonable neither is it at all probable that the
Commissioners should pervert the good Ends of It. But, by both, the Support and
Improvement and Well-being of the Church is directly aimed at.

The Design of the Commission is set forth in these Words in the Body of It.
Whereas the particular Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies
appointed to be used therein, being Things in their own Nature Indifferent and
Alterable, and so acknowledged; It is but reasonable that, upon weighty and
important Considerations, according to the various Exigences of Times and
Occasions, such Changes and Alterations should be made therein, as to those
that are in Place and Authority should from time to time seem either necessary
or expedient.

And Whereas the Book of Canons is fit to be reviewed, and made more suitable to
the State of the Church; and Whereas there are Defects and Abuses in the
Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions, and particularly there is not
sufficient Provision made for the Removing of Scandalous Ministers, and for the
Reforming of Manners either in Ministers or People: and Whereas it is most fit
that there should be a strict Method prescribed for the Examination of such
Persons as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders, both as to their Learning
and Manners.

We therefore, out of Our Pious and Princely Care for the Good Order, and
Edification, and Unity of the Church of England committed to Our Charge and
Care; And for the Reconciling, as much as is possible, of all Differences among
Our Good Subjects, and to take away all Occasions of the like for the future,
have thought fit to authorize and empower you, etc. and any Nine of you,
whereof Three to be Bishops, to meet from time to time, as often as shall be
needful, and to prepare such Alterations of the Liturgy and Canons, and such
Proposals for the Reformation of Ecclesiastical Courts, and to consider of such
other Matters as in your Judgments may most conduce to the Ends
abovementioned.

In pursuance of the Sense of these Expressions, it may be shown,

That All Churches, in process of time, though as well constituted at first as
the Case would bear, may admit of Alterations and Improvements. Ar^ic. 34 Every
particular or National Church has Authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by men's Authority, so that All
things be done to edifying.


That our Constitution was Reviewed in Lxi. and yet notwithstanding that
Review, is capable of this which is now intended.

That what is now designed is for its Support and Advantage, with respect both
to Conformists and Dissenters.

1. All Churches in Process of Time, though at first as well constituted as the
Age and Case would bear, may admit of Alterations and Improvements. He who
affirms the contrary, believes a Visible Church on Earth may, in some one Age,
be brought to Perfection even in Circumstantial Things, which vary with Time,
and Place, and Custom: And he uses an Argument against all Reformation from the
time of the Establishment of such a Scheme. Upon this false Ground it was that
Hist. of Ref. p. 393. L 3. An. 1559.
Heath and Fecknam, in the First Year of Queen Elizabeth, opposed the Act of
Uniformity, objecting, That these Changes were Departures from the Standard of
the Catholic Church; That Points once defined, were not to be brought again
into question; That the Church should be constant to it self: Forgetting the
common Practice of their own Church. Ours, and every sound Church, is constant
to it self in Substantials, and in the general frame of Forms of Worship; but
in Things of an alterable nature it ought not to be so.

Where Alterations are fit for the Edification of Christians, the real Good of
them will overweigh the accidental Evil of the Surmize of the Ignorant, who may
for a Week or two fancy that their Religion is changed: Neither is such Change
and Improvement a Reproach to Churchmen. They are not fickle, who are constant
in all necessary Things, and in Circumstantials affect not Change, but do it
when Piety, and Peace, and Discretion require it.

The Church of Rome it self, though She pretends to Infallibility, has not
showed a stiffness against All Alterations. She has made very many, and might
have made them for the Common Good of Christendom, though she has failed
extremely in it.

The Roman Breviary now in use is called by themselves, Breviarium restitutum.
The Restored or Reformed Breviary.

Their short Latin Service of the Canon of the Mass, has been so often varied,
that it is now the least part of its self. Nay, the very Jesuits themselves in
the disposition of their Bibles in their Library at Paris Syst. Biblioth. Coll.
Par. Soc. Jesus. p. 17. Latina ante Correctionem. Latina post Correctionem.
distinguish their Latin ones into Those Before and those After Correction.

2. Our Constitution was reviewed in LXI. and yet notwithstanding that Review,
is capable of Another.

The Commissioners of that time did not add the last hand to that Work, so as
to render it incapable ever after of being corrected and improved.

Some who have well considered All the Alterations and Additions then made by
them (which amount to the Number of about 600.) are sufficiently convinced,
that if They had reason for those changes, there is equal, if not greater
reason, for some further Improvements.

If They had foreseen what has since come to pass, I charitably believe They
would not have done all that they did, and just so much and no more. And yet I
also believe, that if They had offered to move much further, a Stone would have
been laid under their Wheel by a secret but powerful Hand. The Mystery of
Popery did even then work, and a Romanist has very frankly informed us of the
Expectation raised in that Party in the beginning of the Summer of LXI. Vid.
Cause. Valesian. p. 126, 127, 128.
They had some hopes cherished in them, of Liberty of Conscience, of the
removal of the Sanguinary and then of other Penal Laws, and of Forty Chapels
to be opened for Them in and about the City of London.

Much more is understood by those who have penetrated into the design of a
certain Paper, called commonly, The Declaration of Sommerset-House.

The Enemies of this Commission do seem to grant a need of Reformation in the
Canons Queries. p. 1.
and Ecclesiastical Courts; and They well understand (and I wish from my heart
that their Charity were equal to their Skill,) that the Book called Reformatio
Legum was long ago prepared, and has from that time, been very well esteemed,
though not authorized and put in execution.

It is true, the present Churchmen have given their Assent and Consent to the
last Book of Common Prayer; but even part of that Consent is to the Preface of
it, in which it is set forth that there are, in Churches, Circumstantials which
from time to time may admit of Alteration.

Neither can any Man reasonably think, that when They Assented and Consented to
the use of the Book, as containing nothing that was unlawful, They intended to
declare, that every Thing in It should be unalterable.

3. For the Alterations and Additions now intended, I verily believe they will
conduce to the great good of this Church, though as it is, I am persuaded it is
the best constituted Church in the World; and that the Person reflected on
Quaeries. p. 4.
as writing those words in a good mood, did publish no more than was his
settled Judgment.

But the best Church is not absolutely perfect in all Circumstantial Things,
nor can it ever be made so here on Earth.

I am in part of the Opinion of the Quaerist P. 2.
That the Prayers cannot be altered for the better by any mere human
Composition. This seems to be true of the Confessions, at the beginning of the
Service, and at the Communion, and of many other Forms: but it ought not to be
said of every Collect. But the great business as to the Liturgy, is the adding
to some Offices, and preparing new ones which are wanting, and the amending of
Rubricks.

To instance publicly in any possible Alterations and Improvements, is
unseasonably to prevent the Commissioners and Convocation. But Time will show,
by the Particulars, that this Church may receive Great advantage, and no
prejudice, by That Work, which is, by some, so angrily, though causelessly spoken
against. They must pardon me if so near after the mentioning of them, I take
notice of the French Papists who have, in so many of their late Gazetts,
reviled both the Commission and the Persons named in It. They are not apt to
speak ill of a thing that would do hurt to us.

Good is intended, and may be done, to the benefit both of Conformists and
Dissenters Quaer. p. 1. Qu. 2. Whether intended for the sake of the Church, or
for the satisfaction of Dissenters, or to serve both these ends together?
.

Conformists who purpose to continue such, will naturally be glad if the House
in which they resolve to live and die, have all the strength and beauty added
to it which can be given It by Commission, Convocation, and Parliament.

As to Dissenters, for such as are either against All Forms, or (whilst the
Healing of our Breaches is under consideration) go on with fresh Ordinations,
or (as the Quaerist Quaer. p. 3.
relates the Story of some in Northampton) like Novatianus of old, oblige their
Communicants to Vow or Swear upon the Sacrament, that They will never return to
the Communion of the Church of England; we must leave Them to God. Better
things are to be hoped from some, at least, of this Generation, and from many
more in the next. And if the Convocation does its own reasonable part, (as I am
confident it will) to make an Union among Protestants, let Those look to It at
whose door the Fault lies, in case the Separation continues: They will surely
be left without Excuse.

IV. Now because Things which may be done, yet are not to be done at a time
when they are not expedient; It is my opinion, that The Things designed in the
Commission should, for that Reason, be done now; this being a fit juncture for
the pursuing the Ends of It.

That is true which the Quaerist says Quaer. p. 6. Q. 2.
, and in part he makes it go(...) by his own m^nner of writing, that the
(...)ssions of Men (...) this time are in a vehement Fermentation; but it is so
always in all Revolutions; and it is one great business of the Parliament and
Co^^^^^tion to allay our Heats: but He that would abate the Fever, may stay too
long if he forbears to prescribe till the Blood is quiet.

It is again granted to him, that the Church at this time has powerful Enemies
P. 3. Q. III.
. I think it seldom is without Them. But if it does its part in showing a true
Christian Temper, I doubt not but God will disappoint their devices.

An Attempt is to be made toward an Union amongst Protestants, and I humbly
offer those Reasons to the Consideration of better Judges, which move me to
believe that This is the Time for It.

Their Majestes have declared their desires of it.

The House of Lords have given us their Sense of it, in the Bill of Union. The
Bill was brought down to the House of Commons, and had a Place on the Table
amongst other Bills, till their Prorogation. Toleration is already granted by
Statute; the Nature of which requires our utmost Application in order to the
preserving our own People, and the bringing in of Dissenters, for the good of
both.

The Eyes of the World are upon us. All the Reformed Churches are in
expectation of something to be done which may make for Union and Peace. Greater
numbers of the Irish and French Protestant Clergy are now here, than ever were
since we were a Nation. We may consult them with Ease, and not without Benefit.

No Man can be wise too late: For Wisdom would not delay what is necessary or
expedient to be done beyond the due Seasons of Action. After the Year Lxi,
though there were sometimes Writs issued out for the meeting of a Convocation,
yet no Warrant could be procured for the Support and Improvement of the Church,
during the Reign of King Charles the Second; much Iess were we to expect it
from King James.

Those therefore, in my Opinion, do not give wholesome Advice, who say, Do
nothing now, or As little as may be. Little or Much is not the Business, but as
much as is fit. And if One Opportunity be neglected, it may discourage the
Powers that offer It, from vouchsafing Another.

Upon the whole Matter, I have a threefold Request to make.

The First is to those Churchmen to whom the Commissioners and Matters in the
Commission are not fully known, and who may have conceived some Prejudice
against Them, and the Work under their Hands, by means of any Letters, or
Printed Pamphlets, containing uncharitable Misrepresentations, and sent about
too industriously by Those who are either Enemies to Peace, or ^ Persons
employed toward the making of It, or have a Zeal not according to Knowledge. I
heartily pray them, That, as becomes their Holy Function, they would duly
consider both Things and Persons, before they censure them, and forbear,
judging before the Time, lest they offend God, and lead the People into an
Error, out of which it will not be easy to bring them afterward.

The Second is to the People. I earnestly beseech Them not to give too open an
Ear to any such Censures of Things which they do not yet fully understand, and
which, for ought they know, may prove a great Blessing to Them; nor receive ill
Impressions concerning Men who, having with Judgment and Zeal, and Firmness in
both, endeavored to support This Church in the late Difficult Times, are not
likely, upon any Account whatsoever, to betray It in These.

The Last is to the Quaerist, whether he be of the Laity or the Clergy. I
entreat him to make some Christian Reflections upon his Letter, and piously to
consider whether he has not been angry without Cause, judged rashly, done to
the Commissioners what he would not have had done to himself, and endeavored
to lead others into the like Offenses.

APPENDIX,
Anno 25 Henrici Octavi. Cap. 19.
An Act concerning the Submission of the Clergy to the Kings Majesty.
WHere the Kings Humble and Obedient Subjects, See. p. 5.
the Clergy of this Realm of England, have not only knowledged according to the
Truth that the Convocations of the same Clergy, are and always have been, and
ought to be Assembled by the Kings Writ, but also submitting themselves to the
Kings Majesty, have promised ( in Verbo Sacerdotis) that they will never from
henceforth presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure or enact,
promulge, or execute any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial, or
other, or by whatsoever other Name they shall be called in the Convocation,
unless the Kings most Royal Assent, and License may to them be had, to make,
promulge, and execute the same, and that his Majesty do give his most Royal
Assent and Authority in that behalf, etc.

Anno. 2. and 3. E. 6. C. 1.
See p. 2.
WHereof long time there has been had in this Realm of England, and in Wales,
diverse forms of Common Prayer, commonly called the Service of the Church; that
is to say, the use of Sarum, of York, of Bangor, and of Lincoln: And besides
the same, now of late, much more diverse and sundry Forms and Fashions have been
used in the Cathedral and Parish Churches of England and Wales, as well
concerning the Mattens, or Morning Prayer, and the Evening Song, as concerning
the Holy Communion, commonly called the Mass, with diverse and sundry Rites and
Ceremonies concerning the same, and in the Administration of other Sacraments
in the Church. And as the Doers and Executors of the said Rites and Ceremonies,
in other Form than of late years they have been used, were pleased therewith;
so other not using the same Rites and Ceremonies were thereby greatly Offended.
And albeit the Kings Majesty, with the advice of his most entirely beloved
Uncle, the Lord Protector, and other of his Highness Council, has heretofore
diverse times assaied to stay innovations, or New Rites concerning the
Premises: Yet the same has not had such good success as his Highness required
in that behalf. Whereupon his Highness by the most prudent advice aforesaid,
being pleased to bear with the frailty and weakness of his Subjects in that
behalf, of his great Clemency has not only been content to abstain from
punishment of those that have offended in that behalf, for that his Highness
takes that they did of a good Zeal: But also to the intent a uniform, quiet
and godly Order should be had concerning the Premises, has appointed the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most Learned and Discreet Bishops,
and other Learned Men of this Realm, to consider and ponder the premises, and
thereupon having as well Eye and respect to the most sincere and pure Christian
Religion taught by the Scripture, as to the usages in the Primitive Church,
should draw and make one convenient and meet Order, Rite and Fashion of Common
and open Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, to be had and used in
his Majesty's Realm of England, and in Wales, the which at this time by the aid
of the Holy Ghost, with one uniform agreement, is of them concluded, set forth
and delivered to his Highness, to his great comfort and quietness of mind, in a
Book Entitled: The Book of the common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church after the use of the
Church of England. Wherefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament Assembled, considering as well the most Godly Travel
of the Kings Highness of the Lord Protector, and other of his Highness,
Council, in gathering and collecting the said Arch Bishops, Bishops, and
Learned Men together, as the Godly Prayers, Orders, Rites and Ceremonies in the
said Book mentioned, and the considerations of altering those things which be
altered, and retaining those things which be retained in the said Book; but
also the honor of God and great quietness, which by the Grace of God shall
ensue upon the one and uniform Rite and Order in such Common Prayer, and Rites
and Extern Ceremonies to be used throughout England and in Wales, at Calice and
the marches of the same, go give to his Highness most hearty and lowly thanks
for the same, and humbly pray that it may be ordained, and enacted by his
Majesty, with the Assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, etc.

See p. 2.
The Compilers of the Book of Common Prayer An. 3 Edw. 6.
Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. George Day Bishop of Chichester. Dr.
Goodrich Bishop of Ely. Dr. Skip Bishop of Hereford. Henry Holbech Bishop of
Lincoln. Nicholas Ridley Bishop of Rochester. Thomas Thurlby Bishop of
Westminster. Dr. May Dean of St. Paul's, Dr. Tailor then Dean, afterward Bishop
of Lincoln. Dr. Haines Dean of Exeter. Dr. Robertson Arch Deacon of Leicester,
afterward Dean of Durham. Dr. Redman Dean of Westminster. Mr. of Trinity
College, Cambridge, Dr. Richard Cox then Almoner to the King, afterward
Bishop of Ely.
Fuller Church History l. 7. p. 386.

Reviewers of the Common Prayer 1558. See p. 2.

Dr. Parker, Camb. Eliz. A. 1558, p. 23.
Cox, May, Bill, Pilkington, Smith, Whitehead, Grindal.
Compilers of the Articles of 1562. MS. D.W
Matthaeus Parkerus Cantuariensis. See p. 3.
Edmundus Grindallus Londin. Robertus Horn Wintoniens. Richardus Cox Eliensis.
Nicolaus Bullingham Lincolniens. Thomas Bentham Lichfeildens. Joan. Jewellus
Sarisburiens. Gilbertus Barkley Bathoniensis. Gulielmus Allen Exoniensis. Joan.
Parkhurst Norvicensis. Edwinus Sands Wigorniensis. Joanes Scory Herefordensis.
Gulielmus Barlow Cicestrensis. Edmundus Gwest Roffensis. Richardus Cheyney
Glocestrensis. Edmondus Scambler Petriburgensis. Rich. Davies Menevensis.
Antonius Kitchen Landavensis. Rolandus Merick Bangorensis. Thomas Young
Eboracensis. Jacobus Pilkington Dunelmens. Joannes Best. Carleolensis.
Gulielmus Downam Cestrensis.
By King James the First.
In H. Lestranges Affin. of div. Lit. p. 6.
A Proclamation for the Authorizing an Uniformity of the Book of Common Prayer
to be used throughout the Realm.

See p. 3.
Some of those who misliked the state of Religion here Established held
Assemblies without Authority, whom we restrained by a former Proclamation in
the Month of October last, and gave Intimation of the Conference we intended to
be had with as much speed as conveniently could be for the ordering of These
things of the Church, which accordingly followed in the Month of January last,
at Our Honor of Hampton* Court, where before Our Self, and Our Privy Counsel,
were Assembled many of the gravest Bishops and Prelates of the Realm, and many
other Learned Men, etc. March 5. In the first Year of Our Reign of England, etc.

14. Carol. 2.
WHereas in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth, See p. 4.
there was one Uniform Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the
Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England,
(agreeable to the World of God, and usage of the Primitive Church) compiled by
the Reverend Bishops and Clergy, set forth in one book Entitled, The book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies
in the Church of England, and enjoined to be used by Act of Parliament holden
in the first year of the said late Queen, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity
of Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and Administration of the
Sacraments. --

-- the Kings Majesty (according to his Declaration of the five and twentieth
of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty) granted his Commission under
the great Seal of England, to several Bishops and other Divines to review the
Book of Common Prayer, and to prepare such Alterations and Additions, as they
thought fit to offer; And AFTERWARD the Convocations of both the Provinces of
Canterbury and York, being by His Majesty called and assembled (and now
sitting) His Majesty has been pleased to Authorize and require the Presidents
of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops and Clergy of the same, to
Review the said Book of Common Prayer, etc.

The NAMES of the COMMISSIONERS. See p. 7.
A. D. 1689.
Thomas Lamplugh Lord Archbishop of York. Henry Compton Lord Bishop of London.
Peter Mew Lord Bishop of Winchester. William Lloyd Lord Bishop of St. Asaph.
Thomas Sprat Lord Bishop of Rochester. Thomas Smith Lord Bishop of Carslile.
Jonathan Trelauny Lord Bishop of Exeter. Gilbert Burnet Lord Bishop of
Salisbury. Humfrey Humfreys Lord Bishop of Bangor. Nicholas Stratford Lord
Bishop of Chester. Edward Stillingfleet, late Dean of St. Paul's London, now
Bishop of Worcester. Simon Patrick, late Dean of Peterborough, now Bishop of
Chichester. John Tillotson D.D. Dean of Canterbury. Richard Meggot D.D. Dean of
Winchester. John Sharp D.D. Dean of Norwich. Richard Kidder D.D. Dean of
Peterborough. Henry Aldridge D.D. Dean of Christ-Church, Oxford. William Jane
D.D. Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford. John Hall D.D.
Margaret Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford. Joseph Beaumont
D.D. Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge. John
Mountague D.D. and Mr. of Trinity College in the University of Cambridge. John
Goodman D.D. Archdeacon of Middlesex. William Beveridge D.D. Archdeacon of
Colchester. John Battely D.D. Archdeacon of Canterbury. Charles Alston D.D.
Archdeacon of Essex. Thomas Tenison D.D. Archdeacon of London. John Scott D.D.
Prebendary of S. Paul's London. Edward Fowler D.D. Prebendary of Gloucester.
Robert Grove D.D. Prebendary of S. Paul's London. John Williams D.D. Prebendary
of S. Paul's London.
The END.
Books Lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.

Reflections upon the Opinions of some Modern Divines, concerning the nature of
Government in general, and that of England in particular. With an Appendix
relating to this Matter, containing 1. The Seventy fifth Canon of the Council
of Toledo. 2. The Original Articles in Latin, out of which the Magna Charta of
King John was framed. 3. The true Magna Charta of King John in French: By which
the Magna Charta in Matthew. Paris is cleared and justified, and the Alterations
in the Common Magna Charta discovered. (Of which see a more particular Account
in the Advertisement before the Appendix.) All three Englished.

Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archiep. Historia dogmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodoxos and Pontificios de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis nunc primum
editae. Accesserunt ejusdem dissertationes de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, and de
Epistola ad Laodicenos ante hac ineditae. Descripsit, digessit and notis atque
Auctuario locupletavit Henricus Wharton, A.M Reverendissimo Archiep.
Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation on Account of
the Oaths. With an Answer to the History of Passive Obedience so far as relates
to them. ( will be Published in few days)


