A SERMON Concerning Holy Resolution.

Preached before the KING At KENSINGTON, December 30th. 1694.

By his Grace THOMAS Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY Elect.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON. Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCV.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the KING at Kensington.
Psalm 119. 106. Old Translation. I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed, to
keep thy righteous Judgments.

New Translation. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments.


THESE are the Words of King David; and the Saying is the more remarkable, by
reason of the Condition of the Speaker: For, the more Power, Opportunity,
Temptation there is to break God's Commandments, the greater is the Virtue of
religiously observing them.

This Prince was a Debtor to the Law, as one who had entered into Covenant with
the God of Israel; he renewed this obligation as often as, by the hand of the
Sacrificer, he presented an Offering to him. When he came to the Throne, he
understood (no doubt) from the Book of God, to which he was no Stranger, that
it was his Duty to write out a Copy of God's Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
Law, and to keep it by him, and to read in it, at convenient Seasons, all the
days of his life, in order to his better observing the Contents of it. He was
in many Troubles, and those Troubles Psalm. 132. 1. etc.
(both Public and Private) were, also, exceeding great; and he made many
Solemn Promises to that God who could alone support, comfort, and deliver him;
and by these he strengthened his Obedience. Of such Holy Resolutions he has
given some account in the Words of the Text, Saying, I have sworn, and am
steadfastly purposed, to keep tby righteous Judgments.

In this Pious Declaration, are contained Four things well worthy our notice.

First, Herein is taken for granted a possibility of keeping the Law of God.
[That is, according to the measures of a sincere Man, and by the assistance of
God's Grace; for without him we can do nothing.] David was a Man of better
Understanding, then to take an impossibility upon him; and of greater Piety
then to assume to himself a Power of doing that which was righteous, and, in
its nature, possible, without the help of his God.

Secondly, We have here supposed the eternal Equity of God's Commands, which
are called Righteous Judgments; they being the Results, not of the
Arbitrariness, but the Counsel of his Will.

Thirdly, Here is further suggested the Rule by which Wise and Pious Men go in
making Vows. They do not rashly oblige themselves to things either doubtful or
unlawful, or if lawful, inexpedient: But they proceed upon sure Grounds, vowing
and resolving to perform such things as God himself has enjoined in his
Righteous Judgments, or Statutes.

Fourthly, The Royal Psalmist does here expressly set forth a most serious and
fixed Resolution of obeying these Possible, these just and reasonable Laws of
that God whose Wisdom and Clemency are equal to his Power. I have sworn, and am
steadfastly purposed, to keep thy righteous Judgments.

I have chosen the last of these four Points for my present Subject, designing
to Discourse (by God's assistance) concerning Holy RESOLUTION, and the
strengthening of our selves by it in our religious Duty. And,

In the First place, I shall inquire into the Nature of Resolution. Then,

Secondly, I shall show how useful, how necessary a steadfast Holy Purpose is
in the course of our Lives.

Thirdly, I shall conclude with a Hearty Exhortation to this Practice;
endeavoring so to move you to it, that you, being true to your Religious
Obligations, may finally obtain the Fruit of the exceeding great and precious
Promises of that God, and that Sun of Righteousness, with whom there is no
variableness nor shadow of turning.

First, For the Nature of Resolution, it may be described as an Act or Habit of
the Mind, as determined with strength, vigor and steddiness toward some
Object, concerning which it was formerly doubtful, or toward which it was
either indifferent or averse. It is the Application of the Will to Business, in
the Opinion of some Moralists. It is the Bent of the Mind which sets on work
the other Powers. It is, as it were, the Seal of the inclination. St. Peter
seems to describe it as the fortifying of the Soul, in these Words, forasmuch 1
S. Pet. 4.
as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, A R M your selves, likewise, with
the same mind; or, with the like force of Holy Resolution. Resolution
considered in it self, is neither Good nor Evil; but it is either according to
the matter and the degree of it. It is of a like Nature with Zeal, which, so
long as it is exercised in a good matter, and with due temper, is very
commendable and useful; but, in a bad Cause, it is a most pernicious
Instrument; and, like Fire in an undue place, the more it rages, it is the
more destructive.

The Resolution which I am to recommend, has Religion for its Object, and
Discretion for its Temper. To be premptory in a Trifle is great folly and
weakness; To be resolute in any Brutal way is high Impiety; To be moved by the
Reason of the Case is just Compliance; To be steadfast and unmovable in our
Duty to God, and others and our selves, is Resolution truly and properly so
called.

To such a sort of Resolution there are several Distempers in the Mind, Will
and Affections which oppose themselves.

The First is Slightness, Carelessness and Indifferency of Temper, which causes
so little regard to be had to Persons, or Things, even those of the greatest
moment, that it neither sets the Heart upon them or against them. Such was
the disposition of Gallio the Deputy of Achaia. Though Act. 18. 15.
He was a Man in Authority, and acquainted with the Riot of which the Greeks
were guilty in the Case of Softhenes, yet he CARED for none of these Things.

The Second is, Haesitancie and doubtfulness of Mind, a kind of halting betwixt
God and Baal; a Spirit not wrought up to that pitch of Resolution, to which the
Prophet Elijah would have the Purpose 1 Kings 18. 21.
to rise, in his Expostulation with the double minded Men of his Time; how long
halt ye between Two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: But, if Baal,
then follow him.

A Third Opposite, is Fickleness and Instability; an humor which abounds where
the Imagination governs, That being pleased not so much with Things which are
really good, as with those which are new. Thus some of the Israelites affected
novelty in Worship more than the Heathen themselves. This moved the Prophet to
upbraid them on this manner, has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no
Gods? but my People have changed their GLORY for that which Jerem. 2. 11.
does not profit.

A Fourth Distemper is Easiness of Disposition, and good Nature, commonly
indeed, but very falsely so called. The Persons whom God has formed out of this
softer Clay, go on tolerably well when they are left to Themselves; but they
are soon drawn aside by the Ordinary Persuasions of Others, and much more by
their Importunities. Some Gentle Entreaties, and seemingly Kind, but Deceitful
Words, bring them off from their Judgments and good Purposes. One of these
Easy Persons is the Simple One described in the Seventh Chapter of the
Proverbs. The Harlot, Prove. 7. 7, 21, 22.
with her much fair Speech, caused him to yield; with the flattering of her
Lips she forced him. And He went after her straightway, as an Ox goes to the
Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks.

A Fifth Distemper which hinders Resolution, is Weakness and Faintness of
Purpose, whence diverse express themselves in Phrases of desire rather then of
Bent and fixedness of mind. They say, we wish, we would, we would be glad to
have it so; But there are not Nerves strong enough in their Hearts to cause
them to protest, (though in a good and necessary matter) that they are
Resolved, and peremptorily determined. Agrippa is represented, in the Acts of
the Apostles, as a Man of such a Temper. He said unto Paul (who spoke with a
Acts. 26. 28, 29.
force of Evidence not to be resisted by a teachable Mind) ALMOST Thou
perswadest me to be a Christian. To whom that Apostle thus dexterously applied
himself; I would to God that not only Thou. but also all that hear me this Day,
were both ALMOST and ALTOGETHER such as I am, except these Bonds.

Sixthly, Nigh to the Nature of the forementioned Evil, is that of Fearfulness
and Cowardice, in reference to the Difficulties which Men must go thorough, if
they will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Men, in whom this Passion rules,
start out of the straight way, as soon as they espy the Cross, though it be at
some distance from them. They do indeed take up a Resolution, but it is, to go
no further then They shall be attended by Ease and Safety; by Worldly Pleasure,
Profit and Honor. When Persecution arises by reason of the Word or Gospel of
Christ, by and by they are offended. They stumble at the Affliction, and
forsake a good Cause rather than suffer for it.

Lastly, There is a Temper, which (it is true) is a pretense to Resolution, but
it is as different from it as those others which I have named; That is to say,
Wilfulness, Stubbornness or Perverseness, which maintains the same Stiffness,
be the matter what it will. This arises, partly from Soureness in the frame of
the Body, partly from Ignorance which first blinds Men, and then makes them
confident in a false way; and partly from Pride which is very assuming and
Dogmatical, and will not suffer a Man either to see his Mistake, or, when it is
seen by him, to own it. Of this Refractory, Stomackful and Restive Humor were
diverse Jews in the Jer. 18. 12. c. 44. v. 17.
Days of Jeremiah, who were resolute without Reason, saying, We will certainly
do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our mouth. And yet every thing which
proceeded out of it was far from being Oracle.

Hitherto I have considered the Nature of Resolution; and those Distempers in
the Faculties, Passions, and Tempers of men, which are Enemies to it.

It is time, in the

Second Place, To bring under our Consideration, the Usefulness and the
Necessity of such Purposes as are both Wise and Holy, Firm and Steadfast, in the
Course of our Lives, in order to the obtaining the End of our Hopes, the
Salvation of our Souls.

Here then I lay down these Two Things.

First, There is great Power and Strength in Resolution.

Secondly, We have need of all the Assistance that it can possibly give us,
toward the performing of our Duty.

In order to That, there is great Force in the Resolution which is Natural, and
much more in that which is Moral and Religious.

1st. There is great Force in that kind of Resolution which is but Natural.

This appears from Experience, which shows us daily, That the Resolute
discourage all others; and are by nothing discouraged themselves.

This is also showed by the very Nature of Resolution before explained; for it
is the Fortitude of the Mind in executing its Designs; it knitteth those Powers
of it, in which, before, there was a luxation. It is certain that there is
great Difficulty oftentimes in resolving, but when we are once resolved, our
Trouble is well-nigh over. The main Point is gained when we have gained the
Will. The Wall of Jerusalem Nehem. 4. 6.
(says the Book of Nehemiah) went forward, because the People had a mind to
the work. We are at first like Children who stand trembling upon the brink of a
River; they desire to step in, but they fear to do so; and no sooner have they
done it, but the Fear vanishes, and Refreshment and Pleasure succeed.

Likewise, The Power of Natural Resolution is manifest, from that Reverence
which every man has naturally for his own Mind; I mean every man who is not
become brutish by evil custom, and in whom the very Ruins of Understanding are
not perished. An uneasiness arises in the minds of those who deliberately break
their own measures, and live in a war with their own Judgments and Purposes.
St. Paul complains of the wretchedness of his estate, whilst his Affections
and Appetites Romans 7. 19.
did in such sort overrule the Purposes of his Mind, that the good which he
would do, that he did not, and the evil which he would not do, that he did.
There is naturally more Greatness in the Mind, than to be willing solemnly to
give it self the Lie; to make Promises to it self, and then presently to break
them. Stedfastness therefore is many times the effect of Holy Vows and
Purposes, because it is Pain and Grief to the Mind to be a daily witness of its
own Instability; to blush, as it were, before it self, and to be condemned by
its own Evidence, in its own Tribunal.

Again, The Strength of Natural Resolution does in some sort appear from the
tender sense men have of their Reputation. Their Good Name is dear to them, and
a Point of Honor is that on which they naturally insist: Now all Weakness is
dishonorable; and to vow and resolve, and by and by to violate such Vows,
argues either a Weakness in the Judgment in resolving without good ground, or a
Weakness in the Will and Temper, in not prosecuting that which was, on good
ground, steadfastly purposed. Where this Infirmity (if I may call it by so soft
a name) is understood, it brings a man presently to shame and contempt.

Now, if there be so much force in the Resolution which is natural, there may
be much more in that which is moral and religious. Even where the Conscience is
depraved in some degree, but not wholly wasted; such as have made holy Vows,
and are willing to break them, would, notwithstanding, not seem to break them,
either to themselves, or to the World; they would not directly cut the knot in
sunder, but choose to untie it, by putting a new sense upon the words, by using
some subtle distinction, by having recourse to Equivocation, mental
Reservation, or some other Evasion suggested by the Sophistry of a deceitful
Heart; not being able to endure the sting of a downright Reflection.

Where the Conscience remains pure and undefiled, Holy Men are still, with more
true strength, assisted in their Duty by their Religious Purposes.

For first, Such have a mighty veneration for the Great God, and fear to trifle
with so Sacred a Majesty, by taking up his Name in vain, by a frequent change
of yea into nay, by vowing and resolving and then disanulling. Insomuch that
the weaker sort of sincere Christians do dread to break a Vow, even because it
is a Vow, though hastily made, and with inadvertence, choosing rather to be
Martyrs to their own Indiscretion, than to depart from that Promise which they
made, in the heat of their Zeal, in the name of him before whom they tremble,
the Everlasting God, Faithful and Just, the same to day, yesterday, and for
ever.

Secondly, Religion is the highest Principle by which men can act; there is
therefore in holy Resolution the greatest strength. The Religious have for
their scope the best and highest Ends and Interests, the Glory of God, who is
the Chief Good, the benefit of all Reasonable Creatures, the present and
Everlasting Happiness of their Persons; and True Religion is a certain way to
these blessed Ends. Now, if they 1 Timothy 6. 9.
that will be rich in this World, decline no Labors, run all manner of
Hazards, are not discouraged by Rocks and Shelves, by Waves and Tempests, or
Pirates in effect as dangerous as they; whilst they aim only at things
Temporal, which perish in the using; shall not those have greater Courage and
firmer Resolution, who propose to themselves the obtaining Treasures which fade
not away, and may fully depend upon the Promises of God in welldoing, and on
the Grace of his blessed Spirit for the enabling them to do well, if they are
not wanting to the Power already given them?

Obj. But I expect that it should be objected, That all this sort of Reasoning,
if it be admitted to be specious, is notwithstanding false. For (as they may
continue to speak) the Purposes of Mankind are vain and uncertain. They vanish
as the morning dew upon the glittering of a new Temptation. Is it not daily
observed, that diverse who are in danger of death, and dread to go forth into a
vast Eternity, after having lead immoral Lives, do weep and pray, and make many
Protestations of becoming new men, if God shall be pleased to spare and restore
them? And when God has restored them, the World has been convinced, that all
their Tears, and Prayers, and Promises, were the effects of Fear; and they have
returned at once to their Health, and to their Vices.

To this it may be answered.

First, That if Men will not be altogether Answer.
Christians by the help of Holy Purposes, they will be much less such without
them. If there is not force enough in them perfectly to amend the Lives of Men,
yet, however, they are some check and restraint to them. And he who says a Cord
is strong, does not pretend to say, that it is impossible to be broken.

Secondly, Those Men who are so false to their Vows, and so unstable in their
Ways, are to be thought not to have built their Purposes upon a right
Foundation. Perhaps the Foundation wanted Breadth. It may be, they resolved
against many Sins, but not against that which did most easily beset them, and
was most agreeable to Flesh and Blood. And this One evil Spirit left in
possession, may have brought back all the rest.

Perhaps the Foundation wanted Firmness. They might take up their Resolutions
in the heat of their Affection, which is suddenly kindled, and suddenly dies
away.

But, for such as have hated every Evil way, and, upon the most mature
Deliberation, dedicated themselves, Souls and Bodies, to Christ without any
reserve, it is not likely that they should be so unsteddy, and so much given to
change for the worse. Among the Primitive Christians there were Armies of
Martyrs who were faithful to the Death. Pliny Plin. lib. 10. Ep. 97. Pervieam
certe and inflexibilem obstinationem debere puniri non dubitari.
reproached them as Obstinate, but their Perseverance arose from the Strength
of their Faith, the Heartiness of their Love, their Sincere Resolution to keep
their Baptismal Vow, in despite of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and
(that which made all these effectual) the extraordinary Grace of God.

Now, if there be any Strength in natural Resolution, and more in that which is
Moral and Religious (and more still there must be when one is added to the
other) certainly it is our Wisdom to bind our selves with this double Cord; for
we have need of all the Assistance we can possibly get, and that is a Second
Consideration.

We come into the World with sensual Inclinations. Our natural Passions are apt
to move with intemperate Violence. Our Lusts and Appetites, till Reason and
Grace subdue them, are strong and impetuous. Our Mind is, generally speaking,
overgrown very early with the Prejudices and Indiscretions of Youth; we are
first accustomed to Folly and Vanity, before we are acquainted with Christian
Piety, and solid Virtue; and to many ill Customs we are united, as the Soul is
to the Body, with a very intimate Union, though we know not how. Our Senses and
Fancy treasure up many idle, extravagant, and deceitful Images. This World,
being present, has great Influence upon our Sense and Imagination, whilst
Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen. All places abound with evil Men, who
live without God in the World, and who by hurtful Persuasions, and bad
Examples, entice the Unwary into a wicked Confederacy with themselves; and
there are Legions of spiritual Enemies, who envy God the Glory, and Man the
Happiness of a sober, righteous, and godly Life.

Wherefore, in so many and so great Perils, amidst which the Frailty of our
Nature is apt to supplant our Faith, it behooves us to use all manner of good
means (and therefore, amongst others that of holy Resolution) that, by God's
Blessing upon such Instruments, we may be supported in all Dangers, and carried
safe through all Temptations. To the speedy Use, therefore, of a holy Purpose,
I proceed, in the

Third Place, to exhort you, beseeching you, as Barnabas did those of Antioch,
that, Acts 11. 25.
with full purpose of heart you would cleave unto the Lord; the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is true, as to the general End of Man, which is his Personal
Happiness, there is no need of any vehement Persuasive to it; no great need of
Deliberation and Resolution of Mind. Nature it self has fixed and determined
this Point, that it is as necessary to be happy, as it is to be at all Andron.
Rhod. 1. 6. c. 2. p. 151. (...).
But Mankind is not so steadfastly resolved upon the Means as the End: Diverse
would be happy hereafter as Angels and Saints, and yet live here as Beasts.
But, without a holy Purpose, and a suitable Performance, no Man shall see the
Lord. Take, therefore, to you Words, and say with Josh. 24. 15.
Joshua, as for Me and my House, we WILL serve the Lord. Use the Language of
Balaam; but let it proceed out of a more righteous Heart: If any one would give
Numb. 2. 18.
me his House full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the Word of the Lord
my God, to do less or more. With Caleb and Joshua follow the Lord, wholly and
you will enter into a better Land of Promise than they at first did. Engage
your Hearts to approach unto the Lord, and he will draw nigh unto you, and make
what you do to prosper.

In purposing on this manner, be pleased to observe these few Directions:

First, When Difficulties in Religion discourage you, oppose Necessity to them,
saying, Jer. 30. 31.
Let come on it what will, we must serve God, we must save our Souls. It must
be confessed, that when those who have been enchanted with sinful Pleasures,
begin to think of reforming themselves, there is a great strife betwixt the
Flesh and the Spirit, and they are ready to think they cannot by any means get
the Victory, and they cry out with Anxiety, and say, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? What should they do? Doubtless they should encourage themselves in
God, who is greater than those who are against them, and will come in to their
Aid, if they pray to him, and repeat their Holy Vows in sincerity of Heart. It
cannot be denied, but that the first Steps in our Ascent toward Christian
Perfection are very laborious; but in due time we shall make good Progress if
we faint not. S. Paul, when at first he found his Mind struggling betwixt Grace
and Nature, cried out as a Man in great distress, who shall deliver me Romans 7.
24.
from the body of this Death? Yet at length the Grace of God did carry his
Resolution to such a Degree of Power, that he changed his Complaint into the
Triumph of these Words, I can do all things through Christ, who Phiiip. 4. 13.
strengthens me.

Secondly, In all Temptations maintain such a Presence of Mind as may enable
you to reflect upon the Resolutions which you have formerly taken up against
them. Commune with your own Hearts after this manner. Is not this the very Evil
which, upon due Consideration, we have so often vowed to forsake? How can we
thus contradict our selves? How shall we do this great Wickedness, and sin
against our Conscience, our Baptismal Engagement, our Righteous Purposes, and
our Holy, Just God, who keeps his Promise for ever.

Thirdly, When you have taken a Resolution to lead a more Christian Life,
abstain, at least for a time, from the familiar Conversation of such who
account it a Crime not to be dissolute, and endeavor, by mockery, to
discourage all Seriousness in Religion. The profane and scurrilous Breath of
such Men, who are of a Party for Vice, may drive back again that Disease, which
was coming forth by Confession and Repentance.

Fourthly; Think frequently of the solemn Vow, Promise and Profession which you
made in Baptism, and renew it often in the Holy Communion. By it all worthy
Partakers are strengthened and refreshed.

Lastly; Say not, All this we will do, though not now, yet in a convenient
Season. It may be that convenient Season will never come; for who knows what a
Day may bring forth? How foolish are such, and ignorant, who say in effect, We
resolve to be good, but not till it be more difficult to be so; not till Custom
in Sin has hardened our Hearts, and stiffned our Necks into Inflexibility? O ye
Sons of Men, how long will ye love Vanity, and seek after Leasing? Imitate
rather Holy David, and attend to his Words in the 119th Psalm; I thought on my
Ways, and turned my Feet unto Psalm. 119. 59, 60, 57.
thy Testimonies. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. I
have said, [or fully determined] that I would keep thy Words.

Finally; Let us pray unto Almighty God in some such Words as these; Lord, we
believe; Lord, help our weak Belief. Lord, we resolve; Lord, strengthen our
Holy Resolutions. And, as by thy Grace preventing us, thou do put into our
Hearts good Desires and Purposes; so, by thy continual Help, make us able to
bring the same to good Effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory now and for ever.

Amen.
THE END.

