A TABLE OF ISREAL'S JUDGES with all the KINGS of ISRAEL and JVDAH, wherein
their Actions and Ends are briefly Recorded.
The Children of Israel after they departed out of the land of Egypt, and had
wandered Forty Years in the Wilderness, under the conduct of Moses and Aaron,
came into the Land of Canaan, under the Command of Joshua the Son of Nun; And
they were successively under four several kinds of Government, under Captains
and Judges, under Prophets, under Priests, and lastly under Kings, until their
Final Captivity.

Joshua was a Captain and a Judge, so was Gideon, Jephtha, Sampson, etc.
Deborah and Samuel were Prophets and Judges, Eli and Samuel were Priests and
Judges, for Samuel was both a Priest and a Prophet. And Lastly of the Kings,
David was both a Prophet and a King.

Isreal's JUDGES.
AFter Joshua's death the Government of Israel was of the LORDS Appointment by
Judges.

Othniell of the Tribe of Judah was the first, he continued Judge 40. years,
Judge. 3.

Next to him Ebud of the Tribe of Benjamine, he was left handed, he slew Eglon
that had oppressed Israel 18 years, Judge. 3.

After him Shamgar that slew 600. Philistines with an ox Goad, Judge. 3.

Deborah and Barak at the waters of Megiddo, put Sissera to flight that had
900. Chariots of Iron, and Jael entertained Sissera into her Tent, he falls
asleep and she smote a Nail through his Temple, Judge. 4.

After both these the Lord stirred up Gideon to help Israel called also
Jerubball, Judge. 6.

Abmilech his son by conspiracy slew 70. of his brethren and at the last was
himself slain by a Woman, Judge. 9.

Tola of the Tribe of Issachar he judged Israel three and twenty years.

After him Jair of the Tribe of Manasses, he helped Israel six years, Judge. 10.

Then Ibsan of Bethlem Judah, he judged Israel seven years, Judge. 12.

Next him Elon of the Tribe of Zebulon he judged Israel ten years, Judge. 12.

After him Abdon of Ephraim, he judged Israel eight years; he had forty Sons
and thirty Nephews that rod on 70. Ass Colt, Judge. 12

Then Sampson of the Tribe of Dan, for twenty years was a strong plague to the
Philistines, heslew more at his death then in all his life, Judge Chap. 14.15.25.

After him Eli of the Tribe of Levi, he was both Priest and Judge for the space
of 40 years, his sons were wicked, Eli his two sons were slain, and he sell
backward and brake his neck at the News of the Arks taking, 1 Samuel 1. and 2.

Samuel was Judge, Priest, and Prophet, he Judged Israel righteously, but his
sons Governed so inequally that the Office of judge-ship became Loathsome, and
Israel desired a King after the manner of the Gentiles, and Samuel is appointed
to anoint Saul King, I Sam. Chap. 8.9.

Samuel Anointed SAUL KING at Mispach by Lot, 1 Samuel 19.

KING Saul did sight the Lords battles at first, I Sam. II. But he took on him
the Priests office, 1 Samuel 15. he spared Agag, and the best of the spoil; he
slew the Lords Priest, and consulted with the Witch, his three sons were slain
by the Philistines, and he at last slew himself, 1 Samuel 31.

Samuel also Anointed DAVID KING 1 Samuel 16. King David slew a Lion and a Bear,
he slew great Goliab, 1 Samuel 17. he slew 200 Philistians, he was preferred
before Saul of the Virgins, he was persecuted by Saul, I Sam. 18. at Gath he
did counterfeit himself mad, 1 Samuel 22. he did cut off Saul's lap of his
Garment, 1 Samuel 26. he distroyed the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30. he restored the Ark
prepared to build the temple, 2 Samuel 5.

KING David's sins was in the the matter of Vriah, and causing the people to be
numbered, he Reigned 40 years, 2 Samuel 24.

KING Solomon is anointed by David's appointment, he slew Adoniah, Joah, and
Shemei, 1 Kings 10. he makes choice of wisdom, and built the Temple in seven
years, he entertained the Queen of Sheba, 1 Kin. 10. he Reigned 40. years, 1
Kings 12.

Kings of JVDAH.
KING REHOBOAM succeeded Solomon 1 Kings 12. and then the Kingdom was rent
into two because of Solomon's sins, in the Kingdom of Judah there were but two
tribes of Judah, and Benjamine, Rehoboam did evil in the sight of the Lord. He
Reigned eighteen years.

KING Abiam succeeded him, 1 Kings 15. he put Jeroboam to flight, and slew 500
chosen men of Israel, I Kin. 1. he Reigned three years.

KING AS A succeeded him, he Fought with Zerah King of Ethiopia, and with
Baasha King of Israel, he put the Sodomites out of the Land, and suppressed the
Jews. He Reigned 41 years. 1 King. 15.

KING Jehosaphat succeeded him, 1 Kings 15. he abolished Idolatry, and caused
the people to be taught, he overcame the Moabites, the Ammonites, and the
inhabitants of mount Seir, he sinned in making affinity with Ahab. 1 Kings 18.
He Reigned tweny years.

KING Jehoram succeeded him, 1 Kin. 22. he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
he Married Ahabs Daughter, he slew seven of his brethren, He Reigned eight
years.

KING Ahaziah succeeded him, he did evil in the sight of the Lord. he was
wonnded at Ramoth Gilead, he and 42 of his brethren were slain by Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 22.

QUEEN Athaliah succeeded him, 2 Kin. 11. she put to death all the Kings seed
except Joash, the son of Abaziah she was slain at the command of Jebojadah
having Reigned 17 years, 2 King 11.

KING Joash succeeded her, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord
all the time that Jebojadah taught him, he made provision for the repair of the
Temple, 2 Kin. 12. he slew Zachariah the Priest, committed Idolatry, and to^k
upon him the honor of God, he was slain by his servants, he Reigned 40 years.

KING Amaziah succeeded him, and he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, 2 Kin. 14. he put them to death that slew his Father, and overcame
the Edomites he after committed Idolatry, 2 Ch^n. 25. he was overcome by Joash
King of Israel, the City was taken and the Temple spoiled, and he slain by his
servants, having Reigned 29 years.

KING Vzziah alias Azariah succeeded him, 2 Chronicles. 26. he did that which was
right all the days of Zacha^iah, he took upon him the Priest office, he was
smitten with Leprosy; in his time, Isaiah, Joel, Hosea, and Obadiah,
prophesied, he Reigned 52 years,

KING Jotham succeeded him, 2 King. 15. he did uprightly in the sight of the
Lord, he built the gate of the Temple called Beautiful, he overcame the
Ammonites, 2 Chro. 27. in his time Isaiah, Nahum, and Micah prophesied, he
Reigned sixteen years.

KING Achaz succeeded him, he did that which was evil and drew his sons through
the fire, he forsook God, and distroyed the Ornaments of the Temple, he Reigned
sixteen years.

KING Hezekiah sueceeded him, 2 Kings 16. he did that which was right, he
repaired the Temple, Reformed Religion, restored the Min^stry, Celebrated the
Passover, he humbled himself, and in one night an Angel of the Lord destroyed a
hundred fourscore and five thousand of Senacheribs Army, he prayed and the Lord
added fifteen years to his days, he showed the Treasure of the Temple to the
Babilonian Ambassador, he Reigned 29 years.

KING Manasses succeeded him, he did evil in restoring Idolatry, and making
his sons pass through the fire, he cut Isaiah a sunder with a wooden saw, he
was carried captive to Babylon, there he humbled himself and the Lord restored
the Kingdom to him again, 2 Chronicles. 33. then he took away the strange Gods and
restored Religion, He Reigned fifty years.

KING Amon succeeded him, 2 Kings 21. he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and was slain by his own servants, having Reigned two years, 2 Chronicles. 33.

KING Josiah did that which was right, 2 Kings 22. he repaired the Temple, he
was slain at Megiddo with an arrow.

KING Jehoahaz succeeded him, he did evil 2 Kings 23. he was plagued by
Pharaoh King of Necho.

KING Je^^jakin did that which was evil, 2 Kings 23. he imprisoned Jeremiah
the Prophet, and cut Habbackuck in pieces, he burnt Ba^uchs prophecies, and
after was carried captive by Nebuchadnezzer.

KING Jehoiachim succeeded him, he according to Jeremiahs Council delivered
himself into Nebachadnezzers hands, and was carried captive to Basilon. 2 Kings
24.

KING Zedekiah did evil in the sight of the Lord, for which he and the Kingdom
of Judah were c^rryed Captive to Babylon, his sons were slain before his eyes,
and his own eyes put out and he bound in Chains, 2 Kin. Chap. 24.25.

The KINGS of ISRAEL.
KING Jeroboam set up two Golden Calves, the one in Dan the other in Bethel, to
cause Israel to sin, and he also made, Priests of the Lowest of the people, 1
Kin. 12.

KING Nadab did evil in the sight of the Lord, he was slain by Baasha at
Gibbethon, 1 Kin. 14.

KING Baasha succeeded him, and did that which was evil he sought with Asa and
built Ramah, 1 Kings 15.

KING Ela succeeded him he also did evil in the sight of the Lord, and was
slain by Zimri being drunk, 1 King. 16.

KING Zimri succeeded him, and he also did that which was evil, he slew all of
Baasha's house, burnt Tirzah and himself in the midst of it being besieged by
Omri, 1 Kings 16.

KING Omri succeeded him, he was made King by the Soldidiers, he built Samaria
and was the worst of all the Kings before him, 1 Kings 16.

KING Ahab succeeded him, he also did that which was evil in worshipping Baal,
and biult him a Temple, he slew 19 Prophets of the Lord, and slew Naboth for
his Vineyard, and himself was slain at Ramoth, 1 Kings 21.

KING Ahaziah he also did evil in walking in the ways of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, he fell through the Lattis of his Window, and sent to enquire of
Baalzebub, 1 Kings 22.

KING Jehoram succeeded him, he also did that which was evil, he was slain by
Jehu, 2 Kings 9.

KING Jehu succeeded him, he slew Jehoram and Abaziah, at his command Jezebel
was cast out of a window, he slew 70 of Ahabs Sons, and 42. of Ahaziahs
brethren, he slew Baals Priests, and destroyed Baals House, 2 Kin. Chapter 9.10.

KING Jehoahaz he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and was delivered into
the Assirians hands, but when the Lord delivered him he was after as wicked, 2
Kin. 10.

KING Joash his son overcame Benhadad, three time he took Amaziah, and broke
down Jerusalems Walls and spoiled the Temple, 2 Kings Chap. 13.14.

KING Jeroboam his son did that which was evil, and departed not from all the
sins of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, he restored the coasts of Israel, 2
Kings 13.

KING Zechariah did that which was evil, and was slain after he had Reigned
six months, 2 Kings Chap. 14.15.

KING Shallum the Conspirator was slain by Menahem when he had Reigned one
month, 2 Kings 15.

KING Menahem Committed great evils, he wript up Women with Child, and walked
in the sins of Jeroboam, 2 Kin. 15.

KING Pekahiah his son did also evil in the sight of the Lord, Hosheah slew
him by conspiracy, 2 Kings 15.

KING Hoshea succeeded him, he did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord, but not as those that were before him, he became servant to Shalmaneser
King of Assiria. and for his Conspiracy was shut up and bound in prison, 2
Kings 17.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by T. C. 1660


