Ward Mayor.
Jovis xxi. die April. 1681. Annoque Regis CAROLI Secundi Angl. etc. xxxiij.
THis Court does desire Dr. Tenison to Print his Sermon preached at St.
Sepulchers, on Wednesday in Ea^ter-week last.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON CONCERNING DISCRETION IN GIVING ALMS.

PREACHED At St Sepulchers Church in London, instead of the Spittle, upon
Wednesday in Easter-week, April vi. M DC LXXXI.

By THO. TENISON, D. D. Vicar of St Martins in the Fields, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Francis Tyton at the Three-Daggers in
Fleet Street, over against St Dunstans Church, M DC LXXXI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir PATIENCE WARD Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON:
And to the HONORABLE COURT of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
IN obedience to Your commands, I have made this Discourse Public; and I
humbly offer it to Your favorable acceptance. There is need of such candor in
reference to the manner of handling this Argument; it being so difficult to
speak discreetly of Discretion, and with perfect Charity, of the lavish Abusers
of it. But, touching the Argument it self, I forbar to use any Apology; it
being (as I think) agreeable enough to the design of a Spittle-Sermon.

There is another branch of Charity which equally needs Prudence, and is as
necessary to be considered, though, at that time and place, it was not a
subject so proper for me. I mean, that Discreet Charity which moderates our
Censures. It is too common a practice to leap from bare Report to uncharitable
Opinion and unchristian Language; without staying at all in the midway, to
examine the grounds of ordinary Fame. And so, by public Clamor, and by
private Discontent, as by Winds aloft and Earthquakes beneath, the frame of
Civil Polity is disordered. And it may be taken up against us, as a Proverb of
Reproach, That England is a Creature which, if it finds no other way of dying,
will kill it self with jealousy and fretfulness. We make others our Enemies,
by thinking them to be so, and by giving scandalous Characters of them, before
we truly understand their merits. And I heartily thank God, that I have found,
in Conversation, so much of good temper and real Piety in many Men, upon whom
rashness had fixed names of Infamy. God grant that we may, on all hands, avoid
Extremes; and, by the voice of universal Charity, call back that Blessed Peace
which has seemed to be flying from us. No man can desire this with greater
degrees of affection and sincerity, than,

Right Honorable, Your humble and most faithful Servant, THO. TENISON

PSALM. cxii. part of verse 5. A Good man -- will guide his Affairs with
Discretion.
PRudence (if we discourse concerning it with propriety) is not so much a
distinct and particular virtue, as the common Governess of all the virtues. It
considers the scope at which we aim; it chooses honest and useful means, and
fitteth them to their end; it conducteth them, in due manner, in their
operation; it adjusteth all the circumstances of humane life.

It is true, there may be something done without it which is, in its nature,
good: but, even then, it cannot be said to be performed well and correctly, and
with the approbation of right reason. For to affirm that chance is wise, is to
say most absurdly of it, that it is not it self.

The useful influence of discretion appears, plainly, in all the Affairs of a
Christian man. But I shall only give an instance of it in the exercise of
Charity; whether it be when we use Reproof, or administer Alms.

In using of Reproof, it is Discretion which shows what Arcana of Vice are
unfit to be exposed; at what seasons men in fault are in the fittest temper for
Advice; what are those happy hours in which they are softest, and most
receptive of any virtuous impression; by what steps and degrees we ought to
proceed; when we are to favor the modesty, or to dash the confidence, of
offenders; how we ought to proportion the degree of our passion to the quality
of the offense; lest, by equal vehemence against infirmity and presumption, we
hinder the ignorant from discerning whether the crime be venial, or unworthy of
favor.

Then, in the Administration of Alms, we are guilty of unprofitable (not to
say, very injurious) prosuseness, whenever Prudence is not the dispenser of
them. Alms are called, in Holy writ, by the venerable Name of Religious
Offerings. But, whatsoever the Altar be at which they are presented without
Discretion, they are so many Sacrifices without Salt. Wherefore, in the Text,
Charity and Prudence meet together in this excellent character of a bountiful
Person; A good man [sheweth favor, and lends, and] will guide his Affairs
with Discretion.

You perceive, by this Introduction, what is like to be my present Argument,
that particular one of Discretion in giving Alms, and not that of Charity in
general, in praise of which so much has been, already, said by others, and so
very accurately; that they have, in effect, exhausted the subject.

And, indeed, it appears to every judicious Christian so excellent and so
necessary a duty; that it is difficult for such a one to prevent amazement when
he hears it put in form of Query by the Schools, T. Aquin. Sum. 2^ 2^ q 23.
Art. 3. utrum Charitas sit virtus?
whether or no Charity be a virtue? I mean this of such a man as is not well
acquainted with their usual way of tying knots upon the plainest things to show
their dexterity in the solution.

Now, in pursuance of my intended subject, I shall,

In the first place, inquire who that good man is who is described in the Text,
as a person, at the same time wise, and liberal.

Secondly, I shall show, in general, that bounty ought, evermore, to be
governed by Discretion.

Thirdly, I shall lay, before your consideration, those particular measures of
Religious Prudence by which a man, truly and wisely Charitable, does guide his
Affairs.

Fourthly, I shall earnestly move this Audience (if need there be of
importunity in so good a cause and in a Christian Assembly) both to Charity it
self, and to the prudence of it.

Lastly, Under this Exhortation, I shall direct to such means as are proper to
be used toward the attainment of this great perfection of discreet and
rational bounty.

And all this, to the intent that they whom God has prosper'd, may be
persuaded both to communicate, and to do it in such prudent and profitable
manner; that the Providence of God may be glorified by man's wise and good
management of its liberality to him; that the public needs may be the more
conveniently supplied; and that men of equal discretion and Charity may lay up
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, and, at length, lay
hold of eternal life.

I am (by the order I have prescribed to my self) to inquire, in

The first place, Who that good man is, in commendation of whose Charity and
prudence, not only the Text, but this whole Psalm, is penned. And it is
manifest by these following words [he shows favor and lendeth] that by such
a one is meant, a man of gentle temper and generous disposition; a Man neither
rigid nor selfish: one to whom belong the good qualities of the Zone we live
in, which is temperate and fruitful. So that this kind of goodness consists
in two very valuable things, sweetness of nature, and largeness of heart. And
both these generally go together. For it is with the soul of man as it is with
the parts of matter, which, the lesser they are, they are always the harder,
and the more inflexible.

And, First, This Good man excels in sweetness and goodness of Nature. By
which I mean not that easiness of temper which renders him apt to be seduced,
but that humanity of disposition which prepares him with inclination to do
good. The Hebrew word which, in our Translation, is rendered [a good man] is, in
that of the Seventy, interpreted by (...) which signifies gentle and benign.
And Phavorinus Phav. Lex. p. 1874. (...).
glosseth this Greek word by that other of (...), equitable, clement, void of
rigor, humane, merciful.

Secondly, This Good man excels in largeness of heart. Vir bonus is, here,
Vir utilis. A Good man is a man useful to his Generation. In this sense the Law
is said Romans 7. 12.
to be, not only holy [or a Rule separate from the immoral measures which the
World lives by] and just [that is, a Rule of right reason] but Good also; that
is, a Rule useful and serviceable to all who follow it. A Good man is not
injurious, nor so much as rigorously just; but (like the best of Beings of whom
Plato said, that there was no Envy or narrowness in him) diffusive of Good will
and favor toward all mankind. He is One who does S. Matt. 5. 47.
(...), some excellent thing; something more generously good than others, who
(like the Publicans) are wont rather to exchange, them to do, good Turns. When
the Jews personate such a one, they introduce him speaking in this proverb:
That which is thine is, for me, still thy property; and that which is mine is
thine also. This is He for whom some other man of an upright intention, but of
much meaner capacity to serve his Age, would (as S. Paul Romans 5. 7.
observes) even dare to die. And certainly he who, when there is apparent
hazard, sacrifices his own less profitable life, to preserve the more useful
one of some light of Israel, some man who is a common and public good, some
Hero in generous virtue; can never fall an inglorious victim in the Eyes of God
or any virtuous beholder.

Having, thus, showed you who this Good man is who is so well spoken of in the
Text, and prayed (as I hope we All do very heartily) that God would add
thousands and ten thousands to his Order; I come to prove,

In the Second place, that the goodness of such a man's nature, and the bounty
of his heart and hand, are always to be governed by Discretion. And this is a
truth which needs no laborious proof.

For, First, without Prudence, the circumstances of charity cannot be measured
and limited with judicious LXX. (...). Gejer. in Loc. judiciose.
estimation and allotment. For there are Givers of different abilities, and
there are Receivers, whose needs are different, and whose merits are unequal.
And the same kind of Alms, and the same measures are not, at all times, proper
to be given or received by the same Persons. And therefore, it is necessary
that men be furnished with discretion, by which they may be qualified for the
due oeconomie LXX. (...).
of their Alms, and disposed to be good (or useful) Stewards of the manifold
grace 1 Pet. 4. 10. (...). Comp. v. 9, 11.
(or temporal liberality) of God.

Now (Secondly) unless our charity be judiciously weighed and proportioned,
three great inconveniences will attend it.

For (First) without such judicious estimation, our charity will be, often,
ridiculous and indecent. Hence many have given humorous Alms, and conceited
Legacies, and have made Statutes relishing of Monkish Caprice; and written
Folly, in very legible Characters, upon the Front of their Foundations. Hence
some, whose devotion has had Ignorance for its mother, have built Two Churches
in the same Enclosure in a small village; endamaging the public service of God
by dividing the Assembly. Hence a man otherwise of no ordinary Figure in the
English Chronicle K. Edg. vid. Hist. of Ref. part 1. p. 22.
is said to have resolved to increase his sorty seven Monasteries to the number
of fifty, because that was the number of the year of Jubilee. A reason derived
from no deeper Cause than the pleasure which the chime of those agreeing
numbers made in his weak imagination.

Secondly; unless discretion adjusteth and proportioneth our Alms, we shall do
less good with them than is in our power. Good is to be done; and every degree
of Good is Good. And though a man is not obliged to do always that which, in
the abstracted speculation of it, is best; yet true Philosophy, as well as
Theology seemeh to assure us, that there are no such things as moral Counse's
which are not also Commands: And that every man is bound to do whatsoever is,
in his Circumstances, best to be done by him, and easily understood by him to
be best. Now how dwells the love of God and goodness in that man, who, when
he may do a greater good, does irrationally choose to do a less, by a careless
and indiscriminating liberality? There is a certain proportion of needs and
provisions, in the world. And, in many places of it, the provisions do scarce
balance the needs. Wherefore, there is cogent reason for the making of our
charity go as far as it can. And if it is to be done for the best, discretion
must guide us in the performance. For what harvest can we expect from that
precious seed of Alms, which is either thrown on an heap, or scattered at all
adventures, and in such sort, that the cultivated land is not distinguished
from the fallow and unbroken; that the very Rocks and high ways are sown; and
that the Birds of Prey devour that which ought to have been committed to the
good ground, and to have taken root there, and to have sprung up, from thence,
for the sustenance of man's indigent Nature?

I should offend against manifest Truth, if I should say, that no good can be
done by indiscreet Alms: For good is, often, done by prodigality it self, of
which some spoils, accidentally, fall to the lot of the wise and sober. But,
the greater the Prudence, the greater the good. And it is with Alms as with
Estates, where half of the Riches does consist in the discretion of the Owner.
A Judicious man will serve more good purposes with a few pence, than an
imprudent man with a great number of Talents. We see it daily, that a competent
Revenue, by good management and Gods blessing, supporteth diverse Families, and
diverse Societies founded by charity, in very decent and comfortable manner. And
S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. Hom. 67. in S. Matt.
reports concerning the Church of Antioch, that, in his time, the small
Revenue of it, well applied, did maintain three thousand Widows and Virgins,
besides the Clergy, the Prisoners, the Strangers, the Lepers. On the other
hand, it cannot escape our most negligent observation, that there are some
single Persons [some did I say? Would God they were to be easily numbred] who
have had greater abundance in this world than many Families, and public
Foundations. And yet, by Imprudence, and by Vice (Vice which is the greatest of
Indiscretions) they have consumed the very stock, and outlived all but the
miserable remembrance of their former plenty, and the brutish abuse of it. And
yet, it may be, they never did one worthy deed, nor enjoyed themselves as men
of Honor and Condition, nor satisfied many of the most just debts: I mean such
as have been due either for faithful service, or for the conveniences of life.

Thirdly, without judicious estimation, we shall do real damage with our Alms;
and inverting the method of the All-wise God (which the same God forbid) we
shall bring Evil out of Good. By not distinguishing aright of Persons, and
their needs; we shall encourage vice, instead of relieving Poverty. We shall
imitate sensual men who consider only the craving of the vitiated appetite, and
not the real health of the body. For instead of supporting, according to our
power and skill, the just necessities of the Commonwealth; we shall be
tempted, by giving ear to the clamorous importunities of the idle, the vicious,
the hypocritical, to nourish the Plagues and feed the diseases of it.

By these means we shall make it necessary for us to repeat this Prayer (for
which there is too frequent cause; though, I fear, it is very rarely used) God
forgive me the prodigality of my Alms; God forgive me the indiscretion of my
Charity.

The necessity of Prudence in conjunction with Charity being thus, in more
general manner, evinced; I proceed,

In the third place, To the more particular rules and measures of Religious
discretion in relation to Alms. These (I think) may be comprehended under the
two following heads.

First, Discretion in providing, preserving, or increasing wealth; that we may
have ability to do good.

Secondly, Discretion in dispensing of it, that we may do it to the best and
wisest purposes.

First, The prudence of Charity consists in that discretion which provideth,
preserves, increases wealth, that we may have ability to do good, and to
continue in doing of it, and in bearing of such useful fruit until we die. It
is the care of every good man to be rather helpful than burdensome. There will
be always enough unavoidable necessities: And, therefore, he who wilfully
creates more, is an unjust Usurper upon the substance of the Rich, and an
uncharitable diminisher of the Alms of the Poor.

Now, toward the making of our fortune, religious Prudence prescribes such
means as these:

To begin with God, praying for direction and success to that Governor of the
World, to whom, after all our planting and watering, we owe the increase. To
furnish our selves with competent skill in the affairs we undertake. To be
diligent in them without anxiety, which interrupteth the steady thoughts of
Prudence, and hangs weights upon business. To use the conversation of a few
familiar Friends; and of such as may not rob us of our time, our substance, our
innocence. To Account accurately, and often. Not to esteem it a point of
dishonor to examine the reckonings of imposing and unreasonable men. Not to
think it unworthy of us to bargain sometimes (as do the Politest of people, the
Italians) for our Food and our Raiment. To cut off all vain and unnecessary,
and much more all dissolute, expense. Not to engage in equal charge with
persons of superior condition and fortune. Not to go to the utmost criticism in
Modes. Not to be Trimalchio's and artists in Luxury. Not to pamper Beasts, and
starve Christians. To do as much with our own hands as decency, ability, and
innocent diversion, will allow us. To have, as much as may be, upon our own
matters, our own Eye, which is that auspicious star that ripeneth business by
its influence, and makes it thrive and prosper. Finally, The way to advance
our selves in all our Dealings, is, in all of them, to be just and honest. And
this was the rule even of that late Philosopher Ren. des Carts in Epist. par.
1. p. 97. -- Sitque apud me axioma, Justas and honestas vias omnium utilissimas
esse, and tutissimas.
who has, I hope, been free from the crime, but not from the suspicion of
Atheism.

But I enlarge my self (I believe) too too copiously upon this subject, whilst
I speak to many who understand the world with such judicious insight. So that,
by the pursuit of such an Argument, I may seem, as it were, to utter Proverbs
before Solomon.

Being now, by such means as have been mentioned, and by the blessing of God
upon them, made competently able; It is our wisdom to raise and maintain (as in
the Church V. Tertul. Apol. C. 39. p. 31. Etiam si quod Arcae genus, etc.
a public, so in our Closet) a private bank of Charity, by laying aside a
convenient share of our worldly Incomes for so worthy a purpose. It will grow
insensibly: the Oil will rise in surprising manner in the Cruise. And this
being done, we shall then not be to seek for Alms upon sudden and emergent
occasions; we shall have a store for daily needs; we shall be unwilling to
alienate or to imbezzle that which we have devoted to so laudable, so sacred an
use; we shall always give with cheerfulness, having by us a stock designed to
no other end than that of Charity: So necessary toward the furniture of a
Religious Closet, where a man's circumstances can allow it, is a private Corban.

Discretion having, thus, in some measure either made or continued Provision
for Alms; there is great need

(In the Second place) of its further Care in the distribution and wise
application of it, that Charity may attain its blessed Ends.

Now discretion, in distributing of Alms, has due regard to The Scope, the
Objects, the Place, the Season, the Quality, the measure and proportion of this
material Charity; and to the manner of its conveyance.

First, Prudence has due regard to the scope of Charity, a failure in which,
is an error in the foundation. For that which is given without respect to the
Glory of God who gave us all, and to the relief of real needs in humane
Societies, is expense indeed, but it is not Charity. It is wealth Exposed, but
not Bestowed. And when we give for no worthier end than the serving our humor,
Pride, and Vanity, it is not at all probable that we shall place our Alms upon
the most deserving. For, The bold, the talkative, the clamorous, the
frequenters of public places, will then be judged the fittest Instruments to
blazon our praise, and to flatter our hypocrisy. If our scope be the sake of
God and the common good, that will direct us in the due application of our Alms
to a purpose so fit to be our aim.

There is great boast made of Alms in the Romish Church. They sound the Trumpet
of them perpetually in our Ears. But what is the End to which a great part of
this charity tends? Frequently the motive which persuades them is extremely
selfish, and the means they use are extravagantly indiscreet. The scope they
too often vainly aim at, is The blessing of a presumed Saint who is ignorant of
them; Security from the external force of evil Spirits by the charms and spells
of Monkish Conjuration, (A sort of Ecclesiastical Magic which those very
Spirits invent and encourage); Avoidance of those causeless Curses and
Anathema's which are with terror denounced from their seven-hill'd counterfeit
Sinai; preservation from, or deliverance out of, the imaginary flames of
Purgatory, blown on purpose by Jesuitick breath for the melting of the
treasures of credulous people; Canonization, as scandalous as it is chargeable,
and performed in such manner, that, according to the note of Cardinal
Bessarion, the making of their new Saints, does move some skeptical men to
question the old ones. Nay, sometimes, the scope is that very wicked one of
compounding with heaven, by their liberal Alms, for their unforsaken sins: and
here in this Nation (whilst Horae B. M. v. ad Us. Sar. fol. 66. -- who that
devoutly say [these three Prayers] shall obtain ten hundred thousand years of
pardon for deadly sins granted by our holy Father John 22d P. of R.
the Island was enchanted with Popery) there were granted Indulgences even for
what they call deadly sins for many thousands of years to come.

The Event is, The alienation of Alms from their proper uses, the increase of
Superstition, and the maintaining of an universal Usurper. For the Pence of S.
Peter conduced to the buying of such a yoke as neither we nor our Fathers were
able to bear.

The things they purchase as conducive to these ends, are the wares of dark
imposture; namely such as these. Shrines, Images, Lamps, Incense, Holy Water,
Agnus Dei's, Blessed Grains, Roses, Peebles, Rings, Beads, Relics, Pardons,
Masses, Dirige's and Soul-obits; the goodly Inventory of Superstition.

Blessed God! what a miserable and irrational waste is this? what great good
might have been done by the wealth laid out upon such unprofitable and such
dangerous Toys, with the profane Merchandizers in the Romish Temple? how many
real necessities might have been supplied by the many hundreds of pounds yearly
offered at that one Shrine of the pretended Martyr of Canterbury? how many
hungry persons might have been fed; how many good men, bound in misery and
iron, might have been set at Liberty by such Popish indiscreet Alms, squandred
so fruitlesly, and levelled at a Scope to which Christianity did never direct?

Secondly, discretion duly considers the proper objects of Christian Charity;
that dogs may not devour the bread of Children.

The Objects which I shall speak of, are, First, those more Public ones of
common Societies and charitable Foundations.

Secondly, those more Private ones of particular Families and Persons.

First, touching those more Public Objects, Societies founded by Charity; I
shall, at present, make only these sew Reflections upon them.

First, I observe (which is obvious enough) that it is an imprudent and
irreligious liberality, which erecteth such Public Houses and Societies, as
please private Imagination, but disserve the Public Interest. True Charity
erecteth not such Sanctuaries as are too common in Romish Countries; such as
are Refuges for wilful and capital malefactors. It foundeth not such
Monasteries as are nurseries of a blind and formal way of worship: A kind of
worship so very ritual, that the intention of the mind (unless it be of his who
Officiates) is the least part of it. It favors not such Convents as receive,
for term of life, the young, the strong, the able and apt for business, even
against the desires, endeavors, importunities of their Parents, under pretense
of teaching them to serve God with greater perfection. The Romanists frequently
object to us that Statute which was made, in the Queens time, in favor of the
poor: and they reproach us in a Proverb, saying, that begging began with
Protestancy. But they should do well to use less partiality in their Censures,
and to consider this plain truth, that the indiscretion of the Monasticks (by
feeding the slothful, the superstitious, the Enthusiastic, the Friars
Mendicants, the Pilgrims or loytering wanderers of that Church) provided
objects of burden and expense, for those of the Reformation. And who (I
beseech you) were most in fault, those who bred the Beggars; or those, who,
finding them in great necessities, made a Law to keep them that they might not
perish?

Lastly (not to spare our selves where there is a failure) true Charity does
not countenance such places of exemption, as, by their private privilege, do
not support the Government by supporting the necessary Officers of State and
Justice, in honor and without disturbance: such places into which the Law has
reason to enter, yet (which is matter of just astonishment) no legal Authority.

Secondly, I observe, that it is much more probable that the public Charities
of the Reformed should serve the public Interest, than those of the Roman
faction. Among the truly Reformed, such Societies are founded upon the impulse
of plain, and prudent, and rational Causes. To wit, that God may have a
public, reasonable service offered to him. That Children may be educated for
offices Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military Mechanic. That offenders may be
corrected, or secured. That the idle may be employed. That the aged, the
impotent, the wounded, the sick, the distracted; may have relief, shelter, cure
and oversight.

But in the Church of Rome, the first motive to many Foundations is some
pretended Vision or Revelation from God or a Saint. And by this means it comes
to pass that sometimes fraud is a founder, and hysteric vapor (passing for
Oracle) a Benefactor. And in such Places Enthusiasm is dutifully nursed and fed
by those Societies, which owe to it their birth and original. The occasion of
them is fancifull, and the scope of them is an indiscreet (not to say an
Idolatrous) end. Thus it came to pass in the several Houses of their celebrated
S. Teresa the Foundress of the Reformation of the discalced Carmelites. I will
give you her own words Life of S. Teresa. 2d part, p. 2, 3.
with respect to her first Foundation of the Monastery of Avila. One day (says
Teresa) after I had communicated, our Lord strictly charged me to set about
this Foundation with all my might, making me great promises, that the Monastery
should not fail to be erected; that his divine Majesty should be very much
served in it: that it should bear the title of S. Joseph, who should stand at
one Gate for our guard, and our Lady, the glorious Virgin his Mother, at the
other; and that himself would stand always in our Company. -- That I should
tell my Confessor this, which his Majesty had enjoined me; and that he willed
him not to oppose or hinder me at all.

You see what Hay and Stubble is at the bottom of such buildings: and
therefore, ifthe superstructure be solid, and it be advanced and perfected by
that great moral Architect, Prudence, it is a miracle scarce inferior to any
which their Legends have fitted to the wide swallow of their people. But if
Discretion does not succeed Enthusiasm, and correct it, what aids can be given,
by so irregular and extravagant a principle, to the common good?

Thirdly, It may at least be offered to consideration, whether Prudence would
not judge it conducive to the public interest, both of Religion and Civil
order, if there were places of retirement, rightly constituted (without Masses,
Images, Litanies to Saints, Cords of discipline, or any other instruments of
Superstition) for the use of men of less sound temper, though their disease be
not perfect distraction. These (one would imagine) might be fit retreats for
the pensive, the melancholy, the malcontent, the inordinately scrupulous, the
fearful, the reserved, the musing, the indiscreetly zealous, the fierce
disputers of this world; the vain janglers, who disturb peace and entangle
truth: in sum, for the many who are not qualified for dispatch of business, or
for freedom of conversation. By this means, pensiveness might be changed into
godly sorrow; and discontent at the world, into self-denial; and that Religious
fury which now rages in the very streets, into private Devotion.

But I say this with submission, and not with assurance: As also that there is
a public Charity in nature and dignity before this; a due support of Gods
public service in all places of this Kingdom by such a maintenance as is not
scandalous and insufficient. And thus far, ever since there was a prize put
into public hands at the dissolution of superstitious Houses, there has been
part of a debt due from the State unto the Church; which God grant it may have
ability and opportunity, and religious inclination to discharge.

Lastly, I cannot but take notice, upon this solemn memoria lof your public
Charities, of that singular Prudence which does appear both in the founding,
and in the managing, of the Hospitals of this illustrious City. The good ends
to which they were so wisely designed, and the diligent, prudent, and
successful pursuance of those ends, ought not to be passed by with supine and
ungrateful inadvertence.

In this past year, there have been put forth Apprentices, and discharged out
of Christ's Hospital, Seventy six Children. There remain, under the care of it,
five hundred forty seven. And the number taken in, since the erection of it,
has been about Twelve Thousand, of which many have proved eminent in diverse
faculties, and in Offices Sacred and Civil, and arrived at great things from
very low beginnings. Ten of the formention'd Children have been, this year,
placed out to Masters of Ships, having first been educated in the Arts of
Aritbmetick and Navigation by the Royal bounty of his most Excellent Majesty,
whose great and wise example ought highly to be honored, and diligently to be
pursued by the people of this Island, which God and Nature have designed, by
its situation, for Sea-affairs; I had almost said, for the sovereignty of the
Ocean.

There have been Cured, this last year, in the Hospital of St Bartholomew, nigh
Sixteen Hundred persons, of which many were partakers, also, of other relief
convenient for them.

The like Charity has been extended to more than Eighteen hundred in the
Hospital of St Thomas.

There have been received into the Hospital of Bridewell nigh Nine Hundred
persons fit to be disciplined into good manners. And it has brought up, in
diverse Arts and Trades, no less than One Hundred twenty eight. And all this has
been done, notwithstanding these Foundations have, so deeply, suffered by the
dreadful calamity of Fire; the remainder of whose rage God, in mercy, restrain;
that this great City may never mourn a second time sitting in Ashes; unless it
be in those of Humiliation.

I ought not, here, to forget the Hospital of Bethlem, that sanctuary of
unsound minds, dwelling unhappily in unsound bodies. It has, this year,
received fifty three persons distempered in their imaginations. It has Cured
of Lunacy, and discharged Forty one; and it maintains under Cure a Hundred
and ten; notwithstanding that great burden of debt there is upon it, by reason
of that noble and commodious structure lately erected.

Happy the miserable who partake of this Charity; more happy they, who out of
hearty love to God and Man, have raised the several funds of it: as also they
who, with pious liberality, build further upon them.

But I forbear to discourse more at large, concerning such public Charities,
in this place, where it appears, by the fruits of the management, that they
are so well understood, and so prudently governed.

I pass to the

Second sort of charitable objects, those more private ones of miserable
Families, or Persons. And here, discretion considers that these words of the
Lord Jesus S. Matt. 5. 42.
[give to him that asketh] are, by the Laws of reason, and by other pious Rules
in Holy Scripture, to be, thus, expounded. Be charitable to every one, even to
those who have done thee injury, if thou judge, in general, that they are fit
objects; and, in special, that they are proper objects of thy Alms. No man is,
by the most luxuriant growth of Riches, made all-sufficient. The needs of a
small Precinct in the world will soon exhaust even the Rich Man of Crassus, who
would not reckon any one in that number, who was not able to maintain an Army.
Seeing, then, we cannot benefit all the world by our Alms, (though we may do it
by our charitable Prayers for them;) it is fit that the little portion, which
we are masters of, be placed upon those, whose circumstances are best suited to
our own. Objects so particularly fit, are those in our Church, our Family, our
Neighborhood; in the places of our Birth, our Baptism, our Education, our
Office, our Revenue, our spiritual assistance, our temporal deliverance or
advancement.

Amongst these objects fitted to our personal circumstance, discretion
encourages those only who are likewise fitted for our Charity by their own
just qualifications.

Prudence, therefore, discountenanceth those who are irreligious and profane,
and never use the Name of Christ with show of reverence, but when they ask an
Alms with it: who will not follow Christ unless there be Loaves to tempt them.
It discourageth those who have been early Beggars, and have sacrificed the very
flower and strength of their Age to idleness: Who, being accustomed to sloth,
are more reconciled to shameful Poverty than honest labor. Who tell us, falsely
and absurdly, that it is as good to be idle for nothing, as to work for
nothing. As if there were not profit in all labor: As if sloth did not disable
both mind and body: As if the mere employing of our time with diligence, did
not secure us from many temptations. And certainly none have fallen into more,
and into more perilous snares, than they who, from the beginning, have trodden
the ways of unmanly laziness and unjust begging.

Again, Prudence gives no countenance to the over confident, who stand in need
of such discipline as may humble them into a deeper and more becoming sense of
their miserable and low condition; whose impudence, adding menaces to their
entreaties, gives us cause to suspect concerning them, that they would extort
those Alms by force (were it in their power) which now they endeavor to wrest
by their boldness from timorous men, and from the easie-natured by their
importunity.

Likewise, discretion repulseth the craving and unsatisfied, who must have
benefits covered daily with benefits, or else a shower of their imprecations
will find passage through them. These would monopolize Charity, as if they were
the only objects on Earth; as if the comfortable dew of it were not well
directed, if a drop of it fell besides their private fleece.

It discourageth, also, the dissolute and riotous Tertul. Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
Haecquasi deposita pietatis sunt; nam inde non epulis, nec potaculis, nec
ingratis voratrinis dispensatur; sed egenis alendis humandisque, and pueris ac
puellis re ac parentibus destitutis, jamque domefticis senibus item-naufragis:
and siqui in metallis, and fiqui in insulis vil in Custodiis, dumtaxat ex causd
dei sectae, alumni confessionis suae fiunt.
, who turn the Alms of the day, into the revels of the night: who are not easy
'till by expensive intemperance they have unburthen'd themselves of the little
stock they have gathered. Amongst these, it sets its face even against that
sort of men who are for a season, very laborious. They will, for a while,
endure the heat of the day with honest and painful diligence. They will be
frugal and sober 'till a sum is earned: and then it is not laid up for the
support of their Family, and against they themselves fail through impotence and
Age; but the wages of some weeks are all riotously wasted in a few hours; and
they use them as their thorns which, after a growth of some considerable time,
make a blaze and crackling for a few moments.

Furthermore, both Religious and Civil prudence refuses to favor wanderours,
who are, oftentimes, pernicious spies and conveighers of unlawful Intelligence;
who, in all places where they have opportunity, leave behind them the marks of
their wickedness and dishonesty; who dare not lead their unwarrantable lives in
any fixed abode, where the Government may take a true account of their
behavior under it.

Finally, Discretion weighs well the case of pretended Converts, lest, after
the modern Policy of France See Pol. of the French Clergy to destroy the
Protestants, etc. p. 151, etc. p. 204, etc.
, it sets up a Market for Conversions, and exposes Religion to sale in a
mercenary world, where diverse will turn their Conscience to that point from
whence prosperity blows. It is exceeding tender of all those, who, for
Christ's sake, quit their Countries, their stations, their false Religion. But,
if it sees any considerable spot in the Morals of such who go under this
character, it fears, for the sake of the same Blessed Jesus (whose Religion is
too Divine to cover base and carnal purposes) to give them encouragement. It
must be a mighty love of God, and a deep sense of Christian Piety which will
force a man, for mere Conscience sake, to die, as it were, whilst he is alive;
to forsake the beloved Land of his Nativity, his dear Relations, his profitable
employs, and to follow Jesus whithersoever he goes, be it to Pilates Tribunal,
or to Calvary. Wherefore, he who pretends to have forsaken all that he may
adhere to the Crucified Jesus, and leads not life very exemplary, and of
remarkable circumspection; awakens the jealousy of the Prudent, and gives
them signs of his insincerity.

Thirdly, Discretion has regard to the place in which Charity is fitly
dispensed. It gives, sometimes, very publicly, for Example sake, and
sometimes very privately for Love sake, and as a sign to our selves of our
freedom from vainglory. It has not a constant door for a promiscuous, bold,
contentious crowd; but chooses rather to conveigh its Alms to the houses of the
needy, than to tempt them abroad daily, to the expense of their time, and
modesty, and innocence; and the neglect of their Family and business.

Again, Prudence raises not a great bank, by all the Alms it has ability to
give, for the behoof of some narrow Precinct, whose necessities require not
such redundancy of supply. That will but bring burden, instead of maintenance.
For in this sense, also, our Lords saying is true, Where the Carcass is, there
will the Eagles be gathered together. Prudence (to use the words of a great man
Lord Bacon in his Advice touching Mr. Sutton's Estate, in Resusc. p. 199.
from whom it is no shame to borrow) distributeth the remedy as the Disease is
dispersed. Greatness of relief accumulate in one place, does rather invite a
swarm and surcharge of poor, than relieve those that are naturally bred in that
place: Like to ill tempered Medicines, that draw more humor to the part, than
they evacuate from it.

Again, where Discretion finds the needy actually in their miseries, or in
their labor and industry, there it conceives it has a fit place. offered to
it for the depositing of its Alms.

For the public Streets and Avenues to Churches, the prudent are very sparing
toward those confederate and immodest Petitioners, who perpetually haunt them.
They fear to turn their Charity into a blaze of glory. They expect little fruit
from that which they scatter upon the stones. They will not be imposed upon, or
forced, by those bold people who are, on purpose, importunate in such public
places, where they think men will be shamed, at least, into bounty toward them.

Fourthly, Discretion considers the time of giving Alms. It has respect to
the seasons of great Sickness, of great losses, of scarceness of Work, and of
dearness of Provisions. It has especial regard to diligent men just sinking in
their fortune, who may, often, be kept above water by a very little help, when
a hand is opportunely reached toward them. It assisteth at the beginning of
Arrests, where timely aid delivers men from perpetual chains. It gives as soon
as it sees a fit object, not suffering the Christian to pine away whilst the
Charity is growing. It places out to Masters the Children of the Poor, as soon
as ever they are capable of work or instruction. By such means it preventeth
new Families of Beggars; it puts the Children into a capacity of being helpful
to their Parents; it secures their innocence, by preventing the very beginnings
of begging which are dangerous. For there seems to be a kind of enchantment
in that evil Trade; and few who are entered are made to forsake it even by
hardship it self.

Furthermore, As to time, prudence has an especial eye upon the seasons of
men's setting up in honest Callings; giving them some place of footing where
they may stand. At such times, a small sum is a greater Charity, than the
liberality of the openest hand, when the way of the person is more fixed, and
his circumstances are ripened into some degrees of prosperity.

Likewise, Discreet charity is liberal at those solemn times when the Church
celebrateth the memorials of the Birth, the Passion, the Resurrection, the
Ascension of the Savior of the world; and the descent of the Holy Spirit of
God: or, when it observes public Fasts; or other days of Thanksgiving,
besides those already remembered: that so our giving of Alms may be an act and a
sign also, both of our humanity and our Devotion.

Again, If there be absolute necessity, wisdom judges that time, a season for
assistance, even of the personally unworthy. If it has power, it will pull out
of the ditch the perishing Goat or Swine. It knows that extremity will give
violent counsel, and that men, in such circumstances, will force a way to their
relief, if they cannot find one.

Last of all, Wisdom turns not all Alms into Legacies; it does not adjourn
all its Charity to the last Will, which is, sometimes, never made but in a vain
purpose, and, as often, not fulfilled.

Fifthly, Discretion considers the quality of our Alms. And here, it is our
prudence to prefer those which serve toward a constant provision, before those
which are transient: those, I mean, which help a man in a pang of need, but put
him not into a way of living; which just hold him up from perishing, for an
hour, but do not take him out of the deep waters. Wisdom, also, persuades
always to give suitable supplies, and not mere counsel when bread is wanting.
And it persuades to give such suitable supplies (if it consists with our
convenience) rather in kind, than in that which will purchase them; as Clothes
to the naked, and Food to the hungry, and Books to the uninstructed, and
Physic to the sick. Money can answer all these needs, but it will not be
always laid out upon them. And for some materials of Charity, discretion does
purchase them from Workhouses for the poor; at the same time doubling the
good, by encourageing diligence and administering supply.

Sixthly, Discretion considers the due measure and proportion of Alms, that
it be fitted to the needs of the receiver, and to the ability of the giver.

Touching the needs of the receiver, it does not always limit it self to mere
necessity; but, in persons whose fortunes are, by loss and accident, in
declension, it has respect to decence; considering how great the fall is from
Riches to Poverty. And, in men always poor, but always in hard labor, and able
only to refresh life with the continual sweat of their brows; it pitieth the
heaviness of their yoke. It sometimes sweetneth their flavish estate by some
addition to the wages of their drudgery; and allows them some Sabbath for the
ease of humane nature.

Touching the ability of the giver, discretion considers what we justly
possess, and what quantity of it is required for the supporting of us in the
condition of our birth, our place, our office, our family, and for the
discharge of our obligations. It does not require of all the same proportion.
Some may afford a twentieth, and others a thirtieth part: and to others, whose
Children and dependents are numerous, and whose fortunes are entangled, the
hundredth part may be over measure. According as the heap is, so the wise man
sows. Religious Prudence does not pull down one Family for the support of
another. But for raising of a new Family to worldly grandeur (especially where
the heirs of it are not encouragers of our hope, either by the quickness of
their parts, or the virtuousness of their tempers, or the goodness of their
educations) the wisdom of charity does not press it with earnestness. This is a
design of no great use, but of great uncertainty. The Family of Herod Joseph.
Ant. l. 18. c. 7. Et R. R. Usserii Annal. A. 4079.
was all extinct in a single century of years. And it is noted by the Author of
the Baronage Sir W. Dugd. Pref. to Vol. 1. p. 7.
of England, that, of the 270 Families of which he treats, there were not, when
he wrote, above eight remaining. And yet, a great many imprudent men live all
their days in unbecoming parsimony, and without doing good so much as to their
selves, for the advancing of some mean man, born to labor and low estate, and
incapable of any thing greater than that which he is already. And such a one is
ruined by his preferment. Galba said the honest truth of himself, when he told
his Friends, That they had spoiled a good Soldier, and made the worst of
Emperors.

Lastly, Discretion has regard to the due manner of dispensing Charity;
obliging both by what it gives, and by the way of giving. It gives not
grudgingly, or of necessity, but with signs of a free and willing heart. It
finds out, privately, just needs, and it preventeth asking, and surprizeth
with a kindness, for which the needy did not look. And this strengthens their
faith in the providence of God who creates friends to them out of the dust;
who brings them supply without and beyond their expectation. Wherefore when
prudence gives, it does it without malicious upbraiding or proud insulting.
When a miserable creature would borrow [or, beg] of him, it turns not him
away S. Matt. 5. 42. (...).
. That is, it does not remove him to a distance, with signs of disdain, and
contemptuous violence. It oppresses not the modesty of the humble; especially
of those who have been wont to give and not to receive. To the more confident
it gives with a mixture of governance and favor, that they neither be
encouraged in insolence, nor driven to desperation.

Having said all this touching the necessity, and the nature, of discretion in
giving Alms, (and all, with reference to the further judgment and definition of
a prudent man, when a particular case does lie before him;) It remains,

In the last place, That I exhort both to Charity it self, and to the prudent
exercise of it.

First, I beseech you, be ye willing to give, and glad to distribute. Consider
that power to do good, is a dangerous ability, unless we use it. Remember that
it is God who gives wealth, and that he expects some answerable returns of
it. Live not in such inhumane manner, as if Nabal and Judas were come again
into the world. Think frequently and warmly of the love of God and Jesus to
you. You will not deny your crumbs to the miserable, when you thankfully call
to mind that Christ gave, for you, his very flesh and his blood. Consider that,
as one great end of Poverty is Patience, so one great end of Wealth is Charity.
Think how honorable it is to make a present to the great King of the world;
And what a condescension it is in his Alsufficiency to do that good by us,
which he could, so abundantly, do without us. Forget not that you your selves
are in the body; and that you know not what calamities may fall down upon the
Earth, and what relief from others you may stand in need of. And let this be
one of your daily thoughts, that, according to your Charity, the sentence of
doomsday will pass upon you.

Secondly, When you give Alms, do not offer the sacrifice of the indiscreet,
which, it self, needs atonement. Be not uncharitable by your charity. Add not
to other evils, the great grievance of a numerous unmannag'd Poor. Remove, as
far as in you lies, the reproach of a late sharp Writer J. M. Char. p. 10.
, who says, in effect, of the people of England, that they generally use a kind
of mother-wit; and have the generosity to do great things, but not the
discretion to do them wisely.

Now, that our Charity may be discreet, let us,

First, Exercise our minds with good compass of thought. He that regards only
a few things, shall never arrive at Prudence. It is necessary for a man to
consider his own condition, to view objects of Charity with a strict and
judicious Eye, and to look round about them in all the circumstances which
attend them. The imprudent behold a show of misery, and consider no further;
and, by one motive, are prodigal of those Alms, from the misapplying of which
many other Arguments would have dissuaded them. Plotinus Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 2.
p. 11.
denies that there is prudence in God, meaning it of that wisdom which needs
consultation (...), etc.
. But it is not with man as it is with God, whose will is his wisdom. Man
knows but few things, and cannot arrive at discretion without study. And it
is worth his labor to study the art of knowing men, by inquiry and
observation; that he may secure his Charity from the wiles of the fraudulent:
and not be abused by fictitious needs, and deceive himself into a dangerous
conceit that he lends to the Lord, when he gives to those who, sometimes, put
out their very Alms to Interest. And, by degrees, a man will observe a certain
Air in ungodly mendicants, which (as great Masters as they are in the art) they
cannot easily dissemble. It is, indeed, possible for the wisest and most
cautious observer to be, sometimes, mistaken. But then he has this
satisfaction in his mind, that he was not accessory to the imposture: and it is
certain that they who are the blindest, are the soonest misled.

But blind we shall be, and daily misled, unless, in

The second place, We avoid slothful and easy credulity. Covetousness will
require, as an excuse, and as a way of saving its beloved Money, very rigid
demonstration, e're it gives. On the other hand, credulity will be satisfied
without tolerable proof, and take a lewd man's asseveration for an argument. It
behaveth it self toward the tales of Beggars, as it does toward those of idle
Pamphlets: Though it be, one day, grossly deceived by them, it will trust them
the next that follows. And where there is such blind trust, the idle will
multiply petitions and pretenses. They will tell them they have suffered deeply
by suretyship, though they never had the credit to get into Bonds. They will
profess that they have suffered extremely by fire, though they be of that
number of barbarous Thieves, who will set their Neighbors house on a flame,
that they may the more securely share in his goods. The credulous will be
deceived by those very appearances which would undeceive them, if they would
use any competent reflection, and had not a kindness for the scales on their
Eyes. I mean the naked arms and breasts of Mendicants in sharp seasons; and
their lying in the Mire, and on the Pavements, day after day. Now, what a
strength of nature is this which is not injured by those customary seeming
hardships, which would destroy the lives of many who are in sound and perfect
health; and who were not bred to tenderness but labor?

Thirdly, For the administering of Charity with Prudence, it is necessary that
even piety of inclination be directed by it. It is storied of Mr. Fox, the
Author of the English Martyrology, that he could deny no man who asked of him
an Alms in the name of Jesus. His Piety is to be highly valued; but, surely,
the weakness of it is not to be drawn into imitation. For multitudes use that
name, to whom if we are liberal we offend our Savior, who will say to them at
the final judgment, Depart from me, I know you not [or will not own you as my
Disciples] ye workers of iniquity.

Fourthly, Superstition is to be removed, that Charity may have its perfect
work. In the Eastern Countries, it seedeth Dogs, and other such Creatures, with
provisions much more convenient for men; conceiting that it is, thereby,
charitable to the souls of some of their departed Forefathers, which are
wandered into the bodies of those beasts. In those, and in diverse other parts
of the world, it erecteth Convents for Will Worship; and fixes Romish
Emissaries in such posts, that they may give disturbance to reformed
Christendom. In sum, it can do nothing discreetly, being the issue of
reverence overstrained, and of devout imagination heated into madness.

Fifthly, That Charity may be prudent, let us avoid all pride of heart which
deals out the measures of it to the unqualifyed and unworthy. It would buy
off the clamor of their tongues whose credit is so low that it can give no
authority to their slanders. It fears the calumny of penuriousness, which will
not stick long upon any man, who is not sparing in any other case, where he may
be justly liberal, and not prostitute his Riches. It would bribe the mercenary
throats of vile people, into the flattering sounds of, good Man, brave
Housekeeper, and bountiful Master. Wretched ambition, which loves the praise
of licentious Mendicants, more than the suffrage of Conscience and the praise
of God!

Sixthly, Let us arm our selves with Christian courage, that the menaces, and
revengeful looks of the sturdy and desperate, may not affright us into a
misplacing of our Alms. God will protect us in well-doing against all their
causeless threats and imprecations. And whether is it better, to fear the loose
tongue of an ungodly man, or a dreadful thunderbolt from the just hand of
Heaven?

Seventhly, Let us conquer foolish pity and irrational compassion. That
affection is put into men by nature, to keep their reason from languishing, and
not to pervert it. Yet it is daily suffered to do this disservice in cases of
Charity. There is doleful clamor in the ear, and a show of extreme misery
before the eye; and this raises, by mere mechanic force, a pang in the heart.
And nothing makes the impression, but an appearance of sadness in the object.
The image of it is dreadful; but men under the dominion of passion, consider
not whether it be a real misery, or a fiction, and a kind of spectre of
Poverty. They examine not whether all this, if real, is not the effect of vice
and sloth; and whether industry could not supply those needs for which there
Alms are asked, in a careful tone, formed, on purpose, to move compassion. But
to ease this present pang in their bowels, they give at adventure, and thereby
put a thorn into their Conscience. Some of the Primitive Christians V. Lucian.
de Morte Peregrin.
, out of the abundance of their compassion, gave Alms unwarily to many crafty
Heathens, who knew their weakness, and served themselves upon it. And by this
means, those less prudent Christians increased the Riches and the power of the
Enemies of their persons and their Holy Religion.

There are many who have either none of the miseries which they feign, or none
which they would part with. In some, loud sighs, and deep groans, and flowing
tears, and passionate complaints, are all counterfeit and artificial. And if
they move your hearts, they have more influence upon them, than they have upon
their own. It is said of two Beggars Soz. Eccl. Hift. l. 7. c. 27.
who had a design upon the Charity of Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine; that, to
move his pity, one feigned himself dead, and the other stood weeping and
mourning over him. There are many who are reconciled to very ill circumstances,
as pretenses to beg with. They would not part with their Ulcers, their scarrs,
their Crutches, left they part with their idleness and their Alms. By such ways
they extort that from the tenderness of men's hearts, which the firmness of
their reason would have preserved from abuse. But, alas! This Charity which
springs from such soft temper as cannot bear up against any thing that looks
like Tragedy, does not deserve the name of that Grace; nor shall it have its
reward. For it gives indiscreetly for its own ease, and not to please God in
the relief of just necessities. If this foolish compassion may be called
Charity, the weeping at disasters of persons in Romance, may challenge the name
of Christian pity.

These means, then, let us diligently use, that the wisdom of our minds may
guide the liberality of our hands.

So shall we justify our selves to our own reason; so shall we best promote
the common good; so shall we imitate the great and allwise God, who is good and
does good, and does all things in number and weight and measure. So shall we
provide for our selves, bags which wax not old, and lay up for our selves an
enduring treasure in the Heavens, and find mercy in that day when we shall
stand in the greatest need of it. Having in our life time shown discreet
compassion to the Lazar's who are fit objects of it, we shall, when we die, be
received into the bosom of the most blessed Jesus, to whom, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be given all Honor for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE same Author has an Excellent Treatise, viz. Of Idolatry: a Discourse, in
which is endeavored a Declaration of, its Distinction from Superstition, its
Notion, Cause, Commencement, and Progress; its Practice charged on Gentiles,
Jews, Mahometans, Gnostics, Manichees, Arians, Socinians, Romanists: As also,
of the Means which God has vouchsafed toward the Cure of it by the Shechinah
of his Son.

Printed for Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet, over against St
Dunstans Church.


