BOOKS Printed for Fincham Gardener.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer
to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether
it be Lawful to Separate from a Church upon the account of promiscuous
Congregations and mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In two Parts. 11. A Discourse of Profiting
by Sermons, and of going to hear where Men think they can profit most. 12. A
serious Exhortation, with some important Advices relating to the late Cases
about Conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church of
England. 13. An Argument to Union; taken from the true interest of those
Dissenters in England who profess and call themselves Protestants. 14. Some
Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to the Weak
Brethren. 15. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc. 16. The
Charge of Scandal, and giving Offense by Conformity, Refelled, and Reflected
back upon Separation, etc. 1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the
Reformed Church of England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question,
Where was our Religion before Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing
what is meant by it, and what Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition
is to be rejected. 3. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of
Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the
Church of England. 4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.
A DISCOURSE Concerning a GUIDE IN Matters of Faith; With respect, especially,
to the ROMISH pretense of the necessity of such a one as is infallible.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and F.
Gardener at the White-horse in Ludgatestreet. 1683.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Question, Whether a Man, without submitting his judgment to an infallible
Guide on Earth, may arrive at certainty in Matters of Faith. p. 1. The Moment
of this Question. p. 2. The Temptations to a belief of the negative part of it,
Sloth and vicious Humility. p. 2. The Resolution of the Question in six
Propositions. p. 3. Propos. 1. The True Faith and the Profession of it never
failed yet, nor shall it ever fail, in all places. 3, 4, 5. Propos. 2.
Wheresoever God requires Faith, he gives means sufficient for the obtaining of
it. 5, 6. Propos. 3. Whatsoever those means are, the Act of Assent is
ultimately resolved into each Man's reason. 6, 7, 8. Propos. 4. No true reason
directs to an infallible Guide on Earth. 8. This is proved by several
Considerations. Consid. 1. God did not set up such a Guide amongst the
Israelites. 8, 9. Consid. 2. God has no where promised such a Guide to
Christians. 9, 10. Either directly. 10, 11, 12. Or by consequence. 12, 13.
Consid. 3. God has not given direction for the finding of such a Guide; which
he would have done, had he designed the setting of him up. 13, 14. Consid. 4.
We cannot find out such a one by the strictest enumeration. 14. For 1. This
Guide is not the Church diffusive of the first Ages. 14. Nor 2. The Faith of
all the Governors of all the Primitive Churches. 14. Nor 3. An Universal or
General Council. 14, 15, 16, 17. Which whilst the Reformed deny, they do not
assume to themselves such Authority in their Synods. 17, 18. Nor 4. Is this
Guide any present Church pretending to declare the sense of the Churches of
former Ages. 18, 19. Nor 5. Is this Guide the Bishop of Rome. 20. This is
showed by the following Arguments. Arg. 1. The Romanists themselves are not at
agreement about his Authority. 20. Arg. 2. The infallible Guidance of it is
denied in the public form of the Popes Profession. 21. Arg. 3. His Plea for
this Guidance as Successor of St. Peter is insufficient. 21. Arg. 4. The
Writings of the Popes manifest their Ignorance and Fallibility. 21. Both in
lesser matters. 22, 23. And in Matters of Faith. 23.
Particularly, Pope Vigilius erred in a Matter of Faith. 23, 24. And Pope
Honorius. 24, 25, 26.
Arg. 5. There seems not, in the constituting such a Guide, either necessity or
fitness. 26.


Propos. 5. The Reformed, especially those of the Church of England, refuse not
all Ecclesiastical Guidance, though they submit not to any pretended infallible
Guide. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Nor does our Church pretend to immediate
illumination in Matters of necessary Faith. 30, 31. Nor does it exalt private
reason to the prejudice of just Authority. 31, 32. But the Unlearned have more
of the just Guidance of Authority in it, then in the Church of Rome it self. 32.
Propos. 6. Though Ecclesiastical Authority is a help of our Faith, yet the
Scripture is the only infallible rule of it. 32, 33. This Proposition is
handled in three Assertions. Assert. 1. A Man, without a Papal Guide, may know
which are the true Canonical Books. 33, 34. Assert. 2. He may also find out the
necessary Articles of Faith contained in those Books. 35. The necessary
Doctrines are therein contained. 35, 36. The sense of the words in which they
are delivered, may be found out without submission to such a Guide. 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, etc.
Assert. 3. A submission of our unprejudiced Assent to the Holy Scripture as
the Rule of Faith, is the true means to Union in Faith in the Christian Church.
p. 42.


ERRATA.
PAge 2. marg. l. 5. for, affirmative r. negative. p. 16. l. 13. for, Abots r.
Abbots. p. 17. l. 10. for doubts r. doubles. p. 18. l. 21. for Christian
Ancient r. Ancient Christian. p. 19. l. 19. for, them r. it. p. 20. l. 27. blot
out the Comma betwixt Mauritius and Burdin. p. 22. l. 13. for. Salvations r.
Salutations. p. 23. l. 2. after this add; refuse matter, It. l. 12. for nomina
r. nomine p. 24. l. 3. after* of, -- add, an. l. 25. for, rigor r. vigor. p.
26. marg. l. 3. for Consid. 5. r. Arg. 5. p. 36. marg. put p. 583. after
Critique. p. 38. l. 1. for Council r. Counsel. p. 40. l. 6. for, relectance r.
reluctance.

A DISCOURSE Concerning a GUIDE IN Matters of Faith.
THE design of this Discourse is the Resolution of the following Query.

Whether a Man who lives where Christianity is professed, The Question.
and refuses to submit his Judgment to the Infallibilty of any Guide on Earth,
and particularly to the Church or Bishop of Rome, has, notwithstanding that
refusal, sufficient means still left him whereby he may arrive at certainty in
those Doctrines which are generally necessary to the Salvation of a Christian
Man.

The moment of ^his Question.
Satisfaction in this Inquiry is of great Moment. For it relates to our great
end, and to the way which leads to it. And it nearly concerns both the
Romanists and the Reformed. If there be not such a Guide, the Estate of the
Romanists is extremely dangerous. For then the Blind take the Blind for their
unerring Leaders; and being once misled, they wander on without correcting
their Error, having taken up this first as their fixed Principle, that their
Guide cannot mistake the way. On the other hand, If God has set up in his
Church a Light so very clear and steady as is pretended; the Reformed are
guilty of great presumption, and expose themselves to great uncertainty, by
shutting their Eyes against it.

The Temptations to believe the Affirmative part of this Question.
Now, there lies before Men a double Temptation to a belief of the being of such
a Guide in the Christian Church; Sloth and Vicious Humility of Mind. Sloth
inclines Men rather to take up in an Implicit Faith, than to give themselves
the trouble of a strict Examination of things. For there is less Pain in
Credulity, then in bending of the Head by long and strict Attention and severe
Study.

Also there is a Show of Humility, in the deference which our understandings
pay unto Authority; especially to that which pretends to be, under Christ,
Supreme on Earth. Although, in the paying of it without good reason first
understood, Men are not Humble but Slavish.

The true Resolution of the Query.
But these Temptations prevail not upon honest and considerate Minds, which
inquire, without prejudice, after Truth, and submit to the Powerful Evidence of
it. Such will resolve the Question in the Affirmative; and they may reasonably
so do by considering these Propositions which I shall treat of in their order.

First, The Christian Church never yet wanted, nor shall it ever want, either
the Doctrines of necessary Faith, or the Belief and Profession of them.

Secondly, Wheresoever God requires the Belief of them, he gives means
sufficient for Information and unerring Assent.

Thirdly, Whatsoever those means are, every Man's Personal reason gives to the
Mind that last Weight which turns Deliberation into Faith.

Fourthly, The means which God has given us toward necessary Faith and the
certainty of it, is not the Authority of any Infallible Guide on Earth.

Yet, Fifthly, All Ecclesiastical Guidance is not to be rejected, in our
pursuance of the Doctrines of Christian Faith, in the finding out or stating of
which it is a very considerable help.

Sixthly, By the help of it, and Principally as it offers to us the Holy
Scriptures in the Quality of the Rule of Faith, we have means sufficient to
lead us to certainty in that Belief which is necessary to Life Eternal.

First, Prop. I.
The Acknowledgment and Profession of the necessary Doctrines of the Christian
Faith, are annexed inseparably to the Christian Church.

There is but one Faith; and according to the saying of Leo the great Nisi una
est Fides, non est. L.M.Ser. 23.
, If it be not one, it is not at all: For it cannot be contrary to it self. And
though it be but one, yet Men of differing Creeds pretend to it, as the
Merchants of Relics in the Church of Rome show, in several places, the one
seamless Coat of Christ See Ferrand. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 4. disquis. Relig.
.

This one Faith never did, nor ever shall in all places fail.

The Apostles were themselves without error both in their own assent to the
Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and in the delivery of them.

They heard the Oracles of Christ from his own mouth, and they were Witnesses
of his Resurrection; And they spoke Acts 4.19, 20.
what they had seen and heard. And they gave to the World Assurance of the
Truth, by the miraculous signs of their Apostolical Office. And if they had not
had such Assurance themselves, and could not have given proof to others of
their mission, there would have been a defect in the first promulgation of the
Gospel; and such as could not afterward have been amended. That which, at
first, had been delivered with uncertainty, would, with greater uncertainty,
have been conveyed down to after Ages; and Men, who, in process of time,
graft error upon certain Truth, would much more have grafted error upon
uncertain Opinion.

Ever since the Apostles times there has been True Faith, and the Profession of
it in the Catholic Church: And it will be so till Faith shall expire, and Men
shall see him on whom they before believed. For a Church cannot subsist without
the Fundamentals of Christianity. And Christ has Sealed this Truth with his
promise, that there shall be a Church as long as this World continues. S. Mat.
28.20.
I mean by a Church a visible Society of Christians both Ministers and People;
for public Worship on Earth cannot be invisible.

But the True Faith and the Profession of it is not fixed to any place, or to
any succession of Men in it. God's Providence has written the contrary in the
very Ashes of the Seven Churches of the lesser Asia.

Neither is any particular Church, though so far infallible in Fundamentals as
to be preserved from actual error, an infallible Rule to all other Christians.
If they follow the Doctrine of it, they err not, because it is true; but if
they follow that Church as an unerring Guide or Canon, they mistake in the Rule
and Motive of their Faith. For that particular Church which Teaches Truth,
might possibly have erred* and the Church which errs, might have shined with
the True Light. But the whole Church cannot so err in any Age; for then the
very being of a Church would cease.

Neither does it, hence, follow, that the Faith of the Roman Church, when
Luther arose, was the only true and certain Doctrine. For that Church was not
then the only visible Church on Earth. The Greek Church (for instance sake) was
than more visible than now it is, and more Orthodox: The Rich Papacy having
much prevailed upon the necessities of it by Arguments gilded with Interest.
That Church did not err in Fundamental Points; the Article of the Procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Father by the Son, which the Romans accuse of Heresy,
being easily acquitted of it, if Men, agreeing in the sense, forbear contention
about the Phrases. Besides; if our Forefathers under the Papacy embraced the
True Faith, we have it still; the Faith not being removed, but the Corruption.
Their Question therefore [ Where was your Religion before Luther?] is not more
pertinent amongst Disputers than this is amongst Husbandmen, [ Where was the
Corn before it was weeded?]

We have seen that necessary Faith is perpetual, Prop. II.
and it is as manifest that wheresoever God requires the belief of it, he
vouchsafes sufficient means for information, and unerring Assent.

Of all he does not require this belief, for to all the Gospel is not preached,
and where it is preached there are Infants, and Persons of Age so distempered
in Mind, as to remain unavoidably Children in understanding.

And though the same Sum of Doctrines is generally necessary to Salvation, yet
the Creed of all Men is not of equal length, seeing they have unequal
capacities.

But wheresoever there is a particular Society of Men, who call themselves a
Church, yet err actually in the necessary Articles of the Faith, it is certain
they were not forced into that error for want of external means. For the Just
Judge of the World would never have required Unity in the Faith upon pain of
his Eternal displeasure, if he had not given to Men Power sufficient for such
Unity. No Tyrant on Earth has been guilty of such undisguised injustice as that
is, which makes a Law for the punishment of the Blind because they miss their
way. The Art^cles of Christian Religion come not to the Mind by natural reason
but by Faith; and Faith comes by hearing or reading; and where these means are
not offered, a Man is rather an Ignorant Person than an Unbeliever. Wherefore
our Savior told the perverse Jews, Jo^. 15.22, 24.
that if the Messiah had never been revealed to them, they had not been
answerable for the Sin of Infidelity: But that, since he was come to them, and
by them despised, their Infidelity was blackned with great aggravation.

Prop. III.
The means, then, are sufficient wheresoever the end is absolutely required; but
whatsoever those means are, the Act of Assent is to be ultimately resolved into
each Man's Personal reason. For no Man can believe or assent but upon some
ground or motive which appears credible to him. He could not believe unless he
had some reason or other why he believed. When all is done (said Mr. Thorndike
To the Reader of the Dis. of Govern. of Church^s.
) Men must and will be Judges for themselves. I do not quote the saying because
it is extraordinary, but because that Learned Man said it who was careful to
pay to Authority its minutest dues. If a Man believes upon Authority, he has a
further reason for the believing of it. He is not willing to take Pains in
examining that which is proposed to him; or he thinks himself of less Ability
in understanding than those from whom he borrows his Light. If he desires
another to judge for him, his choice is determined by the Opinion he has
conceived of him. Every Man has his reason, though it be a weak one, and such
as cannot justify it self or him. Something at last turns the Balance, though
it be but a Feather.

This the Romanists own as well as the Reformed, till it touches them in the
case of a new Convert. To induce a Man of another particular Church to embrace
their Communion, they submit these weighty points to his private Judgment: What
is a True Church, and which are the marks of it? What is the Roman Church? And
whether the marks of the True Church do only belong unto the Roman? What Men or
what Books speak the sense of that Church? They tell us R. H. Guide in Controv.
in Pref. p. 3.
That the Light of a Man's own reason first serves him so far as to the
discovery of a Guide; Also that, in this discovery, the Divine Providence has
left it so clear and evident, that a sincere and unbyassed quest cannot
miscarry. But when once this Guide is found out, the Man is afterward, for all
other things that are prescribed by this Guide, to subject and resign his
reason. As if it were not as difficult to judge of such a Guide, as of his
direction.

It seems, the Roman Church is like a Cave, into which a Man has Light enough
to enter; but when once he is entered, he is in thick Darkness.

Prop. IV.
But, how subservient soever our reason may be to our Faith; The means which God
has given us toward the certain attaining of it, is not the Authority of any
infallible Guide on Earth.

This will not be disbelieved by those who weigh well the following
considerations.

Consid. I.
First, God did not set up such a constant, infallible Guide among the Jews;
though, at first, he gave Assurance to them by Miracle, that Moses had received
his Commission from him, and had brought to them the Tables which he had
Written, for their direction, with his own finger.

Some of the Sanedrim were of the Sect of the Sadduces, who erred in the
Fundamental point of a future State. Most of them erred in the Quality of the
Messiah, not considering their Scriptures so much as their Traditions. And of
the errors of the Levitical Priesthood there is, in the Old Testament, Isai.
56.10. Jez. 2.8. Ez. 7.26. C. 22.26.
frequent mention, and great complaint. And the Prophet Malachy, M^l. 2.7, 8.
as soon as he had said, The Priests lips shall preserve Knowledge, he adds
this reproof, but ye are departed out of the way.

It is true, the Israelites were, by God, directed in difficult cases to an
Assembly of Judges Deuteronomy. 17.8. to 12.
. But they were not Judges of controversies in Doctrine, but in Property. To
their sentence the People were to submit, See Levit. 4.13.
as to an expedient for Peace; though Judgment might be perverted, or mistaken.

It must be, also, confessed that God spoke to them by the Oracle of Vrim, and
that the voice of it was infallible. But its answers concerned not the
necessary Rudiments of the Mosaic Law, but emergencies in their civil affairs;
those especially of Peace and War.

But if we admit that there was under Judaism a living infallible Guide; it
does not, thence, follow, that it must be so under Christianity. For their
small precinct (the People of which were thrice in a year to come up to the
Temple) was much more capable of such a judge than the Christian Church, which
is as wide as the World. Also the new Revelation is more clear and distinct
than the old one was, and stands not in such need of an Interpreter.

Secondly, Consid. II.
God has, no where, promised Christians such a judge: He has no where said
that he has given such a one to the Christian Church. And seeing such a one
cannot be had without Gods supernatural assistance, the most knowing amongst
Men being subject both to Error and to Falsehood; it is great arrogance, whilst
the Scripture is silent, to say he is in being. And to affirm that if there
were not such a Guide, God would be wanting in means sufficient for the
maintenance of Peace and Truth, is presumptuously to obtrude the schemes of
Man's fancy upon God's Wisdom. He can Govern his Church without our methods.

Now, God has no where promised such a judge to Christian Men; though he has
promised help on Earth, and assistance from Heaven to Men diligent and sincere
in their inquiries after Truths which are necessary for them.

There are two places of Scripture, which are by some taken for Promises of
such a nature, though they were not, by the Divine Wisdom, so intended.

Of these, the First is that which was spoken by Christ unto St. Peter. S. Mat.
16.18.
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against (the Church.) Which Promise
concerns the Church in general, and the necessary Faith of it, and not any
particular persons, or places, or successions of persons in them.

And Christ does here assure us, that the Gates of the Grave shall not swallow
up the Church; that it shall not enter in at them; that it shall not die or
perrish. But he does not say he will preserve it by the means of any Earthly
Infallible Guide. He can, by other ways, continue it till time it self shall
fail.

The other place of Scripture is, the promise of Christ a little while before
his Ascension into the Heavens. S. Mat. 28.20.
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World: As long as this Age
of the Messiah shall last, and that is the last time or Age. This promise is,
indeed, made to the Apostles, and to their successors also. But it is a promise
of general assistance; and it is made upon condition that they go forth and
make Disciples of all Men of all Nations, and Baptize them, and give them
further instruction in the things which Christ gave in charge to them. And some
of the successors of the Apostles have not performed these conditions; and the
Governor of the Church of Sardis had not held fast what he had received and
heard. Revel. 3.1, 2, 3.


As God has not promised an unerring Guide, so neither has he said he has
set up such an one in any Church on Earth.

He has not said it, either directly, or by consequence.

The places which are supposed directly to affirm this, are two, and both
mistaken.

One of them is that of Christ to his Disciples, after he had given Commission
to them to preach the Gospel, S. Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me; me the infallible way and the Truth.

This Speech, if it be extended to all Ministers, it makes them all infallible
Guides. And it is certain they are so, as long as they deliver to the People
what they received from Christ. But the words are especially directed to the
seventy Disciples who were taught to preach a plain Fundamental Truth, that the
Kingdom of God was come nigh to the Jews. S. Luke 10.1, 9.
And these Disciples were able to give to the Jews a demonstration of the Truth
of that Doctrine which they taught, by miraculous signs: By healing the Sick,
Ver. 12.
and doing, among them, mighty works.

Another place, 1 Timothy 3.15.
used as an express Testimony is that in the first to Timothy to whom St. Paul
says, that the Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. But this place also
is misapplied. It seems to be spoken of that Church of Ephesus in which St.
Paul advised Timothy to behave himself with singular care: Which place has so
far failed that the lofty Building called St. John's Church, Ryc. of the Greek
Chapter p. 44.
is now become a Turkish Mosch. But if it were spoken in a general sense, it
would amount only to this meaning: A Christian Church is like a Pillar
sustained by a Pedestal on which a writing is so fixed, that all who pass by
may see it. It is (as Jerusalem once was to the Heathen-World) a City on a
Hill: It is a visible Society which gives notice to Jews and Gentiles of
Christianity, and is instrumental to awaken their observation, and by their
sense to prepare the way to their belief. For, this advertisement being so
publicly given to them, they have fair occasion of examining the grounds of
Christian Truth, which when they find, they will be induced to build upon them.
In this sense likewise, though not in this alone, Apostolical Men were called
Lights and Pillars. In the Book of the Revelation Revel. 3.12.
this promise is made to him who persevereth in his Christianity,
notwithstanding the cross which it brings upon him. Him will I make a Pillar in
the Temple of my God, and I will write my name upon him, and the name of his
God, and the name of the City of his God which is new Jerusalem [or the
Christian Church.]

And S. Chrysostom In 1 Cor. 9.2. -- (...), etc.
gives S. Paul the Titles of the Light of the Churches, the Foundation of the
Faith, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. The Governors of the Church do
ministerially exhibit Christian Truth; they do not by mere Authority impose it.

Among the Places which are said to prove, by good consequence, that there is a
Living Guide of Faith, that in the eighteenth of St. Matthews Gospel S. Mat.
18.15, 16, 17.
is the Principal.

There our Savior, requires his Followers, if their Brethren persisted in
their offenses, to tell it to the Church, and to esteem them no longer Members
of their Society, if they despised the Sentence of it. From whence they
conclude with strange Inadvertence, that such a Decree is therefore infallible.

See Deuteronomy. 17.6.
But our Lord speaks of their Brothers Trespasses against them, and not of his
Heresy: And of the Discipline, and not of the Doctrine, either of the
Synagogue or the Church. In which case if we submit, even where there is error
in the Sentence, for Peace sake, and because we are come to the last Appeal; we
worthily sacrifice private Good to public Order. And such Submission is safe
in point of property, though not in point of Doctrine; for we may, without Sin,
depart from our property, but not from our Faith.

Now, much of this that has been said in order to the explication of the
foregoing places, might have been well omitted, if I had designed this little
Discourse for the use only of such Romanists as had been conversant with the
writings of the Fathers. For then I should have needed only to have cited those
Ancients, and showed that their sense of these several places was plainly
different from the modern interpretations of the Church Men of Rome. And, by
this way of arguing, they are self-condemned. For they fall according to their
own Rule of expounding Scripture by the unanimous consent of the Primitive
Fathers, who with one voice, speak another sense. Those who doubt of this may
receive satisfaction from the Learned Letters of Monsieur Launoy. Launoy in
Epist. ad Carol. magistrum ad Jacob. Bevil. ad. Guil. Voell. ad Raim.
Formentinum in 5. par. Epist.


If God had promised an infallible Guide, Consid. III.
or told us he had given one to his Church, he would, doubtless, have added
some directions for the finding of him. For, to say in general, you shall have
a Star which will always Guide you without all dangerous error; and not to
inform us in what part of the Firmament it is to be seen, is to amuse rather
than to promise.

Now, God has no where given us such direction. He has no where pointed us to
this Church, or that Council; to this Person, or that Local succession of Men.
He has not said the Guide is at Antioch, or Jerusalem; at Nice, or
Constantinople; at Rome or Avignon.

You will say, he has directed us to St. Peter. I answer, no more than to the
rest of the Apostles, to whom he gave equal power in their Ordination; Joh.
20.21.
All of whom he made equally Shepherds of the Flock; S. Mat. 9.36. C. 10.6. 2.
Pet. 5.2.
to all of whom he gave equal Commission to make Proselytes of all Nations. S.
Mat. 28.16, 17, 18, 19.
And in this sense St. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 9.2. (...), etc.
affirmed concerning St. Paul that the whole World [or the World of the Roman
Empire] was his Diocese. You will reply, that he promised, on him particularly
upon this Rock, or Stone, this Kipha (a Syriac Word of the Masculine Gender See
R. H. Guide in Controv. Dis. 1. p. 5. and Socin. in Loc.
) this Peter; to build his Church. I answer, the Ancients took the Word as
Feminine, S. Hill. de Trin. l. 6. dixit Petrus, Tu es filius Dei, etc. super
hanc igitur Confessionis Petram Ecclesiae edificatio est v. Launoy in Epist ad
Voellum.
and understood it rather of his Confession than of his Person. If it was
spoken of his Person, it was spoken by way of Emphasis, not Exclusion; for
there were twelve Foundations Revel. 21.14. Ephesians. 2.20.
of these he might be called the first, having first preached the Gospel to
Jews and Gentiles, Act. 2.14, 41, 47.
the Eleven standing up with him, and he speaking as the Mouth of the
Apostolical College.

We cannot, by the strictest ennumeration, find out any living infallible Guide
existing in any Age after St. Peter in the Christian Church.

IV. Consid.
1. This Guide could not be the Church diffusive of the first Ages. For the
suffrages of every Christian were never gathered. And if we will have their
sense, they must rise from the dead and give it us.

2. This Guide cannot be the Faith (as such) of all the Governors of all the
Primitive Churches. The sum of it was never collected. There were anciently
general Creeds, but such as especially related to the Heresies then on foot;
and who can affirm, upon grounds of certainty, that each Bishop in the World
consented to each Article, or to each so expressed?

3. This Guide is not a Council perfectly free and universal. For a Guide which
cannot be had, is none. If such a Council could assemble, it would not err in
the necessaries of Faith. For there cannot be a regular Flock without a
Shepherd; and if all the Spiritual Shepherds in the World should at once, and
by consent, go so much astray; the whole Flock of the Church Catholic would be
scattered. And that would contradict the promise of Christ the Supreme,
Faithful, Infallible Pastor. But there never was yet an universal Council
properly so called: Neither can we suppose the probability of it but by
supposing the being of one Temporal Christian Monarch of the World who might
call, or suffer, it. In the Councils called General, if we speak comparatively,
there were not many Southern or Western Bishops present at them. It was thus,
at that first Ecumenical Council, the Council of Nice; though, in one sacred
place (as Eusebius Eusebius. l. 3. vit. Constable. c. 7.* 8. p. 487. Socrat. E. H. l.
c. 8. p. 19.
has noted) there were assembled, Syrians and Cilians, Phoenicians, and
Arabians; Paloestinians Egyptians, Theboeans, Libyans, Mesopotamians; a
Persian, a Scythian Bishop; and many others from other Countries. But there was
but one Bishop for Africa, one for Spain, one for Gaul; two Priests as Deputies
of the infirm and Aged Bishop of Rome. Whilst (for Instance sake) there were
seventeen Bishops for the small Province of V. Council. Lab^. Tom. 2. p. 50, etc.
Isauria; yet such Councils are very useful; such we reverence; but God did not
set them up as the only and the infallible Guides of Faith. If these were such
Guides, what Guided the Church which was before them? By what rule was Ebion
judged before the Council of Nice? How can we be infallibly Guided by them in
Controversies of Faith not determined by them; nay not brought before them; nay
scarce moved till these latter days? Such (for the purpose) are the
Controversies about the virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ, and of Justification
by the Faith of mere recumbence upon his Merits. Or how shall a private Man who
errs in the Faith, be delivered from his Heresy, seeing he may die some years
ere a Council can assemble, or, being assembled, can form its decrees. Arius
vented his Heresy about ten years before the Council of Nice was called for the
suppressing of it. And soon after he had given vent to it, it spread throughout
Egypt and Lybia and the upper Thebes, as Socrates Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 6.
p. 9.
has reported: And, in a short time many other Provinces and Cities were
infected with the contagion of it. And, in the pretended Council of Trent, no
less than five Popes were successively concerned; and it lasted, in several
places longer than two legal lives of a Man. From A. 1545. to A. 1563.
There was, indeed, a Canon in the Western Church V. Council. Constable. sess. 39.
for the holding of a Council once in the space of each ten years: But that
Canon has not been, hitherto, obeyed; and as affairs stand in the Church, it is
impracticable. For the Pope will exclude all the Greek and Reformed Bishops: he
will crowd the Assembly with Bishops of his own Creation; and with Abots also;
he will not admit of former Councils unless they serve his purpose; not so much
as that of Nice it self. V. Greg. magn. Ep. 6.31. Leo. 1. Ep. 53. Gelas. 1. Ep.
13.
He will be the Judge, though about his own Supremacy. He will multiply
Italians and others who, upon Oath Council. Labb. Tom. 10. p. 23, 379. and
Pontific. Roman.
owe their votes to him. He will not hold a Council upon the terms approved by
all Romish Princes. Nor did they agree at their last Council; the Emperor
would not send his Bishops to Bologna, nor the French King his to Trent. And
though the French Church believed the Doctrines of that Synod, yet they did not
receive them from the Authority of it, but they embraced them as the former
Doctrines of the Roman Church. And the Parisian Faculty A. D. 1542. in Coll.
Sorb. See Richer. H. Conc. general. vol. 4. p. 162, 163, etc.
prepared the way to the Articles of Trent.

Notwithstanding all this, we firmly believe that at least the first four
general Councils did not err in Faith; and it is pious to think that God would
not suffer so great a temptation in the Church on Earth. Yet still we believe
those Councils not to be infallible in their constitution, but so far as they
followed an infallible rule. For the greatest Truth is not always with the
greatest number: And great numbers may appear on contrary sides. The Council of
Constantinople under Constantine Copronymus, consisting of three hundred thirty
eight Bishops, decreed against the use of Images in Churches. Yet the second
Synod of Nice consisting of about three hundred and fifty Bishops determined
for it. And, a while after, in the West, the Council of Frankford consisting of
about three hundred Bishops, reversed that decree: And, after that, the Council
of Trent did re-establish it; though there the voting Persons were not fifty.
With such uncertain doubts of belief must they move who follow a Guide in
Religion without reference to a further rule.

But, Object.
here, there is offered to us, by the Guide in Controversies, R.H. Annot. on D.
Still. Answer. p. 82, 83.
an Objection, of which this is the sum. The fifth Canon of the Church of
England does declare that the thirty nine Articles were agreed upon for the
avoidance of the diversities of opinions and the establishing of consent
touc^ing true Religion. Consent touching true Religion is consent in Matter, of
Faith. Establishing of consent relates both to Layety and Clergy. The third
and fourth Canons of 1640. decree the Excommunication of those who will not
abjure their holding Popery and Socinianism. The Re^ormed Churches in France
teach the like Doctrine, threatening to cut them off from the Church who
acqu^e^ce not in the resolution of a National Synod. Art. 31. Chapter 5. du
consistoire. si un ou plusieurs, etc.
The same course was taken with the Remonstrants in the Synod of Dor^. Syn.
Dord. sess. 138.
Wherefore Protestants ought not to detract from the Authority of general
Councils, whilst they assume to themselves so great a Power in their particular
Synods.

The force of this Objection is thus removed. Answer.
Every Church has Power of admitting or excluding Members, else it has not
means sufficient to its end, the order and concord of its Body. Every
particular Church ought to believe that it does not err in its definitions; for
it ought not to impose any known error upon its Members. But though it believes
it does not err, it does not believe it upon this reason, because God has made
it an infallible Guide; but rather for this, because it has sincerely and with
Gods assistance followed a rule which is infallible. And, upon this
supposition, it imposes Doctrines, and excludes such as with contumacy
dissent from them See Artic. 20, 21, 22.


4. This Guide is not the present Church declaring to particular Christians the
sense of the Church of former Ages. How can this declaration be made, seeing
Churches differ, and each Church calls it self the true one, and pretends to
the Primitive pattern. The Church of Rome has, on her side, the suffrages of
all the Councils and Fathers, the first, the middle the last, if Campian the
Jesuit may be believed Camp. Rat. 3. p. 180. Rat. 5. p. 185.
On the other hand Monsieur Larroque has Written a Book of the Conformity of
the Protestant Churches in France with the Discipline of the Christian Ancient
Church, taking it for granted that their Doctrine was Catholic. And we
likewise pretend, both to the Doctrine and Discipline of it. All of us cannot
be in the right. The Roman Church, without any proof, calls her self the
Church Catholic; and she pretends to conveigh to us the sense of the Ancient
Fathers and Councils; which sense was that they understood formerly by the word
Tradition. Lib. diurn. Pontif. p. 35. etenim hujus Apostolicae Traditionis
normam quam venerandam Sanctorum 318. Patrum Con^ilium quod in Nicaea, etc. and
p. 43. hujusmodi Evangelicam Traditionem.
And in this sense a Romanist said of Pope Honorius Ant. Dezallier in Histor.
Monoth. p. 123.
, that he had broken the rule of Tradition. But how can we esteem that Church a
faithful representer of the sense of the Ancients whilst the Reformed consult
the Ancients with equal ability, and find a contrary sense in them? Whilst the
Church of Rome, Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. decr. 1.
by a kind of Ecclesiastical Coinage, stampeth Divine Authority upon Books
esteemed by the Councils and Fathers to be Apochryphal? V. constit. Apost. can.
Apost. conc. Laod. conc. Nic. 1. S. Hieron. Prolog. etc. Eusebius. E. H. l. 4. c.
26. p. 149. Cron. l. 2. etc.
Whilst it has forged decrees of Popes, V. Blondelli Pseudo-Isodorum.
and (like a deceitful Gibeonite) rendered that which was really new, in
appearance old and moldy, on purpose to promote imposture? How does it give us
the sense of the Ancients, when it owneth what it formerly disowned as
Canonical, the Epistle to the Hebrews V. S. Hieron. in Isai. c. 6.8.
? When it takes away the Cup which Pope Gelasius called a grand Sacrilege
Gratian in de Consecr. did. 2. cap. 2.
? When it now rejects the Communicating of Infants which, in former times,
was esteemed by many a very necessary point? When a former Pope Gregory
condemns the Title of Universal pastor as Antichristian, and a latter insists
upon it as the choicest flour in the papal Prerogative? When St. Austin S. Aug.
tract. 30. in Job. and tract. 50.
and from him the very Breviary Brev. Romans Dom. infra. oct. Asc. 3. noct. lect.
7. p. 440.
shall expound Christ's promise, of being always with his Church, of the
presence of his Divinity and of his Spirit, and not of his Body: And Pope
Innocent the third shall interpret them as meant also of his corporal presence
Innoc. 3. Mist. miss. l. 4. p. 196.
?

And, if the Roman Church falsifyeth written Tradition, how shall we trust her
for Oral? And how and at what time did that Oral Tradition remove from Greece
to Rome where the Greek Church, which it allows to have been once possessed
of the true Tradition, is accused of Heresy? At the same time (I suppose) that
the Chapel of the Virgin removed from Nazareth to Loretto. This principle of
Oral Tradition is most uncertain to their Judges; and to those to whom they
offer it, it is most obscure. It is a principle on which they can serve a
purpose, in justifying novel Doctrines as Oral Traditions not known to any but
the Roman Church, which pretends to the custody of them.

5. God has not set up any one Person in the Catholic Church in the Quality
of an unerring Guide in the Christian Faith. The Bishops of Rome who pretend to
this Prerogative, do but pretend: It is a tender point; and the Pope's Legates,
in the Council of Trent, H. Conc. Trid. l. 2.
were enjoined to give forth this Advertisement, that the Fathers, upon no
account whatsoever, should touch it, or dispute about it. They who examine it,
will soon reject it as false and useless.

Arg. I.
And, 1. Whether the Pope be or be not the Guide, the Men of the Roman Communion
are exposed to dangerous uncertainty. For, it is not yet determined amongst
them, whether they are to follow the Pope, with, or without, or against a
Council. Yet a Pope has owned a Council which deposed other Popes, and by
decree, set it self above them, or rather vindicated the superiority due to it.
Thus Martin the fifth received the Papal Mitre from the Council of Constance,
after it had deposed Gregory the twelfth, Benedict the thirteenth, and John the
twenty third. Again, there have been, by the account given us in their own
Historians, See the Index of Onuphrii, vit. Pontif. ed. Colon. 1610.
more than twenty formed Schisms in that Church; two or more Popes pretending
at the same time to the infallible Chair, and each of them not being without
their followers and giving Holy Orders. And at this time there is risen an
Apologist Steph. Baluz. in miscellan. l. 3. p. 471. to 514.
for Mauritius, Burdin or Gregory the eighth, though he was ejected by the
Roman Church, which received Gelasius into his place; Burdin being disliked by
them as a Creature of Henry the Emperor. This Schism (says St. Bernard S.
Bern. Ep. 219.
) distracted that Church and gave it a wound only not incurable. And Baluzius
Baluz. ibid. p. 514. difficile tum erat, etc.
professes that it was then difficult to understand which of the two, Gregory
or Gelasius, was the Legitimate successor of Pope Paschal. Now, how useless,
to them, is the pretense of a Guide, when they want some other Guide who should
tell them which of the pretenders they may securely follow?

Secondly, Arg. II.
the Popes themselves, in their Solemn Profession, suppose themselves liable to
the misleading of the People even in Matters of Faith. For, having owned the
Faith of the Six general Councils, Lib. diurn. Pontif. 2. professio fidei. p.
43. -- Vnde and districti Anathematis interdictioni subjicimus, si quis unquam,
se^ n^s, sive est Al^us, qui novum aliquid praesumat contra bujusin^di
Evangel^cam Traditionem, and Orthodox^efid^i, Christianaeque Religionis
integritatem, etc.
They further profess themselves and others to be subject to an Anat^ema, if
they advance novelty contrary to the aforesaid Evangelical Tradition, and the
integrity of the Orthodox and Christian Faith.

Thirdly, Arg. III.
If the Pope challenges this Power of infallible Guidance, he must lay claim
to it by his succeeding of St. Peter in the Chair Apostolical. But, then, by
equal reason, the successors of each Apostle may challenge the office of an
infallible Guide. For the Power which Christ gave to St. Peter, he gave to the
rest: It was not special. And, for the Bishops of Antioch who first succeeded
St. Peter, they have a much fairer pretense than those of Rome. The Truth is,
Jerusalem was properly the Mother Church: Though Rome was the Imperial City;
and if, by this means, the Popes had not sat higher, they would not have
pretended to see further than others.

Fourthly, Arg. IV.
those who have considered the writings of many Popes, and the decrees made by
them, have found no reason to lay their Faith at their Golden Sandal. It is
manifest to every Learned Man that the Eyes of the Pope are not
(metaphorically) like those of Augustus in which (it is said) there appeared a
brightness like that of the Sun. If we had more of their History, and more of
their Writings, we should find more of their errors. They have showed both
ignorance and extravagance in opinion, and error in the Faith it self. There
are not, perhaps, weaker or more absurd passages in any Ecclesiastical Writer,
than we may find in the works of Pope Innocent the third, who was called the
Wonder of the World Mat. par. A. 1217. stupor mundi.
. He says of Subdeacons that they represented the Nethinims Ezra. 8.20.
(or Nathinnims as he calls them;) and that Nathaniel was one of that Order.
Innoc. 3. Mist. missae l. 1. c. 2. fol. 158.
That the Pope does not use a Pastoral rod, because St. Peter sent his Staff to
Eucharius the first Bishop of Treves, to whom Maternus succeeded, who, by the
same Staff, was raised from the dead. Innoc. 3. ibid. c. 62. fol. 165.
That the People have seven Salvations in the Mass, in order to the expelling
the seven deadly Sins, and receiving the seven fold Grace of God. Ibid. l. 2.
c. 24. fol. 170.
That an Epistle, signifying in Greek an Over-sending or supererogation, the
word agrees very well to the Apostolical Epistles, which are superadded to the
Gospel Ibid. c. 29. fol. 171.
He allots to each Article of the Apostolical and Constantinopolitan Creeds, a
particular Apostle, and finds the mystery in all things that are twelve in
number. For example sake, in the twelve loaves of Shewbread; in the twelve
Tribes; twelve hours, twelve Months.

He gives this reason why Water is by the Bishop mixed with Wine in the Holy
Chalice; because it is said in the Revelation, that many Waters signify many
People, and that Christ shed his Blood for the People Ibid. c. 58. fol. 177.
He says that Judas was not at the Sacrament Ibid. l. 4. c. 13. fol. 189.
because he was not to drink it new with Christ in his Kingdom, which
privilege he had promised to all the partakers. He teaches that Mice eat only
the Shows of Consecrated Bread Ibid. c. 16. fol. 190.
He professes rather to venerate Sacraments than to pry into them Ibid. c. 19.
because it is written in Exodus the twelfth, concerning the Paschal Lamb, Eat
not of it raw, nor sodden at all with Water, but roast with Fire. I have not
narrowly ransacked the plaits of the Popes Vestments, for this is obvious
enough; and so were a great many other sayings of equal weakness; but I am
weary of the folly of them. There have been other Popes, also, injudicious even
to duncery. Eugenius the third approved of the Prophesies or Enthusiastic
Dreams of Hildegardis, in the Synod of Tryers, as Inspirations. Pope Zachary
judged the true Doctrine of Antipodes, to be heretical in the case of the more
Learned and Knowing Virgilius Epist. Zach. p. ad Bonifac. inter op. M. Velseri.
in l. 5. Rer. Boic. p. 148. de perversa autem [Virgilii] Doctrina, quam contra
dominum and animam suam locmutus est, quod scil. alius mundus and alii homines
sub terra sint, ali^squeSol and Luna, si convictus fuerit ita consiteri, hunc
accito Concilio ab Ecclesia pelle Sacerdotii honor privatum.
Herein the Pope committed a greater error than the poor Priest who Baptized in
nomina Patria and filia and Spiritus Sancta Velser. op. Ibid. p. 147.
and whose lack of Latin Boniface the German Apostle would have punished by the
Rebaptization of his Proselytes, if the said Virgilius had not, by application
to that Pope, prevented it. It is true, Virgilius was accused as an Heretic
who had set up another Sun and another Moon, as well as another World of Men
whose feet were opposite to ours. But Velserus himself Vels. Ibid. p. 149.
has the ingenuity to confess that this was meant only of the Sun and Moon as
shining to our Antipodes, as well as to us: And that the accusation was framed
by ignorant Men who had not the acuteness to understand the Globular form of
the Earth, and the scheme of the proposer. Neither had Pope Zachary himself
sagacity enough to discern the nature of this ridiculous charge. He who can
mistake Truth for Heresy, may mistake Heresy for Truth.

Now that Popes have erred not only in lesser things, but even in Matters of
Faith, is plain from History. I will instance, only, in Vigilius, and Honorius,
for-bearing to speak of Liberius and diverse others who swerved from the truly
Ancient Catholic Faith.

Pope Vigilius framed a Constitution in favor of the three Chapters or
Nestorian-Writings of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and
Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus. This Constitution was published by Cardinal Baronius
Baron. Annal. A. 553. N. 48. ed. Colon. p. 486.
out of Ancient Manuscript in the Vatican Library: And he calls it a Decree Id.
Ibid. N. 218. p. 419.
in defense of these Chapters. In this Decree the Pope does not only justify
these Heretical Writings, but, with the Followers of Theodorus, he falsely
charge upon the Council of Chalcedon the Epistle of Ibas Id. An. 553. N. 192.
p. 511.
, and calls it Orthodox. This charge the Fathers of the fifth general Council
Conc. Constant. 2. Collat. 6.
show to be unjust and false. That Council condemns those three Chapters as
Heretical. And, together with them, it condemns Defin. Conc. col. 8.
Pope Vigilius and others under the name of Sequaces or Followers of Nestorius
and Theodorus. Baronius himself acknowledges that the decree of that Council
was set up against the decree of that Pope Baron. Annal. 553. N. 212. p. 417.
-- Act. mque est (ut apparet) adversus Vigihi constitutum, licet pre reverenta
ipsum non nominaverint.
These Chapters had not been condemned if they had not contained in them the
Nestorian-Heresie. The Epistle of Ib^^ does, in particular manner, extol The
d^r^^. And the Council affirms concerning his Creed, that the Father of lies
composed it. And it denounces a ^^rse against both the Composer and the
Believers of it. Yet doubtless, these writings were, in themselves,
inconsiderable enough. But the Council opposed them with such rigor, because
the Faction had made them very popular, and advanced them into the Quality of a
kind of Bible of the Party.

For Pope Honorius, he fell into the Heresy of the Monothelites. Dezall. Hist.
mon. scrut. 5. p. 192, 193. Altera phrasis Honoriana long dificilior, munime
tamen dissimulanda, ea est, quod dicat aperte. Unde and unam voluntatem fatemur
dom. nostri Jesu Christi.
That is, of those who held that there is but one Will in both the Natures of
Christ. This Doctrine he published in his Epistles. This he declared in the
sixth general Council Syn. 6. act. 13. See Richer. Hist. Conc. General. vol. 1.
p. 569. etc.
he is, in the seventh Council Syn. 7. Act. ult. p. 886. Con. in Labb. Richer.
H. Conc. Genesis vol. 1. p. 658. Ad calc. ejusd. Act. 7. in ^mn. editionibus
Council. legitur Epist. Synod. quam Tarasius, etc. -- Et diserte narrat cunctos
Patres -- Honorium damnasse.
condemned as a Monothelite. And he was expressly anathematized for Confirming
the Wicked Doctrine of Sergius.

The guilt of Heresy in Honorius, is owned in the Solemn Profession of Faith
made by the Popes at their entrance on the Papacy Lib. diurn. Pontif. Conf.
fid. 2. p. 41. Autores vero novi haeretici dogmatis, Sergion, Pyrrhum, Paulum,
and Petrum Episcopos, una cum Honorio (qui pravis little assertionibus fomentum
impendit) pariterque and Theodorum Pharamitanum, and Cyrum Alexandrinum, cum
eorum imitatoribus, etc.
This matter is so manifest that Melchior Canus Melch. Can. Loci com. l. 6. c.
ult. p. 242, 243. etc.
professes, no Sophistry is artful enough to put the Color of a plausible
defense upon it. A late Romanist has undertaken to write the History of the
Monothelites Anton. Dezallier. Hist. Mon. Par. 1678.
; and the Defense of Honorius seems to be the principal motive to that
undertaking. Yet so great is the power of Truth, and such, in this case is the
plainness of it, that, in the Apologist himself, we find these concessions:
That the Pope Id. ib. p. 224, 225, 226.
was condemned by the Council, and that the Council was not to be blamed 218.
; that Pope Leo the second owned both the Council and the Sentence, and that
Honorius was Sentenced as an Heretic. Id. p. 220.
He would abate this guilt by saying P. 207, 208.
that Honorius erred as a private Person, and not as Head of the Church,
because his Epistle was hortatory, and not compulsive. It is true, he erred not
as Head of the Church, for such he was not, neither as such was he owned. But
he erred as a public person and with Heretical obstinacy. For Pope Leo, as he
notes, said concerning him, that he had made it his business to betray and
subvert the Holy Faith. Id. p. 122. profana proditione immaculatam fidem
subvertere conatus est. -- Flammam confovit, p. 123.


Now this matter of Fact suffices for the refuting all the fallacious
reasonings of the patrons of Papal infallibility. For all must agree that they
are not unerring Guides who actually err. The Sieur de Balzac Socr. (...). p.
4^0.
mocks at the weakness of one of the Romish Fathers who offered four reasons to
prove that the Duke D' Espernon was not returned out of England: And offered
them to a Gentleman who had seen him since his return.

C^^^id. V.
There seems no sitness in the constituting of such a Guide; nor any necessity
for it.

Had it been agreeable to Gods Wisdom, his Wisdom would not have been wanting
to it self. God having made Man a Reasonable Creature, would not make void the
use of deliberation, and the freedom of his judgment. There is no virtue in the
Assent, where the Eye is forced open, and the Light held directly to it. It is
enough that God* the rewarder of them who believe, has given Men sufficient
faculties, and sufficient means.

And, seeing Holiness is as necessary to the pleasing of God, and to the peace
of the World, as Union in Doctrine (to which there is too frequently given a
lifeless Assent;) seeing there must be Christian Obedience as long as there is
a Church; seeing (as the Guide in Controversy R. H. Annot. on D. St. Answ. p.
81.
himself urges) the Catholic Church and all the parts of it are believed, in
the Creed, to be Holy as well as Orthodox; We ask not the Romanists an
impertinent Question when we desire them to tell us, why a means to
infallibility in the judgment, rather than irresistibleness in the pious choice
of the Will, is to be, by Heaven, provided in the Church? Both seem a kind of
Destination of equal necessity.

Prop. V.
But, though the Reformed, especially those of the Church of England, see no
necessity for an infallible Guide, nor believe there is one on the face of the
Earth, yet they do not reject all Ecclesiastical Guidance; but allow it great
place in matters of Discipline and Order; and some place also (though not that
of an unerring Judge) in Matters of Faith.

At the beginning of the Reformation the Protestants, though they refused the
judgment of the Pope their Enemy, yet they declined not the determination of a
Council. And, in the Assembly at Ausburgh, the Romanists and Protestants agreed
in a Council as the Umpire of their public difference. At this the Pope was so
alarumed (says the Sieur de Mezeray Hist. Fran. A. 1530.
) that he wrote to the Kings of France and England, that he would do all they
would desire, provided they hindered the calling of a Council.

In the Reformation of the Church of England great regard was had to the
Primitive Fathers and Councils. And the aforesaid French Historian was as much
mistaken in the affairs of Our Church, when he said of our Religion, that it
was a medly of the Opinions of Calvin and Luther Mez. Hist. A. 1548.
as he was afterward in the affairs of our State, when he said King James was
elected at the Guild Hall King of England Id. ib. A. 1603.


The Romannists represent us very falsely, whilst they fix upon us a private
Spirit, as it stands in opposition to the Authority of the Catholic Church.

Mr. Alabaster See I. Racsters 7 motives of W. A. p. 11, 12.
expresses one motive to his conversion to the Roman Church in these Words:
Weigh together the Spouse of Christ, with Luther, Calvin, Melancthon:
Ecumenical Councils with private opinions. The Reverend and Learned Fathers
with Arius, Aetius, Vigilantius, Men always in their time Burned for Heretics
[of which words, the former are false reasoning, the latter are false
History.]The Bishop of Meaux Confer. avec M. Claude. p. 110.
reasons after the same fallacious manner, Supposing a Protestant to be of this
persuasion that he can understand the Scriptures better than all the rest of
the Church together, of which persuasion he says very truly, that it exalts
Pride, and removes Docility.

The Guide in Controversies R. H. Annot. on D. St. Answ. p. 84.
puts the Question wrong in these terms. Whether a Protestant, in refusing the
submission of his judgment to the Authority or Infallibility of the Catholic
Church in her Councils, can have, in several Articles of necessary Faith,
wherein the sense of Scripture is controverted, as sure a Foundation of his
Faith, as he who submits his judgment to the foresaid Authority, or also
Infallibility? Here the Catholic Church is put in place of the Roman,
Authority and Infallibility are joined together; and it is suggested
dishonestly concerning the Reformed, that they lay aside the Authority of the
Catholic Church in her general Councils. Authority may be owned where there is
no infallibility; for it is not in Parents Natural or Civil: Yet both teach and
govern us.

If others reject Church Authority, let them who are guilty of such disorderly
irreverence, see to it. The Christians of the Church of England are of another
Spirit. Of that Church this is one of the Articles: The Church has power to
decree Rites and Ceremonies, Art. 20.
and Authority in Controversies of Faith. There is a Question (says Mr. Seldom
Mr. Seldom in his Colloquies; a Ms. in the word Church. Sect. 5.
) about that Article concerning the power of the Church, whether these words
[of having power in Controversies of Faith] were not stolen in. But, it is most
certain, they were in the Book of Articles that was confirmed; though, in some
Editions, they have been left out. They were so in Dr. Mocket's Doctr. and
Polit. Eccl. Ang^. A. 1617. p. 129.
; but he is to be considered in that Edition as a private Man. Now this Article
does not make the Church an infallible Guide in the Articles of Faith, but a
Moderator in the Controversies about Faith. The Church does not assume that
Authority to it self in this Article which, in the foregoing Artic. 19.
, it denied to the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch and Rome. When
perverse Men will raise such Controversies, who is so fit, for Peace sake, to
interpose, as that Church where the Flame is kindled? There can be no Church
without a Creed; and each particular Church ought to believe her Creed to be
true, and, by consequence, must exercise her Authority in the defense of
presumed Truth. Otherwise she is not true to her own constitution. But still
she acts under the caution given by St. Augustine. S. Aug. d^ verb. Dom. super
Mat. Ser. 16.
You bind a Man on Earth: Take heed they be just bonds in which you retain him.
For Justice will break such as are unjust in sunder. And whilst the Church of
England challenges this Authority, she does not pretend to it from any
supernatural gift of infallibility, but so far only as she believes she has
sincerely followed an infallible Rule. For of this importance are the next
words of the Article before remembered. -- It is not Lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word written. -- And besides the same
it ought not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation
Art. 20.


After this manner the Church of England asserteth her own Authority; and she
runs not into any extreme about the Authority of Councils, or the Catholic
Church.

We make Confession of the Ancient Faith expressed in the Apostolical, Nicene,
or Constantinopolitan and Athanasian Creeds. The Canons of forty reject the
Heresy of Socinus as contrary to the first four general Councils Can. 5.
Our very Statute-Book has respect to them in the adjudging of Heresy. 1
Eliz. 1. Sect. 36.
Yet our Church still teaches concerning them Art. 21.
, that things by them ordained have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it
may be declared that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

When Controversies arise, especially when the doubts concern not so much the
Article of Faith it self, as the Modes of it, we grant to such venerable
Assemblies a Potiority of Judgment. Or if we assent not, yet for Peace sake we
are humbly silent: We do not altogether refuse their Umpirage. We think their
Definitions good Arguments against unquiet Men who are chiefly moved by
Authority. We believe them very useful in the Controversies betwixt us and the
Church of Rome; and as often as they appeal to Primitive Fathers and Councils;
to Fathers and Councils we are willing to go with them, and to be tried by
those who were nigher to the Apostles, in the Quality of Witnesses rather than
Judges. We believe that in matters of Truth of which we are already well
persuaded, there may be added by the Suffrages of Councils and Fathers, a
degree of Corroboration to our Assent. In sum we say with S. Aust^ne Ep. 118.
Council. in Eccl. Dei saluberrimam esse Authoritatem.
that there is of Councils in the Church of God a most wholesome [though not an
infallible] Authority. And if S. Gregory Naz^anzen never saw (as he says) a
happy effect of any Synod, Greg. Naz. Ep. 42, ad Procopium.
this came not to pass from the Nature of the means as not conducive to that
end, but from the looseness of Government, and the depraved manners of the Age
in which he lived: For such were the times of Valens the Emperor.

It is true, there are some among us, though not of us, who, with disdainful
insolence, contemn all Authority; even that of the Sacred Scripture it self.
These pretend to an infallible Light of immediate and personal Revelation. It
has happened according to the Proverb, every Man of them has a Pope within him.
Henry Nicholas puffed up many vain ignorant people with this Proud Imagination.
Hetherington a Mechanic, about the end of the Reign of King James, advanced
this notion of Personal Infallibility. His followers believed they could not
err in giving deliberate Sentence in Religion See D. Dennisons white wolf.
And this was the principle of Wynstanley and the first Quakers, though the
Leaders, since they were embodied, have in part forsaken it.

But these Enthusiasts have entitled the Holy Spirit of God to their own
Dreams. They have pretended to Revelations which are contrary to one another.
They can be Guides to themselves only, because they cannot by any supernatural
sign prove to others that they are inspired.

And such Enthusiasm is not otherwise favored in the Church of England then by
Christian pity, in consideration of the infirmity of Humane Nature; but in the
Church of Rome, it has been favored to that Degree, that it has founded many
Orders and Religious Houses, and given Reputation to some Doctrines, and
canonized not a few Saints amongst them. The Inspiration of S. Hildegardis, S.
Catharine of Siena, S. Teresa, and many others seems to have been vapor
making impression on a devout fancy: Yet the Church of Rome in a Council under
Leo the Tenth, has too much encouraged such distemper as prophecy Conc. Lat.
sess. 11. A. 1516. inter Labb. Conc. Max. p. 291. Caeterum si quibusdam eorum
Dominus futura quaedam in Dei Ecclesia inspiratione quapiam revelaverit, ut per
Amos prophetam ipse promittit, and Paulus Ap. praedicatorum princeps Spiritum,
inquit, nolite extinguere, prophetas nolite spernere, hos aliorum fabulosorum
and mendaciumgregi connumerari vel aliter impediri minime, volumus.
.

For private Reason, it is the handmaid of Faith; we use it, and not seperately
from the Authority of the Church, but as a help in distinguishing true from
false Authority. And in so plain a case as Heresy, if our Church thinks a
private Man may without an infallible Guide on Earth judge aright of it, it
does but believe as Pope Adrian believed, as he professed in a Synod at Rome,
of which profession report is made in the second Synod of Nice Syn. Nic. 2.
Art. 7. sec. verse. Anastasii. Licet enim Honorio post mortem Anathema sit
dictum ab Orientalibus, sciendum tamen est quia fuerat super haeresi accusatus,
propter quam solam licitum est minoribus majorum suorum moribus resistendi, vel
pravos sensus libere respuendi, etc.
For, speaking of the Sentence against Pope Honorius, he excuses it in point
of good behavior, because it was given in the case of Heresy. For in that
case, and in that case alone, he allowed Inferiors (so he was pleased to call
the Oriental Bishops) to reject the corrupt sense of those who are superior to
them.

I will hasten to the next Proposition, after I have added one thing more which
relates to the guidance of Ecclesiastical Authority: And it is this. Those of
the Unlearned Laity who are Members of the Church of England, have much more of
the just guidance of Ecclesiastical Authority than the like order of Men in the
Church of Rome. For the Authentic Books of that Church being all written in
the Latin Tongue, the illiterate People resolve their Faith into the ability
and honesty of their Confessor or Parish Priest. They take it upon his word,
that this is the Doctrine, this the Discipline, this the Worship, of their
Church. Whereas each Minister in our Church can direct the People to the Holy
Bible, to the Books of Homilies, Articles, Canons, Common Prayer, Ordination,
as set forth in their native Tongue, by public Authority. Of this they may be
assured by their own Eyes, as many as can but competently read. They do not
only take this from the mouth of a Priest, but from the Church it self. Where
the Laws of the Church and the Statutes of the Civil Government are written in
an unknown Tongue, there the Unlearned depend more upon private than public
Authority; for they receive the Law from particular Priests or Judges.

Prop. VI.
Though Ecclesiastical Authority be a help to our Faith, yet the Holy Scripture
is the only infallible Rule of it; and by this Rule and the Ministerial Aids of
the Christian Church, we have sufficient means without Submission to papal.
Infallibility, to attain to certainty in that Faith which is generally
necessary to Salvation.

I do not mean that, by believing the whole Canon of the Scripture in the
gross, we thereby believe all the necessary Articles of the Faith, because they
are therein contained. That looks too like a fallacy; and it gives countenance
to an useless Faith. For he that believes on this manner, has as it were
swallowed a Creed in the lump only, whereas it is necessary for a Christian to
know each particular Article and the general Nature and Tendency of it.
Otherwise his Faith will not have a distinct influence upon his Christian
behavior to which if it were not useful, it were not necessary. To believe in
general as the Scripture believes, is with the Blind and Flexible Faith of a
Romanist, to believe at adventure. He believes as his Church believes, but he
knows not what is the belief of his Church; and therefore is not instructed by
that Faith to behave himself as a Member of it.

The Scripture is that rule of Faith which gives us all the particular
Articles which are necessary to eternal Life.

By this rule the Primitive Fathers governed themselves, and this they
commended to the Churches. And Clemens Alexandrinus Cl. Alex. Strom. 2. (...),
etc. and Strom. 7. -- (...).
does in terms, call the Consent of the Old and New Testament the
Ecclesiastical Canon, and the Touchstone of true and false. I will not multiply
Testimonies; enough of them are already collected V. Davenant. de Judice and
norm^ fidei. c. 12. p. 53. etc. D. Till. Rule of Faith. part. 4. sect. 2. p.
320. etc.
.

I will rather pursue the Argument before me, in these three Assertions.

First, a Protestant without the submission of his Judgment to the Roman
Church, may be certainly directed to the Canonical Books of Holy Scripture.

Secondly, He may without such submission, sufficiently understand the Rule of
Faith, and find out the Sense of such places in those Canonical Books, as is
necessary to the belief of a true Christian.

Thirdly, This rule of Faith is the principal means of Union in Faith in the
Christian Church.

Assert. I.
First, a Protestant without the submission of his Judgment to the Roman Church
may be certainly directed to the Holy Scriptures.

It is commonly said by Men of the Roman persuasion, but injudiciously enough,
that we may as well receive our Creed from them, as we do our Bible. The
Scribes and Pharisees might have said the like to the People of the Jews. But
with the good Text, they conveyed down to them a very false gloss, and
misinterpreted the Prophesies, as meant of a pompous temporal Messiah. But, for
the Reformed, they have received neither Creed nor Bible from the Church of
Rome. The first enumeration of those Books they find in the Apostolical Canons,
and in those of the Council of Laodicea; no Western writings. They have
received the Scriptures from the Universal Church of all Ages and Places, the
Copies of them having been as widely dispersed as the Christians themselves.
And they receive them not from the infallibility of any particular Church, but
upon the validity of this sure principle, that all the Christian World, so
widely dispersed, could not possibly conspire in the imposing of false Books
upon them.

For particular Churches, we may, of all others suspect the Roman, in reference
to the Scriptures. For what sincerity of dealing may we hope for from such a
Cabal of Men as has forged decrees of Councils and Popes, obtruded upon the
World Apocryphal Books as Books Canonical, purged out of the writings of the
Fathers such places as were contrary to their Innovations, depressed the
Originals under an imperfect Latin Copy, and left on purpose in that Copy, some
places uncorrected for the serving of turns. For example sake, they have not
either in the Bible of Sixtus, or in that of Clement (both which, though in War
against each other, are made their Canon) changed the word [ She] in the third
of Genesis, Genesis 3.15.
for [ That, or, He.] But, contrary to the Hebrew Text, to the Translation of
the Seventy, to the Readings of the Fathers, they persist in rendering of it
after this manner; She shall break thy Head. They believe this Reading tends
most to the Honor of the blessed Virgin, whom they are too much inclined to
exalt, in the Quality of a Mother, above her Son. The English Translation of
Doway has followed this plain and partial corruption.

Secondly, Assert. II.
A Protestant may without Submission of his judgment to the Roman Church, find
out, in the Books of Holy Scripture, the necessary Articles of Christian Faith.

Two things are here supposed; and both of them are true.

First, That the Scriptures contain in them all the necessary Articles of our
Faith.

Secondly, That the sense of the Words in which these Articles are expressed in
Scripture may be found out by a Protestant, without the Submission of his
judgment to the Papacy.

First, The Scriptures contain in them all the necessary Articles of the Faith.
This is true, if the Scriptures themselves be so: For this they Witness See S.
Joh. 20.30, 31. C. 21.25.
St. Paul 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
says of the Old Testament, as expounded of Christ, that it was able to make a
Man wise unto Salvation. Much more may this be affirmed of the entire Canon.
The Apostles preached the necessaries to Salvation, and what they had preached
they wrote down Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
concerning the manner of it, Eusebius may be consulted Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 14.
. For the Primitive Fathers, they allowed the Scriptures to be a sufficient
Rule. Irenaeus said of them they were perfect Iren. l. 2. c. 47. S. Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
; and of the words of St. Austine this is the sense; Among those things which
are plainly set down in Scrpture, all those things are to be found which
comprehend Faith and Good Manners. Nay, the Romanists themselves attempt to
prove their very additional Articles out of the Bible. That there are in it the
Articles of the Apostolical Creed, is evident enough to a common Reader. But
how the Romish Articles should be found in that Bible which was written some
hundreds of years before they were invented, is a riddle beyond the skill of
Apollo.

Secondly, the sense of the Scriptures, in matters necessary to Salvation, may
be found out by Men of the Reformed Religion, without Submission to Roman
Infallibility. The Learned know the Originals, and the true ways of
Interpretation. And amongst us, those of the Episcopal Clergy have obliged the
World with such an Edition of the Bible in many Languages as was not before
extant in the Roman Church. And a Romanist who writes with great mastery in
such matters, prefers it before the great Bible of Paris V. P. S. p. Hist.
Critique. p. -- Mais elle est 583. plus ample and plus commode; etc.


For those of the Laity who are Unlearned, they have before them a Translation
which errs not in the Faith. And the phrases are not so obscure, but that, by
study and Ministerial helps, they may understand them.

They have, before them, a Translation which errs not in the Faith. Of this the
Italians and French may be convinced by comparing the Translations of James de
Voragine, and the Divines of Lovain with those of Signior Diodati, and Olivetan
or Calvin. And the English may receive satisfaction in this matter by comparing
their Translation with that of Doway. In all of them they will find the same
Fundamental Doctrines of Faith. And were there any such material alteration
made in our Bible, it would appear by the notorious inconsistence of one part
of the Canon with another: It would have been, long ago, detected, and exposed
to public shame, both by the Romanists and the other Dissenters from our
Communion. But the former are not able to produce one instance; and the latter
agree with us in the use and excellence of the Translation, though in other
things, they extremely differ from us: And where they do but dream we err they
forbear not to proclaim it. In so much that a difference in the Translations of
the Psalter which concerns not Faith or Manners See Hook. Eccl. Pol. Book
fifth. Sect. 19.
and a supposed defect in the Table for keeping Easter have been made by them
public Objections Mr. Hs. peaceable design renewed. p. 14.
and stumbling blocks in the way to their Conformity. It is true, there is a
Romanist who has raved against the Bible of the Reformed, in these extravagant
words A. S. Reconciler of Religions, Printed 1663. c. 11. p. 38, 39.
The Sectaries have as many different Bibles, in Canon, Version, and sense, as
are days in the year. -- The Sectarian Bible is no more the Word of God then
the Alcoran, Almanac, or Aesops Fables. Of great corruption he speaks in
general, but his madness has admitted of so much caution, that he forbears the
mention of any one particular place.

The Learned Romanists understand much better, and the Ingenuous Will confess
it. And they are not ignorant that we Translate from the Original Tongues,
after having compared the Readings of the most Ancient Copies, and of the
Fathers: Whilst they Translate the Bible from the Vulgar Latin, which, indeed,
in the New Testament is a tolerable, but in the Old, a very imperfect Version.
If our English Bible were turned into any one of the Modern Tongues by a
Judicious Romanist who could keep Council, it would pass amongst many of that
Church for a good Catholic Translation. And this is, the rather, my
persuasion, because I have read, in Father Simon Histoire Critique. Chapter 25. p.
392, 393.
that not unpleasant story concerning the Translation of Mr. Rene Benoist a
Doctor of the Faculty of Paris. This Doctor had observed that a new Latin
Translation of the Organon of Aristotle, performed by a person who understood
not the Greek Tongue, had been very well received: Upon this occasion he was
moved to turn the Bible into the French Tongue, though he was ignorant of those
of the Greek and Hebrew. For the accomplishing of this Design, he served
himself upon the French Translation of Geneva; changing only a few words, and
putting others of the same signification in their room. But, it seems, he was
not exact enough in this change of words. For he having over-looked some words
which were used by the Genevians and not the Romanists, a discovery was made by
the Divines of Paris, and this Edition of the Bible was condemned by them,
though published under the name of one of their Brethren.

I do not say that such places of Scripture as contain Matters of Faith, are
plain to every Man. But those who have a competence of capacity, who are not
prejudiced against the Truth, who pray to God for his assistance, who attend to
what they read, who use the Ministerial helps which are offered to them, shall
find enough in Holy Writ to Guide them to everlasting life. In finding out the
sense of the Scriptures, the Church gives them help, but it does not, by its
Authority, obtrude the sense upon them. The Guides of it are as Expositors and
Schoolmasters to them: And by comparing phrase with phrase, and place with
place, and by other such ways, they teach them how to judge of the meaning
themselves. They give them light into the nature of the Doctrine, they do not
require them to take it upon trust. They endeavor to open their understandings
that they may, themselves, understand the Scriptures. And if they cannot
themselves understand the Doctrine, it will be of little use to them in their
lives. For they then believe in general that it is a necessary Truth; but what
Truth it is or for what ends it is necessary, they apprehend not. A Foolish
Master in the Mathematics may require his Scholars to take it upon his word
that a Problem is demonstrated: But a wise and useful teacher will give them
light into the manner of the demonstration, in such sort, that they themselves
shall at last be able to judge that it is truly performed: And till they can do
this, they are not instructed. St. Hierom relates it in praise of Marcella a
Roman Lady S. Hieron. in prf. ad Comment. in Epist. ad Galat. -- Vt sentirem me
non tam Discipulam habere quam judicem. v. Psalm. 119.99.
that she would not receive any thing from him after the Pythagorean manner, or
upon bare Authority. She would, with such care examine all things, that She
seemed to him, not so much his Scholar as his Judge.

It is certain that there are great depths and obscure Mysteries in the Holy
Bible. But the Doctrines of Christian Faith are, to the sincere and industrious
and such as wait on God in the way of the Reformed Church, sufficiently plain.
But to the Idle, the prejudiced, the captious, Light it self is Darkness.

The Romanists affright with this pretense of obscurity and profoundness; as if
we must not adventure into any part of the Waters, because in some places, we
may go beyond our depth. If there are hard and difficult places which the
Unstable wrest; who required their meanness to make a judgment of that for
which they might perceive themselves to be insufficient? But whilst St. Peter
speaks of some few places in St. Paul's writings which are obscure, he does,
at the same time, suppose many others to be plain enough for the capacities of
the Unlearned. And if they be evil Men, though very Learned, they will wrest
the plainest places; and (as some did in St. Hieroms S. Hieron. in Ep. ad
Paulin. ad sensum suum incongrua aptant Testimonia -- Et ad voluntatem suam S.
Scripturam repugnantem trabunt.
days) they will draw violently to their private sense a Text of Scripture
which is incongruously, and with relectance applied to it.

It is true all Sects of Christians cite the Scriptures; but that does not
prove the obscurity of those Sacred writings: It rather shows the Partiality,
Boldness, and Sophistry of those who allege them. All Laws are obscure if this
Argument has force in it. For every Man, in his own case, has the Law on his
side. Men take up their opinions and Heresies from other reasons; and then,
because the name of Scripture is venerable, they rake into the several Books of
it, and they bend and torture places, and force them on their side by unnatural
construction. So do the Socinians, producing all the niceties of Grammar and
Criticism in a matter of Faith. Yet the Guide in Controversies R. H. Guide,
etc. Disc. 4. p. 375, 376, 377, 378, etc.
uses it as an Argument against the plainness of this Rule of Faith, that the
Socinians cite the Holy Scriptures in favor of their Heresy. But is not this
Argument two-edged? And will it not cut as well on the other side, and do
Execution against the words, of Fathers and Councils, and the Apostolical Creed
it self? For the Socinians (those especially who are turned Arians) since
Petavius has furnished them with Quotations, will cite the writings of the
Ancients: And Slichtingius, a mere Socinian, V. Confess. fid. Christ. ed. nom.
Eccles. Polon. etc.
has expounded every Article of the Creed in a sense agreeable to the Heresy
of his Master.

But, if the Scriptures were so obscure in necessary matters, what remedy would
be administered by the Roman Church? They cannot offer to us any Ancient;
infallible exposition. What the Ancients have said, the Reformed generally
understand much better then Popes, amongst whom there have been some who could
scarce read the Holy Gospel in Latin. For the Fathers of the earliest Ages,
they were more busied in writing against Heresies, then in explaining of
Scriptures. Nor, to this day has the Roman Church, given any Authentic
Collection of Expositions, either of the Ancients or of her own. And if we must
go to any Church for a comment on the Scriptures, let the Roman be one of our
last Refuges. For it is manifest that the Key the Papalins use, is the Worldly
Polity of that Church. And as they like, so they interpret. Had not they
governed themselves by this art, we should not have found in the writings of
their Popes, and in the very Canon Law it self, those words which were spoken
to Jeremiah expounded of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome V. Innoc. 3. in
decret. Greg. l. 1. tit. 33. c. 6. Greg. 7. Ep. l. 8. Ep. 21. Extrav. de Major
and Obed. c 1. P. Pi. 5. in Bull^ Cont. R. Eliz. in Camd. Annal. A. 1570.
I have set thee over Kings, to root out, to pluck up, and to destroy. Jerem.
1.10.
The Donatists found their Church in these words of the Canticles, Tell me
(thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest; where thou make thy Flock to
rest at noon. For they expounded this (as it liked them best) of the Flock of
their party in the Southern Country of Africa. Such Expounders of Scripture are
those Popish Writers, who interpret [ Feed my Sheep] of the Universal Monarchy
of the Bishop of Rome, and conclude that a Pastor must drive away Wolves or
depose Princes hurtful to the Church. But the straining of such Metaphorical
expressions (as an excellent Person D. Falkner in Christ. Loy. p. 315.
says) proves only that they want better proofs. And, by a like way of
interpretation, from the same Text it might be concluded that all Christians
are Fools, because Sheep are silly Creatures.

No expositions are more besides the sense of the Text, or more ridiculous,
then some of those which may be found in the Authentic Books of the Roman
Church. And those who composed them appear to have looked asquint on the
Scriptures. For whilst they looked on them, they seem to have looked another
way. I will instance only in a few of those many absurd expositions, with which
the Roman Breviary abounds.

The words of the Angel to the Holy Virgin [a Sword shall go through thine own
Soul also] are Domin. infra Octav. Nativ. in 2. nocturno Lect 8. p. 175.
interpreted of that word of God which is quick and powerful, and sharper then
any two-edged Sword. And this sense is designed as an evasion of their
reasoning, who from that Text, conclude concerning the blessed Virgin, that she
died, and was not miraculously assumed. The Ascension of Elias is thus
expounded. Dom. infra Oct. Asc. in 3. Noct. p. 443.
He was taken up into the aerial, not the aetherial, Heavens; from whence he
was dropped in an obscure place on Earth, there to remain to the end of the
World, and then to expire with it. They say Infra. Oct. Asc. 3. Noct. Lect. 8.
p. 447.
of Job, That when he spoke of a Bird, and of her path in the Air, he, by a
figure, called Christ a Bird, and, by the motion of it in the Air, figured also
our Lords Ascension.

We may perceive, by these few Instances, what an entrance into the sense of
Scripture is like to be given, whilst a Pope has the Key of Knowledge in his
keeping.

Assert. III.
Thirdly, If Men would use the Church as their Ministerial Guide, and admit of
the Scripture as the only Rule by which all Matters of Faith are to be
measured, they would agree in the proper means to the blessed end of Unity in
the Faith. This was the persuasion of St. Austin who thus applies himself to
Maximinus S. Aug. Cont. Max. l. 3.
; Neither ought I at this time to allege the Council of Nice, nor you that of
Ariminum: For neither am I bound to the Authority of the one, nor you to that
of the other. Let us both dispute with the Authorities of Scripture which are
Witnesses common to both of us.

Whilst the Romanists ascribe the differences which arise amongst the Reformed
to their want of an infallible Guide, and to their different interpretations of
the Scriptures, they unskilfully derive effects from causes which are not the
natural Parents of them. There is (says St. Austine) one Mother of all
strifes, and she is Pride. Neither does the Scripture divide us, nor does the
infallibility of their judge unite them. Their Union (such as it is) arises
from the mighty force of their External Polity; and they speak not differently
because they dare not; and the strength of that Polity arose at first from
Rome, not as the Chair of St. Peter but as the Seat of the Empire. Our
divisions like theirs, arise (as all Wars do, be they Ecclesiastical or Civil)
from the unruly Lusts and Passions of Men. And from these likewise, arise
generally the misinterpretations of plain Laws, and Rules; the sense of which
must be made to chime according to the Interest of prejudiced Men, or else they
will not give attention to them. If the Lusts and Passions of Men were
mortified; all Christians agreeing in the certainty of the Scriptures, though
not of any Living Guide; and the words of the one being as intelligible as
those of the other: All might agree in one Creed, and put an end to those
unnecessary Controversies which entangle Truth, and extinguish Charity.

FINIS.

