AN ARGUMENT FOR UNION, Taken from the True Interest OF THOSE DISSENTERS in
ENGLAND, Who Profess, and call themselves PROTESTANTS.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street; Benj. Took,
at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard; and F. Gardener, at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street, 1683.

THE CONTENTS.
DIssentions are dangerous to the Church. Page 1. If the Church should be
dissettled by such means, our Dissenters would not obtain their Ends. p. 2.
Their First, or Subordinate End, is the Establishing of themselves. p. 3. The
first Branch of it is the Establishing themselves as a National Church, which
cannot be hoped for, either First by all of them; p. 4. Or, Secondly, by the
Prevalent Party amongst them, p. 5. This is proved First, from several Reasons.
p. 5, 6. Secondly, from the history of our late Revolutions. p. 6. to 10. After
which it is showed, That if they could not then gain their point, they can,
much less, do it now. p. 10, etc. The second Branch of their Subordinate End,
is the settling of themselves by mutual Sufferance. p. 12. This is proved still
more improbable. p. 12, 13. Also, it is showed that Parties tolerate each other
no longer then one gets Power to suppress the rest, with public safety. p. 14.
to 18. The Second End of the Dissenters is more Principal, and the first part
of it is the keeping out of Popery. p. 18. That this End cannot be obtained by
Dissenting from our Church, is showed From Reason. p. 18. to p. 25. From the
History of the late Times. p. 25, etc. From the Judgment and Methods of the
Papists themselves. p. 28, 29. The second part of the more Principal End of the
Dissenters, is the advancing of Pure Religion. p. 30. But, there are Reasons to
persuade us that upon the Dissettlement of this Church, Religion would not be
advanced, but embased. p. 30, 34. to 37. And the History of the late Troubles
shows this to have been so in Fact. p. 33, 34, 38, 39. By virtue of the
Premises, Dissenters are persuaded to consider seriously the state of things
in this time of Prosecution, and to hold constant Communion with our Church,
with which the wisest and best of them hold occasional Communion; that the
blessed Ends of Truth, Holiness, and Peace, may be obtained. p. 40, 41, 42, 43.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 5. for Persuasive read Persuasion. p. 12. l. 5. for Laxation read
Luxation. p. 30. l. 22. for Opposed read Proposed. p. 36. l. 17, for ties read
Impurities.

AN ARGUMENT FOR UNION, etc.
I Take it for granted (seeing a Truth so very plain needs no formal Proof)
that the ready way to overthrow a Church, The Introduction.
is, first to divide it. It is, also, too manifest, that our Dissentions are
Divisions, properly so called, or Public Ruptures. It is true, notwithstanding
these Ruptures, the Church still lives, and, in some good measure, prospers:
But how Mortal these Breaches may, at last, prove, through their Continuance
and Increase, a Man, who has but a Competency of Judgment, may easily foretell.
It is, therefore, the business of every Good Man, as far as in him lies, to
dissuade, with Prudent Zeal, from these Divisions; which are, in their Nature
so uncharitable, and so perilous in their Consequence.

Now, one way of moving Men to desist from their Undertakings, is, the showing
of them, with calmness of Temper, and plainness of Reasoning, that their Ends
are not likely to be obtained: As, also that, by the Means they use, they will
bring upon themselves those very Evils which they fear, and of the removal of
which they have Expectation.

Wherefore, I have chosen an Argument of this Nature, in order to the
persuading of Dissenters to join in the Exercise of Constant Communion with the
Church of England. And I have, here, endeavored to make it evident to them;
that, in attempting to pull down this Established Church, they, unwarily, turn
their own force against themselves, and prepare Materials for the Tombs of
their own Parties.

This Argument is, here, offered to them in the Spirit of Christian Charity,
and without any design of exposing or exasperating any person who differs, is
his Notions, from the sense of the Writer. For he had rather lie at the Feet of
the meanest Man who is overtaken with an error, then spurn insolently against
him.

Now, in the managing of this Argument, it is necessary to show two things. The
Argument it self. Its Partition and Method.


First, What those Ends are which are proposed by the Dissenters? I mean, those
which seem, with any tolerable color of Reason, fit to be proposed; and which
are designed by the better and wiser of that number.

Secondly, What Reasons may make it manifest that the Ends which they propose,
can never be procured by the Dissettlement of the Church of England.

These things being showed, there shall follow such a Conclusion, as is
suitable to the Premises.

First, The Ends of the Dissenters.
For the Ends proposed by the more Prudent Dissenters, they are of two kinds.

The First End is Subordinate.

The Second is Principal: Or the End to which the former serventh in the
quality of the Means.

The Subordinate End is, the Establishing of themselves. And it has two
Branches.

Either, the settling themselves (First) as a National Church:

Or, (Secondly) as several distinct Churches, giving undisturbed Toleration to
one another.

For I am not willing to believe all of them to be given up to such a degree of
Infatuation, as to be intent only upon beating down, without considering what
is fit to be set up. That is the way of Tempests, and not of Builders.

The Principal is, the further Advancement of the Reformed Religion. This also,
has two parts.

1. The Removal of Popery. 2. The Introduction of the Protestant Religion in
greater Purity and Perfection, then the Church of England is (in their Opinion)
as yet, arrived at, or can probably attain to by virtue of its present
Constitution.
If there be amongst them, Men disturbed in their Understandings, by the heat
of Enthusiasm; if there be amongst them, any Men whose Wisdom is sensual and
worldly; who presumptuously make Heaven stoop to Earth, and conceal their
private and secular Designs under the venerable name of Pure Religion; I do not
concern my self with them in this Persuasive to Union. The former cannot, and
the latter will not be convinced: For there is no Ear so deaf, as that which
Interest has stopped. And there is a great deal of earnest Truth suggested in
the Jocular Speech of James the fifth of Scotland; who, when his Treasurer
desired liberty to be plain with him, Melvil's Memoirs p. 2.
drew out his Sword, and said merrily to him, I shall slay thee, if thou speak
against my profit.

The First Branch of the first, The first Branch of the first End of the
Dissenters: viz. Union in a National Church.
or Subordinate End of the Dissenters is, the Establishing of themselves as a
National Church.

This is either designed by All of them, or by a Party which believes it self
to be most sober, and most numerous, and most likely to prevail over the rest;
so far at least as to become the State-Party.

For All of them to expect to be united in one Uniform Body, is to hope, not
only against the Grounds of Hope, but of Possibility.

For the Parties are very many, and very differing, (or rather very contrary)
and they cannot frame amongst them, any common Scheme in which their Assents
can be united.

What Communion (for Example sake) can the Presbyterians have with Arians,
Socinians, Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Sensual Millenaries, Behmenists,
Familists, Seekers, Antinomians, Ranters, Sabbatarians, Quakers, Muggletonians,
Sweet-Singers. These may associate in a Caravan, but cannot join in the
Communion of a Church. Such a Church would be like the Family of Error and her
Daughters, described in Mr. Spencer's Fairy-Queen, of which none were alike,
unless in this, that they were all deformed: And how shall the Christians of
this present Church be disposed of to their just satisfaction? They will never
Incorporate with such a Medly of Religion; and they are such, both for their
Quality and their number, as not to be beneath a very serious Consideration.

For the Prevalent Party, there seems to be both Reason, and Experience,
against their hopes of Establishing themselves as a National Church.

These Reasons, amongst others, have moved me to entertain this Persuasive
concerning them.

First, Such a Party not maintaining Episcopal Government, which has obtained
here from the Times of the Britains (who in the Apostolical Age, received the
Christian Religion) and which is so agreeable to the Scheme of the Monarchy; It
is not probable that they shall easily procure an exchange of it for a newer
Model, by the general consent of Church or State. I may add, the Body of the
People of England, whose Genius renders them tenacious of their Ancient Customs.

Again, All the Parties amongst us, have of late declared, for Mutual
Forbearance. They cannot, therefore, be consistent with themselves, if they
frame such a National Constitution, by which any Man, who Dissents from it,
shall be otherwise dealt with, then by personal Conference; which, also, he
must have liberty not to admit, if he be persuaded it is not fit or safe for
him. And such a Body without any other nerves for its strength and motion; for
the Encouragement of those who are Members of it, and the Discouragement of
those who refuse its Communion; will not long hold together: Nor has it means
in it, sufficient for the Ends to which it is designed. And indeed by this
means, the Spiritual Power of Excommunication will be rendered of none Effect.
For, what Punishment, what Shame, what Check, will it be to Cross and Perverse
Men, if being shut out of the National Church, they may with open Arms and with
Applause due to real Converts, be received into this or the other particular
Congregation, as it best suiteth with their good likeing?

Furthermore, It is commonly said, that since the Presbyterians have gathered
Churches out of Churches, there are not many true and proper Disciplinarians in
England.

If it be so, then Independency is amongst Dissenters, the prevalent side; and
I know not how a National Church can be made up of Separate Independent
Churches; for each Congregation is a Church by it self, and has, besides the
general Covenant of Baptism, a particular Church Covenant; and therefore, it is
difficult to imagine how all of them can be, by any Coherence of the Parts,
united into one entire Society.

But, be it supposed, that the Disciplinarians are of all Parties, the most
numerous and prevalent; yet Experience shows how hard a Work it is for all of
them to form themselves into a Church of England. In the late times of Public
disquiet, they had great Power; they had in humane appearance, fair and
promising Opportunities; and yet there grew up at their Roots another Party,
which, in Conclusion, overdropped them, and brought their Interest into a
sensible decay; it being the nature of every Faction, upon Victory obtained
over their Common Adversary, to subdivide. In the Year 1640, July 17. 1640.
Whitlock's Memorials p. 45.
The Commons had a debate about a new form of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: And
they agreed that every Shire should be a several Diocese. That there should be
constituted, in each Shire, a Presbytery of Twelve Divines, with a President as
a Bishop over them, That this President with the Assistance of some of the
Presbyters, should Ordain, Suspend, Deprive, Degrade, Excommunicate. That there
should be a Diocesan Synod once a Year; and each third Year, a National Synod.
A while after, A. 1644. Id. ibid. p. 117.
it was voted by them, that, to have a Presbytery in the Church, was according
to the Word of God.

Many other Steps were made in favor of the Discipline. The Common Prayer Book
was removed; an Assembly of Divines was Established: Their Directory was
introduced; they were united in the Bond of a solemn League and Covenant. There
was sent up In Sept. 15. 1646. Diurnal, p. 1313.
from the County of Lancaster, a Petition signed with 12000 Hands for the
settling of Classes in those parts. A Petition of the like importance was
framed by diverse of the Common Council of London. Whitlock's Memoirs. p. 187.
They seemed nigh the gaining of their Point; yet they widely missed of it.
There was in the Assembly it self, a ferment of Dissension. Mr. Sympson, and
some others, favored an Independent; Mr. Seldom and some of his Admirers, an
Erastian Interest. There was a Party in the Nation who were then called
Dissenting Brethren; and to these the Directory was as offensive, as the Canons
and Liturgy had been to those of the Discipline. They drew up Reasons Id. ib.
p. 116. A. 44.
against the Directory of Church Government by Presbyters.

They afterward Printed an open Remonstrance against Presbytery, Ib. A. 45. p.
189.
of which the Assembly complained to the House, as of a Scandalous Libel. And
there were those who Reproached the Presbyterians, in the same Phrases in which
they had given vent to their displeasure against the Liturgy of the Church of
England. The Ministers of Lancashire Harm Consent. p. 20.
complained concerning them, That they had compared the Covenant to the Alcoran
of the Turks, and Mass of the Papists, and Service Book of the Prelates. As
likewise, that they said, it was a Brazen-Serpent fit to be broken in pieces
and ground to Powder, rather then that Men should fall down and Worship it.

Amongst the Disciplinarians, some were confident of Success. One of them Mr.
S. Symp. in Sermon. of Reform. A* 1643. p. 29.
(for he was not then gone over to the Part of the Independents) expressed his
assurance in these most unbecoming Words, before the Commons. It will (said he)
bring such a Blot on God as He shall never wipe out, if your poor Prayers
should be turned into your own bosoms; that Prayer for Reformation. A Speech
not fit to have been repeated, if it were not necessary to learn Sobriety of
Wisdom from the Remembrances of Extravagance in former Times.

Others acknowledged their hopes, but did not dissemble their Fears. Six years
ago (said a person eminent D* John Arr. in Ser. called, The Great Wonder, etc.
before the Commons. A. 1646. p. 36.
amongst them) after this Parliament had sat a while, it was generally
believed that [the Woman, the Church] was fallen into her Travel -- but she
continues still in pain. Insomuch, as they begin to think she has not gone her
full time, and earnestly desire she may; because they fear nothing more then an
abortive Reformation.

Others did openly confess that their hopes were not answered, and that the
State of Religion was much declined. The Ministers of the Province of London
Testim. to Truth of Jesus Christ subsiribed Dec. 14. 1647. p. 31.
used upon this occasion, these passionate words. Instead of a Reformation, we
may say with Sighs, what our Enemies said of us heretofore with scorn, we have
a Deformation in Religion.

Those Independents who adhered to that part of the House which joined with the
Army, prevailed for a Season, but they also were disturbed by those who went
under the Names of Lilburnists, Levellers, Agitators. See Hist. of Indep. 2
part. p 168.
Then likewise, Gerard Wynstanley In Mist. of Godlin, etc. Anno. 1649. Wynst.
in Saints Paradise C. 5. p. 54. etc.
published the Principles of Quakerism, discoursing (or rather, repeating the
Dreams of his Imagination) in such Expressions as these. If you look for the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, you must know that the Spirit within the Flesh is
the Jesus Christ. -- Every Man has the light of the Father within himself,
which is, the Mighty Man Christ Jesus. Then Enthusiasm, excited in part by the
common pretense of an extraordinary Light, revealed (as of a sudden) in those
days in England, brake forth into open distraction. Then Joseph Salmon, a
present Member of the Army, published his Blasphemies, and defended his
Immoralities. He justified himself, and those of his way, saying, Whid.
Memoirs. A. 1649. p. 430.
That it was God who did Swear in Them, and that it was their Liberty to keep
Company with Women for their Lust. Wyke, his Disciple Id. ibid.
, kissed a Soldier three times, and said, I breath the Spirit of God into thee.
Salmon himself printed a Pamphlet called, a Rout, in which he set forth his
villainous self as the Christ of God, saying, Salmon's Rout. in Pref. and p.
10, 11, etc.
I am willing to become Sin for you, though the Lord in me knows no Sin. We
love to sweat drops of Blood under all men's offenses. -- We shall see of the
Travel of our Souls. Enthusiasm, though not in this rankness of it, was now
openly favored by Cromwell himself; who, together with six Soldiers, prayed
and preached at Whitehal. On Sund. after East. day. Ann. 1649. H. of Indep.
part 2. p. 153.
His own temper was warmed with fits of Enthusiasm. See View of the late
Troubles. p. 366.
And he confessed it to a Person of Condition E. M. L C.
(from whom I received it, as did others, yet living) that he prayed according
to extraordinary Impulse. And that, not feeling such Impulse (which he called
Supernatural) he did forbear to pray, oftentimes, for several days together.

In Process of time, his House of Commons and he himself were publicly
disturbed by that wild Spirit, in the raising of which they had been so
unhappily instrumental. A Quaker came to the door of the House Whitl. Memoirs.
A. 1654. p. 592.
, and drew his Sword, and cut those nigh him, and said, He was inspired by the
Holy Spirit to kill every Man who sat in that Convention. And he himself was
not only conspired against by those who called themselves, the Free and
Well-affected people of England, See their Declar. in A. 1655. in Whitl. Me. p.
606.
, but openly bespattered by the Ink of the Quakers in several Pamphlets, See
Ed. Buroughs Trumpet of the Lord sounded. p. 2. A. 56.
and by their Clamours, affronted in his own Chapel; where before his face,
they gave bold interruption to his Preachers. Whitl. Memoirs. p. 624.


Other Historical Memorials might be here produced, relating to the hopeful
Rise, and mighty Progress, and equal Declension of the Disciplinarian Party.
But, in such cases, I choose rather to take of my Pen, then to lean too hard
upon it. Yet the nature of my Argument did necessarily lead me to the former
Remarks; and if useful Truth smarts, let Guilt suffer a Cure, and not kick
against the Charitable Reporter.

In Sum, the longer the Church of England was dissettled, the greater daily
grew the confusion; and the division of Sects was multiplied not unlike to that
of Winds in the Mariners Compass, in which Artists have increased the
Partitions, from four to two and thirty. Insomuch, that the very Distractions
which were among us did, in some measure, prepare the way for the return of the
King, and the Restitution of the Church: men finding no other common Bottom on
which the Interests of Religion and civil Peace might be established.

Now, if the Dissenters could not then, when so fair Opportunities were in
their hands, carry on their cause to any tolerable Settlement; much less may
they now hope to do it. For there are now, many hindrances which did not then
lie cross their way.

First, The Platform of Discipline, so highly applauded, so earnestly contended
for, during the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, has now been in part
tried; and the presence of it (to omit other Reasons) has abated the Reverence
some had for it.

Secondly, There is not at this time, such an Union amongst Dissenters, as
appeared at the beginning of our late Troubles. The number of those Dissenters
who were not for the Discipline, was then very inconsiderable. But in a few
years, they brake, as it were, into Fractions of Fractions. Insomuch, that the
Ministers of the Province of London, expressed the Estate of things in the Year
47, on this manner. Testim. to the Truth of I. Chr. p. 30.
Instead of Unity and Uniformity, in Matters of Religion, we are torn in pieces
with Distractions, Schisms, Separations, Divisions, and Subdivisions.

Thirdly, Those who then favored the Discipline, are much departed from their
former Scheme of Government, inclining to Independency, which they once denied
to be God's Ordinance Mr. H^^l. etc.
, and pleading for Toleration, which they once called, The last and strongest
hold of Satan. The Title of Mr. Edwards's book. 1647. See Testim. of Min. p. 20.


Fourthly, At the beginning of our Disturbances, many Men of Quality, and such
who had a Zeal of God, favored the Settlement of the Discipline in the
simplicity of their hearts. They had not then seen any Revolutions; they had
not discovered the secret Springs of public Motions; nor the vile Interests of
many men which lay concealed under the disguise of Pure Religion. They saw
(what all Men may see in all times) abuses in Church and State; and the very
name of Reformation was sweet to them.

Now, notwithstanding the sincere zeal and the power of these Men, the
Discipline could not long be carried on; much less could it be perfected by
them.

There is, therefore, at this time, a much greater Improbability of Success in
the like design. For many considerable men, Piously inclined, have seen their
error; and will not be a second time engaged: And they will not say of our late
changes, as the Protector did, Oliver's Speech in the Painted Chamber. Ian. 22.
54 at the Dissolv. of the Parl. p. 29. 33.
That they were the Revolutions of God, and not humane designs; That they were
the Revolutions of Christ upon whose Shoulders the Government was stayed. They
are not of the same mind with him who told the Commons, Mr. Caryl in Ep. Ded.
bef. Ser. called the Arraign. of Unbelief. A. 45.
That if they acted Faith, then the Records of those Times on their side,
should bear thus to all Posterity, the Book of the Wars and Counsels of God.

Also, since those days, through the laxation of Discipline during the license
of the War, the discovery of great and black Hypocrisies, the multiplication of
Parties and Opinions, the publishing of many lewd and irreligious books from
Unlicens'd Presses, Atheism has made very formidable Advances. And they say,
that some undisguised Skeptics and Atheists have, sometimes since the King's
Return, been much used in the Cause of our Dissenters. Now, if well meaning
zeal could not establish the Discipline, it is not likely to be promoted, much
less settled, by the help of such hands of which the outsides are not washed by
so much as an External form of Godliness.

The Second Branch of the first End of Dissenters, The second Branch of the 1st
End of the Dissenters. viz. Union by mutual forbearance.
seems more improbable then the first, viz. The settling themselves as several
distinct Parties, giving undisturbed Toleration to each other.

This seems not probable upon many accounts.

First, Some Dissenters believe some of the Parties to be incapable of
Forbearance, as maintaining Principles destructive of Christian Faith and
Piety. This Opinion they still have (for instance sake) of Antinomians,
Quakers, and Muggletonians.

And they formerly declamed against the Toleration of diverse others. They
published here (by Authority so called) an Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh, A
1647. Act of Assemb. p. 2.
Against Erastians, Independents, and Liberty of Conscience, bearing (as they
speak) their public Testimony against them, not only as contrary to sound
Doctrine, but as more special Letts and Hindrances, as well to the Scottish
received Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, as to the Work of Reformation
and Uniformity in England and Ireland.

The Ministers of the Province within the County Palatine of Lancaster, in
their Harmonious Consent Harmon. Consent. A. 1648. p. 12.
with the Ministers of the Province of London, published their Judgments in
these zealous Words. A Toleration would be a putting of a Sword into a
Mad-man's hand -- An appointing a City of Refuge in Men's Consciences, for the
Devil to fly to -- A proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves to come into Christ's
Fold to prey upon his Lambs -- A Toleration of Soul-murther (the greatest
murder of all others) and for the establishing whereof, damned Souls in Hell
would accurse Men on Earth. Neither would it be to provide for tender
Consciences, but to take away all Conscience. -- If error be not forcibly kept
under, it will be Superior.

It seems, they were not then of the later Persuasion of the Protector, who
said, Protect. Speech. Ian. 22. 54 p. 28.
concerning the People of several Judgments in this Land, That they were All
the Flock of Christ, and the Lambs of Christ, though perhaps under many unruly
Passions and Troubles of Spirit whereby they gave disquiet to themselves and
others: And that they were not so to God as to us.

Again, There is no firmness or social influence in the nature of this Union.
It is the Union of a multitude who meet and disperse at pleasure. and he who
proposes this way as the means to knit Men into Christian Communion, is like a
Projector who should design the keeping of the stones together in the strength
of a firm and lasting House, by for bearing the use of Cement. The Union that
lasts, is that of the Concord of Members in an Uniform Body.

Moreover, It is to be considered, that there are no Parties in this or any
other Nation, so exactly poised, that they have equal Numbers and Interests.
There is always one of them which over-ballanceth the rest. And one of the
several ways must always be favored as the Religion of the State. And it is
natural for the strongest side to attempt the subduing of the weaker. And
though this be not soon effected; yet 'till one side gets the mastery, the
Parties remain, not as distinct Bodies settled in peace within themselves, and
toward each other, but as Convulsions in the common body of the State.

Some think this Inclination to the swallowing up of all other Parties to be
found almost only in the Romish Church.

But there is something of it to be discerned (I will not say in all Churches,
seeing I well understand the good Temper of our own which suffered Bonner
himself to live) yet in all Factions and Parties; though the inequality of
Power makes it not seem to be alike in all of them.

The Catt has the same inward Parts with the Lion, though they differ much in
size: And some such likeness they will find who dissect humane nature, and
Bodies civil.

There is this Disposition in Men, whether they be the Politic, or the
Conscientious.

The External practice of all Parties is answerable to this inward Disposition.

There is this inward Disposition in men who espouse any Faction, whether their
Ends be designs of State, or of Religion.

Parties who are not (otherwise then in show) concerned for Religion, will
perpetually covet Power after Power. And Parties who are serious and
Conscientious in their way, whatsoever it is; will not remain in an
indifference of tempers toward thosewho treadin contrary Paths, and with whom
they do not maintain Communion. For therefore they with draw from them, because
they believe Communion with them to be unlawful. Otherwise they have no
Judgment in the price of Peace and Unity, if they willingly part with it, when
they may, without sin, enjoy it: and if they esteem their way sinful, and
believe those persons who remain without their pale, to be so gone astray, as
without Repentance, to be eternally lost; Charity it self will urge them to use
all means probable toward the reducing of them. And they will be apt to think,
that the suffering of them in their Wanderings, declares them to be contented
with their Perdition.

The External Practice of all Parties does show plainly what is their inward
Disposition.

All would do what is good in their own eyes; but I do not perceive that any
are willing to let others do so. Where there is Power, there is little
Forbearance: And the same men, as their Conditions alter, speak of Mercy or
Justice.

Amongst those of the Party of Donatus whose Schism opened so dangerous a Wound
in the Churches of Africa; all pleaded earnestly for Forbearance, whilst their
Power was in its Minority. Yet, S. Austin* remindeth one of them Petil. ap. S.
Aug. cont Petil. l. 2. Absit, Absit a nostra conscientia, ^t ad nostram fidem
aliquem comp. Ilamus, etc.
of a Practice contrary to their Profession, whilst they turned against the
Maximianists, the edge of the Theodosian Laws; and abused the Power which they
had gotten under Julian, in oppressing, as far as in them lay, the Catholic
Christians.

Amongst those of the Protestant Persuasion; the Heads of the Discipline, were
plainly unwilling that any should have leave to make a separation from their
body. And one of them Mr. Cal^my in Ser. called, The great danger of Covenant
refusing. A. 46. p. 3.
, with a mixture of Grief and Expostulation, thus discoursed before the
Commons. The Famous City of London is become an Amsterdam; Separation from Our
Churches is countenanced; Toleration is cried up; Authority lies asleep. Every
one would have Power to rowse upit self, and maintain his Cause. And indeed it
is, and has been too often in Religion, as it is and was in Philosophy, Where
the diverse Sects do not contend merely for the enlarging the bounds of
Philosophical Arts in a sincere and solid inquiry, Lord Bacon's Pref. to Adv.
of Learn.
but for the Translating the Empire of Opinion, and settling it upon
themselves. The same men who pleaded for Forbearance in this Church, and
removed themselves into New England (as by themselves was said) for the Liberty
of their Conscience or Persuasion; when once they arrived there, and made a
figure in that Government, they refused Indulgence to the Anabaptists and
Quakers, and used them (as to this day they do) with great severity. Those
Commons who in the Year 47 Whitlock's Memories. p. 276.
, made an Order, For the giving of Indulgence to tender Consciences; did at the
same time make another Order, That this Indulgence should not extend to
tolerate such who used the Common Prayer.

Some who do not well understand the Policy of the Dutch, do believe it to be
otherwise in those Netherlands. But, by their Constitution, none have liberty
to speak against any public Error or Corruption, on which the States shall
stamp their Authority. And Episcopius Episc. Exam. These. Cap. Op. vol. 1. par.
2. p. 185.
complained that the Calvinists would tolerate none whom they had power to
punish. There are now great numbers of his own Remonstrant Party, who, when any
juncture of Affairs gives them encouragement, are apt to contend for
Superiority. The Parties in their Sermons and Writings, speak with bitter Zeal
against each other: And where the ordinary Conversation of Men of different
Judgment is peaceable amongst them; diverse who mind Traffic more than
Religion, seem rather to be an Heterogeneous body frozen together by a cold
indifference, then a Society united by Christian Love.

In the Church of Rome, the several Orders, who at present mortally hate one
another, if they were not restrained by the force of the common Polity, they
would soon devour one another. We are not without a remarkable Instance in this
kind, published by a Dominicans Bishop, and a Capuchin Friar. Certain
Dominicans See Lettres Sinceres. Trois. party Sixieme Lettre. p. 111.
had seated themselves nigh the River of Plate in Paraguay, where there are
Gold Mines in the Earth, and Gold Sands in the Rivers. Of this the Jesuits, who
have long ears, had good intelligence. They desired to go thither in order to
the further instruction of the American-people, and the education of Youth.
They obtained leave, procured Letters of Credence, were furnished with money
for the Voyage. After having gotten sure footing, they soon removed the
Dominicans and Spanish Laiety, and established themselves.

Among the Socinians, the great Asserters of Liberty in Religion, both in
thinking and speaking; though they cannot impose, because they have not yet
been any where (that I know of) the prevailing Party; yet they show sometimes
what Spirit they are of.

Gittichius was, beyond all good manners, troublesome to a Socinian of better
temper (I mean Ruarus*) because he had chosen to fast one day in a week, Ruarl.
Epist. par. 1. p. 415, 416.
and had taken Friday for the day, though without any fixed purpose.

Among the Quakers themselves, whose Principle seems to be the Guidance of each
man by his personal persuasion, there want not signs of that fierce heat with
which their Light is accompanied. When some had formed them into a Society, and
gotten the Governance into their hands, they Excommunicated others; they
suffered them not to Marry or Bury in their manner who would not be guided by
what they called the Light of the Body, and the Light of Ancient Friends. See
Spirit of the Hatt. p. 12, 13, etc.
George Fox declared he had Power to bind and loose whom he pleased, p. 27.
and said in a great Assembly p. 41.
that he never liked the Word Liberty of Conscience, and would have no Liberty
given to Presbyterians, Papists, Independents, and Baptists.

From the Subordinate End of the Dissenters, The Principal End of the
Dissenters the first part of it.
I pass to the Principal; and begin with the first part of it, the removal of
Popery. A very good and commendable end. And I heartily pray to God to prosper
all Christians who pursue it by fit and lawful ways.

But the Methods of Dissenters do not so well lead to it as those of the
established Church.

Bare Reason makes this manifest. It may be also proved to us by Historical
Inference.

This likewise, is the Judgment of the Papists themselves, who take their
measures from this Principle, that they shall enter in through the Breaches of
the Church of England.

First, Common Reason shows, that the Interruption which, may be Dissension,
be given to this Church, will rather weaken, then improve the Protestant
Interest, both at home and abroad.

Abroad, the Protestant Interest will suffer much, in the overthrow of this
Church. For, by such means, a principal Wheel is taken out of the Frame of the
Reformation. Nay, Signior Diodati Florentissima Anglia Ocellus ille
Ecclesiarum, Peculium Christi singular, etc.
was wont to praise it in a more excellent Metaphor, and to call it the Eye of
the Reformed Churches; and it is plain to considering Men that the Church of
England, which had greater regard to the Primitive Pattern than some others of
the Reformation, can give a more full and unperplexed answer to all the
Objections of the Romanists, then some other Churches, who are cramped in a few
points unwarily admitted. If therefore Dissentions put out this eye of the
Protestant Churches, the dark Doctrines and Traditions of Popery will the
sooner spread themselves over Reformed Christendom.

At Home, the Dissettlement of the Church of England will sooner introduce then
root out Poperty. I am constrained thus to judge by the following
Considerations.

First, The design of keeping out Popery by the Ruin of this Church, is like
the preposterous way, of securing the Vineyard by pulling up of the Fence; or
of keeping out the Enemy by the removal of our Bullwark. Under that name this
Church is commonly spoken of, and they do not flatter it who give it that
Title. Its Constitution is Christian, and it is strong in its Nature; and if
such a Church has not ability (with God's assistance) to resist the assaults
of Romish Power, much less have they who dissent from it. And it is Fanaticism
properly so called, or Religious Frenzy, to lay aside a more probable means,
and to trust that God will give, to means which are much less probable,
supernatural aid and success.

God supporteth a good Cause by weak means (if they are the only means he has
put into our power) agaisnt a bad Cause though externally potent. But he, who
in cases of emergence assisteth honest Impotence and Infirmity, will never work
Miracles in favor of Men's Presumptions and Indiscretions.

The Romanists are a mighty body of Men; and, though there are Intestine Fewds
betwixt the Secular and Regular Clergy, as likewise betwixt the several Orders,
yet they are all united into one common Polity, and grafted into that one
stock of the Papal Headship. They are favored in many places by great Men;
they have variety of Learning; they pretend to great Antiquity, to Miracles, to
Martyrs without number, to extraordinary Charity and Mortification; they have
the Nerves of worldly Power, that is, banks of Money, and a large Revenue: They
have a Scheme of Policy always in readiness; there are great numbers of
Emissaries posted in all places for the conveying of intelligence, and the
gaining of Proselytes; they take upon them all shapes, and are bred to all the
worldly Arts of Insinuation. There is given to their way, in the Iargon of Mr.
Coleman Coll. of Let. p. 8. etc.
, a very fit name of Trade, Traffic, Merchandise.

Against all this Craft and Strength, what (under God) can Protestants oppose
which is equal to the Power of the Church of England? A Church Primitive,
learned, pure, and not embased with the mixtures of Enthusiasm or Superstition.

A Church, which is able to detect the Forgeries and Impostures of Rome; which
has not given advantage to her by running from her into any extreme; which is
a National Body already formed; a Body both Christian and Legal; a Body which
commends it self to the Civil Powers by the Loyalty of its Constitution; a
Body which has in it great numbers of People judiciously devout, and who are
judged only to be few See L. de Moulin's Advances, etc. p. 26.
, because they are not noysie, but prudent, though truly exemplary, in their
Religion.

And, there is in the Church of England, something more considerable then
number; for Union is stronger then Multitude. Take the Character of this Church
from Monsieur Daille De Confess. Advers. H. Hammond. c. 1. p. 97, 98.
, a Man whose Circumstances were not likely to lead him, in this matter, into
any partiality of judgment; and who, at that time, was engaged in a learned
Controversy with one of our Divines. The Character is this. As to the Church of
England, purged from Foreign wicked Superstitious Worships and Errors, either
Impious or dangerous, by the Rule of the Divine Scriptures; approved by so many
and such illustrious Martyrs; abounding with Piety toward God, and Charity
toward Men, and with most frequent examples of good works; flourishing with an
increase of most learned and wise men from the beginning of the Reformation to
this time; I have always had it in just esteem, and till I die, I shall
continue in the same due Veneration of it. And, indeed it is to me a matter of
astonishment, that any men who have been beyond the Seas, and made Observations
upon other Churches and States, should be displeased at Ours which so much
excel them.

Now, is it probable that such a Church as this is, should have less strength
in it for the resisting of Popery, then an inferior number of divided Parties,
of which the most Sober and most Accomplished, is neither so Primitive, nor so
learned, nor so united, nor so numerous, nor so legal: And against which it
will be objected by the Romans, that it is of Yesterday?

Amongst these Parties, there are some who have not fully declared themselves.
And who knows whether they have not a Reserve for the Romish Religion, against
a favorable Opportunity, though sometimes they speak of Rome as of Babylon? I
mean those People who are called Quakers, who speak in general of their Light;
and in such doubtful manner, that Inquisitive Men cannot yet understand from
what quarter of the Heavens it shines. The Men of design amongst them may
embrace any Religion, and the melancholy will make a tolerable Order amongst
the Romans; and the Priests will find for them a second St. Bruno.

Again, There are some who though they have declared themselves against Popery,
yet they have scarce any formed way of keeping it out. For what hinders a
crafty Jesuit from gathering a particular Congregation out of many others, and
modelling of it by degrees according to his pleasure? and what a gap do they
leave open for Seducers, who take out of the way all Legal Tests, and admit Men
who are Strangers to them to officiate amongst them upon bare pretense of
Spiritual Illumination?

Furthermore, the Romanists have more powerful ways of drawing Men from the
Parties of the Dissenters, then they have of enticing them from the Church of
England; for such Men (too frequently) go out from us through weakness of
imagination, for which the Church of Rome has variety of Gratifications.

They will offer, to the Severe, such strictnesses as are not consistent with
the general Laws of a National Church, which being framed for Men of such
various Conditions, must have some Scope and Latitude, though no license in it;
and many of those who now join themselves to the Dissenting Parties, would then
choose to be admitted as Members of this or the other Superstitious Fraternity:
And it is (at least) my private Conjecture, that if the Revenue of the
Religious Houses which were dissolved, had been judiciously applied to the
service of Men, either weak in mind, or indisposed by temper, or singular in
their Inclination, amongst the Reformed; there might have been a Diversity here
(I mean such as there is in our present Colleges) without a Schism.

Likewise, they have Mental Prayer, and (as they call them) Spiritual
Eructations, for those who contemn or scruple forms. See Rational Discourse of
Prayer chiefly of Mystic Contemplation. chap. 14. page 74.


They ahve mystical Phrases for such who think they have a new Notion when they
darken understanding with Words. And accordingly, the third part of the Rule of
Perfection, (a very mystical Book, written by Father Benet a Capuchin) was in
the Year 46, reprinted in London, A Bright Star centring in Christ our
perfection. Printed for H. Overton in Pope's Head Alley 1646.
, with a new Title, and without the Name of the Author; and it passed, amongst
some of the Parties, for a Book containing very sublime Evangelical Truths. And
it pleased some Enthusiasts when they read in it, That Christ's Passion was to
be practiced and beheld as it was in our selves rather than that which is
considered at Jerusalem. Chapter 18. p. 189.


Also, they use much gesture, and great show of Zeal in preaching, and have
singular ways of moving the zealous temper of the English, from whence some of
them, in Rome it self, had the Name of Knock-breasts, Picchia-(...) S. R. C.
Posth. p. 125.
given to them. A Romish Preacher comes forth out of an obscure Cloister into
the Pulpit, and appears all heavenly in the Exercise: And having excited a
warmth in their affection, he retires again, and does not mix with
Conversation, and is not observed (as other Ministers) by many eyes; and the
People never seeing him but in this Divine Figure, look upon him as an Angel
coming to them out of Heaven, and then ascending* thither again.

It may be observed, also, that the Romanists have greater shows of self-denial
for the moving of English Pity, then the Dissenters. They have rough Cords,
mean Garments, bare Feet, Disciplines, Whips, Pretenses of not touching Money,
or enjoying Property; though some of these are often no other then Arts used by
ordinary Beggars.

Again, they have ways, not only of humouring the infirmity, but even the
Foppishness of Humane Nature. Processions and other Rites of the Romish
Religion are so ordered as to be Games for Diversion; and the Mass with Scenes
pleases, though it be not understood.

Dissenters do now think, that Popery may be very easily subdued by their Arms:
But if Recluses were once crept out of their dark Cells (as Serpents from under
the deadly nightshade) they would have cause to alter their Opinions, and not
to think too highly of themselves, after a wilful removal of the Church of
England which is sufficient (under God) for this Encounter. This Church designs
to make Men good by making them first Judicious, as far as means can do it. But
some others desire to bring them to their side by catching of their
Imaginations; and by that way they can neither reform nor fix them. Some new
Device shall, in time, bring them over to a new Party.

Dissension it self amongst Protestants weakneth their Interest; and that which
weakens one side, strengthens another.

And many men, entangled in Controversy, and wearied with endless wrangling,
are too apt, for mere ease and quiet sake, to cast themselves, in servile
manner, into the Arms of pretended Infallibility.

Our Dissentions have already introduced too much of that which is the very
spirit of Iesuitism, the doing of Evil that pretended Good may come of it; the
serving of a Cause by any means, whether they be just or unjust.

Some Dissenters do accidently prepare the way for Romish Religion by running
into an other extreme upon pretense of avoiding Popery; by decrying the Church
of England as Antichristian and Popish; and by condemning that as Popish which
is Christian and decent. [As, Episcopacy, Liturgy, Observation of the Nativity
of Christ, and other Festivals, Reverence of bodily Gesture, particularly in
receiving the Holy Communion; Preservation of places and things set apart for
Holy uses, with reverend care.] By this means they bring Popery into
Reputation. Men will be apt to say, if such a Body as the Church of England be
Popish, it is fit we set down and consider of it; for surely they are not so
inclined without weighty Reasons. If the Clergy of it be inclined to that
Religion the Introduction of which, together with great numbers of the
Popish-Clergy, will diminish their preferment; it must be the Power of Truth
which moves them against their worldly Interest. They will continue their
Argument and say further; if such good things as these abovementioned be
Romish, and it be lawful to judge of the whole by the parts of it which are
before us, surely that which is Popish is also Primitive and Evangelical. That
which we have examined is good, and that which we have not, may probably be of
the same kind.

Secondly, the History of our late Revolutions shows that Popery will not be
smothered in the Ruins of the Church of England, but rather be advanced upon
them.

It made great Progress in the late Times; insomuch, that the Dissenters do
remove the Odium of the late King's execrable Murder from themselves, and lay
it upon the Jesuits; thereby tacitly acknowledging that they had so great a
power over some of them, as to make them to become their Instruments for the
cutting of the Lord's Anointed. For if they will not allow Cromwell and Ireton
and some others of that Order, to have been Dissenters, properly so called; yet
certainly they must not deny that Name to Mr. Peter's, Mr. John Goodwin and many
like to them, who appeared publicly in that very black and insolent
wickedness. How far it is true that the Jesuits influenced those Counsels, I do
not now examine, nor does my Talent lie in Mysteries of State. But that in the
late Revolutions, Popery was not rooted out, no Man can remain ignorant who is
of competent Age, and has not perfectly lost the use of his memory, though he
has made the most negligent Observations.

Robert Mentit de Salmonet Hist. des troubles dela grand Bret. a Paris 1661.
live. 3. p 165 See short view of the late Troubl. p. 564.
a Scotchman, and a Secular Priest in actual exercise of Communion with the
Church of Rome, has publicly taken notice of the many Priests slain at
Edgehill, and of two Companies of Walloons and other Catholics (as he is
pleased to style them) in the Service of the States.

It has been commonly said Arbitr. Government p. 28.
that Gifford the Jesuit appeared openly in the Year 47, amongst the
Agitators, and that his Pen was used in the Paper drawn up at a Committee in
the Army, and called the Agreement of the People. See Whitl. Memoirs. p. 279,
280 282.
K. Charles the Martyr speaks of such things as notorious, in one of his
printed Declarations Exact Coll. p 647.
; All Men know (said he) the great number of Papists which serve in their Army,
Commanders, and others.

In the Year 49, Id. ibid. p. 405.
Those in the House were acquainted with diverse Papers, taken in a French Man's
Trunk at Rye, discovering a Popish Design to be set on foot in England, with
Commissions from the Bishop of Chalcedon, by Authority of the Church of Rome,
to Popish Priests and others, for settling the Discipline of the Romish Church
in England and Scotland.

Mr. Edwards Gangrena p. 16 par. 2.
reports, from Mr. Mills a Common-Council-man, who was so informed by a knowing
Papist, that the Romanists did generally shelter themselves under the Vizor of
Independency. It is certain, that a College of Jesuits was established at Come
Narr. sent up to the Lords from the Bishop of Hereford p. 7.
in the Year 52. And in a Paper found there, mention was made of 155 reconciled
that year to the Church of Rome. Oliver himself used these words in a
Declaration published by the Advice of his Council. Prot. Declaration October.
31. 1655.
It is not only Commonly observed, but there remains with Us, somewhat of
Proof, that Jesuits have been found among some discontented Parties in this
Nation, who are observed to quarrel and fall out with every Form or
Administration in the Church or State. Dr. Bailey In the Life of Bish. Fisher.
p. 260, 261.
the Romanist openly courted Oliver as the present hopes of Rome, and, with a
Flattery as gross as the Jingle was ridiculous, called him Oliva Vera: And one
of his Physicians V. Elench Mot. par. 2. p. 341.
has said of him, that he was once negotiating with the Romanists for
Toleration, but brake off the bargain, partly because they came not up to his
price, and partly because he feared it would be offensive to the People. It is
also publicly told us, H. Indep. part 2. p. 245, etc.
that an Agreement was made in 49, even with Owen o Neal, that bloody Romanist;
and that he, in pursuance of the Interest of the State, so called, raised the
Siege of Londonderry.

A great door was opened to Romish Emissaries when the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy were, by public Order, taken away: For they were Tests of Romanism.
Likewise, the Doctrine of the unlawfulness of an Oath, revived in those days,
by Roger Williams, See Mr. Cotton's Lr. Exam. A. 44. p 4, 5. Simplicit.
defense. A. 1646. p. 22. Min. of Prove. of Land. Testim p. 18.
Samuel Gorton, and others, helped equivocating Papists to an evasion; as (I
fear) it may do, at this day, among the Quakers. So we may be induced to
believe, by comparing present with former Transactions. For we are infomed that
in the Reign of King James, Gee 's Foot out of the Snare. p. 58, 59. A. 1621.
Thomas Newton, pretended to have had a Vision of the Virgin Mary, who said to
him, Newton, See thou do not take the Oath of Allegiance: And being of this
publicly examined at the Commission-Table, and asked, how he knew it to be the
Virgin Mary which appeared? He answered, I knew it was she, for she appeared
unto me in the form of her Assumption.

It was the Church of England, which, in our late Troubles, principally
fortified and entrenched the true Protestant Religion against the Assaults of
Rome.

This Church was still in being, though in Adversity. She had strong Vitals and
did not die, notwithstanding there was some Distemper in her Estate. There was
still a Constitution where Primitive order and decency might be found, and in
which Men of Sobriety might be fixed. And great numbers of the Churchmen, by
their constant adherence to their Principles, under public contempt and heavy
pressure, gained daily on the People, and convinced the World that they were
not so Popish and Earthly-minded as popular clamor had represented them. Also,
their learned Books and Conferences reduced some, and established many, and we
owe a part of the stability of Men in those times to God's blessing on the
Writings of Archbishop Land, Mr. Chillingworth, Dr. Bromhall, Dr. Cosins, Dr.
Hammond, and others.

Last of all, It is the Opinion of the Papists themselves, that their Cause is
promoted by our Dissensions; and, according to these measures of Judgment, they
govern their Councils.

This was the Opinion of the Jesuit Companella in his Discourse touching the
Spanish Monarchy, written about the Year 1600; and, in 54, published at London
in our Language. Campan. Disc. of Span. Mon. c. 25. p157.
Concerning the weakening of the English (says that Jesuit) there can no better
way possibly be found out, then by causing Divisions and Dissentions among
themselves. -- And as for their Religion, -- it cannot be so easily
extinguished and rooted out here, unless there were some certain Schools set up
in Flanders, -- by means of which there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of
Schism, etc.

And whether these kinds of Seeds have not come from hence to us, as well as
those better ones of the Brabant-Husbandry, remains not now any longer a
question.

It was the Advice of the Jesuit Contzens, Cont^. Polit. l. 2. chap. 18. Sect 9.
To make as much use of the Divisions of Enemies, as of the agreement of
Friends.

After this manner it is that they manage themselves; they endeavor to widen
the Breach, in order to the introducing of Popery into a divided Nation. They
will have hopes, as long as we have Divisions. They will believe, whilst they
see the humors are in conflict, that the Body will be at last dissolved. If
they will hope for Resettlement, as they declare they do, upon such
inconsiderable grounds as the Printing of a Monasticon Journal des Scavans de
l' Ann. 1665. p. 140.
or the Provincial Iourn. etc. de l' An. 1666. p. 230, 233. etc.
of Lynwood amongst us, though in the Quality of History rather then of Title
or Law; what will they not expect from our un-christian Distempers, and from
our forbearing of Communion with the established Church, as if it were the
Synagogue of Satan?

By this Artifice it is that they gain Proselytes. They expose the Protestants
as a dis-united People. They demand of injudicious Men how they can, in
Prudence, join with those who are at variance among themselves? Though at this
time, in the Church of England it self, there is much more agreement then in
the Church of Rome, in which (they say) there are great numbers of more private
Deists, V. Polit. of France,
and Socinians, and some (we are certain) who publish it to the World Moyens
Surs, etc. pour la conversion de tous les Heretics.
that the Primacy is Antichristian; in which there are Solemn and Public
Assemblies who declare openly against one another in the great point of the
Papal Supremacy; and show, by so doing, that (in their Opinion) their common
head cannot certainly tell the nature of his Head-ship.

There remains to be considered, the second more principal End, The second
part of the second or more Principal End of the Dissenters.
the advancing Christian Religion, in these Kingdoms, to greater Purity and
Perfection.

But neither in this is their expectation likely to be answered.

For First, The means toward the settling of themselves is the Dissettlement
of that which is well fixed. And this is the way, not to a greater purity in
Religion, but to the corruption of it.

For, it removes Charity which is the Spirit of the Christian Religion. It
lets loose great numbers who cannot govern themselves; it moves
Unbelievers, Atheists and Idolaters, to pour Contempt upon the Church of
Christ; and confirms them in their evil course. It exposes the Church as a
Prey to the Common Enemy. Thus the Divisions in Africa gave encouragement to
the Arms of the barbarous Nations; and those, in the Egyptian Churches, made
way for the Saracens. And the Proposal of the maintenance of Charity and pure
Religion by the overthrow of a tolerable Ecclesiastical Constitution, is as
improbable a Project as that of Flammock; who, in Henry the 7th's time, L. Bac.
H. 7. p 164.
prosed a Rebellion without a breach of the Peace.

And it is here to be considered, that those who dissent from a National
Church, do generally make use of such Junctures, as are apter to debase, then
refine Religion. They often move for Alterations in the Church when there is a
great heat and ferment in the State: And in such Seasons, the Form of a Church
may be pulled in sunder, but there is not temper enough and coolness of
unbiased consideration to set it together to advantage. Such times are the
Junctures of State Dissenters, and amongst them Revolutions generally begin,
though without the pretense of reforming Religion, they are not carried on
amongst the People. For it will not serve their purpose to say plainly, they
are against the Government, because the Government is against their Interests.
Now, when well meaning Dissenters are in the hands of such worldly Power, they
will not be able to establish what they think is purest, but that which
pleases their secular Leaders. A change in the Church naturally produces some
change in the State; and in such changes who can secure the Event for the
better? The words of Bishop Andrews Ser. 6. on Nov. 5. 1614.
, about the midst of the Reign of K James, touch this Point, and they doubtless
are worth our observation. When (said he) they have made the State present
naught, no Remedy; we must have a better for it, and so a change needs: What
Change? Why! Religion, or the Church Government, or somewhat (they know not
what well): stand a while, ye shall change your Religion (said they of this day
[the Gun-powder-Traytors]) and have one for it wherein, to your comfort, you
shall not understand a word (not you of the People) what you either sing or
pray; and for variety, you shall change a whole Communion for an half. Now, a
blessed exchange, were it not? What say some others? You shall change for a
fine new Church Government; a Presbytery would do this better for you than an
Hierarchy, and (perhaps) not long after, a Government of States, then a
Monarchy. Meddle not with these Changers.

Now when a State is either disturbed or dissolved, men cannot foresee all the
ill Consequences of it. When the Vessel is stirred, the Lees come up, which lay
before undiscerned in the Mass of the Liquor. And so it is in Religion; it is
not fined, but rather rendered less pure, by motions in the Body Spiritual or
Civil. Then Politicians use conscientious Instruments no further then they
serve a present purpose; and for new Purposes they find new Instruments. One of
the Assembly of Divines D. J. L. on Psalm. 4. 4. Feb. 24. A. 1647.
discoursed, on this manner, at a public Fast. Have not these Trumpets and
these poor Pitchers had their share, and a good share too, in bringing down the
Walls of Jericho, and the Camp of Midian? and have not they (like the Story in
Ezekiel) if I may so express it, Prophesied you up an Army? The Witness of
these things is in the whole Kingdom, and a Witness of them is in your own
Bosoms. Yet the Preacher was very sensible at the same time, that those whom
they had helped to Power, were turning it against them, and breaking them to
pieces by dashing Independency against them. Aspiring Men make fair Promises,
till they have gained their point; but when that is once secured, they take
other Measures. They say Melvil's Mem. p 33.
that Maximilian, for the gaining of Votes in order to the Empire, used secret
Preachings to please the Protestant Princes [the Elector Palatine, the Dukes of
Saxony and Brandenburgh;] and went openly to Mass to please the Popish Bishops
of Mentzs, Triers, and Collein. Also, the claims of the worldly increase with
their Power: And (for illustration-sake) when the House, being garbell'd had
much less right but more force (the Army as yet agreeing with them and the good
King being in their hands) then they gave to the Declarations of their Pleasure
the Title, not as before of Ordinances, but of Acts of Parliament. Whitl.
Memoirs. p. 363.


Oliver, likewise declared plainly, Speech at the Dissol. of the House. Ian.
22. 1654. p. 22.
That there was as much need to keep the Cause by Power, as to get it. And
being potent, he entered the House, and mocked at his Masters, and commanded,
with insolent disdain, that That Bawble Id. ibid. p. 529.
(meaning the Mace of the Speaker) should be taken away. Men may intend well,
but using the help of the illegal secular Arm, they can never secure what they
propose, but frequently render that which was well settled, much worse by their
unhinging of it.

By such means it comes to pass, that the Civil State is embroiled, and
Religion sensibly decays, ^^stead of growing toward perfection, where public
order is interrupted, and Men gain a Liberty which they know not how to use.

Secondly, It appears, by the History of our late Revolutions, which began
with pretense of a more pure Religion, that our Dissentions occasioned great
Corruptions both in Faith and manners.

Then the War was Preached up as the Christian Cause. And one of the
City-Soldiers, mortally wounded at Newberry-fight, was applauded (in an Epistle
Hill's Se^. called Temple work. A. 1644.
to the Houses) as one whose Voice was more then humane when he cried out, O
that I had another Life to loose for Jesus Christ. Then this Doctrine (so very
immoral and unchristian) was by some D. Crisp in Ser. called, Our sins are
already laid on Christ. p 274, 275.
Preached, and by great numbers embraced. The Lord has no more to lay to the
charge of an Elect Person, yet in the height of Iniquity and the excess of
Riot, and committing all the Abominations that can be committed -- then he has
to lay to the charge of a Saint Triumphant in Glory. Then certain Soldiers H.
of Indep. part. 2. p 152, 153.
entered a Church with five Lights, as Emblems of five things thought fit to be
extinguished, viz. The Lord's Day, Tithes, Ministers, Magistrates, the Bible.
Then by a public Intelligencer, who called himself Mercurius Britanicus Mert.
Brit. N 13. Nov. A. 43. p. 97.
the Lord Primate Usher himself was reproached as an Old Doting Apostating
Bishop. Instances are endless; but, what need have we of further Witnesses then
the Lords and Commons, and the Ministers of the Province of London, whose
Complaints and Acknowledgments are here subjoyned.

The Lords and Commons, in one of their Ordinances, Die Jovis. Febr. 4. 1646.
, use these words. We -- have thought fit (left we partake in other Men's sins,
and thereby be in danger to receive of their Plagues) to set forth this our
deep sense of the great dishonor of God, and perilous condition that this
Kingdom is in, through the abominable Blasphemies, and damnable Heresies vented
and spread abroad therein, tending to the Subversion of the Faith, contempt of
the Ministry and Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

The Ministers made a like acknowledgment, saying, Instead Testlm. to Truth of
I. Chr. p. 31.
of extirpating Heresy, Schism, Profaness; we have such an impudent and
general inundation of all these evils, that Multitudes are not ashamed, to
press and plead for public, formal, and universal Toleration.

And again, We the Ministers of Jesus Christ, do hereby testify to all our
Flocks, to all the Kingdom, and to all the Reformed Churches, as our great
dislike of Prelacy, Erastianism, Brownism, and Independency; so our utter
abhorrence of Anti-Scripturism, Popery, Arianism, Socinianism, Arminianism,
Antinomianism, Anabaptism, Libertinism, and Familism; with all such like, now
too rise among us.

Thirdly, some Dissenters, by the Purity of Religion, mean agreeableness of
Doctrine, Discipline, and Life, to the dispensation of the New Testament, and a
removal of humane Inventions: and thus far the Notion is true; but, with
reference to our Church, it is an unwarrantable Reflection. For it has but one
Principal Rule, and that is the Holy Scripture; and Subordinate rules in
pursuance of the general Canons in Holy Writ, are not to be called in our
Church, any more then in the pure and Primitive Christian Church, whose Pattern
it follows, humane Imaginations, but rules of Ecclesiastical Wisdom and
Discretion.

But there are others among the Dissenters, who, by the Purity of Religion,
mean a simplicity as opposed to composition, and not to such mixtures as
corrupt the Circumstances, or parts of Worship which in themselves are pure.
Quakers and some others believe their way the purer, because they have taken
out of it Sacraments and External Forms of Worship, and endeavored (as they
phrase it G. Fox in. J. Perrot 's Hidden things brought to light. p. 11.
) to bring the Peoples minds out of all Visibles. By equal reason the Papists
may say their Eucharist is more pure then that of the Protestants, because they
have taken the Cup from it. But that which makes a pure Church, is like that
which makes a pure Medicine; not the sewness of the Ingredients, but the good
quality of them how many soever they be; and the aptness of their Nature for
the procuring of Health.

Men who have this false Notion of the purity of Religion, distill it till it
evaporates; and all that is left is a dead and corrupt Sediment. And here I
have judged the following words of Sir Walter Rauleigh not unfit to be by me
transcribed, and considered by all. Hist. of the World. l. 2. 1. part c. 5. p.
249.
The Reverend Care which Moses had in all that belonged even to the outward and
least parts of the Tabernacle, Ark, and Sanctury -- is now so forgotten and
cast away in this Superfine Age, by those of the Family, by the Anabaptist,
Brownist, and other Sectaries, as all cost and care bestowed and had of the
Church, wherein God is to be served and worshipped, is accounted a kind of
Popery, and as proceeding from an Idolatrous Disposition: Insomuch, as time
would soon bring to pass (if it were not resisted) that God would be turned out
of Churches into Barnes, and from thence again into the Fields and Mountains,
and under the Hedges; and the Officers of the Ministry (robbed of all Dignity
and Respect) be as contemptible as these places; all Order, Discipline, and
Church Government left to newness of Opinion, and Men's Fancies: Yea, and soon
after, as many kinds of Religions would spring up as there are Parish-Churches
within England: Every Contentious and ignorant person clothing his Fancy with
the Spirit of God, and his Imagination with the gift of Revelation; insomuch,
as when the truth, which is but One, shall appear to the simple multitude, no
less variable then contrary to it self, the Faith of Men will soon after dye
away by degrees, and all Religion be held in scorn and contempt.

Fourthly, If several contrary Parties be established by way of sufferance; no
progress is likely to be made toward the perfecting of Religion. For the
suffering of diverse Errors is not the way to the reforming of them. One
Principle only can be true; and the blending of such as are contrary with it,
creates the greatest of ties; a mixture of that which is profane, with that
which is sacred.

Fifthly, Many Dissenters are not likely to erect a Model by which Christianity
may be improved amongst us, because they lay aside Rules of discretion, and
rely not on God's assistance in the use of good means, but depend wholly upon
immediate illumination, without the aids of Prudence: And some of the more
sober amongst them, have inclined too much toward this extreme.

In Reformation ( said one Mr. S. Sympson In A. 1643. Reform. Preservat. pl 26,
27.
in his Sermon before the Commons) do not make reason your Rule nor Line you go
by. It is the line of all the Papists. -- The second Covenant does forbid, not
only Reason, but all Divine Reason, that is not contained by Institution in the
Worship of God. -- God's Worship has no ground in any reason but God's Will.

Sixthly, There are already provided in this Church, more probable means for
the promoting of pure Religion, then those which have been proposed by all or
any of the Dissenting Parties. It is true, each Church is capable of
improvement, by the change of obsolete Words, Phrases, and Customs; by the
addition of Forms upon new Occasions; by adjusting discreetly some
Circumstantials of External Order. But, to change the Present Model for any
other that has yet been offered to public consideration, is to make a very
injudicious bargain. There are in it, all the necessaries to Faith and
Godliness; there is preserved Primitive Discipline, Decency, and Order: And,
under the means of it, there are great numbers grown up into such an
improvement of Judicious Knowledge and useful, prudent, serious Piety; that it
requires a Laborious Scrutiny to find Parallels to them in any Nation under
the Heavens.

I do not take pleasure in distastful Comparisons. Yet I ought not (sure) to
pass by with unthankful negligence, that excellent Spirit which God has raised
up among the Writers and Preachers of this Church; their labors being so
instrumental toward the right information of the Judgment, and the amendment
of the Lives of unprejudiced Hearers.

It must be confessed, that there is some trifling on all sides: And it will be
so whilst Men are Men. But there is now (blessed be God) as little of it in the
Church of England as in any Age. And the very few who do it, appear plainly to
be what they are, Phantasticks, and Actors, rather then Preachers. But, amongst
the Parties, the folly and weakness puts on a more venerable pretense, and they
give vent to it with studied shows of mighty seriousness, and deliver it
solemnly as the immediate dictate of God's Holy Spirit. And I cannot call to
mind one Minister in this Church, who would (for instance sake) have
deliberately used these words of Mr. Rutherford, in a solemn audience, Ruth. on
Dan. 6. 26. p. 8. A. 1643. bes. the Commons.
and after his solemn manner. God permits Sins, and such Sins, that there may
be room in the Play for pardoning Grace.

It seems also, not unfit for me to take notice, that the Changes formerly
made in Church Matters in England by Dissenters, were not so conducive in their
nature, to the edifying of the Body of Christ, as the things illegally removed.
The Doctrine of God's Secret decrees taught in their Catechisms, was a stronger
and more improper kind of meat then that with which the Church of England had
fed her Children. Ordination by a Bishop, accompanied with Presbyters, was more
certain and satisfactory then that by Presbyters without a Bishop.

There was not that sobriety in many of the present and unstudied Effusions,
which appeared in every of those public Forms which were considered and fixed*
And it sounded more decently (for example sake) to pray in the Churches words,
and say, from Fornication Good Lord deliver us; then to use those of an eminent
Dissenter, Prayers at the end of Farewell Sermons. Mr. U's Prayer bef. Sermon. p.
31.
Lord un-lust us. Nor did the long continued Prayers help Men so much against
Distraction as those shorter ones, with Breaks and Pauses in the Liturgy; and
the great and continued length of them introduced, by consent, sitting at
Prayer.

Neither did it tend less to edification, to repeat the Creed standing, then to
leave it quite out of the Directory for public Worship. Neither was it an
advantage to Christian Piety to change the gesture of kneeling in the Eucharist
when the Sacred Elements were given together with Prayer, for that less
reverend one of sitting: Of sitting especially with the Hatt on, as the most
uncomely practice of some was; the People being taught to cover the Head,
Edwara's Gangrena. part 1 Error 112. p. 25.
whilst the Minister was to remain bare amongst them. Nor was the civil Pledge
of the Ring in Marriage, bettered by the invention of some Pastors, who (as is
storied of them) took a Ring See Edw. Grangr. 2. part p. 13.
of some Women-converts, upon their admittance into their Church.

Neither was the Alteration of the Form of giving the Holy Elements, an
amendment. For the Minister was directed to the use of these words. Directory
for public Worship. p. 27.
Take ye, eat ye; this is the Body of Chirst which is broken for you. -- This
Cup is the New Testament in the blood of Christ, which is shed for the
Remission of the Sins of many. -- The words denoting Christ's present
Crucifixion, (either actually or in the future certainty of it) give
countenance to the Romish Sacrifice of the Mass; though I verily believe they
were not so intended.

Nor did the forbidding the Observation of Christ's Nativity and other
Holy Days, add one Hairs breadth to the Piety of the Nation; but, on the other
hand, it took away, at least from the common People, one ready means of fixing
in their Memories the most useful History of the Christian Religion.

It is easy enough, even for Men who are Dwarfs in the Politics, in such sort
to alter a constitution as to make it more pleasing for a time to themselves
during their Passion, and the novelty of the Model in their Fancy not yet
disturbed by some unforeseen mischief or (...); but it is extreme difficult upon
the whole matter, to make a true and lasting Improvement; there being so many
parts in the frame to be mutually fitted, and such variety of Cases in Humane
Affairs.

I pray from my Heart for the bettering, but I dread the tinkering of
Government.

The Conclusion.
IF then, Dissenters are not likely to obtain their Ends; of Establishing
themselves, of rooting out of Popery, and promoting pure Religion, by
overthrowing the Church of England; the Inference is natural, they ought, both
in Prudence and Christianity, to endeavor after Union with it.

They will (it may be) say to me, can Men be persuaded two contrary ways? Can
they both Assent and Dissent? And whilst they secretly Dissent, would you force
them into an Hypocritical Compliance? I Answer thus.

First, Though a Man cannot at the same time wholly Assent and Dissent; yet
there are means for the rectifying of a false persuasion; and he may, upon good
Ground, change his Mind.

Secondly, No Man's Mind can be forced; for it is beyond the reach of Humane
Power.

Thirdly, Good Governors do not use Severity to force Men to dissemble their
Minds, and to make them Hypocrites, but to move them, after a Trial of fair
means, to greater consideration.

I am not concerned in the Emblem of the Persian Dervi Tavern. Pers. Trav. l.
4. c. 6. p. 155, 156.
who, whilst they go about their Office of teaching the Law to the People,
carry a great Club in their hand. But neither do I think that the best way to
remove pernicious error from Men, is never to give them any disturbance in it.

I have two things only to recommend, first to the consideration, and then to
the practice of such as Dissent.

First, This is a time of Prosecution, and a time of Adversity is a proper time
for Consideration, and Consideration is a means to make us hold fast that which
is good, and reject that which is evil. I beseech you, make such advantage of
this Juncture. Sit down, and think once more of the Nature of this Church.
Confer with the Guides of the National Religion; read without prejudice, the
Books commended by them to you. Peruse seriously the Books which Authority has
set forth. Some who have spoken against them, have by their own confession,
never read them. Examine, and Judge. Many of your Scruples have arisen from
what you have heard, and read; they would not have otherwise been engendered in
your Minds. Hear and Read for your Information, as well as your entanglement.

Secondly, Do as much as you can do. Do as much as the Dissenters, who are most
eminent for Learning, Piety, Preaching, Writing, Experience, and Fame;
sometimes actually do. They have owned our Communion to be lawful. See Lawf. of
hearing the public Ministry, etc. by Mr. Nigh, Mr. Robinson, etc. and Mr.
Corbet's Non-Conformists Plea for Lay-Communion.
They have received the Communion kneeling. They have bred up Children to the
Ministry of this Church. They have joined in the Liturgy. They have been
Married according to the Form of it. Nay, one who assisted in making the
Directory, would have his own Daughter (in those times) be Married in the way
of the Book of Common Prayer. Mr. Marshall in Hist. of Indep. 1 part p. 80.
Do as the ancient Non-conformists did, who would not separate, though they
feared to Subscribe: Who wrote with such Zeal against those of the Separation,
that Mr. Hildersham was called, See Dr. Willit's Epistle Dedicatory before his
Harm. on 1 Samuel Schismaticorum (Qul vulgo Brownistae) malleum.
The Maul of the Brownists.

Do more for the Peace of God's Church, then for a Vote, or Office, or Fear of
Legal Penalty. Come as Christians to the Sacrament, and not as Politicians.
Those who have so done, yet break the unity of the Church, are said to use the
Arts of Jesuits, and to be without all excuse, by a Dissenter Vox. (...) 6. p.
49, 50, etc.
who writes with commendable temper.

Do constantly what you do upon occasion. No Preaching, or Praying, which is
better liked, can balance the evil of Separation from a Church, which imposes
no terms of Communion which are sinful.

For Peace sake, let that be more constant, in which your Conscience allows
occasional exercise. A Member who joins himself to any established Church, and
also to any Churches which are set up, not as legal Supplements of it, but as
Forts against it, seems to be a kind of Wooden Leg; if I may represent so
grave a matter by so light a Similitude. He is tied on, and taken off, at
pleasure; he is not as, by natural Ligaments and Nerves, knit to such
Ecclesiastical Bodies. If all would do constantly what they can in Conscience
do sometimes, they would create a better Opinion of themselves, in the
Governors, and move them to all due favor, and hinder all the destructive
breaches amongst us. For the remain of other Dissenters would be so
inconsiderable, as to abide in the Body of the Nation, as ill humors thrown off
to the extreme parts, from which there may arise some little pain, but no
mortal danger.

Now, the God of Peace grant Peace to us always, by all fit means.

The END.

