A SERMON CONCERNING The Celestial Body of a Christian, After the
Resurrection: Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL April 8. 1694.
Being EASTER DAY.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Published by their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, London, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.
1 CORINTHIANS. XV. 53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality.
THIS is part of a very remarkable Discourse of St. Paul's; and indeed all his
are such. In it he treats of the great Article, by which our holy Religion
stands or falls, The Resurrection of Christ; as, likewise, of that of Christian
Men. For, here he does not speak of the entire Argument, 1 S. John 5. 29.
but of the Resurrection to life. Acts 24. 15.


Now, after having proved by several convincing Reasons, that Christ is risen,
and that those who are Christ's shall rise also in God's due time, he proceeds
to the discovery of a mysterious Truth not hitherto unfolded to the
Corinthians. This holy S^cret consists of two Branches. The first, is the
wonderful change which shall, of a sudden, be made in the Bodies of those true
Christians who shall be found alive at that time, when Christ shall come to
judge that world, which, with such insolence and ingratitude, set him at
naught. The Apostle shows that there shall then be no other separation of the
Souls of the Just from their respective Bodies, than what the Almighty power of
God shall make by the transmutation of those Bodies from a gross to a heavenly
frame. The second, is the like glorious alteration which shall be made at the
last in the Bo^es of those, who, having slept in Christ, shall be raised again
at that day* Behold (says he) I show you a mystery; 51*
we shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed,

In a moment, 52.
in the twinkling of an Eye at the last Trump (for the Trumpet shall found)
[some awakening Power shall go before the Heavenly King, when he descends
with his Host of Angels] and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, 53.
and we shall be changed.

For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

That which I have to say, at present, upon these words may be reduced to four
Heads.

1. The grounds of the Belief of a Christian, concerning this change of a
corruptible and mortal, into an incorruptible and immortal Body. 2. The many
and great advantages which will accrue to those whose bodies shall be at last
in this extraordinary manner transfigured. 3. The means without which no man
shall attain this Blessed End. 4. An Exhortation to the conscientious use of
the means, by which we may, with certainty, arrive at this Change, which will
be so very much every way for the better, that whenever we shall leave these
earthly Tabernacles, (in which we shall dwell but a few days, and, peradventure
whilst those last, incommodiously enough) we may (by the grace of God and the
ministration of his holy Angels) be received into everlasting habitations.
1. I begin with the grounds upon which we believe that the Body shall be
raised and made Caelestial in the Heavens, and corrupt no more, and dye no more.

That the Body is mortal, is an Article in every man's Creed, though many live
as if they had not spent a thought about dying, and upon the account which,
after death, must be made by them.

That the Body shall rise, M. Fell p. 10. putes co. jam revixisse.
was a Doctrine which the Primitive Christians spoke of with such great
assurance, that as the Heathen, in Minutius* Felix, observes, a man that heard
them would almost think they themselves were already risen. And tho the conceit
of Origin v. Gennad. Massil. de Eccl. dogmat. c. 6. p. 5. c. 7. p. 6.
about a new Caelestial body, instead of the glorified frame of the old one (at
least of the ideal rudiments of it) had been by his Followers entertained, yet,
they agreed with other Christians in the point of a heavenly Tabernacle.
Nevertheless, all men in all Ages have not had a Faith equal with theirs, but
some (especially in ours so overrun with Skepticism) have doubted concerning
the Resurrection and further Change of this Body; such things entering with
difficulty into our imaginations, of which no Instance has been seen by us.
Notwithstanding which, we have reason to believe this Change, though none have
come out of their Graves to show us it.

And here, I appeal to all sensible men, whether That God who is the Author of
Motion, by which all Alterations in bodies are made, who brought this goodly
Frame of the World out of an heap of indigested Matter, who formed the Body of
Adam out of the Dust, who has so framed Nature, that a spring of Vegetables
should succeed their death in Winter; who quickens dying Seeds into beautiful
Stems and Flowers and Fruit, who caused even the dry rod of Aaron to bud, and
blossom, and bring forth Almonds; who has given skill and power to men, by Fire
and other natural Causes, to open and refine the grossest bodies, in whose Book
(says David) were all our members written, Psalm 13^ 1^
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them; who
is pleased frequently to raise the Sick to Health and Strength and Vigor,
after they had suffered a long and tedious languishment, in which low Estate
their Flesh and their Spirits were wasted, and their Bones stood, as it were,
staring upon them; I appeal (I say) to all men of sound common sense, whether
that God who has done these great things, is not able to put together the
parts of an humane body which he made, contrived, and formerly joined; and to
advance the frame of it from grossness to purity. To think he is not, is next
to no thinking at all, and it is to reproach God's Power, and Knowledge and
Wisdom, which is a perilous as well as an injudicious and irreverend practice.

How God will effect the change of this Body, when he shall make it Celestial,
I pretend not to explain. No man (I believe) can minutely tell how a grain of
Mustardseed grows up into a Tree, or arborescent Plant. It is true, we cannot
properly call that part of this Doctrine, which is revealed, any longer a
Mystery. But there is something of it kept secret still. God has not been
pleased fully to discover the methods of his working this wonderful effect. It
may suffice, in this Doctrine of Grace, (as in those of time, and place, and
rest, and motion in Nature,) that we know enough for our present use, though we
know not all; and that we are sure of the thing it self, though we cannot
comprehend the manner of it.

It is more than barely credible, it is certain, That God, who can do all this,
will at last do it, because he has said he will. He who, on earth caused the
Faces of Moses and Saint Stephen to shine, who translated Elias, in the Chariot
of a bright and glorious Cloud, into the Heavens; has told us, in his holy Word
(which shall not pass away, though this World shall) that, S. Mat. 13. 43.
at the end of it, the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom
of their Father;

That they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World, St. Luke 20. 35,
36.
and the Resurrection from the Dead, shall be equal with the Angels.

That if our earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
we have a Building of God [a Divine Frame], an House not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

That there is a natural and a spiritual Body: 1 Cor. 15. 44. 49.
and that, as we have born the image of the earthy, we [Christians] shall also
bear the image of the heavenly [Adam].

All this is further confirmed to us by the Economy of the Gospel. That sets
forth Christ as the Person, who, on Earth, was transfigured in so admirable a
manner, that his Face did shine as the Sun, and his very Raiment was white as
the Light; S. Mat. 17. S. Mark. 9. 2, 3. S. Luke 9. 29.
who bought both Body and Soul with an incorruptible price; who died and rose
again, That he might be Lord both of the dead and living; who rose as a public
person, as the Head of his Church, in order to the Resurrection of the members
of it; who, rising from the Dead, became the first Fruits of them that slept;
who, (both to accommodate himself to these Regions, and to prove, beyond
contradiction, that it was he himself and not a Spectre; Took again his body
with flesh, Artic. 4
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's nature, and
ascended through the starry Heavens into a Region still more pure, Heb. 4. 14.
and had that body made Celestial, and still lives in that most heavenly form,
and will come again and receive his true Disciples into that thrice happy
Jerusalem, Philip. 3. 21.
where he now is, and will change their vile bodies, and fashion them like to
his own glorious body, not abolishing the substance of them, but exalting the
meanness and earthliness of their present frame into Celestial agility and
luster.

And, indeed Philosophy (such as is not vain, though much is, especially when
it refines upon sacred Mysteries,) does plainly show us, that a heavenly body
is only fit for a heavenly Region; That a pure body is not in its element,
unless it lives and moves in pure ether. Upon which account, I suppose, Saint
Paul himself observes that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God
above; 1 Cor. 15. 50.
neither does corruption inherit incorruption. It must be changed into a body
that cannot corrupt or die, if it is to subsist most happily for ever in an
heavenly place: and such is the place prepared for the Children of the
Resurrection.

All this being considered, it becomes us not to be faithless, but believe that
this mortal shall put on immortality. For it is full out as absurd to refuse to
believe when there is a reason for our Faith, as to believe, with a forward
credulity, when there is none.

The consequence of this Belief is very comfortable: for great and many are the
advantages derived to Christians, by being clothed with a Celestial Body: and
that is the 2 d. Head which I proposed to discourse of. The very nature of the
thing speaks aloud the benefit which will accrue to them by the renovation of
this Body. There is scarce a comparison to be admitted betwixt this earthly
body, and that which shall be at the Ascension of Christians. They differ more
than the least and dimmest Star, and the brightest and greatest Luminary in the
Firmament of Heaven. Of this St. Paul takes notice in the fortieth verse of
this Chapter, and those which follow it, saying, There are Coelestal bodies and
bodies Terrestrial; 1 Cor. 15. 40.
but the glory of the Coelestal is one, and the glory of the Terrestrial is
another. There is one glory of the Sun, v. 41.
and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; for one Star
differs from another Star in glory. So also is the Resurrection of the Dead.
It is sown in corruption, v. 42.
it is raised in incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory:
It is sown in weakness, v. 43.
it is raised in power. It is sown a natural body, v. 44.
it is raised a spiritual body. Happy are the people who are in such a Case.

But, to descend to a more special consideration of this matter: The happiness
derived from the change of a natural to a spiritual body, consists in a
deliverance,

1. From the grossness of the former, as it is a body of this flesh and blood.

2 dly, From the disorderly motions of it, as it is a corruptible body.

3 dly, From the perishing nature, decay and fall of it, as it is both a
corruptible and mortal body.

The first advantage which Christians obtain by changing an earthly for an
heavenly body, is deliverance from the grosness of the former as it is a body
of this flesh and blood. And this is a very valuable privilege, upon three
Accounts.

1st. Upon the account of natural case. 2dly, Of Divine Contemplation. 3dly, Of
Piety and Devotion.
1 st. Christians have a privilege, by being freed from the grosness of this
body, upon the account of ease which is so naturally desired. For (as the Book
of Solomon speaks agreeable to its title) the corruptible body presses down
the Soul. Wisd. 9. 15.
And, in that load and heaviness, there is little comfort. Corpus hoc Animi
pondus ac poenaest, quod equidem non aliter adspicio quam vinculum liberta^i
meae circumdatum.
Seneca says, of the body, that it is the weight and pain of the mind, and a
kind of Bond round about its Liberty. Our Office for the Burial of the Dead,
calls it the burden of the Flesh. St. Paul, also, makes this acknowledgement
in 2 Cor. 5. 4. we who are in this Tabernacle do groan [groan earnestly. v. 2.]
being burdened. By this great change that which was formerly, a heavy and
uneasy weight, becomes as wings and (as the Ancients speak) a Celestial
Chariot, to the Soul.

2 ly, Another privilege enjoyed by Christians upon deliverance from the
grosness of this body, is freedom from a mighty impediment of Divine
Contemplation. The ScripScripture teaches us, That this visible World shall be
renewed. Hebr. 1. 10, 11, 12.
The Heavens and the Earth which now are shall Perish; not in their Being, but
with reference to their present Frame; which, as it is, is a glorious
Structure; but He who made all things, can and will Build it better. This Earth
and these Heavens shall be folded up as is a Vesture, and be marvellously
changed. Upon which, there shall be new Heavens, and a new Earth.

That Phrase is in some Places metaphorically used, in setting forth a New and
Excellent State of the Church. 2. Pet. 3. 3, 7, 12, 13, 6.
But, in St. Peter it is to be literally understood of a New Frame of Nature,
after the Old (reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment) shall be, by
such means, dissolved, as the Earth was once overflowed by Water. But the
Change in Noah's time was from better to worse; this will be from worse to much
much better. Doubtless it will be a glorious World which God will raise out of
the Ruins of this. It is a World expected as a wonderful Blessing from the
Promise of God. Verse. 12, 13, 14.


Now in this World, Wisd. 9. 15.
the Earthly Tabernacle weighs down the Mind that museth upon many things;
and it is from the grossness of the Organs of it that we think so little, and
discern so little of the Beauty of Nature and Providence. And the more the Eye
is helped by Art, the more it raises Admiration in him who considers the Works
of God. It lets in a New World of Creatures, and an infinite agreeable
Variety of Motions, Figures, and Contextures, which we discern nothing of by
our naked Sight. And in such Contemplation, there is more true and useful
Pleasure, than in all the Brutalities in which Sensual Men consume their Time,
Substance, and Health; and waste their Conscience too. Now, it will be
necessary for the Body to be Celestial, that it may be capable of considering
those extraordinary Stamps and Characters of the Divine Power and Wisdom which
will be found upon a Celestial and Incorruptible World; the observing of
which, will (I believe) be one of those Exercises in which the Spirits of Just
Men made Perfect shall be most happily employed. For if these Heavens declare
the Glory and Handiwork of God, those will much more do so; and a Saint cannot
be such if he delights not in that Manifestation.

3 dly, Another Privilege arising from our Deliverance from the grossness of
this Body, is the removal of a great hindrance of Piety and Devotion. It cannot
but be an extreme Mortification to those who would lift up their Hearts to God,
and have their Conversation in Heaven, to feel such a pressure and dullness upon
their Spirits as damps and deadens them in their Holy Admirations, Praises and
Prayers. This especially will be an extraordinary Grief to them when they set
themselves with all their Heart and Soul and Might, to answer, with the Degrees
of their Devotion, the most solemn Occasions of Public Worship; such as those
of this Day, on which all that is within us should bless the Name of God, who
has begotten us again to a lively Hope by the Resurrection of Jesus from the
Dead. But when the Body is not Restive, and the Spirits move as Handmaids to
the Soul; then, even here on Earth, it is ravished with Religious Joy.

The second Advantage which Christians obtain, by changing an Earthly for an
Heavenly Body, is Deliverance from the disorderly Motions to which this Body is
liable, as it is a Corruptible Body; whether the Spring of them be within, or
from without; and upon which account it may be called (as it is in the Book of
Wisdom) a Body that is subject unto Sin. Wisd. 1. 4.
Here frequently Sickness and violent Torture render Life not worthy the Name
of Life, and provoke the Patients to think, sometimes, that Death moves very
slowly toward them. Here, it many times happens, that one corrupt Member must
be cut off for the Preservation of the rest; though with certain Pain, and
uncertain Hope. In this Body, the Warmth which is subservient to Wit and
Elocution, carries frequently with it a mixture of Extravagance and
Indiscretion. How often does this Corruptible Frame bring such Decays upon the
Memory, that all things are almost forgotten, even Injuries themselves? tho of
this sort of Oblivion we have no reason to complain. What is more common to Man
than the raging and swelling of unruly Passions and Affections, which are
troublesome both to the Person so highly moved, and to the World to which he
gives Disturbance? How often do unreasonable Appetites and Inclinations become
so impetuous, and war with such force against the Soul, in Men who are not yet
grown up into strong Habits of Grace, that the Good which they would do, that
they do not; and the Evil which they would not do, that they do? How often do
Flesh and Blood prejudice the Understanding by Enthusiastic Heat, which
represents to it Dreams and strong Delusions and flashes of Madness in the
Fancy, as immediate Illuminations from God? How frequently does it form a dark
Cloud of Melancholy in the Imagination, and fashion that Cloud into all the
Shapes of Terror and Affrightment, in good, though scrupulous Men? Upon this
account they cry out, in their haste, and in the anguish of their Souls, Psalm.
77. v. 7.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will He be favorable no more? Is his
Mercy clean gone for ever? v. 8.
Does his Promise fail for evermore? v. 9.
Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he, in Anger, shut up his tender
Mercies? These, through the fumes of the Blood, rather than the guilt of the
Conscience, are for a season in this Life, of all others the most miserable;
for such a troubled Spirit who can bear? Nevertheless, upon the whole, their
Condition is much safer and better than theirs who sport with their
Misfortunes, and mock at their Griefs, and at the same time wallow in Sin
without any Reflection upon either the Criminalness or the Peril of their own
Sensuality. For these latter, at the dreadful Day, shall have their Bodies made
the most Dishonorable and Unprofitable of all Vessels, whilst those of the
former shall be changed into Vessels of the highest Honor and the greatest
Use, that Hum^ne Nature is capable of; and such they shall remain for ever. And
that is

The third sort of Advantage which those who are Christ's will be happy in;
that is to say, a freedom from the perishing nature, decay, and fall of this
Body, as a corruptible mortal Body; for this Corruptible must put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality. There are two things
which all Men naturally desire; to know an end of their Sufferings, and to have
no end of their Happiness. The way to the Accomplishment of these Desires is
not shown in the Schools of Zeno or Plato. It is confessed, there was taught by
them a celebrated but false Doctrine of Restitution (...)
of the World. This they would have to be brought to pass in the Revolution of
a certain Period of Time, in such sort, that all things should come about
again, and be as they had been before for a like quantity of Duration; and so
in Vicissitudes for ever: From whence it would follow, that this Corruptible
Body, after it had put on Incorruption for a season, should become corruptible
again, and mortal again. But in the School of Christ, we learn a Proposition
which is most Confortable as well as most True; to wit, that after the
Resurrection, Ascension, and glorious Change of this Body, all Grossness, all
disorderly Motion, all Pain and Trouble shall cease; but of the Felicity of the
Christian Man's Soul dwelling in it, there shall be no End. The Apostle assures
us, That Death, their last Enemy, shall, it self, be then destroyed. For the
Lord [Jesus] shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17.
with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the Dead in
Christ shall rise first; then those which are alive and remain, shall be caught
up in the Clouds together with those that have been raised, to meet the same
Lord in the Air, and so shall they be ever with the Lord.

The Sting of Misery is the Continuance of it, and Hell is the more Hell for
that. Continuance also is the Heaven of Joy. It is made Perfect by our
possessing it, without any Shadow of Suspicion of being ever bereaved of it.
And thus it will be after the Resurrection of the Just. Then shall be entirely
fulfilled the Words of the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 13. 14.
He will ransom thee from the Power of the Grave: He will redeem thee from
Death. O Death! he will be thy Plague; O Grave! he will be thy Destruction.
Then shall be made good those Words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life: Or, as he expresses it, in the Words
after the Text, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
-- When this Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall
have put on Immortality; Then shall be brought to pass the Saying that is
written, [written of old by the Prophet Isaiah] Death is swallowed up in
Victory. Isai. 25. 8.


These which I have recounted, are (you will say) very great Advantages which a
Christian shall gain by changing this Earthly for a Heavenly Body. But, it may
be, you will add, Why cannot the Soul be fully happy in it self without any
Body at all; and happier than in a Body, though Incorruptible and Immortal?

To this, I think, it is proper to answer no more than thus much, in this short
Discourse which is designed not for nice Dispute, but solid Edification. That
is to say, That God who framed his Creatures in diverse Orders, made Man a
Creature consisting of Soul and Body; and that it belongs to his Rank in the
Creation to have them at last united again: Also, that by the perfectest Union
of them, a Creature of that Order is, as such, completed both in his proper
Being, and in the happiness of it. To this purpose are (as I conceive) the
words of St. Paul. In this [Tabernacle] we grow earnestly, 2 Cor. 5. 2, 3, 4.
desiring to be Clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven. If so be
that, being Clothed, we shall not be found Naked. For we that are in this
Tabernacle do Groan, being burdened: Not that we would be Uncloathed, but
Clothed upon, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life. He would not be
without a Body at That day (for of that time he speaks) but he is desirous that
a Celestial Form should be put upon Terrestrial Matter. Ver. 10.


These is a Question less curious than that which has been put, but exceedingly
more useful; and it is this. What shall we do that we may come at these several
great Advantages of living at last in an Heavenly body? And this is the

Third Consideration, and very fit for the Exercise of our Thoughts. For, in
vain, do we Philosophize about a Celestial Paradise, and a Spiritual Body, and
an Heavenly Word, without knowing and using the means of being happy in them
all.

Those means are the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace to which Christians on
their Parts have solemnly consented, and which, by the assistance of God's
Grace, they may and must perform, by their sincere Obedience to Him. The way to
have better Bodies is to have more Virtuous Souls. God has put us into this
Body, as into the Habit of a Pilgrim on Earth, as Probationers for a more
excellent Clothing. And, according to our Patience, our Self-denial, our
keeping the Body in Subjection to the Mind, our governing the Appetites and
Passions of it, so shall the Resurrection and Ascension of it be. Righteousness
(says the Book of Wisdom) is Immortal; Wisd. 1. 15
and the giving heed to her Laws is the assurance of Incorruption; Chapter 6. 18,
19.
and Incorruption makes us near unto God. And he that will not awake to
Righteousness shall not ascend to a state of Incorruption. God will not receive
such a Violater of his Laws into his especial Presence. He will not admit so
brutal a Creature into his Kingdom, where there is nothing to gratify the
Inclinations of Flesh and Blood. Such a Creature would still be desirous to Eat
and Drink, and to enjoy the Pleasures of a corruptible Body.

We rise to Glory as Members of Christ, who (says the Apostle) died for all, 2
Cor. 5. 15.
that they which live should not live to themselves, but unto him who died for
them and rose again. His true Members we cannot call our selves with any
Propriety, if we fulfill not the holy Vow we made to him when we were initiated
into his Church, by renouncing and forsaking all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.
St. Paul has told the World in express Terms, Gal. 6. 8.
That he who Sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh Reap Corruption. (He shall
die after all the pampering of the Body with Epicurean Art, and for that it may
be, much the sooner; He shall fat himself for Slaughter) but He who Sows to
the Spirit (who Feeds and Cultivates the Soul with Wisdom and Holiness) shall
of the Spirit Reap Life everlasting; the Life of an Immortal Soul in an
Immortal Body. Can it ever be imagined (or if it be, is it any other than mere
imagination, and a very false and gross one too) that Christ shall raise the
Temple of this Body to a Celestial House, making that second Temple much more
glorious than this first, after it has been wilfully Desecrated by Man, and put
to the vilest uses of Insobriety and Lust. Such Sensualities render this Body
more Earthly still, and bury the Soul in it, so far are they from promoting it
to an Heavenly Estate.

The impenitent Sinner hopes against all grounds of hope, if he has expectation
of seeing God face to face with Eyes which have been full of Adnltery? and of
praising God in Heaven with a Tongue that has been set on Fire from Hell, that
has Insolently blasphemed him on Earth, and bitterly reviled his Servants,
perhaps because they were his Servants, or for reviling sake. The like may be
said of every Wickedness done by the Soul in this Earthly Tabernacle. ^ Cor. 5.
^0.
For we must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, that every Man may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be Good or Evil. This is part of the Confession of our Faith which we have,
this day, made in these words. At [Christ's] coming all Men shall rise again
with their Bodies, and give account of their own Works; and they that have done
good shall go into Life everlasting, and they that have done Evil, into
everlasting Fire. Wherefore,

Fourthly, Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, which will seize upon the Ungodly,
and bring them to Destruction both of Body and Soul, and the joyful Estate of a
happy Soul in a Celestial Body, which shall be the Portion of all those who
walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; We beseech you, both by the
Severities and Mercies of God;

That ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, Romans 12. 1.
holy and acceptable unto him, which is your reasonable Service. Seeing That
all these things shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13.
what manner of Persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness,
looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of GOD, wherein the
Heavens being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
servant heat?

Nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

Wherefore, Seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of
him, in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless.

As sure as Christ is risen, these dry Bones shall live, as well as those did
which the Prophet spoke of in a Political Sense, Ezekiel. 37. 3, 11, 14.
meaning by them the House of Israel, which God promised to Restore.

It should, therefore, be our Care, not to put this vile Body into far worse
Condition, but to consult the good of it; seeing the more Heavenly its Frame be
made, the Felicity of the Soul in it will be the greater.

Men of light and desultory Humors affect Alterations, without considering the
Events of them. Wise Men choose them also, when they foresee plainly they will
turn to their exceeding Benefit. And here they have a plain prospect of a most
considerable advantage, of changing Corruption for Incorruption, and Mortality
for Immortality.

If any are extremely concerned at Deformities of the Body, as so many marks of
Shame (though nothing which is not of our own doing can be a just reproach to us)
why have they not the innocent Ambition of desiring a Celestial Body, which
will be without wrinckle or blemish? And the way to procure so decent a a Body,
is to rectify the distractions of our Reason, and the monstrous choice of our
ungoverned Wills; and to subdue all dishonorable Passions and Vices; and to
keep our selves unspotted from the World. If diverse are very Covetous of Life
in this Body, as burdensome as it is, and wish their Years were not so many as
they are, and that they would still be many more, even then when the Wheel is
almost broken at the Cistern, and the Blood can scarce creep on in its Circle;
why are they averse to Christian Piety, which will provide for them an Immortal
Body?

You will permit me, Ephesians. 5. 14.
to use the Exhortation of the great Apostle, Awake thou that Sleep, and
rise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Life. Say not, Ver. 32.
as the Epicures mentioned in this Chapter, Let us Eat and Drink for to morrow
we die: But rather, let us be Sober and Vigilant, that when ever we die the
first Death, we may overcome the Second. Seeing Christ is risen, and we shall
rise and be changed by his Power, say not, upon any difficulties about
Christian Religion, Why stand we in Ieopardy every hour? Ver. 30 31, 32.
Why do we die daily? Why do we Fight with Beasts, or Men as Savage as they?
Why do we not rather consult the ease of Flesh and Blood? but rather (as St.
Paul in the Conclusion of this Discourse) Let us be steadfast, Ver. 58.
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know
that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Finally, Let us glorify him with our Bodies, and with our Souls, that he may
glorify both. Then may we, upon good and comfortable grounds, join with the
same Apostle in these words of Spiritual Triumph,

O Death! where is thy Sting? Ver. 55, 56* 57.
O Grave! where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of
Sin is the Law. But thanks be to God who gives us the Victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Glory and
Dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

