THE Saints Duty In Contending for the FAITH DELIVERED TO THEM.

A SERMON PREACHED At Paul's Church before the Right Honorable the LORD MAJOR,
and Aldermen of the City of LONDON, JULY 17. 1659.

By JOHN TEMPLER, B. D late Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and now
Minister of the Gospel at Balsham in Cambridgeshire.

(...). Hes.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Rothwell at the Bear and Fountain in
Cheap Side, Anno Dom. 1659.

Ireton Major.

Tuesday, the 26s of July, 1659.

It is ordered that Mr. Templer be desired to print his late Sermon at Paul's.

SADLER.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LATE LORD MAYOR, AND The Court of Aldermen of the
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful.
IN the printing what I lately adventured to entertain you with, I have not
followed the inducements of my own spirit, which (before I received your
Commands) was not under the least Temptation to expose those slender
Preparations to the public view. What I was enabled through Mercy to deliver,
was not intended for the Press, which requires the most close Composure, but
the Pulpit, which does not disallow of a greater freedom; not for the eye,
which is more critical, and quick to discern the least Incongruity, but the
ear, which is less exact in weighing and giving its Judgment. My unwillingness
to be guilty of an appearance of disregard to your Order, has carried me out
beyond my own private Inclinations to this Action. I am the more cheerful in
it, by how much I am assured of the same favor from you in reading the Ensuing
Discourse, which you were pleased to vouchsafe in the hearing. As for others,
who will give themselves the trouble of perusing it, I have considered they are
but of two sorts, either those which are sensible of their own Infirmities, or
those which are not. The first (I presume) will pardon mine: The second (I
suppose) will find no just reason to be displeased, if I take more
encouragement in this Attempt from your acceptance, then discouragement from
their Censures. Though a sense of the meanness of my performance keeps my hope
at a low ebb; yet my desire is earnest, that he which has chosen the weak
things of the world, would exert himself, and so far accept my Endeavors, as
to use them as shadows to commend the Excellency of his own power.

My intent is not to put any countenance upon vain Contentions, endless
Controversies, perplexing Disputes, which waste precious time, disquiet the
people of God, dry up the spirit of Religion. Those sparks which issue from
such kind of Discussions (considering the Disposition of the matter on every
side to take fire) are more likely to put all into a violent Combustion, then
enkindle in any the least flame of sincere love for the interest of the Gospel.
The scope I aim at is to animate and provoke to a well tempered zeal, a holy
contending, a vigorous asserting of that faith, which is engrossed in the Bible
by the Spirit of God, sealed with the blood of Christ, delivered to the Saints,
witnessed by Thousands of Martyrs. Those Acts of violence it has sustained in
the world, can have no other effect upon all, who love the Lord Jesus, then to
engage them so far in its vindication. When the Levites concubine was divided
into pieces, and dispersed through the coasts of Israel, all that saw it,
thought themselves concerned to take advice, and declare their minds. As
strange a spectacle we are daily exercised with. The faith which Christ has
espoused as his own, we see dis-memhred and mangled, distributed by Piece-meals
through several Tribes and Parties, some having only the skin and outside,
those matters which are most remote from the heart and life of Religion; others
only the bones, the hard and controversal parts; but few in comparison the
marrow and spirit. In these Circumstances no less then a Duty is incumbent upon
you, and all the Israel of God to unite as one man in asserting of it, which
indeed will be a crown to you, a Glory to the Christian profession, an
Astonishment to the Adversary, and shall be his prayer, who is

Yours in all Christian Service, JOHN TEMPLER.

A SERMON PREACHED At Paul's Church before the Right Honorable the LORD MAJOR,
and Aldermen of the City of LONDON. JULY 17. 1659.
JUD. 3. V. Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints.


IN the ninth verse of this Epistle, we find Michael the Archangel contending
for the body of Moses. In the words of the Text we are advised to contend for
the soul and spirit of Moses, the Faith delivered to him and all the Saints.

However at the first appearance it may be judged unseasonable to press any
thing, which looks toward Contention, at such a time, when the pool of
Bethesda ordained for healing, is turned into the waters of strife, when men
generally have better skill in Premises and Conclusions then in the Promises
or Precepts of Christ: yet when I consider either those delusions, which lie
upon the spirits of some, who contend for their own shadows in stead of the
Faith delivered to the Saints, and think they embrace the Goddess, when it is
but a cloud upon their own understandings, or that skeptical frame that
prevails upon the spirits of others, who by reason of the counterfeit money
which is abroad, conceive it impossible to be assured of that which is current;
who are as unresolved in divine concernments, as he was that did not know,
Haereo lac inter meditans, interque cruprem, inter delicias uberis and lateris.
Angel. Gazaeus p. 259.
whether to prefer the milk of the mother, or the blood of her son: or indeed
that deadness which has surpised the hearts of most, how listless they are,
when any thing lies before them which relates to the radical Truth of the
Gospel; it pleads not only the convenience, but the necessity of this advice.
How many have lost their former heat and vigor, and are ready to dispute that
Faith in defense of which they were once ready to die. Aquam selis vocant, sub
lucis ortum tepida manat, medio die qaum vchemedtissimus est calor silgida
cadem fluis, media nocte servida ex^stuat. Q Cur. l, 4. cap. 7.
Their hearts are become like the fountain at the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, at
midnight it was exceeding hot, about the rising of the Sun lukewarm, at noon
time exceeding cold. When they were in a night of Persecution, their hearts
were hot; when the day of deliverance approached, their heat abated; and now at
noon-time, when the Sun is come to his Zenith, they are grown stark cold.

How necessary is it therefore to quicken one another to this Duty. Such an
Exercise may be proper for the restoring our former heat, and the recovering a
sound constitution of mind.

The occasion of this Exhortation were some attempts made by the Gnostics to
imbase and corrupt the Christian Faith: although the name might be of later
date, yet the thing was as early as this Epistle. They pretended to a more
refined and sublimated knowledge then others were arrived at, Irenaeus lib. 1.
cap. 1.
which the Apostle tells them, Puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. They styled themselves
spiritual, and all others carnal, and therefore in the 19th. verse of this
Epistle, it is charged upon them, notwithstanding this pretense, that they
themselves (and not those whom they would brand with that mark) were carnal,
not having the Spirit. Their false claims to the divine Spirit gave occasion
for those words, That ye be not shaken in mind, neither by spirit, etc. 2 These.
2.2. Irenaeus tells us, Lib. 1. advers. H.
they drew their Rise from Simon Magus who was contemporary with the Apostles.
Oecumenius upon the place, that the persons against whom the Christians were
animated here to defend the Faith, were the followers of Simon. (...).
These men crept into the Church, (...), verse 4. by pretending to unusual
severities, they did by degrees insinuate themselves. They made many meek
condescentions to those whom they desired might become their Proselytes: we
find them there in a very lowly posture, creeping upon their knees: The minds
of the vulgar sort were so low, that they could not get into them without
stooping.

Yet in the mean time their tongues were employed in inveighing against the
sacred Appointments of God, in speaking evil of Dignities, despising Dominion,
verse 4. He that considers the present danger the Doctrine of Faith is exposed
unto by persons not much of a different stamp, will conclude for the
seasonableness of this Advice, Earnestly contend for the Faith once delivered
unto the Saints.

In these words three parts expose themselves to our view, 1. An Act contend.
2. The Object of this Act, the Faith once delivered to the Saints, 3. The
manner how their Contention is to be managed earnestly, after the manner of the
Agonists, (...). I shall treat of these in their order.


1. Here is the Act contend.

It speaks the using your most serious endeavors to maintain the Doctrine of
Christ, the opposing of every thing which may conduce to its prejudice, the
expense of your parts, your Authority, your Estates, your Lives (if God
requires) to maintain faith in its primitive purity: it calls to every one to
come into the help of the Lord against the mighty, those mighty and strong
delusions which prevail with many to the eclipsing of the glorious Gospel:
during this present state the Faith of Christ has so many enemies to contest
with, so many prejudiced minds, rebellious hearts, seared Consciences, that if
there be any bowels or love in us, we can do no less then side with him in this
holy Conflict.

2. Here is the Object we are to contend for Faith once delivered to the Saints.

It is Faith, not the Faith whereby we believe, (though that merits our most
vigorous contending) but the Faith which is believed by us, The Doctrine of the
Gospel, 1 Timothy 4.1.

This Faith either pertains to the Foundation of Religion, or else to the
Superstruction; this Distinction the Apostle makes, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. If we
would know what Faith belongs to the Foundation, the best way is to examine its
Connection with that which is of undoubted necessity to salvation: The Scripture
mentions two heads, Saving Faith, and Holiness; Heb. 11.6.12.14.
without the first none can please God; without the second none shall see him:
whatsoever has an essential Connection with these two is to be owned as a
fundamental Truth, and whatsoever is repugnant, rejected as a fundamental
Error.

By the light of this Rule a great part of Socinu's his Divinity will appear to
be a fundamental mistake; for how can a man believe, and devolve himself upon
God in the way of his providence, who is possessed with an apprehension of his
not knowing future Contingents? How can a man believe and rely upon Christ,
who conceives him to be but a mear man? when the Scripture pronounces him
cursed that relies upon man, Jer. 17.5. As these Apprehensions are repugnant to
saving Faith, so they will appear to be as contrary unto Holiness. The first
prevents the Resignation of our Wills to the divine pleasure, the principal
part of a holy life. The second destroys the first branch of the Mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the flesh.

As for what belongs to the Superstruction, the Apostle has ranked it under
these heads, Gold, Silver, Precious stones: Gold, that is next to the
Foundation, and therefore of the greatest value; then Silver, then precious
Stones; Every stone in the Building is precious; though every Truth be not of
equal importance in reference to salvation, yet every one has his just price
and value.

It is a Faith once delivered, once for all. Indeed it was gradually discovered
to the world; first in the Promise to Adam, then the Sun of Righteousness began
to appear above the Horizon; Then to Abraham. He was enjoined to offer up his
Son, to signify that the promised seed should break the Serpents head by being
made an offering for sin; in the very Act he was prohibited, to denote the time
was not yet come for the manifestation of that seed; A Ram, a principal
Sacrifice amongst the appointments of the Law was substituted, to express Gods
acceptance of that service in the mean time. The waters of life like Ezekiels
waters did arise by degrees: Eze. 47. v. 3, 4, 5.
in Adams time they were to the Ancles; in Abraham's to the knees, in Moses and
the Prophets to the loins, in the times of the Messiah they became a great
River; in time past God spoke at sundry times, and in diverse manners, but now
he has spoken by his Son, most fully once for all in the New Testament. This is
his last Will and Testament, which Christ as his only Son and Heir has opened
and disclosed; he has spoken by his Son whom he has appointed Heir, Heb. 1.2.
This Testament being the last, will admit of no alteration, and therefore at
the End of the book which concludes it, there is a curse pronounced against him
who shall make any such Attempt; I testify to every man that hears the words
of this Book, if any man shall add to these things, God shall add to him the
Plagues which are written in this Book; and if any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, Rev. 22.18. By the Book of this Prophecy is not only meant the
Revelation, but the whole Scripture which is sometimes called the Prophets,
Act. 24.44, 45. sometimes the Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16.18. and here
the Book of Prophecy, because the greatest part of those, who were employed to
pen it, Omnes Canonici Thri veteris Testamenti scripti sunt a Propheris. Vid.
Whitakcri contrav 1. Q est. cap. 5.
had a prophetic spirit. The Revelation being now united and incorporated into
the Canon, and the last part in order, what is thus spoken in the conclusion of
it, must have Relation to the whole, Cursed be he that makes any Addition.
Moses who concludes the Law, charges the people not to add or diminish from it,
Deuteronomy. 12.32.
but suggests that God would raise a Prophet like unto him, whom he enjoynes
them to hear. Malachy the last of the Prophets foretells of Christ, and a
Messenger before him, from whom further instructions were to be received, but
John who consigns the Canon of Scripture, pronounces an Anathema without the
least intimation of any further discovery; he insinuates that the next
appearance to be expected from Christ, is at his last coming to Judgment,
verse 20. he that testifies these things, says, surely I come, and then the
Church which was acquainted with the mind of Christ's Answers, Even so, Come
Lord Jesus. Upon this account it is expressed in the eleventh verse, He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him he filthy
still, to signify, that if men refuse to be reclaimed by this last Revelation,
be it at their own peril, no other Gospel shall be made known to reduce them.

It is a Faith once delivered to the Saims, a Faith not invented by the Saints,
but delivered to them, not the Result of Fancy and Imagination, but the
Product of the Eternal Counsel and Wisdom of Heaven it was sealed and
delivered: sealed with the blood of Christ, and publicly delivered to the
Saints.

Every Saint is Gods Depositarius, he commits this Treasure into his custody,
he will one day call for an account of this Trust, and requires that we do not
return that corrupt to him, which was given pure unto us.

Having thus made some general discovery of the Act and the Object, I will in
the next place give some account, why this Act ought to be terminated upon this
Object: why it is so much our concernment to contend for this Faith.

The first Argument may be drawn from the Excellency of this Doctrine: the
second from the Attempts of Satan to corrupt it: The third from the Resolution
of former Saints to defend it.

1. Argument from the Excellency of this Doctrine: this will appear, if we
consider the Author of it, the Doctrine it self, the Effects it produced.

1. The Author, Isa. 9.6.
his name declares his most excellent nature, wonderful Counselor, the mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. During his Manifestation here
in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.19. I a. 9.6.
a divine Power or Spirit resided upon him, which did justify and acquit him
from that disparagement which his humane nature might have exposed him unto; He
was beheld and admired by Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in
the world, which was of no ductile Temper, by reason of those Prepossessions it
was under by the Pagan Religion; after the spending a most holy life, the
expressing the highest Acts of Grace to his friends, of love to his enemies, of
zeal for his Fathers interest, he was visibly received up into Glory: This
excellent person was the Author of this Doctrine we are to contend for.

2. The Doctrine it self, it is comprised in two words by the Prophet, The Lord
our Righteousness, Ier. 33.16. This is he which shall preach unto her the Lord
our righteousness.
the Hebrew runs thus, (...) this is he, meaning Christ the branch, (...) which
shall preach or declare unto her, meaning Jerusalem, for (...) signifies
praedicare as well as vocare, and (...) is not in the Accusative but Dative
case, The Lord our Righteousness, meaning the Gospel which Christ should preach
and hold forth to the Church. These two words are the sum of the Gospel, the
principal part of the Christian confession is that Jesus is the Lord, Phil.
2.11. and his doctrine is still a word of righteousness. Heb. 5.13. In every
vein of the Gospel there is something of the blood and imputed righteousness of
Christ. The excellency of these matters is so great, that the Apostle
attributes an Eminency to the knowledge of them (...), Phil. 3.8.9. there is an
excllency in the knowledge of arts and sciences but in the knowledge of the
Doctrine of Christ there is an (...), a supereminent and superlative worth.

3. The effects it produced without any external help or advantage. The
religion of the Jews did abound with temporal encouragements, Mahomets
doctrine was calculated for depraved nature; but the doctrine of Christ has no
such external advantage to Commend it. It does not allure to obedience by
promising the possession of a Land flowing with milk and honey (an argument fit
for the Church in her state of Infancy) or the enjoyment of inordinate lust in
paradise. The arguments it uses are of another strain, mortify your lusts, do
good to your enemies, return blessing for cursing, undervalue the delights of
the world, deny your selves, take up the Cross. I do not remember any rule in
Rhetoric to which this example may be reduced.

One would think such oratory should not prevail with many to become
proselytes; O suasionem dissu^si n^s omnis vndique pl^n^m An (...). De^ost^^^cm
C^cer^^^^que ^acr^tion^quicq^ mpersu^d^recuiqu^^ potuisse. Marsiliu^ Ficinus de
Christ. Relig. cap. 8. p. 9.
yet where this doctrine was preached we find 3000 Converted, the Magicians
burning their curious books, Felix trembling, the oracles of the Devil
silenced. No greater evidence of the excellency of it then these miraculous
effects, which were produced against wind and tide without the interposall of
any extrinsick power.

If any shall infer, if a divine power did so far interpose in asserting this
doctrine, there is the less need of our contending for it, especially it being
of a spiritual nature, and not so easily falling under humane cognizance.

All that I shall return is this. if Judes exhortatition (earnestly contend)
was of use in those times, when this doctrine was vindicated and asserted by a
miraculous power, then certainly of much more now when no assurance is given of
such extraordinary appearances for heaven.

2. From the attempts of Satan to corrupt it.

Some footsteps of this we may find in the new Testament: Hymenaeus and
Philetus are made use of to strike at the whole doctrine by asserting the
resurrection to be already past, if no resurrection or eternal salvation the
faith delivered to the Saints will presently vanish, the mind will be as Fred
for the entertainment of error as truth, therefore the armor designed for the
defense of the head is called the Helmet of salvation; implying that the hope
and desire of the resurrection to life and salvation is a security against
error.

Others were employed to compass the same design by decrying the necessity of
all outward worship and ordinances. They gave it out, that it was indifferent
what outward worship they had; so the purity of the heart was preserved;
Grotius.
such were those among the Corinthians who made no scruple to sit down in the
Idol-Temples. This is believed to be the reason of John's Admonition, Little
Children keep your selves from Idols. The Tempter knows, if all external
worship, the solemn appointments of God (in which he has obliged himself to
make conveyance of his Truth) be taken away, or made indifferent, he can with
the greater facility impregnate the mind with apprehensions repugnant to the
faith of Christ. Lest these designs prove abortive, he attemps the corrupting
of the Christian Faith by a profane mixture of Paganism. Simon Magus, and his
Adherents were his principal Instruments in this design. This seems to be the
reason of the Apostles caveat, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any spoil you through
Philosophy. Philosophy here signifies the Doctrine of the Pagan Religion, which
some endeavored to incorporate into the Christian Faith. Such mixtures have
always been attempted by Satan: if he cannot pull down the Ordinances, he will
endeavor to employ such in the dispensing of them as shall intermingle their
own erroneous Conceits; if he cannot remove the golden Candlesticks, he will
infuse what dross he may into them. He endeavors to make such a potion as the
Jews once offered to Christ, (...), The Gentiles wine mixed with the Christians
Myrrh, which has a Narcotick virtue, and in time will extinguish all the
sense of Religion. If we had no other Argument but this, the frequent attempts
of Satan to destroy the Christian Faith, it would give in a sufficiency of
Light to evidence the value of it. What Tertullian says in his Apology of Nero,
Qui scit illum intelligere potest, non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerene
damnatum.
may be well applied to the Devil, he that knows his nature, may understand
that it is a very great good, which is persecuted and condemned by him.

3. From the Resolution of the Saints to defend it. All the Devices which the
Understanding could frame were used to compel them to renounce their Faith.
The Heathens set their own wits upon the wrack to invent tortures for them,
Filesaci. select tom. 1. p. 44. Prudentius in hymno Cyptiani.
witness the Candida Massa at Carthage, a deep pit filled with lime, into which
great numbers were cast headlong. Vlpian wrote seven Books to show the several
punishments which ought to be inslicted upon Christians. They were condemned to
the fire, to the Cross, to the Mines: incredible numbers suffered every day.
Jerome writes, that there is not a day in the year to which the number of 5000.
cannot be ascribed. What effect did all this produce, not any affrightment to
the survivers. The cuting off of these branches made the Vineyard to grow the
faster. They like the plant upon Olympus did flourish in the midst of burning
Flames. They were daily increased: the love of their Savior made them to
forget their own safety. This firmness and constancy to the Faith (which by the
Apostle is styled (...), 2. Pet. 3.17.
a stedfastness peculiar to a Christian) was so well known to the Heathens,
that with Galen it was grown a Proverb, (...).
when he would express an impossible thing, A man may as soon unteach
Christians what they have learnt of Christ. Austin relates when the Oracle was
consulted by one how he might convert his wife from the Christian faith, that
the answer was, he might as soon engrave letters on a swift stream, or fly in
the air, as bring his desires to pass. This resolution of their's is a fit
pattern for our imitation.

Before I proceed I must remove a scruple.

Quest. Must we contend for every branch and parcle of faith? as for foundation
truths they are worthy of Zeal, but as for others which are not of
indispensable necessity to eternal life, we are apt to pronounce the expense of
our thoughts and endeavors about them vain and superfluous.

Answ. Amongst those truths which belong to the superstruction, some are nearer
the foundation, some are more remote; every truth calls for a measure of vigor
and zeal suitable to its situation and nature, and every error a
proportionable opposition; For

1. The least slip in any article of faith portends danger to the whole; if a
man be at the top of a house where he is most remote from the foundation, in
case his foot slip it is very doubtful, whether he will stop till he comes to
the bottom. If a man lets his hold go in any part of the doctrine of Christ,
it is very uncertain where he will stay; a little error imbases the mind,
Effecit poto Mithridates saepe veneno, Toxica ne possent sava nocere sibi.
and by a hurtful influence prepares it for the reception of a greater. The
King of Pontus by taking at first weaker poisons wrought himself by degrees
into such a constitution that he could concoct the strongest.

2. Though the being of a Christian depends upon his holding the foundation,
yet the well being and comfort of his life lies in the superstruction: Though a
house may have a sure foundation, yet if there be an error in the
superstruction, if it be not contrived into convenient rooms fit for
habitation, the Inhabitant will be deprived of the comfort of his life.

3. It is an argument of a selfish spirit to contend only for such truth as is
of absolute necessity to its own salvation. It Is a sign it is moved by a private
interest of its own, and not by the public interest of heaven. Was there no
reward at all, yet the owning of truth (none of the least stars in the bright
constellation of divine perfections) in every tittle and apex would be a piece
of that homage we owe to God. These arguments speak our duty to contend for
every branch of Faith, whether it belong to the foundation, or that which is
built upon it. Although I would not contend so much for the slate of a house as
for the foundation stone, yet both are worthy the contending for; if the
foundation be taken away the house must presently fall, but if the slate which
use to defend it against the importunity of the weather, it may in time fall
and the foundation it self perish.

Having thus opened the duty and the reasons of it; I shall in the next place,
before I proceed to the Third particular, look back a little and make some
inference from what has been spoken.

1. Observe, it is Faith we are to contend for, a matter of pure revelation,
the eternal wisdom of God disclosed, a Doctrine given from heaven.

The heathen could tell us.

(...).

More then a superficial regard is to be had to the Illustrious gifts of the
gods. The faith of Christ is one of the Choicest gifts of heaven; life and
immortality are brought to light by it, the way into a communion with the
supreme good fully discovered.

2. It is a Faith once delivered.

Therefore, own it in opposition to the fancies of those private spirits which
would deliver a new faith to us. They speak of a light within them which they
own as their guide in this undertaking, and in the mean time neglect the sure
word of prophecy. Whereas the scripture says to the Law and to the Testimony,
they say to their inward light, their understandings being colored with a
false light, they look through it upon the scripture, and so make the scripture
appear to them of the same color; just as to men, that put green or blew glass
before their eyes, all the objects round about will appear blew or green. They
see by emission and not by reception; they do not fetch a sense and meaning
from the scripture, but impose their own sense and meaning upon it. Let us not
suffer our selves to be cheated of our faith by such pretenses Their
suggestions must not be our rule, till they can demonstrate they are conducted
by an in fallible spirit.

All that I know which may induce any to the same belief with them, is either
their confidence in asserting, their arguments in proving, or their voluntary
humility in living.

1. As for their confidence and bare assertion that is nothing to us, The most
notorious Impostors have been as confident and made as high pretenses. Montanas
used to boast of the inspiration of the holy Ghost, and had his (...), women
that preached and set forth their prophesies, which he esteemed above the sacred
Gospel; (...)
they called themselves spiritual and all others carnal; wheresoever they met
them they pronounced them in a state of wrath. Their death was as strange as
their life. Eusebius says it was the common report that Montanus and Maximilla
ended their lives as Judas did. (...) l. 5. acc. hist. 15. cap.


Their pretense to act upon a principle of Conscience must be no demurre to us,
for conscience is not the original but a transcript of the Law of God. It is
sit the transcript should be examined and corrected by the original. We have
reason to doubt, whether this copy be always authentic, if we consider the
opportunity the Tempter (which wants no will) has to corrupt it; for when he
has committed an act of murder upon the soul, he usually flies thither as to a
sanctuary and lodges himself in it, knowing that it is a tender and secure
place, where the hand of violence will not easily reach him.

2. As for their arguments, let not them prevail upon us without due advice,
this is the weakness of the vulgar sort, if they meet with an argument they
cannot answer, they presently conclude no body else can; and so they receive
every slight objection for an undoubted truth. Those scruples which the
Defendants of the protestant cause have long since blown away) for want of
opportunity or skill to converse with their writings) are cried up for the
grand concernments of the Gospel a light which former ages were unacquainted
with. These being once received into the mind though weak in themselves yet
having the advantage of possession, a point very material in the Gospel as well
as the Law, will keep out the strongest truth. One man (though infirm) being
possessed of a strong hold will hinder twenty well appointed from entering: It is
the nature of error to fortify the understanding which prejudice against
every thing which may conduce to its dispossession: it has one peculiar
advantage, the faith of Christ containing something in it above the capacity of
a man, the reason of an erroneous mind does with more facility oppose it,
Villeroy
then the best informed reason defend it.

3. As for their voluntary humility their seeming disregard of the world, let
not that impose upon us. Philost. d^vita Apol. Thya.
This is no argument to evidence their being under the direction of the spirit
of truth. Apollonius Thyanaeus who had acquaintance which an evil spirit (as
may appe^ar to any who considers what Philostratus who attempts to vindicate
him from that crime represents of him) did raise his reputation amongst his
disciples by renouncing worldly delights, (...).
by a severe and austere diet; he would drink no wine, use to feed upon bread
and water. The devil is not so much a novice as to be ignorant that a
pretended neglect of the world, a seeming humility are fit engines to raise and
advance his own Kingdom. It is his common method, in the front of his design
to place something which is really good, that he may with the more security
make his access to the mind, and introduce what is really evil. He knows the
best way to make men to take his poison, is to mingle it with wholesome diet.
Delrio tells us of one who was exhorted by the devil to read Paul's Epistles.
Disq. mag, 4. lib. p. 380.
Iacobus Vitriacus of another, who was reprehended by him for his vicious and
dissolute life. It Is a good rule to discern the spirit of God, from the spirit
of Satan by; the spirit of God persuades nothing but that which is really good:
the spirit of Satan may persuade some good but always mixes that which is
evil. By this it is easy to discern, that the spirit these persons are
under, is not the spirit of truth; it persuades to a seeming neglect of the
world, a mortifying of the flesh, yet in the mean time attempts to bring in
ataxy and confusion, to overturn the ordinations both of God and man, a design
the Spirit of God cannot be accessory to, for that is a Spirit of order, upon
its moving, Genesis 1.2. The Chaos vanished and all things were put into a comely
and decent posture, whereas if this spirit of theirs had its liberty to move,
it would force all things into their primitive confusion.

3. This Faith was once delivered to the Saints, the ancient people of God, and
therefore we are not to part with it on easy terms. Will a man part easily
with his Inheritance, the ancient Possessions his Ancestors enjoyed? 1 King.
21.3.
Naboth said to Ahab, God forbid that I should give the Inheritance of my
Fathers to thee. This Faith was the Inheritance of our Fathers, of those which
were in Christ before us: the insinuations of every Jezabel must not persuade
us to resign up our right in it.

But possibly you will put this Querie, who are the persons which are to contend
for it?

Answ. That is intimated in the word Saints, to them it is committed as a
special Trust, and therefore they are to contend, that they be not divested of
it.

Saints may be reduced to these three heads, Magistrates, Ministers, Private
Christians.

1. Magistrates; Indeed it was the speech of the old Donatists, Quid Imperatori
cum Ecclesia? what has the Magistrate to do with the Church? implying, as
though a power did only reside in the Church as to matters of faith: upon
enquiry it will be found that an Ecclesiastical power resides in both.
Bocbarti. Epist.
The power of the Magistrate is objective ecclesiastica, conversant about the
things and affairs of the Church, but modo politico in a politic way and
manner. The power of the Church, formaliter Ecclesiastica conversant about the
same affairs, but modo Ecclesiastico in a Church way. Some have asserted the
Magistrate to be an Officer in the mediatory Kingdom of Christ; all grant that
he is an Officer in his essential, as he joins with the Father and the Spirit
in the general Government of the world. Now the world being upheld and governed
principally for the Churches sake; The Magistrates Power which is engaged in
that Government, must needs have relation to, and be concerned to seek the
Welfare of the Church, which can be done in nothing more, then in keeping the
Faith of Christ free from Corruption.

It is prophesied of the times of the Gospel, that Magistrates shall be nursing
Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49.23. which speaks a duty of care upon them, that
the sincere milk of the Word, the Churches nourishment, be not poisoned with
Error.

We are to pray for those which are invested with civil Authority, that we may
lead a quiet life in Godliness. Why is Godliness here mentioned, 1 Timothy 2.12.
except those in Authority are to have an influence upon the promoting of it?
And how can they be influentiall in this matter, except they exert their power
in asserting against all Attempts the Faith of the Gospel, a Doctrine according
to Godliness?

That which is granted on all hands does administer sufficient evidence to this
Assertion. None can deny but that Magistracy is intended by God for the
securing external Peace and Tranquillity. Now he that appoints the end, does at
the same time give a right to the means conducing to it: There is nothing more
conducing to the obtaining external peace and Tranquillity, then the true and
genuine influence of the Faith delivered to the Saints; for this excellently
directs Superiors to govern, inferiors to obey, removes the fuel upon which
the sparks of sedition use to kindle.

It Is observed, Verulam.
that the matter of sedition is of two sorts, much Poverty and much
Coffeehouse. He that is under the power of this Faith, is obnoxious to
neither of these. He cannot judge himself a poor man that has an interest in
the purchase of Christ, or be agrieved at the meanness of his fortune, who is a
Coheir with the natural Son of God; under all Emergencies though he cannot
rejoice, yet his faith will learn him to be content; when others are in a
Region where there is nothing but storms and thunder, his heart and life are
above encircled with calmness and serenity.

There is an innate power in it, where it is obeyed from the heart, to keep men
in those stations providence has placed them. As in a Circle all the lines
which are directly drawn from the Center to the circumference, never cross each
other: so when men make God their Center, and are drawn forth according to the
Gospel in a right line about their secular employments, they keep their proper
place without molestation to those which are next to them. vid. Hookers Eccl.
pol. 5 b. p. 404.


Besides this inward power, there is an outward blessing intailed upon that
community where this faith is kept in its strength and vigor. The Israelites
which had it but in dark discoveries, if we compare them with the demonstration
and evidence of the New Testament, did always ebb and flow in prosperity
according to their swerving from, or their more strenuous asserting of it
against Idolaters. When this flower began to fade, it was an undoubted
prediction, that a winter of Affliction was coming on. When any storm did shake
the State, it was usually made by vapors which did proceed from coldness of
affection in this matter. While they kept close to the revealed rule, their
Counsels were happy, their attempts full of Spirit; upon their neglect, an
infatuation fell upon those who were famed for prudence, a disanimating fear
upon persons of the greatest resolution, as great a change upon all as was in
Belshazzar, when he saw the hand writing, their loins were loosed, their knees
ready to smite one against the other.

The ten Tribes after they had forsaken the appointments of God at Jerusalem,
which were but shadows of Gospel faith and worship, are represented always as
in a tottering condition, as a reed shaken in the water, 1 Kin. 14.15. If it
fared so with those that forsook the shadow, what may be expected, in case the
substance be deserted; This faith is the (...), the Pillar and Stay of a State,
and therefore the Magistrate who is to uphold the one, can do no less then
contend for the other.

Ministers, they are likewise to contend,

In their Doctrine.

In their Lives.

In their Doctrine, not only by exhorting, but convincing Gainsayers, Tit.
1.9. Not only by building up the Church, but in keeping off the enemies which
would pull it down: Their condition is not unlike that of the Builders of
Jerusalem, who wrought with one hand in the work, with the other held a weapon:
the policy and resolution of the enemy puts a necessity upon them to be
polemical as well as practical. In their lives, by living as well as preaching
Christ, by expressing life in their preaching, and preaching in their lives;
Greg. Nazianz. Carmina varia. tom 2. p. 153. Serm^ tuus toni^ru vi^aque fulgor
erat.
by so preaching, and so living, that Basils Epitaph may be verified of him,
(...).

In a word, That they may contend to purpose, they must earnestly endeavor to
get knowing heads and humble hearts. Many who know how to advance the work of
God, yet wanting humility, which would make them stoop to the meanest Capacity,
do not perform what they know: Many who have broken hearts, and yet are
deficient in knowledge, are by that means unacquainted with the most
compendious way to promote the design of the Gospel. Knowledge and Humility
must not be divorced. Our hearts must be like Gideons pitchers, furnished with
spiritual Lamps, and thoroughly humbled, and broken, before they will be
serviceable.

Private Christians, these are likewise to contend in Prayer, in holy
Communion, by provoking one another to walk according to the Rule of the
Gospel. Every one has his (...) his proper office, every star his own Orb,
which must not be rashly deserted. Hieron. in loc. Joseph. Antiq. Amos 1. v. 1.
When Uzziah broke his order, it is believed by the Jews, that at that time
Amo's Earthquake happened, nature her self seems to have trembled at such
confusion. No man is a competent Judge, when he is to leave his own Sphere, and
pass into another; every man has a natural propensity to conceive better of
his intellectuals, Nulla res aequabilius inter bomines distributa, quam bona
men's. Carts. method. p. 1.
then the merit of them will bear. It is the observation of a Philospher, that
nothing is more equally distributed by nature amongst men, then Understanding
and Reason; for every man thinks he has enough. That mind which is never
satiated with honor or with profit, would deem it a disparagement to be
thought not to have wisdom and understanding enough. Upon this account it is not
expedient that any should judge in his own case, when he is invested with
sufficient ability to warrant the relinquishing his own, and the invading
another place. This breaking our ranks, has exposed the Faith of Christ to
the assaults of the enemy. Let the magistrate continue in his sphere, the
Minister in his, the private Christian in his; Let Magistrates and private
Christians conspire to uphold a powerful Ministry. What disparagement soever
men may think fit to cast upon it, yet in the thoughts of him who was both God
and man, it was of that moment, that when he ascended on high, and as a
Conqueror did (spargere missilia) distribute his bounty, he made choice of it
as the most excellent gift, and cast it as a peculiar Testimony of favor to
his own spouse, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

I having thus directed my self to all sorts, do desire to leave this
Exhortation with you, that every one which is a Saint, would remember Gods
Depositum, what he has committed to his Trust, that he may keep it as it was
delivered in its primitive Perfection. Bessarion writes of Pythagoras that when
he died, Lib. 1. in (...) p. 2.
he left with his daughter in a large volume, the whole sum of his doctrine,
with an injunction upon no terms to part with it. She was so obsequious, that
although she was reduced to poverty, and had a great sum of money tendered for
it, yet made it her choice, rather to suffer the inconvenience of penury then
to violate her fathers commands. It Is a good pattern for our imitation; our
heavenly Father has delivered the doctrine of faith to all the Saints with the
same injunction; let us be careful to buy the truth, but sell it not.

And now I am come to the third particular, the manner how this contention is
to be managed, We are (...) signifies to contend after the manner of the
Agonists in their games and exercises; and (...) is added to denote the
intension or reinforceing of their action. The manner of their contending will
appear from the Laws they were regulated by, to which the Apostles alludes in
these words, He is not crowned except he strive (...) lawfully 2. Tim. 2.5.
Amongst their (...) the Laws they were obliged to conform to Three I observe
very applicable to my present purpose.

1. (...), etc. Theophyline in Epist 2. ad Tim. cap. 2. v. 5. (...).
Before the Contest they were bound to prepare themselves by a set diet and to
acquire (...), a good and full state, and habit of body.

2. In the Contest they had their bounds and limits on either side which they
might not transgress.

3. At the end of the Contest they had their judge by whom doubtful cases were
decided, (...)
from whom no appeal was lawful.

These rules will declare what our deportment ought to be before, in, and after
our contending for the faith delivered to the Saints.

Before the Contest we must aquire (...), a good state and habit of mind as
they did of body. Three Ingredients are requisite to make up this state,
Information, Purity and Peace.

The mind must be well informed, Pure, Peaceable. Well informed of these five
things, 1. Of the Sovereignty of Gods will. 2. The infinity of his
understanding. 3. Of his prescience. 4. Of the order and importance of all his
particular truths. 5. Of the seasons when he requires we should openly contend
for them.

1. Of the Sovereignty of the divine Will. The great Mysteries of the Faith of
the Gospel, being acts of Will and Sovereignty, having no necessary connection
with the holiness of the divine nature, are with difficulty entertained. None
dare but own such Truths as have an immediate relation to the essential
goodness of God; but those which result from mere pleasure and Sovereign will,
are received but by few: The reason is manifest, his essential goodness has
the advantage of innate ideas within to make it known; His Sovereign Will
appears only from Scripture without. Now these impressions, being nearer then
the Scripture will naturally produce a more facile assent to what complies with
them. Therefore he having displayed much of Sovereignty in the Gospel, in
imputing the sin of the first Adam, the righteousness of the second; in
preparing effectual grace for some, in not preparing of it for others; the
ready way to arm the mind with resolution to appear in the asserting of such
truths, which have not the help of an inbred notion to commend them, is
frequently to meditate upon, and possess our selves with deep apprehensions of
this attribute.

2. Of the Infinity of his Understanding. Some truths too big to be confined
within a created mind, do cast a damp upon Zeal. Every one in the midst of his
pursuit is ready to stop at them, as the Israelites did at Amasa. Men have an
aversness from contending for and giving credit to that which they are not able
to comprehend. It Is natural to desire not only to render a reason of our
belief, but of the thing believed by us. The ready way to prepare the mind that
it may be fit to engage for such truth, is to ponder the nature of an immense
and infinite understanding: How unfit a finite being is to take a survey of it,
how unable to penetrate its Counsels, to perceive the reason of all its
Contrivances, that sometimes it is the interest and glory of God to conceal a
mattet, to teach us who are apt to judge of Divine things by our own measure,
that there is an understanding far more excellent then ours that he steers by.

One propounds this Question; Despagne upon the Creed.
why sometimes in scripture Man seems to reason better then God? he instances
in the story of Abimelech, Genesis 20. He him-himselfe is threatened with death,
his wife and women-servants struck with barrenness, his whole family afflicted:
In his own Justification he pleads the innocence of his family, the integrity
of his heart, which God himself acknowledged; if man might judge, Abimelech
seems to have the better. The reason is obvious, we being men, easily
understand his reasons who was but a man of a finite extraction, but we do not
so easily comprehend the reasons of God, who is infinite. This is that which
gives so great an advantage to the Remonstrants: They bringing the reasons of
man; Arguments calculated for humane Capacity, are easily received; but their
Adversaries bringing the reasons of God, his standing upon his Prerogative, Who
art thou which replyest? Upon the unsearchableness of his ways, O the depth of
the riches, etc. They are not so easily understood. Therefore in case we desire
to receive and contend for the Faith delivered to the Saints, we must be well
informed of the Infinity of that understanding which contrived it.

3. Of his Prescience the Characteristical attribute whereby he is distinguished
from the heathen gods, Isa. 44.7. Many are affrighted from owning branches of
the faith delivered to the Saints by those strange consequences which others
have attempted to pin upon them. We are told, that from the Doctrine of
personal Election and Preterition without any previous motive, it will follow,
that God is not cordial in his importunate entreaties, that he violates humane
freedom, is accessory to men's enormities. These decrees being represented with
such odious consectaries, like comets with a prodigious retinue, are believed
by the overcredulous to presage a sad fate to Religion. That we be not checked
by such vain appearances, when we enter the lists for this part of Gospel, let
us be rightly informed of divine prescience, which is owned and acknowledged by
both sides. Upon a strict survey it will be found, that the same charge which
is drawn up against the forementioned appointments, does as fully lie against
the foreknowledge of God: and therefore there is no reason it should cool our
zeal for those decrees, but rather be pronounced the issue of a disordered
mind, when it is as much against that Doctrine which all receive, as that Truth
which some deny. This consideration will inspire us with resolution, and give
the enemy reason to suspend his acts of hostility. When those, which beseige a
place, see their friends set upon the walls, consideration persuades them to
cease from the expressions of war.

4. Of the order and importance of all his particular Truths, to be able to
distinguish betwixt the Mint and Cummin, and the weighty matters of the Law,
betwixt the foundation and the remote parts of the superstruction. It Is the
policy of the Tempter to invite men to spend their zeal upon Truth most remote
from the foundation. He usually sets them as he did our Savior upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple, a part at the greatest distance from its basis. He does
all he may to draw our life and zeal from the heart of the Gospel into the
external parts. If we look upon those heats which are betwixt persons of
different persuasions, they are usually about such things as have small
affinity with the grand points of Religion; they contest and quarrel about the
bark and leaves of the tree of knowledge, and in the mean time the root that
bears it, lies under ground without any notice taken of it. The wise man says,
The eye of the fool is in the ends of the earth, v. 17.24.
he is more acquainted abroad with foreign parts, then at home with those
Truths which more nearly concern his salvation: The Tempter imitates the policy
of Joshua, used toward the men of Ai: He entices the persons he deals with as
far as he can from the strong holds, and then rises suddenly from the ambush,
and set's all on fire. Therefore it is the wisdom of a Christian to be
acquainted with the order and importance of every particular Truth, to know
were his strength lies, that he may stick close to that which is the spirit and
life of Religion, that he may lend the greatest portion of zeal to that Truth
which is of the greatest value.

This Affection is to be intended or remitted according to the quality of its
Object. Sometimes God himself did appear in the cool of the day, sometimes in a
burning Bush.

5. Of the Seasons when he would have us openly contend for them. We must not
presently divulge every persuasion impressed upon the mind. The Apostle says,
Romans 14.22.
Have thou Faith? have it to thy self. We are to consider the persons we deal
with. All which profess Faith, are not of the same Elevation. Those which are
built upon Christ, are like several rooms built upon the same foundation; some
are high, some low, some dark, some lightsome, some weak, some strong: Every
Disciple is not of the same pitch, Usher of the unity of faith. ^.14.
many like Zacheus are but of small stature; we are to consider every one
according to his measure; the strong must not be fed only with milk, nor the
weak invited to doubtful disputations, but rather consi^med in that saving
Truth they have already received.

Our Savior forbears to speak of some things which the people were not able to
bear. The Jews say, Maimonides More-neb^u
it is unlawful to speak of their (...) the more abstruce part of Theology
before any, but their wise men. In Procatech.
Cyril of Jerusalem refused to expound some Articles of Faith to one not
perfectly initiated, by reason of their sublimity. (...). utile est ut taceatur
aliquod verbum propter incapace^ de pers. lib. a cap. 16.
Austin says it is advantageous to be silent in some Truths, for their sakes,
who are not arrived at a capacity of receiving them. We are likewise to weigh
the Errors which are to be opposed, the persons which vent them the ends they
aim at. Sometimes the unseasonable opposing of an Error does but increase it;
the water which would slide away without any noise, if it be dammed up, rises
and becomes considerable; That fire which would go out if let alone, being
stirred and agitated, becomes a great flame, Vidi ego jactatas mota face
crescere flammas,
Et rursus nullo concutiente mori.


Here is a place for Christian prudence to exercise it self in, to know the
Times and Seasons when God would have us to make our Onsets.

2. A pure mind, the Mystery of faith must be received into a pure conscience,
the new wine of the Kingdom must not be put into an old bottle, a mind not
refined and renewed by the spirit. If there be holiness in the heart, it will
put an excellent temper upon all our contendings, it will annihilate all that
worldly interest by which most are animated, and make them no farther contend,
but so far as an advantage may accrue to the glory of God. A person that has
light in his understanding, and has not his Will and Affection ballasted with
holiness, is waving and very uncertain, he will never last the Conflict; his
zeal will die with his secular interest, he will no farther contest for the
glory of God, but so far as he may promote his own. That he may become some
great one, the head of a Party, he will work himself up to a great measure of
zeal. This is the fuel which makes the fire burn: this being removed, his
fever will presently cease, these external weights being taken off, he
instantly loses his motion.

3. A peaceable mind. It Is no contradiction to be in a peaceable frame, and yet
to contend: There is a great affinity betwixt (...) Contention, and (...) Love.
(...) which signifies to express Enmity, is nearly related to (...), which
imports the expressing of love. No greater expression of Love, then for a man
to contend with a person to dispossess him of his Error: he may be at war with
the error, and yet at peace with the person; like lightning he may melt the
sword, and yet spare the scabbard.

By a peaceable mind I understand a mind unwilling to make a breach upon every
diversity. A mind that can more love others, because they shall all be of the
same general Assembly of the first born in heaven, then dislike because they
are of diverse Assemblies here. The true Disciples of Christ ought to be like
the Curtains of Mose's Tabernacle, which although they were not all of the same
color, some blew, some purple, some scarlet, yet all were coupled together.

Further by a peaceable mind, I understand a mind willing to condescend to the
infirmities of others, so far as the interest of the Truth will permit. This
Temper was very apparent in our Savior, his Apostles, the primitive
Christians. Our Savior did so far accommodate himself to the Jews, that he
borrowed their Rites, and implanted them into his own Ordinances. His
appointments at his last supper seem to be an imitation of what was in use at
their Passover and other feasts.

His blessing the Cup before and after the distribution of the bread, Luke
22.17. Fagius in Deuteronomy 8.10. (...)
was an imitation of their double benediction; the first they called the
Sanctification, the second, The blessing of the meat. His phrase, this is my
body, is borrowed from their calling the Lamb, The body of the Passover. His
singing an Hymn, (...)
an imitation of the hymns they were accustomed to sing after supper. It Is
believed he used the same Psalms with them, beginning at the 113. and ending at
the 118. Paulus Burgen. sis. De hoe hymno ex istis sex Psalmis composito
intelligi debet illud, quod in imminente passione Mat. capite 26. legitur, etc.
His Sacrament of Baptism answers to their admitting Proselytes by water.

In the Apostles times the Deacons instituted by them, answer to the Parnasin
in the Jewish Synagogues, The Angel of the Church to the public Minister
there, called (...) Angelus Ecclesiae.

The several steps which the ancient Christians appointed to be taken by those
whom they admitted into their Communion, Causaub. exerc. 16.396.
their Catechumeni, Competentes, Fideles were derived from the Heathens (...).
Their calling the Sacraments, (...) was by way of accommodation to the heathens
which gave the same names to their Mysteries. This carriage of theirs, was like
the carriage of Parents, which use to suite their behavior and speech to the
age and infirmity of their Children. Quo facilius ad veritatis amorem corruptas
superstione mentes traducerent, verba sacrorum illorum in suos usus
transtulerunt.
If these condescentions were used toward Jews and Heathens on purpose to
allure them to embrace the Faith; what ought one Christian to use toward
another, who have the same head, and ought to have the same heart.

In all this I intend nothing toward the asserting an unworthy Syncretism, a
compliance with others for peaces sake with loss and damage to the truth: We
must follow the prophets rule, love truth and peace; first truth then peace.
The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable. Numa's temple was styled
(...), the Temple of faith and peace, first of faith, then of peace. The sum of
what I intend is only to persuade to a condescending deportment, a peaceable
and meek demeanor, free from pride and insulting, a mutual love in our
strivings for the faith, which would more prevail against Error, then
exasperation and bitterness.

It was the wisdom of God to appoint (when Christ and his Disciples were in
the mount) that Moses and Elias should appear to them, that the Disciples might
learn their duty, in there contendings for the faith, to mix Moses meekness
with Elias zeal. Immoderate Anger does but disturb that reason God has given a
man to convince his adversary. The storms which passion raise, do but ruffle
and make the passage uneven to him.

The words of the wise are heard in quiet. It was not a rough stone which sunk
into the forehead of the Philistine. A well polisht Argument used by an even
spirit, will make the deepest impression. When intemperate heats prevail
amongst parties, there is reason to suspect, whether it be Truth they contend
for. Such inordinate flames do not proceed from Gold, Silver and precious
stones, to which Truth is resembled, but rather from Wood, Hay and Stuble,
which easily takes fire. It Is hotter under the Tropicks then under the line: In
the extimate parts, where Error resides, there is more violent heat then in
the middle where Truth lies.

These Preparations are required before the Contest.

2. In the Contest we must be careful to avoid extremes. This fault the
Apostle (alluding to the custom and Law amongst the Racers,) expresses by
(...), to extend a man's self or run over his set bounds 2. Cor. 10.14. When we
contend against an error opposite to faith 'its easy to observe a secret
propensity to fall into the contrary extreme. Arius contending against the
Gentiles plurality of gods, forced him into another extreme of denying of the
Divinity of Christ. Sabellius's dislike of Arius Tenent, did drive him so far
to maintain an Identity of his nature with God, as to destroy the distinction
of his person. A man is inclined to conceive himself most secure when at the
greatest distance from his adversary. The Philosopher observes, that bodies in
motion have a propensity to recede from their center: It Is true of the mind,
when resolved against error, it is apt to fly from the center of truth toward
the opposite point of the circumference. It Is visible how this inclination has
been managed and improved by the policy of Satan. Sometimes he raises the
Manichees to defend a fatal necessity upon the Will; presently Pelagius, who so
far proves an advocate for humane feedome, as utterly to annihilate the grace
of God. He persuades the Papist that Christ's merits are so redundant, that by
them men are enabled to merit and satisfy the displeasure of heaven. He makes
use of the Socinianian to defend there is no satisfaction at all; some he
persuades that Justification is by the works of the Law; others that the Law is
a thing out of date, of no use to one ingrafted into Christ. It was his former
attempt to beget a belief that the Ambassadors of Christ could not be invested
with too much outward pomp; and now instead of that double portion of honor,
God has allowed them, he conferrs upon them a double portion of contempt.
(...) at the beginning.
Plutarch in his treatise about superstition, says, there are two extremes
into which men are lead through their want of a true knowledge of the nature of
the gods, Superstition and Atheism: formerly the design of the Tempter was to
enervate the power of Religion by superstition; but now he as strongly attempts
the leading of men into the other extreme, namely Atheism. As his design is
contrary, so the means he uses.

Before he advanced the externals of religion, and now he casts disparagment
upon them. Before he set up the institutions of men, now he pulls down the
ordinances of God. He perceiving he could not bring us in love with humane
appointments, that he might advance superstition; endeavors to annihilate
those divine appointments which are designed for the furnishing the mind with
lively apprehensions of God, that he may bring in and establish Atheism. Thus
you shall always sinde him in some extreme, walking at the outsides, amongst
the tombs, where he may revive and give life to some dead error. Therefore it
is good in the heat of contention to beware we be not suddenly transported
beyond the just bounds and measures of truth. There is nothing more pernicious
to the peace and welfare of the Church. When men overshoot themselves, when
their opinions like Jonathans arrows fly beyond, it is a signification of
imminent danger.

3. After the Contest we are to rest in the determination of the (...) or
judge. We own no supreme visible judge but the Scripture: There are other
subordinate judges, the Magistrate in his place, the Minister in his, the
private Christian in his. The Magistrate may judge in order to restraining acts
of violence committed by the outward man against the faith delivered to the
Saints. The minister in order to the instructing the ignorant, directing the
erroneous, confirming the doubtful. The private Christian in order to his own
duty; that his faith may depend upon divine Testimony, that he may believe
Christ more for his own, then the Testimony of others. Yet the Scripture is the
only supreme visible judge, to whom appertains the infallible deciding of all
controversy in the matters of religion. Although as it directs our practice
it is properly termed a rule, yet as it exhibits the voice of God, passing
sentence upon mistakes in the concernments of Faith, we commit no incongruity
to call it a Judge. This is the reason why passing of judgment is attributed to
it, Joh. 12.48. Why it is styled a living Word, a Judge of thoughts, Heb. 4.12.
a Judge is nothing but a living or animated Law. (...).
This word tenders a decision of all doubts, it does not let pass the first
controversy concerning its own Authority. Although the stamp of divine
Authority be not equally evident in all the parts; yet it is plain enough to
distinguish every piece from counterfeit coin.

If the Scripture be the only Judge, I need not express the benefit which will
accrue to us by being willing in our contendings to be decided by it: all the
difficulty is, how to discern what this Judge has determined. Every party
pretends to be acquainted with it: though the dreams be many, yet the
interpretation is but one; all the Question is, how we shall find it out.

Answ. In order to this end, a double evidence is required, in the Object and
in the Subject: That the Object may be evident, we are first to be informed of
the importance of the words and Phrases. The mind of God in Scripture, is said
to be a Light or Candle (...), Psalm 119.105. The words and phrases are the
lanthorn in which it is contained. Many times the darkness of the Lanthorn
hinders the shining of the light, and therefore we are indebted to those who
have dived into the languages the Spirit of God was pleased to use, and
informed themselves and us with the customs and manners of speaking which
prevailed at that time when the Scripture was penned; without this method many
portions of sacred Writ which are now disclosed, would have continued under
their former concealment. For a miraculous appearance could not have been
expected for the opening of them, seeing a full provision of means in
preserving ancient Records, in erecting Schools of Learning, has been made by
divine Providence for that purpose. This Expectation would have been as
unreasonable, as for the Israelites to have looked for the continuance of Manna
from heaven, after by a divine hand they had been led out of a barren
wilderness into a land of plenty.

The words and manners of speaking being understood, we are to weigh the
Circumstances of every Text; The Spirit which is sent Ambassador from heaven to
treat with us in every portion of Scripture has his Interpreter not far from
him; usually some word or expression stands ready in the Context to explicate
his mind.

If the Circumstances be dark, we are to light them at other Scriptures which
are clear and evident. Passages in Scripture are like the stars, not all of the
same magnitude. Those of the lesser are at no great distance from those of the
greater, which without any diminution can lend them evidence. If nothing shall
be accounted evident, because some or other have made diverse glosses upon every
Text, upon the same account we may doubt whether the snow be white, because
Anaxagoras was of a contrary mind; that he had not many followers, is no
Argument of less probability for his opinion, then many have for their
Conjectures. For I doubt not, if it had been as much the interest of Satan to
persuade men that snow is black, as to misinterpret all those places which
speak for the discriminating Grace, Divinity, Satisfaction, Ministry of Christ,
but Anaxagoras might have had as many Disciples as Arminius or Socinus.

In order to the procuring evidence in the subject, it is the divine pleasure
to assure the communication of such a measure of his Spirit in the use of means
to his own people, as will inlighten their minds, and lead them into all truth
which is of precise necessity to eternal life. He which bestows upon every
Creature a Principle to distinguish betwixt food and poison, has not left his
people without a spiritual taste, by which they relish radical Truth, and
disgust those glosses which tend to the corrupting of it; though they may be
under the Conduct of their own spirit, when conversant about the
superstructions of faith, yet they have the promise of an unerring guide in
those things which relate to the foundation, which are of indispensable
necessity to salvation. Therefore if we desire this Spirit may be a Guide to go
before us through the dark passages of Scripture, it is good to apply our selves
to the use of such means which may help to possess us of it. When the Disciples
had received the promise of the Spirit, they are reproved for standing idle and
gazing about them, Acts 1.8. When the Apostle had received the Spirit it self,
he does not lay aside his former study and industry, he was solicitous about
his books, 2 Timothy 4.13. (...) Th^cam librorum.
(...) the Syriack Interpreter translates a Chest of Books which he charges
Timothy to bring with him. In the midst of all endeavors we must be
importunate in prayer, which is powerful in drawing down the aids of this
Spirit, who knows how to loose the seals which are set upon any part of the
Bible.

Iamblicus saves, it was the custom of all prudent persons in matters of
Philosophy, De vita Pythago. p. 1. (...)
to begin with the invocation of God; it is of much more use in so divine a
concernment, as the unfolding the Counsel of Heaven. The Ancients use to
repeat their dreams every morning before the Sun: were those dreams and Fancies
which men take up in reading the word, (...). (...) in Seph (...).
repeated before the Sun of Righteousness, and he earnestly implored to detect
by his Spirit the vanity of them, it would be the next way to be led into a
right understanding of the Will of God.

The mind in all these accesses must lay aside its own prepossessions. Socinus
says, he went to God upon his knees for the interpretation of the 58. ver. of
the 8. of John. No wonder he came away without any return from Heaven, who had
no intent to find out Gods mind, but to confirm his own. He first believed the
Trinity to be no way consonant to reason, and then attempted the bending of
Scriptures into a compliance with that belief. He that would receive a clear
answer from God, must bring a mind clear from prejudice, willing to submit to
that light which confutes, as well as confirms his former conceptions.

And now I have run through the several parts of the Text, the Act, the Object,
the manner how this holy contention is to be managed; in a word, in all the
your contendings for the faith delivered to the Saints, we are to use such a
tenderness toward others as becomes men, such a meekness as becomes
Christians, such a fervency and ardour as becomes a peculiar people zealous of
good works.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 16. del. his, p. 7. l. 26. r. Christ. p. 11. l. 20. r. attempts. p.
14. l. 32. r. (...) and (...). p. 17. l. 2. r. with. p. 18. l. 6. r.
Ordinances. p. 22. l. 12. r. them. p. 24. l. 19. r. Apostle. p. 27. l. 11. r.
some branches. p. 28. l. 1. r. commiseration. p. 29. l. 29. r. that. p. 34 l.
1. r. himself. p. 34. l 3. r. that tene^t. (in being before Arius)

In the Margent.

Page 7. r Co^trov. p 9 And this is be. p 10 Putamus without a stop, p 13 (...),
p 16 (...), p. 17 (...) p. 24 Platonis. p 34 (...).


