Imprimatur,

C. Alston, R. P. D. Henrico, Episc. Land. a Sacris.
November. 4. 1690.
A SERMON Preached to the Protestants OF IRELAND IN THE CITY of LONDON, At St.
Helens, October. 23. 1690.

BEING The Day Appointed by Act of Parliament in IRELAND FOR AN Anniversary
Thanksgiving For the Deliverance of the Protestants of that Kingdom, from the
Bloody Massacre begun by the Irish Papists on the 23d. of October, 1641.

By RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Killala.

Printed at the Earnest Request of many of the Gentry of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.

2 CHRONICLES. xxviii. 9. Behold, because the Lord God of your Fathers was wroth
with Judah, he has delivered them into your hands: and ye have slain them in a
rage that reaches up to Heaven.


WHEN the Royal Tribe of Judah did highly offend and displease Almighty God;
when the many signal Mercies and Favors which he had bestowed upon them, could
not oblige them to obey his Laws, and keep his Commandments, he afflicts them
with many, and great Judgments, to see if that could reduce them to Obedience.
He had long waited for their Conversion; and sent his Prophets early and late
to admonish and forewarn them of their danger: He courted and allured them with
Temporal Blessings; and promised them a perpetual continuance of his Favor.
But when all these Methods proved ineffectual, and nothing could work upon
them; he then showered down the Vials of his Wrath and Indignation. Beside their
great and deserved Sufferings mentioned in other places, this Chapter tells
you, that God delivered them into the Hands of a Foreign Prince, who smote
them, and carried a vast Multitude of them Prisoners to Damascus.

This was a very great and a heavy Punishment, to be forced from their
plentiful Habitations; to live in Exile and Bondage; poor, and unpitied;
groaning with the weight of their uneasy Chains; and languishing in dark and
loathsome Dungeons: But when even this could have no influence upon them, he
afflicts them with a Domestic and Intestine War: Their own Brethren rose up
against them, Samaria. Thus dangerous and fatal is it to provoke and incense
the Lord.

This Punishment did far exceed the other: The Wounds which we receive from a
Friend's Sword, are most painful and tormenting. Psalm. 55.13.
David says, Had it been an Enemy, I could have born it; but it was thou mine
equal and acquaintance.

The Laws of God and Nature are more violated by Domestic Feuds and Treasons,
than by Foreign Quarrels and Invasions: And none more rigid and unmerciful
than those of our own House and Country. This was evidently seen in the
Cruelties of the Men of Israel; who not only killed such a prodigious number of
their Brethren, and took much Spoil from them, Behold, because the Lord God of
your Fathers was wroth with Judah, he has delivered them into your hands; and
ye have slain them in a rage that reaches up to Heaven: In which you may
observe, First, Judah into the hands of the men of Israel. Secondly, Thirdly,
Israel, for slaying their Brethren with a Rage that reached up to Heaven.


First, Judah into the hands of the Men of Israel. The whole Scripture does
abundantly declare how merciful and gracious God is, how slow to anger, and how
unwilling to punish: But when his Mercies are slighted, his Favors rejected,
and all his Invitations and Threatenings are vilified and contemned, he then
exerts his Power, his Veracity and Justice, and makes himself terrible to the
Children of Men, by throwing down his Judgments upon them.

Here you see, the Men of Judah were given up: That Tribe, which was to be
eternally famous by our Savior's Birth, that very Tribe did he suffer to be
thus severely punished. Whence, it is evident, that God exempts none, but
whosoever sins shall be punished. That Nation, or Family that offends God, and
runs into open Hostility against him, shall suffer. If he spared not Judah,
none must hope for Pardon and Immunity. And if you search the Divine Annals,
you will find, that whenever they wallowed in Sin, and slept in security, then
did God rouse them with the noise of War, and brought Devastations and
Desolations upon them: He surrounded them with Enemies on every side, and did
by them lash them in, when they ran into Rebellion against him.

And if he used them thus; if he spared not the Natural Branches, take heed
lest he spare not you; for thus will he deal with all who will not be reformed:
He will withdraw his Protection, and leave them to themselves, and let their
Enemies invade their Houses, and ruin their Country; of which, the many
Conquests in Judea, and the Dispersion of their Tribes over all the Earth, is a
remarkable and dreadful Example.

The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 34 7.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them: But they who will not fear him, shall have no such ministration and
attendance: Their Guardian-Angels remove, as they did from the Temple, before
Titus sacked Jerusalem; when (as Josephus and Eusebius tell us) a Voice was
heard, Let us depart hence; and they were left to themselves, and lay open to
the Assaults of their Enemies, and were then soon ruined and scattered up and
down the World, near two Millions of them being destroyed in sour Years; Eleven
Hundred Thousand fell in the City, Ninety Seven Thousand were taken Prisoners,
and Thirty of them were sold for a Penny. Thus lamentable and dreadful is the
Condition of that People who are forsaken of the Lord, who are left void and
destitute of his Protection: I will forsake them and hide my face from them,
and many evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say in that
day, Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not amongst us? Deuteronomy.
31.17.

Beware then of driving God away from you; where he withdraws and absents
himself, no good thing can continue: While we are his People, he will be our
God, but no longer. If we renounce our Allegiance to a Mortal Prince, he will
soon withold his Favors from us, and Correct us according to the nature of
our Crimes: And shall we expect to go free, when we violate our Loyalty and
Homage to Almighty God? That were inconsistent with his Justice; for being a
just Judge, he must Punish and give Sentence, Amos 3.2. And he declares his
Resolutions of punishing them this way, Lev. 26.17. Ye shall be slain before
your enemies; they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when
none pursue.

Many other such grievous Comminations are in his Word, which were exactly
fulfilled; God making them a Prey to their Enemies, and scattering them up and
down the Earth. And still you may observe, the Scripture says, God gave them
up: God caused them to be smitten: As in the Text you are told, God delivered
Judah into the hands of the Israelites; which teaches us two things:

First,

Secondly, Isa. 45.7. Grot. Pisc.
It Is he that makes peace, and creates our evil; our Calamities of War,
Pestilence, or Famine, as Interpreters render it. And the Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 46.8.
It Is he that makes desolations in the earth. And what Judgments fall upon us,
come from him, as a just Retribution of our Wickedness. He makes use of several
Rods to Correct us; now Foreign Invasions, then Domestic Rebellions; he
suffers our Neighbors to rise up, and destroy us; and owns himself the Avenger
of Iniquity, Romans 12.19.
nor will he lose the Glory of the greatest Executions; for Vengeance is his,
and he will repay it.

Such Acts are the outward signs and demonstrations of his Justice and
Omniscience; and our sighs and groans in Adversity contribute to his Honor, as
well as our Praises and Thanksgivings in Prosperity. The shrieks and cries of
the Damned in Hell bring Glory to him, as well as the Anthems and Hallelujahs
of the Saints in Heaven: Genesis 18.25.
for shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? His Justice should be
conspicuous to all the World, and the most punitive effects thereof, are for
his Honor, and tend to our benefit and advantage. They make us acknowledge his
Power, and fear his Wrath; and own, with the Psalmist, that there is a God
which judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.11. They make us turn to him with Sorrow
and Repentance, with Reformation and Amendment: Isa. 26.9.
And when his Judgments are in the earth, we will learn Righteousness. Nunquam
Dei meminerint, nisi dum in malis fuerint, says Lactantius. We seldom remember
God as we ought, but when his hand lies heavy upon us, and presses us down
sore; so that for the vindication of his own Honor, and for our good, it is
necessary we should be punished and chastis'd.

It Is true, all his Corrections are not out of Anger, some proceed from his
Love, and are sent as Antidotes to prevent sin, and improve our Graces; to draw
us nearer to him, and increase our dependence upon him; to know him and our
selves better; to discern our Frailties and Weakness, to wean our hearts from
this vain and transitory World, to give us a clear sight and sense of our
Offenses; to make us Presidents of Courage and Constancy unto others, and to
manifest his own Glory in our Deliverance.

And such, I hope, are those which we now suffer: And therefore beware how you
censure those who groan under the sharpest Trials, and most grievous
Calamities; for in all Ages of the World, the holiest Persons have gone through
much Tribulation to the Kingdom of Heaven. Not to mention the Sufferings of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, do but see what happened to the Disciples and
Followers of the Holy Jesus. Was not St. Matthew Martyred in Aethiopia, St.
Mark burnt, St. Luke hanged, and St. John thrown into a Cauldron of Oil? Was
not St. Peter crucified, and St. Paul beheaded? And were not the rest put to
various and cruel Deaths? And it would grate your Ears, and make your Hearts
tremble to hear the Tortures of Christians in the Ten Persecutions. They slew
them in a rage that reached up to Heaven. Severus ordered that none of them
should be left alive in all his Territories: And Nicephorus tells us, we may as
well count the Grains of Sand, as the Names of all that were Martyred under the
Inhumane Decius: And in all Ages since, the best Christians have undergone
great Trials and Afflictions.

So that you must be very cautious how you judge of the Sufferings of Kingdoms,
of Families, and Individual Persons: You must not think their Calamities are
always sent for the Punishment of some grievous sin; and that the greatest
Sufferers are the greatest Offenders: God having many other Ends and Reasons
for visiting us with Afflictions; and they are Marks and Tokens of his Love,
his Fatherly Care and Protection, and of our Filiation and Adoption, as well as
of his Wrath and Displeasure: Heb. 12.6.
For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every Son whom he
receives.

But we must also know, that Judgments do often proceed from his Wrath, and are
the just Punishments of sin: and therefore in public or private Calamities, we
should search and examine our own Hearts, and see, with Job, why God contendeth
with us; and repent and bewail our sins, and resolve upon uniform Obedience for
the future: We should give Glory to God, and take shame and confusion of face
to our selves, and own our Sufferings to be far less then we deserve, and say,
Psalm. 145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

And let us never imagine they fall upon us by mere Accident, Job 5.6.
or Chance: For affliction arises not out of the dust, nor trouble out of the
mire. We cannot perish but by his knowledge, consent, or permission: His
Judgments are the just and usual effects and consequents of our sin, and are
generally sent either to punish us for it, or to keep us from committing it:
And therefore in National or particular Judgments, let us still look at that
great Hand from whence they come, and humble our selves under it, and be dumb
because God does it. The Text tells you, He delivered Judah into the Hands of
their Enemies: If he had not done so, they could not have destroyed them: And
it also gives you the Reason of it, which is the second thing to be considered.

Secondly, He was wroth with them: Israelites could not arrogate this Victory
to themselves: It was not their Innocence, or their Merit which obtained it,
for they were sinners as well as the men of Judah, as the Prophet tells them in
the next Verse; Judah which occasioned it; because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers, Pekah slew in one day an hundred and twenty thousand. It
was their sin of forsaking God which gave their Enemies that mighty Conquest
and Success: 'Twas that which enabled them to subdue so many stout men at one
time.

Whence observe, That neither Courage nor Conduct, Strength nor Magnanimity,
can withstand the Power and Will of God; there is no resisting his Almighty
Arm, when he is provoked by our sins. It Is said, When the Lion roars, all the
Beasts of the Forest tremble: And well may poor Mortals quake when God is
angry. A due consideration of his Power and our own Guilt, may fill the
stoutest Heart with Dread and Terror. Psalm. 119.120.
David, though a man of invincible Courage, cries out, My flesh trembles for
fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy Judgments. He knew God could afflict him
with Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Judgments; the apprehension of which did
so terrify him, that he could neither sleep nor speak. Psalm. 77.4. Thou
keep me waking, and I am astonished; I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
And he gives the Reason of this in the next Verse; I have considered the days
of Old, the years of ancient times: or the eternal years, as the Septuagint
renders it.

It Is a dangerous thing to provoke a God who is armed and invested with such
Power; it is not safe to stir up his Anger and Wrath: For as David tells you,
Psalm. 90.11.
Who knows the power of thine anger? Even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath. And the Epithets, Hot, Great, Fierce Burning, and Smoking, are
generally added to the Anger of God in Scripture, to show the great danger of
exciting his wrath, and the difficulty of resisting it, and defending our
selves against the fatal consequences of it, when it is once kindled: It being,
as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.31.
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

What vast Armies have been defeated, what flourishing Cities have been
consumed, what Noble Countries have been laid waste in his Anger, you may at
large see in Scripture. All the Elements are at his Command, and can destroy us
when he pleases. The Earth, the Sea, and even Hell it self have opened their
voracious mouths, and swallowed down numbers in his wrath. Angels have come
from Heaven, and slain whole Armies at a time. If one of those powerful Spirits
could slay 185000 in a Night, (as one did in the Army of Sennacherib) what can
the whole Host of Heaven do, when God is enraged against us?

Observe therefore the Advice of Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and fear the Lord thy God, and serve him; lest the anger of the Lord thy God
be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth. How
soon did he make it open, and swallow down Corah and his Confederates? And did
he not rain down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrha? Which
with many other sudden Judgments in Holy Writ, may terrify us from incurring
his Indignation. Remember also what he did to his own People of Israel, whom he
brought through the Red Sea, and fed with Manna in the Wilderness; and dread
the like Executions of his Vengeance, and seriously conclude, That except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Compare your sins with theirs, and you will soon find that you have reason to
fear as great, and as heavy strokes; for sin was never more openly committed,
and all sorts of Impiety did never more abound, than they have done of late
years in these Nations. The Records of God's former Punishments have had little
Operation upon these Kingdoms. And we, alas! who are now met together, may with
shame and sorrow confess, that the dreadful Judgment, which we this day
commemorate, did not Reform us: And therefore God has justly punished us
again, in delivering us into the hands of our Enemies; who, but for the Terror
of the English Arms, would, in all probability, have slain us, as the
Israelites did the men of Judah, with a rage that would have reached up to
Heaven: Which is the Third thing in the Text to be discoursed on.

Thirdly, Judah, in slaying them with a rage that reached up to Heaven.

When once God gives up a People to be punished, the Devil instigates the
Executioners to do it with all possible Malice and Inveteracy. They gratify
their revengeful Appetite at such times; their Ambition and Rigor increase
with their Power: They throw off all sentiments of Humanity, and are pleased
with those Tragical Spectacles, which Nature shrinks at, and abhors. Thus did
Adonibezek cut off the Thumbs and great Toes of seventy Kings, and made then
feed at his feet, and eat the crumbs which fell from his Table. Sesostris, King
of Egypt, was of the same cruel Temper: He delighted to hear the Kings whom he
had conquered, groan as they drew his Chariot. And did not Lysimachus laugh to
see Telesphorus, whose Ears and Nose, and Lips he had cut off, bemoan himself
in his tormenting Cage? in which he barbarously exposed him to be seen, as some
strange Creature. The like might I tell you of Cyrus and Cambyses, of Nero and
Caligula, of Domitian and Decius: But how remarkably did God punish these, and
many other cruel Men? Did not Cambyses, who murdered his Wife and his Brother,
and slaughtered his Nobility for nothing; and cut off all the Syrians Noses,
fall by his own Sword, and his merciless Army eat one another in Aethiopia?

As they did to others, so did God requite them: He abhors their Tyranny, and
insatiable thirst after Blood: And his permitting them to punish others, will
not acquit their Spite and Malice, their Rancour and Spleen, their Rage and
Cruelty in doing of it. These are sins which proceed from their own corrupt
Nature, their perverse Will and free Choice, and not from any inevitable
Necessity, or irresistible Force imposed upon them by Almighty God. He tempts
not any man to sin, James 1.13:
says St. James. He being Holy, Just, and Perfect, cannot seduce man to that
which is sinful, and concur in the evil of his Actions. He withdraws his Grace,
which softens and restrains the Heart; and for want thereof, the Heart is
hardened, as the Earth is by the Sun, when its softning moisture is exhaled and
drawn up by it: And leaving Man to himself thus hardened, he is then drawn away
with his own Lusts, and chooses, wills, and commits sin, for which he is justly
accountable. And such men's malicious and revengeful Acts are highly offensive
and displeasing unto God, for which he does often most severely punish them.
They are contrary to his Nature, Lam. 3.33.
who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. He never
strikes but when he is forced; and therefore all delight in Cruelty must be
most odious unto him.

If an Executioner, instead of striking off a man's Head, should cut and mangle
all his Body, and put him to much greater pain and torture than the Judge
decreed, he is justly blamed and punished. Here the just Judge of Heaven is
angry with the bloody Israelites, for their severe usage of poor Judah, and
sends his Prophet to acquaint them with his Resentments of their Barbarity, who
undauntedly tells them of their sin, and denounces the fierce wrath of the Lord
against them. He did not fear what they could do unto him, neither must we
dread any in publishing the Commands of God: We must cry aloud, and spare not,
and imitate this zealous Prophet, in reproving the Tyranny and Oppression of
bloody Men. He did not lessen their Outrages, but upbraids them for exceeding
their Commission, in slaying them with a Rage that reached up to Heaven. Ad
Coelos pertigit, inde in se vindictam excitans. Mas.
Their great and unreasonable Rage which they executed with so much severity
and delight, cried loud in Heaven, and made God punish them afterward. They
should not have been so severe to their own Brethren, nor took such pleasure
and satisfaction in their Punishment. God in Judgment remembers Mercy; and
though he would humble his own People, and bring them low, he would not have
them quite destroyed.

But so fierce and outrageous are the Enemies of his Children, that instead of
going, they run to destroy them; they thirst after their Blood, and, like the
Horse-leech, burst ere they are satisfied. No less than an Ocean of Blood could
sale the greedy Appetite of these Devourers; a hundred and twenty Thousand
Victims must be Sacrificed to their Malice.

By which you see what a heavy Judgment it is to fall into the hands of
inveterate Adversaries. Well did David choose, when he sinned in Numbering the
People, to receive his Punishment from God's own hand: For, as Solomon tells
you, the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Nothing but the height of Rage
and Fury can be expected from them.

Of this all Ages have given us many and sad Examples: but none more than that
in which this monstrous and unparalled Cruelty was acted, which we this day
are commanded by the Law of our Nation to commemorate. For when God was wroth
with us for our sins, he suffered the Irish Papists to rise up against us, and
slay many Thousands in a Rage that reached up to Heaven. Which horrid Fact,
seeing they are grown so impudent and audacious to deny, and in their Pamphlets
pretend there was only a little Commotion, and but some few killed; and that
the Protestants were the first Aggressors: I shall (as I have been desired) to
undeceive you that are strangers, and for the just Vindication of the English,
take the usual Liberty allowed to Preachers on these Occasions, and show you
how their Rebellion began, who chiefly contrived it, and what cruel Actions
they committed; by which you will soon perceive that they imitated these men in
my Text, and slew their Brethren in a Rage that reached up to Heaven.

The unhappy Natives of that Country having lived long in a blind Obedience and
Vassalage to the Church of Rome; and believing the Pope Infallible, would not
doubt the truth of what his Janissaries, the Jesuits, did suggest unto them.
Whatever any of their Clergy affirms Lawful, did then, and does still pass
among the Vulgar for Catholic Doctrine; and no Oracle more unquestionable than
their Assertions. Sic credit Ecclesia weighs down the Balance of Religion and
Loyalty, let the Doctrine be never so contrary to the Laws of God and Nature.

Being thus ignorant and credulous, and wholly devoted to follow the Advice of
their Clergy, they ran into Rebellion in the Year 1641. being instigated
thereunto by their Churchmen, who having plotted the Mischief abroad, came
over in Shoals the Year before, as was well known to Men of Wisdom and
Observation then living, and very apparent from the Intelligence King Charles
the First then had from his Ambassadors in Spain, and other Countries; of which
he gave timely Notice to his Justices.

These grand Incendiaries dispersing themselves throughout the Kingdom, and
removing the Native Clergy of the Pale into remoter Parts of the Land, and
placing men out of Vlster and Connaught, of more fierce and bloody Principles
there, they blew up the Trumpet every where to rise in Arms; branding us and
our Religion with the blackest Calumnies, and most falsely telling the People,
they were a Free Nation, and had no dependence upon England, and should
therefore strive to recover their Ancient Rights, and be no longer Subject to
an Heretical Prince. I say, most falsely did they suggest, that Ireland was a
Free Nation, when they cannot but own that it was Conquered some hundreds of
Years since. In which case Grotius tells us, De jure be^^ lib. 3. c. 6.
Jure Gentium non tantum is qui ex justa causa bellum gerit, sed and quivis in
bello solenni, and sine fine, modoque Dominus fit eorum quoe ex Host eripit.
Not only he that wages War in a Just Cause, but every Man in a Solemn War, is
Lord and owner of what he takes from the Enemy. Xenophon calls it an
Everlasting Law with all Men. And Aristotle says, The Law of Nations, as by an
Universal Agreement, had ordained, That the Conqueror should enjoy what he
Conquers; it being a general Rule, Quoe ex Hostibus capiuntur, Jure Gentium,
statim capientium fiunt. Whatever is taken from the Enemy, is, by the Law of
Nations, his who takes it.

If so, then certainly Ireland belongs to the Crown of England. For, not to
insist upon King Arthur's Claim, when he summoned their Petit Princes to appear
before him here, and own their Subjection to him. Cambden.
Or upon King Edgar's Conquest, who subdued Dublin, and the greatest part of
the Kingdom, and made them acknowledge his Sovereignty over them. Giral. Cambr.
We all know that King Henry the Second reduced them to Obedience above Five
Hundred Years ago; and Charters of Submission to him were voluntarily signed
and delivered by the seven Kings of the Country, They submitted to Henry the
Second, to King John, to Richard the Second, and to Henry the Eight, and their
Submissions were sworn to, signed, and recorded; yet did they still Rebel as
soon as they had Opportunity. And though Oneal did in his Letters style Richard
the Second his King, and perpetual Lord of Ireland, and in the Instrument of
his Submission used these words; Ego Nelanus Oneal, tam pro meipso, quam pro
filiis meis, and tota Natione mea, and pro omnibus subditis meis, devenio
Ligeus homo vester, etc. Yet did he run into Rebellion again, and committed
great slaughters. By which they in those days, and their Posterity since, have
verified the Prophecy which Giral. Cambr. mentions, That after the first
Invasion of the English, they should spend many Ages in frequent Conflicts,
Battles, and Murders, and that almost all the English should be driven out of
Ireland, etc.
and transmitted to Rome, which were confirmed by a Bull from Pope Adrian, and
by the delivery of a Ring, in token of his Investiture; to which both Clergy
and Laity did consent, and swear Homage and Fealty to him in a Public
Convention at Mat. Paris. Giral. Cambr.
Lismore, where the Laws of England were also thankfully received, and they all
sworn to observe them: and afterward he gave it to his Son John, and the Pope
confirmed it. And in the Synod at Cashell, they did unanimously, before
Christianus, President thereof, acknowledge the King's Ancient Right to
Ireland; and enjoined all to be subject unto him. And there, and at another
General Synod held at Armagh, they ordered and decreed, That the Church of
Ireland should observe all Divine Offices that the Church of England did; and
there also was the King's lawful Right again confessed, and submitted unto: and
for Four hundred years after it was called the King's Land of Ireland; and, by
many Acts of Parliament, Collodion of Statutes.
declared to be appending and belonging, and knit unto England.

So was it in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, when, by the States of the
Realm, he was declared King thereof. And 11 of Queen Eliz. her Title to that
Kingdom is recognized in Parliament, and declared to be very Ancient, and
derived from Gurmund (Son of Belin, King of Britain) Lord of Bayon in Spain:
some of whose Subjects he permitted to live in that Island, and sent Guides
with them to settle them in it; who, with their Posterity, ought therefore to
be subject unto England, as the Inhabitants of the English Plantations in
America now are.

But though the Title of England to that Kingdom be so clear, so very ancient
and just, yet they have openly rebelled five times in less than fourscore
years, beginning in the Year 1567. Two other Rebellions were also contrived and
resolved on within that space, to which they had Promises of Foreign Aid; but
were, by God's Providence, discovered and prevented: beside that intended, and
begun by three of their Principal Cities in the beginning of King James's
Reign. So very prone and apt they have always been to Rebel upon the Accession
of Princes to the Throne; or when England was engaged in Wars, either Domestic
or Foreign.

And the like opportunity they made use of in the late unhappy War, violating
all Laws of God, Nature, and Nations; and throwing off their Allegiance to
their undoubted Sovereign, as soon as the Troubles began in this Kingdom. To
which Wickedness their Clergy, of all sorts, did then seduce them, telling
them, That Faith was not to be kept with Heretics; That the Pope, being God's
Vicar, Pro-Deus, as Mart. Azpilcueta calls him, had Power to depose Heretical
Princes; and that they would do God and the Church good Service in killing
Heretics. Upon which they ran furiously to commit those horrid Acts which they
thought meritorious. And so cunningly did they draw Arguments from Religion,
Honor, and Profit, that they made the English Pale break out, which neither
the Pope's Bulls, nor the Declarations of the Divines of Salamanca and
Valedolid could instigate them unto in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

But now they had better digested the Romish Tenets; and the Priests appeared
every where in the Head of their Troops, and in sharp and bloody Oratory
animated them to go on.

What the Jesuits had wrote was become Canonical; and the Actions of others
were now to be imitated. Why should not they be as blindly Zealous, as any of
their Religion had been? They knew the Merindolians and Calabrians were
murdered for their Aversion to the Romish Religion: that Alphonsus Diazius
came, in great Zeal from Rome, and killed his own Brother in Germany, for being
a Protestant. They had heard how many had been martyred here, in the Reign of
Queen Mary; and what numbers the Duke de Alva had executed in the Netherlands.
The Massacre of Paris was fresh in their memory; where, and in other parts of
France, the French King boasted in his Letters to the Pope, that he had cut off
70000 Heretics; for which there were solemn Processions at Rome, and a Jubilee
granted to all Christendom by the Pope; who, by Cardinal Vrsinus, gave thanks
to the French King for that good Service, and desired him to go on, and
extirpate Heresy out of his Kingdoms. They knew the many Plots and
Confederacies against Queen Elizabeth and King James; and how some of those
monstrous Parricides gloried in their Sin, at their Execution.

And beside these bloody Examples, they had the Authority of their Learned
Writers for the lawfulness of such Actions. De Reg. l. 6. c. 6.
Mariana had told them, That if the Prince wont be advised, they may take up
Arms against him; and if nothing else will do, they may kill him. And Emanuel
Sa had said, When once he is Excommunicated, the People, who have sworn
Allegiance to him, may depose him; and any one may be his Executioner. Lib. 6.
c. 3. and 6.
And Suarez had encouraged them to it likewise; telling them, If Subjects were
once absolved from their Oaths, they might rise up against their Natural
Prince, and kill him. And their great Cardinal Bellarmin left them also many
rebellious Instructions, De Cler. lib. 1. c. 29.
too tedious to relate; and said, That all agree, that if the King be
Tyrannical, or Heretical, he may, and ought to de deprived of his Kingdom: Nay,
he adds, to prevent an Objection, Si hoc minus factum sit priscis temporibus,
causa est, quia deerant vires: De Pont. l. 3. c. 7.
though he could not but know that Tertullian and St. Austin tell us the quite
contrary.

But these Modern Authors having said otherwise, their Authority did soon
prevail; and having both Precedents and Commands for such horrid Acts, they
took up Arms, and committed the most execrable Villainies that ever any Mortal
read, or heard of: Some of their chief Prelates and greatest Clergymen being
their Officers and Commanders; and others writing and preaching in defense of
their Wickedness. I might name many; but shall only tell you, that their Bishop
of Ferns calls it a just War; Bleeding Iphigenia.
and says, They were forced to take Arms to avoid their own Destruction, and in
the necessary Defense of their Estates and Religion. And how much he, and the
rest of their Bishops, opposed the Cessation, is notoriously known: and did not
Father Molief cause them (contrary to the Law of Arms) to tear the Heralds
Coat, who proclaimed the Peace at Lymerick; for which he had Thanks from the
Nuncio, and the Apostolic Benediction? And were not all Excommunicated who
adhered to that Peace? I could trace them from place to place, and show you how
vigorous and active they were in all parts of the Kingdom: But I hasten.

You see, by their Books and Practices, they hold it lawful to extirpate
Protestant Kings and their Subjects: and, while they retain such Principles,
what Safety can we expect? What Protestant Prince and Country is not in danger?
What may they not fear, when the Fathers of their Church, who should restrain
them from such horrid Murders, do, by Precept and Example, prompt them unto
them, and justify them by Religious Arguments?

And if their People may be absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance, as the
Duke of Suevia was by Gregory the Seventh from his Oath to the Emperor Henry
the Fourth, and the English, by Pope Pius, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, how
can Princes be secure? And while they allow of Equivocating and Mental
Reservations in taking of Oaths, to what purpose are they administered? And
while they hold that the Commands of their Superiors must be observed, as the
Command and Will of God, there is little likelihood of Peace hereafter: Nor
need we wonder at former Conspiracies, the Clergy having such power over their
Consciences, and holding such Principles, and approving of such Actions; on
both which I might abundantly enlarge. But having showed you how this Rebellion
began, upon what Principles, and at whose Instigation, what could follow, but
the greatest Cruelty that could be committed? Of which you expect some Relation
and particular Instances also this Day.

But alas! what Heart can think of it; what Tongue can express it without great
Emotion and Concern? The very remembrance of it strikes Dread and Terror into
my Soul. For being thus instructed, and enraged by the Jesuits, Priests, and
Friars, (as the Act of Parliament for the Observation of this Day tells you,)
they began a most cruel, bloody, and unnatural Rebellion, resolving to destroy
both Church and State, and cut off all the Protestants that would not join with
them in their Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship. To effect which, they rose
this day in all Parts of the Nation, running, like Furies, up and down,
breathing forth nothing but Death, and finding no delight but in Slaughter;
their Hands reeking with Blood, and their Swords and Skeins dulled and rebated
with hewing Christians in pieces; their Zeal hurrying them into the greatest
Violations of Religion and Humanity that ever the Sun beheld.

They fully verified this Text in the greatness of their Rage, and spared but
few whom they could kill. Gray hairs were no protection to the Aged; neither
could Beauty or Youth find any Mercy from them; and even Innocence it self
could not save the sucking Infants from being tossed on their Pikes, and hung
on Tenterhooks. It was Crime enough in those poor Souls to be born of
Protestant Parents. Some tender Virgins fled in Frost and Snow to the Woods and
Deserts; and when sharp Hunger drove them out of those doleful Solitudes, they
were caught, and made a Prey to their Bestial Desires; their Shrieks and Tears
could no way move them to pity; and when by force they had satisfied their
Lust, they murdered the very Persons they had embraced.

Hanging and drowning were Acts of Mercy among them; for they killed Men by
degrees, as the Tyrant Caligula did, In the Castle of Moroghan.
that they might feel themselves dye, tying one naked to a Table, and giving
him a Gash at every Health they drank, until his whole Body was one continued
wound. Nor were their Women less cruel to their own Sex, Bp. Maxwel's
Examination.
barbarously killing the Protestant Women; and even their Children (as if they
had sucked in ferity with their Milk) murdring the Protestants Children.
Examination of Adam Clover.
And a Youth, not above fourteen years of Age, slew fifteen men, being
disarmed, and in the Stocks: and another, about twelve, killed two Women and
one Man at the Siege of Agher.

They brake the Backbone of a young man, Bp. Maxwel's Examination.
and would not kill him, but removed him from place to place, to eat the Grass
of the Field; and roasted Mr. Watson alive, after they had cut off some pieces
of his flesh. Exam. of Phil. Tailor and John Wisdom.
They rip't up the Bellies of Women, and cast their Children to the Swine, who
eat them; and some were delivered of Children while they were hanging. They
made a man drunk, Exam. of Alex. Creighton, Chapter Campbell, and Geo Cottingham
Clerk.
and then hanged him. They forced others to Mass, gave them the Sacrament, and
then murdered them; saying, It was no sin to kill Protestants, for they were
all damned already.

Nay, Bp. Maxwel's Examination.
their Cruelty did extend to the very Cattle of the English, cutting pieces out
of them alive; in which Torment they lived some days, roaring about the Fields.

They compelled some to tread on the Holy Bible, cursing it in a horrid manner,
and saying, Exam. of Ed. Slack, Rog. Holland, and Mr. Dean.
It had bred all the quarrel. They also burnt some Bibles, and said, It was
Hellfire that burnt; and wished they had all the Bibles in Christendom to burn
with them. And they triumphed and rejoiced in the numbers they had killed,
saying, Exam. of John Wisdom, Phil. Tailor, and Marg. Stoakes.
The Devil was beholding to them for sending him so many Souls to Hell.

But their Rage against the Clergy was such, Mr Harcourt's Martyrology.
as I am not able to relate, nor could you, without Horror and Amazement, hear
it. And the barbarous usage of one of their Wives is not to be named among
Christians. Mrs. Smithson.
They drowned and burnt great numbers, and laughed at their Cries and
Lamentations; and took pleasure to hear Men speak, as they buried them alive in
Ditches. Exam. of Antho. Stratford. Abstract of Irish Massacres.
They tried whether a Man's Guts or a Dogs were longest; and made Candles of a
Man's grease in the County of Tyrone, and did many other things which Nature
loathes, and Humanity abhors: as may be at large seen in the Examinations taken
upon Oath, Bp. of Mead.
by a late eminent and learned Prelate, with seven other Reverend Divines, Dr.
Jones' Remonstrance. Mr. Harcourt's Remonstrance Sir John Temple's Hist. Dr.
Borlases Hist.
and in other Books writ on this Tragical Subject, to which I refer you: and in
them you will see, that Piso's Head never afforded more pleasure to the
inhumane Otho, than the dead Carcasses of Protestants did to those men. A quick
death was the only favor, and the greatest Act of Humanity to be expected at
their Hands: but alas! even that was sometimes denied, though most earnestly
desired by those whom they had grievously wounded.

The whole Kingdom was an Aceldema, and nothing but Sighs and Groans were heard
throughout the Land. When Titus saw Jerusalem in flames, and Marcellus beheld
Syracusa burning, their Words and Tears did testify their trouble and concern,
though Enemies, for the destruction of those Noble Places; but these men sung,
with Nero, while they burnt our Cities, demolished our Churches, and buried
those Sacred Fabrics in their own Ruins, because they had been used by
Heretics.

All the Country was in a flame. The Towns were filled with the Blood of the
Inhabitants; and the Bodies left in many places to be devoured by the Fowls of
the Air. Nay, Exam. of Mar. Woods, Tho. Hewetson, and Rob. Collis.
they violated the very Sepulchers of the Dead, dug up their Bodies, and threw
them into the Sea, or into the Fields, as unworthy to be interred among them.

Naturalists tell us, the fiercest Lions covet Honor more than Revenge; they
are appeased when they see their Enemy on the Ground, and give Life to that
which yields the Victory: but that could not satisfy these Men. To see the
British poor and miserable, was not enough; 'twas their Blood alone could
quench the thirst of such Canibals. I might give you numerous Examples of their
Rage and Fury, but I shall end, the whole Day being little enough to give you a
full account of their Villainies, which were so great and savage, so barbarous
and inhumane, that no Epithet can reach them, no History can parallel them. For
proof of which, you have the undeniable Testimony of the whole Parliament of
Ireland, who, with one Voice, tell you in their Act for the keeping this
Anniversary, That it was a Conspiracy so generally inhumane, barbarous, and
cruel, as the like before was never heard off in any Age or Kingdom.

Which Act, we need not wonder they would Repeal, it being the united Evidence
of those, who were met in Parliament, from all parts of the Nation, and had
fully enquired into their Actions, and had also many among them who had been
Eyewitnesses of their Cruelties; to smother which; the Irish had used all the
Art and Industry imaginable: and to terrify all from any farther search into
them, did most barbarously murder Archdeacon Bysse, who was appointed by
Authority to take Examinations of their Rapines and Murders; which, in a word,
were so many, and so spitefully acted, that the most compendious Writer could
scarce comprize them in a Volume, and the sharpest Satyrist represent them in
their just Characters.

Such was their Rage; thus excessive and immoderate was their Fury, that we may
say of it, Genesis 49.6, 7.
as Jacob did of the Rage of his Sons, O my Soul, come not thou into their
secret, unto their assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united; for in their
Anger they slew a man. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce, and their
Wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel. By which pathetical Apostrophe, he shows his great and zealous
detestation of their Outrage, curses their sin, and foretells their punishment:
which was accordingly fulfilled, when their Union in Evil was punished with a
Division and Scattering among the Ten Tribes.

Neither did these bloody men long escape, Vengeance did pursue them close at
the Heels. None values the Executioner when the work is done. Alexander was
raised to punish the Pride of the Persians; and Caesar and Pompey the Lust and
Luxury of the Romans: But when God had done his work with them, they came to
sudden and untimely ends. And so did our just God deal with the merciless
Irish; for beside vast numbers which were slain in the War, great Plagues and
sharp Famines came among them, so very great, that they did eat one another in
some places. The Wrath of God fell heavy upon them, as it did on the
Israelites, and they were most grievously punished for the Blood which they had
spilt.

Which might well have terrified them from committing the like wickedness any
more: but alas! so inveterate were they against us, that there is no
expectation of Peace among them longer than they are kept under. Their Religion
alters their very Morals, sours their Nature, and imbitters their Spirits: And
all the Favors and kindness we can show them, prove ineffectual. For was not
the last Rebellion begun when they enjoyed their Estates, and had the free
Exercise of their Religion? When they were Members of Parliament, and
Magistrates of Corporations? When their Lawyers (who were then, and are now the
contrivers of our Ruin) did Practice in our Courts? And when they had all the
other Privileges they could reasonably desire? And now the whole Government of
the Nation, and both Civil and Military Employments could not satisfy them.
They have a Natural Aversion and Antipathy to us: And have resolved (as the
Jesuit Campian declared here) to be our Enemies for ever. And I fear they think
themselves obliged (as O Mahon, Disput. Apolog.
another of that Order, says they are) to join unanimously in the extirpation
of Heretics: and then undoubtedly, when they have the Power in their hands, we
must expect all the Mischief they can do us.

Of which we have lately had another fatal Instance; the whole Nation rising
again in Arms, seizing our Houses, plundring us of our Goods, and driving us
into Exile and Banishment, when we had lived Peaceably, Hospitably, and most
Obligingly among them. But God in Judgment remembered Mercy; he delivered us
from their Rage, he preserved us in our sudden Flight, and when no Ships could
be had, he brought some of us in Open Boats to this Charitable and
Compassionate Nation; where we have been kindly received, and many thousands
have been Charitably relieved; which with all gratitude and thankfulness must
be for ever remembered.

And God has raised us up a Glorious Deliverer, who has exposed himself to as
great dangers as ever any Prince did, to restore us to our Country again. He
succeeds his Illustrious Ancestors in their Hereditary Zeal for the Reformed
Religion, as he does in their Valor; and rescues us from Popish Tyranny and
Slavery, as they did the Netherlands in the last Century. And by his Wisdom,
Conduct, and Courage, he has obtained a Victory which is the Admiration of
this, and will be the Wonder of future Ages: By which, the Metropolis of our
Nation, and many other great Towns are preserved from Flames; and the Lives of
many Thousands of Protestants are saved, and the whole Kingdom in a happy way
of being reduced; and we, who were forced to fly, have now a joyful Prospect of
returning home.

For which, let us pay him all Duty and Honor, all Fidelity and Allegiance.
Let him be as dear to us, as David was to the Israelites; and as Titus and
Constantine were to the Romans. Let us love him as the Father of our Country,
and the Defender of our Faith. Let us pray that his Arm may be strong, and his
Sword Victorious: And may the God of Battles Crown him with Success in all his
Engagements for the Protestant Religion.

And let us this day praise and adore our God for that, and all other Blessings
and Deliverances. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name
together; for his anger endures but a moment. He has turned our mourning into
dancing, and girded us with gladness. They are brought down, and fallen; but we
are risen, and stand upright. Let our mouth speak the praises of the Lord, and
let all flesh bless his Holy Name for ever and ever.

And now let his Mercies, and his Judgments have their due Influence upon us.
Let us not defeat their gracious Design and Intention; but let us grow better
under our Sufferings, and return with Resolutions of entire Obedience, and
universal Amendment. Let us humble our selves, and bewail those sins which
brought these Punishments upon us; and sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto us. And while we live, let us bless the Lord, who has delivered us from
our merciless Enemies. Let us live up to the Mercies we have received, and walk
answerable to the Favors he has bestowed upon us and our Forefathers, in
discovering the Plots and Contrivances of our Adversaries, and preserving us on
this day from their intended Cruelties.

We may well conclude by their murdering so many, they would have done the like
to all, had not God detected their Designs, restrained their Malice, and made a
way for us to escape. He did not quite cast off his People, nor forsake his
Inheritance: But was, as David calls him, a present help in the time of
trouble. For when we were surrounded with bloody Men, when the Snare was laid,
and the Pit was dug, and we were just falling into them, he pulled us back, and
rescued us from them, as he did the Jews from Haman's Conspiracy. For which,
this our Feast of Purim is to be kept with all Thankfulness and Devotion. For
now may our Israel say, If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us: Or, in the words of my Text, They had slain us with a rage that
would have reached up to Heaven.

Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey unto their Teeth. Our
Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; and we are yet
living Monuments of his Mercy. And let us conclude, in the words of the
Collect: It was his Goodness, not our Merit; it was his Mercy, not our
Foresight, that any were left alive when they rose up against us. To him
therefore, on this day of Mercy, and all the days of our Life, and in all
Generations to come, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be sold by Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Sermon preached before the Court of Aldermen and Citizens of London, at
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday September the 16. 1688.

The Golden Rule, or Royal Law of Equity Explained. Both by J. Goodman, D.D.

An Account of the Transactions of the late K. James in Ireland, wherein is
contained the Act of Attainder past at Dublin in May 1689. As also the
Proclamation for Raising Twenty thousand pounds per Mensem, without an Act of
Parliament, with other Proclamations and Acts made there.

A List of such of the Names of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of England
and Ireland (amongst whom are several Women and Children) who are all by an Act
of a pretended Parliament assembled in Dublin on the 7th of May 1689. before
the late K. James, Attainted of High Treason. Both Licensed by the Command of
his Majesty's Principal Secretary of State.

Seasonable Reflections on a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A History of Passive
Obedience since the Reformation, where the true Notion of Passive Obedience is
settled and secured from the malicious Interpretations of designing Men.

Obedience and Submission to the present Government, demonstrated from Bishop
Overal's Convocation Book.

A Letter of Advice to a young Gentleman of an Honorable Family, now in his
Travels beyond Seas, for his more safe and profitable Conduct in the Three
great Instances of Study, Moral Deportment, and Religion.

The Life of the Right Reverend Father in God Ed. Rainbow, D. D. late Lord
Bishop of Carlisle. To which is added a Sermon preached at his Funeral by Mr.
Tho. Tully his Lordships Chaplain, and Chancellor of the said Diocese of
Carlisle, at Dalstone, April the 1st, 1690.


