THE FLAMING HEART OR THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS S. TERESA, Foundresse of the
Reformation, of the Order of the All-Immaculate Virgin Mother, our B. Lady, of
Mount-Carmel.

This History of her Life, was written by the Saint her self, in Spanish;
and is newly, now, Translated into English, in the year of our Lord God,
1642.

Aut mori, aut pati. Either to dye, or else to suffer.

Chap. 40.

ANTWERPE Printed by JOHANNES MEVRSIVS. ANNO M. DC. XLII.

TO THE INCOMPARABLE, SOVEREIGN PRINCESS, HENRIETTA-MARIA OF FRANCE, QVEEN OF
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRLAND.
MADAME
I Presume not now, to approach to your Majesty's presence, with design to
beg your Favors, (though this, use to be the case of every Creature) but to
pay your Majesty a Service, and that, a great one, for the many Princely
benefitts, which I have received already, from your gracious hand. For here, I
come to offer your Majesty a means, of magnifying your own natural
greatness, by your avovving, and protecting, and enlargeing the glory of an
incomparable Saint, S. Teresa. To whom, as I have well understood that
already, you carry an extraordinary devotion; and not only devotion to her
self, but affection also, to the holy Religious women of her Angelical
Order; whereof, the English Nation (which now enioyes the honor, to be
also, yours) has a Monastery at Antwerpe, which needs not, perhaps, be
ashamed, to appear near any other of the whole world, whether it be, for
their great, and entire contentment in Recollection; their insatiable, yet most
delightful thirst, after Perfection, and Union with our Blessed Lord; or the
everlasting Feast, of Joy, and Iubily, which they solemnize, both in the
hearty, and high respects, which they carry to their Reverend Mother Superior,
and their true, and most tender love, to one another: so, it will not be
unworthy, either of your own greatness, or goodness, that, when there is
question of considering the virtues, and perfections of the Glorious S. Teresa,
and the celebrating her praises, and the studying her Life, (J mean that Life
of hers, which she vvrote, with that most holy, and wise hand of her own,
which I here present) your Majesty vouchsafe to march at the very head of
that whole Troop, which may address it self, to the imitation of her
Heroical actions, and to the admiration of those incomparable Graces, and
Favors, which the God of Heaven, and Earth, thought fit to infuse, with his
enamoured heart, and omnipotent hand, into that most happy Soul. For, who can
ever, be more fit, to patronize so great a Saint, as she is, then so great a
Queen, as your Majesty; who, besides your Birth, and renown, whereof (to
speak after the manner of men) you have so much occasion to bragg, have also
(in order to Heaven) shevved such constancy, in the way of Religion, and
pietye, as may justly, (all things considered) give cause to the rest of your
own most eminent Rank, at least, to shrink, if not to blush. For my self,
to beg your Majesty's pardon, for this appearance of presumption, were now,
to acknowledge some such fault, as whereof, J acquitted my self, before. I
will therefore, rather by this means, hope to obtain a Suite for this
Service; yea and that, of the most sauory kind, of all other; and it is, That
you will vouchsafe to employ the Sacrifice of my whole Life, in obedience to
any of your Majesty's least commands. God make, and keep your Majesty, as
healthy, and as happy, as this world can tell how to vvish; yea, and as the
other, can tell how to grant; and I most humbly ask leave, to do your
Majesty all Reverence, at your Royal Feet.

Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, most devoted, and most obliged
Servant M. T.

A word of Aduertisment to the Reader.
TO the end, that the Reader's judgment may be kept from any considerable
error, concerning the person of the Glorious S. Teresa, he is humbly, and
earnestly desired, to read the Preface, before he read the Book; and
especially, that part thereof, which occurrs betvveen that. which beginns,
with these follovving words, For she will tell you, etc. And that other
which beginns, But now it will come fittly in, etc.

He may also be pleased, to excuse the fevv Faults, which shall be found, in
the Print; the rather, because it was performed, both in a strange Country,
and by strangers.

THE PREFACE, OF THE TRANSLATOVR, TO THE CHRISTIAN, AND CIVIL READER.
I Was moved (and who would not be moved?) by the Reverend Mother Superior of
the English Teresian-Carmelites, at Ant werpe, and the rest of that holy
Assembly, to Translate, out of Spanish, into English, the Life of the
Admirable, and Blessed Woeman, S. Teresa, their holy Mother, and mine; whose
Excellencies, and Perfections, it is hard, for any Penn, to express; and few
Hearts, even of the most refined, and raised, can fully understand, and
comprehend. For, though it were translated long ago, by an eminent, and
worthy Man of our Nation, in the great devotion, which he carried to his
excellent Saint; yet he had lived, so very long, out of his Count^^; and had
attended, in so serious a manner, to the acquiring of Perfection, and
Knowledge, in order to the Conversion of Souls, that, on the one side, he
seemed to have lost a little of the purity of his own English Tongue, and, on
the other, not to have acquired enough of the Spanish; and consequently, not to
have been able, to perform the Work, so exactly, as he desired. Since, such a
Book, as was so sublimely conceived, by such a Heart, and so vehemently
posted-out, by such a Penn, could never be exactly translated, out of any one
Language, into an other, without a kind of full possession of them both;
besides a great attention, and application of mind, otherwise. Some places
being therefore very obscure, and many other, more then a little,
misunderstood, the Book was not so well received, nor so gladly, and
greedily read, as it deserved. And therefore, both in honor of their renouned,
and admired Parent, and in appetite also of their own consolation, and
perfection in Spirit, the zeal of these holy Religious women could not
content it self with less, then a procuring, to get a new Translation made,
which perhaps might prove, (to their thinkeing) a little less imperfect, then
the other.

For my part, I confess, I vvonder, that some such Reuievv, and Reformation,
concerning a Public Work, so much importing the glory of Almighty God, and
the honor of so eminent a Saint, could be forborne so long. But even that very
conceit, and consideration, did help to clappe the Spurrs into my Sides,
toward a running through this Course, and Carreire, with all the care, and
speed, which I could possibly use.

And heerin, though my abilityes were small, yet my attention grew to be great;
and so I considered several Coppyes, and took also many opinions, and yet
found, that all my diligences were few enough, toward the discharge of the
multitude of doubts, and difficultyes, which occurred; Partly, through the
high, and abstracted Nature of the very Contents of the Book; Partly, through
the great length of the Periods; Partly through the multitude, sometimes, of
Parenthesis, even in the same sentence; Partly, through her forbearing to use
those Particles, in the beginning of the said Sentences; as namely, For, But,
Yet, Therefore, and the like; without which, it is not always so easy to
discern, whether the Discourse be either continued, or interrupted or ended;
and partly, and cheiflie, by the ill printing, and worse pointing, of all the
Spanish Coppyes, which I could ever come to see. All which, I am feign to
allege, by way of an humble excuse, for whatsoever error, I may have
inuoluntarilie committed, in this case. But howsoever, I here present it, to
the glory of Almighty God; to the praise of this Excellent Saint; and to the
consolation of these Children of hers, who are no less, then a kind of
counterpoise, to the misery of the times, wherein we live.

But now, as soon as I had translated the Work, a certain wise, and
vvorthie man, and my friend, took knowledge of it, and desired me, by a very
earnest letter of his, to usher this Book into the world, with a Preface of
mine own; which might open the Readers eye, the more easily to behold the
Saint, when she followed; and so also, to give some notice of her Children,
who are following her. And though I alleged my reasons, why this might be
less necessarily done, yet still, he urged me to it; and so, I made his Will
mine own, and accordingly, shall speak a few of my thoughts.

I say, some few of my thoughts; For, whosoever has studied the person of the
Glorious S. Teresa, well, will find so much to say, as, if he have a mind to
say all, he may do well not to begin, since it will never be in his power,
to make an end; such a full sea, is this excellent Saint, of all perfection,
which has neither Bottom, nor Brimme. I will therefore, say very little of
her here; and that, shall cheiflie tend, to let you see, how highly this Life,
(which was written by the Saint her self) is authorized, and how
punctuallie it deserves to be believed, forasmuch as may, any way, concern
the truth of the Historical part thereof, as also the excellency of the
Order, which she both Reformed, and Erected.

But for the present, you may first be pleased to consider, that we find the
Lives of Saints, to be written, by three several kinds of persons. For, some
are delivered by men, who are only emine^t, in the Historical way; and they,
deserve to be esteemed, and believed, for the merit of that worth, which shall
appear, whatsoever it fall-out to be.

The second sort, is, when the Writers, are not only vvorthie Men, but are
withal, so great Servants of Almighty God, as to be acknowledged, by the
Christian world, for Saints; as S. Athanasius, who vvrote the Life of S.
Anthony; S. Epiphanius, of several Prophets; S. Hierome, of S. Paul, and S.
Hilarion, both of them, Heremits; S. Gregory the Great, of S. Bennet; S.
Bonauenture, of the Humble, and Admired S. Francis; and the like; who deserve a
far higher credit, then the former; in regard, that the vvriters were Saints.

The Third is, when Saints themselves write their own Lives; as the
Incomparable S. Augustine did a great part of his, in the Divine Book of his
Confessions; upon the excess, and admiration, wherein he was, at the
unspeakable Mercy of Almighty God, for removing all the miseries of his
Soul. And the Relations of such Lives, as these, are, incomparably, of the
most credit of all. For first, no body knows so well, what passes
concerning a man, as himself; And Saints are very far, from saying any
thing, which is not exactlie true; and especially, if the Saints be such, as
that they be also endued with very great natural parts, of Wit, and
Memory, and Judgment, forasmuch as concerns the Brain, or Understanding; as
they will be sure to be with Truth, and Sincerity, and Candor, forasmuch as
may concern the Heart, or Will. For, as these Moral parts will keep them from
deceauing others: so, the Intellectual, will secure them, from being deceived
themselves; and will make them define, and divide, and suspect, and doubt, and
ask, before they fully resolve, to believe; and much more, before they will
publish things, to the world.

And now, as the Incomparable S. Augustine, was called, by the consideration of
his own great Sins, and God's greater Mercies, to declare his Life, in the
never enough admired Book of his Confessions: so also, did the Glorious S.
Teresa, the self same thing, in effect, in this Book; but, by direction of her
Ghostly Father. Not yet, that he did so much, as incline her to publish her
own imperfections, and sins, (nay rather, he did the direct contrary) but
only to declare her Form of Prayer; together with the Favors, which our
Lord imparted, to her, therein. But now she, upon that occasion, would needs
make her own Process, in view of the World; and show (as incident to the
rest) how ill, she had complied with Almighty God, from time, to time. And
by this means, does she, in effect, vveaue that great piece, of rich
Cloth-of-gold, and Tislue, which concerns, almost, the History of her whole
Life; and now, the same is hungout abroad, to the view of the world.

But yet, amongst all the excellencies thereof, there is one thing, which
displeases many vvorthie, wise, and holy men; or at least, which pleases
them less, then the rest. And it is, that whensoever there is any question
at all, of her self, (in order, either to Virtue, or Vice,) she would never
trust her own eyes, though they were so clear, and good, as the world
knovves; but she resolved, to work with Perspectiue-Glasses, of different,
yea, and even contrary kinds. For, when she described her Virtues; she
served her self, of a Diminishing-glasse; which made them seem so little, as to
be no more, then a kind of Nothing. But, on the other side, when she gave
account of her Imperfections, she would, by no means, know them, by any
other name, then of Vices, and Sins; because she took a Multiplying-Glasse,
to her self; for fear, least else, those Mole-hills should not seem Mountains.

Now, in the strength of this vvelmeaning, and holy kind of error, which she
incurred (if any error may well deserve so indulgent a name) she gave her
self too great scope (if the Reader, would needs take her at her word) to
violate her own excellent fame, by certain too venturous dashes of her penn,
which was driven too too hastily on, by the impulse of a kind of inordinate
Humility. In such sort, as that, if a body were disposed, to trust his eyes
alone, without his reason, he might be easily drawn, to pass a very
erroneous Judgment, upon her Soul.

For, she will tell you, in twenty places of this Book, What a grievous
Sinner she was; What a multitude of great sins, she had (in her conceit)
committed; How many years, she had continued, in that dangerous state; And,
in fine, how she conceived, that her proper place, and particular torments,
were prepared, for her, in Hell it self, for the everlasting punishment of her
Sins; which (she faith) she felt in Spirit. Whereas yet, in realitie, and
sincerity of truth, it may be clear enough, (to such as will vnpartiallie
consider, what they are to judge; and not look through the mist, or clovvde,
of that too great insatisfaction, and severity, which she would be sure to
carry toward her self) that she was alvvaies far, from committing any
Mortal Sin, in all the course of her Life.

Now, the difference, in point of Judgment, betvveen our Saint, and others,
may well seem to have proceeded from this occasion, which follows. They
looked upon her whole life, with the eyes of a Religious kind of reason; And
she, with those, even of a kind of inordinate passion, (as a man may say) of
devotion. They, looked upon her, as men, who being informed, even by her self,
of the Case, are most fit, through their indiffere^cie, to be the Judge;
Whereas she, looked upon her self, as a mere Party; who must not, in her
own Case, be trusted, by any means, so well, as her Judge; especially,
when that Judge, knovves all things, as well as her self, since she declares
them to him. Besides, that she expresses clearly, how diverse, who were her
Ghostly Fathers, at the times of her greatest imperfection, declared to her,
in very positive terms, that she was far, from commiting Mortal Sin.
And note, that they passed such a Judgment upon her, at times, when her self
professes, that she Confessed all her Sins so entirely, as not to omit so
much, as even all those Venial Sins, upon which she could reflect. So that
clearly, by the very vvorst of her case, if any such thing, as she had ever
done, were doubtful; and if her Ghostly Fathers assured her then, that it
was not Mortal, (as indeed, they did) what reason could she have, to be so
very highly, and irreconciliably unsatisfied with her self? But the truth is,
she pierced so deeply, by means of Celestial grace, into that endless,
spotless Mine, of the Purity of Almighty God, and the unlimited Excellentie
of his High Majesty, and the unspeakable deformity of the least Imperfection,
or frailty, when once it should be brought to appear, before that
incomparable Claritie, of the King of Glory; And, on the other side, she was
endued, with such a strange, internal kind of knowledge of her self, that it
made (as I was saying before) those Moates of her Imperfections, seem
Mountains, when once, they were to appear, as in God's presence.

She was also of so very sensible a nature (which I must needs touch again
afterward) and so easily obliged, and so inseparably engaged, upon the
receiving, even of poor, vveake, little services, from mortal Creatures; and
much more, when Celestial Favors distilled down, so very fast, toward
her, from that neuer-failing Fountain of Divine Mercies; that, for her, to
find her self any way ungrateful, yea or so much as even unmindful thereof;
and yet, much more, if she should prove so inhumanly unkind, as, in stead of
paying services, to commit faults (how light soever they might be) such
errors would seem, in those eyes of hers, (which still, were fed, from that
inflamed heart) to be really, not very much less, then almost, as so many
half Sins, against the Holie-Ghost. And from this composition of her Mind,
(both in the Natural, and Supernatural way) did grow those profound
detestations of her self; those high exaggerations, of her Imperfections, and
Frailties; those lovvde exclamations, against her supposed ingratitudes, and
unkindness, toward Almighty God, which broke (as it were) even her own
very heart, whilst she was thinking; and delivered over, such feeling
arguments of her sad remorse, whilst she was vvriting, as are able, to strike
the water of tears, out of the stony hearts of her Readers (like the Rod of
Moses, which drove water out of the Rock) when once, they lend their sight,
though never so little, to behold that svveet Object, of her enamoured
thoughts, and expostulations against her self.

From hence it is, I say, that she accused her self, after a kind of obstinate
manner, whensoever she reflected upon God, and her self; in order to his
Bounties, on the one side, and her discorrespondences, on the other. Whilst
yet, when her thoughts were bent, but to express the plain order of things,
after a manner merely abstracted, from those superior Considerations, she
delivers such truths, concerning her self, as makes all these imputations,
which fell so fiercely upon her Soul, out of her own mouth, appear, to be
far different, from that, which she would desire, that they might be
thought. And so, in conformity with this, you (my Reader) shall do well, to
consider, in serious manner, how she, who spoke, after a sort, erroneously,
(when she would partially judge of her actions, in order to the spotless
Purity of Almighty God, and his strict Judgment) did yet unfold her self,
most literally truly, when she expressed her self Via facti, and related her
affections, and actions, as it were, in the Historical way.

Observe therefore, how, in this way, she says of her self, That she was
ever Cap. 4.
very careful, not to commit any Mortal Sin; That she had great care of
her Conscience, still, forasmuch as co^cerned any thing of that kind; and
that, if ever she would be so unhappy, as to commit any such sin, that she
should never be in quiet, till she was disburthened of it; That she seldom
received the B. Sacrament, Cap. 5.
but with abundance of tears; That, after she had once tasted of the Regalo's
of that Celestial Banquet, (which she began to do, when she was young)
she never omitted to Confess any thing, which she might conceive to be a
Sin, though it were but Venial; That she had ever great remorse, Cap. 2.
whenever she committed any offense, against Almighty God; That she did
naturally detest all dishonestie; and that she conceived not, that there was,
either any occasion, or any person, in the whole world, who could possibly
overcome that resolution, in her; That, difficulties grew after-vvard upon her,
by occasion of some Conuersations, which she had; whereof yet, she Confessing
her self, by way of doubt (as I have insinuated before) her Ghostly Father
made her know, that she did not offend God, therein. For, the truth of the
case, was this: She was then, a Secular vvoeman; and the inclinations, which
she had to the person, were capable of being concluded, in a Marriage;
besides, that really, on her part, there was never so much, as one impure
thought; That another Spiritual Cap. 8.
man, with whom she also consulted shortly after, about matter of her Soul,
(by occasion of some fears, into which she grevv then, to fall) declared to
her, that, though she were in the state of never so high Contemplation, yet
such conferences, and conuersations, as those, were not to be inconvenient,
for her; That she also understood by others, of like condition, that the
conuersations, which she used, and the contentments, which she took, were
lawful; That she Cap. 7.
conceived not her self, to be in Mortal Sin; for, if she had known any
such thing of her self, she would never have endured it; That she was ever a
great Cap. 6.
enemy, to detraction; yea and that the world was ever safe in that kind,
when she was present; for, every body, who knew her, knew also, that she
would not, so much, as endure, that this Sin should ever be committed, in her
hearing; That she was never, any way, subject to Cap. 22.
Envy; And that she had also, never observed her self, to offend Almighty God,
either by Hypocrisy, or even so much, as Vainglory; That she always stuck,
so very fast, to the truth of Holy Scripture, and even to the least Ceremony
of the Holy Catholic Church, that rather then believe otherwise, she would
endure a thousand deaths; That she was not cordially addicted, to any thing,
but to serve, and please our Blessed Lord; And that, in fine, the whole
world, seemed to her, to be no better, then a very Hill of Ants.

Now, this was the very truth of the Case; and this was the state of our
Saints Soul, from the first, to the last. And yet, upon the considerations,
which I touched before, this Blessed, and Heavenly Creature (I say, Heavenly,
even whilst she was yet, upon Earth) would needs conceive her self, once, in
Prayer, not only to see, but even to feel her self, to be in those very
torments of Hell, which she held her self (as has been said) to have
deserved, for her sins; and which, indeed, would have been literally, and
finally true, if our Lord had not prevented her, and accompanied her, and
conducted her, by his Holy Spirit, and Heavenly grace; without which, what
living Creature can be safe? But that, otherwise, she had actually committed
such sins, as for which, hose eternal torments might be, indeed, deserved,
seems to be but an ungrounded, and unsound opinion, in realitie of truth. For,
the constant excellency of her Life, was such, as that, she began, at the
first, where others might be glad, to end it; (namely, with fervent, and
inflamed desires of Martyrdom, even when she was scarce eight years old) and
both continued, and finished the same, afterward, in such virtue, and express
sanctity, of the highest kind, as that the world, may be rather willing, then
able, to admire it, to such a proportion, as it deserves. And therefore, that
conceit of her great Sins, and of her deserved place also, in Hell, seems
partly to have had the true foundation, upon the jealous, and sollicitous, and
curious, enamoured, and inflamed Affections, of the faithful, watchful,
loyal, laborious thoughts, of our Glorious Saint; which tended, almost ever,
toward a complying, in most perfect manner, with the duties, to which she held
that she was liable, in her self; and with the Inspirations, by which she was
so constantly solicited, and called upon, and, as it were, even Courted, by
the powerful, and precious heart, of our Blessed Lord; and partly, yea and
peradventure chiefly, by the ill quarter, which she conceived, and acknowledged
her self, to have kept sometimes, with our Blessed Lord, by not corresponding
with his heavenly grace, and not complying, with his holy Inspirations; and
commiting some neglects in that kind; whilst yet she was so enarnestly moved,
by his Divine Majesty, to giue-ouer certain natural affections, and
recreations, of hers. In regard of which unkindness toward Almighty God, she
might have congruously deserved, to be deprived of God's grace afterward; and
then she might also have fallen, by degrees, not only into greater faults, but
even into greiuous Sins, which might truly have been then ascribed, to her
former, lesser offenses. And so it was merely, the unspeakable goodness of
Almighty God, and no merit of hers, that she was not permitted to fall, by
degrees, even as low as Hell it self, Like a man, who, in a small distemper of
body, neglects the help of Physicians, and grows thereby afterward, into
mortal diseases and death.

Now therefore, in all such things, as might concern the estimation, which she
made of her self, in order, either to the excellency, or deformity, of her
life, there is (and let the Glorious Saint forgive me this error, once, of
speaking truth) no credit at all, to be given her; because that subject, lies
but in the way of discourse; and all things in effect, of that nature, use to
be just, of that very color, whereof those Glasses be, through which they are
seen; and I have already showed, that hers, were of the partial Cut. But as
for those other things, which occurred to be set down, by her, in the
Historical way, or else, which are related, as happening to the person of the
writer, in the way of fact, whether it were more or less; as namely, that she
did, and suffered, and said, and heard, and felt, and saw, whatsoever she
affirmed, in those kinds, whether it were in the Natural, or Supernatural
way, there can be no question made, as I have showed else where, but that all,
was most certainly, and even most punctually true. For else, she either must
deceive, or be deceived; whereof the former were a great impiety; (but far
enough from her) and the latter (all circumstances considered, and especially,
in parriculars of that nature) no less, then a most impertinent absurdity, to
be either affirmed, or believed; as was partly touched before.

It is true, that both in her Supernatural Prayer, and yet more, in her
Visions, and Revelations, there are many things, which surpass any
Understanding, which is but merely Humane; but so also, are there in finit
other Particulars, in the Ecclesiastical History, concerning other Saints,
which, howsoever they seem, and are strange, yea and much more strange then
these, yet are they generally, and most justly admitted, to the degree of
Moral belief. For, as we Catholics, are instructed, and taught, that, on the
one side, we must not be so light, or rather in fine (to the end, that things,
may have their right names) not so very weak, and foolish, as to believe
strange, and supernatural things, without a mighty deal of authority, and
proof, ( Note this great, and most certain Truth.
yea and the Church her self, does most bitterly Excommunicate, whatsoever
Creature in the world, who shall knowingly propound any false thing of this
kind, to be believed) so on the other side, that they, are most justly to be
held, both rash, and childish, and foolish, who believe not that, which
multitudes of the most, and wisest, and worthiest, and learned, and holiest
men believe. Though yet still, in all these Cases (wherein the Church has not
expressly declared her self) we are not, to believe things, with Divine Faith,
but only with a Moral, and humane belief; no, nor even so much as that, but
only, when they are so abundantly proved to be true, as that they can not
rationally, be denied, or even doubted, by any prudent, pious man. For, to
resolve to believe nothing at all, which is elevated above the ordinary course
of natural things, or which surpass a man's own capacity, and his explicit,
and deciding judgment, at the present time, is not only (as I was saying) a
very foolish, but even a childish, and ridiculous kind of thing.

I must here, put you also in mind, how, particularly, it is found in Holy
scripture, that there are innumerable instances (and especially, in the
Revelations, of the Blessed, and Beloved Apostle, S. John) which are
incomparably more repugnant, both to reason, and even to Common sense, then
any thing, which is related here. And as, (how difficult and strange soever,
those things of holy Scripture be) they must yet, be as entirely believed (and
that, upon the price, of a man's being otherwise, an Heretic, or a very
Pagan) as the Blessed Trinity it self; because, in fine, the least tittle of
Holy Scripture, is as fully, and entirely, to be believed, as the very
Divinity it self, of Almighty God; since the very least, and lowest point of
our Faith, depends upon the self same formal reason, and ground, with the
highest, and greatest: So also, whosoever shall not receive, whatsoever is
delivered, by the Saints, and great Servants of Almighty God, concerning such
things, as pass in their own Souls, through the intercourse, and commerce of
his Divine Majesty (cuius deliciae, are, to be, cum filiis hominum; whose
delight consists, in visiting, and regaling the Souls of his dearest, and most
devoted Servants) the same being considered, by holy, and wise and learned
Discerners, and Tryers, and Judges of Spirit, (whereof there is never want,
in God's Church) and so, the Catholic Christian World, growing by degrees, to
accept thereof, in the way of giving a just admittance, and a pious Moral
credit to what is related, that man, I say, shall be neither pious, nor
prudent, who reiects it; and he shall be an ignorant fool, if he deride it.

Nor is also any of my Readers, to be scandalized a whitt, if he chance to
hear Saints speak, of some material and corporeal kinds of things, which
are represented to them, in their Visions; as namely Rings, or Crowns, or
Chains, or Mantles, or Darts, or the like (whereof there is some little
mention, even in this Book) any more, then he has cause to be scandalized,
at the Horses, and Riders, and Trumpets, and Seals, and Precious Stones,
wherewith the Celestial Jerusalem was paued, in the Revelation of S. John.
For, though I say not, that he is necessarily bound, in the quality of a good
Catholic Christian, to believe the Particulars, which are represented in
this Book, after any gross material way, with the same kind of infallible,
Supernatural Faith, which he is strictly, and precisely obliged to allow, to
all things, which are contained in Holy Scripture (upon the price, as I was
saying) of being otherwise, an Heretic, or a Pagan) yet I presume to say (and
it seems to be most true, and certain) that when such particular
Supernatural Favors, as aforesaid, are vouchsafed by Almighty God, to his
Saints, and are also admitted, and embraced, by multitudes of the learned,
and vvisest, and holiest persons of the world, that man will be neither
holy, no nor so much as learned, or wise, who not only shall reject that,
which he has no will to approve, but deride also that, which he has not
wit, or grace; to understand. In a word, the Visions expressed in Holy
Scripture, must be all believed, by Divine Faith, in their true sense,
whatsoever that falls out to be; and not the Visions of Saints, with that,
but with a far inferior kind of Faith; till the Holy Catholic Church,
both have defined them, and propounded them also, to be believed, by her
Children.

Nor yet are you, my Reader, whosoever you may be, to be idly scandalized, by
any means, at the Forms, whereby things are represented sometimes, in the
Visions, and Revelations of Saints; and this, upon another, and that a very
substantial reason, which follows here. For, the important business, in those
cases, is, that our Blessed Lord, is pleased to imprint, at such, and such
times, upon the Souls of such, and such of his dear Servants, such, or such a
kind of virtue, or Favor, or Strength, as himself is pleased to design, for
the comfort, progress, and perfection, of that Servant of his. And so, that
Servant, consisting both of a Body, and a Soul, his Divine Majesty is also
graciously pleased, many times, to affect both the Body, and the Soul,
together, with a sensible kind of feeling of that grace; Those outward
demonstrations (which speak, but, as it were, to the Body) serving chiefly,
but to denote, and describe, in that sort, to the whole man, the influences,
and impressions, which then are made, and powered out, into the Soul.

But now it will come fittly in, ere long, to show you that part of the
Epistle Dedicatory, or Preface, which the Famous Dominican Father, and
Doctor, Father Lewis de Leon, thought fit to write, both in honor of S.
Teresa herself, and of those Primitive Daughters also of hers, who were first
Founded at Madrid. For thereby, you will easily discern, what a Race, that
Glorious Saint had run (eauen like some Gyantesse) in the way of our B. Lord;
as also how close, those Children followed their holy Mother. Of which Mother,
I shall not here, have room to reflect, though I should but touch, and go;
unless vvithall, I would make this Preface, as long as the very Life it self.
And therefore, you must give me leave, to adiourne you, for more ample
satisfaction of this expectation, to those dropps, which I may, perhaps, both
be able, and vvilling to derive, and draw, out of that Sea of her Perfections,
if I shall finish another small Discourse, and Description of the Saint, which
I intend to make, and place, as by way of Preface, both to certain
Exclamations, or loud Aspirations, whereby that enamoured Soul of hers, found
means to vent it self to Almighty God; as also, to two short Relations, which
she made for her Ghostly Father, in vvriting, concerning the Degrees, by
which, she passed on, in the exercise of virtue, and in the use also of
Prayer, that so, the said Ghostly Father, might be the abler to direct, and
instruct her. In the mean time, I shall only say, in very few words (by way,
as it were, of Antepast, till the Feast come in) That she was Of very
ancient, noble Birth; Of choice Breeding; Of a gracious, and lovely person; Of
an humor, highly acceptable, and agreeable, to the whole world, which knew
her; Of a melting, and bleeding Nature; Of most Loyal, true, and tender
Freindship; Of a sweet, and charming way, in conservation; Of great
significancy, and elegancy of speech in her expression, though natural, and
round, and without affectation; and in particular, her Talent was rare, in
abounding with the choycest Comparisons, which can be found. Her felicity was
also great, in negotiation; for she was owner of a solid wit; a steady, and
sound judgment; and deep vvisdome. She had a heart, as open as day, in the
exercise of bounty; Her compassion was most eminent, to wards the releife of
all Creatures in miserye; and so especially, was her solicitude, to
consolate, and regale all such, in all occasions, as were entrusted to her
care; whilst yet she would needs be unkind, and even, as it were, cruel, to
her self alone.

Above all things, she was a most perfect Lover of Truth, and so full of
matchless candor, and sincerity, in all expressions, and upon all occasions,
that she would no more have even so much, as but disguised it, and much less
varyed from it, in the least kind, (especially, when the question had, any
way, concerned her own advantage) then she would have sold her self, for a
Slave.

These, I say, were the conditions of this admirable Creature; and these, were
the parts of her Mind, which yet I consider, but in the nature of Fruits. But
they grew, from these Roots which follow; A most profound Humility; A most
inviolable Chastity; A most strict love of Poverty; A most unshaken, and
invincible Patience; in despite of sharp Sicknesses, tormenting pains, and
endless persecutions: A most ardent, and inflamed Charity, both toward God,
and man; which bred an eager, and insatiable appetite, to win Souls; An
undaunted Fortitude, and high Courage, and that, no less, in the endeavoring
great things, then in the suffering hard things; A constant, continual,
Supernatural, and most Elevated course of Prayer, and Contemplation.

Such a kind of excellent Creature was this. But yet, when I ouerlooked the
little, which I had here set down, I confess, it seemed, at the first, eue^
in mine own eye, to be a very extraordinary Elogium, of her Virtues, and
parts; and, as if it might, perhaps, have had more in it, of the Panegerick,
then of a just Praise. And therefore, before I would give it passage to the
Print, I looked attentively back, upon what I had read of her, concerning her
resolutions, and heroical actions, recorded in authentical manner, by diverse
grave, and wise Authors; and in several places also of her own Works; and
particularly, upon what is delivered, by Father Ribera, in the Historical
Relation of her whole Life. But when I came back from thence, and compared
that kind of Descant, with my Plaine-Song, concerning the Saint, I found my
self to have rather fallen much too short, then to have, any way, ouer-short,
in this kind; and that the particulars, recounted with great authority, else
where, for the proof of how she professed her self, after a high, and most
Heroical manner, in the practice, and pursuit of Virtue, in order to all
sanctity, and perfection, to which she aspired, and where, by God's great
mercy, she arrived, would have no less auowed, then encouraged my Penn, to have
done her much more honor, (that is more right) if it had not been employed, by
so vveake a hand, as mine. But, in the mean time, I have considered the
Example of the holy S. Hierome; who vvriting of his S. Paula, to Eustochium
her Daughter, has these words. I take Jesus, and his Saints to witness, as
also, that particular Angel, who was the Guardian, and Companion of this
admirable vvoeman, That I will say nothing of her, for favor; nothing after
the custom of Flatterers; but that whatsoever I am to deliaer, shall be, as
if it were upon mine Oath; and yet still, it will fall short of her merits.
And now this, shall authorize me also, to take our Blessed Lord to witness,
that, to the best of my poor understanding, I have not mistaken my self,
about the celebration which here I make of our Saint, in the point of haueing
praised her too much: but rather, that I am grown to be her Debtour, then her
Creditour, heerin. For, if ever there have been, in the whole world, many
women of more admirable parts, and perfections, both in their Intellectualls,
and their Moralls, (which I account to be, as the Simples of a Soul) and in
the use also thereof, whereby those Simples, grow to be mixed; and whether we
shall consider them, in the Natural, or Supernatural way; it is more then I
have been able to know, either by reading, or else by Discourse; and yet I have
been careful enough, to enquire.

But now, the certainty of this truth, will yet, even further appear; when I
shall tell you that, which follows. And it is, That when the Saint made
observation, and had experience of the world's great frailty, and less
perfection; and that the Religious Order, and House, where she had entered, had
obtained certain Relaxations, and Dispensations, from diverse strict Clauses,
and Conditions, of the first Institute; and when she had also met with some
Customs, through which, even her self had received disadvantage, by
dissipation, and diminution of Spirit; as namely, in regard of great, and
public resort to the House, and a multitude of unnecessary Conuersations;
and especially, for that they were not bound to continual Clausure, but had
liberty, to go abroad (though yet, only by leave of their Superiors,) to
visit their Parents, and near kindred, at some times; she grew into a full
resolution, That, if ever it should be in her power, to free her self from that
course; and to set more limited bounds upon her ways; and to inuit others
also, by her example, to express their great desire, to gain, and perfect
Souls; she would not fail, to put that purpose of hers, in execution.

And so, after the expiring of some time, and the encountering of many
impedime^ts, and the ouercoming a world of difficulties, she grew to express
her love, to our B Lord, (but in the person of such Creatures, as for whom he
dyed) to such a proportion, and in so high a kind, as to project, and perfect
so great, and hard a work, as that perhaps, no Woeman will be seen, to have
ever procured, and performed the like. For, to reform a Religious Order, and
to reduce it to the first strict Institute, is a matter of much more
difficulty, then to Found one. And, for a Woeman (who was of no absolute
power to command) to pass through so many impediments, and to win the
Prize, and to adorn even that Original Rule it self, with so many holy,
and wise Documents, and Constitutions of her own, for the raising, and true
refining of Spirit, according to the necessities, and exige^ces of those
present, most depraved times, makes the business become yet more hard, and
strange, on the one side, and more useful also, and more excellent, on the
other. For, as I conceive it to be a truth, that there is no one approved Order
of Religious people, in the Holy Catholic Church, which is not of the best
of all others, in that way of Spirit, for which it was chiefly instituted by
Almighty God; and especially for those times, in which it was instituted: So
is it, not only piety, but even prudence also, to believe, that, since this
Blessed Woeman, was stirred-vp by God's holy Spirit, in this Age of ours, for
the redress of our modern, great disorders, that his Divine Majesty had a
mind to be most particularly served, and glorified by it; and that the Souls,
which would consecrate themselves to him therein, might prove to be holy, and
happy, in a very eminent degree, as long as they would continue attentive, and
careful, not to swerve from that Spirit, which was derived to them, from
Heaven, through S. Teresa, by her Prayers, and tears, and other holy means.
Which Spirit of hers, though it evidently appear, both by the exercise, and
example of all Heroical Virtue, yet particularly, it seems to aim, and point
at the regular, and constant use of Recollection, and Mental Prayer; whereof
she speaks oftnest, and with most particular desire, and care; and appoints
two Hours, to be employed, every day, therein, besides all other Devotions of
any kind; which is practiced by all her holy Religious, and is really that
time, which gives them more abundant joy, then all the rest. And indeed, she
takes many occasions, not only to recommend it earnestly, to the Children, and
Successors of her own Order, but exhorts also all Creatures, who will have
the happiness, to be the true Servants of our Blessed Lord, to take fast hold,
by this Anchor, in their Navigations through the Sea of this world. In which
Sea, not only they, who are best shipped, but even such others also, as have
been cast over board, from Grace, into the storm, and tempest of a Sinful
life, may yet, by means of Prayer, prove able, yea and morally certain,
through the mercy of Almighty God, to recover the assured Port of Salvation.
For, in the judgment of this excellent creature, this point, and practice, of
Mental Prayer, is the most sacred, and sovereign help, by way, either of
Preservative before Sin, or yet of remedy, or Restoratiue, after it, which
can possibly be found, or ministered in this world; and indeed a kind of Manna
from Heaven, which imparts all kind of Good to the Soul. Good always, in the
substantial way; because it always brings increase of grace, and so enables
men to win great victoryes over themselves; where by, they daily grow to be
the Servants of Almighty God, more and more. And sometimes also Good, in a way
of most sovereign sweetness, beyond any thing, which Flesh, and Blood knows
how to imagine. But yet, to make the Soul capable of this last, she must
resolve to untie her self wholy, (and it must indeed, be wholly) not only from
the firm purpose, of committing any Sin, whether it be great, or small, but
even from the very fastening her affections, in any manner of inordinate way,
to any Creature of any kind; though yet, it should not be unlawful in it self.

And a most particular care, must also be taken, by all such, as will follow
the footstepps, and directions of this Glorious Saint, (upon which she presses
so very often, and so very hard, in twenty places of this excellent Work,)
That a Soul which pretends to serve our Blessed Lord, in this kind, as she
ought, must resolve, both very faithfully, and very early, to dispose herself
to do it, with true, and perfect Liberty of Spirit; that is, with an absolute
intention and determination, to do it, merely, because it is the holy Will of
our B. Lord; and because he has made it the means, whereby she may obtain
the pardon of her Sins, and acquire all Christian virtue, through increase of
Grace; and pay, both frequent, and ardent acts of Homage, and Grief, and Love,
to his Divine Majesty; and procure an imitation of those Heroical virtues,
which he was pleased to express, in his bitter Passion. And, above all things,
the Saint requires us, to take heed of haueing any mercenary respect at all, to
receive gusts, and spiritual delights, or other higher Favors from him, in
this Life; but to remitt all such things, to the next; and (so that we may
ever do him true Service) to leave it, with all indifferency, and conformity
to our Blessed Lord, whether he will dispense all his Favors to us, at one
payment, in the next world; or else, by parts and portions, in this. And
whosoever shall be of a different mind, will not only disoblige the Glorious
S. Teresa her self, but may also make this Book, both an unprofitable, and
vnvsefull, yea and even an inconvenient Study for his Soul.

But (to return to the glorious actions of this Saint) That, besides the
instituting, or redressing this Order, (where she had, both men, and women
though yet chiefly, her own Sex in her eye,) she should also, being only but a
Woeman, be able, so to work upon men, as (in despite of less rigor, and no
little envy) to bring them to take, as it were, the Law, at her hands; and,
notwithstanding the pride of Old Adam, to ouer-worke them, to cooperate with
the Grace of the New; and to make them not disdain to accept of her
Instruction; and to apply themselves to the imitation of this Virgin, will not
allow us to do any thing, but vvonder; save that, it was, most evidently, the
hand, and the strong hand of Almighty God, who enabled, and strengthened this
dear Servant of his to be the Instrument of so Heroical a work.

And all this, is so excellently set down, by the said Doctor Lewis de Leon,
as that I will do both the Saint, and her Children the right, to show them
the very Fountain it self, from whence the Relation springs; and not deface,
or disgrace it, by any imperfect description of mine own.

You are therefore to understand, and consider (for, these circumstances are
not impertinent, to the substance) that some years, after the death of this
excellent Creature S. Teresa, and long before she was declared a Saint, by the
judgment of the Holy Catholic Church (in the Process whereof, there uses
ever, to be even an excess of difficulty, in weighing, and admitting of all
Proofs) there grew a question, about the publishing of her Writings, and
Works. And, to the end, that nothing might be done therein, either by any
indiscreet zeal, or other accident, the Council Royal of Spain (which is a
Body of great Authority, and Wisdom) committed the review, of whatsoever
the Saint had left behind her, in that kind, to be considered, by some fit,
and grave person; that so, that which should be found, to be truly hers, might
be distinguished from other things, and so proceed to be public, by
Authority. This person, was a learned, and renowned man, a Father of S.
Dominicks Order, and a Doctor, who lived in Madrid, at that time. His name
was Lewis de Leon, as I said before; who, together with acknowledging, and
approving, yea and admiring her Writings (whereof this Life of hers, is the
chief, employed himself also, with great care, to set them out, himself. And
when this Book went to the Press, he dedicated it to the Prioresse, and
Religious Women, of the Teresian-Carmelites, who then, were newly founded,
in Madrid. And here, you shall be entertained, with as much of that
Dedicatorie Epistle, as imports the excellency, both of the Holy Mother S.
Teresa, and of those happy Daughters of hers, who already began to live
under her Rule. And these, are his very words,

I never saw, nor knew the Blessed Mother, Teresa of Jesus, whilst yet, she
was in this world; but now, when she lives in Heaven, I know her; and do, in
effect, continually see her, in two living Images, or Pictures, of her self,
which she left amongst us; and those are, her Daughters, and her Books; which
serve also, in my opinion, for very faithful witnesses, and superior to all
kind of exception, concerning the proof of her great virtue. For, if I had but
seen the figure, and features of her face, they would have informed me, but of
that part of her Body; And if I had heard her speak, and discourse, that,
might also have declared some part of the vvorth of her Mind. But the first,
would have been common, to others; and the second, might have been subject to
error; to which these other, are not subject, in which I see her, now. For,
as Solomon says: A man, may be known, by his children; And the fruits,
which any one leaves behind him, when he goes out of the world, are the
true testimonies of the life, which he led, when he was here. And so we see,
that Christ our Lord himself, when he was pleased in the holy Ghospel, to put
a difference, between the Good, and the Bad, addresses men, to consider their
Fruits; for, By their Fruits, says he, you shall know them.

So that, the Virtue, and Sanctity of Mother Teresa, which might perhaps have
seemed questionable, and doubtful to me, when I should have seen her here,
the same I hold to be, both very evident, and very certain, (whilst now, I see
her not) by the view, which I have of her, both in her Daughters, and in those
Books, which she has left behind her. For, by the virtue, which shines so
brightly, in all those Daughters of hers, we come to know, without any
error at all, the great abundance of grace, which it pleased Almighty God to
vouchsafe to her, whom he would ordain to be the Mother of this new Miracle.
And really, that deserves, to be held for no less, then a Miracle, which we
see our Blessed Lord to be doing daily, both in them, and others, by their
means. Nay, if that must go for a Miracle, which happens beyond the natural
course, and order of things, there are, in this particular, so many of them,
which are both new, and extraordinary, as that to call them but a Miracle,
were to say little; for they are rather an assembly, and heap of Miracles.

For, it is one Miracle, that a single Woeman alone, should have reduced an
Order, both of Men, and Women, to Perfection. And a second, that the
Perfection, to which she brought them, was so great, and high. And a third,
to find, to what a huge increase, it is grown, in so very few years, from so
small beginnings. And now, every one of these three, is a thing, which
deserves particular consideration. For, if it belong not to Women, to teach,
but to be taught, (as S. Paul affirms) it grows instantly, to be a kind of
Miracle, that a weak, and sickly Woeman, should be so full of courage, as
even to undertake so great a work, as that; and vvithall, should be so full
of vvisdome and efficacy, as finally, to prevail therein and should be also
able, to steal the very hearts, out of the bodies of them, with who me she
treated, that so, the might be able to give them, to Almighty God and carry
such multitudes of people, after her, toward the embracing of all such things,
as are apprehended, and abhorred most, by flesh, and blood. Whereby, me
thinks, it appears, that, in a time, when the Devil pretends, to triumph, in
the multitude of those Infidels, who follow him; and in the obstinacy of
diverse Heretical Nations, which take part with him; and amongst the many
vices of loose Catholics, who range themselves also on his side, the Majesty
of Almighty God, would be pleased (for the greater contempt, and scorn of
the Devil) to advance, and set before him, not a Man, who should be valiant,
and learned, but a poor, single Woema^, who should raise-vp, and plant a
Banner of Defiance, against him; and should publicly draw people together,
who might conquer him, and trample upon him, and even turn him, in fine, out
of doors. And certainly, he was also resolved, that it should serve for a
demonstration to the world, (and that, in a time, when so many thousands of
men, were seeking, to venture upon the spoil of his Kingdom, (some, by their
erroneous understandings; and others, by their depraved life, and manners) to
prove, how Mighty, and Omnipotent he was, by his introducing, and enabling a
Woeman, who should both illuminate the minds, and compose the affections, and
reform the actions, of many; and that her Children should daily grow-vp, into
greater numbers, toward the reparation of those ruins.

Now, in this (as it were) old age of his Church, he has been also pleased to
show us, that his Grace is not grown old, and vveake; and that the strength
and virtue of his Holy Spirit, is not less powerful, at this day, then it
was formerly, in those happy times of the Primitive Church. Since now, by
certain means, which are of an inferior, and weaker kind, then before, he
does, either the same, or, in effect, the very same, which he did, then.

For (to pass from the first Miracle, to the second) the Life, which your
Reuerences lead, and the Perfection, wherein your Holy Mother has placed
you, what is it, but a picture of the Sanctity of the Holy Primitive Church?
For really, that, of which we read, in the Histories of those times, the self
same thing, do we see now, with our very eyes, in your conversation, and
proceeding. And your Life demonstrates that, by your actions, and works,
which has lately (through the little practice thereof) seemed to be only
found, in papers, and words. And that, which being read, makes men wonder,
yea and even flesh and blood, does hardly know how to believe, we see to be all
accomplished, and performed, by your Reverence, and your holy Community. For,
how absolutely, are you all, untied, and freed, from whatsoever, in fine, is
not God? And, how have you offered your selves up, into the arms of your
Celestial Spouse; in whom, you howerly embrace one another; with minds of
valiant men, though in the bodies, but of weak, and delicate Women? And, how
do you put in execution, the most high, and generous kind of Christian
Philosophy, which ever was so much as thought of, by men; and so, ariue, by
your actions, (in order to a perfect life) to the exercise of all Heroical
Virtue; where, even the wits of men, have scarce arrived, with their
Imagination? For, you make litter, of all the riches of this world; you have
Liberty, in hatred; and Honor, in contempt; and you love Humility, and
Mortification; and all your attention, and study, seems ever to consist, in
gaining ground upon Virtue, by a holy kind of emulation, and competition,
with one another. And so also, on the other side, your Spouse keeps very
close correspondence with you, by infusing so very great strength of delight,
and joy, into your Souls, as that you possess the treasure of true Alacrity,
even in your very being deprived, and stripped of all those things, which are
wont to give contentment, to poore-harted people, in this life. And so you
also, with great generositie, tread all worldly things, under your feet; as
persons, who be, as it were, exempted, even from the laws thereof; or at
least, are grown superior to them all. For, neither does trouble, or labor
vvearie you; nor Clausure, afflict you; nor infirmity, discourage you; not
even death, amaze, or fright you; but rather yield himself up, to be conquered,
by you.

But that, which in the midst of all these particulars, serves, to make the
vvonder, very extreme, is the great facility, and gust, wherewith you go
through all these things, which, of themselves, are hard enough to be
performed. For, Mortification is matter of solace to you; Resignation, as a
kind of Sport; and Penance, a Passe-time. And you go putting that, in
execution, which turns Nature, into admiration; and you convert the exercise
of the most Heroical Virtues, into a pleasant kind of entertainment; and all
this, as it were, in a sporting, and rejoicing way; whereby, in fine, the
certainty of those words of Christ our. Lord, that His yoke, is svveet, and
his burden light, grows to be found effectually true. Since no Secular Lady,
takes so much pleasure, in her ornaments, and attires, as your Reuerences find
it, to be a thing of great joy, and gust for you, to lead the life, even of
Angels. And such do you seem, really, to be, not only in the perfection of
your lives, but in the union also, and resemblance of minds, which you
maintain therein, with one another; Since no two things, are more like one
another, then you are all, amongst your selves; and every one, to every
other; in your speech, in your modesty, in your humility, in your discretion,
in your sweetness of Spirit; and finally, in your whole proceeding, and
conversation. For, as the self same virtue, and way of Life, animates you all:
so does it also frame you all, after one manner; and we see, in you all, (as
in so many pure, Crystal glasses) one kind of face, and countenance, which
is that, of your Holy Mother Teresa, derived down, and stamped upon her
Daughters. By means whereof, I see her now, (as I was saying, at the first)
with more evidence, and clearnes, even without having formerly seen her;
because her Daughters, are not only the lively pictures of her internal
features, but the assured testimonies also, of her perfections. And these, are
communicated to you all; and they pass from one of you, to another, with so
great speed (which makes the Third Miracle-vp) that, in the space of twenty
years (for, this falls-out to be the time, since she founded her first
Monastery, till now) Spain alone, is grown to be so full of her Monasteries,
that above a thousand Religious persons, are daily serving Almighty God, in
this Country; amongst whom, your Reuerences (who are the Religious Women
of that Order) shine brightly; and that, with as much difference, as the
greater, and fairer Stars, exceed the lesser. For, as it was a happy Woeman,
who gave beginning to this Reformation: so it seems, that the Women are they,
who, in all things, have advantage of others; and not only are the great, and
guiding Lights of the Order, but are withal, the very honor of our Nation,
and the glory, even of the Age, wherein we live. And, in fine, you are those
fair Flowers, which beautifye the great barrennes, of the Times; and are
certainly, the most rare, and choice parts, of the Church of God; and lively
testimonies of the efficacy of Christ our Lord; and the evident proof, of his
Sovereign virtue; and finally, the express patterns, whereby we take the
daily experience, of what is promised us, by our Faith.

And this is now, as much, as concerns her Daughters; which is the former, of
those two Images, or Pictures, of your Holy Mother, whereof I spoke. Nor, is
the second Image, or Picture, a whitt less Miraculous, then that former; and
it consists, in her Writings, and Books; wherein, without any question at
all, the Holy Ghost vouchsafed, and resolved, that holy Mother Teresa should
remain, as a rare example, to the world, etc. All these are the very words,
of Doctor Lewis de Leon.

By this you therefore see what judgment was made, at that time, of this
admirable Creature, our Glorious Saint. But, by way of full conclusion, to as
much, as I now intend to speak of her excellencies, I must needs add a Clause,
or two, which I find delivered by another eminent, wise, and learned Author,
and it was Father Ribera, a Father of the Society of JESUS, who vvrote her
whole Life, at large; and together with it, and indeed, as a very part
thereof, he published certain Exclamations, or loud Aspirations, which her
enamoured Soul was wont to make to Almighty God, together with certain
Aduertisments also, concerning the sense, and feeling of Spirit, which she
found in her self; with a signification, how she was affected, toward his
Divine Majesty; and finally, how she behaved her self then, in the growth of
Prayer, and Perfection. Now, all this Account of her self, had been delivered,
by her, in her own hand, to her Ghostly Father, (though one part of it, about
a year sooner then the other) for the enabling him the better, to direct her;
and she did it all, whilst she was yet, in the Monastery; of the
Incarnation, where she was placed first, before she had settled her own
Order, and way of Life, according to the primitive Institution thereof; though
yet, she had even then, begun to serve our Blessed Lord, in great earnest.
And then also, did his Divine Majesty rain down abundance of Supernatural
Favors, upon her happy Soul; as the same exact Author declares. But, that
judgment, which he made upon her, I will here deliver to you, since it is so
very short; and withal, so very highly significant. For, thus he says: By
this, you may discern, to how great perfection, this happy Soul arrived, in
so short a time, which deserves to cast the world, into admiration. For, since
she, in her beginnings, got-vp, toward the very top of that Perfection, which
is wont to be acquired, in this Life, even by Saints; to what pass, would she
arrive, in the space of two, or three and twenty years, which she lived
afterward; whilst she daily went increasing, in the love of Almighty God, by
receiving so many high Favors, from his Divine Majesty; by performing so
many Pennances; by enduring so great afflictions, and tormets, through
sickness: together with many persecutions, and troubles; by founding so many
Monasteries; by gaining so many Souls; by possessing so high Prayer; by using
so continual Mortification; and finally, through such an incomparable
treasure, as she acquired afterward, by a multitude of most excellent works.
For, if her beginnings were such, as out-stripped even the conclusion of very
perfect Souls: how far shall we imagine, that she would be sure to ariue,
and reach, ere she came to an end?

These are the lively testimonies, of this last, exact, and diligent Author.
And as for that former excellent discourse, of Doctor Lewis de Leon, it
serves also, to let us see, very clearly, the perfections of her happy
Children, the Religious Women of her Order. And, since even the Christian
world, at large, is wont to call, and know her, by the name of Mother Teresa,
how much more, have the Religious, her dear, and most dear Daughters, reason,
to call her so, as they do. Since, together with the strictnes of their Rule,
(a strictnes yet, much more tending to the preserving, and purifying their
Minds, then, any way, to the afflicting of their Bodies; (whatsoever the
Devil would feign make the world believe, so to discourage the Servants of
God, from becoming his better Servants, by living under this most holy, and
happy Rule) there was ever so great indulgence in her, toward them, and such
a tender kind of care, over the health, and contentment, yea and even, as it
were, for the good humor of her Children, as that she might well deserve the
name of a hundred thousand Mothers, all in one. For, that her very kindness,
arrived even thus far, may be seen, in many passages both of her Rule, and of
her Life. So that, upon the whole matter, it was a kind of hard case, to
decide, whether she were of more rigor to her self; or of more indulgence,
toward her Children. And she did expressly require, that her Successors should
be always careful, to maintain the very self same sweet, and even, as it
were, kinde-harted Spirit, in the government of all such Souls, as should,
ever, come to range themselves by her Order. And it seems, that not only her
counsel was imparted to them then, but that her prayers, and protection,
continues now, to the self same purpose; and that still, she shrowdes, and
shelters, them, under that care. For, the self-same Spirit remains so entirely
truly, amongst them, at this day, that, as they lead the lives of Angels, on
the one side, so yet, do they also, on the other, spend their time, with so
much joy, and gust, (through that incredible kind of peace, and union of mind,
which they possess, as well in order to their Superiors, as to themselves)
as if every one of them, were no less, then mightily even in love, with
every other; which puts them into a kind of Heaven, before their time. Nay
still, she seems, as it were, visibly, to work, in all kinds, for their
advantage.

And here, since this holy Saint took all the accidents, and occasions, not
only of her Children, but even of those Strangers, so extremely, and
extraordinarily, to heart, who applied themselves, to obtain her help, whilst
she was yet, but an Inhabitant of this world, I am confidently, yea and
assuredly persuaded, that she will now, have another manner of solicitude, for
their good, and growth, in all happiness, who shall celebrate, and desire to
serve her. Which I wish, that the whole world may do; and, for my part, I am
so much bound to our Blessed Lord (for which I adore him, with my whole heart)
as to be sure, that I will procure to make one.

The short Preface, or Introduction, which was made by the Glorious S.
TERESA, her self, to this Life of hers, which she vvrote.
I Could have wished, that, as they have given me, a large kind of liberty,
yea and a commandment also, to setdovvne, both the manner of my Prayer, and the
Favors, which our Blessed Lord was pleased to do me, they had also, no less
permitted me, to declare my great Sins, and wicked Life, in very particular,
and clear manner; for heerin, J should have received much consolation. But
this, they would not suffer me to do; nay rather, in this kind, they tied me
up, very short. And therefore I beg earnestly, even for the love of our Blessed
Lord, that they, who shall read this Discourse of my Life, will take
knowledge, and attentively observe, that it has been so very unworthy, and
wicked, as that I have not found any one Saint, amongst all them, who have
been converted from Sin, to the Service of Almighty God, in whose example,
J might be able to take comfort. For, J consider, that, when once our Lord
called them to himself, they returned not, any more, to offend him; whereas
I, not only grevv worse, but rather, did (it seems) even make it my very
business, and study, how to resist those great Favors, which his Divine
Majesty was pleased to do me. As one, who, on the one side, found her self
obliged to serve him, for them, so much the more; and yet, who, on the other,
observed vvithall, that she was unable, to make him any payment, for the
least part of all that, which she ovved him. Let him be Blessed, for ever,
who vouchsafed to expect me, so long; and I beseech him, with my whole heart,
to give me grace, that I may, with all claritie, and truth, make this
Relation, which my Ghostly Fathers have commanded, at my hands; yea, and
which, I know, our Lord himself, has long expected, from me; save that yet
vvithall, I could not easily presume so far, as to venture upon it. But at
least, I vvish, that now, it may prove, to the glory, and praise of his
Divine Majesty; as also, to the end, that my said Ghostly Fathers, (growing
hereafter, into a clearer knowledge of me, by this means) may assist me, in
my weakness, so much the more; that so, at length, I may be able, to pay some
little part, of that much service, which I owe to our Blessed Lord; Whom,
let all Creatures praise, for all Eternities;

Amen.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
She shows, havv our Lord began to stirre-vp her Soul, in her Childhood,
to the performing of virtuous actions; and of the help, which it gives, in
order to this end, to be borne of virtuous Parents.

THE very having of virtuous Parents, and such as live in the fear of
Almighty God, together with those favors, which I received from his Divine
Majesty, had been able, to have made me good, if I had not been so very
wicked. My Father was delighted, in reading good Books; and used to have them
in Spanish, that so his Children might also read them. This consideration,
together with the care, which my Mother had, to make us say our Prayers, and
to put us into a way of devotion to our Blessed Lady, and some other
particular saints, began to awake, and stir me up, when I was (to the best
of my remembrance) about six, or seven years old. It assisted me also,
toward this good end, to find, that there was no means for me, to win the
favor of my Parents, but by the way of Virtue. My Father was a man of much
charity, toward poor people, and of compassion, toward the sick; yea, and
he had so much pity, even of his servants, that he could never resolve to
keep any slaves, for the tenderness which he had toward them. And there being
once a slave, in his house, who belonged to a Brother of his, he caused him to
be treated, and fed, as if he had been one of his own Children; and said,
through his great compassion, that he could not endure to see such as he was,
unless they might be made free. He was a man of much truth; nor did ever any
creature hear him, either detract, or swear. He was exeedingly honest, and
chaste. My Mother also, was enriched with many Virtues; and she passed through
this life of hers, with grievous sicknesses. Her chastity, and purity, was
great, in the very highest degree; and though she had an abundance of Beauty,
yet was it never so much as heard, that she gave occasion, for the world to
conceive, that she made any account of it, at all. For, coming afterward to
dye, when she was but three and thirty years old, the order of her attire,
had yet been such, as might have well become a person of Age. She was of a most
sweet disposition; and yet vvithall, of a very solid understanding. The
afflictions, which she sustained in this life, were great; and she made a
most Christian end, when she dyed.

We were three Sisters, and nine Brothers; and all, through the goodness of
Almighty God, were like our Parents, in being virtuous, except myself; though
yet, I was the most beloved of them all, by my Father; and truly, till I
began to offend Almighty God, he might seem, to have had some reason. For
it goes to my very heart, to remember, and consider, those good inclinations,
which our Lord had given me; and the very little I knew, how to serve myself
thereof. My Brothers also were such, in their proceeding, and way of life, as
that they did not, by any means, dis-assist me, from serving Almighty God.
One of them was almost of my years, and I loved him best, of them all; though
yet, I loved them all, very much, as they also, did me. But we two, joined
much together, in reading the Lives of Saints; and when I saw the Martyrdomes,
through which, some of them had passed, for the love of our Lord, me thought
they had bought Heaven (where they were to see, and enjoy his Divine
Majesty) very good cheap: And myself also desired much, to dye so; though not
yet, for the love, which I found, and felt my self to bear him; but rather,
that I might come, by so compendious a way, to enjoy those great felicities,
which I had read, to be imparted in Heaven. I associated my self therefore, to
this Brother of mine, to consider, what means there might be, for our
obtaining this end. And so we grevv to resolve, that we would go into:
Barbary, amongst the Mores, and beg, by the way, as we went; that so we
might come, by degrees, to loose our lives there, for our Lord. And it seemed,
that he, gave us courage enough, for this purpose, even in that tender age of
ours, if we could have found any means, to set it on foot; but our even
having of Parents, seemed to be the greatest hindrance, we had.

We found our selves much amazed, to perceive, in those things, which we
read, that both the Pain, and Glory, of the next life, was to last for ever;
and we chanced, to speak often, of this particular; and we took pleasure,
in repeating these words, many times; For ever, For ever, For ever; and by
continuing to pronounce them, long, and often, our Lord was pleased, to
imprint the way of Truth, upon my heart, in that very infancy of mine.

But now, when I savv it was impossible for me, to go, where they might put
me to death, for the love of our Lord, my Brother, and I, proiected, how to
become Heremits, at home; and so, in a certain Garden, which belonged to the
house, we procured, to set up some little Oratoryes, or Chapels, after the
manner of Heremitages, the best we could; and we assembled little stones, for
that purpose, which would instantly be falling down again; and so we met
with no means, to put out good desires, in execution. But, in the mean time,
I am not without some feeling of devotion, to consider, how soon it pleased
Almighty God, to give me this kind of tenderness toward him; which
afterward I grevv to loose, through mine own fault. I gave Alms, as well
as I could, though it were but little. I procured to be much alone, for the
better doing my devotions, which were many; and especially that of the
Rosarie, to which, my Mother was much affected; and she endeavored also, to
make us, so. I took particular contentment, whilst I was playing with other
Children, like myself, to frame certain little things, like Monasteries, as if
we had been Religious women; and me thought, I desired to be one; though yet,
not with such vehemency of affection, as I did those other things, whereof I
spoke.

I remember, that when my Mother dyed, she left me a little less, then twelve
years old; and as soon as I began to understand, how great a loss I had
sustained, by loosing her, I was very much afflicted; and so I went besore an
Image of our Blessed Lady, and I humbly besought her, with many tears, that
she would vouchsafe, to be my Mother. And though I performed this little
action, but in a plain, and simple manner; yet, me thinks, I may well
conceive, that it has served me, to very good purpose; for I have most
evidently found, the favor of this Sovereign Virgin, concerning all things,
wherein I have recommended myself, to her care; and, in fine, she has brought
me about, to her self.

It afflictes me to the very heart, to see, and consider, how poor those
impediments were, which kept me from remaining entire, and constant, in those
good desires, which I began to have. But, O my dear Lord, since it seems,
thou vvilt vouchsafe to save me (and I beseech thy Divine Majesty, that it my
be so) and to show me so great favors, as thou have done me; might it not
please thee (not for my interest, and profit, but for that high reverence,
which is due to thy self) to take order, that this house of my heart, wherein
thou should for ever remain, might be no more defiled? Nay, it goes, O Lord,
to my very soul, even to say thus much; because I know, and feel, that the
fault thereof, was wholy mine; for, as for thee, I find clearly enough, that
there wanted nothing at all, on thy part, to secure me, for being totally thine
own, even from that tender age of mine. And if I would be content, to seek
some color, to complain of my Parents; with as little reason also, can I do
that; since I could never discover any thing in them, but all goodness, and all
care also, of my good. But passing on, from that tender age, to be able, to
begin to understand the benefits, and gifts of Nature, which our Lord had
bestovved upon me (which others esteemed, and said, to be great) in steed of
giueing him thanks for the same, I began, to serve my self of them all,
toward the offense of his Divine Majesty; as I shall now declare.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Which shows, how she went loosing, in the way of Virtue; and how very
much it importes, to converse, in childhood, with virtuous persons.

I Believe, that a certain thing, whereof I vvil now give account, began
to do me a great deal of hurt. Sometimes I grow to consider, how ill those
Parents do, who procure not, that their Children should be ever seeing
examples of Virtue, in all kinds. For, though my Mother were very eminent that
way, (as I have said already) yet I took not so much of that good to myself,
when first I came to the use of Reason, no nor almost even any thing at all;
and, on the other side, whatsoever there was of imperfect, and ill, did hurt
me much. My Mother was very particularly affected, to read Books of
Caualleria, or vain histories; but she took not so much hurt, by that
entertainment, as I did; because it hindered not that work the while, about
which she was; but disengaged us, from other things, that so we might read
them. And perhaps she did it also the rather, that she might so, have her
thoughts less bent, upon the memory of the great afflictions, which she
felt, and to employ also her Children in such sort, as to divert them, from the
thought of worse things. My Father was yet so much troubled at this, that
particular care was had, that he might not kouvv it. But I, in the mean time,
remained with the custom of reading these Books; and that little fault of
mine, which even I, myself, discerned therein, began to cool my good
desires; and was the reason, why I also grevv to fail, in the rest; and I
made myself believe, that it was not very ill done; though yet I spent many
hours, both of the day, and night, in so vain an exercise; and though it
were still concealed from my Father. But I was possessed heervvith, in such
extremity, that if perhaps, I could not get some new Book, I savv not, how
I could be in contentment.

I began also to make my self fine; and to desire, to grow acceptable, in
seeming handsome; and I took much care of my hands, and of my hair, and to
get choice perfumes; together with all those vanities, which it was
possible, for me to incurte, by this means; which, I confess, were enough; in
regard, that I was very curious, in this kind. I had only, no ill intention;
nor desired I, upon any terms, that any Creature should offend Almighty
God, upon any occasion of mine; but I continued, in so great a curiosity, for
daintines, and cleanlines, as was even beyond all reason; and those things,
which for many years, I conceived to be of no sin at all, I find now,
how very ill they were.

Now I had certain Cosen-germans, who frequented my Fathers house, in
familiar manner; no others, having any such liberty as that. For, my Father
was very wary, and reserved, in this kind; but I would to God, he had also
been so, in respect of my Cosins; because now, I discern the danger, that it
is, for such as are to begin to plant Virtue in the soul, to treat with
persons, who know not, in true account, how great the Vanity of the world is;
but rather are inclined to awake, and stir others up, to cast themselves
also, into the same danger. These kinsmen of mine, were, in effect, of mine
own age; or rather a little elder then I. We were usually together: and they
carried great affection to me, and in all things, which gave them contentment,
I was willing to uphold the discourse; and gave ear, to the successes of their
love to others: and such other fooleries, as are good for nothing. Yea, and,
which is worse, I grew, by these means, to lay my soul open, to be looked
upon, by certain idle thoughts, which were the cause of all the ensuing ill.
If I were worthy, to advise Parents, I would wish them to take great heed,
what kind of persons they admitted, to converse with their Children; for, much
harm, may grow from thence; since the natural condition of Mankind, will
never clime up, so easily toward good, as decline towords ill; at least, it
happened so, to me. I had a Sister, much elder, then my self, of whose purity,
and goodness (whereof she had great store) I took no part; but I failed not, to
take all hurt, from a certain other kins-woman of mine, who had also, familiar
entry into our house. Now she, was of so light, and guiddie a conversation,
that my Mother had used several diligences, to divert her, from familiarity
with us. For it seems, she did even half foresee the mischief, which was to
grow upon me, by her means; and yet, on the other side, the occasion was so
great, and fair, whereby she was to enter, that even my Mother, could not
tell, how to decline it. With this Creature (as I was saying) did I come to
have much delight, to entertain myself. With her, was my conversation, and my
discourse; because I found, that she employed her self willingly, upon all
those ways, of passing my time, wherein I delighted most. Yea, and, sometimes,
she would embarke me in them, of her self; giving me part, and knowledge, of
all her own conuersations, and vanities. Till I began to be familiar with
her (when, I think, I was some foureteen years old, or rather a little more)
I mean, till she had wrought her self into so much frie^dship with me, as to
make me partake the knowledge of all her little affairs) I am much inclined to
think, that I had never forfeited the favor of Almighty God, by any Mortal
Sin; nor ever forsaken the fear of his Divine Majesty; though yet still, I
feared more, to loose my honor. This last point, was of power enough with me,
for not permitting me to loose it outright; nor do I conceive, that any thing
of this world, could make me change that resolution; nor was there any person
alive, who could win me, to yield my self up, to that misery. I would to
God, I had so abounded in strength, and courage, as not to make one pace,
against the honor of his Divine Majesty; as even a kind of natural
constitution of mind, confirmed me, toward the not loosing that, wherein I
held the honor of this world, to consist; though yet I considered not, the
while, that I lost, even that also, many ways. For the vain upholding
heerof, I had even an extreme resolution; though yet, for the proper, and fit
means, which was necessary for preserving it, I used none at all; only I was
earnest, in taking care, that I might, by no means, loose myself, outright.

My Father, and my Sister, were much troubled about this friendship of mine,
and reproved me for it, very often; but yet, they being unable to remove the
occasion of her coming to us, at times, their diligences were ever wont, to
fall short; for, my sagacity, and sharp conceit, in contriuing any thing,
which might be ill, was very great. I am sometimes, upon this occasion, in a
wonder, at how much hurt, ill company may do; and if it had not been mine
own case, I could hardly believe it; especially, when it occurrs, in the time
of innocent, and fresh youth; for then, does it greatest hurt; and I could
wish, that Parents would take some warning by me, that so they might consider
it well. For the truth is, that this conversation did work such an entire
change upon me, that I, who formerly, had not only a Soul, but even a kind of
natural constitution, inclined to Virtue, was grown to have, in effect, no
semblance, or sign at all, thereof; and it seems, that both she, and yet
another, who was, upon the matter, of the same humor, had imprinted their own
conditions upon me. From hence also, I am grown to understand, how precious a
thing, good company is; and I hold it for as good, as a most certain truth,
that, if in that age of mine, I had conuersed with only virtuous persons, my
self should have proved accomplished, in the way of Virtue; and that, if, in
those tender years, I had met with such, as would have made it their business,
to make me fear Almighty God, my soul would have gathered such strength, as
might have kept it from falling. But afterward, this fear of God, growing to
be lost, the care only of my honor remained; which gave me a kind of torment,
in whatsoever I did.

But now, with thinking, that such, and such things, would never be known, I
presumed to do many, which were both against my honor, and against God. In
the beginning, those things did me harm, as I am apt to think; though yet
perhaps, that happened not, by the fault of others, but by mine own; but
afterward, mine own malice fell out, to be sufficient, for mine own mischief;
together with the help of my Maids, who were ready enough, for any thing,
that was naught. If any one of them, had but advised me well, it would have
served my turn; but interest blinded them; as my inclination, did me. And
though I never was addicted to much ill (for even naturally I abhorred such
things, as concerned dishonestie) yet I liked to pass my time in fair
conversation; but being afterward grown into the occasions, the danger was
nearer at hand; and that brought also my Father, and my Brothers, into some.
But God, delivered me out of them, in such sort, as that it well appeared, how
he was pleased to procure, even against my will, to preserve me, from my total
perdition; though yet still, things could not be carried so privately, as that
my honor did not suffer prejudice by it, even abroad; besides a little
suspicion of my Father, at home. For I remember not, that they arrived to be
three months, of my walking, up, and down, in these vanities, when they
carried me to a certain Monastery, in this town, where they were wont to
give education, to such, as I was; though yet, not so untoward, as myself. But
it was done with great discretion, and reserve; for only I, and a kinsman of
mine, knew of it; and they stayed a while, for a certain coniuncture of
things, to keep it from seeming new, or strange; for, my Sister was then
lately married; and so, it would not seem, so very handsome, that I should
stay at home alone, without a Mother.

The love, which my Father bore me, was so extreme (and so also was my
dissimulation) that he could not believe so much ill of me, as I deserved; and
therefore I was not fallen into his disfavor. For, the time having been but
short, though perhaps, he might happen to hear of some little wispering, yet
it could never be delivered to him, with any certainty; in regard, that I
having so tender a care of myself, in point of honor, all my diligences were
employed, upon keeping things secret; and I considered not, the while, how
impossible a thing it was, to hide any thing from him, by whom, all things
are seen. O my God! what a mischief does it bring upon the world, to make light
of this; and to think, that such things can be secret, as are repugnant to thy
will? For my part, I hold it for certain, that many great sins would be
forborne, if once we would grow to understand, that the business does not
consist, in saueing our selves harmless from men; but in keeping our selves
very far, from disgusting Almighty God.

During the first eight days of my being in the Monastery, I feit it much,
even for it self; but yet more, for the suspicion I had, that my vanity was
discovered, then for that I was placed there. For now already, I became weary
of doing ill; and I failed not, to have great fear, of Almighty God,
whenever I offended him; and I procured, to Confess myself often.

But after those eight days, yea and peradventure sooner, I grew to be better
pleased there, then even in mine own Fathers house. All the Religious were
glad to be in my company; for in this, our Lord endewed me with a particular
grace, that I always, gave contentment, wheresoever I was; and so I used ever,
to be much beloved. And though I were, at that time, in extremity of being
auerse from becoming a Religious woeman, yet I ioyed to see so good Religious
women, as they were, after an eminent proportion, in that house; and of great
purity, and observance, and recollection.

But yet, notwithstanding all this, the Devil gave not over to tempt me; and he
found out such persons from abroad, as might disquiet me, with certain
messages of theirs. But, in regard there was no great opportunity for those
things, they quickly ceased; and my soul began again, to accustom it self
to the good impressions, of my first youth; and I saw, how great favor,
Almighty God does them, whom he casts into their company, who are good. And
it seems, as if the Divine Majesty had gone looking, and yet looking again,
by what means he might bring me back, to himself. Blessed be thou, O lord, who
did endure me so long; Amen. One particular there was, which, it seems,
might turn a little, to my excuse, if I had not been guilty of so many
faults: And it is, that the Conversation, which I held, was with one, who, by
way of marriage, seemed to make it probable, to end well. And I informing
myself, about it, of my Confessarius, and of others also, with whom I
consulted in many things, they told me, that I offended not Almighty God.

But now, one of the Religious was lodged, where we, who were secular persons,
were also accommodated; and it seems, that our lord was pleased to give me
light, by her means; as I will now declare.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Wherein she treates, how her falling into virtuous company, was the
occasion of her returning to awake good desires, in herself; And how our Lord
began, to give her some light of the error, wherein she had formerly been.

But now, I, beginning to take gust, in the good, and holy conversation, of
this Religious woeman, was ioyed to hear, how well she was wont to speak of
Almighty God; for, she was both very holy, and very discreet. Of this, I
conceive, and confess, I did never, at any time, give over, to ^^^^ery glad
to hear. She began, one day, to tell n^^^^ow she was grown, to be a Religious
woman, by the only reading of that place, of the Gospel, That many are
called; but fevv, are chosen. And she spoke much to me, of the reward, which
our lord is wont to give to such, as leave all things, for the love of him. In
a word, this good society of hers, began quickly, to put to flight, those
customs, and condiuons, which ill company had brought upon me; and restored
the desire of eternal blessings, to my thoughts; yea, and to stripp me, in
some part, of that great enmity, and opposition, against becominge a Religious
woema^, which formerly had been very extreme. But now, if I chanced to see
any one, who shed many tears for her sins; or else, that she abounded in
other virtues; I carried a kind of envy toward her; though as for this heart
of mine, it was so very hard, and even impenetrable in this kind, that if I
should have read over, the whole History of the Paision of our Blessed
Savior, I was not able to shed a tear; and this put me to a great deal of
pain. In this Monastery, did I remain, a year, and a half; and I was much
improued there. I began to say many Vocal prayers; and I procured, of all
the Religious, that they would recommend me much, to Almighty God; to the end,
that he might place me in such a way of Life, as, wherein, I might be likely,
to serve him best. But still I did even desire, that I might not be a Religious
woman, and that this, might not be the state, which God would give me; though
yet still, I was afraid to be married. But now, at the end of the time, when I
was there, I already began to be more inclined to be a Religious woeman;
though yet, not in that very House where I was then in regard of those actions
of extraordinary virtue, and penance, which, I understood, they used; and
which seemed to me, of too much rigor. Yet there were some of the younger sort
of themselves, who encouraged me, toward those formet more imperfect thoughts;
for, if they all, had been of one opinion, it would have been much, to my true
advantage. I had also a great friend, in another Monastery; and this was
partly a reason, why, if I would be a Religious woman, I would not yet be so,
in any other place, then where that friend of mine was. For I carried more
respect, to my sensuality, and vanity, then to the benefit, which I might
bring to my soul. These good thoughts of being a Religious woman, were often
coming to me, by times; but they were instantly sent away again; and I could
not yet persuade myself, to be one.

At this time, though my self were not altogether without care of my cure, yet
our Lord was much fuller of desire, to dispose me, for that state, which
would be best, for my soul. He then gave me so great a sickness, that I was
forced, to return home, to my Fathers house. And wen once, I was recovered,
they conducted me, to give a Visit, to one of my Sisters, in the Country; for,
the love, which I bore her, was extreme, and by her will, I should never
have parted from her. Her Husband did also love me very much; and, at least, he
regaled me highly. And even for this also, am I obliged to our Blessed Lord;
since in all places where I have been, I was ever treated after this manner;
notwithstanding that I have been, as unthankful to him for it, as for his
other favors.

Now by the way toward my Sister, I had an Uncle, my Fathers Brother, who
was a very advised man, and of great virtue. He was a Widdower; and our Lord
went disposing him, for his own service; and when he grew on, to be of
years, he left the world, and became a Religious man; and ended his life, in
such sort, that I believe, he is now enjoying the Vision of Almighty God. But
he would needs have me (as I passed) remain with him, some days. His usual
exercise, was to read good Books, in the Spanish tongue; and his discourse
was most commonly of God, and of the vanity of the world; and those Books,
would he also make me read. And though I had no great liking to this, yet I
pretended that I had; for, in the point of giving contentment to others, I had
ever an extreme kind of care, how dear soever it might cost me. So that the
same thing, which had been virtue in others, was a great fault in me; because I
often carried my self therein, with much indiscretion. O my God! By what
ways did thy Divine Majesty go disposing me, for that state, in which thou
were pleased, that I should serve thee; since thou did even force me thus,
as it were, against my will, to force my self. Be thou blessed for all
eternity; Amen.

Though I stayed not long, in that place; yet, by the effect, which the words
of Almighty God, wrought in my heart, whether they were read, or heard by me,
together with so good company, as that was, wherein I found my self then, I
came to understand this Truth, which I had learnt, when I was yet but a Child,
That, namely, all was nothing; and how great, the vanity of the world was;
and that all, would be, shortly, at an end; and that I might justly fear,
least dying in that condition, wherein I was, I might chance go dropping
down into Hell. And though my will did not yet entirely resolve me, to make
my self a Religious woman, yet I well discerned, that it was the better, and
more secure state; and so, by little and little, I determined, to force my
heart, to embrace it. In this battle, I remained three months, constraining
my self, at last, by this following discourse, and reason: that the troubles,
and afflictions, of being a Religious vvoma^, could not be greater, then the
pain of Purgatory; And that I, having so well deserved Hell, it was not to
be esteemed too much, if I remained, whilst I should live, here, as in
Purgatory, so that afterward, I might go straight to heaven. For this, was my
desire. But yet even in this inclination of mine, to take this state upon me, I
doubt I was more moved, by a kind of servile Fear, then by Love.

The Devil, in the mean time, represented to me, that I would never be able,
to suffer the difficulties, and troubles of a Religious life; because formerly,
I had been used so delicately, and was so nice. But yet, against this also, I
defended my self, as well as I could, by the afflictions, which Christ our
Lord, endured for me; and that so, it would not be much, for me to endure
some, for him, I ought also to have considered, that he would give me help, to
bear them. Yet I remember not, whether I had this last consideration, or no;
but I am sure, I had temptations enough, about that time. I then also grew, to
have great fitts of fainting, by a burning Fever, into which I fell; for I
always had little health.

But it gave me even my life, at that time, that already I was grown to love
good Books; and so I came to read the Epistles of S. Jerome, which help me
to such heart, and courage, as to make me resolve, that I would impart my
purpose, to my Father; which, in effect, was even as much for me, as to take
the very Habit upon me. For I was ever so affected, to maintain the point of
Honor, that, me thinks, I could never have turned back again, upon any
terms, when I had first engaged my self, by speaking any one word, to the
contrary. But he loved me, to so strange a proportion, that, by no means, I
could win his consent; nor was the intercession of such persons, as I
procured to move him, in order to my end, of any power at all, to prevail.
The most that I could get at his hands, was, that, when he should be dead, I
might do, what I listed, with my self. But, as for me, I was in doubt, of mine
own great weakness; as fearing, that I might loose ground, and fall back
again: And so, I thought, it was not fit for me, to content my self with the
offer which he made; and I procured therefore, to obtain my end, by another
means; which I will now declare.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Wherein she relates, how our Lord assisted her, to force herself, to take
the Habit of Religion; And of the many infirmities, which he began to bring
upon her.

IN these days, whilst I was walking on, with my heart, in such determinations,
or strong purposes, as I have here described, I persuaded one of my Brothers,
to become a Religious man; discoursing to him, upon the vanity of the world;
and so we, both of us, agreed, to go very early together, one morning, to the
Monastery, where that friend of mine remained, who was she, to whom I carried
so great affection; though yet, in this last firm purpose of mine, I was
grown to be of such resolution, that I would live, vvhereseuer I thought, I
might serve God best, or my Father should desire most, that I might be; for
now, I sought more earnestly, for the good of my soul; and made no account at
all, of rest, or ease. And I remember (to the very uttermost, of what I am
able to call to mind, and according to the very rigor of truth) that, whilst
I was going out of my Father's house, I believe not, that the sharpnes of
sense, will be able to be greater, even in the very instant, or agony of my
death, then it was then. For it seemed to me; as if every bone, which I had in
my body, had been disioynted from all the rest. And there being no such love
of God in me, at that time, as was able to quench that love, which my heart
carried to my Father, and Friends; all that, which then I did, was with so
mighty a violence, that if God had not given me great help, mine own
consideration would never have bee^ able to carry me on; but here, he allowed
me such courage, even against myself, that I had power, to put my purpose, in
execution.

At the instant of my taking the Habit, our Lord gave me well to understand,
how highly he favors them, who offer themselves violence, for the doing him
any service; though yet, no body had found by me, but that I entered into the
way of Religious Observance, with much facility, and good liking. But at that
very instant, I took so great co^tentment, to put my self into that manner of
life, as has never failed me once, till this very hour. And God changed that
drynes, wherein my soul had formerly been, into an extreme tenderness; and
all the obseruances of Religion, gave me great delight; yea, and it is a most
certain truth, that whilst I was, sometimes, going, up, and down, to sweep
the house, at such hours, as, before, I had been wont to employ upon the
gallanterie, and regalo of my person, and went considering, that now I was
free from that subjection, it gave me a particular joy; and that, so very
great, that it amazed me; nor was it in my power, to understand, from whence
the same should come. When I remembered, and considered this; there could be
nothing, how grievous soever, upon which, if it were set before me, I should
not have ventured to attempt. For I have already, good experience of things
enough, to assure me, that since God did help me, in the beginning, to resolve to
do such things, as these (which being only done for the love of God he
ordaines, for our greater merit afterward, that our souls should be in some
trouble, and terror, at the first; and the greater that trouble is, the
greater, and the more sauourie also, will the reward thereof, fall out to be,
if we go through, with the business) his Majesty vvil also be pleased, to
recompense them, highly well, even in this life; by such vvayes, as he only,
who enioyes them, can understand. This, I say, I have found true, by
experience, in many particulars of great moment. And therefore, if I were a
person, who might be wished to give my opinion, I would never advise any
Creature. that, when any good inspiration did often move, and set upon a
soul, it should give it over, for fear of not performing the work. For, if
one go on, merely, and purely, for the only love, of our Lord, there must be
no fear at all, of good success; since the same Lord is powerful enough, to
prevail in all things; And let him be ever blessed, Amen.

These favors, which thou had, hitherto, bestowed upon me, out of thine
own mere goodness, and greatness, might well have been sufficient, (O thou, my
Sovereign Good, and repose of my soul) to draw me toward thee, by so many
vvindings, and turnings, to so safe a way of life; and to a House, where
there are so many servants of thine, of whom I might learn to grow up in
pleasing thee. But here I know not, how I can pass on, to think of any thing
else, when I consider the manner of my Profession; and the great resolution,
and gust, wherewith I made it; and the Espousalls, which I perfected with
thee. For I cannot speak of this, without tears; which were to be, even of
blood; and not without the breaking of my very heart (which yet could not be
too great a demonstration) when I weigh, how deeply I offended thee
afterward. Now, me thinks, that I had reason before, in not desiring so great
a dignity, as this; considering, how ill I were like to employ it. But thou,
O my Lord, were pleased to permit, that I might use this favor so ill,
twenty years together; and would content thy self, to be the person
affronted, that I might be the person, improued. For, it seems not to me now,
O my God, that I made thee any promise, of any thing, but only, that I would
keep no promise, which I had made thee; though yet, my intention was not
such, at that time.

And yet, I find my actions, to have grown afterward, to be such, that I may
very well think, I scarce know, what kind of intention I had. And thus, it
may the better be seen, who thou art; O my Spouse, and my God; and who I am.
For it is really, an express truth, that the grief, for my very great sins,
is tempered in me, many times, by the contentment, which this consideration
gives me, that my sinnefulnes may prove a means, to make the multitude of thy
mercies, be understood. For, in whom, O Lord, can they ever shine so brightly,
as in me; who have, by my wicked actions, so obscured those great favors,
which thou beganst to do me? Ah, woe is me, O my Creator; for, if I look for
any excuse, I can find none; nor has any creature the fault of it, but only
my self; and if I would pretend to pay thee any thing, for the least part of
that Love, which thou beganst to show me, I should not know, how to employ it,
upon any thing, but only thy self; and thereby, might all be redressed, since
I never deserved the same. Nor was I ever so happy as to do even this; and
therefore now, O Lord, let thy mercy vouchsafe, to supply all wants.

But now, the change, which I made of my life, and the difference of my food,
at this time, from the former, began to do me hurt, in the way of health;
for though the contentment, which I had, was great, yet would it not serve the
turn. My fitts of fainting, and swooning, began again to increase; and such
a hideous beating of the heart, came upon me, as amazed all them, who saw it;
besides many other infirmities. And thus I passed on, my first year, with a
kind of health, which was ill enough; though yet, within that time, I conceive
my self, not to have offended God, much.

But my sickness being so great, that it deprived me almost of my senses (yea
and sometimes, I was wholy deprived) the diligences, which my Father used for
my recovery, were also very great; and when the Doctors of those parts,
found no remedy, he procured to get me removed, to a certain place, where
there was great fame of the curing many other infirmities; and so, they
assured themselves, that they would be able to do also, with mine. That
friend, whom I mentioned to be in that House, went with me; for she was of
years; and in the Monastery, where she lived, they made no Vow of Clausure.
I stayed almost a year, in that other place; and, during three months thereof,
I suffered so excessive torments, by the manner of the Cure, which was very
rigorous, that I know not, how I was able to endure them; and though I did
endure them, yet, me thinks, it was not my Body, which could do it; as I
vvil now declare.

This Cure was to be taken in hand, in the beginning of Summer; and I went in
the beginning of VVinter. All this mean time, I remained in the house of that
Sister, of whom I spoke before, who dwelt in the Country; because I was
then, near the place; and yet it was very troublesome, to be going, and
coming, to, and fro. When I departed from that Uncle of mine, whom I
declared my self, to have visited in the way, he gave me a certain Book,
which is called, The third A. B. C.; which treats of the manner of Prayer, with
Recollection. Now, though in that first year, I had read some good Books,
forbearing utterly, to look upon any other (for I was not ignorant, of the
hurt, which such as those, had done me) yet I knew not, how to proceed in
Prayer, nor how to obtain Recollection; and so I was very glad of this Book,
and determined to follovv that way, to the uttermost of my power. And, since
our Lord had already been pleased, to bestow the gift of tears upon me; and
since I delighted also in reading, I began to spend some good fitts of time,
in solitude; and to Confess myself very often; and, in a word, to address
myself, by that way; esteeming that Book to be my Master. For I could meet
with no other Master, (I mean, a Ghostly Father) who was able to understand
me; though I fought such an one, almost twenty years, after this time. Which
accident, did me hurt enough, toward the making me turn back often; yea, and
for the making me loose myself. But such an one, would have daily assisted me,
to lay aside, and leave those occasions, which I took, to offend Almighty God.

In these beginnings, his Divine Majesty began to do me so great favors,
that at the end of the time, when I remained there, (which was about nine
months) in this way of solitude; (though I were not so free from offending
God, as the Book appointed; which I neglected, as holding it impossible, to
continue still, so watchful over myself) I was careful, not to commit any
Mortal sin; and I would to God, I had always been so; but of Venialls, I
made no great account; and this was that, in fine, which destroyed me. But our
Lord began to regale me so much, by this way, that he vouchsafed me the favor,
to give me Quiet Prayer; and sometimes, it came so far, as to arrive to
Union; though I understood, neither the one, nor the other; nor how much they
both, deserved to be prized. But I believe, it would have been a great deal of
happiness, for me, to have understood the certainty thereof. True it is, that
this Union rested with me, for so short a time, that, perhaps, it might ariue
to be, but as of an Aue Maria; yet I remained with so very great effects
thereof, that, with not being then, so much as twenty years old, me thought, I
found the whole world under my feet; and so I remember well, that I was wont to
carry great compassion toward such, as followed the ways of the world;
though it were, but even in lawful things.

I Procured, the best I could, to carry our Lord, who is our true Good, still
present with me; and even within me; and this was the manner of my prayer. If I
thought upon any passage, or Mystery, I represented it, to the interior, of
myself; and other times, I spent in reading good Books; which was all the
recreation, that I had. For God gave not me the talent of discoursing with my
Understanding, nor to help my self, by the use of my Imagination, which I have
so heavy, and gross, that even to think, and represent within my self, so
much as the Humanity of our Blessed Lord, (which I endeavored to do) was yet
more, then I could possibly perform. And, howsoever, by this way, of not being
able to employ, and set the Understanding on work, in the way of discourse,
men may sooner ariue to Contemplation, if they persevere therein; yet is it very
troublesome, and painful; because, if the employment of the will, do fail
so far of obtaining the true end, as that their Love find no present Object
to embrace, the soul is left, as it were, without any exercise, and rest, at
all; and that kind of solitude, and drynes, gives much trouble; and opens the
way, to a combat, and confusion of thoughts.

As for persons, who have this disposition, there is need of a greater purity
of Conscience, then for such others, as are able to work, and discourse, by
way of the Understanding. For he, who is able to discourse, upon what this
world is; and upon what he owes to Almighty God; and how much he suffered for
him; and how little himself is able to serve him; and what he bestows upon
such, as love him; vvil be able to draw a doctrine from thence, which may
defend him from impertinent thoughts, and occasions, and dangers. But he, who
can not serve himself thereof, runs more hazard; and shall therefore do
well, to employ himself much, upon reading; since, on his own part, he knows
not, how to help himself.

This manner of proceeding, is so very extremely painful, that, if the
Directour, who instructs, shall urge him much, to pray, without reading (which
greatly helps to recollect the person, who proceeds thus; yea and is
necessary for him, though it be little, which he reads; save only in time,
and place of Mental Prayer, which he is not able to make) I say, if without
this help, they make him stay much in Prayer, it will be impossible, for him, to
last long, therein; and besides, it will do him hurt, in point of health; for it
is extremely painful.

Now it seems, that our Lord provided so for me, as that I should not find
any Creature, to instruct me; for it had been impossible for me, I think, to
continue to endure this extreme difficulty, and these great aridities,
through my not being able (as I was saying) to discourse. In all these times, I
never durst begin to pray, without a Book in my hand, unless it were
instantly, upon my having Communicated; and as heartily was my soul afraid to
be in Prayer, without a Book, as if I had been to fight, with a multitude of
people; but by this remedy, of a good Book, which was as a Company of Guard,
or as a Buckler, upon which, the blows of many thoughts, were to be received,
I went on, with comfort. For, that drynes was not ordinary with me, though I
had it always, whensoever I had no Book in my hand; but then, my soul was
instantly in disorder; and my thoughts vvandred, up, and down. But with
reading, I began to recollect them, and carried my heart cheerfully, and
delightfully on; yea, and, many times, in the very opening my Book, I found
myself need no more. Sometimes also, I read little; and sometimes, much;
according to the favor, which our Lord was pleased to do me, more, or less.
And it seems to me, that if, in those beginnings, whereof I speak, I might
have had Books, and means to continue in solitude, there would have been no
danger, which could have been able, to deprive me, of so great a good, And I am
also apt to think, that, by the favor of Almighty God, it would have proved
so, if I had had a Directour, or some person, who might have counseled me, to
avoid occasions, in those beginnings, and to make me forsake them quickly, if
I had been entered into them; yea, and, though the Devil should then, have set
openly, upon me, I think, that I would never have been brought, to offend God
grievously again; but he was so very crafty, and I so wretched, that all
these resolutions of mine, did me little good; but the time, which I spent in
Gods service, did me very much, toward the bearing those terrible sicknesses,
which I endured, with so great patience as his Divine Majesty vouchsafed to
bestow upon me.

I have often considered the great goodness of Almighty God, even with
amazement; and my soul had been regaled, to see the magnificence of his mercy
toward me. Let him be blessed for all things. For I have seen, in most evident
manner, that he has not left any one good desire of mine, without recompense,
even in this life; and how imperfect, and full of fault soever, my works
were, yet this Lord of mine, went bettering, and perfecting them, and giving
them vvorth; and my sins, and miseries, he would instantly hide; Yea his
Divine Majesty has permitted, that even the eyes of such, as saw them, should
be blinded, and their memories fail, when they would remember them. He even
guilds our faults, and makes that virtue shine bright, which he, the same
Lord, conueyes into me; and wherein, he offers me even a kind of violence,
that I may receive it.

But I will now, return to speak of those things, which they have commanded
me to declare: And I say, that, if I be to set forth, after a particular
manner, in what sort our Lord proceeded with me, in these beginnings, I shall
need another manner of understanding, then mine own, to perform all that,
with advantage, for which, I am obliged to him, in this particular; and to
publish mine own ingratitude, and wickedness, since he has forgotten it all.
Let him be blessed for ever, who has endured so much, at my hands;

Amen.
THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the relation of the great infirmities, which she had; and of
the patience, which our Lord gave her, in them; and, how benefits are
drawn, out of mischiefs; as vvil be seen, by a certain particular, which
hapened to her, in the place, vvhither she went, to be cured.

I Forgot to relate, how, in the year of my Nouitiate, I suffered much
disquiet, about some things, which, in themselves, were of little importance;
but I found my self, to be blamed many times, without my having made any
fault; and this, I took with trouble, and imperfection enough; though yet, I
endured it all, through the contentment, which I had, to be a Religious woeman.
When they observed me, to love Solitude so well, and saw me shed tears
sometimes, (which yet indeed, was for my sins) they thought, yea, and, they
said, that it grew, but from some inward melancholy, and disgust. For my part,
I had a good inclination, to all the obseruances of a Religious life, save
only, that I knew not, how to endure any thing, which might carry, so much,
as an appearance of contempt, with it; for I delighted in being esteemed. I
was curious, about whatsoever, I took in hand; and I would needs think
this, to be virtue in me, thongh yet, this will never serve me, for a
discharge, because I knevv well enough, how to procure all those things,
which might give me gust; and so, ignorance will not free me from blame. It
was a defect in this Monastery, that it had not been founded, in much
perfection; and I, (as being wicked enough) went roundly on, to that,
wherein I savv there was imperfection; but laid no hold at all, upon the
rest, which was good.

There was a Religious vvoeman, at that time, and in that place, sick, of a
very grievous infirmity, which put her to extreme pain; for she had
certain Ulcers in her body, which grew from great obstructions; and thereby,
did she discharge, whatsoever she took. She dyed quickly, of that disease;
and whereas I found, that all the rest of our Community, had great
apprehension, and fear, of the like; for my part, I had much envy at her
patience; and I begged of Almighty God, that, in case I might be favored by
him, with that virtue, he would send me what sicknesses he should think
fit; and I thought, I feared no disease in the world; for I was so bent, and
set upon the gaining of eternal Happiness, that I resolved to compass it, how
dear soever, it might cost. Nor yet, am I without vvonder, even at this; for
even the^, I did not think, that I had wrought my self, into the love of
Almighty God, as, afterward, I conceived my self, to have it, upon my
beginning, to frequent the use of Prayer. But only I was grown, to have a
certain light, which shevved me, how all things, which come to an end,
deserve little esteem; and how those Blessings, which, being eternal, may
be obtained, are of mighty value. His Divine Majesty, did also hear me, in
this; for, before two years were expired, I grevv to be, in such condition,
that, howsoever my disease were not of that other sort, yet, I believe, that
one, which I had, for three years together, was, not a whitt of less
trouble, and torment to me, then that other was to her; as I shall now relate.

The time being come, which I was expecting, in that place, where I declared
my self to remain, with my Sister, for my better Cure, they carried me, with
care enough, from the regalos of my Father, of my Sister, and of that Religious
woema^, my friend, who, formerly, was come away, with me; and, indeed, she
loved me very much. And now here, did the Devil begin, to discompose my
soul; though yet, Almighty God, drew much good from thence.

There was a certain Churchman residing in that place (to which, I went,
for cure) of very good quality, and understanding; and he was also, not
unlearned. Now I began to Confess my self with him; for I was ever, a
friend of learning; but yet, it did my soul much hurt, to meet with Ghostly
Fathers, who were but indifferent in that kind; because they vvanted, what
Ineeded. And therefore, as for me, I have found by experience, that, when
Ghostly Fathers, are virtuous men, and of holy conversation, it is better,
that they have no learning at all, then but a little. Because, neither such as
have none, are wont to trust themselves, without asking the opinion of more
learned men, then they are; neither should I also, trust them; and, for my
part, I was never deceived, by any solid learned man; yea, and even those
others also, would certainly, I think, not have deceived me, but only,
perhaps, they erred, because they knew no better. Now, I thought, it was
sufficient, and that I was bound to nothing, but to believe them, when that,
which they taught me, was according to the more large opinion, and of more
liberty; for, if they had been more restrained, I am so wicked, that I should
have gone to others. But that, which was a Venial sin, they told me, was
no sin at all; and that, which was a most grievous Mortal sin, they said
was but Venial. This did me so much hurt, that it must not go for a strange
thing, to hear me speak of it here, for the better aduertisment of others,
whom I would very feign save, from so great a mischief. For I see well,
that in the presence of God, this was no discharge of me, from fault; for it
ought to have been enough for me, that the things, were of themselves, not
good, to make me preserve my self, wholy, from them. I believe, Almighty God
permitted, for my sins, that both they should be deceived, and deceive me; as
I, also, deceived many others, by telling them, that very thing, which I had
been told. I continued, I think, in this blindness, more then seauenteen
years, till a Father of S. Dominicks Order, a great learned man, vnbeguiled
me, in some things; and they, of the Society of JESUS, did so wholy terrifye
me, by agrauating those ill begiunings, of mine; as I vvil shortly declare.

But now, I confessing my self, to that other Ecclesiastical person, of whom
I was speaking before, he grew to affect me, in extreme manner; because then,
indeed, I had little to Confess, in comparison of what occurred afterward;
nay, I had not very much, from the time of my entering into Religion. The
affection of this man, was not ill; but yet, by the excess theror, it grew to
be, not good. He well understood already, that I would not resolve, upon any
terms, to do any thing, which was grievously offensive to Almighty God;
and he also assured me of as much, concerning himself; and so, our
conversation grew to be frequent. But, in those times of conference, which we
had, I was so fully possessed, and even swallowed-vp, by the thoughts of
Almighty God, that the greatest gust I had, was to be speaking of him; and I,
being then, so very young, it put him to a kind of confusion, to see it; and
through the great affection, which he bore me, he began to discover his own
misery to me, which was not small; for they were then, almost seven years,
that he had been in a very dangerous state, by his affection, and conversation,
with a certain woeman of the same town; when yet, he said Mass, all the
while. Now, this was so public a thing, that he had, already, lost his honor,
and fame; and yet no body, adventured to speak against it: Neither did I,
think fit to do it, though I were much troubled, to see, in what case he
was; because I loved him much. For I had this part of folly, and blindness,
that even here, I thought it fit, to be grateful, and to keep fair quarter,
with one, whom I loved. But cursed be that quarter, and way of proceeding,
which extends it self, so far, as to be against the law of God. This is a
very madd kind of error, which is used now, so much, in the world; and it puts
me; almost, out of my wits, to see, that we should owe, all that goodness,
which men do us, to the goodness of God; and yet, that we shoud esteem it,
for a virtue, not to break this friendship with men, though it should offer to
carry us away, against him. O strange blindness of the world! O, that thou
would be pleased, to let me be, the most ungrateful creature, that lives,
toward the said whole world, so that yet, I were not ungrateful, to the least
hairs breadth, against thee. But, alas, I have proceeded very contrarily, to
this course, whereof I speak, in punishment, of my other sins.

I procured, in the mean time, to inform myself, concerning this man, by
means of the domestics of his house; and so I came, to understand more, of
his misery; but yet, I found withal, that the poor soul was not altogether
so extremely faulty, as men thought; because, that wretched woman, had
bewitched him, by a certain little Idol of copper, which she had prayed him
to wear about his neck, for love of her; and no body had been of power
enough, to make him leave it. For my part, I confess, I cannot believe the
business of such witchcrafts, as this, in any express, and determinate manner;
but yet, I vvil relate, what I saw, for the better aduising men, to take heed
of all women, who proceed in such sort, as this; And, to the end, that men
may believe, that, when women come to loose the shame of God, and the world
(for they are, even more obliged, to be honest, and chaste, then men) there is
no trust at all, to be reposed in them; for, so that they may have their
wills, and that the love, which the Devil plants in them, may not be crossed,
they never care, what they do. But as for me, though I had been very wicked,
yet I never fell into any thing of this nature; nor ever pretended to do ill;
no, nor, if I should have been able, would I ever yet have forced any body,
to affect me. Our Lord kept me always from this; whereas, if ever he had left
me to my self, I should certainly, have done as ill, in this kind, as in
other; for, in me, there was no trust to be had. But now, when I came to
understand this story, I began to show him more affection. My intention,
indeed, was good heerin, but yet my action, faulty; for, I should not have
committed the least ill, for the obtaining of the greatest good, that could be
thought. I discoursed to him, very ordinarily, of Almighty God, which,
perhaps, might do him some good; though yet, I am more apt to think, that the
great affection, which he bore me, was the thing, which wrought more
vehemently upon him; for, to do me a very great pleasure, he gave me his
little Idol, which I instantly caused, to be cast into the river. After this,
he began quickly (like some man, who had been awaked, out of a profound
sleep) to go recovering, and remembering all that, which he had done, in
those past years, and to be amazed at himself; and so, bewailing his misery,
he came, by those degrees, to abhor it. Our B. Lady, without all question,
assisted him much; for he was very particularly devoted to her Immaculate
Conception; and his custom ever was, to celebrate that Festiuitie, with
great joy. In fine, he utterly gave over, so much as once, to see that woman
any more; and could never satisfye himself, with thanking Almighty God very
much, for the light, which he vouchsafed to give him. And so, just upon that
day twelue-moneth, when I had known him first, he dyed. But, already, he was
grown, to serve Almighty God, in very serious manner; and, though I never
could perceive, that the great affection, which he bore me, was ill, yet it
might have been more pure; and so also, there was no want of occasions,
wherein, if the presence, and assistance of God, had not been close at hand,
his Divine Majesty might have been much offended. But, whatsoever I might
then, have conceived to be Mortal sin, I would, certainly, not have
committed it; and even his seeing that disposition in me, might, perhaps, make
him love me the better. For, all men, I believe, are more the friends of those
women, whom they see inclined to Virtue; yea, and even, for those other
things, to which they pretended, such women gain more, upon such men; as I
shall declare afterward. But I hold it for very certain, that his soul is in
the way of salvation; for he dyed very well; and being grown so free from
that occasion, it seems, our Lord was pleased, that he should be saved, by
this means.

I remained in that place, three months, with extreme affliction; for, the
Cure was, by much, too hard, for my complexion; and so, at the end of two
months of those three, the roughnes of those remedies, did even, as it were,
make an end of my very life; and withal, the rigor of my hartssicknesse, of
which I went to be cured, was grown to be much more fierce; in such sort,
that, now and then, it seemed to me, as if my very heart, had been peirced, and
penetrated, with sharp teeth; so that they were afraid, I would run mad. By
this great loss, and want of strength, (for I was able, to take no food at
all, except it were liquid, and that, suddenly) I had a continual burning
Fever, and I was totally consumed; for they had daily given me a Purge, for
almost a whole month together; and indeed, I was even so burnt up, that my
sinnewes began, all, to shrink; and this, with so insupportable torments,
that I could not take any rest, either by day, or night; and all this while, I
was also oppressed, with a most profound sadness of mind.

With such a kind of gain, in point of health, as this, my Father brought me
back to his house, where the Physicians came to visit me again; and they all,
gave me utterly over; for they said, that, besides all the rest, I was settled
in a Hectic Fever. But this troubled me, very little; for that, which
afflicted me, was the sharp, and bitter pain, which never gave me over, bur
vexed me, even all alike, from head to foot. For, the torment of the sinnewes,
is a kind of intolerable thing, as the Doctors affirm; and especially, when
they all shrink up, as mine did; and certainly, if I had not lost the merit of
it, through mine own fault, the torment was strong enough, to have entitled me
to it.

I continued not, above three months, in this rage of pain; but it seemed,
even a kind of impossible thing for me, to endure such a heap of
afflictions, all, together. And now, I am even amazed at my self, and I hold it
for a great favor of our Lord, to consider the patience, which his Divine
Majesty was pleased to give me; for it was evident, that it came from him. It
assisted me also much, toward the having this patience, that I had read the
history of Job, in the Moralls of S. Gregory; and our Lord seems to have
prevented me so, by that means; as also with having begun, so to use Prayer,
as that I might be able to carry my pain, with much conformity, to his holy
will. The conversation of my heart, was wholly with him; and I carried these
words of Job, very usually, both in my thought, and in my mouth: Since we have
received blessings, and benefits, at the hand of our Lord; why should we not
also, suffer afflictions? And I conceived, that this, help to give me courage.

At length, came the Feast of our B. Lady, in August; for, till then, from the
April before, had my torment continued; though yet it had been greater, in the
three last months. I then made have, to go to Confession; for, I ever took
much contentment, to Confess often. My friends thought, that it was fear of
death, which invited me, to be so devout; and so, to the end, that I might not
be put into apprehension, my Father would not let me Confess. O inordinate,
and irregular love, of flesh, and blood; since, though I had so Catholic a
Father, and so full of prudence, and consideration, in all his actions, which
even abounded in him, (for, this could not be an effect of ignorance) yet he
might have done me hurt enough, by this means. That night, I fell into such a
Trance, as continued to keep me, near four days, without the use, almost, of
any of my senses; and shortly, they came to give me the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction; and every hour, or rather every moment, it was expected, when I
should expire, they being as diligent in saying the Creed Many use to repeat
the Creed, in the presence, and as in the person, of such, as are near
expiring; by way of fortefying the^, at that time, against the temptations of
the Devil.
in my hearing, as if I had understood them; yea sometimes they held me for so
certainly to be dead, that afterward, I found the drops, of the holy When
persons are near expiring, attendants use to be very near them, with hallowed
Candles.
Wax-candles, about mine eyes. The affliction of my Father, was great, for his
not having permitted me to go to Confession. Many outcryes, and many
prayers, were made to Almighty God, for me; and blessed be he, who was pleased
to hear them; for, the Grave remaining open, in the Church of my Monastery, a
day and a half, where my body was expected, to be interred; and my Funeral,
having been already celebrated, by the Religious men of our Order, in another
town, where it was conceived, that I was dead, our Lord was yet pleased at
length, that I should teturne to my self; and so instantly. I would needs go
to confession. I received also the B. Sacrament, with many tears; though yet,
in my opinion, they were not shed, with that sense, and grief, for only my
having offended Almighty God; which might have served, to save my soul, if
the error, into which I was brought, by them, who had told me, that they were
not matters of mortal sin, (which afterward I saw plainly, that they were)
might not serve my turn. For, the torments, wherewith I remained, were
intolerable; and my understanding not very sharp, but rather dull; though yet
(as I conceived) my Confession were entire, of all things, whereby I might
think, that I had offended God. For, this mercy, did his Divine Majesty
vouchsafe to allow me, amongst others, that, after I had once begun to
receive the B. Sacrament, I never omitted to Confess any thing, which I
conceived to be a sin, though it were but Venial; Though yet still, me
thinks, that, without doubt, my soul might have run hazard, not to be
saved, if I had dyed then; in regard, that, on the one side, my Ghostly
Fathers had been so meanly learned; and, on the other side, and indeed, on
many sides, in regard, that, in my self, I was so wicked.

But this is always a most certain truth, that, when I return to a thought
of this passage, and consider, how it seems, as if our Lord had raised me
again, from death to life, I am filled with so huge an amazement, that I
remain, even as it were, all quaking, within my self. And now, me thinks, it
were well, O my soul, that thou would gather this just resolution, from that
great danger, out of which, it pleased our Lord, to deliver thee; that,
although thou would not fly from offending his Divine Majesty, for Love,
yet, at least, thou should forbear to do it, for Fear. For he might have
taken thy life from thee, a thousand times, when thou were in a more dangerous
state; and I think, that I should not say too much, if I did speak of a
thousand times more; though he, perhaps, may chide me, who commanded me to use
moderation, in the recital of my sins; and yet I doubt, that I have painted
them out, too favorably, and fair. But I beg of him, for the love of our
Lord, that he will not once think, of making me diminish my faults; because
the magnificence of Almighty God, is to be discerned thereby, and how much he
is pleased to suffer, and endure, from a soul. Let him be Blessed for ever;
and let it also please his Divine Majesty, that he may rather consume me
quite, then that I should ever leave to love him more.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
She treates, of how much she ovved our B. Lord, for his giving her,
Conformity, to his holy will, in so great afflictions; And how she took
the glorious S. Joseph, for her Intercessour; and how aduantagious, that
Devotion proved to be.

I Remained, during those four days of Agony, or Trance, in such state, that
only our B. Lord is able to know, the insufferable torments, which I felt in my
self. My tongue was deeply bitten by me, in many places. My throat, with having
taken nothing, and by reason also of my very great weakness, could not swallow,
so much as a drop of water, without choking. Me thought, I was totally
disioynted; and my head, in extreme disorder. I was also, as it were, all
rolled up, and contracted, as if I had been a Bottom of Packthridd; for, in
this, did the torments of those days fix themselves, without my being able,
once to stir, either hand, or foot; arm, or head; (unless they moved me)
any more, then as if I had been dead. Only, I think, I was able to wagg one
single fingar of my right hand. Now, for any body to touch me, in any kind,
there was no means at all; for, my whole person, was so affected, and
afflicted, as that there was no enduring, to have it touched. In a sheet, they
would be removing me, now, and then, according to the occasion, with one, at
one end thereof, and another, at the other; and this lasted, till Easter. Only
this I had, by way of ease, that, if I were not approached, and touched, these
torments would be ceasing, many times; and then, upon the account of my being
in less pain, I was content, to affirm my self to be well. But indeed I was
much afraid, least my patience should begin to fail me; and therefore, I was
not a little pleased, to find my self, without those sharp, and continual
torments; though yet I had them, after an unsupportable manner; together with
a very great detestation of food, whilst I had those fierce colds, (which,
indeed, were extremely fierce) of a double Quartane, which I was also, then,
grown to have. About this time, I made so very great have, to return to the
Monastery, that I got my self to be carried away, as I was. And they received
her, whom they expected for dead, with a soul, which was yet in the body;
but the body it self, worse then dead, through the pain they saw, it endured.
The great, extremity of my weakness, cannot be related; for I had nothing left,
but my skin, and bones; and I must say, that I continued thus, above eight
months; for I was directly a Cripple, (though yet I were then, on the mending
hand) upon the very point of three years. When now, I began to go upon all
four, I thanked God, as for a good degree of amendment. But I passed through
all these afflictions, with great co^formitie, to the holy will of Almighty
God; yea, and (unless it were in the very beginnings) with much alacrity,
and joy. For I esteemed it all, as nothing, being compared with those pains,
and torments, wherein I had been before; and I was wholly resigned then, to
God's holy will, although he should have left me in that state, for ever. I am
of opinion, that all the anxietie of my desire, to recover, was only, that I
might apply my self to Prayer, all alone, as I had been instructed; but for
this, there was no means, in the Infirmarie. I Confessed my sins very often;
I spoke with them, much, of God; in such sort, as that it edifyed them all; and
indeed, they were amazed to see the patience, which our Lord imparted to me.
For, if it had not come, from the hand of his Divine Majesty, it seemed a
kind of impossible thing, to endure such a deal of torment, with so much
contentment.

A point of great moment, that favor was, which our B. Lord had vouchsafed to
do me, by giving me Prayer; for, this, made me come to know, what it was to
love him; and from that little time, which I spent therein, I found these
virtues to be grown up, fresh in me; though yet, they were not strong, nor
able to hold me upright, in strict account. I spoke not ill of any Creature,
how little soever it might be; but my ordinary custom, was, to avoid all
manner of detraction; for I, always, had this thought present with me, that I
was never to wish, nor to say, any such thing, of any Creature, as I would
not have them say of me; and I took this, so extremely to heart, in all such
occasions, as might occurr (though yet, not still, so very perfectly, when
sometimes, any great occasion was offered me, to break my Rule) that this was
my constant use; and I persuaded such, as were wont to be much in my company,
and conversation, so earnestly to this practice, that it grew, also, up, with
them, into custom. By this means, it came to be commonly understood, that
wheresoever I chanced to be, all absent persons were safe; and so were they
also much more conceived to be, when any of my near friends, or kindred, or
others, whom I had instructed, were concerned. Though, in other things, I have
a great account to make to Almighty God, for the ill example, which I gave
them. I beseech his Divine Majesty, to forgive those many ill things, whereof
I have been cause; howsoever, I was not so, with so wicked intentions, as the
actions suceeded ill, afterward.

I still remained with great liking, to enjoy Solitude; and I also loved, in
particular manner, to discourse, and treat of things, concerning Almighty God;
and if still, I could find, with whom; that, gave me more contentment, and
even recreation, then all the politenes, or rather, I think, I may say,
grossnes, of the conversation of the world could do; and I loved to Confess,
and Communicate oftener, then I had done; and to desire it much; and to be
extremely affected, with reading good Books; and to have so extraordinary a
sorrow, for having offended Almighty God, that many times, I remember, how I
durst not adventure, to put my self into Prayer; because I feared that
excessive pain, which I was sure I should feel, in the quality of a great
punishment, for my offenses. And this, grew afterward, to such an extremity,
that I know not, to what, in fine, I may well compare this torment. But now,
this never happened to me, either more or less, for any fear at all, but only
when I remembered those regalo's, which our Lord had been pleased, to vouchsafe
me, in my Prayer; and the very much, that I owed his Divine Majesty, for
those high Favors; and when I saw, how ill I paid him, for all his goodness, I
was no longer able to endure it. Yea, and I found my self also, extremely
offended with my self, even for the many tears, which I shed, for the fault,
when I saw the so little amendment, which I made; whilst, neither my
resolutions, nor the pain, and care, wherein I was, not to fall back again,
when once the occasion should be offered, were sufficient to stay me. For then,
even my very teates, would seem deceiptfull to my very self; and my fault
would also appear, so much the fowler, because I saw the great favor, which
our Lord was pleased to do me, by imparting those tears to mine eyes, and so
great repentance to my heart. I procured also to Confess my self often; and so,
in my opinion, I did what I could, on my part, to restore my self, to the state
of grace.

But, all my misery, indeed, consisted, in that I plucked not the occasions of
Sin, up, by the root; and partly also, in those Ghostly Fathers, who
assisted me little; for if they had once directly declared to me, the danger,
wherein I was, from time to time; and that I was in obligation, not to have
passed my hours, in such conuersations, I am very confidently persuaded, that,
all, would have been quickly redressed; for I should never have endured, to
pass one day, in Mortal sin, if I had understood the case.

All these signs, and hopes, of my endeavoring, to fear, and serve Almighty
God, were come to me, by means of Prayer; and the greatest of them all, was,
that I walked, as it were, all wrapped up, in love; for, as for the punishment of
sin, it never once appeared before me. All the while, that I was so sick, I
continued to keep a very close guard, upon my Conscience; for as much as might
concern Mortal Sin. But, O my dear Lord, how vehemently did I desire, to
be restored to my health, that I might procure to serve thee, so much the
better; whereas yet, in very deed, it was the occasion of all my misery. But
now, when I found my self so lame, and even such a Cripple, and that, whilst I
was yet so very young, and how the Physicians of this world, had dressed me,
and to what state, they had brought me, I resolved, that I would apply my self,
to those of the other, to the end, that they might cure me; for I still desired
to recover my health, though yet I endured my sickness, with great alacrity.
And I would be thinking, and considering sometimes, that if, by enjoying my
health, I might chance be damned, it would be better for me, to remain still,
as sick as I was; but howsoever, I conceived, that I should be able, to serve
Almighty God, much better, if I could enjoy my health. Now, this is the abuse,
and error, which deceaues us, not to resign ourselves entirely, to the
disposition, and good pleasure, of our Lord; who knows best, what is fit for
us. But, in the mean time, I got many Masses said, for this purpose; and I
resorted also, to the use of other solid, and approved Prayers; for I was never
a friend of certain odd deuotio^s, which are used by diverse persons, and
especially by women; with some odd Ceremonies, which I could never endure,
since I understood, that they sauoured of Superstition; howsoever other folks
were moved by them. And so. I took, for my Advocate, and Lord, the Glorious S.
Joseph; and I recommended my self much, to him; and I have seen clearly, that
this Father, and Lord of mine, has drawn me, as well out of this necessity,
as out of other greater; when there was question of Honor, and Loss of the
Soul; and that, with more benefit, and advantage, then even my self could
tell, how to desire. Nay, I cannot remember, that hitherto I ever desired any
thing, by his means, which he has failed to obtain for me; and it is able,
even to amaze me, when I consider the great Favors, which Almighty God has
done me, by means of this Blessed Saint; and the dangers, both of Body, and
Soul, out of which, he has delivered me. In such sort, as that it seems, our
Lord has given the grace, and power, to other Saints, to succor men, in some
one kind of necessity of theirs; but I find, by good experience, that this
glorious Saint, succors us, in them all; and that our Lord will make us
understand, that as he would be subject to S. Joseph, upon earth, and that (by
enjoying the name, of his Father, and by being, as it were, his Directour, and
Tutour,) he might command him: so also he would now, in Heaven, grant,
whatsoever this Saint should desire. This truth, has also been seen, by the
experience of others, whom I have desired, to recommend themselves to this
Saint; and now, many are grown to be devoted to him; and my self also, have
fresh experience of this truth.

For my part, I procured to celebrate his Festiuitie, with all the solemnity,
I was able to use; but yet, with more vanity, then true spirit; desiring, that
it might be performed, with much curiosity, and exactnes; though yet still,
with good intention. But I ever had this, of ill; That if our Lord enabled me,
at any time, to do any thing, which was good, it would be full of
imperfections, and faults; whereas, toward the doing any thing amiss, and for
the exercising of curiosity, and vanity, I used much diligence, and
dexterity, and cunning; our Lord pardon me for it. And now, I would feign
persuade all the world, to be devoted to this glorious Saint, for the great
experience, which I have had, of the blessings, that he obtaines for us, of
Almighty God; nay, I have never known any one, who is seriously devoted to
him, and performs him particular services, whom I find not also, to go
proceeding on, in virtue; for really, he assists those souls much, which
recommend themselves to him. And to my best remembrance, there are diverse
years, wherein I have desired somewhat of him, upon his Festival Day, and I
have ever found it granted; and if, peradventure, my petition had some little
of the indirect, belonging to it, he redressed it, and set it straight, for my
greater good.

If I were any such person, as had authority to write, I would gladly enlarge
my self here, to make particular relation, of the Favors, which this glorious
Saint has obtained, both for me, and others; but, to the end, that I may do
no more, then I am commanded, I must be shorter, in many things, then I would;
and more large in others, then is needful; like one, in fine, who has little
discretion, for the doing of any thing, which is good. Only I beg, for the
love of Almighty God, that, whosoever can believe me, will try the truth, of
what I say; for he shall find by experience, how greatly a good thing it is, to
recommend himself, to this glorious Patriarch, and to be devoted to him.
Especially such, as give themselves to Prayer, should always be affectionate
to this Saint; for I know not, how, one can think of the Queen of the Angels,
at those times, when she suffered so much, during the Infancy of our Lord
Jesus; and not give thanks to S. Joseph, for the great assistance, which he
gave them, at that time. Whosoever wants a Master, who might instruct him to
pray, let him take this glorious Saint, for his guide; and he shall never loose
his way.

I beseech our Lord, that I may have committed no error, in presuming to
speak of this Saint; for though I thus profess, and publish my self, to be
devoted to him; yet have I been ever faulty, in the not doing him real
services, and in not imitating his virtues. But now, he did like himself, by
procuring, that I might be able, to rise, and walk, and be no longer a
Cripple; and so I did also like my self, in making so ill use of this favor.

But now, who would ever have imagined, that I could so soon, fall back
again, after my receiving so many regalo's, at the hands of Almighty God;
and after his Divine Majesty, had vouchsafed to give me some Virtues, which
(even, as it were, of themselves) did awake, and stir me up, to his service;
and after I had seen my self, even, as it were, dead, and in so imminent
danger, to be condemned to Hell; and after he had raised me again, both in
Body, and Soul, in such sort, that all they, who saw me, were even amazed to
find, that I could, so long, be alive. But, what is this, O my Lord, and my
God? Is this life to be still, so dangerous which we are to live?

Even now, whilst I am writing this, me thinks, that, by this favor, and
mercy, I might be able to say with S. Paul, (though yet, not with such
perfection, as he said it) that now, It is not I, who live; but thou, O my
Creator, who live in me; according to the experience; which I have had some
years, by that little, which I am able to understand of my self; and still
thou hold, and keep thy hand over me; and I find my self, full of
desires, and good purposes; and, in some sort, I have proved also (even by
experience of many things, in these late years) that I would, by no means,
do any thing, which should contradict, or cross thy will, how little soever
it might be; though yet, I well believe, that I committ many offenses, against
thy Divine Majesty, even without my understanding it. And it also seems to
me, that there could not, so hard a thing be set before me, which I would not
execute, for love of thee, with great resolution; and sometimes, thou have so
assisted me therein, as that such things have taken effect; and, for my part, I
care not, a whitt, for the whole world; no, nor for any creature, which is in
it; nor can I find, that any thing at all, gives me gust, which swarues from
thee; and every thing, which is not thou, seems no less, then a very heavy
cross to my heart.

Yet I may easily deceive my self heerin; and so, I think, I do; for, I
doubt, that I possess not all this, whereof I speak; but yet thou see well,
O my Lord (forasmuch as I am able to understand) that I do not lie. And I am
fearing, and that with very much reason, that, perhaps, thou may yet, leave
me once again; for I am not now to be told, how short a way, mine own
strength, is able to carry, and conduct me; and how little virtue I have, in
case thou be not ever, at hand, to allow me thy benedictions, and succors; to
the end, that so, I may never forsake thee; yea, and I beseech thy Divine
Majesty, that even now, I be not already forsaken by thee, whilst yet I am
thinking thus, of my self.

For my part, I know not, how we can desire to live, since all things are so
uncertain here. It seemed to me, O my Lord, to be already even an impossible
thing, that I should, so entirely, forsake thee; but since I have forsaken thee
so often, I cannot but fear the like again; because, when thou have retired
thy self, never so little, from me, all fell instantly down to the ground.
Blessed be thou for ever, O Lord; for, howsoever I forsook thee, thou would
not yet, so entirely, forsake me; but that still, thou gave me thy hand, that
so I might be able, to rise again; though many times, O Lord, I would not
take hold by it; nor would I understand, how thou vouchsafedst to call me
again, very often; as I will now declare.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
She shows, by what degrees, and means, she went loosing the favor,
which our Lord had done her; and how ill, she began to live. And she also
declares the harm there is, in not maintaining Clausure, in the Monasteries of
Religious women.

I Began, from one pastime, to another; from one vanity, to another; and
from one occasion, to another, to cast my self deeply, into very great
occasions; and to carry my soul so disordered, upon many absurdities, that
already, I grew even ashamed, to approach toward God, with so particular a
kind of friendship, and familiarity, as frequent Prayer requires; and I was
forwarded in that ill way, by this, That as my sins grew to be increasing,
the gust, which I had taken, and the regalo, which I had received, from the
exercise of virtue, began to fail me. I perceived very clearly, O my Lord,
that these good things are wanting to me now, because I had first bee^ wanting
to thee. But yet, this was, in the mean time, the most terrible cosening kind
of wrong, which the Devil could possibly put upon me, when he made me begin,
to fear, to make Prayer; because, forsooth, I saw my self so destroyed; and,
me thought, it was better for me, to proceed, as the multitude did, since I was
amongst the worst of them, who are wicked; and to pray, but as much, as I was
bound; and that, but vocally; and that a person, who deserved to be with the
Devil, was not to use Mental Prayer, and to hold so straight commerce, with
Almighty God; and that, if I did, I should but seek, to deceive the world;
because exteriourly, I made show of virtue. Yet, in the mean time, upon this
reason, the House, wherein I lived, did deserve no blame, at all; because I
procured, with so much cunning, and craft, all that while, that they should
have me, in good opinion. Neither did I all this, of set purpose, by
counterfeyting a better Soul, then I had; for, touching this point of
Hypocrisy, and Vaineglorie, I humbly thank Almighty God, that I remember not
my self, to have offended him therein, for ought I can perceive; for, upon the
very first approach of motion, to committ that kind of sin, I ever received,
and felt, so much trouble, that the Devil was wo^t to go away with loss, and
I remained with gain; and therefore, he would never tempt me much, in this
kind; though yet perhaps, if God had permitted him to endeavor it, as strongly
in this, as he did in some other things, I should also have fallen into this
sin. But his Divine Majesty has been pleased hitherto, to preserve me
heerin; for which, let him be eternally praised. Nay, rather it troubled me
much, that they should hold me, in good opinion, considering, what I knew, in
private, of my self. The true reason, of their believing me, not to be so
wicked, proceeded from this, That they saw me, being so young, to retire my
self, many times, and upon several occasions, to Solitude; and to pray, and
read much; and talk of God; That I loved to make the picture of our Blessed
Savior, be set up, in many places; and to have an Oratorie; and to procure,
to put such things there, as might cause devotion; and not to speak ill, of
any; and other things also of this nature, which carried a kind of appearance
of virtue, with them; and I knew well enough (so vain I was) how to win
esteem, for my self, by those things, which the world is wont to prize.

Upon these observations of theirs, they allowed me as much, yea and more,
liberty, then to the more ancient Religious women of the House; and they were
confident of me, in all things; for, as for my taking liberties to my self, or
to do any thing at all, without leave, yea, or to speak with any body, in
corners, or holes, or by night, me thinks, I could never have resolved my
self, even so much, as to talk of any such thing, as this, in a Monastery;
neither did I ever so; because our Lord held me up, in his hand. For it seemed
to me, (who reflected much, and with much attention, upon many things) that,
to put the honor of so many Religious women, in hazard, whilst they were
good, because I was wicked, had been a very unworthy part in me; as yet
perhaps I should have done, by making strangers think, that they used also,
to do the like. But why do I speak of my avoiding to do ill things, as if
any thing which I did, had been well done? Though yet, the truth be withal,
that the evil which I did, was not performed by me, with so much reflection,
and aduertence, as this, would have required; though yet it were, with too
much. For this reason, I am of opinion, that it brought me hurt enough, that I
was in a Monastery, not enclosed. Which they, who were good, might well enjoy,
without any disadvantage to their goodness; because they owed no more, since
they did not promise Clausure; but as for me, who am wicked, it would certainly
have carried me down to Hell; unless our Lord had drawn me, out of this
danger, by very many remedies, and means, and most particular favors. And
so, me thinks, a Monastery of women, with liberty, exposes them, to very
great hazard; and rather appears in mine eye, as a way, whereby they, who have
a mind to be wicked, may walk on, toward Hell, then as a remedy for their
weakness. I mean not this, by my Monastery; for therein, are so many, who
serve our Lord, so much in earnest, and with so great perfection, that his
Divine Majesty, through his goodness, cannot fail, of doing them favor.
Neither is this Monastery also, of the most open, and dis-enclosed; and
besides, all good Religious Order, is observed in it; but I speak, what I was
speaking, of others, which I know, and have seen. I say therefore, that those
others, give me cause, to have great compassion of them; for they have need of
particular motions, and calls, from our Lord; and not once, but very often;
that so, they may be saved; considering, how much the honors, and recreations
of the world, are now grown to be authorized; and how little, such, as they
are, understand the very much, to which they are obliged. So that I beseech
God, they hold not that, sometimes, for virtue, which is sin; as my self did
often; yea, and there is so great difficulty, in making this, be well
understood, that there is need of no less, then that our Blessed Lord himself,
should seriously, put his hand to the work.

If Fathers would take my counsel (since they will not procure, to put their
Daughters, where they may walk in the way of salvation, but rather be in more
danger, then they should, perhaps, have met with, in the world) I would advise
them, at least, to consider their own honor; and rather to marry them very
meanly, then to put them into such Monasteries, as those, unless they be very
virtuously inclined; yea, and I pray God, that even this, may serve the turn.
Yea, or else, let them rather continue them, in their own houses; for if they
will needs be wicked, it cannot be there, kept private, but for a very short
time; but here, it may be long concealed, though yet, in the end, our Lord is
ever wont, to discover it; and then, they do not only hurt themselves, but
also the rest; and sometimes, those poor Creatures have the less fault,
because they do but that, which they find in use. But still, it is matter of
much compassion, to see many, who have really a mind, to forsake all, and
conceive, that they go to serve our Lord, and to fly from the dangers of this
world, do yet, by this means, grow, to embarke themselves, in ten worlds,
all, together; where they know not, what to do, or how to help themselves.
For, youth, and sensuality, and, in fine, the Devil, both inuites them, and
inclines them, to follow somethings, which do altogether belong to a world;
and so, in effect, they come to hold them good. Me thinks, in this, they are
like those miserable, and wretched men, the Heretics; who first make
themselves blind, and then give themselves to understand, that those opinions,
which they follow, are good, and so they come to believe them, to be true;
though yet, indeed, and upon the matter, they believe them not; for, in their
hearts, there is somewhat, which tells them still, that it is naught.

O great misery! I say, O extreme great misery of Religious persons; (and I
speak not here of women now, more then of men) where Religious Observance, is
not kept; and where, in one, and the self same Monastery, two ways are held:
One of Virtue, and Religious Life; and another, which is utterly in want
thereof; and where they all, go, as it were, equally, hand in hand. Or rather,
I said ill, when I said, equally; for it uses to happen so, for our Sins,
that the more imperfect, make up the greater number; and so, as they use to be
more, they use to be also more favored. And true Religious Observance is wont
to be so rare, in those places, that as well that Religious man, as that
Religious woeman, who shall have a mind, to give themselves wholly, and in good
earnest, to follow their Vocation, and Rule, will have cause, to be in more
fear of the rest of the Religious of their own House, then of all the Devils
in Hell. Yea, and they will need to use more caution, and dissimulation, in
speaking of that intercourse, and friendship, which such persons should procure
to hold, with Almighty God, then of other inclinations, and friendships, which
the Devil finds means, sometimes, to bring into Monasteries. I can therefore
meet with no reason, why we should be amazed, to see so many miseries in the
Church, since they, who ought to be Patterns for others, (that so, all men
might grow to be virtuous, by their example) have totally blotted out, that
Work, which the Spirit of the Saints, in old time, left registered in our
Religious Orders. And I humbly beseech his Divine Majesty, that he will be
pleased, to give such remedy, to these mischiefs, as he knows best, to be
needful; Amen.

But, in the mean time, when I began to use such conuersations as these, I
little thought, that so great distractions, and other damages, would grow to
my Soul, by that kind of proceeding, when I saw, they were so much used by
others; and I conceived, that so general a thing, as it is, for Secular
people, to make Visits to the Religious, in many Monasteries, would be of no
greater prejudice to me, then it was to others, whom I saw, to be virtuous,
and good. But I considered not, the while, that those others, were much more
virtuous, then my self; and that those things, which were of much danger to me,
were not, perhaps, of so very much, to them; though yet, I fear, it be of
some; and, at the best hand, I am sure enough, that it is no better, then time
very ill employed, and spent. And, being once with a certain person, our Lord
was pleased to give me to understand, in the very beginning of my acquaintance
with her, that such friendships would be, no way, convenient for me; and to
give me also advise, and light, in so great a darkness, as that was. For, Christ
our Lord represented himself before me, with much rigor, and gave me well to
understand, how greatly he was disgusted at my proceeding. I saw him only, with
the eyes of my Soul; but yet, much more distinctly, and more clearly, then I
could possibly have done, with the eyes of my Body; and he remained so deeply
imprinted there, that although it happened to me, above six and twenty years
ago, me thinks, he is still as present to me now, as he was then; But I am
sure, I remained so altered, yea and so astonished, that I intended to see that
person no more.

It did me a great deal of hurt, that I knew not, at that time, that it was
possible for one to see any thing, but with the eyes of the Body; and the
Devil was careful enough, to continue me, in that erroneous opinion, and to
make me still believe, that it was impossible; and therefore, that I had but
fancied certain things, to my self; and that, perhaps, it might be a work of
the Devil. And he brought many suggestions, like this, upon me; though yet
still, I were very confidently of opinion, that it was God, and no conceit, or
fancy, at all; but yet still, because it induced me to do things, which were
against my gust, I did the best I could, even to belie my very self. And
forasmuch, as I durst not conferr with any body, about this particular, and
found my self also extremely importuned afterward, and was wished to be
assured, that it could not be ill done, to see such a person as that, and that
there would be no loss of honor by it, but rather gain, I returned to enjoy
the same conversation; yea, and also, at other times, I conuersed, in like
manner, with others; for they were many years, wherein I took this
pestilentiall recreation; and when once, I was far embarked therein, it
seemed not to me, to be so very ill, as yet, indeed, it was; though still, it
be very true, that sometimes I discerned clearly enough, that it was not good.
But yet, no other conversation distracted me so much, as this, in particular,
did; by reason of the great affection, which I bore to the party.

But, my self being afterward again, with the same person, we, both of us,
saw coming toward us (and there were others also present, who saw it too) a
certain thing, which had the manner of a great Toade; and it pressed, and
passed on, with very much more speed, then such creatures use to have. For my
part, I was not able to conceive, how such a filthy Beast as that, should get
into that room, through that part, from whence it came; and even, as it were,
at Noone day; nor had ever any such thing, been seen there. The effect, which
it wrought with me, seems, not to have been void, of some mystery; and this
also, was a thing, which I could never forget. But, O greatness of Almighty
God! with how much care, and pity, were thou admonishing me, in so many
kinds, and by so many ways; and how little did I permit, that all these
warnings should help?

There was also there, at that time, a certain Religious woeman of my kindred;
and she was ancient, and a great servant of God, and of much discipline in her
Religious Order. She also, would sometimes, be giving me good counsel; but I
did not only not believe her, but was also disgusted with her; as conceauing,
that she would needs take scandal at me, without cause.

And this I here relate, to the end, that both my wickedness, and the great
goodness of Almighty God, may be the better understood; and that it may be
known, how well I deserved Hell, for my great ingratitude; and I do it also,
to this end, that if our Lord may so ordain, and be pleased, that any
Religious women may fall upon reading this Discourse, they may be brought to
be careful, to take warning by me; and I beg of them, that, for the love of
our Lord, they vvil take heed of such recreations, as these. And I beseech his
Divine Majesty, that some one of them, may be dis-abused, whom I have
deceived, when I told them, that it was not ill; and when (being in such
blindness, at that time) I procured, to assure them, that there was no danger
at all; and in regard also, that, by the ill example, which I gave gave them,
(as I have related here) I was a cause to them, of great mischief, whilst yet
I thought not, that I did so much hurt; and though also, it be certain, that I
had no design at all, to deceive them.

But now, even whilst I was yet much indisposed, in the way of health, both
concerning Body, and Mind; and so, before I was able to help my self, in
either kind, I grew into an extreme desire, to do others good; which is a
very ordinary temptation, for new beginners; though yet, it happened now to
succeed well, with me. And considering, how dearly I loved my Father, I
wished him the self same benefit, which I conceived my self to have gotten,
and gained, by means of Mental Prayer; and esteeming, that, in this life,
there was no greater blessing, then to obtain, and enjoy that gift, I
began, by certain vvayes of discourse, to procure, the best I could, that he
would endeavor to obtain it; and I gave him certain Books, for this
purpose. Now, he, being a man of so much virtue, as I have already declared,
grew to settle himself, so very well, in this exercise, that he came, within
five or six years, (for so long, I think, it was) to be so well improued,
and advanced therein, that I blessed our Lord much, for the favor; and it gave
me an extreme consolation. The troubles, and crosses, which he endured, were
very great, and of many kinds; and he passed through them all, with much
conformity, to the will of our Lord. He came to see me often; and was
greatly comforted, to treat of Spiritual things. And when now I lived so
distracted, and diffused, without using Mental Prayer, and saw vvithall, that
he conceived me, to be still the very same, that I had been before, I was not
able to endure, to live, without vn-deceauing him; for I had, then, been a
year, and more, without Mental Prayer, as thinking it more humility for me,
to abstain; and this (as I shall declare afterward) was the greatest, and
vvorst temptation, that ever I had; for, by this means, Iranne headlong, upon
my total ruin; whereas, when I frequented Prayer, if I offended God, one
day, I returned to recollect my self, upon another; and so, to absent my self
from the occasion.

But that blessed man, my Father, coming to see me, in such state as this, it
was too much for me (as I was saying) to let him walk on, so far in
error, as to think, that I still conuersed with God, in Prayer, as formerly
I had done; and so I told him then, that I did no longer use Mental Prayer;
though yet, I did not tell him, the cause thereof; but I alleged my
infirmities, for the reason; and that, although I were recovered of the main
sickness, I had yet diseases, yea and very great ones, still; and that,
although, of late, they had not assaulted me, with so very great fiercenes, as
before, yet they failed not, still to continue, and to exercise me also, in
many kinds. In particular, that I had certain vomits, for twenty years
together, every morning, in such sort, as that I could never break my fast,
till Noone, was past; yea and sometimes, not so soon. And since, of late, I
am grown able to receive the B. Sacrament more often, it proceeds from this,
that these vomits come to me, at night, before I go to bed, and they put me to
much more pain; and then, I must procure to hasten, and facilitate them, by
the use of feathers, and such other things; because, if I have not those
vomits, the sickness, which I feel, is extreme. But indeed, I am, me thinks,
almost never, without many kinds of pain; and sometimes, they are very sharp
ones; and especially, at my very heart; though yet withal, it be also true,
that the cruel Palsy, and other infirmityes of Feauers, which were wont to
come very thick upon me, are now found, to oppress me more seldom; so that
many times, I am well, in those respects; and I have made so little account of
these miseries, for these eight years together, that sometimes I am even
glad, I have them; as conceauing, that our Lord may be, peradventure, served,
in some sort, thereby. This was my discourse. And now, my Father believed, that
this, which I told him here, was, indeed, the true cause of my omission, for,
himself never used to lie; and considering, in what sort, and, of what matter,
I was then discoursing to him, he had no reason to think, but that I said
true; and, to the end, that he might believe me the better, I told him also
then, that I well saw my self, not to be without some fault; and that I had
enough to do, to be able to assist in the Quire; though yet, in very deed,
even this reason of corporal sickness, was no sufficient cause, to make me give
any good thing over; for, there is no need of corporal strength, for such
things as these, but only of love, and custom; since our Lord, affords us
always opportunity, if we will, ourselves. I say, always; because, though
infirmities, and other occasions, my hinder one sometimes, from spending many
hours in Solitude, yet there will not want some other time, wherein we may
have health enough, for this business; yea and even in other occasions, as also
in the midst of sickness it self, the truest Prayer may be made (since it is the
Soul, which loves) by offering up that pain, to Almighty God; and in
remembering, for whom it is endured; and in conforming ones self, to God's
holy will, therein; and in a thousand such other things, as will occurr. And
thus may one exercise Love; for, there is no necessity at all, for a person,
either to be in Solitude, or else, that there must be no Mental Prayer, at all.

If we will take a little care, we may arrive to obtain great blessings, at
those times, when our Lord, even takes time for Prayer from us, by means of
our sicknesses, and pain; and my self had found this to be true, as long as my
Conscience was pure, and good. But my Father, through the opinion, which he
held of me, and the love he bore me, believed all, that I had said; or rather,
he not only believed, but had also pity of me; though yet, being then grown,
to find himself, in so eminent, and high a state of Spiritual Life, he
remained not with me, very long. And therefore, having visited me, he returned
home, as holding his stay, there, to be loss of time; and I, who was willing
to spend it upon other vanities, was not troubled very much, at his departure.

It was not only with him, but with other persons also, whom I procured, that
they should addict themselves to Mental Prayer, even whilst I was walking on,
in those vanities; for still, as I found them apt, to use Vocal Prayer, I told
them how they should grow to have the use of Meditation; and I did them good,
and gave them Books; for I had still a good desire, that others should serve
Almighty God, even from the very first time, that I used Mental Prayer; as I
have related here.

It seemed to me, that, since now I served not our Lord my self, so well as I
should, yet I liked not, that that light should be lost, which his Divine
Majesty had bestowed upon me; but that others might also serve him, by my
means. And this I here recount, that so, the great blindness wherein I was, may
be the better seen; which induced me, to make me loose my self, whilst yet I
went procuring, to do good to others.

About this time, my Father fell into the sickness, whereof he dyed, shortly
after. But I went to attend, and recover him, whilst my self was more sick in
Soul, then he was in Body, through many vanities of mine; though yet, not in
such sort, as that, according to my understanding, I was in Mortal Sin, even
in all this worst, and wickedest time, whereof I speak; for certainly, if I
had conceived otherwise, I should, by no means, have continued therein. I
endured some affliction, and trouble, in his sickness; and, I think, I also
made him some part of poor amends, for the pains, which he had taken with me,
in mine; for now, being ill enough in my self, I yet strained very hard, to do
him service; and besides, I well considered, that by the only loss of him,
all my comfort, and regalo, was to be lost; for it all, was shut up, in only
him. I animated my self also, so much, toward the not showing him, that I was
in any pain, and in continuing so, even till he expired, as if I had felt no
trouble at all; though yet it be very true, that, when I saw him come, to be
upon the very point, to loose his life, it seemed to me, as if mine own very
Soul, had then been torn out of my Body; for I loved him much.

It was a thing to make our Lord be highly praised, to see the death, which my
Father dyed; together with the desire, which he also had to dye; and the
counsel, which he gave us, after he had received extreme Unction; and how he
charged us, to recommend him to God; and that we should beg mercy of him, for
his Soul; and that we must serve him ever; and consider, that all this world,
must come to end. With tears he also told us, how sad he was at the heart, for
not having served his Divine Majesty better; That he wished, he were some
Religious man; I mean, that he had been so; and that, of the most strict, who
were in the world. And I hold it, for very certain, that some fifteen days
before, our Lord gave him to understand, that he was not to live; because,
before that very time, he did not think he was sick, though yet he were so,
in good earnest. But afterward, though he seemed to mend much, in point of
health, and though the Doctors bad him believe, that there was no danger at
all, yet he made no account of that, but only atte^ded, to put his Soul, in
good order.

That sickness of his, began with a very grievous pain, round about his
shoulders, which never left him; and sometimes it pressed him so hard, that his
affliction was very great. I told him once, upon this occasion, that since he
had been so devoted to that Mystery, when our Lord carried his Cross upon his
Back, he might do well, to conceive, that his Divine Majesty had been pleased
to give him a feeling, of some part of that, which himself had undergone, with
so much trouble; and my Father was so comforted by this thought, that I
remember him not, to have ever complained more. He remained three days, with
very little show of understanding; but yet, the day, whereon he dyed, our Lord
restored it to him; and that, so entirely, as we were all, even amazed to see
it; and he continued in it, saying the Creed; and as soon, as he had passed
through the first part thereof, he expired. When he was dead, he looked even
like an Angel; and as such (in manner of speech) he ever seemed, in my sight,
to be, both in Soul, and disposition or humor; which he had, extremely good.
Nor do I know, why I have spoken thus much of him, unless it be to confess,
and accuse mine own wickedness, so much the more; since, upon the sight of such
a death, and the knowledge of such a life, I ought to have amended, and
reformed mine, if it had been but to grow the liker to such a Father. His
Confessarius, who was a Dominican, and a great learned man, affirmed, that he
made no doubt, but that my Father would go straight to Heaven; for he, who had
Confessed him diverse years, spoke much of the great purity of his Conscience.
This Dominican Father, being a very worthy man, and a true servant of God, did
me a great deal of good; for I Confessed my self to him; and he undertook the
profit of my Soul, with care; and to make me well understand the way of
perdition, wherein I was walking. He caused me also to Communicate every
fifteen days; and beginning first to treat with him, by little and little, I
spoke with him afterward, at length, about my Prayer; and he told me, that I
must not fail to use it; and that it could not, by any means, but do me
good. I began, therefore, to use it again; and from that time forward, I
never left it; though yet I did not, for the present, giue-ouer the occasions,
of my imperfections.

I therefore, in the mean time, passed a most sad life; for, in Prayer, I came
to understand my faults. On the one side, I was called by Almighty God; and on
the other, I followed the world. All those things, which belonged to God, gave
me great contentment; but those things, which were of the World, tied me up, in
chains; and, it seems, I had a mind, to make these two contraryes, friends,
which yet are so much in enmity, with one another; namely, a Spiritual life,
on the one side; and sensual pastimes, contentments, and delights, on the
other.

In my Prayer, I endured much trouble, because now, my Spirit was grown to be
no longer, a Lord, but a Slave; and therefore I was not able to shut my self
up, in my heart (which was the only way of proceeding, I formerly had held, in
my use of Prayer) without shutting up, a thousand vanities, together with my
self. I passed so many years in this manner, that now I am astonished to
consider, that any person should be able to endure, the not leaving, either
the one, or the other, in so long a time. I well know, that now, it was no
longer, in my hand, to give over Mental Prayer; for he held me now in his, who
resolved to do me greater favors. O that I could declare the occasions of
doing ill, which God removed from me, in those years; and how I put my self
again, into them; and of the danger, wherein I was, to loose all the opinion,
and reputation, which I had in the world, from which he freed me; and of the
have, which I made, to discover, by my actions, what kind of Creature I was;
and the have, which our Lord made also, to cover these faults, and to discover
some little virtue of mine, if there were any; and to make the same seem
great, in the eyes of all men; in such sort, as that they ever held me, in much
account. For, though sometimes, my vanities would shine through my actions, yet
they seeing other things in me, which appeared good, would not believe the ill.
But the true cause heerof, was, that the knower of all things saw, that this
was fit, to be so ordained; to the end, that, when afterward I should come, to
persuade the world, to do him service, they might give me some little credit,
therein. And that Sovereign Bounty of God, did not so much consider my great
sins, as it did those desires, which I had sometimes, to serve him; and the
great trouble I felt in my self, for wanting power, and strength, to put the
same in execution.

But, O thou Lord of my Soul! and how shall I ever be able to express, with
fulness, and clearnes enough, the favors, which thou shewedst me, in those
years? and how, in that very time, when I was offending thee most, thou
made such have to dispose my Soul, to a most profound remorse, and sorrow;
that so I might come to taste of thy regalo's, and great favors again? The
truth is, O my King, that thou did use the most curious, and choice kind of
sharp punishment, which could possibly (to my thinking) be found for me; as
one, who did well understand, what was likely to cost me, the dearest of all
other things; for thou did punish those sins of mine, with great regalo's.
And I think, it is no impertinencie, which I utter; though yet it were a kind
of reason, that I should now, even as it were, loose my wits, whilst I renew
the memory of my ingratitude, and malice, toward thee. But really, it was so
much a more painful, and insupportable kind of thing, for me to receive such
favors, upon the very neck of my having fallen into so great offenses, then it
would have been, to endure grievous punishments; that some one of those said
favors, so received, seems clearly, and very certainly, to have even
ouer-wrought, and defeated, and confounded me more, then all my infirmities,
and torments, and other afflictions, put together, were ever able to do.
For, as for these latter afflictions, I found, that I deserved them well; and
I thought they might go, in part, by way of satisfaction, for my sins;
though yet, even in that kind of account, I know, that my sufferances were
few, for my offenses; which were so many, and so very great. But now, to see
my self receiving so freshly, so high favors, whilst yet the while, I made
so ill retribution, for those, which I had received before, is, in my account,
a kind of most terrible torment; and I think, it will be esteemed so, by all
such, as have any knowledge, or love of God; and we may easily find this to
be true, even by the natural condition of persons, who are virtuously
inclined. And hence flowed down my tears, together with an indignation, to
consider, what I found in my self; for I saw, that still I was, as upon the
pitch of returning to fall again, although my firm purposes, and desires, did
then (I mean, so long as those favors lasted) stand fast, and firm.

A great inconvenience it is, for a Soul, to find her self solitary, and
single, amongst so many dangers; and me thinks, that if I had any Creature,
to whom I might have imparted all this, it would have holp me, not to fall
again; at least, for shame of the world, if I would not be ashamed, to offend
God. I would therefore An excellent Advise.
advise them, who make Mental Prayer, and especially at the beginning thereof,
to procure some friendship, and familiarity, with others, who have the same
design; for, this is of much importance, though it should be for no more, then
to be assisted by the prayers of one another; and how much more, when there is
such advantage to be gotten also, otherwise. And, for my part, I cannot tell,
why, since by means of conuersations, and humane inclinations (even although
they be not excellently good) men procure to get some friends, by whose means
they may vnwearie themselves, and may find an increase of contentment, by
recounting their vain pleasures to one another, it should be so much, as
permitted, that such as begin to love, and serve Almighty God, in good
earnest, should forbear to impart, both their delights, and their afflictions,
to some fit persons; since such as use Prayer, are acquainted with both. For,
if that Creature be in earnest, who desires to hold frie^dship, with his Divine
Majesty, there needs to be no fear of Vainglory; and when that Soul
should be set upon, by any first motion thereof, he would easily get out of it,
with merit. And, as for me, I believe, that he, who should communicate thereof,
with others, to this intention, would both profit himself, and those, that
hear him; and would pr^^e, to be better taught, both in his own understanding
part, and in knowing also, how to instruct his friends. He, who should be
subject to Vainglory, for speaking upon such an occasion as this, would also
not fail to have it, by being seen to hear Mass, with devotion; and by doing
other things also, to which he is yet expressly bound, upon the pain of being,
otherwise, no good Christian. And yet these things, must not be forborne, upon
the fear of a man's being subject to Vainglory. Now, this is a point of so
extreme importance, for the benefit of all such Souls, as are not yet
strengthened, and established in Virtue (who want not, both so many
Adversaries, yea and friends also, to incite them to ill) that I know not, how
to express it, with earnestnes, and advantage enough. And, to me it seems, as
if the Devil loved to use this devise, as a thing, which imports him very much;
Namely, that men should hide themselves as carefully, from such, as can
understand them, and who would procure, to make them love, and give gust to
God; as he has earnestly incited others, to discover their intemperate
desires. Which latter course, is yet so much taken, and followed, that it
passes for a kind of gallanterie, to talk of it; and so, upon the matter,
they publish the offenses, which they committ against Almighty God, by this
means.

I know not, whether they be impertinencies, which I utter; if they be, your
Reverence may be pleased, to tear them; and if they be not, I beseech you,
Sir, assist, and instruct my simplicity, by adding much to them, upon this
subject. For, the business of the Service of Almighty God, goes now so weakly
on, that they, who procure to serve him, had need support, and succor one
another; that so, they may be able to get forward; so very much are the
vanities, and foolish entertainments of the world, grown, to be in fashion;
and in such sort; that there are few eyes in the world, to discern their
fault. But if any body, on the other side, do but begin, to give himself
to Almighty God, there are so many, who will murmr at him, that he shall
find himself to have need enough, to get company, which may appear, in his
defense; till such time, as he be confirmed, in not being troubled, for what he
is put to suffer; which if he chance not to be, he may, perhaps, grow to see
himself, in some straights.

And, perhaps, this may have been the reason, why some Saints have used, to
retire themselves into Deserts. But, as it is a kind of humility, not to put
any confidence, in a man's self; so yet, is it no sin against piety, to
believe, that God will not fail, to help him to live amongst them, with whom
he is obliged, to converse. But thus, Charity, by being communicated, will
grow to be increased; and there are a thousand other benefits, which belong to
this way of proceeding; where of I should not adventure to speak, if I had not
great experience of the much importance here of. True it is, that I am both the
most weak, and the most wicked, of as many Creatures, as were ever borne; but
yet still, I am apt to think, that, whosoever will humble himself, though he
be strong, and will yet, not believe so much of himself, but, in this, will
give belief to another, who is endued with experience, shall never loose any
thing, by the bargain. Of my self, I am able to say thus much, that if our
Lord had not discovered this truth to me, and had not also given me means, to
treat, in very usual manner, with such persons, as had the knowledge, and
practice of Mental Prayer, I had still walked on, with falling and rising,
till I had even dropped down headlong into Hell. For, I wanted not many
friends, who would not fail, to help me to fall; but toward the recovering,
and raising me up, I found my self so absolutely alone, that now I am no less
then amazed, to consider, how I remained not still, laid flatt; and I praise
the mercy of Almighty God; for it was he, and only he, who gave me his
helping hand. Let him be blessed, and praised, for ever, and for ever,

Amen.
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.
She treats of the great good, it did her, toward the not loosing her Soul,
not to have wholy giuen-ouer her Prayer; As also, what an excellent remedy
that is, toward the gaining of whatsoever good thing, which is lost. She
persvvades all Creatures to use it; and declares the great benefits thereof; and
although we should afterward leave it, yet, that still, it would prove a
great good, to have used so great a help for some time.

I Have not, without cause, been considering, and reflecting upon this life of
mine, so long. For, I am able to discern well enough, that no body will have
gust, to look upon a thing, so very wicked; And really, I would be glad, that
all such persons as should read this Discourse, might abhor me; to see a
Soul, so pertinacious, and so ungrateful, toward him, who had vouchsafed it
so great Favors. And I wish, I could get leave, to declare that multitude of
times, that I failed of my obligation to Almighty God, in this number of
years; by reason, that I was not applied to, and supported by, the strong
pillar of Prayer. I passed through this tempestuous Sea, almost twenty years,
between these fallings, and risings (though I rose il-fauourdly enough, since I
returned again so quickly to fall) in this kind of life, tending toward
perfection; but yet in so base a way, as that I made no account at all, of
Venial Take heed of this great danger.
Sins; and for such as were Mortal, it is true, that, although I feared
them, yet I did not even that, as I ought, since I absented not my self from
the danger thereof; but I will be bold to say, that it is one of the most
painful kinds of life, that can possibly be imagined. For, I neither enjoyed
the sweetness of God, nor yet the satisfaction of the world. When I found my
self in the contentments of the world, the remembrance of what I owed to God,
gave me pain; and whilst I was conuersing with his Divine Majesty, the
inclinations, and affections of the world, gave me disquiet. And this is a
kind of war so very painful, that I know not, how it was possible for me,
to find means, to endure it, for one month; and much more, how I could do
it, for so many years; notwithstanding that I yet clearly see, the great
mercy, which Almighty God showed me heerin (since I was to treat of many
things, in the world) that still I should have the courage, to give my self to
Prayer. I say, courage; for, as for me, I see not, what one thing there is, of
so many, as are to be found in the whole world, wherein there is need of a
greater, then to treat of committing Treasons, against a King, and to know,
that he knows it well, and yet, never to go out of his presence. For,
howsoever it be very true, that we are always in the presence of Almighty
God; yet me thinks, that they, who converse with him, in Prayer, are in his
presence, after a more particular manner; for they are seeing then, that he
sees them; whereas others may perhaps, remain some days in his presence, and
yet without remembering, that he looks upon them. True it is, that within that
time, there were, I believe, many months, and sometimes, peradventure, a
whole year, that I kept my self from offending our Lord, and gave my self
much, to Mental Prayer; and I also used some, yea and many diligences, that I
might never grow more, to offend him. And because all that, which I write now,
is to be delivered, with entirenes of truth, I declare my self here, as you
see. But I remember little, of those good days; and therefore it may be
thought, they were few, and the ill ones, many; yet few of those few, passed
away, without my allowing a good long time for Prayer, unless I were either
very sick, or extremely busy. The worse I was in my health, the more I was
united with God; and I procured, that such persons, as used to be with me, at
those times, might be so too; and I begged it of our Lord; and we spoke very
often, of him. And so, unless it were that one year of which I have spoken, in
eight and twenty years, which have passed, since I began first to use
Mental Prayer, I have endured this battle, and strife, of treating, both
with God, and the World, more then eighteen years. In those other years,
whereof I am yet to speak, the cause of the war was changed, though of it
self, it was no inconsiderable thing; but, in regard that I was then, as I
conceive, in the service of Almighty God, and in a knowledge of the vanity of
whatsoever this world can be, it did all, prove delightful, and pleasant; as I
will show hereafter.

Now, the reason, why I have related all this, is; First, (as I was saying
before) to the end, that the mercy of Almighty God, together with my
ingratitude, may be well discerned; And Secondly, that it may be also
understood, how great a blessing Almighty God does to that Soul, which he
disposes to use Mental Prayer, with a good affection, and will; though yet it
should not be so very well disposed for it, as were fit; for, in fine, if he
persevere therein, what Sin soever he committ, and whatsoever Temptation be
offered, and whatsoever Falls be given him, in a thousand strange fashions, by
the Devil Consider this point much, and often.
, I hold, in fine, for certain, that our Lord will draw him, at length, out of
the Storm, into the Port of Salvation; as now, by all appearance, he has
drawn me; and I humbly beseech his Divine Majesty, that I may never return
again, to be lost.

Many holy, and good men, have written of the benefit, which he obtaines, who
exercises himself in Prayer; I mean, Mental Prayer; and glory be to Almighty
God, for being the cause thereof; and yet, if that were not true, though I have
little humility, yet am I not withal, so insolent, as that I would presume to
speak upon this subject. But of that, whereof I have some experience, I may
vet presume to say somewhat; and it is this; That, whosoever has begun to
frequent the use of Prayer, I wish him, not to give it over, whatsoever sins
he committ in the mean time; since this is the means, by which he may recover
himself again; which he will find to be of much more difficulty, without it.
And let not the Devil tempt him to leave it, as he did me, upon a pretense of
humility; but let him firmly believe, that his words can never want truth, who
said, That, if we will repent our selves in good earnest, and resolve to offend
the Divine Majesty no more, he restores us to the same friendship, which we
had before, with him; and does us the same favors, which he did us before;
and sometimes, they prove to be much greater, if the repentance deserve it.
And, whosoever has not yet begun this exercise, I beseech him, for the love
of our Lord, that he will no longer deprive himself, of so great a benefit.

There is nothing, to be feared here; but much, to be desired. For, though a
man should not proceed so far, as to strive to gain such perfection, as may
prepare, and, as it were, deserve those gusts, and regalo's, which God is
wont to give to such persons; yet the least, which he shall get, will be,
that he shall be going on, in the way to Heaven. And I know so much, of the
mercy of Almighty God, that I may conclude for certain enough, that no body
ever took him for a friend, whom he did not well requite, for his pains.
For, Mental Prayer, is no other thing, in my opinion, then a Treaty, about
making Friendship with Almighty God; and a frequent, and private Commerce,
hand to hand, with him; by whom, we know, we are beloved. And, as for you, if
you love him not yet, (for, to the end, that it may be a true love, and that
your friendship may last, the conditions must be reciprocal; and we know,
there can be no want on our Lord's behalf; and that our nature, is vicious,
sensual, and ungrateful; and so, we cannot, perhaps, obtain fully, at our
own hands, to love him so much, because he is not of the same condition, with
us) yet considering, how much it imports us to hold friendship with him, and
how much he loves us, we must pass on, and pass over this pain, of being
much in his company, who is of so different a condition, from ours.

O infinite goodness of my God! how true it is, that, me thinks, I see, both
thee, and my self, in this very manner? O thou, who art the very Regalo of
the Angels in Heaven! how feign would I even defeat, and dissolve my self
totally, in loving thee, when I see, and consider, these things? And how
certain a thing it is, that thou art on the suffering hand, in regard of such,
as will not suffer thee, to remain with them? O how good a friend, do thou
make thy self, to thy friend, O my Lord; and how do thou go enduring him,
and regaling him? And thou expectest, till he make himself grow to be of thy
condition, and inclination; and, in the mean time, thou endurest, and
permittest him to continue, to be a while, of his own; and thou take, O my
dear Lord, by way of good payment, those fitts of time, which he can be
content, to bestow upon thee; and upon a minute of true sorrow, and repentance,
thou forgettest all those sins, whereby he has offended thee. All this, have
I perceived clearly, in order to my self; and, for my part, I cannot see, O my
Creator, how the whole world, can forbear, to procure to draw near to thy
Divine Majesty; that so it may be able, to obtain this particular kind of
friendship with thee. Such as are wicked, and are not, hitherto, come to have
the like inclinations, and dispositions to thine, should yet come toward thee;
to the end, that so thou might make them good; and that they might endure
thee, to be with them, though it were but for some two hours, in the day; yea,
even though they would not, the while, stay in thy company, without a thousand
distractions, and tumblings, up, and down, in wordlie cares, and thoughts; as
I was wont to do. And, for recompense of this violence, which they use to make
against themselves, by continuing in so good company as thine, (for neither in
those very beginnings, no, nor even afterward also, for a while, can they
tell, how to do better) thou forcest, O Lord, the Devils of Hell, to forbear
a setting fiercely upon them; and permittest them, to have daily, less power,
then other, against them; yea, and thou put them into men's hands, that they
may overcome them. So that thou, O thou Life of all lives, do never kill any
one of those Creatures, who puts his confidence in thee; nor of them, who
desire thee, for a Friend; but thou sustainest both the life of their Bodies,
with increase of health; and thou also do impart it, to the Soul. For my
part, I cannot possibly understand, why men should fear, as they do, to
begin to use Mental Prayer; nor of what it is, in fine, that they are
afraid. The Devil, indeed, does not ill, in order to his own wicked ends, to
procure to do me hurt, if, by pretense, and means, of I know not what fears,
he can procure, to make me forbear a considering, how much, and how highly, I
have offended Almighty God; and how much, I am obliged to him, for his great
mercies, and benefits; and to think upon this truth, that there is such a
thing, as glory in Heaven; and torments, in Hell; and upon those great
afflictions, and sorrows, which our Lord endured for me, in this life. For,
this was still my Prayer, when I was continuing in all those dangers; and upon
this, did I think, whenever I was able. And, very often, yea and for some
years together, I was busier, about desiring, that the Hour might come
quickly to an end, still listening when the Clock would strike; then upon better
things. Yea, and it happened to me, many times, that I knew not, what Penance
could be set before me, so very great, as that I would not more willingly
undergo it, then recollect my self to Mental Prayer. And it is certain, that
either the Devil, did set upon me, with such an vn-resistable force; or else,
mine own wicked custom did it, that I might not go make Mental Prayer; and
the sadness of my heart, was such, even when I entered into my Oratorie, for
that purpose, that I was feign to help, and serve my self, of all the
strength, and courage I had, (which, they say, is not very little; and it has
been seen, that God has given me more, then is usually possessed, by women,
but that I have employed it ill) to force my self, to make my Prayer; and, in
fine, it pleased our Lord, to assist me. But afterward, when I had used these
violences to my heart, I found my self with more quiet, and delight; so that,
sometimes, I grew to have an express desire, to pray.

Now, therefore, since it chanced, that our Lord did suffer, and endure so
wicked a Creature, as my self; and if it appear plainly, that all my miseries
were redressed, by this means; what person, how wicked soever he may be,
can find any thing, to be afraid of, here? For, how wicked soever, any other
body may have been, he will never be so yet, after the enjoying of so great
Favors, from our B. Lord, as I had received. And, who can ever come to
dis-confide in his Divine Majesty, who had patience with me, so long, upon
this only reason, Because I desired, and procured some means, for time, and
place, wherein he might be with me? And even this little thing, I did often,
without any inclination of mine own, but only by the great violence, which
either I offered to my self, or else was offered to me, by our Lord.

Since Note this good Conclusion upon the Praemises.
therefore, the use of Mental Prayer is so fit; yea and so very necessary,
even for such, as serve not God, but offend him; and since no body can truly
find any such hurt, which it can possibly do, as would not be much greater
without Prayer; at least, how can such forbear it, as serve Almighty God, and
desire to serve him? Most certainly, unless a man have a mind, to pass
through the troubles, and miseries of this life, with an addition of more
misery, and to shut up the very gate against God himself, for fear, least he
should give him comfort, by this means, I cannot possibly understand this
proceeding of his. I have, really, great compassion, and sorrow, for those
poor Souls, who will needs serve Almighty God, upon their own cost; for, as
for them, who use Mental Prayer, our Lord himself bears their charges; since,
for the little pains they take, he gives them so much gust, that so, they may
the better be able, to endure the taking of that pains in his company. Of
these gusts, which our Lord is pleased to give to such, as persevere in the
exercise of Mental Prayer, there shall be more discourse hereafter; and I will
not make it here. Only this, I will be bold to say, that, of all those so great
favors, which it ever pleased our Lord to do me, the very Gate, was Prayer;
and if that come once to be shut, I know not, how God shall do us favors. For
though he should have a mind, to enter into a Soul, to regale both it, and
himself in it, there is no means, by which to do it; since he must have it
all to himself; and it must be clean, and pure; and it must also have a great
desire, to receive favors. And if our selves, on the other side, bring many
impediments, and take no course to remove them, how shall we ever think, he
can come to us; and how can we conceive, that he will help us?

Now, to the end that his mercy may be seen, and the great benefit, which it
was for me, not to have given over, my Praying, and Reading, I will here
declare (since the understanding of it, imports so much) what battery, the
Devil raises against a Soul, to gain it; and what diligences, and, as it
were, art and mercy, is used by B. Lord, for procuring to reduce it, to
himself; that so, others may preserve themselves, from those dangers, from
which I kept not my self. And, above all things, I humbly desire men, for that
great love, wherewith our Lord goes endeavoring to win us back again to
himself, that they will keep themselves carefully, out of the Note this, very
well; for nothing imports more, the^ this.
occasions of Sin; for, when once we are engaged therein, there is no trust,
or confidence to be had, where we are encountered, and assaulted, by so many
enemies, whilst we, the while, are subject to such weakness, which disables us,
to make any defense. I would feign be able here, to make a draught, and
description, of that captivity, wherein my Soul was, at those times; for I
well understood my self to be in captivity; and yet I could not tell very
well, to what I whas a Slave; nor could I entirely believe, that that which my
Confessors thought fit to aggrauate no more, was so very ill, as yet, I was
apt to find it. A certain person told me, when I went to him once, with a
scruple, that, A great and gross error.
although I were in state of using high Contemplation, yet such occasions, and
conuersations, were of no inconvenience to me. This happened to me, toward the
latter end, when I, by the favor of God, went separating my self, more and
more, from great dangers; but yet, I did not wholy avoid occasions. But now,
when they observed my good desires, and my exercise of Mental Prayer, they
thought, I did great matters; but as for me, my Soul understood well enough,
that it was not so much, as to perform, what I was obliged, for one, to
whom I owed so much. I have now, both pity, and grief, to consider, how
much my Soul suffered at that time; and the little help, it got from any,
but Almighty God; besides the great facilities, and ouuertures, which they
made for me, toward certain pastimes, and contentments, by making me believe,
that they were lavvfull.

But now, the torment also, which I had, by hearing Sermons, was not little;
for I had a great affection, to hear them; in such sort, that, if I savv any
man preach with spirit, and very well, I carried a most particular affection to
him; and that without any endeavor of mine; nor do I know, how I came to
have it. Me thought, no Sermon seemed so ill to me, which I could not gladly
hear; though others would be of opinion, that he preached not well; but then,
if the Sermon were good, it gave me a very particular satisfaction. To speak
of God, or hear him spoken of, did, in effect, never weary me; I mean, after
I had once begun to use Mental Prayer. Yet, on the one side, I was much
comforted, with hearing Sermons; but, on the other side, they tormented me,
because I understood thereby, that I was not, by many degrees, any such
Creature, as I ought to have been. I humbly begged of our B. Lord, that he
would help me; but I believe (by what I can now conjecture) that I was wanting,
in the point of placing all my confidence, in his Divine Majesty, and A point
of very great importance.
totally disconfiding in my self. I sought for remedy; and I used many
diligences; but I understood not, that all is good for nothing, unless first we
stripp our selves entirely, of all confidence in our selves, and lodge it all,
upon Almighty God. I desired, to live a true life; for then I understood well
enough, that, indeed, I did not live, but that I fought, with the very shadow
of death. But there was no body, who would give me life; and as for me, I was
not able to take it; and he, who was only able to give it, had no reason, to
bring me succor; since he, having drawn me to himself so very often, I had
yet forsaken him.

THE NINTH CHAPTER.
She declares, by what means our Lord began to awake her Soul, and give
her light, in so great darkness; and to strengthen also her Virtues, that so she
might offend him, no more.

But now, my Soul was already grown, to be very weary; and yet, the ill
habits, which I had made, and the ill customs, which I had used, would not
permit her, to be unwearied, and take rest. It happened to me one day, upon my
going into the Oratorie, that I saw a Picture, which had been brought in,
thither, to be kept; for they had borrowed it, to serve, for a certain
Festiuitie, which was to be celebrated in the House, about that time. The
Picture was of Christ our Lord, full of vvounds, and soars; and it was so
devoutly made, that, when I looked upon it, it moved me much; for it
represented very well, what he had endured for us. And the sense of the
little gratitude to our Lord, which I had conceived, and expressed, for those
vvounds of his, was such, that me thought, my very heart, did even splitt. And
I cast my self earnestly down, near the Picture, with a great shower of
tears, beseeching our Lord humbly, and earnestly, that he would strengthen me
so far, once for all; as that, at length, I might offend him no more.

I was besides, very much devoted, to the glorious S. Marie Magdalen; and I
thought much, and often, of her Conversion; and especially, whensoever I
received the B. Sacrament. For, knowing, at that time, that our Lord was most
certainly in my very bosom, I placed my self at his feet, as conceauing, that
my tears would not be despised by him. I know not very well, what I said;
but yet I know, that he, who was pleased, that I should shed those tears,
did show me favor enough, for his part; since I forgot the sense, and
tenderness thereof, so soon. And I recommended my self, to that glorious Saint,
that she might help me, to obtain pardon of my Sins. But I conceive, that I
profited the more, in that last time, when I prayed before the Picture;
because then, Note.
I was grown into very great distrust of my self; and placed all my
confidence, in Almighty God. To my thinking, I told him then, that I would
This was the beginning, of many great blessings.
never rise from thence, till he granted me, the humble Suite, which I had
made; and I am fully of opinion, that it did me good; for, I have gone
improuing much, ever since that time.

Now I continued to hold this manner of Prayer; because, not being able to
discourse with my Understanding, I procured to represent Christ our Lord, to my
mind, as being then, within my very self; and Ieuer also found it, to prove
better with me, in my opinion, when I conceived my self, to find him all alone.
For, he being alone, and I being so much afflicted, me thought, he was to
admit me, yea, and to assist me too, as a person, who was in necessity, and
misery. Of this kind of Simplicities, I had many; and in particular, I used
to find my self very well, in the Prayer of the Garden; yea, and I was in my
kingdom, when I might acco^panie him there. I thought also much, upon that
Sweat, together with the great affliction, which he sustained then; and I
wished, that I might have been permitted, to wipe that most painful Sweat,
from his face; but I remember, how, in fine, I never durst resolve, to presume
to do it; so grievously, did my Sins represent themselves to me. Howsoever,
I remained there, by him, as long as my thoughts would give me leave; but, the
truth is, I had store of such, as tormented me. Most nights, during many
years, before I went to rest, and when I was recommending my self to God, ere
I slept, I ever thought a little, upon this passage, of his Prayer in the
Garden; and that, even before I was a Religious woeman; for, they told me, that
I might gain many Indulgences by it; and, at least, I am of opinion, that my
Soul got much, by this means; because thus, I began to make Mental Prayer,
even without expressly knowing, what it was; and then, it was as usual for me,
not to omit this custom, as not to fail of blessing my self, with the Sign
of the Cross, before sleep.

But, to return to what I was saying, of the torment, which my thoughts were
wont to give me. This manner of proceeding, without discourse of the
Understanding, has this in it, That the Soul must both gain much, and loose
much; I mean, all consideration, and discourse is lost; for, as for profiting,
they profit much, who use it, since all such Prayer, is Love. But, to ariue to
this point, and pitch, it will cost every body, a great deal of pains,
except such, as our Lord vouchsafes to conduct, in a short time, to Quiet
Prayer; of which kind, I know some; and for them, who go by this way, it will
be good to have some Book, or other, at hand, that so they may recollect
themselves quickly. As for me, it did me also good, to look upon Fields, or
Flowers, or Water; for, in these things, did I find the memory of our
Creator, as I also did, in mine own ingratitude, and Sins; all which
particulars, were wont to awake me, and recollect me, and to serve me, in stead
of a Book; for, as for Heaven, and such high things as that, my Understanding
was so dull, that I could never (I say, never) be able to have, or frame any
imagination, or fancy, concerning them, till our Lord represented them to me,
by other means. And I had so very little ability, to represent things to my
mind, by way of the vnderstanding-part, that my Imagination served me not, to
work upon any thing, but only what I saw with mine eyes; which yet others are
able enough to do, who know, how to form certain representations of things
to themselves, upon which they can recollect their thoughts.

For my part, I could only think upon Christ our Lord, as man; but yet it is
very true, that how much soever I read of his Beauty, or saw his Pictures, yet
could I never represent him, to my self, but just so, as one, who were either
in the dark, or else stark blind, might be able, at that very time, to
represent any other person to himself. For, though such an one, may speak
with such another, and know, that he is with that person, because he is sure,
that the said person is there; yet, in fine, he does but understand, and
believe him, to be there, for he sees him not; and in this sort, did it happen
to me, when I thought of our Lord.

Upon this reason, was I so great a friend, and favorer of the use of Images,
or holy Pictures. Miserable Creatures are they, who loose this benefit,
through their own fault. And it appears also well enough, that they do not
love our Lord; for if they loved him, they would be glad, to see his Picture;
as here it gives us contentment, so see the pictures of those persons, whom we
love.

About this time, they gave me the Confessions of S. Augustine; and, it seems,
our Lord did so ordain it; for, neither did I procure them, nor had I ever
seen them. I bare a very great affection, to this Saint, because the
Monastery, where I lived, before I grew to be Religious, was of his Order; and
besides, in regard, that he had been a Sinner; for I always found particular
comfort in those Saints, who, after having been Sinners, were converted to our
Lord; as conceauing, that I should have help, by their means; and that our
Lord might also be induced to forgive me, as he had done them. Save only, that
I was discomforted by this consideration, (as I have said before) that our Lord
called them but once, and they returned not, to fall from him, any more; but,
as for me, I had fallen so often, that it afflicted me, to the very heart. But
yet still, when I considered the love he bore me, I grew to be encouraged
again; for I never distrusted his mercy, though I doubted of my self, very
often.

O my dear Lord! how mightily does that obstinate stiffnes amaze me, to which
my Soul must needs have been subject, whilst it received so many helps, at
thy hand; and all in vain? And it strikes me with much fear, to consider, how
little I was able to win upon my self, all that while; and, how I remained
still bound up, from resolving to give my self, wholy to thee. But, when once
I began to read the said Confessions, me thought, that Case, which had been
his, was also now, directly mine own; and I recommended my self much, to that
glorious Saint. But, when I came, afterward, to his Conversion, and read,
how he heard that Voice in the Garden, it was, to my thinking, as if our Lord
had made it to be uttered for me; so quick was that sense, which I had
thereof, in my heart; and I was, for a very great while, even dissolved, as it
were, in tears, and felt a great affliction, and vexation. O my dear Lord;
hovvmuch does a Soul grow to suffer, and what torments does it endure, for
the loosing of her liberty, whilst yet she was created, and ordained, to be
the Lady of her self, and to command? For my part, I am in a wonder, how I
could be able to endure so great torments. But blessed be Almighty God, who
gave me life, till I might get out of that so deadly a death. And now, me
thought, my Soul was obtaining great strength, at the hands of that Divine
Majesty; and that now, he might grow to be pleased, to hear my. Outcryes, and
have compassion of my so many tears.

Upon this, my affection to spend more time with him, began to increase; and
to take my self also, out of the way of ill occasions; for, when they once were
gone, I began, to love his Divine Majesty again. At least, I thought, I might
conclude my self then, to love him; but the truth is, that I understood not, as
I ought to have understood, in what, the true love of God, did consist; and (to
the best that I am able to judge) I did even scarce make an end, of disposing
my self finally, to resolve to serve him, when his Divine Majesty began
already, to vouchsafe me new Regalos, and Favors. And it seems, that, what
others must be glad to endeavor to get, with much labor, our Lord was feign
to find means, to make me content to accept; which was, in these latter
years, to delight, and regale me, in great measure. I never presumed to
desire, that he would give me even so much, as any tenderness of devotion; but
I only begd so great mercy, as might win him to allow me pardon, for my
sins already committed; and so much grace, as that I might committ no more.
But, I seeing, how great they were, durst never advisedly desire any regalo's,
or spiritual delights at his hands; for, me thought, he showed me pity
enough, (and it was really, a very eminent mercy) to consent, that I should
ariue to be in his presence; considering how well I knew, that, if himself had
not procured it, I should never have come. Only once, in my whole life, I
remember, that, whilst I was in great drynes of Devotion, I desired him, to
give me some little spiritual gust; but as soon, as I reflected, upon what I
had done, I remained so full of confusion by it, that the only vexation I
had, to see my self, with so little humility, did give me that very
advantage, which I had presumed to beg.

I was not ignorant, that it might be, no way, an unlawful thing, to desire
it; but I conceived that this was true, for them, who were well disposed to
receive it, by their having procured true devotion, with all their power;
which consists, in not offending Almighty God, and in being inclined, and
resolved, to do all that, which was good. And me thought those tears of
mine, were but faint, and feminine tears, and without any force, or
strength; since I obtained not that, by them, which I desired; though yet, upon
the whole matter, I also believe, that they were useful to me, as I have said.
For, in particular, after those two several times, of that so great
compunction, and travail of heart, which I had, I began to give my self more,
to Prayer, and to interest my self less, in such things, as might do me hurt;
though yet I did not utterly give them over; but God (as I was saying) went
helping me, to withdraw my self, out of those dangers. For, his Divine Majesty
did but expect some preparation, or disposition in me, that so, his Spiritual
Favors might grow on, in such sort, as I shall relate; our Lord being not
accustomed to grant them, but to such, as maintain their Consciences in more
purity, then mine had formerly possessed.

THE TENTH CHAPTER.
She begins to declare the Favors, which our Lord did her in Prayer; and
speaks of that, wherein we may be able to help our selves; And how much it
also imports us, to understand the said Favors, which our Lord is pleased to
do us. She humbly desires of him, to whom she sends this account of herself,
that, whatsoever she shall declare from hence forvvard, may remain in secret
with him, since he had commanded her to set down, in so particular a manner,
the Favors, which our Lord was pleased to do her.

I Enjoyed sometimes (as I said) some beginnings, of that, which I shall now
declare; though it used to pass away, very quickly. It fell out, in this
representation, whereof I spoke, when I placed my self, near Christ our Lord;
yea, and sometimes also, when I would be reading; that there would come
suddenly upon me, and without either expectation, or any immediate
preparation, on my part, such an evident feeling of the Her entrance into the
receaueing Supernatural Favors.
presence of Almighty God, as that I could, by no means, doubt, but that
either he was within me, or else I, all ingulfed in him. This was not in the
manner of a Vision, but I think they call it Mystical Theology; and it
suspends the Soul in such sort, that she seems to be wholly out of her self.
The Will, is in act of loving; the Memory seems to me, to be, in a manner,
lost; the Understanding, in my opinion, It works not indeed, by way of using
Discourse, or making Inferences; but yet it works, by way of Conte^plation,
and Admiration of the Infinite Object, being God, who is set before it.
discourses not; and although, it be not lost; yet it works not in that kind,
as I was saying, but remains, as it were, amazed, to consider, how much it
understands; though yet it pleases God, that it understand it self also, not to
understand fully, any part of that, which his Divine Majesty represents to
it. Before this time, I had been used, to find a very constant, and continual
tenderness, or sweetness, which, I think, may, in some part, be procured; and it
is a regalo, which is neither wholly sensual, nor wholly spiritual; but it is
wholly the gift, and blessing of Almighty God; and it seems, that we may
greatly help, toward the obtaining this, for our selves, by considering our
own baseness, and the ingratitude, which we use, toward Almighty God; how
much he did for us; his Passion, and grievous Torments; his whole Life, which
was so full, of affliction; to delight our selves, in considering his Works,
and his Greatness; and how much he loves us; and many other such things, as
these; upon which, whosoever shall have care to profit, will be able to fall
many times; though yet, he have just then, no particular design that way. And
if, together with these reflections, the party fall out, to be possessed, and
seized with any love of Almighty God, the Soul will be all regaled; the heart
will be full of tenderness, and relenting; and tears will also abound; which
sometimes we shall seem to have gotten, as it were, by force; and, at other
times, our Lord will seem to have brought them so upon us, as that we were not
able, to resist them.

Now it seems, that his Divine Majesty is pleased to pay us here, for the
little poor care, we took to serve him, with so high a gift, as that comfort
is, which he bestows upon a Soul, who sees her self able to lament, and weep,
for having offended so great a Lord. And I wonder not a whitt, at this; for, me
thinks, she has reason enough, and to spare, for receiving joy, and comfort,
upon this occasion. There, does the Soul rejoice, and there, does she regale
her self. I like that Comparison well, which offers it self to me now, That
these joys of Prayer, should be somewhat like those others, which are in
Heaven. For, as they see no more there, then God is pleased that they shall
see, according to their deserts; and they acknowledging, how small those
deserts are, every one of them, is highly well content, with the place,
wherein he is; though yet, there be an excessive difference, betwee^ the joys
of some, and of others, in Heaven; yea much more, then there is between some
spiritual joys, and others, here on earth; which yet is very great. And
really, a Soul, when God does her this Favor, at first, is very apt to
think, that there remains no more then, to be desired; and she esteems her
self then, to be abundantly satisfied, for all the service, which ever she was
able to pay Almighty God; and I find, that she has, at least, reason enough,
to think so. For, even one of those single tears (which yet we may, after a
sort, procure, in some part, even of our selves; though still, without the
assistance, and favor of God, we can do absolutely nothing at all) cannot be
paid for, and purchased, in my opinion, with all the labors, and troubles of
the world. For, a Soul gains much by them; and indeed, what greater gain can
possibly, any Creature acquire, then to have some kind of testimony, that
she is pleasing to Almighty God.

So that, let whosoever shall arrive to this Note.
point, praise God very much, and acknowledge himself, to be mightily in his
Debt; for, already there is good appearance, that his Divine Majesty designs
such a person, for his service, in his own House; and has chosen him, for his
Kingdom, without inte^tion, that he shall turn his back from him, any more.
And, let us not care for certain odd Humilities, which be in the world,
whereof I intend to treat. For, some will needs esteem it to be Humility, A
great and foolish error.
not to understand those Gifts, which our Lord is bestowing upon them. But, as
for us, let us well, and very well know, how the Case stands with us; Namely,
that Almighty God bestows them upon us, without any merit at all, of ours;
and let us be thankful to his Divine Majesty, for them. For, if we know not,
what favor we receive, we shall not stir our selves up, to love him for
them, as we ought. For it is a most certain truth, that the better we find,
that we are rich (knowing first, that of our selves we are poor) we grow to
profit so much the more; yea and even our very Humility, will prove to be more
entire, and sincere. That other course, serves but to accowardize the mind,
and to make it hold it self incapable, of receiving great benefits, if our
Lord, beginning once to bestow them, it shall also begin, to fright it self,
by a fear of Vainglory. But let us rather believe, that he, who does us so
great Favors, will give us also grace, that, if the Devil tempt us, upon these
occasions, we shall have knowledge, how to understand him, and strength from
God, how to resist him; I mean, if we go on, with plainenes, and sincerity,
as in the sight of Almighty God, pretending ever, to content him only, without
respect to men. For, it is a very evident, and certain truth, that we love a
person the better, when we remember very freshly, what benefits we have
received at his hands. And, if it be both lawful, and meritorious, for us to
be ever keeping in memory, that we have our very Being from Almighty God;
and that he created us of nothing; and that he vpholds us still; together with
all those other benefits, of his Passion, and Death, which he endured for
every one of us, who are now alive, long before we were borne; why should it
not be also lawful for me, who was wont to treat of nothing, but vanities, to
understand, and see, and consider these things, often; especially when now our
Lord allows me so great a blessing, as that I would not willingly, even so
much as speak of any thing, but of him. And now, behold here a rich Jewel,
which (remembering, that it is bestowed upon us, and that already we are in
possession thereof) inuites, and even obliges us, to love our Blessed Lord; And
this, in fine, is the total good of that Prayer, which is grounded upon
Humility.

But what will then occurr, when they shall find, that other more precious
Jewels are come into their power, and possession, which our Lord imparts to
some of his servants; as namely, a profund contempt, both of the whole world,
yea and of themselves? It is clear, that, in this case, we must hold our
selves, for deeper debtours, and more obliged, to serve him; and to understand,
that, of our selves, we had no part of this Treasure, at all; and to know the
great bounty of our Blessed Lord, who, to a Soul so wicked, and so absolutely
without all merit, as mine, (for which, the first of those Jewels aforesaid,
was not only sufficient, but, by much, too great) would yet needs load me
still, with greater treasures, then I could even tell, how to desire. We must,
in such cases, as these, procure to get new strength wherewith to serve him;
and by no means to be ungrateful; for, our Lord gives them ever, upon this
condition, that, if we use not well, that treasure, and high place, wherein he
puts us, he will stripp us of them again; and, as for our parts, we shall come
to be more poor, then ever we were, and so his Divine Majesty will dispense
his Treasures, to such others, as he shall think fit; and who may benefit,
both themselves, and others, by the good use thereof.

But now, how shall that man improve his own Stock, and spend thereof, with
latitude of heart, upon others, whilst yet he is not come so far, as to know,
that himself is rich* It is, in my opinion, an impossible kind of thing
(considering the grounds of Humane Nature) for one to do great, and goodly
things, if he understand not himself, to be favored, by Almighty God; for, we
are so miserable Creatures, and so inclined to delight in things of this world,
that we can hardly abhor, effectually, all that, which here we enjoy (and
especially, to do it, with great liberty of Spirit) if we understand not out
selves, to have some kind of taste, or pawn, concerning Heavenly things; for,
by means of such blessings, as these, does our Lord impart that Fortitude to
us, which we lost by our Sins. And he should but unluckily desire, and exhort
a man, to despise, and abhor the world; and encourage him to acquire, all
those great virtues, which Christians of high perfection, use to possess; if
he were not vpheld therein, by a Lively Faith, and by his having also felt
some assurance, of the love, which our Lord, was pleased to bear him. For
naturally, we are so very dead, that we look not after any thing, but that,
which we see, at the present; and so, these very Favors, are the things,
which awake, and strengthen our Faith. I say not, but that it may very well be,
that I, being so very wicked, am apt, to judge of others, by my self; and that
those others may need no more, then the very light, and truth of Faith, for
the making their works very perfect; but I (as very miserable) have bee^ in
need, of all possible helps. Others may well say what they please, but I
relate, what has occurred to me; as they, who have power over me, command; and
if he, to whom I send it, do not like it, he may tear it; as knowing better
then I, what is unfit; Whom I humbly beseech, even for the love of our
Blessed Lord, that, whatsoever I have said hitherto, concerning my wicked Life,
and my Sins, he will publish it; and from this instant, I give leave, both to
him, and all them, who have been my Ghostly Fathers (of which number he is, to
whom this goes addressed) that they do it even now, whilst I am living; to
the end, that even now. I may deceive the world, no longer; which else,
perhaps, may think, that there is some good thing in me; and really, and very
really, I speak truth, to the best, that I can now understand of my self,
that he shall give me great comfort, if he will do it.

But as for that, which shall follovv hereafter, in this Discourse, I allow
him no such liberty, at all; nor will I, by any means, give way, that if
they chance to show the thing to any Creature, they declare, who that person
is, with whom it passed; nor, who vvrote it; and for this reason, have I
forborne, to name, either my self, or any other, who has interuened to the
Story. But I have done the best I could, to write it so, as that I may not be
known; and I desire, for the love of our Lord, that it may ever remain, as a
Secret. For it will suffice, that there are so learned, and grave persons, as
may authorize any thing, which is good, if our Lord will give me grace, to
relate it; and if there be, it must be his, and not mine; for they only, who
command me to write it, know, that I write it; and at the present, they are
not here; and I write it also, as it were, by stealth, and with want of
time, and with some trouble, because I am kept from spinning; and I live in a
poor House, and have business enough; and, if our Lord gave me more ability,
and memory, (of both which, I have very little) I might yet, by means
thereof, serve my self, of what I had heard, or read. So that, if I say any
thing, which is good, our Lord will serve himself of it, for some good end;
but whatsoever is ill said, will be mine own; and that, your Reverence may
blot out. And, both for the one, and for the other, there will be no reason at
all, to declare my name. During any bodies life, it is clear, that the good
he does, is not to be related; and after death, it will also serve for
nothing, in this case; but only to make it loose all authority, and credit,
for having been recounted, by a person, so base, and so wicked, as my self,
And, because I hope you will do that, which I say, (and I humbly beg it of
you, even for the love of our Lord; and of those others also, who are to see
it) I write, as you see, with all liberty, and clearnes; for otherwise, I
should have great scruple to do it, but only, for the mere declaration of my
Sins; and in that, I have none at all. As for other things, it is enough,
that I am a woema^, to make my wings fall down, flatt by my sides; and how
much more then, since I am not only a weoman, but a wicked woeman?

And therefore, whatsoever your Reverence shall find here, beyond the bare
relation of the course of my Life, you must take, to be only, for your self;
since you would needs importune me so far, as to make you some declaration of
the Favors, which our Lord had been pleased to do me, in Prayer; supposing
ever, that you hold them to be in conformity, with the Truths of our Holy
Catholic Faith; for, if not, you are instantly to burn it; and to this
Direction, I will stand. So that I will declare, what passed with me, in this
kind; to the end, that if it shall prove conform to Catholic truth, it may
be of some service to you; and if not, that you may be the better able, to
vndeceaue my Soul; and so, the Devil may get nothing by that, whereby I took
my self, to gain. For, our Lord knows, that I ever have procured, to meet
with persons, who might give me light, as I shall show afterward.

But, how clearly soever I shall strive to declare these things, concerning
Prayer, it will fall out to be obscure enough, for such as have no experience
therein. I will touch also, upon some impediments, which (according to my way
of understanding) use to oppose themselves against such persons, as are walking
on, in this way; and I will also point at some others, in which there may be
some danger, according to what our Lord has taught me, by experience. And I
have since, treated with great learned men, and persons, who had given
themselves to Spirit, many years; and they see, that his Divine Majesty has
vouchsafed me, in seven and twenty years, wherein I have used Me^tall
Prayer, (though I have walked on, so ill, and with so many stumbling blocks,
in the way) that experience, which he has not allowed to others, in seven and
thirty, yea and in seven and forty years; whilst yet, they had spent their
lives in Penance, and ever, in a course of Virtue.

Let him be Blessed for all; and I be seech his Divine Majesty even by what he
is himself, that he will vouchsafe to be served by me. For, my dear Lord
knows very well, that I pretend no other thing by this, but only, that he may
be a little the more exalted, and praised; when you see, that he would needs
plant a Garden, of so sweet Flowers, upon, and in a Dunghill, so foul, and
filthy, and of so very ill favor, as I am. I humbly beseech his Divine
Majesty, that I return not, through my fault, to pluck them all, up, by the
roots, and so become again, what I was before. And this, do I entreat your
Reverence, that you will beg of our B. Lord, for me; since you know, with more
clearnes, what I am, then here you have given me leave to express.

THE ELEAVENTH CHAPTER.
She declares, in what the fault consists, of not obtaining to love God with
perfection, in short time. She begins to deliver it, by a Comparison, which
contains Four degrees of Prayer. And she treats here of the First, which is
very profitable for beginners; and for them also, who have no sensible
delight, or gust, in Prayer.

NOw, to speak of them, who begin to be Servants of our Blessed Lord, for
Love, (and to me it seems, to be nothing else, to resolve to follow him, by
this way of Prayer, who loved us so much) I find it to be a thing of so great
dignity, that I regale my self, after a strange manner, even by the very
thought thereof. For, servile fear will instantly fly away, if we carry
ourselves, as we ought, in this first degree of Prayer. O thou Lord of my
Soul, and my eternal Good! how comes it to pass, that, when a Soul resolves
to love thee, and to do the uttermost she can, to leave all this world, that
so she may the better employ her self upon this love of thee, thou art not
pleased, that she should instantly enjoy the getting up, to possess this
perfect love? But I have said ill; for I ought indeed, to have said, that I
complain against our selves; because it is we, who will not possess it,
since all the fault is ours, for not instantly obtaining this true love of God
with perfection, which carries all kinds of blessings in company thereof. For,
the matter is, that we set so high a price, upon our selves, and we are
withal, so slow, in giving our hearts Behold here the true and great impediment.
totally to God, that, as his Divine Majesty, on the one side, will not
permit, that we should enjoy so precious a thing, without paying well for it:
so, on the other, we never make an end, of disposing our selves therein, as we
ought. I am able to see well enough, that there is nothing at all, in this
world, with which, so great a treasure can be bought; but yet, if we did
indeed, what we could, by not fastening our selves, to any thing of this world,
but that all our cares, and considerations, were sent-vp to Heaven, I am
confident, that this blessing would be imparted to us, with very great speed,
if speedily, and entirely (as I was saying) we disposed our selves, to the
receiving thereof, as some Saints have done. But the misery is, that we
think, we give God all; and the truth is, that we offer his Divine Majesty,
but the yearlie Rents, or Revenues, and Fruits, our selves remaining still,
with the roots, and possession of the Land. We resolve, to make our selves
poor, for God's sake, and it is a point of great merit, to do so; but yet, we
return many times, to take care, and to use diligences enough, that nothing may
be wanting to us; I say not, of that, which is necessary, but sometimes also,
even of that, which is superfluous; and to be procuring, also, to make friends,
who may help us to it, and so put us still, into more care, yea, and perhaps,
into more danger too, (that so we may grow to want nothing) then even we had
before, when we were the possessours of our own estates.

It seems also, that, when we came to be Religious, or as soon as we began
to lead a Spiritual: life, and to aspire toward perfection, we gaue-ouer, to
care for the honor of this world; and yet, as soon as ever any Creature
beginns but to touch us, in that kind, we forget, that we had already, given it
away, to Almighty God; and we resolve sometimes, to snatch it again, out of
his hands, and run away with it, even after we seemed to have voluntarily
made him, the entire Lord thereof. And just thus, does it also happen sometimes,
in other things. Now, this indeed is a very delicate, fine, foolish, ridiculous
way of seeking the love of Almighty God, when, together with this pretense,
we will (as a man may say) have our hands still full of the same imperfect
inclinations, and affections, which we had before; since we do not procure
indeed, to effect our own former good desires; and still we endeavor not, at
length, to raise them wholy up, from the earth; and yet we will needs
expect, the while, to enjoy many Spiritual comforts, and delights. But this,
seems not to be of a Suite; nor does the one Stuff, sit well, with the
other; and therefore, because we will not once resolve, to give our selves
totally up, to Almighty God, we come not totally, to enjoy this Treasure. And
I pray God, it may please his Divine Majesty, to vouchsafe to grant it to us,
though it should be, but by drop, and drop; and though it should grow to cost
us, all the labors, and troubles of the whole world.

A very great deal of mercy does our Blessed Lord show to that person, to
whom he gives the firm purpose, and grace, to resolve upon procuring this
blessing, with all his power; for certainly, if such an one shall persevere,
Almighty God will deny himself to no Creature, but will, by little and
little, go enabling that Soul, in such sort, as that, at length, it shall
find it self to be victorious. But I said, that the Party must have courage;
because the Devil does ordinarily, in the beginnings, dispose himself, to
represent, yea and frame, very great difficulties; to the end, that so we may
not hold-on this way, in good earnest; as one, who knows very well, what
prejudice is like to grow to him by it; not only, through his loosing the
Soul of that Party, but of many others also; if he, who beginns to serve
God, endeavor once, by his favor, to ariue to the perfection thereof. For, I
believe, that such an one will never go alone, to Heaven, but will carry very
many with him; and that, like a good Captain, he shall find, that God will
give him a fair Company. So that, since the Devil will be sure, to lay such
dangers, and difficulties, in his way, there will be need of very great
courage, and resolution, to keep one from running away; yea and also, there
will be need of much, and much, and very much favor, and mercy of Almighty
God, for this purpose.

Now therefore, to speak of the beginnings of such, as be already resolved, to
go in search, after so great a blessing, and to obtain, what they aspire to,
in the end, (for, as for that, whereof I was going once to speak, concerning
Mystical Theology (for so I think it is called) I will treat thereof
afterward) the great, and greatest trouble, consists ever, in these very
beginnings. For, those are they, which cost most, when a Soul comes, to give
our Lord the whole Stock. And, in the other degrees of Prayer, which follow,
the most part of that, which passes, is delighting, and enjoying; though yet
still, both the First, and the two Middle ones, and even the Last, have, all of
them, their several Crosses to carry, yet, in a different kind. But, in fine,
all they, who will follow Christ our Lord, must go by that very way, where he
went, unless they will have a mind to be lost. And happy are those troubles,
which be endured here, since even here, they are so superabundantly
recompensed, and paid.

I must now serve my self of some Comparison, which yet I would be glad, to
forbear, in regard, that I am a woeman; and would feign set that down, very
simply, and plainly, which they command me to say. But this language of Spirit,
is so very hard to be declared, by such, as are unlearned, like me, that I must
seek some particular way, how to do it. And it is likely, that I shall
seldom hitt tight, in making the Comparison serve; but, in that case, it may
pass for your recreation, to see, how very improper, and rude I am.

To my remembrance, I have either read, or heard this This Saint is admirable,
in all the Comparisons which the uses.
Comparison, which follows here; for, my memory is so very imperfect, that I
know not how, nor upon what occasion, I met with it, first; but it contents
me, at least, for the present, in order to what I have in hand. He, who
begins in the way of Prayer, must conceive that he is beginning to frame an
Orchard, or Garden, for the contentment, and delight of his Lord; though yet it
be in a very unfruitful Soil, and full of Weeds. His Divine Majesty now is
he, who must be pleased to plant good Herbs, and root the ill ones up. But
now we will make account, that this is done already, in our case, when a
Soul, not only resolves, to use Prayer, but has already, begun to use it.
And now, by the help of our Lord, we must procure, like careful Gardners, that
these good Herbs, which are planted, may grow; and we must take care, to water
them, that so, they may not wither, but may come to yield Flowers of so
excellent odor, as may serve to be of recreation to this Lord of ours; that
so, he may take pleasure, to come often, into this Garden of his, and delight
himself, amongst these virtues of our Souls.

Now let us see, in what sort, these Flowers may be watered, that so we may come
to understand, what we are to do, and what trouble it is likely to cost; and
whether the gain will prove to be more, then the labor; and how long it will
be likely to last. As for me, it occurrs to me, to think, that these Plants
may be watered, by four ways: Either, by drawing water, out of a Well, which
we cannot do without much labor; or by way of a This is a kind of Engine,
with certain little leather Buckets fastened to the sides of a very great
wheel, which dra was up, very much water, with great ease. In Spanish it
is called a Noria.
Wheel, with certain little Buekets, belonging to it, which is easily turned
about, by the hand; and my self have drawn some, thus, now and then; and I
find, that it brings up more water, with less trouble, then does that, of the
former way. Or else, by means of letting in, some little Brook, or River, into
the Garden; and, by this means, the Garden is watered much better, then by the
former; and the earth remains with more moisture; and there will not be need,
to water it so often; and the labor also of the Gardner, is much less. Or
else, in fine, when there falls a good Shower of Rain upon the Garden, for
then, the Lord himself waters it, without any labor at all, of ours; and this
is, without comparison, the very far best way, of all the four.

But now, for applying these four ways of vseing Water, whereby this Garden
of ours, is to be preserved (because a Garden without water, is to perish)
that, which, me thinks, is to our purpose, is, that we may, by this
Similitude, declare somewhat, of these four degrees of Prayer; into which, our
Lord, through his goodness, has sometimes brought my Soul. And I humbly
beseech him, of his mercy, that I may hitt right, upon what I am about to say;
in such sort, as that it may be of use, and profit, to one of those persons,
who commanded me to write thus much; and whom our Lord has drawn further on,
in four months, then I was able to get, in seauenteen years. But certainly,
he disposed himself better; and so, the Gardner has watered his Orchard,
without any trouble at all, to the Party, with all these four kinds of
Water; though the last of the four, have not yet, come to his turn, but by
drops. But, the business goes on, in such sort, that by the favor, and help of
our Lord, he will quickly ingulfe himself therein; and I shall be heartily glad,
if he laugh at me, in case he find the manner of my declaring this Point in
question, to have been impertinent.

Of them, who begin to hold Prayer, we may say, that those are the persons,
who draw water out of the Well, which uses to be very troublesome, as I have
said; for they are likely, to take much pains, about recollecting their
Senses; which having been used, to wander, and go scattered, up, and down, it
is wont to be of trouble enough. These men A good Lesson.
have therefore need, to go accustoming themselves, not to desire to see, or
hear impertinent things; and to observe their hours of Prayer; and to love to
be alone; and to consider the life, which they have lead; and to do it, hand
to hand, by themselves. And though all these, whether they be, either of the
First Degree, or of the Last, are to employ themselves upon these thoughts,
very often; yet there is to be of the more, and of the less, in these
cogitations; as I will show afterward. At first, they are wont, to be in some
pain, because they use not, to be fully enough satisfied, that they repent
themselves sufficiently of their Sins; and yet they fail not to do it,
since they resolve to serve Almighty God, in so very good earnest. They must
procure, to meditate much, upon the Life of Christ our Lord; though the
Understanding, will perhaps, be weary of this. But yet hitherto, we may be
able, to be of some help, to our selves; I mean, together with the favor of
our Lord; for, without this, the world knows well enough, that we are not
able, so much as to have a good thought.

Now, This is to begin, to draw Water out of a Well; and I pray God, there
fall out to be any; but at least, the fault is not ours, if there be none;
since we endeavor to draw it; and since we do, what we can, toward the
watring of these Flowers. And Almighty God, is so very good, that when (for
reasons, best known to his Divine Majesty, yea, and perhaps, even for our
own greater good) he will have this Well, to be dry, he is pleased (so that
still, we do our parts, like good Gardners) to sustain these Flowers, without
any Water at all; and to make our virtues grow. I mean here, by Water,
Tears; whereof there may, peradventure, be none; as also no tenderness, or
inward feeling of Devotion.

But, what shall he do now, who sees, that, for the space of a long time,
there is nothing but drynes, and disgust, and displeasure; and so little
devotion also, to go draw any more Water, out of the Well? For, certainly, if
he did not remember, that he does some kind of pleasure, and service, to the
Lord of the Garden, and did not take care, not to loose all the labor, which
he has already undergone, and the hope also of getting more, by so great
pains, as he takes, to cast the Bucket so often into the Well, and to bring it
back, without any water at all; without doubt, he would give over, outright.
And, many times, it shall also happen to him, upon this occasion, that he will
not so much as stir his hand; nor will he be able, so much as to continue in
one good thought; for, already, it is to be granted, that this way of working,
by the employment of the Understanding, is a striving, to draw Water out of a
Well.

But now, as I was saying, what is the Gardner to do in this case? I A
consideration of much comfort.
answer, that he is to rejoice, and to receive much comfort; and to esteem it,
for an incomparable Favor, that he may be suffered, to labor, and work in
the Garden, of so great an Emperor, as God is. And, since he knows, that he
gives contentment to his Divine Majesty thereby, (for, the gust, and service
of God, and not the Gardners own, is to be his maine, and final scope) let
him give God glory, and praise, who proceeds with him, and treats him, in so
confident a manner; since he gives him grace, to have so great care of doing
that, which he recommended to him, though he do not pay him yet, for his
pains. And let this Gardner still, help our Lord, to carry his Cross; and
remember, that the same Lord, lived, and lay upon the same Cross, all his
life. And let not this man desire, to enjoy his Kingdom here, in this World;
nor ever once giue-ouer his Prayer; but let him rather resolve, that, though
his drynes of sensible indeuotion, should last with him, as long, as his life,
yet he will never give occasion, that Christ our Lord should fall down, with
his Cross. For, at least, the time will certainly come, when he shall receive
all his wages, at one payment; and let him never fear, that his labor can
possibly be lost; for, he serves a very good Master, who stands looking
earnestly upon him. And let him make no account at all, of ill thoughts, but
consider, that the Devil did also vex S. Hierome with them, in the very
Wilderness. But those labors, have their price, and recompense, set out for
them; and I assure you, as a person, who have spent many years, in the
feeling thereof, that, when sometimes I came to draw, and get but some one
single drop of water, out of this blessed Well, I thought, that God did me a
great Favor.

I know well, that these troubles are very great; and I conceive, that there is
more need of courage, for supporting them, then for many other things, of this
world; but yet I have seen clearly, that God leaves them not, without great
reward, even in this life. For it is most certain, that, with one of these
hours of gust, of himself, which he has given me here, afterward I esteem
all those sad afflictions, to have been very well rewarded, which I sustained,
in all the former time, of my continuing the use of Prayer. As for me, I hold,
that our Lord will give these torments (together with many other temptations,
which occurr) many times, in the beginning; and at other times, toward the
end; to try, who are his true Lovers; and to know if they can drink of his
Chalice, and will help him, to bear his Cross, before he will depositate so
great treasures in them. And I conceive, that his Divine Majesty is resolved
to carry us on, by this way, to the end, that we may first understand well,
how little we are worth; for, the Favors, which sometimes he imparts
afterward, are of so great dignity, that he will, first, have us see our
misery, by experience, before he impart those great Favors, to us; least
otherwise, that should happen to us, which did to Lucifer.

But, what is it, O my Lord, which thou art doing? Were A hard question, most
clearly, and excellently ansvvered.
it not better, for the good of that Soul, which thou know, to be already
thine, and which puts it self into thy hands, to follow thee, whithersoeuer
thou will go, though it were even to the very death of the Cross; and to
resolve to help thee to carry it, and never to leave thee alone, under that
burden? No; for, whosoever finds this resolution in himself, has nothing
left for him, to fear. Spiritual persons have no reason at all, to be
afflicted, who are already placed, in so eminent condition, as it is, to treat
with God, hand to hand; and to forsake the idle pastimes of this world. The
greatest part of your business is dispatched already; and praise you his Divine
Majesty for the same, and confide very fully in his goodness; for he never yet
failed his friends. Shut-vp the eyes of your Mind, from considering, why he
gives sensible devotion to another, in so few days; and not to me, in so many
years. Let us believe, and know, that all this, is done by him, for our
greater good; and let his Divine Majesty conduct us, by what way he will; for
now, we are no longer our own, but his; and he does us Favor enough, in
permitting us, to digg in his Garden, and to suffer us to be so near the Lord
thereof. For it is certain, that he remains with us; and whether he be
pleased, that the Plants, and Flowers, of his Garden, may grow, or not grow,
either more or less, what is that to the purpose? Do thou dispose so, of
things, O Lord, as shall please thee best; and let me, only, not offend thee;
nor let my virtues be lost, if thou have given me any. I am resolved, O Lord,
to suffer, since thou would suffer; and thy Will, be accomplished in me, in
all kinds; and let not thy Divine Majesty be pleased, that a thing of so high
value, as thy Love, may ever be given to any such people, as will not serve
thee, but only for delights, and gusts.

It is here to be noted much, (and I speak it, because I know the truth of it,
by experience) that the Soul, which begins to walk in this way of Mental
Prayer, with firm purpose, and can bring her self once, to a final
resolution, neither to be comforted, nor discomforted greatly, because our Lord
does either give, or not give these spiritual gusts, or tenderness of devotion,
has already passed through a very great part of his way. And let him not once
think of turning back, how much soever he may faulter, or stu^ble; for, his
Building is laid, and grounded, upon a firm Foundation.

So that, the true Love of God, consists not, in having tears, or tenderness,
or Spiritual gusts, which we are wont, for the most part, to desire, and to
take comfort in; but to serve his Divine Majesty, with Mark well these
masculine, and massye words.
Justice, and Fortitude, and Humility. For, in that other course, me thinks,
we are rather on the taking hand, then on the giving, any thing of our own.
As for poor, weak, silly women, and who are of little courage, like me, me
thinks I could find it fit, that our Lord, should carry them on, with Regalo;
that so, they might be the better induced, to suffer those afflictions, which
it has pleased his Divine Majesty, that they should bear. But, for the true
Servants of God; men of Substance, and solid ways; men of Learning, and
Understanding, to make so much reflection, upon God's not giueing them
tenderness of Devotion, as, I see, they do, I confess, it gives me disgust,
even to hear it. I say not, but that they should receive these Spiritual
delights, when God gives them; yea, and that they should esteem them very much;
because, in that case, his Divine Majesty, will have seen, that they were
convenient for them; but only, that, when they have them not, they should not
vex themselves; and that they should also understand, that, when God gives them
not, they are not convenient for them; but that they ought to be, and remain
the Lords of themselves, in all things. Let them believe, that this is a
defect, and fault, in them; for I have seen, and tried it. Let them believe,
that this is an imperfection; and that it is not, to walk on, with Liberty of
Spirit, but rather like weak, and cowardly people, who dare not set upon
difficulties. And I say not this, so much for them, who are but beginners;
(though yet I press it so far, because it imports very much, that they
begin with this Liberty of Spirit, and resolution) but even for others also.
For, there are many, who have already begun, and yet, who never, in fine,
resolve upon doing heerin, home, what they ought; and I believe, that this
proceeds, in great part, from their not resolving to take up, and carry this
Cross, from the very beginning. For, such shall go on, still afflicted, as
conceauing, that all that, is nothing, which they do; because when the
Understanding giues-ouer to work, and act, they use not to be able to endure
it; and yet, perhaps, they will grow even fatt, and strong, at the very self
same time, though themselves understand it not, to be so.

We are to think, and know, that our Lord does not consider, and care for
these things; for, howsoever our selves may think, that they are faults, yet
they are not so, indeed; and his Divine Majesty knows our misery, and base
condition, much better, then our selves; and considers, that these Souls
desire to be thinking always, upon him; and that they desire, to love him. And
this is that firm purpose, which he values, and expects at our hands. But,
that other, is but an affliction, which we bring upon our selves; for it serves
but to disquiet the Soul, and to give occasion, that, if before, it were
unable, to take any benefit, by serving God, for one hour, it may now be so,
for four. And, many times (for I have very great experience of this case, and
know it to be true, because I have both considered it with care, and have also
treated about it, with Spiritual persons) this grows, even from our corporal
indisposition; for we are so very totally infirm, that this poor, little,
wretched Soul of ours, participates in the miseries of the Body; and even the
alteration of the weather, and the revolution of their own natural humors,
are, many times, the occasion, why, (without even any fault of their own,)
they cannot well do, even what they would, but are feign to suffer thus, in
all kinds. And, when they strive to force themselves, in these coniunctures of
time, it proves to be so much the worse with them; and the inconvenience will
last, so much the longer. But, discretion must be used heerin, to weigh, when
this Effect proceeds from this Cause; and they must not oppress, and stifle
this poor Soul, but understand, and consider, that it is sick. Let the hour
of Prayer, in God's name, be changed; yea, and many times it will be fit, to
do so, for some days; and let them pass through this bannishment of theirs,
as well as they can; since it is misfortune, and misery enough, for a Soul,
which does indeed, love Almighty God, to see, that she lives in so great
misery; and that she is no way able to do, even what her self desires, in
regard, that she is lodged, with so untoward, and ill an Host, as this Body is.

I said, this was to be done, with discretion; because sometimes, the Devil
will be a cause of these things; and therefore it is good, neither always to
leave the usual and set time of Prayer, whenever there may be great
disturbance, and distraction, in the Understanding; nor yet always, to stand
tormenting the Soul, toward the making it do more, then it can. There are
also other exterior works of Charity, and of reading also, which may be
used; though yet sometimes, the Soul will not be so much as fit, even for
that; but, in that case, let the Mind be even subject, as it were, to the
Body, for the love of Almighty God, since, many other times, the Body serves
the Soul; and let the Party, in such cases, take the entertainment, and
pastime of conversation, with others, so that it be holy; or divert himself,
with going a little abroad, to take the Air; as the Ghostly Father shall
advise. For, Experience is a great Schoole-Mistris, in all things, toward the
giving any one to understand, what may be fit; and, Almighty God is served,
in all this business; for, his Yoke is sweet; and it is a thing of much
importance, that the Soul be not seruilely dragged, (as one may say) but that
it be carried sweetly on, toward the receiving of more benefit, and profit.

So that I advise, again, and again, (for though I say it often, it will do
no hurt, because the matter imports so much) that no body is to afflict, nor
oppress himself, either through drynesses, or disquiets, or distraction of
thoughts; nor yet to go, up, and down, with any such kind of tribulation, if
they pretend to gain Liberty of Spirit. But let him once begin, not to be
in such a fright, upon the sight of the Cross; and he shall see, how our
Blessed Lord will help him to bear it; and what contentment he will grow to
have; and how he will be able, to make his profit of all things. For, already,
we may sufficiently perceive, that, if there be no Spring of Water in the Well,
we know not, how to put any there. True it is, that we must, by no means, be
negligent, and careless, but endeavor to draw it out, if there be any;
because then, our Lord is pleased to multiply our virtues, by that means.

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes her Discourse, of the First State, or Degree of Prayer; and
declares, how far we may ariue of our selves, by the Favor of our Lord;
And of the hurt it brings, to desire, that our Spirit may rise to
Supernatural, and Extraordinary things, till our Lord himself be pleased, to
ordain it.

THat, which I pretended to give to be understood, in the last Chapter (though
yet I diuerted my self much, upon other things, in regard, that I thought them
very necessary) was, to declare, how much we might be able, to acquire; and
how, in this First part of our devotions, we might, to some proportion, help
our selves; because the considering, and ruminating upon that, which our Lord
suffered for us, is wont to move us to compassion; and the sorrow, and tears,
which grow from thence, is a very sauourie, and delightful kind of thing. And
so, to think of the Glory, for which we hope, and of the Love, which our Lord
bore us; as also of his Resurrection; moves us to joy, which is neither wholly
Spiritual, nor wholly Sensual; but this is a virtuous kind of joy, on the one
side, as, on the other, that former pain, is very meritorious; And of this
sort, are all those things, which cause any such devotion, as is acquired in
part, by the Understanding; though yet there be no merit, nor gain therein,
unless Almighty God be pleased to give it.

But now, it will be very fit, for a Soul, which our Lord has not raised
any higher, not to procure to exalt her self; and let this be very well noted;
for, the contrary course will help her to nothing, but loss. In this Degree,
or State, she may perform many good acts, by way of resolving to do great
things for Almighty God; and to awake, and stirr-vp her love, and others also,
by way of assisting her self, to grow-vp in several virtues; according to what
is contained in a certain Book, called, The Art of serving God; which is a
very good one, and very proper for such as find themselves in this State;
because the Understanding does act, and exercise it self, here. She may also
represent her self, as in the presence of Christ our Lord; and accustom her
self, to be greatly enamoured, with his most Sacred Humanity; and to be ever
carrying that, along in her company; and to be often speaking to it; and to
beg his continual assistance, in all her necessities; and even to complain to
him, of her afflictions; and to joy with him, for her contentments, and gusts;
but yet, not to forget him, upon occasion thereof; And all this, without
procuring to express her self, in any set kind of Prayers, but to make use
of such words alone, as may have conformity with her own necessities, and
desires.

This is an Note.
excellent way of finding profit, and that in a very short time; and, whosoever
shall earnestly labor, to carry this precious company with himself, and
shall have proceeded well therein, and shall have found the way of loving, in
very good earnest, this Lord of ours, to whom we owe so much, I will give, and
pass my word, that this person, is a very good Proficient. For this purpose,
let it not trouble us a whitt, not to find our selves with sensible devotion,
as I have said; but let us give thanks to our Lord, for giving us so good
desires, to please him, though our works be weak.

This way of carrying Christ our Lord in our company, is very useful in all
the Four States, and Degrees of Prayer. It is a most secure, and safe means,
to go profiting in the First Degree; and that we shall get quickly, to the
Second; and then to be free also, in the two last, from those dangers, which
the Devil may provide for us. For, this, in fine, is that, which we may be able
to do; and for any body to passe-vp from hence, and to exalt his Spirit,
toward the feeling of certain gusts, which are not allowed him, is but, in my
opinion, to loose, both the one, and the other; because, in fine, that, is all
Supernatural; and so, the Understanding being at a Stand, and lost, the Soul
remains all desolate, and with great drynes. And, since this whole Building is
grounded upon Humility, the nearer we grow to Almighty God, the more shall we
proceed, and profit, in this Virtue; and if we do not this, all is lost. And
it seems to be no better, then a kind of pride, if we desire to get-vp to a
higher rank, since God does us but too much honor, and favor (considering,
how unworthy we are) in suffering us, to be so near, to himself.

But now, it must not be so understood, as if I spoke all this, against
raising-vp our thoughts, to consider the high things of Heaven, or of God, or
of the greatnesses, which are there above; as also of his Incomparable Wisdom.
For though I never did this, because I had no ability for this purpose, (as I
have said) and I found my self so miserable, and so mean, that God did me
particular favor, to enable me, to think of earthly things, by means
whereof, I might come afterward to understand this truth; (for even this, was
no small adventure for me; and how much more was it so, to consider Celestial
things) yet others may take benefit heerby; and especially, if they have
Learning, and Knowledge, which is, in my opinion, a great treasure, toward
this exercise of Prayer, if it be accompanied with Humility. I have seen the
truth of this, very lately, by occasion of some learned men, who begun not
long ago, and yet have proceeded, and profited very much; which makes me have
an earnest, and even a kind of impatient desire, that many such, as are
learned, would grow to be very Spiritual men, whereof I shall give the reason
hereafter.

But now, that which I have said, Namely, That men must not exalt themselves,
to rise higher, then God does raise them, is a certain kind of Language of
Spirit; and he will understand me, who has experience of it; but as for me, I
know not, how to express it, if he know not, how to understand me, by what I
have said.

In Mystical Theology (whereof I began to speak) the Understanding ceases
from working, because Almighty God This suspending of the Thought or
Understanding, of which the Saint speaks, is a presenting a multitude of
Supernatural, and Divine Objects before it; together with a copious infusion
of Light, which is decerned by it, after a kind of intuitiue way at once,
without discourse, or trouble: And this Light rests not there, but passes-on
to the Will, and grows to be, as so much Fire, for the inflameing it, in the
Love of our Lord. And the Soul does more properly suffer here, then act. And
now the Saint gives great warning, that people be not so foolish, as to offer
at these things, of themselves.
suspends it; as I will declare hereafter, if I be able, and if he give me
grace, for that purpose. But as for us, to presume, yea, or so much as to
think of suspending it, is that, which I am saying, we should not do. Nor
must we leave to act, and work thereby, and therewith; for if we do, we shall
be stupid, and sottish, and cold; and we shall effect, neither the one, nor the
other. But when our Lord suspends, and stopps it, he furnishes it with matter,
upon which, the Party may employ himself, and at which, he may be amazed; and
he makes him understand more, in the time, and space of saying one Credo,
(though yet still, not by way of Discourse) then we could tell, how to
understand, with all our humane diligences of this world, in the compass of
many years. But now, to exercise, and employ the Powers of the Mind, and
yet, the while, to think of making them stand at a stay, is a sensles kind of
fancy, and foolerie. And I say, and say again (though perhaps, it be not well
understood) that this, is no act of any great Humility; and though it should
not be guilty of being a fault, yet it will not fail to be subject, to the
punishment; for at least, it will be all labor lost; and the Soul finds it
self to remain with an odd little kind of disgust; as when a man goes to
leap, when yet men hold him fast, by the back. For such an one seems already,
to have employed all his strength, to do somewhat which he desired, and yet
finds himself, without effecting, what he pretended. And so, whosoever will
consider the matter well, shall come to discern, by the slender gain, which
he made, this little half invisible dust of the want of Humility, whereof I
spoke. For, in fine, this virtue has that excellency, amongst others, in it,
That there is no work, or action, in the world, if it be accompanied with that
virtue, which will ever leave the Soul, in disgust. There were diverse A great
truth.
years, when I was wont to read many things, and yet understood none of them
all; and there was, afterward also, a long time, when, though God gave me
ability to understand, yet could I not speak a word, wherewith to make it be
understood, by others; and this point cost me no small labor. But, when his
Divine Majesty has a mind to teach it, he does it so, and all at an instant,
that I am amazed. And one thing I can say with much truth, that though I spoke
with many Spiritual persons, who had a mind to make me understand, what our
Lord imparted to me, that so, I might the better declare things, in particular,
and clear manner, to them; it is certain, that my dulnes was so great, as
that their discourse was not of any use to me, at all. And perhaps our Blessed
Lord (as his Divine Majesty vouchsafed still, to be my Master; and let him be
blessed for ever, since it is confusion enough for me, to be able to say thus
much, with truth) was pleased, that I should have no body, to thank for it,
but himself; and that, without my desiring, or even wishing it, (for in this, I
was not a whitt curious, wherein it might have been a virtue, to be so; but I
was so, about the vanities of the world) he would give me to understand, and
comprehend it, with all claritie; yea and so, as that I could unfold it also,
to others; in such sort, as that men were amazed at it; and my self more, then
any of my Ghostly Fathers; because I understood mine own dulnes, better then
they. Nor is it any long time, since this happened to me; and so I procure not
to know those things, which our Lord has not taught me, but I only consider,
and take care of them, so far, as whereby my Conscience may be concerned.

I return yet once again, to advise, and declare, that it will import us very
much, not to A dangerous, and provvd, foolish error.
eleuate, and raise our Spirit, unless our Lord be pleased to eleuate, and
raise it; which if he do, it will instantly be understood; and especially,
this is more dangerous for women; for, the Devil may bring some illusion upon
them; though yet withal, I hold it for very certain, that our Lord will not
permit, that the Devil should be able to hurt any such person, as shall
procure to approach his Divine Majesty with Humility; but rather that he
shall be able, to give himself more advantage, and profit, by that, whereby the
Devil meant to destroy him. But now, in regard, that this way of beginners, in
the exercise of Mental Prayer, is more beaten, and because the admonitions,
which I have given, import much, I have enlarged my self, thus far; though
yet, others will certainly have written much better of it. But thus much do I
confess; and I have expressed my self heerin, with abundance of confusion, and
shame, though yet still, not with so much, as I ought to have had. Let our Lord
be ever Blessed for all, since he permits, and is pleased, that so miserable a
Creature, as I, should speak of things, belonging to his Divine Majesty; and
those things, such, and so high.

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
She proceeds in this First Degree, and State of Prayer; and gives advise
against some temptations, which the Devil is sometimes wont to bring. This
Discourse is very profitable.

I Have thought fit, to speak here, of certain temptations, which I have
found, to be brought against some, in their beginning, to use Mental Prayer;
and some I have felt my self; and I will also give some advise, which I hold to
be necessary, heerin. Let therefore a Observe the generous way of this great
Saint.
beginner procure, to goe-on with great alacrity, and Liberty of Spirit; for,
there be some, who are apt to think, that all their devotion is instantly to
vanish, if they do never so little amiss, therein. It is true, that it will
be very fit, to continue in a holy doubt, and fear, of themselves, that so
they may not be confident at all, to put themselves into any occasion, wherein
our Lord is wont to be offended; for it will ever be very necessary, to use
this actual diligence, till one be very entire, in the possession of virtue;
and there are not many, who may be so very confident of themselves, as that,
in such occasions, which have Note this very well.
conformity with their natural disposition, and inclination, they may be out
of care, and fear. And, in fine, it will ever be fit, that so long, as we
shall live, in this world, we consider our miserable nature; though it were but
even for the continual exercise of humility; but there are many times, when
it is permitted, as I have said, to be taking recreation, though it were but to
enable us the better, to return the more encouraged, and fortifyed, toward
the making of Prayer. In all things, it will ever be needful, to use
discretion; and withal, to have great confidence, in God; for it is, by no
means, fit, to go lessning, and diminishing our desires, but to believe of
Almighty God, that, if we will endeavor earnestly; by little and little, we
may, by the favor of his Divine Majesty, ariue, though it be not presently,
where many Saints have arrived; who, if they had never resolved to aspire to
Perfection, and had not also endeavored, by little and little, to acquire it,
would never have been able, to obtain so high a State. His Divine Majesty, is
a very great friend, and favorer of A great praise of a large heart.
courageous Souls; so that withal, they proceed with Humility, and not with
any confidence, in themselves; and I have yet never seen any one of this
kind, who has continued to remain in a very inferior degree, in this way;
nor never also, any one cowardly Soul (though yet withal, it had the
safegarde of Humility) which was able to make so much way, in many years, as
I have found those others do, in very few. I am even amazed, when I consider,
how much it works in this kind, for one to animate himself, toward the doing
of great things; though instantly he may, perhaps, not have force, where with
to perform. For, the Soul puts herself to make a Flight, and ariues to be, in
a high place, though yet, like some young Bird, she be not so well feathered
yet; and therefore, as being weary, she can but pause, and houer. In former
time, I often remembered, and considered, what S. Paul affirms of himself,
Namely, That he could do all things, in God, who comforted him; for, as for
me, I knew well, that I could do nothing of my self. But, that Saying of his,
did me very much good; and so also, did this other of S. Augustine: Give me, O
Lord, what thou command; and then command me, what thou vvilt. And, for my
part, I thought also many times, that S. Peter had lost nothing by the
bargain, when he cast himself headlo^g into the Sea though yet he were
afraid, afterward. In a word, these first strong purposes, and resolutions, are
a great matter, though yet, in this First Degree, and State, it is fit, that
we go detaining our selves, and hold our selves fast tied, to the discretion,
and disposing of a Directour; but then, we must procure, that he may be such an
one, as will not teach us, to leap heavily, and dully, like certain Toades;
nor be content, that our Souls dispose themselves, to hunt, those little weak
beasts, called Lizards; Only Humility must ever go before, that so we may
besure to understand, that this strength does not grow from our selves.

But here, it will be necessary for us, to know, what kind of Humility, this
of ours, must be; and I am very apt to think, that the Devil does much hurt,
toward the making such, as exercise Prayer, not to advance themselves very
much, in their way, by causing them to mis-vnderstand Humility; and by
procuring to make us believe, that it is but a kind of pride, to have
Heroical desires; and to pretend, to imitate Saints; and to desire, to be
Martyrs. For, upon this, he tells us, and makes us think, that the actions of
Saints, are fit to be admired, but not to be imitated, by us, who are Sinners.
This do I also say, as well as he; only we must consider, what, in particular,
is fit for How Saints are to be imitated; and how, admired.
admiration; and what, for imitation. For it would be no way convenient, that a
person, who were sick, and weak, should put himself, upon great Fasts, and
sharp Pennances; or should betake himself to the Wilderness, where he might
neither be able to sleep, nor yet could get, what to eat; or the like. But
yet, we ought to think, that we may well endeavor earnestly, by God's Favor,
to hold the world, in great contempt; and not to esteem earthly honor; and
not to remain tyed-vp to the care of riches. But we really, have hearts so very
poor, and straight, that it seems to us, as if we could not have ground
enough, to go upon, if once we should lay the care of our Body, never so
little aside, to give it, to the Soul.

It seems therefore here already, that, even for the better enjoying of
Recollection, it will be good, that we be in no want of necessary things; for,
any kind of care, will be able to disquiet men, in Prayer. And I am heartily
sorry, that we should have so little confidence in God, and so much love of our
selves, as that we should be disquieted, by this thought. But the truth is,
that, wheresoever men have made so small progress, as this, in the way of
Spirit, certain fooleries, will trouble some, as much, as greater, and more
substantial matters, will do others; and yet still (in our way of
understanding) we will needs presume our selves, to be Spiritual persons. It
seems to me, that this kind of way of proceeding, shows a desire in them, to
put the Body, and Mind, into such a concurrence, and correspondence, as that
we would feign find means, to take our ease in this world, and yet enjoy God,
in the next; and that conceit will prove to be true, if we live according to
Justice, and continue, to stick close to Virtue; but yet still, this is but the
pace of a Henn, and it will never be able to bring us on, to enjoy true
Liberty of Spirit. This seems, indeed, to be a good way of proceeding, for
such as are in state of Marriage, who are to carry themselves, according to
their Vocation; but for any other state, then that, I do, by no means,
desire, any such kind of profiting in Spirit, as this; nor shall they ever
make me believe, that it is a good one; for I have tried it, long enough; and I
had ever continued, in that way, if our Lord, through his infinite goodness, had
not showed me another, and a shorter cut; though yet withal, it be true, that
I had ever great desires; but I procured (as I have said) to use Prayer; though
yet still, to live withal, at my pleasure. But really, I conceive, that if
any body would have encouraged me, to fly a higher pitch, I should have
striuen hard, to make those desires, prove deeds. But alas, it is true, that
through our Sins, there are so very few, and may so quickly be counted, who
have any more discretion, then is necessary, for such occurrences, as these,
that, I believe, it is a great part of the cause, why such, as are beginners,
can get no faster on, toward great perfection; for, our Lord does never fail,
on his part; but it is we, who are still the faulty, and miserable Creatures.

They may also be able, to imitate the Saints; in procuring to use Solitude,
and keep Silence; and to exercise many other virtues, which, will yet, by no
means, murder this miserable Body, which they desire to preserve, with such
curiosity, and care, though it should turn to the disorder of the Soul. And
now, the Devil is careful enough, to help to render us the more unable; for,
when he sees but a little inordinate fear, he desires no more, then to make us
apprehend, that every thing, will be apt to kill us; or at least, to deprive
us of our health; yea and if we be accustomed to have tears, he will put us
into a fear, that we shall be blind. My self have passed by this Walk, and
therefore I know it; and I know withal, that I cannot tell, what better kind
of life, or health, we can possibly desire, then to loose them both, upon such
an occasion. My self, being so sickly as I was, till I resolved to make no
account at all, of my health, and of my body, was ever tied up, and was good
for nothing; and even now, it is very little, which I can do. But yet, as
soon as our Lord was pleased, that I should understand this deceit, and trick
of the Devil, if he objected to me, my loss of health, I told him, it imported
little, that I must dye; If he tempted me with love of rest, and ease, I told
him, that it was not ease which I needed now, but the sufferance of a Cross;
And so also, in other things. For I saw clearly, that, in very many, it was
either a temptation of the Devil, or mine own lazines; though yet, in very
deed, I be sickly enough. But howsoever, I now enjoy much better health, since
I am not so very curious, and dainty, as I was, then I did before. And it is
therefore of great importance, for them, who begin to hold Mental Prayer,
that they do not subtilize too much, with their thoughts. And let them believe
me heerin; for I know it by experience; and perhaps it may be of good use, for
me, to recount my faults, that so, others may take warning by me.

There is also another temptation, and it is very usual; To desire, forsooth,
that every body might grow to be very Spiritual, when once themselves
begin, to taste of this great Quiet; and how much, is to be gained by this
means. It is not an ill thing, to desire it; but to procure it, may
peradventure not be good; unless much discretion, and, as it were,
dissimulation, be used, in doing it so, as that they seem not, to take upon
them, to teach; for, such as will procure to do good, upon their neighbors,
in such cases as this, had need have their own virtues very strong; least else,
they breed temptation for others. It happened just thus to me, and therefore I
understand it; that when (as I was saying) I procured, that others might use
Mental Prayer, and on the one side, they heard me speak of high matters, and
of the great benefit, which it brought, to use that exercise; and when they
saw, on the other, how very poor I was, in point of virtue, I occasioned them
to be tempted, and disordered; and they were so, with reason enough; and
themselves told me as much, afterward. For they knew not, how it was possible,
for one of those things, to be compatible with the other; and it caused them
not to think that, to be ill, which yet, indeed, was so; because, forsooth,
they saw me do it sometimes, when they held a good opinion of me. And this
does the Devil effect, who, it seems, can serve his turn, even of the
virtues, which we have; that so, he may, the better, grow to authorize the
mischief, which he desires to do us; and how little soever that be, in it
self, yet when that is done, in a Community, he gains very much, by the
bargain; and how much more, when that, which I did ill, was very ill. And so,
in many years, there were only three persons, who took benefit, by what I
told them; and, when our Lord was already pleased, to bestow more strength of
virtue upon me, they were many, who profited by me, even in two or three
years; as I will show afterward.

Besides, there is this other great inconvenience, that the Soul looses her
progress in virtue; for the chief thing, which she is to procure at first, is
only to take care of her self alone; and to make account, that there is not,
in the whole world, any one thing, but God, and She. And this is a certain
point, which imports the same Soul, very much.

There is also yet another temptation (and all, such as this, show themselves
ever, with a kind of zeal of virtue; and they are fit to be understood; and
that we walk with much circumspection) and this is a trouble, which men
receive, from the defects, and faults, which they discern, in others. For, the
Devil procures to make us believe, that this grief is entertained by us, but
only, because we would nor have them offend Almighty God; and that forsooth,
we are troubled, because his honor is interessed thereby; and then it comes
presently in, that we would feign procure to redress it; and this care
disquiets us so much, that it hinders our Prayer; yea and the greatest mischief
of all, is, that we think, that this is virtue, and perfection, and great
zeal of God's service. I speak not of those afflictions, which public
Sins must give, when they are usually committed by a Community, or when they
grow to be of prejudice to the Church; as these Heresies do, whereby we find
so many Souls to be lost; for this is a very good affliction, and trouble;
and, in regard, that it is so good, it disorders not, and disturbs not him, who
has it. But Note this well.
the secure way, for that Soul, which desires to give it self to Prayer, is to
seek to forget, both all things, and all persons; and to attend, to keep all
reckonings straight with her self; and so, to give contentment to Almighty
God. Now, this is both very convenient, and important; and if I should stand to
tell you, what errors I have seen fall-out to be committed, upon the
confidence, which men have put in their good intentions, I should never make an
end. Let us therefore always procure, to consider the virtues, and good
works, which we shall discern in others; and to shut our eyes, from seeing
their defects, by the consideration of our own great Sins. Now, this is a
kind of working, wherein, though we ariue not instantly, to do it with
perfection, yet we come thereby, to gain a great virtue, which is, to hold
every body better, then ourselves; and we begin, to get it, through the
Favor of Almighty God, whereof we have need, in all things. For, whenever
that is wanting to us, all other diligences, serve to little purpose; and we
must therefore humbly pray him, to bestow this grace, upon us, wherein
certainly, he will not be wanting, if we be as careful, as we ought. Let them
also consider well of this advise, who use to discourse much, with the
Understanding; and have power to draw many considerations, and conceits, out
of some one. For, as for them, who are not able to work with this Faculty (as
I can not) there is no cause of giving them this advise; but only, that they
will be content, to have patience, till our Lord shall be pleased, to help
them to matter, upon which to work; and light, where with to know, how to do
it; Since they are able, to perform so little, for themselves, as that their
Understanding part, does rather give them trouble, then help.

But, returning now to such others, as are able to serve themselves of
Discourse, they must take care, that their whole time, be not spent in that;
for, howsoever it be very meritorious, yet, conconsidering how sauourie a
thing, they conceive, that Mental Prayer should be, they fear, that they
shall never live, to see Sunday, nor any Season, wherein they are not to
labor, and drudge; and therefore, they presently think, that all their hopes
are lost; though, for my part, I conceive, that all that Loss, is Gain. But
let them, A necessary Advise.
as I have said, represent themselves, as in the presence of Christ our Lord;
and, without wearying of the Understanding, be speaking, and regaling
themselves, with him; and not tire their wits, to find out, and frame
certain Discourses; but let them only present their necessities, and the
reason, which he may have, not so much as to endure them, there. Some one of
these considerations will serve, at one time; and some other, at an other; that
so the Soul may not be weary, of feeding always upon one dish.

These particulars, are both very gustfull, and very profitable also, if once
the Party be accustomed to feed on them; for they use to bring great support,
and strength, for the life of the Soul, and many adua^tages also, otherwise.
I will declare my self further upon this matter; because all these points,
concerning Prayer, carry their difficulties along with them; and, unless
there be a good Directour, at hand, they are very hard to be understood. And
this is the very cause, why, though I would feign make short, and that justly,
(because it would suffice for me, but even to touch them, by reason of the
great capacity of him, who commanded me to write these particulars, of
Prayer,) yet my dulnes, is not able to declare, and explicate, in few words, a
thing, which it so much imports, to be well understood. And, because I suffered
so very much, by using only Books, when I began the exercise of Prayer, I
have compassion of all them, who do so too; for it is no less then strange,
to see, how far otherwise Books are wont to be understood, then men see they
ought to have been, when once they come, to have had experience of these things.

But now (to return to what I was saying) let us put our selves, to consider
some passage of the Passion of our Blessed Lord; and, for example, let it be
that, when he was tied to the Pillar. And here, let the Understanding
search-out the cause of those great dolours, and afflictions, which his Divine
Majesty felt, in that Solitude of his; as also, upon many other things,
which, (if the Understanding be good at working; or else, if he have Learning)
he may easily be able, to fetch from thence. And this is a manner of Prayer,
wherein all Creatures may both begin, and proceed, and make an end; and it
will be a very excellent, and secure way, till our Lord, may, perhaps, carry
them on, to other things, which are supernatural. I say, for all; though yet
there be many Souls, which profit more, by other Meditations, then by that of
the Sacred Passion. For, as there are many Mansions in Heaven, when a Soul is
there: so are there also many ways thither. Some, profit more, by considering
Heaven; and some, afflict themselves best, by thinking of Hell; others, by
reflecting upon Death; and some, if they be very tender-harted, are too much
troubled, and vexed, if they always go ruminating upon the Passion; and they
regale themselves better, yea, and they also profit more, by considering the
Power, and Greatness of Almighty God, in his Works; and the Love, he bears
us; which they find to be represented to them, in all his Creatures. And this
is an admirable way of proceeding, though yet still, we must neither forget,
nor forbear, to consider the Life, and Passion of our Blessed Lord, very
often; that, in fine, being the very thing, from which, all our good, both
ever did, and ever can ariue to us.

He, who is a Beginner, had need be careful, to consider very well, what that
is, whereby he profits most; and to this purpose, he will have great need of a
Directour, if he can meet with an experienced man; for if he be not so, in good
measure, he may chance err, by carrying a Soul on, without either
understanding her, himself; or else, giving her to be understood, by the Party.
For, as the Party cannot but know, of how great merit it is, for him, to
subject himself to a Directour: so he will not presume, to depart from that,
which the other shall direct. I have met with certain Souls, which have been
afflicted, and dejected, and straightened, because he, who had the instructing
them, wanted experience; and I was heartily sorry for them; And some also I
have seen, who knew not, what to do with themselves; for they, not
understanding matter of Spirit, afflicted themselves, both in Body, and Soul;
and, the while, were sure enough, not to benefit others. One of them told me
once, of a Directour of hers, who would not suffer her, in eight years
together, to pass on, out of the consideration of the knowledge of her self;
and yet our Lord had her then, in the condition, and degree of Quiet Prayer;
but so, she was in trouble enough. And, though it be very true, that this point
of the knowledge of ones self, is never, indeed, to be utterly given over; nor
is any Soul in the way of Prayer, to think, she has so much of the Giant in
her, as not to understand, that many times, she must turn Child, and suck
again; and this must never be forgotten; and perhaps, I shall also speak
often of it again, in regard, that it imports so much; because there is no
State of Prayer so high, wherein it will not be necessary, to turne-againe
often, to the beginning. And this point of the knowledge of our selves, and of
our Sins, is the daily Our daily Bread.
bread, which must be eaten, with all the meat (how delicate soever it may be)
of such, as are in this way of Prayer; yea and without this very bread, they
will never be able, to support, and strengthen themselves; yet must even this,
be taken, by weight, and measure. For, when once a Soul finds her self laid
very flatt, and low; and sees clearly, that she has no good thing of her own;
and finds her self to be full of confusion, and shame, so much as to appear
in the presence of so great a King; and the little, which she is able to pay
him, for the very much, which she finds her self, to owe him; what necessity
is there, to spend so very much time, upon this, without applying our selves to
such other things, as our Lord may, perhaps, set before us, and which it will
not be reason for us, to leave; since his Divine Majesty knows better, then
we, upon what, it is convenient for us to feed.

So that it imports us very much, that the A description of a good Directour in
matter of Spirit.
Directour be well advised, and I mean also, that he be of good understanding,
and experience; and if, with this, he be also learned, it will be of mighty
importance. But yet still, when all these three parts shall not chance, to meet
together, in the same man, the two former qualities of these three, will fall
out, to import more, then the third, because they may easily procure to consult
with such as are learned, whenever they shall have need thereof; but as for
Beginners, learned men, if they possess not the use of Prayer, can be of
little profit to them. Yet I say not, that they should not treat, and conferr
with such men, as are learned; for, as for having a Spirit, which should not be
first settled in a way of truth, for my part, I had rather have it without
Prayer. For, Learning is a great matter, since it instructs us, who know
little; and brings us light; and when we approach near to the truths of Holy
Scripture, we begin to do that, which we ought; but as for silly, and
foolish devotions, our Lord deliver us from them. I will declare my self yet
better; for I fear, I put my self upon too many things at once, though I ever
wanted means, to know, how to give my self to be well understood, (as I have
said) but upon the expense of many words.

A Religious Woeman, for examples sake, will begin to use Prayer; and in case
some silly kind of man, direct, and govern her, he will, if the toy take him
in the head, give her to understand, that it is better for her, to obey him,
then her Superior; yea, and he will do it, without any malice, at all; as
conceauing, that he is in the right. And now she being a Religious woeman, will
be likely enough, to think, that he says true. And if she be a married
woeman, he will tell her, that it is best for her, even when she ought to be
about her Household businesses, to exercise her self in Prayer; though it were
to be, to the disgust of her husband. So that, she knows not, how to dispose
of her time, nor of her businesses, in such sort, as that all may go,
according to reason, and truth; because, in fine, that Directour wants light;
and not having any himself, he cannot give it to others, though he would never
so feign. And though, in order to this end, it seem, that there is no great
need of Learning; yet as for me, my opinion both is, and ever will be, that all
Christians shall do well, to treat with such men, about their Souls, as are
well learned; and so much the more, so much the better; and they, who go by
the way of Prayer, have yet more need, then others, to meet with such men; and
so, the more they shall be also Spiritual, the better will it be for them,
still. And let not folks deceive themselves, with saying, That, learned men,
without the exercise of Prayer, are not to the purpose, for them, who use
Prayer; for I have dealt with many; and for some of these latter years, I
have endeavored it the more, because then, I found my self in more necessity.
But I was ever, much a friend of learned men; for, though some of them have not
experience, yet they hate not Spiritual people, nor are not ignorant, what
these things mean; because they ever find this truth, that there is such a
thing, as a good Spirit, by holy Scripture, wherein they are continually
versed. And, as for me, I hold, that a person, who exercises Prayer, and will
treat with learned men, shall never be deceived, by illusions of the Devil, if
he have not a mind, to deceive himself. For I believe, that the Devil is
mightily afraid of Learning, whenever it is accompanied with Humility, and
Virtue; for he knows, that he shall be discovered, in the end, and that so, he
shall come to loose, by the bargain.

And now I have said thus much, because I know, there are opinions, that
learned men, are not fit, for persons of Prayer, unless they be also of
Spirit. Already I have signified, that it would be necessary, to have a
Spiritual Directour; but if he prove not to be learned, the inconvenience will
be great; and yet it will be of much help, to treat with learned men, so that
they be virtuous; for, though they be not Spiritual (as, in this case, we
understand Spiritual) they will yet, be able to benefit us; and God will
vouchsafe to enable them, to teach us; yea, and so, may perhaps, by degrees,
grow even to make them also become Spiritual; to the end, that they may be
able, to instruct us, the better. And I speak not this, without some trial;
for, the occasion has happened to me, with more, then two. I say therefore, that
if a Soul resolve to render it self, to be entirely subject to the order of
any one Directour, she shall err very much, unless she procure, in particular
manner, that he be learned; especially if he be a Religious man of any Order.
Because such an one, is to be subject to his Prelate, or Superior; and in that
case, peradventure, all those three aforesaid parts, which were said to be so
necessary, for a Directour, will be wanting to him, which will be no little
cross to the Party; besides, that he may perhaps find himself, to have
voluntarily submitted his Understanding, to that of another man, who has no
very good one, himself. At least, forasmuch as concerns me, I was never able,
to bring my self to it; nor indeed, do I hold it convenient.

But now, if the Party, of whom we speak, be a Secular person, let him
bless Almighty God, that himself may make choice of that man, to whom he
will resolve to subject himself; and let him take care, not to loose this
virtuous liberty. Nay, let him even stay, without any Directour at all, till
he find a fit one; for, our Lord will not fail to provide him such an one, if
he go wholly grounded in Humility, and with desire, to make a fit choice. For
my part, I praise a fit Directour very much; and women, and such men also, as
are not learned, were always to give God infinite thanks, for that there are
some, in the world, who take so great pains, and trouble, to obtain the
knowledge of truth; whereof such as be not learned, are ignorant. And it amazes
me, many times, to see Religious men, who are learned; and particularly to
consider, with how much trouble, they grew to gain all that knowledge, which
is to bring me so much profit, without any more trouble of mine, then only to
ask them the question; and yet, that we should not benefit our selves by it.
But, let not God permit, that still it should continue, to be so. For I see
them subject, to the troubles, and mortifications of a Religious Life, which
are very great; with Pennances; with ill Diet; with hard Lodging; with being
subject, in all things, to Obedience; and, in fine, I so perceive, that all is
affliction, and all, Cross, that really, the thought thereof, does cast me
sometimes, into confusion; and, me thinks, it must be a great misery, that
any body should loose so important a benefit, by his own fault. It is
possible, that some of us, who are free from these austerities, whereof I
speak (or at least, if we feed upon them, we will needs have them finely
dressed, after our own fancy, and so will live, as we list ourselves)
conceive, that, for the making a little more Prayer, we shall out-stripp them,
who yet are subject to so great Penance. Blessed be thou, O Lord, who have
made me so unprofitable, and vn-vsefull; but yet, I praise thee, after an
extraordinary manner, in regard, that thou awakest so very many, who may
awake us. And we should do well, to make very continual Prayer, for them, who
give us light; for, what would become of us, without them, in the midst of so
great tempests, as are now in the Church? If some men have been wicked; the
good will shine the brighter, by their means. I beseech our Lord, to hold them
up, with his hand, that he may help such, as help us; Amen.

I have travailed far out of the way, from that, which I was going to say;
but, all will serve the turn, for beginners; to the end, that they may so, put
themselves upon this high way, that it may also prove to them, a true way.
Returning therefore, to what I said, of Note.
meditating upon Christ our Lord at the Pillar, it is good to discourse a
while, and to think, upon the pain, which he felt there, and why he felt it;
and who it is, that felt it; and the Love wherewith he felt it; yet let not the
Party weary himself, by going about to seek all this, but let him remain
still there, with a calm, and quiet kind of understanding. If he can, let him
employ himself, upon considering, who looks upon him; and let him accompany
him; and beg of him; and humble himself before him; and regale himself with
him; and, in fine, let him remember, that our Lord deserved not to be there.
Whenever you shall be able to do this, though it should fall out to be at
the very beginning of your Prayer, you will find great benefit by it; nay,
many benefits are acquired, by this manner of Prayer; and, at least, my Soul
found it so. I know not, whether I hitt right, in declaring my self; but your
Reverence will consider of that; and I beseech our Blessed Lord, that I may
hitt right, in everlastingly pleasing him;

Amen.
THE FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER.
She begins to declare the Second Degree of Prayer, wherein our Lord is
already pleased, to give the Soul more particular gusts; which she relates,
to the end, that she may make them be understood, to be Supernatural. This
Discourse is very much to be noted.

SInce now it is already declared, with how much labor, this Orchard is
watered; and how, by the strength of the arm, the Water is to be gotten out of
the Well; we must say somewhat of that Second way, of drawing-vp this Water,
which the Lord of the Garden has ordained; that so, by this artifice of the
Wheel, with those little Buckets, which belong to it, the Gardner may draw out
more water, and with less trouble; and may be able, to rest, now and then; and
not be continually in labor. Now, this way being applied to Prayer, which is
wont to be called Quiet Prayer, is that, whereof now, I will treat.

The Soul does here begin, to recollect, and, as it were, shut it self up.
And it touches a little here, upon the Supernatural; because the Powers
thereof, can, by no means, gain this, for it self, by all the diligences,
which it can possibly use. It is true, that sometimes, she may seem to have
wearled her self, in going round about the Turn, and to have labored hard,
with the Understanding; and so to have filled-vp the little Bucketts; but here,
the Water is growne-vp to be higher; and so she labors much less, then she
did, in drawing it out of the Well. I say, the Water is grown nearer to her;
because Grace gives it self now, to be more clearly known, by the Soul. This
is a kind of recollecting, and, as it were, a shutting-vp of the Powers of the
Soul, into her self, that so she may be able to enjoy the contentment, which
then, she has, with more gust. But yet, the use of the Faculties, is not lost,
nor do they sleep; but only the Will is employed, and possessed, in such sort,
that it is grown to be captiued, though yet it self know not how; only it
gives consent, that Almighty God may put it in Prison, as one, who understands
now, very well, how to let it self be made Prisoner, to whom it loves. O my
dear Jesus, and my Lord! of how much worth, is thy love to us, in this case,
since it holds our love fast, in so strong chains, that it leaves us not even
liberty, at that instant, to love any other thing, then thy self? The other
two Faculties, which are the Understanding, and Memory, are then assisting the
Will; to the end, that they may go enabling it, to enjoy so great a good;
although now and then, it happen, that, howsoever, they be even thus united to
the Will, they yet, are apt enough, sometimes, to dis-assist it, much. But in
this case, let not the Will make any great account of that, but remain still,
in her quietness, and joy. For, How the Will is to carry it self to the other
Faculties of the Mind.
if she shall persist, in resolving to recollect those other Faculties to
herself, both they, and she, will loose, by the bargain. For, they are then,
as so many Doves, who content not themselves, with the food, or bait, which
the Lord of the Doue-House presents, without their laboring for it; but they
go to seek it, in other places; though yet they soon grow to find it so bad,
that they quickly return again; and so, come, and go, to see, whether the
Will, may be brought to bestow any part of that, upon them, which it enioyes.
And, if our Lord please to cast them any food, they stay; and if not, they go
again, to seek it; and all this while, they conceive, that they are even of
use, and benefit, to the Will it self; though yet sometimes, both the Memory,
and Imagination (even whilst they have a desire, to represent that, better to
her, which she enioyes) fall out to do her hurt, in stead of good. Let her
therefore be content, to carry her self so, toward them, as I shall here
advise; since all that, which passes here, is of extreme consolation, and is
obtained with so little labor, that Prayer never wearies one here, though it
chance to last, very long; because the Understanding goes working now, at great
leisure; and walks, as it were, foot by foot; and brings-vp another manner of
quantity of water, then formerly, it drew out of the Well; and the tears,
which God gives, in this case, come already with very great joy; which,
howsoever we feel, yet we procure them not.

This The blessings of Quiet Prayer.
Water of the Well, which imports the great Blessings, and Favors, which our
Blessed Lord shows us here, makes our virtues increase, incomparably more,
then that other of the former Degree of Prayer, did; because now, the Soul is
already beginning, to get up away, from her own misery; and already, she
grows to be allowed, to have some small notice, even of the gusts of glory.
And this, I think, makes her thrive, and improve so much the more; as also,
because, by this time, she is grown to approach nearer to that virtue, and
power, from whence all virtues proceed, which is Almighty God; because his
Divine Majesty does not only then, communicate himself, to that Soul; but he
is also pleased, that she should find, in what sort it is, that he communicates
himself to her. In ariuing once to this place, she instantly begins to loose
the appetite of all things, concerning this world; and I cannot blame her; for
already, she sees very clearly, that one moment of that gust, is not to be
purchased here; and that no riches, nor dominions, nor all the honors, nor
delights of this world, are able to give such contentment, and satisfaction, as
this, though it were but for the twinkling of an eye; because this, is true
contentment, and such an one, as we really see, and find, to content us indeed.
For, as for those others of this world, it may well go for a wonder, if we can
so much as tell, even wherein the contentment of any thing does consist. Nor
does there ever fail to be a kind of measuring cast, between the Yea, and the
No, in any of them; but here, all is in the Affirmative, and professes to say
Yea, as long as it lasts; and the No, comes not in, till afterward; because
then, they see, that the business is grown to be, at an end; and that he cannot
recover it again; nor knows, indeed, how to go about it. For, though he
should even half kill himself with doing Penance, and making much Prayer,
and use, in fine, all other possible diligences; yet will it all serve to very
little purpose, unless our Lord vouchsafe to impart it. But, Almighty God is
pleased here, for his own greatness, that this Soul should now understand,
that his Divine Majesty, vouchsafes to be so near her, that now, there is no
need of sending any messengers to her, but only, that she her self, may speak
with him; though yet, not by word of mouth, because then, he is already so near
her, that he understands her (as a man may say) even by the very least
stirring of her lips.

But now, it may chance seem to some, to be impertinent for me, to talk after
this manner; in regard, the world knows well enough, that our Lord does ever
hear us, and is ever present with us; and there can be no doubt at all, but
that this is true. But yet here, this Emperor, and Lord of ours, is pleased,
that we should also understand, that he understands us; and what his presence
is able to do; and what he will particularly begin to work in our Souls;
and the great, both interior, and exterior satisfaction, which he imparts;
and the mighty difference, which (as I have said) there is, between this kind
of delight, and gust, and all the other, of this world. For, this seems even
to fill, all those hollow, and void places, which our Sins had made in our
Souls. And this so great satisfaction, is in the very most intimate part
thereof; and she knows not how, nor by what means also, it comes; nay, many
times, she cannot tell, even what to do, nor what to ask, no nor what to
wish. For, the Soul seems there, to find all good things together; and she
does not very well know, even what she has found; nor yet, can I tell, how to
give it to be understood. For there would here, be need of Learning, for many
purposes; and here, would it come very well in, to give to understand, the
difference, betwixt General, and Particular Helps, or Succors of Grace,
whereof many are ignorant. And our Lord, in this Prayer, is pleased, that our
Soul should see this particular Succor, as it were, with her very eyes; and
many other things also, which may perhaps be ill declared here, by me; but,
since understanding persons are to see what I write, and who will know, if it
have any error in it (wherein I may easily be found faulty enough, through
want, both of Learning, and Spirit) I am in the less pain, and care;
considering, that this goes into the hands of such, as will both understand it,
and will blott also any such thing out, as may have been ill said.

Yet I would feign give this to be understood, because these, are the
beginnings; and when our Lord disposes himself first, to do these Favors,
the Soul herself does not understand them; nor does she know, what to do,
with her self. For, if Almighty God conduct, and guide her, by the way of
fear, as he did me, the trouble is very great; unless there be some at hand,
who can understand her. But then, it is a great gust for her, to see her self
well described, by them; for then, she evidently finds her self to be in that
way; and it is also of great benefit, to know, what one has to do, in any of
these States, or Degrees, that so, they may go profiting, on. For my part, I
endured much, and lost a great deal of time, because I did not know, how to
carry my self. And therefore I have very great compassion of those Souls,
which find themselves alone, when they are come thus far; for though I have
read many Spiritual Books, and though they touch upon that, which is to the
purpose, yet fall they very short, in declaring themselves; and, unless the
Soul be very well exercised in Prayer, she shall have enough to do, to
understand them, though they seek to express themselves, at large.

I could very much desire, that our Lord would do me the favor, that I might
know, how to set down the effects, which these things, that grow already to be
Supernatural, use to work in the Soul; to the end, that it might be
understood, by them, when it is the Spirit of God. I say, that it might be
understood; according to what we can think, we understand, in this world;
though it will always be very well done, to go on, with circumspection, and
fear. For though it be indeed of God, yet the Devil can tell, how to
transform himself sometimes, into an Angel of Light; and, if a Soul be not
well exercised in Prayer, she will not understand it well; and indeed, to be
exercised well enough, to understand this point, as it deserves, the Soul must
be arrived, to the highest Degree of Prayer.

The little time I have, will allow me no great help, for what I am
designeing; and therefore his Divine Majesty, had need to do it himself; for
I must be stirring, up, and down, in the Community; and have many other
businesses to do; since I am, at this present, in a House, which is but
beginning now, as I shall show afterward; and therefore, I am writing this,
without any such rest, and quiet kind of being, as were convenient; so that I
must do it, by little and little, and by fitts. But I could wish, I were now,
at more leisure; for, when our Lord gives a spirit, to do a thing, it is
easily, and much better set down. And it seems to be, as when one has an
Original, before him; and then he may easily take-out the Coppie. But, if the
Spirit be wanting, there is no more power, and means, to make one word of this
language suite well with an other, then if (as we may say) we would suite
Spanish, and Turkish together, even though we should have exercised our
selves, many years, in Prayer; and therefore, me thinks, it is of very great
advantage, when I write, if I be then, in state of Prayer; for I see clearly,
that it is not I, who declare it, nor who do either order it then, with my
Understanding, nor yet know afterward, how I declared it before; and this
happens to me, very often.

But now, let us goe-back to our Orchard, or Garden, and see, how these Trees
begin to button, and budd-out toward flowring, that they may afterward yield
fruit; and how these Gillie-flowers, and other odoriferous Plants, dispose
themselves, to give delight full Sent to the Owner. I confess, that this
Comparison regales, and pleases me much; for, many times, in my beginnings
(and I humbly beseech our Lord, that even yet, I may have been a beginner, to
serve his Divine Majesty) I say, in those beginnings of that, which I shall
say afterward, of my Life, it was of much delight to me, to consider, that my
Soul was a Garden, and that our Lord walked in it, up, and down; and I humbly
pray him, to increase the odor of those little young Flowers of Virtue, which
showed, in all appearance, that they would be glad, to find means to sprout;
and that also, they might serve, for his Glory; and that he would be pleased
to sustain them, since I desire nothing for my self; and that he would also
dress, and prune as many of them, as he pleased; for already, I knew well
enough, that they would thrive, and grow the better, afterward. I say, that he
would cut, and prune them; in regard, that some such times ariue, now, and
then, to the Soul, as wherein there is no appearance left of this Garden, at
all; but then, all seems to be withered, and dry, and that there never will
come more Water, to sustain it; yea, and that there also seems, to have never been any virtue, in that Soul. In this case, it undergoes great affliction;
because our Lord is pleased, that the poor Gardner may conceive, that all that
care is lost, which he had formerly employed, upon sustaining, and improuing
his Garden. But then comes-in the time, of true plucking-vp, and rooting-out,
all those little, paltrie herbs, which, till then, had remained there, how
little soever they might be; with making us also know, that no diligence of
ours will serve, if Almighty God take the Water of his Grace, from us; that
so, in fine, we may come to hold this poor miserable Nothing of ours, in no
manner of account; yea, and, if the thing were possible, even for less then
Nothing. For here, great Humility makes us the gainers, since the Flowers will
thus, grow to reflourish.

O thou, my Lord, and my God! (for I know not, how to say this, without tears,
and without a great Regalo, to this poor Soul of mine) is it possible, O my
Lord, that thou art pleased to be thus amongst us? Yea, and thou remainest in
the B. Sacrament, which may well be, with all truth, believed, because so it
is; and we may, with much truth, make this Comparison; and, if it be not
through our own fault, we may enjoy our selves, together with thee; yea, and
thou do also rejoice to be with us, since thou declarest, That it is thy
delight, to be with the Children of men. O my Lord, what is this? For,
whenever I hear but this word, it is to me, of great consolation; yea and
was so, when I found my self in the worst condition. But is it possible, after
this, O my dear Lord, that there should be, in the whole world, any one
Soul, which ariuing to receive such Favors, and Regalo's at thy hands, and
understanding, that thou reioycest so highly in her, should yet return to
offend thee, after the receiving of so many Favors, and so great
demonstrations of the love, thou bear her; in such sort, as that they cannot
possibly be doubted, since the effects do so manifestly declare it. Yes, yes,
it is most certain, that there is such a Soul in the world, which has
offended thee; and that, not once, but often; yea, and I am this very Soul.
And I beseech thy Divine Goodness, O my Lord, that I may have been, the only
Creature, who ever committed so high a wickedness, and who have been guilty, of
such an excessive ingratitude against thee; though yet already, even from this
very misery of mine, thy infinite goodness, has been able to draw some
advantage; yea, and even by how much the ill has been greater, the great
benignity of thy Mercies has shined so much the more. But now, with how much
reason, may I resolve to celebrate them, for all eternity? I most humbly
beseech thee, O my God, that it may be so; and that I may sing praises to thee,
for ever, since now, thou have vouchsafed to show thy goodness so highly, and so
greatly, to me, that such as see it, are amazed; and, as for me, they carry me
very often, even out of my self. And, if I should once find, that I were
deprived of thee, I could be fit, O my Lord, for nothing, but to return, to
be such a kind of Garden, as that the Flowers being plucked-vp, yet once
again, this miserable earth of mine, would return to be a direct Dunghill,
as it was, before. To the end therefore, that I may praise thee the better,
permit not, I beseech thee, O my Lord, that this Soul may ever grow to be
lost, which thou have bought with so many afflictions of thine own; and which
thou have so often repurchased, again, and again, and taken, from out of the
very teeth, of that hideous Dragon of Hell.

I beseech your Reverence, excuse me, for speaking thus, from the purpose; and
do not wonder at it, since it is, at least, to mine own purpose, to speak as
I do. For, it happens, according to those apprehensions, and reflections,
which the Soul chances to make, when one writes. And sometimes, it falls-out
to be hard enough, to forbear to celebrate the praises of Almighty God, when
it happens, that the penn represents such things, as express the high
obligations, which we have to his Divine Majesty. And I believe, that this,
will be, no way, displeasing to your Reverence; for I am of opinion, that we
may, both of us, do very well, to sing one Song, though yet, after a different
manner; because it is much more, which I owe to Almighty God, then you; in
regard, that he has pardoned me more Sins, as your Reverence knows very
well.

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER
She prosecutes her Discourse of the same matter; and gives some advise, how
persons are to carry themselves, in this kind of Quiet Prayer. She treats,
how many Souls come to ariue to this Degree of Prayer; and that fevv pass
beyond it. The particulars, which are touched here, are not only very
profitable, but very necessary.

LEt us now return to our purpose. This Quietness, and Recollection of the
Soul, is easily perceived, by the satisfaction, and peace, which is infused
into her, with a very great contentment, and calmnes of the Powers of the said
Soul, together with a very great delight. And now it seems to her (because
she is not come yet any further) that already she has nothing left to desire;
and that, with a very good will, she could make the same suite with S. Peter,
That her aboade might be ever there. She dares not stir, or move; nay she
would hardly give her self leave, so much as to take her breath, for fear,
least so, that Good should be flying away, out of her hands, And the while, the
poor, little Soul understands not, that, as, by her own power, she could do
nothing, for the drawing of that good to her self: so is she of less ability,
to detain it there, any longer, then our Lord shall be pleased to grant it. I
have already declared, that in this first Recollection, and Quiet, the Powers,
and Faculties of the Soul, are not wanting; but yet she is so fully satisfied
with God, that, as long, as this occasion lasts, howsoever those two other
Powers may discompose themselves, yet, the Will remaining united with Almighty
God, that Quiet, and calm rest, is not lost, but rather, by little and little,
the Will again recouers, and recollects the Understanding, and Memory. For,
howsoever the said Will be not yet totally ingulfed, yet is she so employed,
without knowing how; that, how diligent soever they be, they know not how to
deprive her, of her contentment, and joy; but rather she goes helping her self,
without any trouble at all, of her own; to the end, that this little spark
of the Love of Almighty God, may not be quenched in her.

I beseech our Lord to allow me grace, that I may give this, to be well
understood; for, there are many, and very many Souls, which ariue to be in
this Degree, or State; and few, which get beyond it; and I know not, who may be
in fault thereof; only I am sure enough, that there is none, in Almighty God.
For, since his Divine Majesty does a Soul the Favor, that she may be able to
ariue to this point, I cannot believe, that he would cease, to carry her much
further, if it were not for some fault of her own. But now it imports the same
Soul very much, that, when she ariues thus far, she may well understand the
great dignity, wherein she is; and the great Favors, which our Lord has
done her; and how, in all good reason, she were no longer to be, as of the
Earth; because it seems now already, that his goodness makes her an Inhabitant
of Heaven, if it be not her fault; and wretched shall she be, if she turn
back; and I believe, it would be then, to go down, low enough, whither I was
going, if the mercy of our Lord had not made me turn yet back again. For the
most part, in my opinion, they give over, for very greiuous faults of their
own; nor is it possible, for any Creature, to quitt so great a good, without
the Note.
blindness of being subject to committ some very great ill. And therefore I
humbly beseech those Souls, even for the love of our Lord, to whom his
Majesty has done so great a Favor, as to make them able to reach this
Degree, and State, that they will know themselves; yea, and that they will hold
themselves in great account, with an humble, and holy presumption, that so,
they may never return again, to the Flesh-Potts of Egypt. And yet, that if
through their weakness, and wickedness, and through their naughty, and miserable
condition, they should chance to fall back, as I did, they will ever be yet
representing to themselves, the great good, which they have lost; and that
also, they will grow into suspicion of themselves, and walk along with Fear;
as they have really, great cause, to be afraid. And, if they return not to
Prayer, they will be sure to go from bad, to worse; for, this Note.
indeed do I call a true Fall, when one comes once, to abhor that very way,
whereby they purchased so great a good; and it is with such Souls, that I am
speaking, now. For I say not, that Souls will never offend God, nor that they
will never committ any Sin; though yet still, it were but reason, that
whosoever had begun to receive such Favors, as these, should be very
careful, to keep themselves, from committing any. But, in fine, we are
miserable Creatures; and that, which I advise very earnestly, is, that they
will not giueouer their Prayer; for there, shall they come to know, what they
are doing; and there, shall they gain sorrow, for having left our Lord; and
strength, to rise again. And let that Soul believe, (and let her do it home)
that if she depart from Prayer, she grows, in my opinion, to run great
hazard. I know not, whether I hitt right, in what I say; but, at least, I judge
of others, by my self.

But now, in the mean time, this kind of Prayer, is a certain Spark of the
Fire of that true Love, which our Lord begins to kindle in a Soul; and his
pleasure also is, that the same Soul shall go understanding, what kind of
thing this Love is, and what kind of great Regalo, and delight, it brings.
This Quiet, and Recollection, and little Spark, if indeed it be of the Spirit
of God, and not a gust, either given by the Devil, or yet procured by our
selves; (though yet still, one, who has experience, cannot possibly but
understand, at the very instant, that it is no such thing, as can be acquired;
save that, even in our very Natural condition, we are so greedy of all that,
which is sauourie, that we will needs taste of all) but if as I said, it be of
the Devil, we quickly grow again, to be very cold. And, how much soever we our
selves, may begin to make this Fire also burn, for the procuring of this
gust, we seem to have indeed a mind, to do no other business heerby, then to
cast-on water enough, to quench it. whereas, if, in very deed, this little
Spark were of Divine Love, and were conveyed by Almighty God, into the Soul,
how small, and poor soever it be, it would find some shift, or other, to make
a mighty noise. And if the Soul do not quench it, by her own fault, this
proves that very thing, which begins to make a huge kind of fire; and sends
forth, great flames from it self (as I shall declare in fit place) of that
mighty love of God, which his Divine Majesty is graciously pleased, that
perfect Souls should enjoy. And this very Spark, is a certain kind of
sign, and even pawn, which his Divine Majesty gives to that Soul, to show
that he chooses her out, for great things, if she will make her self fit to
receive them. I say, this is a mighty gift, yea and far greater, then I am
any way able to express. And it is matter of much grief to me, that (as I
was saying) I know many Souls, which ariue thus far, and that yet, there
are so very few, which pass further, (at least, as they ought to pass) that I
am even ashamed to confess it. I say not, that there are so very few, who
pass on; for it may very well be, that there are many; for God does not
sustain us for nothing; but I only speak of such, as I have seen.

For my part, I would earnestly wish them, not to hide their Talent, since, it
seems, Almighty God chooses them out, for the profit of many others; and
especially in these times, when it is so necessary, that his Divine Majesty
should have strong friends, to support, and uphold such, as are weak. And let
them all, who find, that they have received this great Favor, at our Lord's
hands, esteem themselves for strong, if they know, how to correspond well, with
the laws, which a firm, and fast freindship, even of this very world,
requires. And if they will not, let them apprehend very much, and fear, that
they shall do themselves a great deal of hurt; yea, and I pray God, that it
may be to none, but themselves.

That, How the Soul is to carry it self in Quiet Prayer.
which the Soul is to do, in these times of enjoying this Quiet, is but only,
Note.
that with suauitie, and without noise, she employ the Will to understand, with
much calmnes, and discretion, that the Soul is not to negotiate with Almighty
God, by the strength of the Arm. I call it noise, if the Understanding go
seekingout many words, and considerations, to give thanks for this benefit;
and to make up, a mighty heap of her defects, and sins, to show, that she
deserves not this Favor. For all, is in motion now; and the Understanding
represents many things to us; and the Memory is boiling up; and really, these
Powers of the Mind, are wont to give me trouble enough, at times; and, in
regard that I have but a weak Memory, I cannot, in these cases, subdue them.
But those other considerations, and mental discourses, be indeed no better,
then as so many great loggs of wood, which are laid, with small discretion,
upon that little Spark of fire, to quench it. And therefore let her know, and
say, with great humility: O Lord, what am I able to do here? What has this
Servant, or Slave, to do, with the Lord of Heaven, and Earth? Or else, she may
use such other words, as shall present themselves then, in the way of Love. But
note here, that she must be very, very well grounded, upon knowing that to be
true, which she says.

Now, as for that, which concerns the Understanding, let the Soul consider
it, no otherwise, then merely, as if it were a Miller; and, if she will needs
give it part of that, which she enioyes, or shall labor to recollect it also
to her self, she will find, that it is not, to prove well with her. For, many
times it is seen, that, during this Union, and repose, or rest, in the Will,
the Understanding is still much out of order; and, if the Will cannot be be
able to arrest it, it is better, to let it alone, then that she should still
go hunting after it; I say, the Will. But let it remain enjoying that Favor,
and be recollected, and shut-vp in it self, like a wise A true and happy
Comparison.
Be; for, if no one of the Bees, should go into the Hiue, but all, be gadding
abroad, so to be still ferching one another home, there would little store of
honey be made. And so, a Soul will loose very much, if she be not well
advertised of this; and especially, if the Understanding be quick, and sharp.
For, if once such an one, begin to put discourses in order, and light upon
some pretty reasons, to the purpose, she will, if they be handsomely said,
begin to think, that she performs, some great exploit. But, the discourse,
which is to be used here, must be a knowing clearly, and confessing plainly,
that there is no other reason at all, why Almighty God should ever do us so
great a Favor, then his own only goodness; and to consider, that we are now
approached so near to him; and to beg Favors of him; and to beseech him also,
for his Church, and for all such, as have recommended themselves to us; and so
also, for the Souls in Purgatory; and this, not by the noise of words, but
only by a feeling desire, to be heard, by his Divine Majesty.

This is a Prayer, which comprehends very much; and we shall obtain more
thereby, then by multiplying much rolling discourse, by way of the
Understanding. But let the Will stirr-vp her self, by some reasons, which will
easily represent themselves to her then, when she finds her self to be so very
much improued; to quicken-vp her Love, and to make her perform certain
amourous acts, of how great things she would be glad to do for one, to whom
she owes so very much; without admitting, and permitting, as I said, that the
understanding part, should make a noise, in the search, and pretense, of doing
high and mighty matters. For here, any few, little, poor strawes, presented,
and offered-vp with Humility (and they may be sure enough, to be strawes, if
we bring them) will make a great deal more, to the purpose, and will help to
kindle a good fire more quickly, then a great deal of bigg loggs of wood, will
be able to do. I mean, reasons, which, in our opinion, shall be very sure, to
quench, and put-out the fire, even in the turning of a hand.

This is good for learned men, who command me to write all this; for, through
the goodness of God, it may be hoped, that all of them ariue hither; and it
might perhaps, so happen amongst them, that this time would pass away, in
applying some places of Scripture. But though that kind of knowledge could not
fail to be useful to them, both before such occasions as these, and also
after, yet, at these very times of Prayer, there would be little occasion, to
use it, in my opinion; unless they had a mind, to cool the feruorous
employment of the Will. For, the Understanding finds it self then, to possess
such an excessive kind of claritie, by being so near to Light it self, that
even I (with being so poor, and miserable, as I am) seem to be another kind
of Creature. And it is most certainly true, that it has happened to me, being in
this kind of Quiet, and without understanding, in effect, any thing of the
Prayers, which are recited, in Latin, and especially of the Psalter, that not
only I understand the Verse in Spanish, but I pass also, yet further on, and
delight my self highly, in considering, what the meaning of that Spanish, is. I
speak not here, of what it might import, if such persons were to preach, or
teach others; for then it would be fit to serve themselves, of that advantage,
toward the assisting of their neighbors to that good; and to help also poor
people, who know very little, like me. For, Charity is a very great matter;
and so is this helping souls forward; so that always, it be done, purely, for
God.

But now, in these times of possessing this great Quiet, let the Soul be
suffered to remain in rest, with her true repose, and let Learning be laid
aside; for, time will come afterward, when it will fall-out to be held, in so
high account, that they would by no means, have missed that treasure of
knowledge, if it were but only, for the power it gives them, to do more, and
better service, to his Divine Majesty; for it assists very much, in order to
that excellent end. But yet believe me still, that, in the presence of that
Infinite Wisdom, a very little attention to exercise Humility, and one single
act of that virtue, is more worth, then all the knowledge of the whole world.
For here, there is no room, for disputing of Questions, or arguing Cases, but
only to know with truth, and plainenes, what we are; and to represent our
selves, with great simplicity, in the sight of Almighty God; who desires,
that the Soul should make her self, as very ignorant, and silly, as, in very
deed, she is, when once she comes to appear in his presence; since his Divine
Majesty descends so much below himself, as to endure her, near his own
person; all we, being that, which we are.

The Understanding will also move it self here, to give certain thanks to
Almighty God, which may be handsomely ordered, and composed; but the Will,
with a certain kind of Quiet and peace, and with a not daring, like the
Publican of the Gospel, so much as lift-vp her eyes, pays yet more
retribution of thanks, then the Understanding, perhaps, knows how to do,
with reuoluing all the Rhetoric, in the world. But, in fine, we are not
totally, in this case, to forbear to make Mental Prayer; no, nor yet
sometimes, to use some Vocal Words, if we will, and can. And I say, can;
because if the Quiet be great, and deep, they will hardly enough be able to
speak, without making it cost them much pain.

In The good Spirit very easily discerned from the bad.
my opinion, we may well understand, when this is of the Spirit of Almighty
God; and when it happens to be procured, by our selves, though it be upon a
beginning of that devotion, which God gives us. For, when, as I have said, we
will needs resolve our selves, of our selves, to procure to pass on, to this
possessing the Quiet of the Will, it uses to work no good effect, at all; but
quickly ends, and leaves nothing but drynes, behind it. And, if it chance to
proceed from the Devil, a Soul, which is exercised in this kind, will, I
believe, grow easily to understand it; for, in that case, it will leave a
certain kind of disquiet, and little affection to Humility, and an untoward
disposition, in order to the producing of those effects, which the Spirit of
Almighty God, is wont to breed; nor does it also leave, either light, in the
Understanding, or a constant love of truth, in the Will. And this, will do a
Soul, either very little hurt, or none at all, if she direct, and address the
suauitie, and delight, which then she feels, to the glory of Almighty God;
and, if she lodge her thoughts, and desires, upon him, as I have formerly
advised, the Devil will gain little, by the bargain. Nay, rather Almighty
God will so dispose of things, that he shall loose much, even by that very
delight, which he causes in her Soul; for, this very delight, shall be a
means, to make that Soul, which conceaues, that it proceeds from God, to come
again, often to Prayer, with desire to receive more delight, Or else, if the
Soul be very humble, and not withal, very curious, nor very much interessed,
in taking delights (though even they be spiritual) but be indeed, a true
friend to the Cross, she will make very little account of any gust, which the
Devil can give her; which yet she shall never be able to do, if, indeed, it be
the Spirit of God; for, in that case, she will ever be sure, to hold it, in
very high account. Now, when the Devil propounds such a business, (since he is
all, made of Lies) whenever he sees a Soul abase, and humble her self, by
means of that delight, and gust, which she receaues (for, indeed, we are to
have very great care, to procure to prove very humble, upon all the occasions
of Prayer, and gusts) the Devil will not return to tempt us very often, when
he co^siders, how much he looses, by the endeavor.

For this reason, and upon many other considerations, did I advertise, in the
First Degree, and State of Prayer (which answers to the First way of drawing
Water, in the Garden) that it is a Note this point, above all.
principal business, when the Soul is entering first, upon Prayer, to begin
to untie her self, from the desire of all kind of sensible contentment; and to
enter upon this only resolution, to help our Lord JESUS, to carry his Cross;
like good Caualliers, who are resolved to serve their King without wages, since
they are so sure of him, as they are. And we are also, still to carry our
eyes, upon that true, and everlasting Kingdom, which we procure to acquire.

It is a very great point, to have this ever in view, and especially in the
beginnings; for afterward, it is seen so very clearly, that it may rather be
fit, to forget it; to the end, that we may be able even to live, then procure
to be remembering, that the world is to last very little; and that all, in fine,
is nothing; and that here, the ease and rest, which we can have, is to be
esteemed for nothing. This may seem to be a very poor, and base consideration;
and so indeed it is; for they, who have proceeded to more perfection, would
take it for an affront, and would even blush, and be ashamed amongst
themselves, if they thought, they forsook the goods of this world, because
they must come once, to have an end. For, although those goods were to last
always, they would yet rejoice to leave them, for the love of our Lord; and
still the more perfect they were, they would rejoice so much the more; yea, and
the more also would they rejoice, the longer they believed, they were to last.
In these men, this Love, is already growne-vp to strength; and it is this,
which works most; but for such, as are but Beginners, it is a point of highest
importance (and they must, by no means, hold it for low) to be content, to
leave all gusts, for God. For, the benefits, which are gained by this
consideration, are great; and therefore do I advise it so much. Nay, even
those others, who are most elevated, and accomplished in Prayer, will have need
also of such considerations, as these. And there are times, when Almighty God
will try them; nay it will seem, as if this Divine Majesty would forsake them.
For (as I have said already, and I would feign not have it be forgotten) the
Soul in this life, which we live, increases not, as the Body does; though yet
we say it do; and really, it does increase; but yet a Child, after he is
grown, and become tall, and proves to be already a man, returns not to
decrease again, and to have a little body. Yet now, in the point of a Soul,
our Lord will have it be otherwise, by what I have seen of my self; for I know
it not, in respect of others; and it ought to humble us, for our own greater
good, and to the end also, that we may not be negligent, as long as we shall be
in this bannishment; since he, who is highest in virtue, shall do well, to
fear himself most, and to trust himself, least. The times, perhaps, may come,
when even they, who have their Will, so conform to the Holy Will of Almighty
God, that they would rather be tormented, and endure a thousand deaths, then
swerve from it, shall do well, to be in doubt, that even they, may grow to
fall, into some great offense of his Divine Majesty. And so, there are
certain times, when they shall see themselves so assaulted by temptations, and
persecutions, that, to the end, they may not commit gross sins, they will
have need to serve themselves, of the First Defensive weapons of Prayer; and
return to remember, and consider, that all the world, is finally to end; and
that there is a Heaven, and a Hell; and to use such considerations, as these.

But now, returning to what I was saying, a great foundation it is (for being
freed from the subtle enterprises, and gusts, which the Devil is wont to give)
to begin with a firm A most necessary Document.
purpose, at the very first, to walk in the way of the Cross; and to desire
no such thing, as gusts; since our Lord himself showed this way of perfection;
by saying: Take thou up thy Cross, and follovv me. For he is to be our
Pattern; and whosoever shall follow his counsels, and that, for no other
reason, then to content him, may be sure, that he shall have nothing to fear.
And by the spiritual profit, which they shall find in themselves, they will
easily come to know, that the Devil had no hand therein; and though they should
even return to fall again, there will yet remain one sign, that our Lord
had been there: which is, That they will quickly rise again; besides these
others, which I shall now declare.

When it is the Spirit of Almighty God, there will be no need at all, to go
in Quest, and Sent, after certain reasons, to draw humility, and confusion,
from thence. For, our Blessed Lord himself, is wont to impart it, in those
cases, after a very different manner, from that, which our selves can procure,
by any pretty little considerations of our own; all which, are nothing, in
comparison of a certain true A great blessing, by means of this Prayer.
Humility, that comes along with a light, which our Lord instructs us in,
here; and which breeds such a real confusion in us, as even does e^tirely
defeat us. And the knowledge, which Almighty God is wont to give us, to the
end, that we may perfectly understand, that we have no good at all, of our
selves, is a thing very sufficiently perceived; and still, so much the more, as
we receive the higher Favors, from his hands. It also imparts to a man, a very
great desire, to proceed in Prayer; and he will not give it over, for any
trouble, which may possibly succeed to him. He offers himself, and is ready to
endure all things. He has also a kind of assured hope, that he shall be saved;
though yet still, not without humility, and fear. By this time, he also
instantly forsakes all kind of servile fear, of his Soul; and it gives a
great deal of growth, to a Filial fear, in stead thereof. He sees, that now
he beginns to bear a certain love, toward Almighty God, which is far from
any interest of his own; and he couets to get times for Solitude, that so, he
may have the better opportunity, to enjoy that good. In fine, (that I may not
weary my self too much) this is a direct beginning, of all good things; a
State, wherein the Flowers are now upon the very point, to blossom. And all
this, the Soul sees very clearly; and can, by no means, at that time,
conceive, but that God was, and will be with her, till such time, as she shall
return, to find her self guilty of faylings, and imperfections, toward him;
for, in that case, she fears all things; and it is fit, that she do so.
Though yet, there are These, are the more generous minds.
Souls in the world, to which it proves more useful, to believe, for a most
certain truth, that they are well with Almighty God; then all the fears of
the world, are able to give them. For, if the Soul, in her self, be apt to be
enamoured, and grateful, the memory of that great Favor, which God did her,
will be of more power, to make her return, to his Divine Majesty, then all
the torments of Hell, which they can possibly be ever able to represent. At
least (as wicked, as I am) it happened after this manner, to me. Now, as for the
signs of a good Spirit, I will speak of them hereafter, more at large; for
now I cannot do it, since it costs me so much trouble, of many kinds, to get
them written our, fair; and I believe, that, with the favor of our Lord, I
may be able to hitt right, in this kind; for, (besides the experience, which I
have, whereby I came to understand many things) I know somewhat, by means of
some learned men, who, indeed, are very learned; and of some person's also, who
are very holy; to whom it is great reason, to give belief. And therefore, let
not other Souls be so very much afflicted, and vexed, as I have been; when
once, through the goodness of Almighty God, they shall be come on, so far, as
to find themselves in this State.

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.
She treats of the Third Degree of Prayer, and goes declaring some very high
points; and what a Soul, which ariues thus far, may be able to do; and
what effects, these so great Favors of our Lord, are accustomed to work.
The sense heerof, is very fit, to raise the Spirit high, in the praises of
Almighty God; and it is also of great consolation, for the Soul, which
ariues to this State.

LEt us now come to speak of the Third Water, wherewith this Garden is
watered; for, this, is a running Water of a River, or Spring; and it waters it
with much less labor; though yet the distribution thereof, causes some. Our
Lord will here so help the Gardner, that, in some sort, he will be, as it were,
the Gardner himself, and, in effect, the Doer of all. This is a sweet repose,
or sleep of all the Powers, which are yet neither totally lost, nor yet do
they know, how they work. This gust, and delight, and suauitie, is greater,
beyond all comparison, then the former; for, the Water of this grace, gets-vp
to the very throat of the Soul; in such sort, that now it cannot go forward;
nor knows, how to do it; nor yet would, by any means, return backward; but
enioyes an excessive kind of glory. It is, as when a man is already, with the
Holy As when one is dyinge.
Candle, in his hand; so that now, there wants very little, of dying; but it is
of that very death, which is desired; for she is enjoying the greatest
delight, that can be imagined, in that agony of hers; and me thinks, it is no
other thing, then even to dye, as it were, entirely, to all the things of this
world, and to be enjoying Almighty God. For my part, I can think of no other
terms, wherewith to express it, or declare it; nor knows the Soul, at that
time, what to do; nor, whether she should speak, or be silent; or laugh, or
weep. This is an admirable State of Mind.
It is a glorious kind of Frenzy; and a Celestial kind of Folly, where
yet, true wisdom is learnt; and it is a most delightful manner of enjoying,
for the Soul, in a Superlatiue Degree. It is true that it may be about some
five, or six years, since first our Lord vouchsafed to allow me this kind of
Prayer, often, and in great abundance; and that I neither did, either perfectly
understand it, nor yet can exactly declare it; and for my part, I made account,
when I was come hither, that I could say, either little, or nothing. And yet I
well understood, that this was not an entire Union of all the Powers of the
Soul; and yet still, that it was clearly more, then might be found in the
former Degree of Prayer; and yet withal, I must ever confess, that I could
not tell, how to know, and much less exactly determine, what this difference
was. But I well believe, that, for the humility, which your Reverence has
showed, in being desirous to help your self, by so great a simplicity, as
mine, our Lord gave me this Prayer, this day, immediately after my receiving the
B. Sacrament; yet without my being able, to go forward. And he put these
Comparisons into my head, and taught me the manner, how to express them, and
what the Soul is to do, in these cases; and really, I was amazed at it; for,
I understood all this business, at an instant. Many times, I was, as it were,
out of my self, and as if I had been even inebriated with this love; and yet I
could never understand, how it was. Only I knew very well, that it was God; but
I could not tell the manner, how he wrought in me, at that time. For it is the
very truth, that the The true State of the Powers of the Mind, in this
Prayer.
Powers are, as it were, all united, though yet not so ingulfed, but that still
they work; and I have been extremely ioyed, that, at length, I am come to
understand it; and Blessed be our Lord for ever, who has regaled me, in so
high a degree. These Powers have only now ability, to busy themselves
totally, upon Almighty God; nor does it seem, that any of them now, even
dares so much as houer, or stir, not, as it were, breath, if we do not
divert our selves then, with great endeavor; yea and even so, me thinks, we
can scarce do it entirely, at that time. A multitude of words, are conceived
here, by the Soul, in praise of our Lord; but yet so, as that they are without
any order, unless our Lord himself be pleased, to order them; for, at least,
the Understanding serves here, for nothing. The Soul would feign cry out, in
praise of Almighty God; and she is then, in such condition, as that she knows
not, how to co^taine her self. This is now, a very fauourie kind of disquiet;
and now, yea even very now, the Flowers open themselves, to blossom; and
already do they begin, to yield their odor. And here the Soul would be
glad, that all the world might be able to see, and understand her glory, that
so, Almighty God might be praised; and that they might be able to assist her
therein; and that she might give them part of her joy; as not knowing, how to
enjoy it all, her self. Me thinks, she is now, to be like her, of the Ghospel,
who had a mind, to call-in all her Neighbors. Or else, like, the admirable
Spirit of the Royal Prophet David who might feel some such thing in himself,
as this, when he played upon his Harp, and sung, in honor, and praise of
Almighty God. I find my self very much devoted, to this Glorious King; and I
wish, that all the world were so; especially all we, who are Sinners.

O my dear Lord; what kind of thing, is a Soul, when she finds her self in
such a condition; as this? She would feign become, all Tongue, to praise our
Lord. She vtters a thousand holy impertinencies; but yet, she does ever
endeavor to hitt right, in pleasing him, who holds her there, in that manner.
I know of a certain person, who, though she were no Poet, yet instantly did
she happen to make certain Verses, all, extempore, which were very significant
in the way of complaint, and declared her pain very well, though they were not
made, by her own Understanding, alone; but, for the better enjoying that
glory, which gave her so delightful a pain, she complained thereof, to her
God. She wishes, that she might be all torn in pieces, both in Body, and
Soul, to show the joy she finds, to feel this pain. What torments could
then, be set before her, which then, she would not be glad to endure, for the
love of our Lord? She clearly sees, that the Martyrs did very little, on their
parts, when they suffered torments; for, the Soul knows then, very well, that
her strength comes to her, by some other way, then from her self.

But now, what will she feel, when she comes back, to employ her wits, upon
knowing how to live again, in this world; and to return both to the cares,
and complements, thereof. And certainly, me thinks, I am far, from having
exaggerated any thing, concerning this manner of joy, which our Lord is
pleased, to make a Soul possess, even in this place of bannishment; for, all
that, which I have said of it, is very poor, and mean, in comparison of what
it is, in it self. Blessed be thou for ever, O Lord; and let all things praise
thee, for ever; And be pleased, O my King, (I most humbly beseech, and beg, at
thy hands) that, since when even now I am not wholly out of this holy
Celestial Frenzy, or folly, (which, through thy goodness, and mercy, and so
wholly without any merit of mine, thou do me the great Favor to impart,)
either all such persons, as with whom I shall have occasion to converse, may
be even, as it were, madd fools, for thy love; or else, dispose thou so, of me,
as that I may never converse more, with any Creature; or else finally, O Lord,
give order, that I may have nothing to do in this world; or, at least, take me
out of it, quite. For now already, O my God, this Servant of thine, is no
longer able to endure so great afflictions, as she feels to come upon her, by
her being thus, without thee. And if she needs must live, she desires to have
no ease in this life; nor, indeed, do thou give her any; for it is death to
her, to see her self eat; she is afflicted, by the sleep she takes; she finds,
that her whole life, is spent, and past through, in Regalo's; and yet that now,
there is nothing, but thy self, who can indeed regale her; So that it seems, I
live now even against nature, since now I would feign not live in my self, but
only in thee.

O thou my true Lord, and my Glory! how delicate, and yet how hugely heavy,
is that Cross, which thou have prepared, and provided for such, as ariue to
this State? It is delicate, because it is incredibly sweet; and it is heavy,
because there grow to be certain times, when there is not patience enough, in
the whole world, to enable us to endure it; and yet the Soul would never
desire, to be free from it, unless it were, to the end, that she might find
her self once, to be with thee. And when also the same Soul remembers, that
she was never able to do thee service, in any thing; and that, by continuing
to live, it may yet, perhaps, be possible for her, to serve thee, she would be
glad, if she might lie under a very much more heavy burden, then the former;
yea, and that she might also never dye, even till the very end of the world.
She values not any manner of repose, or rest, so much as to the weight of one
hair, in comparison of doing thee any poor little service; nor does she
know, what more to desire; but she is only sure of thus much, that she desires
nothing, but thy self.

O my Son (for you, to whom this is directed, and who have commanded me to
write it, are so humble, that you will needs be called, by that name) let these
things be only for your self, when you see, that I am gone out of all limits;
for there is no kind of reason, which suffices to keep me from leaving the use
of humane reason, when our Lord is pleased to draw me thus, out of my self. Nor
do I know, or believe, that it is I, who am speaking thus, ever since I
received the B. Sacrament, this morning. For, me thinks, I do but dream, of
what I see; and I would be glad, not to see any other, then such, as are sick
of that very same disease, which is now upon me. I humbly beseech your
Reverence, that we may all, become like madd fools, for his love, who was
content to be called Fool, for the love of us. And, since your Reverence
says, that you wish me so cordially well, I desire, that you will show it, by
disposing your self in such sort, as that our Lord may do you this Favor.
For, I see, there are very few men, who have not more wit, then even they
need, for the effecting such things, as they hold, to concern them; but now
perhaps, I may have more, then they all. But do not you suffer this, my dear
Father, (since you are so, as well as my Son; because you are my
Confessarius, to whose hands I have committed the care of my Soul) but
vnbeguile me, by telling me truth; though truths be, now a-dayes, seldom told.
And now I would be very glad, that we Five, who, at the present, love one
another, in Christ our Lord; That, I say, as others meet in secret, against the
Service of his Divine Majesty, for the ordering of their wickedness, and their
Heresies; we also might procure, sometimes, to meet, for the disabusing one
another; and to conferr, how we might reform our selves, and give Almighty
God, more gust. For, there is no Creature, that knows himself so well, as they
do, who look upon us; so that it be with true love, and care of our
amendment. I speak of this, as a Secret, and in your care; for now, already,
no such language, as this, is used; when even Preachers themselves, go so
composing their Sermons, as that they may be sure, to give men no disgust by
them. But their intention, forsooth, is so good, as that the fruits will be
answerable to it; and so we see, how few grow to mend their lives. But how
comes it now to pass, that they are not very many, who give over, to be
public in following vice, by means of those Sermons, which are made? Shall I
tell, what I think? It is, because the Preachers, make themselves too wise.
Not yet, that they are indeed, without wit, by reason of any great fire of the
Love of Almighty God, which is in their hearts, as the Apostles were; and so
their flame falls-out to give but very little heat. I say not, that I expect,
that it should be so great, as theirs was; but yet I heartily wish, that it were
greater, then I can now find it is. Your Reverence knows, in what, very much,
would consist; Namely, in having this life of ours, in detestation; and honor,
in very little estimation; and that, rather then fail, both to speak truth,
and to maintain it, for the glory of Almighty God, we would be as well
contented to loose all, as to gain all. For, whosoever is resolved, in very
good earnest, to put it all, to hazard, for the love of our Blessed Lord, will
be as well content, with the, one, as with the other. I say not, that I am any
such Creature; but I heartily wish I were.

O great, and gallant Liberty, to esteem it for a direct captivity, to be
bound to live, and converse, according to the Laws of this World! For, when
this is once obtained, at the hands of Almighty God, there is not so base a
Slave upon Earth, as would not venture all; that, so he might redeem himself,
and return home to his own Country. And, since this, wherein we are, is the
true way; there is neither cause, nor color, why we should desire, to loyter
in it. For we shall never finish the gaining of so great a treasure, till our
Lord give us his grace, to do it well. I humbly pray your Reverence, to tear
this, which I have written, if you think fit; and pardon me; for I have
presumed too far.

THE SEAVENTEENTH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the same Argument, about this Third Degree of Prayer; And
finishes the declaration of the effects, which it works; and declares also,
the disadvantage, which the Memory, and Imagination, are wont to bring, in
this case.

I Have already spoken, to some good proportion, of this manner of Prayer, and
of that, which the Soul is to perform therein; or rather of what God does in
her; for now it is himself, who takes the Office of Gardner, upon him; and he
will have her, take her case; and only, that the Will may accept of those
Favors, which she enioyes; and she must offer her self, to go through, with
all that, which he, who is true Wisdom, shall be pleased to ordain; for which
purpose, there is really need, of a great deal of courage. For, so great, *
and high, uses that joy to be, that sometimes it seems, that there needs not so
much, as a hairs breadth, for making the Soul go instantly out of that
Body; and O, what a happy death would that be! And here, me thinks, that
comes in, very well, which once was said to your Reverence, that you must leave
your self wholly, in the Arms of God; If he will carry you to Heaven, That you
go; If to Hell, there will be no torment there, so that you be with him, who
is your total good; If instantly to make an end of this life, That you desire
nothing else; And yet, that you be as well pleased, if yet, he will have you
live, a thousand years. Let his Divine Majesty dispose of you, as of a thing,
which is properly his own; for, your Soul is now no longer yours, but it
wholly belongs to our Lord; and therefore you must be altogether out of care.
Now I say, that in so elevated, and high a Prayer, as this, she understands
that she can perform it, without any wearines at all, to the Understanding;
for when God gives this Prayer to a Soul, she is able to do all this; yea,
and can also work other manner of effects, then these. Only me thinks, she
is, as it were, amazed, to see our Lord perform the Office of a good Gardner,
so well; and is not pleased, that she should take any trouble or pains; but
only that she is to delight her self, in beginning to enjoy the odor of those
Flowers. For, in one such approach as this, (how little a while soever it may
last) such a kind of Gardner this is (for, he is the Creator of the Water; and
he gives it so very freely, beyond measure) that, what this single poor Soul
was not able to assemble, by the labor of tyring-out her Understanding, in
twenty years together, this Celestial Gardner does it all, in one moment of
time; and the Fruit does so grow, and become ripe, that it is able, through the
good pleasure of our Lord, to sustain the Owner thereof, and to enable him, to
live upon the gain, which he makes by it. Only, he gives not this Soul leave,
to Present of this Fruit, to others, till such time, as she be grown strong,
by what her self has eaten of it; and she must not squander it away, in trying
idly, how it tastes. For so, (she not valuing the profit, which she might make
by it, nor they paying her any thing for it, to whom she gave it) she comes
to maintain, and feed them up, at her cost, whilst her self may, by degrees,
grow to be ready to dye, of hungar. This will perhaps, be well comprehended by
them, who have a right kind of understanding, and will know, how to apply it
better, then I can declare it; and now I am even weary, to think if it.

In a word, the truth is this, that the virtues, which are obtained in this
Prayer, remain so much stronger here, then in the Prayer of Quiet (whereof I
spoke before) that the Soul cannot be ignorant thereof. For she finds her
self to be wholly grown, another kind of thing, then she was; and she begins
(she even scarce knows, how) to act, and work great things, by the odor,
which the Flowers yield, of themselves. For now, our Lord is pleased, that they
may sprowt, and open; to the end, that she may know, she has virtues; though
yet with all, she see very clearly, that she was not able, to acquire, and get
them; but that the Celestial Gardner, was pleased to impart them to her, as it
were, at an instant. The humility also of this Soul, is much greater, and
more profound, then in the former Prayer; because she sees more clearly, that
her self did, neither much, nor little, but only consent, that our Lord might
do her those Favors; and she embrace them, with her Will. To me it seems,
that there is, in this kind of Prayer, a very evident How there is an Union in
this Prayer; and how there is none.
Union of the whole Soul, with God; save that, it also seems, that his Divine
Majesty gives liberty to the Powers thereof, to understand, and enjoy the
abundance, of what he works therein. Now, it happens sometimes, yea and many
times, that the Will being thus united (that your Reverence may see, both that
this may be, and may also be able, to understand it, when you have it; and, at
least, it puts me almost out of my wits, and therefore I relate it to you
here) knows, and understands, that it is tyed-vp, and bound, and yet in
condition of enjoying. I say again, it knows, that it self, being the Will,
remains in much Quiet, whilst yet, on the other side, the Understanding, and
Memory, are free, and are able to treat of businesses, and to attend to
certain works of Charity. Now, though this seem to be all one, with that,
which was spoken of, in that other Discourse of Quiet Prayer, yet it is
different. Because there, the Soul is in such case, as it would feign not
stir, nor move it self, in that kind of Prayer, as enjoying the leisure and
contemplation of Marie; I mean, of S. Marie Magdalen; Whereas here, in this
Prayer, she can also act the part of Martha. So that she does now, in effect,
perform the offices, both of the Active, and of the Contemplative life; and
all at once; and is able to exercise her self, upon those businesses, and
works of Charity, which are incident to her condition. And she can also read;
though yet still, the Powers, or Faculties of her Soul, are not absolutely the
Lords of themselves; and still she vndersta^ds well enough, that the greatest
part of her self (that is to say, her chief attention, and operation) is
somewhere else. It is just, as if we were speaking with some one; and that
withal, at the self same time, some other person were speaking to us, in such
sort, as that we were not entirely attentive; either to the one, or to the
other. But it is a thing, which is perceived very clearly, and gives great
satisfaction, and contentment, whenever it ariues; and it uses to be a very
great preparation, and disposition, to the end, that, whenever the Party may
be in any Solitude, or exemption from business, the Soul may instantly enjoy a
very perfect quietness, and repose. This is a certain Being, as if a person
received such a kind of satisfaction, and cessation of appetite in himself, as
that he would have no need at all, to eat, but felt his stomach content; in
such sort, as that he would not easily apply himself to taste, of whatsoever
should be set before him; but yet withal, that, if he saw such meat as he
liked, he would not forbear: to eat of it. For just so, does the Soul, not
satisfye her self, nor is content to feed upon the meat of this world; because
she finds that, in her self, which gives her satisfaction, it being the far
greater co^tentment, which she has in Almighty God; and her desire also is,
to satisfye even those desires of hers; and this is that, which she procures.

There is also, another kind of Union, which even yet, is not so much, as an
absolute, and entire Union, though it be greater then that, of which I was
speaking before; and not altogether so great, as that of this Third Water; And
your Reverence will be very glad (supposing, that our Lord bestow them all,
upon you, if you have them not already) to find it written thus; and directly
to understand, what it is. For it is one kind of Favor, for our Lord to
impart the same very Favor; and another, to understand, what grace, and
Favor, that is; yea, and yet another, to be able, to unfold, and declare, how
it passes. And howsoever it may seem, that there may no more, then the First of
these Three, be needful, for the keeping of the Soul, from being in a kind
of confusion, and fear, and for enabling it to go forward, with more courage,
in the way of our Lord, even treading with the very feet thereof, upon all the
things of this world; yet is it a Favor of so great advantage, to understand
it, that it is reason, that both he, who has it, and even he also, who has it
not, should praise our Lord, much, for it; because his Divine Majesty has
been pleased to give it to some one, who is yet alive, to the end, that he
might also do us good.

Now, it happens also many times to me, that I have this manner of Union,
whereof I am speaking; for it pleases Almighty God, to do me this Favor,
very, very often; and that God recollects, and takes hold of my Will; yea and
also, in my opinion, of my Understanding; for then, it discourses no longer,
but is employed, upon enjoying Almighty God; as one, who stands looking, and
looking, and sees so very much, that he knows not indeed, which way to look;
for, one thing instantly appears, which takes away the sight of the other; and
so, nothing makes any impression at all. The Memory, remains free; and so
also does the Imagination, seem to do; and this Imagination, when it finds it
self thus, all alone, (that is, without being controuled by the Understanding)
it would make a body wonder extremely, to see, what a coil it keeps; and what
a war, it makes; and procures, to put all, out of order. For my part, I am
sure, it tires me; and I am also sure, that I abhor it; and I have often
besought our Lord, that, if it must needs distract me still, after this manner,
he will be pleased, to take it from me, in these occasions. And sometimes I
presume to say thus to him: When, O my God, is this whole Soul of mine, to be
entirely united, in thy praise; and not divided thus, into pieces, without
being so much as able, to serve her self, of her self. But here, do I, in the
mean time, discern the mischief, which has been brought upon us, by Sin;
since it makes us be so subject, to the not doing, of what we so much desire;
which is, to be ever busied about Almighty God.

I say, this happens to me diverse times, and one of those times, was this
very day; and so, I may the better remember it. For, in fine, I see my Soul,
even dissolve, and defeat her self, through the desire, which she has to be
wholly there, where she finds her self, for the most part, to be already; and
yet, that this is impossible, because both the Memory, and Imagination, do
still make such war upon her, that they suffer her not to work, like her
self. And though they be not able, to do her any hurt, in regard that the
other Powers, and Faculties are wanting; yet indeed, they may well be thought,
to do hurt enough, by the disquiet, they give. But yet still I say, that they
do her properly no hurt; because, indeed, they have no strength; nor do they
fix themselves in any one Being, or State. And, in regard that the
Understanding does not help the Imagination, in that, which it represents,
either more, or less, it cannot fasten upon any thing; but skipps, up and
down, from one to another. And it is like those importunate, and unquiet
little Gnatts, which buzze, and whizze by night, here, and there; for just so,
are these Powers wont to go, from one to another. This Comparison seems to
me, to be extremely proper; for though these inferior Faculties, have not
strength, and means, to do harm, yet are they troublesome enough, to such as
feel them. Not do I know, what remedy there is, against this inconvenience;
for hitherto, Almighty God has not enabled me to find any out; and if he
had, I would have been very glad, to use it; for it torments me (as I said)
very often. But in this, is our misery made apparent to us; and so also does
the power of Almighty God shine very clearly in it, since this Faculty of the
Soul, which is loose, can put us to so much trouble, and so tire us, whilst
yet those other, which are employed, and do attend so near to his Divine
Majesty, make us feel so much ease, and joy.

The last Remedy, upon which I have fallen, after my having wearied my self
many years, is that, whereof I spoke, in Quiet Prayer; That we should make no
more account thereof, then we would, of some starke-madd-Foole; but to let it
still alone, in telling that impertinent idle Tale, wherein God only can impose
silence. And since, in fine, it remains to us here, in the nature of a Slave,
we must be content to endure it, as Jacob, did Lya; for our Lord does us Favor
enough, to permit, that we may enjoy Rachel. I say, that it remains as a
Slave; by reason, that it cannot draw the other Powers, or Faculties to it, how
vehemently soever it may strive, but rather, they draw it often to them,
without any difficulty at all. Yea, and sometimes our Lord is pleased to have
pity, to see even the Imagination it self, so very much disquieted, and lost,
through desire to be in company with the other Faculties, and Powers of the
Mind; and then, his Divine Majesty is content, that it also, may be burnt up,
in the fire of that Divine Taper, where those others are already even consumed
to dust; and where (having, as it were, even lost their Natural Being) they
are enjoying so great Blessings, in a Supernatural kind.

In all these ways, of this last Fountaine-Water, whereof I have spoken, the
peaceful rest, and glory of the Soul, is so great, that even the Body does
very manifestly participate of that joy, and delight; I say, it does so, very
manifestly; yea, and the virtues also of the Mind, increase, and grow
stronger, as I have said.

And now it seems to me, that our Lord has declared these States of Prayer,
wherein the Soul may discern her self, as far, as she can be given to be
understood here. And your Reverence shall do well, to conferr about it, with
some such Spiritual person, (who may be learned) as shall have arrived, thus
far. And if he tell you, that all is well, you may conceive, that God has
said it to you; and esteem it, as a great benefit, from his Divine Majesty;
for you will, in tract of time, rejoice (as I have said) very much, to
understand in clear manner, what it is; though now, whilst you have the grace
to enjoy it, he allows you not the Favor, to understand it so. But, as his
Divine Majesty has given you the first part, which is the enjoying: so you
will afterward, perhaps, by your knowledge, and learning, come also to
understand it, by this means. Let him be adored, and praised, for the
eternity of all eternities,

Amen.
THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER
She treats of the Fourth Degree of Prayer. She begins here to declare, in
excellent manner, the great dignity, to which our Lord aduances that Soul,
which is exalted to this State. It serves to animate men much, to endeavor,
that they may ariue to so high a condition, since it may be obtained in this
world, through the goodness of our Lord, though it cannot be deserved. Let this
be read, with consideration, and care.

I Beseech our Lord, that he will teach me, how to use some words, and way of
speech, which may enable me, to say somewhat, of this Fourth Water; for I well
discern, that I have need enough of his Favor heerin; even yet more, then I
had in that of the last; because in that, the Soul does find her self, not to
be wholly dead; and so we may very well say, that she is not dead, because she
remains still in the world; but still (as I affirmed) she has sufficient
understanding, to know, that she is still, here; and that she finds the
Solitude, wherein she is; and serves her self, to some proportion, of the
exterior; at least so far, as, by outward signs, to give that, which she
feels, to be understood. In all that kind of Prayer, and in the manner also of
it, which has been described, the Gardner labors to some proportion; though
yet, in the Prayer of these latter kinds, his labor goes accompanied with so
much joy, and such a happy kind of ease, as that, for his part, he finds no
trouble at all, in it; for he considers it not as Trouble, but as Glory; and
he would be glad, that it might never end. But in this Fourth Degree, or kind
of Prayer, there is no suffering left at all, but only enjoying; though yet,
without any distinct particular understanding, of what is enjoyed. He knows
well enough; that a certain Good, is enjoyed, wherein all good things are
contained, and shut-vp; but yet this Good, is not totally comprehended by him.
All the Senses are taken up, upon the finding, and feeling of this joy; in such
sort, as no one of them, is so dis-employed, as that it can possibly attend to
any thing else, either in the exterior, or interior way. Before, a certain
leave, or liberty was given to these Powers, that they might be able, to make
some kind of demonstration, of the great joy, they felt; but here, the Soul
enioyes much more, beyond comparison; and can give her self also to be
understood, much less. Because there is no means left in the Body; nor yet
has the Soul any at all, wherewith to communicate that joy; but, all things
would then, be disturbance, and even torment to her; yea, and distraction, from
the entirenes of her sweet repose. I say, the Soul is no way able, to
communicate the joy she has, if indeed there be an absolute, and entire Union,
of all the three Powers together, for as long as that Union lasts; and that
also, if she be able to communicate it, I say, there is no absolute Union. In
what manner this thing happens, which they call Union, and what the thing also
is, I am not able to give to be understood. It is declared in that, which they
call Mystical Theology; but as for me, I am not able, so much as to name even
the terms. Nor do I know, what that is, which is called Mind; nor the
difference between Mind, and Soul; nor what also, is Spirit; for, to me, all
these several things, seem to be but one; though yet the Soul, now and then,
spring-vp even out of her self, as if it were a kind of fire, which is burning
up, in a flame; and sometimes this fire increases, with a kind of impetuositie.
Now this flame, rises very much higher, then does the fire; but yet still,
notwithstanding all that, it is no distinct thing, from the very fire; but it
is the flame it self, which still, is in the fire. Your Reverence will
understand this matter, by your learning; but as for me, I know not, how to
declare it better. For my part, the thing, which I pretend to declare, is, what
the Soul finds, and feels, when it is in this Divine Union; for, as for the
knowing, what an Union, in general, is, it is every where understood, well
enough, to be, when two several things, become one.

O my dear Lord! and how good art thou? Blessed be thou for ever; and let all
things praise thee, O my God, who have been pleased, to love us in such sort,
as that we may be able, to speak with truth, of this kind of communication,
which thou vouchsafest to hold with Souls, even in this bannishment of ours;
which, although they were never so holy, and good, yet this latitude of
liberality, and magnificence of thine, were great, in proceeding with them
after this manner. But, in fine, it is all thine own Majesty, and Greatness,
who give, after the rate, of what thou art. O infinite latitude of Bounty!
and how magnificent are thy works? They are able, even to amaze any such
person, as has not his Understanding wholly employed, upon the things of this
world; and who has left himself no room, both for the knowing, and
considering such things, as are real truths. But now, that thou should be
pleased, to fasten such Sovereign Favors upon Souls, which have offended thee
so much, does really, even make an end of my very Understanding; and when
once, I come to consider of this proceeding of thine, I am even unable to pass
on, any further. But indeed, how can any Creature go any whither, in this
case, which shall not be, a mere comeing back again; since no Soul can ever
know, how to give thee any tolerable thanks, for so incomparable Favors? As
for me, I help my self sometimes, with speaking certain impertinencies, which
have neither head, nor foot; and it often happens to me, both when I come from
receiving these Favors, and when also our Lord is beginning to impart them
(for, as for the very time, when I am enjoying them, I have already showed,
that there is then, no power at all, to do any thing) that I express my self
to his Divine Majesty, much after this manner: O Lord, consider well, what
thou do; forget not my so very greiuous Sins so very soon; and though thou
have forgotten them, so far, as to vouchsafe to forgive them, yet remember
them also (I humbly beseech thee) so far, as to make thee put some limits
upon those Favors, which thou art pleased to bestow upon me. Power not, O my
Creator, so precious a liquour as that, into so broken a vessel as this;
since already, thou have seen, how often I have scattered, and spilt it. O
lodge not, and trust not, such a treasure as this, where the appetite, and
affection, to all the consolations of this life, is not yet so totally lost,
and spent, as it ought to be; for, if thou do, it will be utterly wasted. How
can thou find in thy heart, to deliver the strength of this City, and even
the very keys of the Fort, into the hands of such a cowardly Commander, who
is likely not to fail, to give the Enemy entrance, upon the first Assault,
which he shall make. Let not, O my Eternal King, thy love to me, be so great,
as that it should make thee put such precious Jewels as these, into hazard. And
to me, it seems, O my Lord, that thou may give the world occasion heerby, to
undervalue these great Favors of thine; since thou put them into the
custody, and power, of a Creature, who is so wicked, so base, so weak, so
miserable, and of so little worth, in any kind. Who, though I now begin to
labor, that I may not utterly loose them, through thy favor (which also has
no need to be little, considering, what kind of thing I am) shall yet be never
able, to gain any other Creature to thee, by means thereof. In fine, I am a
woeman, and no good woeman, but a very wicked one; and it seems, that these
Talents of thine, are thus, not only to be hidden, by this means, but even to
be quite buried up; since thou put them into so ungracious, and unlucky a
Soil. Thou art not wont, O Lord, to impart such Favors, and Greatnesses as
these, to any Soul, but when there may be hope, that she will be able to
gain many others, to thy Service. And thou know, O my God, already, that I
have, sometimes, begged this Favor; and still I beg it of thee, with my whole
heart, and with the entire affection thereof; and I am resolved to think it
fit, to be content, to loose the highest blessing, which can possibly be
enjoyed upon earth, to the end, that thou may vouchsafe it to some other, who
will profit more by it; that so, thine own glory may be increased.

Both these, and such other things, as these, has it occurred to me, to utter
many times; but yet afterward, I perceived mine own great folly heerin,
together with my little humility; for, our Lord knows very well, what is
fittest for every Creature; and, that there was not to be strength enough, in
my Soul, whereby she might ever grow, to be saved, if his Divine Majesty had
not enriched her, with so great Favors.

But I also now pretend to declare, the graces, and effects, The great effects
of this high Prayer.
which remain by this Prayer, in the Soul; and what that is, which she may be
able to do, of her self; and, if she may, any way, conduce, toward the
bringing her self, to this high State. It happens, that this Elevation of the
Spirit, or Union, come, both of them, with a Celestial kind of Love. For
(according to my way of understanding) this The difference betvvee^ Eleuatio^,
and Union.
Union, is a different things from Elevation; though yet the Soul be elevated,
in this very Union. Whosoever has not tried, and felt this last, will be of a
different conceit; but yet, in my opinion, though even it should be all one,
yet our Lord works therein, after a different manner; And, by the increase,
which the Soul has, of being able to untie her self from the love of all
Creatures, she seems to be very much greater, in that Flight, and Elevation of
the Spirit. And I have clearly seen, that this is a distinct, and particular
Favor, although the things themselves, may be all one, as I say; or at least,
may seem so. But a small fire, is as truly, and really, Fire, as a great one;
and yet still, we see difference enough, between the one, and the other; for,
before a little iron can be able to be made red hot, in a small fire, a good
space of time will be spent; but now, if the fire be great, the iron, though it
be also great, will loose the appearance of iron, very quickly. Just so, does it
seem to me, to happen in these two sorts of Favors from our Blessed Lord; and
I know, that whosoever may ever have arrived, to be in Rapt, will understand me
well; but such as have had no experience therein, will hold all that, to be
impertinent, which I have said. Perhaps also it is so indeed; and so, as he
will have had reason, who beleiues it. For, how shall such a thing, as I,
presume to speak of such a thing as this; and to give some part of that, to be
understood, which it seems impossible, even to begin to declare, with any
words? So that it is not strange, a whitt, if I talk idly. But yet I believe
this, of our Blessed Lord (because his Divine Majesty knows, that, next to
this act of Obedience, my intention is no other, then to make Souls, even, as
it were, gluttonous, after the obtaining of so high a good) that he will be
pleased, to assist me heerin; and I am sure, I will say nothing, whereof I have
not had much experience. And it is a real truth, that when I began to write
of this Water, I conceived it to be a more impossible thing, for me to treat of
it, then to speak Greek; so very hard, did I find it. Upon this, I gave it
over, and went to receive the Blessed Sacrament. But our Lord be ever praised,
who does so great Favors to ignorant persons. O virtue of Obedience, which art
able to do all things! For, Almighty God did illuminate my understanding,
sometimes, by helping me to the very express words, which I was to use; and,
at other times, by representing the manner to me, how I should declare the
thing; So that, as his Divine Majesty was pleased to do, in the former Degree
of Prayer, it seems, that he will also here declare, what I neither can, nor
know, how to express. But that which now I say, is a most literal truth; and
so, that which shall be good, is his instruction, and doctrine; and whatsoever
falls-out to be ill, it is clear, that it proceeds, and flows, from this deep
Sea of mischief, and Sin, which is my self. And therefore I here affirm,
that if any have arrived to these points, and particulars of Prayer, wherein
our Lord has done so great Favor, to this miserable, and wretched Creature,
(as it is likely, that there are many) if they shall be pleased, to treat of
these things with me, as conceauing, that I am mistaken, and out of the way,
our Lord will so assist this poor Servant of his, as that she may be able, to
go forward, to uphold this truth.

But now, to speak of this last Water, which comes from Heaven, to satisfye,
and even fulfill the whole Garden, by the abundance thereof; if our Lord did
never forbear to give it, whenever there were need, it is evident enough
already, of what case it would be to the Gardner, and that there would never be
any Winter, but always most temperate weather; nor would there ever, be any
want, either of Fruits, or Flowers; and so it may be easily seen, in what
delight he would remain. But, as long as we live in this world, this condition
is a kind of impossible thing; and we must always be in care, that whenever
we shall want one of the Waters, we may procure another. This last, which falls
from Heaven, comes down sometimes, even when the Gardner thinks of it least.
True it is, that these things are almost ever wont to happen, after a long
exercise of Mental Prayer. For, our Lord uses to come, by degrees, to catch
this poor little Bird, and to lodge it then, safely, in the Nest; to the end,
that it may rest, and repose. And after it had put it self long, upon Flights,
procuring, by the exercise of the Understanding, and Will, and, in fine, by all
the Powers it had, to go in search of Almighty God, and to please him, he
vouchsafes to allow it a reward, even in this life; yea, and this, so very
great a reward, that any one little moment thereof, may well suffice, as a full
satisfaction, and retribution, for all that care, and trouble, which he could
ever have endured, in this world.

The Soul being thus, in search of Almighty God, does find her self, as it
were, even sink, under a sweet, and most excessive delight; as being all, in a
certain way of dear faynting; so that the breath is even beginning to fail,
and so also, does all corporal strength; in such sort, as that the Creature is
now not able, so much, as to move her hands, but with much pain. The eyes are
also closed, though without any purpose to shut them; and when, by accident,
they chance to be open, she, in effect, sees nothing distinctly; nor, if she
read, can she so much as judge rightly of any letter; nor can she even
guess, how to name it right. She sees, that indeed, there are letters; but,
the Understanding not giving her any assistance, she knows not how to read,
though she would. She hears, but yet understands not, what she hears; so that
she receaues no other benefit at all, by her Senses, but only, that they will
not permit her, to take the full fruition of her delight; and so, upon the
matter, they do her more hurt, then good. As for speaking, it is a vanity, so
much as to think of any such thing; for she cannot possibly hitt right, so
much as in framing any one word; nor, if she were able to judge it, were she
yet possibly able, to pronounce it; in regard, that all the strength of her
Body, is absolutely lost, for the greater increase of that, of her Soul, that
so, she may the better enjoy her glory. The exterior delight also, which she
feels, is both great, and very certain.

This Prayer puts the person to no manner of inconvenience in any kind, how
long soever it may last; at least, it never put me to any; nor am I able to
remember, (when our Lord did me this Favor) how sick, or weak soever I were,
that I ever found my self the worse; but rather, with much improuement, even in
the way of health. But indeed, what hurt can ever be done to any Creature, by
so great a blessing, as this? It is so known a truth, concerning the exterior
operations, that there can no doubt be made, but that there were natually great
occasions, for their alteration, since our Lord took all their strength from
them, though yet it were with so great delight, that the same grew afterward,
to be greater.

It is true, that in the beginning, this state, and feeling, is wont to pass
away, in very short time; at least, it happened so, to me. But, as for these
exterior signs, as also in this failing of operation in the Senses, it is not
so easily to be given to be understood, when things pass away in short time;
but yet they are discerned with ease, by the excess of the Favors. For, the
clearnes, and heat of the Sun, must needs have been then, very great, when
all that, which came in the way, was so absolutely melted, and dissolved.

Let this also be well noted, that, in my opinion, how long soever that space
of time might seem to be, wherein all the Powers of the Soul were in suspense,
it must needs have been indeed, very short; and, if it should ariue, to half an
hour, it were very much. For my part, I think I was never so long. True it
is, that one can hardly judge, how long they are, since the Parties are
deprived of outward sense: but I say, that it must needs be a very short time,
wherein no one of the Powers, can be able to return again, to it self.

But now, the Will is, indeed, the only Power, which maintains the Work;
for, as for the other two, they quickly become importunate upon her. Yet the
Will remaining quiet, and fixed, suspends them yet again; and so they stay
another little while; and afterward return to live, as before.

In this manner, some whole hours of Prayer, may be passed; yea and sometimes,
they are passed so. For, when the two Powers of the Soul, have tasted of that
Celestial wine, and begin to be inebriated with it, they easily are induced
to loose themselves, once again, so to get still, the more, by the bargain;
and so they go to accompany the Will; and all three, come to be in the act of
enjoying. But this point of being totally lost, and so without framing any
Imagination at all (which Power, in my way of understanding, is also wholly
lost) I say, lasts but a very little time; though yet they come not always, so
wholly to themselves, upon a sudden, but that they may remain, even some
hours, as in a kind of being, still, a little out of the way, and in disorder;
Almighty God vouchsafing, to recollect them again to himself, by little, and
little.

And now let us come to the interior of that, which the Soul is wont to
feel, at these times; and let them declare it, who know how; since it cannot
be well understood, and much less expressed. I was thinking, (when I disposed
my self to write this, (as soon as I had received the B. Sacrament, and after
the end of this very kind of Prayer, which now I write) of what the Soul
did, at that time. And our Lord said this to me, in these words: It does, my
Daughter, dissolve, and defeat it self, to be so, the more ingulfed in me; for
now it is no longer she, who lives, but I; and since she cannot comprehend
that, which she understands, her very understanding it, after a kind of
Morrall way, which she does, is really a not understanding it, after a
strict, and comprehensiue way, which she is not able to do. He who shall
have had trial of this, by experience, will be able to ariue to the expression
of some part thereof; but, as for me, I cannot deliver that, more clearly, which
passes here, since it is so very obscure. I can only say, that, in this case,
their being then, so close to Almighty God, is represented to them; and there
remains such a kind of certainty thereof, that it cannot possibly fail, to
be believed.

And now here, all the Powers of the Soul fall short of operation, and are
suspended, in such sort, that, by no means (as I have said) it can possibly be
understood, that they work. If she were thinking of some Mystery, it is
instantly so forgotten, as if there had never bee^ any such thought. If she
were reading, there is no remembrance of it; nor yet of pawsing; and if praying
vocally, in like manner. So that now, this importunate little Gnatt of the
Memory, has her wings burnt here, and can now no longer spring-vp, nor
stir. The Will also, is now employed, all, in loving; though it understand
not, how it loves. The Understanding, if it understand, it is not yet
understood, how it understands; and, at least, it can comprehend nothing of
that, which it understands. To me, it does not seem, that it understands;
because (as I was saying) it is not understood; and, for my part, I attain
not, to understand all this.

At the first, I chanced to be in so great an ignorance, as not to know, that
Almighty God, was in all things; and considering, how very present, I
conceived him to be to me, it seemed impossible for me, to believe the
contrary. To leave therefore to believe that he was there, I could not;
because it seemed to me, as it were, apparently, and clearly, that I had
understood his very Presence to be there. Some men, who were not learned, told
me, that he was only there, by his Grace; which still, I could not possibly
believe; because, as I was saying, I held him to be directly present otherwise;
and thus I continued, with some trouble. But, at length, a great learned man of
the Order of the Glorious S. Dominick, freed me from this doubt; and told me,
not only, that he was present, but that he also communicated himself to us;
which comforted me very much.

But now, it is here to be noted, and understood, that this Celestial Water,
is always a most eminent Favor of our Lord, and gives the Soul excessiuely
great advantages; as I shall now declare.

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the same Discourse; and begins to declare the effects, which
this Degree of Prayer, works in the Soul. She persvvades men earnestly, not
to turn back, nor to giue-ouer their Prayer, though they should happen to
fall, even after they had received these Favors. She speaks of the great
harm, which will ariue to them, if they do otherwise. This Discourse is
much to be noted; and it is of great consolation, for vveake persons, and
Sinners.

THe Soul does, in this Prayer, and Union, remain with an excessive kind of
tenderness; in such sort, that she would feign, even defeat, and dissolve her
self; not through pain, or trouble, but by abundance of tears of joy, wherein
she is bathed, without so much, as feeling, or knowing, how, or when she wept
them. It gives her a great delight, to find the impetuous force of that fire,
appeased, and allayed by Water; which yet makes it increase so much the more.
This language of mine, may seem to be a kind of gibberidge; but yet, thus
stands the case.

It has happened to me sometimes, when I was in this part of this Prayer, to be
so She proceeds in declaring the great effects of this high Prayer.
wholly out of my self, as that I knew not, whether I were awake, or asleep; or
whether, in very deed, I had been in that glory, which I felt; and whether it
were true, that I was indeed, so, all bathed in water, which distilled with
such force, and speed, from mine eyes, that it seemed, as if a very Cloud of
Heaven had rayned it down; but, in fine, I found that it was no dream. This
happened to be in the beginnings of this Prayer; and it passed quickly over. But
the Soul remains so courageous thereby, that, if it were possible for her to
be cut into a thousand pieces for God's sake, it would be of extreme
consolation to her. And now, here come in, all her promises; her heroical
resolutions; the lively efficacy of her desires; her beginning to abhor the
world; her clearlie discerning her own vanity; and all this, much more
perfectly, and more highly, then it happened in any of her former Prayers. Her
humility is also grown much stronger; for now, she very clearly discernes,
that no diligence at all, of her own, was any piece of a cause, for bringing
her that excessive, and incomparable Favor; nor for making her enjoy the same.
She sees now clearly, that she is a most unworthy Creature; for, in any
room, where there enters a strong, and clear Sunne-Beame, there is not the
least, and thinnest Cobweb, which can lie hid. She now looks very clearly,
upon her own misery; and now she is so very free from Vainglory, that it
seems a kind of impossible thing, for her to have any; because now already,
she has it even in her very eye, how little she is able to perform; or
rather, in very deed, that it is, just nothing at all; and that, in this case,
there was hardly so much, as any consent of hers; but that it seems, that
even, whether she would, or no, they shut the gates of all her Senses, up; to
the end, that she might so, the better enjoy her Lord; and that now, since she
remains all alone with him, what can she have to do, but to love him? She
neither can see, nor hear, unless she be made to do so, as it were, by very
strong hand; and therefore, there is little, for which, to thank her. Her
former life, grows then, to be represented to her, with perfect truth;
together with the great mercy of Almighty God. And all this, occurrs to her,
without any necessity at all, that her Understanding should now, go hunting
after it. For there, does she already find all this kind of food, ready
dressed, for her, to understand, and eat. Of her self, she sees very well, that
she deserves Hellfire; and that now, in stead thereof, they give her no other
punishment, then glory. And therefore she does now, even consume her self, in
the praises of Almighty God; and now would I be glad, even to consume my self
so. Blessed be thou, O my Lord, who have, in such sort, vouchsafed, to make so
filthy a Fish Pond, as I was, become so pure, and clear a water, as that it
may serve for thine own Table. Be thou adored, and praised, O thou Regalo of
the Angels, who have vouchsafed, thus to exalt so base a worm.

This profit of the Soul, remains, for some time, therein; and now she can
already understand clearly enough, that the Fruit is none of her own; and she
beginns to give part of it to others, without ever feeling any want of it her
self. She now beginns also, to give signs, and apparances, of being the owner
of some such Soul, as it to be a Iewel-House, fit for the Treasures of
Heaven; and to carry great desires, of making others partake them; and humbly
to beseech Almighty God, that she may not be alone, in possessing them. She
beginns now, to profit her Neighbors, without almost understanding it her
self, and without her seeming to do any thing therein; but they, who receive
the benefit, understand it well. For already, do those Flowers yield so high,
and apparent a Sent, that it inuites all the world, to come near them. They
know, that she has great Virtues; and they see, that the Fruit is very
tempting; and they would feign help her to eat it.

And now, if the earth of this Garden be manured, and digged-vp very deep, with
Persecutions, with Detractions, and with Sickness; (as there are few, who ariue
thus far, without these things) and if also, it be very clean stripped of
all proper Interest, the Water sinkes so very deeply, into this Soil, that it
will scarce be ever dry again. But yet, if it be such a kind of earth, as that
(with being earth) it have also, such a quantity, and company of thorns, as
I remained with, in the beginning; and, if it want a rootingout of the
occasions of ill, and is not withal, so grateful, as so high a Favor
requires, that Soil grows again, to be dry. And, in that case, if the
Gardner prove negligent, and slack, and if out Lord, through his own only
goodness, do not again resolve, to bestow rain upon it, you may well give
this Garden, for destroyed, and lost. For just thus, did it happen to me,
several times; and really, I am even amazed, to reflect upon it; yea, and it
were not possible for me, to believe it, if the case had not been wholly mine
own.

But now I write thus much, for the comfort of such Souls, as are weak, like
mine; to the end, that they may never despair, nor so much, as once leave, to
have confidence, in the greatness of Almighty God; and that, A Consideration of
strange comfort.
although they should fall, even after our Lord had brought them, to so
incomparable Favors as are mentioned here, they must not yet despair, unless
they will be totally lost; for, there is nothing, which will not be gotten with
tears; and so, the employing of one Water, will be the means of getting
another.

One of the things, by which I have been animated (with being that miserable
Creature, which I am) to write this Discourse, and to give this kind of
account, of my wicked Life, and of the Favors, which our Lord has been
pleased to do me, (and that, not whilst I was serving him, but offending him)
has been this. And really, I wish now, that I were some person of great
authority, that so I might be the better believed, in this particular; and I
humbly beseech the Divine Majesty of my dear Lord, that he will bestow this
Favor upon me. I say then, that no one, even of those Creatures, who have
begun, to use Mental Prayer, is to be dismayed with saying: If I should
return to be wicked again, it would be worse for me, to go forward with the
use of Prayer. For, the thing, which I believe, is, that it will be worse, if
he giue-ouer his Prayer, and forbear to reform his life. But, if he shall not
giue-ouer his Prayer, let him be confident, that it will bring him again, to
the Port, where he shall be able to see the Lantern, and ariue safe. The Devil
made so feirce battery against me, and I passed so long, without Prayer, (as
conceauing, that, being so wicked, as I was, it would be an act of more
humility, to desist from it) that I gave it over, for about a year, and a
half, or for a year at least; for, of the half year, I remember it not, so
very precisely. But this was likely to be, and was then, indeed, no other
thing, then for me to put my self even into Hell, without needing any Devils,
for that purpose.

O my dear Lord, how great is that blindness, and how unhappily does the Devil
hitt right, for his purpose, in laying so heavy a load upon us, heerin? The
Traitor knows very well, that he has lost that Soul, which continues, with
perseverance, in Prayer; and that all those Falls, which he procures to give
us, will but assist us, through the goodness of Almighty God, to make,
afterward, the greater leap, toward his Service. The Devil, I say, knows
very well, how much this imports him. But, O my dear Jesus, what a thing it
is, to see a Soul, in this State, falne-back This is strange indeed.
to Sin, when yet thou, by thy mercy, do lend him, that hand of thine, to
rise again? O, how will such an one, come to know, the multitude of thy
greatnesses, and mercies; together with his own misery? Here comes this
Creature in, to understand thy Maiesticall way; and to annihilate himself, in
good earnest. Here is the Soul, not once presuming, so much, as to lift her
eyes up, to Heaven, though yet she raise her thoughts, to consider the
unspeakable obligation, which she has to thee. She here, grows all devoted,
to the Queen of Heaven, that she may help to appease thee. Here, she inuokes
those Saints, who fell, after thou had once called them, to thy Service; to
the end, that she may be assisted by them. Here, she conceaues, and finds, that
whatsoever Crosses thou send her, they are all of them, too easy, and light;
because she sees already, that she deserves not the very ground, upon which
she goes. Here, enters the frequenting the Sacraments of the Church, and that
vigorous Lively Faith, which now remains in her heart, as seeing the great
power, and virtue, which God infused into it. The praising thee, for having
left such Unguents, and other Medicines, for the cure of our Sores; which close
not only the skin, but take them utterly away. In a word, she is amazed, at
all these things; and who, O thou Lord of my Soul, is not to be amazed, at so
great mercy, and at such an ouerflowing kind of Favor, upon our Treasons,
which are so abominable, and foul, that, for my part, I cannot understand, how
my heart comes not, even to splitt, when I write thus much; because I find my
self so very wicked? And yet, the while, it seems, as if I had a mind, to
make thee a kind of recompense, and satisfaction, for so many foul Treasons,
as I have committed against thee, by these few, poor, little tears of mine,
which yet are given me, by thy self; and which really, for my part thereof,
are but as so much water of a stinkeing Well. For, still I am committing
Sins, and procuring to frustrate, and, even as it were, annihilate the
Favors, which thou have done me. But, be thou pleased, O my Dear Lord, to
give vallew to these poor tears, and do thou purifye this so troubled Water
of my Soul, though it should be for no other reason, then only to keep men
free, from the temptation of making rash judgments; as, for my part, I have
been subject to this thought. Why, O Lord, do thou pass over those other
holy people, who have always served, and suffered for thee; and have been
bred-vp, in the way of a Religious Life; and are, indeed, truly Religious; and
not like me, who had no more thereof, then the name; And yet, I clearly see,
that thou did them not those Favors, which thou have done me. But yet here,
I discern very well, O thou my eternal Good, that thou keep their reward
in store, that so thou may give it them, all together; and that my weakness,
is so great, that I had need to be proceeded with, thus; whereas they, like
gallant persons, are content, to serve thee still, without these helps; and so
thou treatest them, as valiant people, who have no interest of their own.

But yet I, with all this, O my Lord, cryed-out many times, before thee,
excusing them, who murmured against me; because I thought, they had too much
reason, for what they said. But this occurred to me, O Lord, when, already,
through thy goodness, thou with-heldst me, from offending thee so highly, any
more; and when I went diuerting my self from all that, which I thought might
displease thee. For, when once I began to do but thus much, thou also did
begin to open thy Treasures, toward this Servant of thine; and, it seems,
thou did expect nothing else, but only, that there might be an inclination in
me, to receive them; so quickly did thou begin, not only to bestow them,
but to be pleased, that the world should understand it. When this was once
perceived, some began to hold a good opinion of me; though all had not yet
known well, how ill I was; and that, much of it did then half appear. But
then, did Detraction, and Persecution begin, at a clapp; and, in my opinion,
not without much cause. And therefore, I undertook no enmity against any
Creature; but only besought thy Divine Majesty, to consider, what little
reason they had. They said, that I had a mind, to make my self a Saint; and
that I invented certain Novelties, though I had not arrived yet, by a great
deal, to fulfill all mine own Rule; nor overtaken, in the way of virtue,
those many good, and holy Religious Women, who were in that Monastery. Nor
do I think indeed, that I shall ever ariue so far, (unless Almighty God,
through his goodness, will be pleased to perform it all, on his part) but
rather, that I was likely to abolish that, which was good, and to establish
certain customs, which were not so; at least, I did what I could, to
introduce them; and I had always power enough, to do hurt. So that they
blamed me, without any fault of theirs; nor do I say, that they were only
Religious Women, but others also, who told me truth, because it was permitted
by thee.

When once I was saying my Office, I, who had sometimes, been subject to this
temptation, came to this Verse: Iustus es, Domine, and rectum iudicium tuum;
Thou art just O Lord, and thy judgment is right; and I began to consider,
how true this was; for, in this kind, the Devil had never power to tempt me, so
far, as to make me doubt, but that thou, O Lord, art the Owner, and Author
of all goodness; no nor yet, in any thing at all, which belongs to Faith. Nay
rather it seemed to me, that the more they were above Nature, the more firmly
did I believe them; yea, and they caused even more devotion in me. And, in
regard that thou art Omnipotent, all such greatnesses, as thou should be
pleased to act, and execute, were resolved upon, and concluded in me; and of
this, as I was saying, I never had doubt. So that, when I came afterward to
consider, how thou could permit, that there should be so many dear Servants
of thine, as I was saying, who yet received not those Favors, and Regalos,
which thou were pleased, to vouchsafe me, (I being so miserable a Creature, as
I was) thou answeredst me thus, O Lord: Do thou serve me; and do not trouble
thy self, with that. Now, this was the very first Word of that kind, which
ever I perceived thee to speak to me; and therefore, it amazed me much; And I
will, hereafter, declare this manner of understanding things; together with
diverse others. I speak not of it here; for it were to go from the purpose;
and I believe, I have gone from it already; and, in effect, I scarce know, what
I have said; nor can it indeed, well, be otherwise; but your Reverence must
needs bear with these interuals, and interruptions. For, when I once consider,
how much God endures at my hands, and, withal, behold my self in this
condition, it is not to go for a strange thing, that I loose my aim, both in
that, which I say, and am to say. And I beseech our Lord, that all my
impertinencies, and roauings, may always be of this kind; and that his Divine
Majesty may not permit, that I may ever vary one hairs breadth, from him,
but rather, that I may be consumed, even in this moment. For it may well be
sufficient for me, to have observed, and discerned his great mercy, not once,
but often, in that he has been pleased, to pardon so great an ingratitude, as
mine. He pardoned S. Peter once; but me, often; so that the Devil had some kind
of reason, to tempt me, as hopeing, that I would not pretend, to hold straight
friendship with one, with whom I had been in so public enmity. But how
great, O Lord, was this blindness of mine? For, where could I ever think, O my
Lord, to find any remedy, but by thee? What a senseless kind of folly, was
it for me, to fly from the light, that so, I might, for ever, go stumbling-on
in the dark? What a foolish kind of proud Humility was that, which the Devil
invented for me, when he persuaded me to depart, from leaning against that
Staff, and Pillar, The strong Pillar of Prayer.
which might support me; that so, my Fall might not be so great? At this
instant do I bless my self, with the Cross; for, me thinks, I never passed
a danger, so very hazardous, in my whole life, as this invention was, which the
Devil had a mind to teach me, by way of Humility. For, he put it into my
conceit, to think, how it could be possible, that so wicked a thing, as my
self, having received so great Favors, from Almighty God, could ever procure
to come to Mental Prayer; and that, for me, it would suffice, if I said those
Vocal Prayers, to which I was bound; as others did; but that, since now I did
not even thus much, well, what sense was there, that I should pretend to do
more; and that this, was to express little reverence to Almighty God, and to
undervalue his Favors.

It was fit, to think, and know all this; but to put it in execution, had
been extremely ill done. And be thou Blessed, O Lord, who broughtst me the
remedy. For, this temptation seems to have been no less, then a beginning to
that other, which the Devil brought upon Judas; but, that Traitor, the Devil,
durst not tempt me, so openly, but would feign have come, by little and little,
to set upon me; as he did, upon him.

And now, for the love of our Lord, let all them, who use Mental Prayer,
consider Consider this very well.
that, which follows, very well. Let them know, that, during the time, when I
forbore it, my life was much worse, then before. And let it be well considered,
what a fine kind of remedy the Devil brought me, and what a dainty ridiculous
Humility, it must be, which could fill me, with so deep a disquiet. For
indeed, how could this Soul of mine, appease it self? The ignorant, foolish
Creature went away, as fast as she could, from her true repose, and rest. She
had her Favors, and Regalo's, present to her memory; and she found, that the
contentments of this world, were so loathsome, as even almost to provoke a
Vomit. But I am amazed, how I could endure it; though belike, it was with some
kind of hope, that, at the worst hand, I might be able to remain free from
Sin; for, I never, as I remember, (though yet, it be now, more then one and
twenty years ago) gaue-ouer a being resolved, to return to Prayer. But, O,
how ill-grounded, and addressed, was this hope of mine? For, the Devil would
feign have turned me over, till the Day of Judgment; that so, from thence, he
might conduct me to Hell.

But yet now afterward, I frequenting Prayer, and Reading, which was indeed the
way, to see real Truths; and looking down, upon that wicked course, which I
was holding; and often importuning our Blessed Lord, with many tears, I was
yet, so very wretched, that I knew not, by any means, how to help my self.
But then again, on the other side, I growing to giue-ouer these good things,
and employing my self upon certain idle pastimes; and exposing my self to
many occasions of ill; and enjoying very few helps; (and I may rather venture
to say, none at all, but only such, as might help me to fall) for what, might
I ever hope, but what I have said? I believe, that a certain Religious man of
S. Dominick's Order, who was very learned, has great merit, in the sight of
God; for he awaked me out of this sleep. And he made me (as, I think, I have
already expressed) receive the B. Sacrament, every Forthnight. And so, my
misery being then, not altogether so great, I began to come back again
into my self; though yet withal, I forbore not, to commit some offenses
against our Lord. But, because I had not lost my way, I went still on, with
falling, and rising; though yet, but by little, and little. And he, who never
giues-ouer to go forward, will ariue at length, by going softly, though it be
late. For my part, I conceive, that, for a Soul to loose her way, and to leave
her Prayer, is indeed but one, and the self same thing; and our Lord deliver us
from it, for his own Mercies sake.

It is, heervpon, to be inferred, (and I desire, even for the love of our Lord,
that it may be much observed) that, although a Soul shall come to such pass,
as that our Lord may do her great Favors, in Prayer, she must not yet, be
confident of her self, since she may yet, come to fall again. And let her not,
by any means, expose her self to Take heed.
occasions of Sin. Let her be careful, to consider thus much; for, the
deceit, of which the Devil is wont to serve himself, in this occasion, is very
great. For, though the Favor, which was imparted to the Soul, were most
certainly from Almighty God, yet the Traitor will not fail to serve himself
of that very Favor, in whatsoever he can; and especially, for the
disadvantage of persons, who are not strong in virtue, and mortification; nor
are absolutely untied, and loose, from all things, belonging to this world. For,
men, in fine, must know, that they are not, by means of this Prayer,
sufficiently strengthened, and fortifyed (as I will declare afterward) for the
putting themselves into occasions, and dangers; how great desires, and
resolutions soever, they may have.

This is an excellent Doctrine; and it is not mine, but taught by Almighty God
himself; and so I shall be glad, that all ignorant persons, like me, may learn
it. For, though a Soul be never so high, in this State, yet must she not trust
her self so far, as to go out, to combat; but she will have acquitted her
self well, if she can defend her self. So that, in this State, and condition,
it will be necessary for her, to carry Defensive Arms, against the Devil;
for yet, she has not strength enough, wherewith to assault him; and much
less, to tread him under foot; as yet, they will be able to do, who shall
find themselves, in that State; whereof I will discourse afterward. But this,
is that devise, and cosening-Trick, whereby the Devil is wont to take us; That,
when once he sees a Soul ariue to be so very near to our Lord, and which can
judge so very well, of the difference, between the blessings, which belong to
this life, and the next; and of the Love, which our Lord bears to that Soul;
from this very Love, he makes such a kind of confidence, and security grow, as
that she shall never, forsooth, be able to fall from that, which she is
enjoying, at that time. And she also seems, there-vpon, to eye her reward, so
very clearly, that she is easily brought to hold it, even impossible for her,
to quitt that, which is so very delightful, and gustfull, even in this life,
for so base, and filthy a thing, as worldly pleasure is. Now, by means of
this vain confidence, does the Devil grow to deprive her, of the distrust,
which otherwise she would have, of her own strength; and thus, she exposes her
self, as I was saying, to danger; and begins, with a foolish kind of good
zeal, to be giving the Fruits of her Garden, away, to others, without any
limits; as beleiuing now, that she has no more cause, so to be afraid,
concerning her self; and that this, is not, forsooth, out of pride (for, the
Soul understands well enough, that she is able to do nothing, of her self)
but through the much A most dangerous temptation.
confidence, which she has, in Almighty God. Yet all this, is without
discretion; because she does not well consider, that she has not yet, mewed
all her own sick-feathers. She may well stepp out of her Nest; yea, and
Almighty God himself, will, perhaps, take her, now, and then, out, from
thence. But she is not yet, fit for a Flight, because her virtues are not yet
grown to be of full strength; nor has she yet, experience, for the knowledge
of dangers; nor does she yet, understand the mischief, which grows, by putting
too much trust, in her own forces.

And now, this is that, which destroyed me; and both for this, and for all
things, there will be great necessity, of a Directour; and of conversation
with persons, who are spiritual, indeed. It is true, I am fully persuaded,
that, when Almighty God does once bring a Soul to this state, he will not
leave to favor her, nor suffer her to perish; if she do not very shamefully,
and entirely, forsake, and forbear, to serve his Divine Majesty. But yet, if
it should so happen, that she fall, let her consider, and consider again,
(even for the love of our Blessed Lord) and take heed, that the Devil deceive
her not, so far, as to make her giue-ouer her Prayer, as he did me, under the
pretense of false Humility; as I have declared; and, as I would feign repeat,
very often. But, let her trust in the goodness of Almighty God, which is
greater, then all the sins, which we can commit; and let her hope, that he
will not remember our ingratitude, when once we, reflecting duly upon our
selves, desire to return again to his friendship; nor even Consider, and
admire this passage.
so far consider the Favors, which he has done us, as to make us be
punished for them; but that rather they will help to obtain pardon for us, so
much the sooner, as for persons, who have belonged to his House, and have had
the honor to eat (as men use to say) of his bread. Let them remember his
words; and consider, how he has proceeded with me, who even wearied my self,
with offending his Divine Majesty, before he would forbear, or fail, to
pardon me. For, he never grows unwilling to give; nor is it ever possible, to
draw his Mercies dry; and so, let not us be weary of ever receiving Favor, at
his hands. Let him be blessed for ever, Amen; and let all creatures praise him.

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER
Wherein she treats of the difference, betvveen Union, and Rapt; and declares,
what kind of thing, a Rapt is. She speaks also, of the blessing, which that
Soul has, which our Lord, through his goodness, brings thither; and of the
Effects, which Rapts use to produce. This Discourse is of much admiration.

I Would be glad to know, how to declare (through the Favor of Almighty God)
the difference, which there is, between Union, on the one side; and Rapt, and
Flight, (as they are wont to call it) of Spirit, on the other; for, these two
latter, do signifye, in substance, but one thing; and it is also called
Extasis. The advantage is very great, which belongs to Rapt, beyond Union; and
the effects also, which it produces, are much greater; and it has also many
other operations. For, mere Union, seems to be always, after the same manner;
both in the beginning; in the middle; and in the end; and it is always, in the
interior part. But now, as Rapts are Visitations of the Soul, which use to be
of a higher Strain, they are wont to produce their Effects, not only
interiourly, but exteriourly also. I humbly beseech our Blessed Lord, that, as
he has vouchsafed to declare the rest, so he will also vouchsafe to do this;
for certainly, if his Divine Majesty had not been pleased to give me to
understand, by what means, and in what manner, it might be done, I should not
possibly have known, which way to turn my hand.

Let us therefore now consider, that this last Water, whereof we have spoken,
is so very plentiful, and abundant, that, if it were not, because the Soil of
the Garden cannot consent to receive it, we might believe, that the very Clowd
it self, of that great Majesty, were here, rayning it self down, upon this
earth. And so, when we are grateful to our Lord, for this great blessing,
acknowledging the same, by our good works, according to the uttermost of our
power, our Lord catches-vp The manner and nature of Rapts.
that Soul (as a man may say) even just so, as the clouds snatch up the
vapors, from the earth; and so, taking her wholly up, from the same earth, the
clowd rises up to Heaven, and carries the same along, with it self; and shows
her certain things, belonging to that Kingdom, which is prepared for her. I
know not, whether this Comparison will be thought to suite well, with that,
whereof I am speaking; but I am sure, that, in realitie of truth, it passes
thus. In these Rapts, it does not seem, that the Soul does even animate the
Body; and so, the Body it self, remains with a kind of trouble, and defect,
through the want of that natural heat, which belongs to it; and it goes, all
cooling it self, though yet, with an excessive sweetness, and delight. There is
here, no means at all, to resist; though in Union (we being then, as in our
own Country) there is some remedy; and so (though it be not without
suffering a kind of pain, and using some force) it may always, in effect, be
employed. But here, for the most part, there is no remedy, at all; nor any
help; but, many times, the thing ariues, without our being so much as able to
prevent the coming of it, even by our very thought. And there grows to be,
such a speedy, and strong kind of impetuositie, that you feel, and find this
Clowd to raise it self instantly up; or rather, that this strong Eagle takes
you, and carries you quite away, between her wings. And I say, it is
understood, and you find your self to be carried away, though you know not,
whither. For, howsoever the thing happen to be with delight, yet so great is
the weakness of our natural condition, that it puts us into some fear, in the
beginning. And therefore, it will be necessary, in this case, for the Soul,
to be much more courageous, and resolute, then for all those occasions, which
were precedent. For here, she must be content to hazard all, and to leave her
self wholly, in the hands of Almighty God; and to go, whithersoeuer she shall
be carried; and this, with a very good will; for, in fine, they will be sure to
carry her, whether she will, or no; and that, with so great extremity of
strength, and speed, that, howsoever I had a mind, very, very often, to resist
it, yea, and that I employed all the strength I had, to that purpose, (and
especially, at some particular times, when things fell out, to happen, in
public; yea, and at many other times also, when they were private; for I was
then, in doubt, and fear, least I might be abused, and deceived) it was yet
but seldom, that I was able to prevail, to some small proportion. But it cost
me a very great deal of harrassing, and wearines, to my self, just so, as if
some ordinary person had been fighting with some strong Giant; and afterward I
should find my self very weary. But at other times, it was altogether
impossible for me to hinder it; for, my Soul would be carried absolutely away,
and ordinarily, even my head, as it were, after it; yea and this, sometimes, so
far, as that my whole Body would be transported so, as to be raised-vp from
the ground. This last, has happened rarely to me; but once it was upon the
very point to ariue, whilst we all, were assembled together, in the Quire; and
I being then, upon my knees, (as at the point of going to receive the Blessed
Sacrament) it put me to an extremity of trouble; because it seemed to be a
very extraordinary thing, and that instantly, there would be much note of it;
and so I commanded my Religious-woemen (for at that time, I was grown to be
Prioresse) that they should not speak of it, to any creature. But, at other
times, when I began to discern, that our Lord was going about, to do the
same, again, (and once, in particular, when diverse principal Ladies were
present; and it was upon the Feast of our Vocation, when there was a Sermon) I
did even spread my self, all along, upon the ground; and though the Religious
women came then about me, to keep my Body down, yet the thing was easily
perceived. Upon this, I humbly prayed our Lord, in most particular manner,
that, by no means, he would do me any such Favors, as might carry any of
these exterior demonstrations, with them; for, already, I was very weary of
being necessarily so wary, and watchful over my self; for that such kind of
Favors, could not possibly be done me, by his Divine Majesty, but so, that
every body, would come to know it. And it seems, that, through his goodness,
he has been pleased to hear my Prayer; for, since that time, I never had any
Rapts of that kind, and to that proportion; but it is true, that it is
notlong, since I had the last.

But yet now, so it is, that when I had a mind to resist these Rapts, there
seemed to be somewhat of so mighty force, under my feet, which raised me up,
that I know not, to what to compare it; but it came with much more
impetuositie, then any of these other things of Spirit; and so, I was even
torn, as it were, to pieces; for, the combat, and strife, is great; but, in
fine, all helped little; for, when our Lord has a mind to do any thing, no
power is able to stand against it. At other times, he is pleased to content
himself, with letting us see, that he is disposed, to do us that Favor, and
that there is no auersion, in his Divine Majesty; and that we, opposing our
selves, for Humility's sake, there follow yet, the self-same Effects, as if we
had wholly consented.

Now, these The Effects of Rapts.
Effects are great. For first, the mighty power of our Blessed Lord, is made
apparent thereby; and that, when his Divine Majesty is pleased to dispose of
things otherwise, we are no more able to detain our Bodies, then our Souls;
nor are we Lords thereof; but we must, in despite of our hearts, acknowledge,
that there is a Superior; and that these Favors come from him; and that, of
our selves, we can do nothing, in nothing; and so, a great impression of
Humility, is made upon the Soul, by this means. And further, I confess,
that it bred also a great fear in me, (and, at the first, an extreme great
one) to see, that a massy Body should be taken-vp from the earth. For, though
the Spirit be that, which draws it after it; and though it be with great
suauitie, and delight, (if it be not resisted) yet our Senses are not lost
thereby; at least I, for my part, was so perfectly in my Senses, that I was
able to understand, that I was raised. There does also, heerby, appear so
great a Majesty in him, who can do this, that it makes, even the very hair
of the head, stand on end; and there remains a mighty fear, to offend so
great a God; but yet so, as that it is wrapped up, in an excessive kind of
love, which she beginns to conceive, even newly, and freshly again, toward
him, whom she finds, to carry so great a love to such rotten worms, as we
are. For now he seems not content, with drawing the Soul only to himself, in
so particular, and so certain a manner, but that he will needs also, draw the
very Body too, even whilst it is so very mortal, and composed of so filthy
earth, as we have made it, by our Sins. This also leaves, in the Soul, a
very strange kind of loosning, and casting it self off, from all the things of
this world; whereof I know not, how to express well, what it is; but, me
thinks, I may well say, that it is not only, in some sort, a different, but
also a greater kind of thing, then those others, which work upon the only
Spirit, import. For though, in those other Visitations also, there be a kind of
total untying, and loosning it self from all things, for as much as concerns
the Spirit; yet here, it seems, our Lord is pleased, that even the Body also
it self, shall put this point, in practice. And it breeds, in any Creature,
such a new kind of shynesse, and mislike, in order to the things of this world,
that it makes even our very life much the more painful to us. It gives also
such another The strangest state of Mind, which perhaps is described in the
whole Book.
pain, as we can neither tell, how to procure, when we have it not; nor free
our selves from the same, when we have it. And I would be extremely glad, to be
able, to give this, to be understood; but, I believe, I shall not know, how to
do it; though yet, I will say somewhat, if I be able.

But now, it is to be noted, that these things come upon me, when I am, as it
were, in the very Evening of the day, after all those Visions, and
Revelations, whereof I will write; and after the time, when I used to hold that
Prayer, wherein our Lord was wont to allow me so great Regalo's, and gusts. And
though yet these things do not cease with me, at some times, yet does this
Pain, more often, and more usually seize upon me, which I will now declare. It
has sometimes, of the more; and sometimes, of the less; and now I will apply
my self, to speak of it, as when it has of the more. For, though I will treat
hereafter, of those great impetuosities, which they used to bring upon me,
before our Lord was pleased to give me those Rapts; yet they had, in my
opinion, no more to do, by way of Comparison, one with another, then there is,
between things Corporal, and Spiritual. And I believe, that I do not
exaggerate the matter, a whitt, by saying so; because that Pain seems to be
such, as that, although the Soul do feel it, yet it feels it, together,
with the Body; and so, both of them, participate therein. And it is not also,
with that extremity, of being, as it were, abandoned, and utterly forsaken;
which yet abounds in this; wherein, as I was saying, we have no part at all,
our selves. But, there often comes a kind of desire, unseasonably, and
unexpectedly, upon us; and I know not, from whence it moves. And, upon this
desire, which penetrates the whole Soul, even at one very instant, she
begins to afflict, and even belabour her self so, as that she rises much
above her self; and indeed, above whatsoever is created; and Almighty God is
pleased, to make her so very desolate, and disgusted, in order to all temporal
things, that, how much soever she may labor, and endeavor to the contrary,
there is nothing in this world, which will either accompany her, or whereby
she would be glad to be accompanied, but even directly to dye, in that
Solitude. For, if any body speak to her, or if she would employ all the
power, which possibly she might have, to speak to others, it serves to very
little purpose; for, her Spirit (do what she can) does still, not depart, from
making her find her self, to be perfectly alone. And though it seem to me, as
if Almighty God were then, extremely remote from her; yet, at times, he
communicates his greatnesses to her, by a manner, the most highly strange, that
can be imagined; yea and more strange, then can possibly be expressed. Nor do
I believe, that any other creature will either believe it, or can understand
it; but only some such person, as may have felt it. For, this is no
communication, to give comfort; but only to show the reason, which that person
has, to be afflicted, and distressed, for being absent from that Good, which
comprehends all good things, in it self. By means of this communication, both
the desire does increase, and so also, does the extremity of that Solitude,
wherein the Soul finds her self; together with a certain pain, which is so
very delicate, and penetratiue (the Soul being placed then, in that kind of
Desert) that it may expressly, and even literally, seem to be, at that time,
that very thing, where of the Royal Prophet spoke, when he was, in the same
very Solitude. Save that, our Blessed Lord would vouchsafe the sense of those
things, to him, and make him feel it, being a Saint, after a more perfect
manner. But the words, whereof I speak, were these: Vigilaui, and factus sum
sicut passer solitarius in tecto. I have vvatched, and am become like a
solitary Sparrovv, upon the topp of a House. For so does that Verse represent
it self to me, at those times, that, me thinks, I do even see mine own
condition, therein. And it comforts me to observe, that others have also found
themselves, in so high an extremity of Solitude; and especially, when they
were such persons, as the Royal Prophet was. So that, me thinks, this kind of
Soul, is not then, it self; but rather upon the very topp, or ridge, as one
may say, thereof; yea, and of all things also, which are created; for then, me
thinks, the Soul remains, in the very highest, and most superior part of
her self.

At other times, the Soul seems to find her self, in that occasion, as in the
very extremity of necessity, and misery; and that then, she is saying, and
asking her self this question: Where is now thy God? But now here, it is to
be noted, that, for my part, I knew not then, what those words signified in the
vulgar Tongue; yet, when afterward I came to know it, I was much comforted to
see, that our Lord was pleased to bring them to my memory, without any
procurement at all, of mine. At other times, I also called that Saying of S.
Paul to mind: That he was crucified to the world. I say not, that I was so;
for I see but too well, that I am not; but me thinks, the Soul, in this case,
is very much after that manner; for, she gets no comfort, either from Heaven,
because she is not there; nor carries she any affection at all, to the Earth;
nor is she also there, but remains, as if she were even crucified, between
Heaven, and Earth; and suffering all the while, without receiving any succor,
either from one of these places, or the other. For, that which comes to her
from Heaven, (which is, as I have said before, but a notice of Almighty God,
so admirable, above all that, which we know any way, how to desire) does but
serve for her greater torment, because it multiplyes the same desire, in such
sort, that the excessive pain thereof, does put her, in my opinion, even past
her senses; save that she remains so, but a very little while. Now this
condition of mind, seems to be no less, then even the very agony, and
passage of death it self; yet withal, there is so very great a conte^tment
taken in this suffering, that I know not, to what, in fine, I may possibly be
able to compare it. It is a feirce, and yet a sauourie, and delightful kind of
Martyrdom; since all that, which concerns this world, and which it is
possible, to represent to the Soul (yea though it were, even the most
delightful Object, which ever she had been accustomed to embrace) is by no
means admitted, but is instantly, cast sharply away, from her. She understands
also here, very well, that she cares for nothing at all, but Almighty God; and
yet, she considers no particular thing, even in him; but she will have him, all
together; and yet, after a sort, she knows not, what she would have. I say
again, that she knows not; because her Imagination represents nothing at all,
to her; yea and, in my opinion, during a great part of that time, wherein she
is after that manner, the Powers of her Soul do not work that joy, which
uses to be felt, both in the case of Union, and of Rapts; for they are wholly
suspended by her pain.

But O, that I were able to give your Reverence to understand this business,
well; though it were, but, that you might so, make me know more particularly,
what it is. For now, this is that, in which my Soul does ordinarily most
continue; and, whenever I am not employed about somewhat, she is put even
upon these very straights, and agony of death. She is afraid, when she sees
them begin, for fear least it should cost me my life; but yet when it is
once begun, she would be glad, that, during all that life, which might last,
she might continue, in that state of sufferance; though yet still, it be so
very excessive, that the person is scarce able to endure it. For, sometimes, I
am, in effect, without any pulse at all, as my Sisters tell me, who then come
toward me, to see what passes; for now they begin a little, to understand
more, of the case. And the bones of my very arms, to which the joints are
fastened, grow then to be even opened; and my hands are so stark, and stiff,
that I cannot possibly, sometimes, bring them together; and so the pain
remains, till the next day after, in my wrests, and in my Body, in such a
manner, that it seems, as if I were even racked, and disioynted. And I am
sometimes conceauing, that our Lord may one day, perhaps, think fit (in case
this course go on) to make it end, with the very ending of my life. For, so
great a torment as this, may well, in my opinion, be sufficient, for so great
an effect, as that; save only, that I deserve not, to be so happy.

All the anxietie of my desire, consists, at this time, that I may dye. For I
neither remember Purgatory, nor yet those great Sins, which I have
committed, for which I deserved Hellfire. But, all is now forgotten, through
that anxietie of desire, and appetite, to see Almighty God; yea, and that vast
Solitude, and Desert, wherein I am, at that time, seems a much more desirable
thing, then all the sweetest society of this world. If any thing were of
power, to give her comfort, in this case, it would be, that she might be able
to treat with some one, who had endured the same torment; for now, though she
complain thereof, it seems, that no Creature can tell, how to believe her.

It also contributes to her torment, that this pain is so extreme, that she
would feign, neither be in Solitude, nor yet have company, as others have; but
only to have the society of some such persons, as to whom, she might be able
to make her complaint. It is with her, in in this case, as with one, who even
has the halter about his neck; and who, whilst he is even strangling,
endeauours, and would feign take his breath. For, just so, me thinks, does
this inclination to have company, seem, to be an effect of our natural
frailty, and weakness; that, as this excessive pain seems to put us to iminent
danger of death, (for, it is certain, that it does all this; and I have seen
my self, diverse times, in this danger, through my great sicknesses, and other
occasions; as I have declared; and I will believe, that this may perhaps, prove
to be as great, as any of the rest) so the desire, and inclination, which,
both the Body, and Soul have, not to be parted, is that, which seeks such a
kind of succor, as to take breath; and by expressing it self, and diuerting,
and complaining, seeks yet, for some means, how to live again, here below;
though still, much against the will of the Spirit, or superior part of the
Soul, which would feign not be quitt of this Pain.

I know not, whether I hitt right, in what I say, or if I know indeed, how to
do it; but to the uttermost, and best of my opinion, it passes just thus, as I
have declared. And now, your Reverence shall do well, to consider, what kind
of rest, or ease, it is possible for me to enjoy, in this life; since that,
which I was wont to find by means of Solitude, and Prayer (for therein, our
Lord was pleased, to give me great consolations) is now most usually converted
into this torment; which yet, withal, is so delicious a kind of thing, and the
Soul perceaues it to be of so high value, that now, she delights in it more,
then in all those other Regalo's which she was ever wont to possess. For she
holds it, to be more secure, as being the way of the Cross; and it gives also,
in my opinion, a gust, which is of mighty worth. For she allows nothing at all
to the Body, but pain; and the Soul is that, which originally suffers; and
does only feel that joy, and high contentment, which this very suffering,
gives her.

I know not, how all this, can be; but yet it passes so, in very truth, that
(forasmuch as I can understand of my self) I would not change this Favor,
which our Lord does me, (and which proceeds, as I have said, from his hand, and
is no way acquired by me, as being wholly Supernatural, in it self) for all
those others, which I I shall here declare, afterward; I say not, for all them
together, but for any one of them, being taken severally, by it self.

And here, let it not be forgotten, how I say, that these impetuosities, or
impulses, which are described here, arrived after the Favors, which our Lord
did me first; as also after all that, whereof I will write in this Book; yea,
and even after my entrance into the Favor, which I am enjoying at this
present. And I, finding my self, in the beginnings, to be in some fear (as, in
effect, it happens to me always, whenever it pleases our Lord to do me any
Favor; till at least, in the proceeding thereof, I may have received some kind
of security from his Divine Majesty) he willed me, not to fear, but to
esteem this Favor, for greater, then all those others were, which he had
formerly been pleased to vouchsafe me; because the Soul was purifyed by this
pain; and for that it was burnished, and refined here, as gold might be in the
Chrysuble; that so it might be the more capable, to receive those enamels, and
ornaments of his gifts, and graces; and that so, that was to be wiped away,
which would otherwise have made work for Purgatory.

I understood very well, even before, that this was a great Favor; but yet I
remained with much more security, after this; and my Ghostly Father also
tells me, that it is good. And though I were formerly afraid, yet, because I am
so wicked, I could never bring my self to believe, that it was ill; but rather
the very greatness it self, of the benefit, gave me a kind of fear, when I
remembered, how very far I had been from deserving it. But, Blessed be our
Lord, who is so good, Amen.

It seems, that I have gone from the purpose; for I was beginning to speak of
Rapts; and this, which now I have said, is a greater thing, then a Rapt; and so
it leaves those effects, in the Soul, which I have related. And therefore, let
us now return to speak of Rapts; and of that, which is most usual therein. I
say then, that it seemed to me, many times, that it The effect of Rapts.
left my whole Body so light, that all the weight thereof, was utterly gone;
yea and sometimes, to such a kind of proportion, as, in effect, I knew not, how
to set, so much as my feet, upon the ground; though yet, when the Soul is in
Rapt, the Body remains apart, as if it were utterly dead, being able, many
times, to do absolutely nothing at all, of it self; but as it chances to be, at
the time, so it remains, whether it be sitting, or no; or whether it have the
hands, either open, or closed. For, though she loose her senses, some few
times, (and the same has also happened to me, now and then) yet have they
seldom been totally lost; and that, but for a very short time at once. The
most usual effect, is wont to be, that she finds her self, a little in
disorder; and though she can do nothing of her self, forasmuch as may concern
the ministry of the exterior part, yet leaves she not to understand, yea and
also to hear, as if a thing were spoken to her, from far off. I say not,
that she either understands, or hears, when she is in the highest part of the
Rapt (I say, in the very highest) at those times, when the Faculties, or
Powers, are lost; because then, they are very straightly united to Almighty
God; and then, in my opinion, she neither sees, nor hears. But (as I was
saying, in the former Prayer of Union) this total transforming of the Soul
into God, is wont to continue little; yet, for the time it lasts, no Power of
the Soul, either feels, or does so much as know, what passes there. And this,
seems to be, after this manner; to the end, that men may understand, that it
is not God's will, that we should know it; and belike, we are not capable
thereof; at least, it has passed thus, with me.

But now your Reverence will peradventure ask me, how then it can come to
pass, that a Rapt should be able to last so many hours. To which I answer,
that the thing, which has often occurred to me, is this; That (as I have
declared already, in the former Prayer) we enjoy Rapts, by certain interuals,
and interruptions. For, the Soul does, many times, ingulfe it self; or rather
(to speak both more properly, and more truly) our Lord ingulfs the Soul into
him, and entertaines her so, a while; and then there remains that only
Faculty of hers, which is the Will. Now, me thinks, that business, and bussle,
of the other two Faculties, and Powers, is like those This Saint it admirable,
in her Comparisons.
little Needles of Sunne-Dyals, which usually do never stand still; but yet,
when the Sun of Justice has a mind to it, he makes them stable, and firm;
now this, I say, lasts but a very little while. But yet, since the impulse, and
impetuositie was great, and the exaltation of the Spirit, high, the Will
remains ingulfed, and behaues it self like a Sovereign Lady, over all those
operations, which concern the Body; though those other Faculties, and Powers
of the Mind, be in agitation, and disorder. And so also, since those other two
said unquiet, and disorderly Powers, have a mind to disturb, and distract
the Will, (for, of enemies, the fewer, ever the better) the Senses are not
suffered to divert it. And so it grows from hence, that they are also
suspended; because our Blessed Lord, is so pleased; and, for the most part, the
eyes are shut, though yet we had no intention, to shut them; and though, by
accident, they may be open sometimes, yet (as I said before) she does not fix,
or aim, or consider, at least, at all, what she sees.

But now, the Body, here, is much less able to do any thing with it self,
in order to that time, when the said Powers shall return to be united; for
then, there will not be much, for it, to do. And therefore, let him, to whom
our Lord shall vouchsafe this Favor, not be discomforted at all, if then, he
chance to find, both the Body, to be, as it were, bound up, many hours; yea
and even his very Understanding, and Memory, to be diuerted sometimes.

True it is, that Souls be ordinarily, in this case, even drenched, yea and,
as it were, drowned, in the praises of Almighty God; and in desiring also, to
comprehend, and understand that, which has passed with themselves; and yet,
even for this purpose, they use not to be very well awake, but rather like some
one, who has slept, and dreamt, and is not yet, come very well again, to
himself. I declare my thoughts so largely heerin; because I know, there are
persons, at this time, yea and even in this very place, to whom our Lord does
these Favors; and yet, if they, who direct them, have wanted the experience of
these things, perhaps they will conceive, that they are to be, as it were,
dead, in these Rapts; especially, if these Directours be not learned men. And
it is matter, both of pity, and grief, to consider, how much is suffered, by
means of such Ghostly Fathers, as do not understand this business; which I
will declare afterward. Perhaps I know not well, what I say; but your Reverence
will easily understand, if I hitt any thing right, since our Lord has already
given you experience therein; though yet, because it is not long, since you
began, you will not, peradventure, have considered it, so much as I.

But now, though I endeavored Other great effects of true Rapts.
much, and many times; yet the Body has not strength, wherewith to stir it
self, but the Soul carries it all, along with her. The person, who was sick,
does thus recover health, many times; and she, who was full of weakness, and
pain, recouers strength. For, they be great things, which are bestowed in
these cases; and sometimes our Lord is pleased (as I was saying) that the Body
should also feel his part of joy, since already it yields obedience to that,
which the Soul desires. When once she is returned into her self, it will
happen to her (if the Rapt have been great) to go a day, or two, yea and
sometimes three, with the Powers, so absorpt, and, as it were, stupifyed, that
they seem not to be, altogether themselves. But now, here comes-in the pain,
to be able to know again, how to live; here, are our feathers imped; and here,
are the sick ones fallen off; and here, is the Banner of Christ our Lord, so
directly raised-vp, and displayed, that now, there seems to remain no more,
but that the Captain of this Fort, may either get up himself, or else may
instantly, be carried-vp to the highest Tower, there, to plant the said
Standard, for the glory of Almighty God. She looks now upon them, who are
below, as one, who is already in safety; for now, she is so far from fearing
dangers, that she rather wishes for them; as a person, to whom, in some sort,
a security, for obtaining victory, is designed. She sees now, very clearly,
the little, that all worldly things ought to be esteeemed; or rather, the
direct Nothing, which all things are. They, who are seated very high, are able
to discover very much. Already, she renounces the having of any Will; and is
resolved, to have no other, then that, which is the Will of our Lord; and she
gives him also the keys of hers. So that now, she, who was the Gardner, is
grown to be the Governor of the House; nor will she do any thing at all,
but according to the will of the Lord thereof; nor will she be Lady, so much
as of her self; no, nor of any thing; nor even of any single Well of that
Garden. And, if there be any thing in her, which is good, she desires, that
his Divine Majesty may dispose thereof; for, she will not, from that time
forward, possess any kind of thing, whereof the propriety may be her own;
but couets, that all things may be entirely done, in conformity to the will of
our Blessed Lord, and for his glory.

Now really, and with effect, all these things are wont to pass in this
manner, if the Rapts be true; and the Soul is vested, with those advantages,
and benefits, which are related; and, if these do not follow, I should be apt
to doubt, very much, that they were not Rapts, on the part of God; but should
rather be inclined to fear, that they were of that kind of Rauings, whereof S.
Vincent speaks.

At least, this is what I understand; and I have seen, by experience it self,
that the Soul is wont, in these cases, to become a Lady, and Queen, over all
Creatures; and to acquire so much Liberty of Spirit, in less then an hour,
that she cannot even know her self; but yet, she well understands, that all
this, is none of her own; nor does she know, how she could come to obtain so
great a blessing; but yet still, she understands withal, the extreme great
benefit, and advantage, which every one of these Rapts bring upon her. There
is no Creature, who can credit all this, but such an one, as has learnt it, by
experience; and therefore men believe not the poor Soul, which they have seen
to be wicked, and now find, so very soon, to pretend to do certain things,
of so high importance; for instantly she resolves, not to be content to serve
our Lord in small matters, but in the very greatest she can. Now the world is
apt to conceive, that such endeauours are but impertinencies, and temptations;
and yet, if men would but understand, and consider, that they are not things,
which grow from themselves, but from our Blessed Lord, to whom they had
already deliuered-vp the keys of their Will, they would not so much wonder at
it. For my part, I am of opinion, that a Soul, which comes once to this state,
does already neither do, nor even say any thing, of her self, but that this
Sovereign King has care of all that, which is to occurr.

O my dear God! and how clearly does a Soul see here, the sense, and
signification of that Verse; and how it is to be understood, that both he had
reason, and that all the world should also have it, to desire the vvings of a
Dove. For it is easily, and clearly to be understood, of that Flight, which the
Spirit makes, whereby to raise it self, above all Creatures; and, in the first
place, from, and above her self. But this is a sweet Flight; a gustfull, and
pleasant Flight; and a Flight without noise. What kind of dominion does such a
Soul possess, which our Lord does once conduct to this pitch, that she may be
able to look down, upon all things, without being once entangled by any of
them? and how full of confusion will she be, for that time, wherein she was
entangled before? And how much will she be amazed, to looke-back upon that
blindness of hers? How full, will she be of compassion, for such, as do yet
remain therein? especially, if they be persons of Prayer, and such, as it
pleases God to regale. She will here, be glad, to cry out very loud, that so
she may make men understand, how mightily they are abused, and deceived; yea
and so, she also does, sometimes. And then, men are apt to rain down, even
whole showers of persecutions, upon her head; and they treat her, as one, who
wants Humility, and who employes her self, to teach those persons, of whom
she might do well, to learn; and especially, if she be a woeman; for then,
come they in, to condemn her; yea and perhaps they may have reason; because
they know not, by what impulse she is moved. But yet, as she knows not, how to
help her self, on the one side; so also can she not forbear, on the other, to
vnbeguile those persons, whom she loves, and whom she desires to see
vnfettered, from the Prison of this life; for, that state, wherein she was,
neither seems less, nor is less, then a Prison. She is also much afflicted,
and tired out, with the thought of that time, wherein she took any care of
points of Honor; and for the gross, false error, wherein she was, to have
believed that, to be Honor, which the world calls Honor; for she sees, that
it was an abominable lie; and yet, that ever ie body lives in practice of that
false Doctrine. But now, this Soul understands, and knows, That, right
Honor, is not false, but true; esteeming that, to be worth somewhat, which
indeed is so; and holding that, which indeed is nothing, in no account at all;
since all is nothing, and less then nothing, which once comes to have an end;
and, in the mean time, does not please Almighty God.

She despises also, and laughes at her self, for the time, wherein she made
any account of Money, and of the covetous desires thereof; though yet, in this
particular, I do not believe (and certainly, it is very true) that I ever had
any fault, to confess; but it will have been fault enough, to have held them,
in any manner of account. If, with them, I had been able to buy these
blessings, which now I find in my self, I might have esteemed them very much.
But now, the Soul perceaues, that this blessing is gotten best, by leaving all
things. But what, in fine, is that, which can be bought with this Money, which
we so much desire? Is it any thing of true worth? Is it any thing, which is
durable? Or to what end, do we desire it? A miserable kind of supply, and
repose, do we procure, by that, which costs us so dear; for we often go with
it to Hell; and we buy no other thing, by means thereof, then endless torment,
in everlasting fire. O that all men would, at length, resolve, to hold it but
for earth, which is good for nothing? How orderly would the world then proceed?
How free would all places be, from unjust contracts? and how sincerely would
all men perform acts of freindship, if once there reigned no interest, either
of Honor, or money, in the minds of men? For my part, I conceive, that the
world, would be reduced, to good order.

This Soul sees also then, that there is a great blindness, in the conceit,
which men frame, about the delights of this world; and how we buy nothing, by
their means, even for this very life, which we lead here, but affliction, and
disquiet. How great disquiet, and how little contentment? and, in fine, what a
deal of laboring in vain? And here, is the Soul able to discern, not only
gross Cobwebs, and great faults, but even any poor grain of dust, how
little soever, it may be; and so, how much soever she may have labored, to
perfect her self, if once the Sun shine bright, and if the same Sun strike
it through, with those beams, in good earnest, she will find it to be dustie
enough. It is like a Glass, full of water, which you will hold to be very
clear, and pure, unless the Sun shine upon it; but if you see it once fallen
upon, by those beams, you will find it to be all, full of moates. This
Comparison is very literally true; for, before the Soul is in this Extasis,
she conceiues her self, to have been very careful, not to offend Almighty
God; and that she performed it according to the uttermost of her power; but yet
being come once so far, as that this Sun of Justice shines upon her, which
makes her open her eyes, she then sees so many moates therein, that she would be
glad, if she could tell how, to shut them again; for she is not yet, become so
true an Eaglet, of this swift, and strong Eagle, which bred her, as that she
can be able to look earnestly upon this Sun. But, how little soever she
chance to hold them open, she sees her self all impure; and calls that Verse to
mind, which says: Who shall ever be just, in thy presence? When once she
beholds this Divine Sun, her sight is dazzled, by the brightness of it; but
when she looks in, upon her self, her eyes are stopped up, with clay; and so
this poor Dove, is blind; yea, and it happens many times, that she also
remains blind, for good, and all; as being absorpt, amazed, and, as it were,
out of her wits, with so many mighty greatnesses, as she is then, grown to
see. Here, finally, is true Humility acquired; not careing, any way at all,
either to speak well of her self, or yet, that others should do it. And our
Lord deuides, and disposes of the Fruit of this Garden; not she; and so, there
sticks nothing of it, to her fingars. All the good, which she has, goes on, as
still addressed to Almighty God; and if she be drawn to say any thing of her
self, it is also directed to his glory; for she knows, that she has no
interest therein; and cannot be ignorant thereof, even though she would; as
discerning it, by the very sight of her eyes, which are shut toward the
things of this world, but which are still kept open, for the understanding of
Truths, almost whether she will, or no.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes, and finishes, this last Degree of Prayer. She declares, what
the Soul finds therein, when she returns to live again, in the world; and
the Light also, which our Lord gives, concerning the deceipts, and errors of
the same world. This Chapter delivers excellent Doctrine.

I Will therefore now finish that, which I was saying; That, namely, there is
here no more now any need, that the Soul should give any new consent, since
already she has given it all; and knows, that she has voluntarily, delivered
her self wholly up, into his hands; and that she cannot deceive him, who is the
knower of all things; for it is not, as things pass here, in this world, where
all this life of ours, is full of nothing, but duplicities, and deceipts; and,
when you think you have fully gotten the good will of any Creature, by the
show he makes, you quickly come to understand, that all, is tricks, and lies;
and that no body can tell, how to live in a world of so much odd business;
especially, if there be any little interest of the Parties. But blessed is
that Soul, which our Lord comes once to draw to the knowledge of such things,
as are real Truths. O what a condition, and fortune were this, for Kings! and
how much would it import them, more, to gain this great advantage, then to get
large Dominions, and States? What rectitude would there be found, in the
Kingdom? How many mischiefs, would have been forborne already, and would also
be forborne hereafter? For here, there is no fear of loosing life, or honor,
for the love of Almighty God; but rather such losses as these, would go for a
great blessing, amongst such, as find the^felues carry another manner of
respect, to the honor of our Lord, then to all them, to whom they are less
obliged. For, Kings are the men, whom those others follow; and, in this case,
these Kings, would loose a thousand Kingdoms; and they would have great
reason, to be glad to do so, rather the^ to loose the means, of making one
stepp further, toward the augmentation of the Holy Catholic Faith, or the
procuting some light, for Heretics; for, it is another manner of business, to
purchase, and get such a kind of Kingdom, as will never end. And what Soul
soever, shall come to taste but one single dropp of this water, all the rest of
this whole world, will be but fit, even to turn the stomach.

But now, if the Soul of such a person, should fall out, to be once ingulfed
into this water; what strange effects, would it produce? Dear Lord, if thou
should draw me, to such a condition, as that I might be able to publish this
truth, with a loud voice, they would yet believe me, no more, then they do
others, who know, how to publish the same, after a much better manner. But yet,
at least, I should give satisfaction to my self; and, me thinks, I should
esteem, even my very life, but at a little rate, upon condition, that I might
be able to give but some one, of these single Truths, to be well understood.
And yet I know not, what I should be able to do with my self, afterward; for
there is no trust at all, to be had in me, I being that miserable creature,
which I am. Yet still I have so great impulses, to utter, and declare these
things, to such as be in authority, and command, that, me thinks, they do
even annihilate, and consume me.

And yet now, since I can do no more, I return, O my Lord, toward thee, to
seek remedy, for all inconveniences; for thou, O my Lord, know well, how
highly glad, I would be, to dispossess my self, even of all these very
Favors, which, of thy goodness, thou have vouchsafed to do me (provided
always, that I might still remain, in condition, never to offend thee more)
and to resign them up, to Her great zeal for the conversion of Kings.
Kings, and Princes; for then, it is very certain, that it would be wholly
impossible for them, either to permit, that those things should be done, which
are permitted; or yet, that they should fail, to receive extraordinary
blessings, at thy hand. O make them, my God, understand, to how much they are
obliged, since thou were pleased (by what I have heard) to honor them, in such
sort, upon earth, as that, when thou take any of them away, there is some
kind of She alludes to Comets, and blazing Stars.
signification thereof, even in the Heavens. And, when I think of this, it
breeds a kind of devotion in me, that thou, O my King, may be pleased to make
them, even heerby, understand, that they ought to imitate thee, in their life;
since there grow, in some sort, to be certain apparances, and signs, in
Heaven, at their death; as there was, when even thy self came to dye. I see
well, that I am presuming very far; but I beseech your Reverence, tear it,
if you mislike it, and believe, that I would be glad, to speak it better, if I
were present with them; and if I could tell, how; and especially, if I thought,
that they would believe me; for I recommend them, very much, to Almighty God;
and I wish, that it might do them good. When a body resolves to venture his
life, he may, in effect, do what he lists; and I desire very often, to loose
mine; for, that were to venture little, for the gaining of much. But now, one
may think, that there is scarce any Creature in the world, who indeed lives;
considering how grossly visible, that great deceit, and error, is, which we
carry about us; and with what blindness, we converse, in this world.

But, when once the Soul comes to the pass, of this Water, they are not bare
desires, which she carries, for the service of Almighty God; for then, his
Divine Majesty gives her strength also, to put them in execution. Nor can
there any such thing be once represented to her, wherein she may think to
serve him, upon which she will not cast her self, all at once; and yet she will
think, all the while, that she is doing nothing; for now she sees very
clearly, that all things are merely nothing, which concern not the giving gust
to Almighty God. The only trouble, in this case, is, that there is nothing
indeed, deserving truly the name of trouble, which will offer it self, to any
such person, as is so very unprofitable, as I am. But be thou, O my eternal
Good, so well pleased, as that once, some such little moment of time may
occurr, as wherein, I may be able to pay the least imaginable crumme, of all
that great service, which I owe thee. Ordain thou things, O my Lord, in what
sort thou will; so that yet, this poor creature of thine, may once be able to
pay thee some little service. There have been other manner of women; in the
world, who have done heroical things, for love of thee; but I am good for
nothing, but to prate; and so it is not thy pleasure, O my Lord, to employ me,
about putting any thing in execution; but that all the service, which I am to
do thee, must pass away in words, and desires; yea and even I have not
liberty in this little; and peradventure I should be faulty, in all. But
strengthen thou my Soul, and dispose of it first, O thou, the Good of all
Goods, my dear Jesus; and then ordain things in such sort, as that I may
once, be able to do somewhat for thee; and that there may be no such Creature
in the world, as should endure to receive so much; and yet withal, to pay
nothing. Let it cost, O my Lord, what it can; but let not these hands of mine,
appear always so very empty in thy presence, since Rewards are to be setout,
and given, according to the Works. Behold, here is my Life, here is my Honor,
and here is my Will; and thou know, that I have given it all, to thee; and
am entirely thine; and therefore, dispose of me, according to thine own good
pleasure. I see, O my Lord, very well, how little I am able to execute; but yet
being now come to thee, and having mounted-vp to this Tower, from which, Truths
are truly discovered, if thou depart not from me, there is nothing, which I
shall not be able to perform; and yet, if thou depart, how little soever that
may be, I am to go, where I was; which is, into a kind of being in Hell.

O what it is, for a Soul, which finds her self, in such condition, as this,
to be put to return again, to converse in the world; and to behold, and see,
the Antic, and fantastical Puppet-Playes of this life, which are so
ridiculously ordered; and to spend time, in complying with this Body of ours,
both by sleeping, and eating; for, all this, wearies the Soul, which knows
not, how to escape from thence, but finds it self to be surprised, and
enchained. It then sees, much more evidently, the true captivity, wherein we
remain, by the very condition of these Bodies of ours, and by the misery of
these lives, which we lead; and then, we come to know, very well, the much
reason, which S. Paul had, to beseech Almighty God, to deliver him from it;
wherein, he cryesout alowd, and beggs liberty, of his Divine Majesty; as I
have formerly said. But now, this is often done, with so very great impulse of
mind, that the Soul would even feign get out of the Body, in pursuit of
this liberty; and, in the mean time, since she cannot be freed, she A rare
expression.
walks up, and down the world, like one, who were sold for some Slave, to
serve, and play the Drudge, in a strange Country. And that, which afflicts her
yet more, is, that she knows not, how to meet with many, who will be so well
disposed, as to lament with her, and to desire that, which she desires; for
they ordinarily, desire but to live. O that once we might be untied from all
things! and that we might not place our contentment, in any thing of this
world! How would then, that pain, which we should find to be living always
without God, appease, and temper the fear of death, through the desire, which,
by this means, we should have, of attaining to the fruition of eternal life.

Sometimes, when I am considering, how such a Creature, as I, to whom our Lord
has given this light, with such an imperfect kind of charity, as I possess,
and with so poor repose, as I enjoy, (since my life has deserved no better)
can yet so often find my self in distress, for being in this bannishment of
mine. I may easily grow to imagine, what kind of sense, and feeling, that would
be, which Saints have had in this case; and what kind of commotion, a S. Paul,
and a S. Marie Magdalen, and such others, like them, would find in themselves,
in whom the fire of the Love of Almighty God, did reign. It must certainly
have been, a continual Martyrdom to them. To me it seems, that all the ease,
or rather indeed, absence of pain, which I might be able to find in this
world, were, but to treat with some such persons, as in whom I might be able
to meet with such desires, as these; I say, desires, with deeds; and I say yet
again, with deeds. For, there are certain people in the world, who, if you
will believe themselves, are absolutely untied from the world, and so they
publish, that they are; and so indeed, it is very fit, they were; because even
their very profession, and condition, requires as much; and so also do those
many years, since they began to enter into the way of Perfection. But yet,
this Soul of mine, knows well, how to find a difference, even from far off,
between such, as desire these things, but in words; and such others, as
confirm their words, by their works. For she knows, how to understand, very
well, the little good, which these do in the world, and the much, which is
done by those others; and indeed, this is such a kind of thing, as whosoever is
of experience, may very easily discern.

And now I have set down the Effects, which those Rapts, that proceed from
the Spirit of Almighty God, are wont to produce. It is true, that some of
them, do it more; and some, less; I say less; because, though in the
beginnings they work, yet then, the Effects are not seen experimentally, by
way of outward expression; nor can it be yet, so well perceived, that they have
them; and besides, the perfection thereof, goes increasing; and the Soul goes
procuring, that there may now, be no memory of imperfections; which will
appear if there be any, like so many Cobwebs; and this now requires some time.
And by how much the more, Humility, and the Love of our Lord, increases in the
Soul: so much the more sweet, and fresh odor, will these Flowers of virtue,
be sure to give, both to themselves, and others. And it is most certainly true,
that our Lord knows, how to work so well, upon any Soul, in one of these
Rapts, that there will not much remain, for the Soul her self, to work, and
labor in, toward the acquiring of perfection. For, no Creature is able to
believe, without direct experience upon himself, how much it pleases our Lord,
to bestow upon a Soul, in such an occasion, as this; nor is there any kind of
diligence of ours, which can, in my opinion, attain it. I say not, but that,
by the Favor of our Lord, such as employ themselves many years, by those
ways, which they prescribe, who write of Prayer, both concerning the
beginning, and proceeding thereof, may ariue to perfection, and to a total
untying, and loosening themselves, from the things of this world, with much
labor, and pains, but never in so short a time; whereas here, our Lord is
pleased to work it, and that presently, without any labor of ours. And he
expressly, and clearly, draws the Soul from the earth, and whatsoever is
earthly; and he gives her an absolute dominion over all things, which are
therein; though yet there be not, in this Soul, any more true value, or merit,
then there was, even in mine. Nor do I know, how to exaggerate this point
more; for in mine, there was, in effect, none at all. If now it chance to be
asked, why his Divine Majesty does it, there is no other answer, but because
he is pleased to do it; and he does it also just so, as he is pleased; and
though sometimes there be no disposition in her at all, to receive it, he yet
disposes also the same, to receive that benefit, and blessing, which his Divine
Majesty is pleased to impart. So that he gives it not always, because the
Gardner has deserved it, by dressing up, and cultiuating his Garden well,
(though yet it be very certain, that whosoever does this, as he ought, and
does procure, withal, to untie his whole affection from things of this world,
will never fail to be regaled by him) but sometimes, because it is his
pleasure (as I have said) to show his power, and greatness, even upon the most
barren Soil; and to prepare it, for the receiving all kind of good. So that
now, she seems not, in some sort, to have so much as a Power, to return to
live in offense of Almighty God, as she was wont; but she has her thoughts so
habituated to understand what is Truth indeed, that all the rest, seems but a
foolerie, and fit to make sport for children. She smiles also in her self
sometimes, when she finds certain grave persons, who live in the exercise of
Prayer, and Religion, make account of certain foolish points of Honor, which
such a Soul, as this, holds now to be directly, under her feet. Some will say,
that this is but discretion, and a preserving, forsooth, of their dignity, and
rank; that so, afterward, they may be able, to do the more good. But, that
other Soul, understands very well, that they might have done Almighty God
more service, in one day, if they would have made their authority, and honor
yield, and shrink, for the love of Almighty God, then they would ever do, in
ten years, by upholding, and authorizing the same, after their way. But thus
does this kind of Soul lead a certain troublesome life, and is ever subject
to the Cross; though yet ever going on, with increase. And though the persons,
who use to treat with her, conceive her sometimes, to be even already, at the
very very topp of Perfection, yet do they find, shortly after, that still
she grows to be more improued; for, our Lord goes ever favoring her, more and
more. God himself, is, in effect, her Soul; and it is he, who has already
taken the charge of her, into his hands; and he shines even brightly, in her;
and seems to be assisting her, after a kind of evident manner; both that she
may not offend him, and by continually also favoring, and stirring her still
up, to serve him.

When once my Soul arrived so far, as that Almighty God might be pleased to
do her this great Favor, my miseries, and Sins, did cease, even all at
once, and our Lord gave me strength, to quitt them; and it moved me no more, to
be afterward in those occasions of imperfection; and with persons, who had
formerly been wont to to bring distractions upon me, then if I had not been
there, at all; nay rather that, which was wont to damnifve me, grew to assist
me now; and all things were now, fit means, to make me know God more, and to
love him better; and to see, how deeply I was obliged to him; and to make me,
in fine, very sorry, for what I had been.

But yet I well understood withal, that this came no way from me; nor had I
grown to gain it, by any diligence of mine own; nor indeed, had I even had
time for it; but only his Divine Majesty, through the mere, and only motive
of his own goodness, had given me strength, for this purpose. From the time,
when our Lord was pleased to afford me the Favor of these Rapts, this strength
has gone on, with increase; and he has also held me so fast, with his hand,
that I might not return back again, any more. And now, me thinks, that it
is nothing at all, which I do on my part; but I understand, in a very evident
manner, that our Lord is he, who works; and therefore I am apt to be of
opinion, that the person, to whom our Lord does show these Favors (supposing
ever, that, with all humility, and fear, he will understand, and acknowledge,
that it is our Lord himself, who does them, and that, in effect, we do nothing
at all in the business) may put himself into any company; and that, how
distracted, and vicious soever it be, it will not move, or even concern him,
but that rather, it will be of help to him, and minister him some occasion, or
other, whereby he may reap more advantage, for his own good.

For, these are already made strong Souls, which our Lord is pleased to
choose, for the helping of others; though yet still, it must be considered,
that this strength proceeds not from themselves. But when once our Blessed Lord
brings a Soul so near himself, as I have showed, he goes, by little and
little, communicating very great secrets to her. And here, come the true
Revelations, in this kind of Extasis; and other great Favors, and Visions. And
all these things serve to make this Soul, both more humble, and more strong;
and to give her grace, to hold all kind of worldly things, in no account; as
also to know more clearly, the greatness of that reward, which our Blessed Lord
has provided for such, as serve him. I humbly befeech his Divine Majesty,
that the excessive bounty, which he has vouchsafed to show, toward this
miserable, sinful Creature, may prove some part of a motive, to make them,
who shall read this Discourse, encourage, and animate themselves, to leave all
things, yea even absolutely all, for Almighty God, since his Divine Majesty is
pleased to give so complete rewards. For we see, and that clearly enough, what
advantages, and Favors, and retributions, he is pleased to allow, even in this
life, to such as serve him; and what then will he be sure to do for them, in
the next?

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
In which she treats, of how secure a way it is, for persons, who give
themselves to Contemplation, not to raise-vp their Spirit, to high things,
unless our Lord raise them up; and that the Humanity of Christ our Lord, is
in deed, to be the means, toward the highest Contemplation of all others.
She speaks also of an error, wherein once she was. This Chapter contains
matter of much profit.

I Will here declare a certain thing, which is, in my opinion, very important;
and, if your Reverence think fit, it may serve you, for a word of advise; yea
and perhaps, you may grow even to have need thereof. I have read in some Books,
written of Prayer, which affirm, that, how soever the Soul is not able, of it
self, to ariue to that State, whereof I spoke before, (because all that, is
Supernatural, which our Lord works there) yet she may be able, forsooth, to
help her self therein, by raising-vp her Spirit above all things created; and
that so, she having raised it up, many years together, with humility, and
having first passed through the Purgative way, and after that, through the
Illuminatiue, they advise, in particular manner, that men should separate, and
abstract themselves, from all kind of imagination or reflection, upon
corporeal things; and that so, they should be able to approach, and reach, the
contemplation of the Divinity. For they say, that, although it be even the
very Humanity it self, of Christ our Lord, yet is it of some impediment, to
such, as proceed thus far; yea and that it hinders men, from the most perfect
kind of Contemplation.

For the making this Opinion Anopinion, which is more probable, then true.
good, they allege that, which our Lord said to his Apostles, when himself
was ascending-vp to Heaven, of the coming of the Holie-Ghost down upon them,
which would not be accomplished, till himself were retired out of their sight.
But, for my part, I am apt to conceive, that if they had then, had that Lively
Faith, of our Lord's being both God, and Man, (which they had, after the coming
of the Holy Ghost) his Corporal Presence would have done them no hurt at all.
For he held no such discourse to his Blessed Mother, though she loved him much
more, then they all. But these men use to allege this passage, or place of
Scripture; because it seems to them (in regard, that all this action of
Prayer, is a work of Spirit) that every Corporeal Object, will be able to
divert, and hinder it; and that, forsooth, they must consider themselves, after
a manner, which is totally independent upon Creatures; and that God is alike
near them, on all sides; and so, to see themselves ingulfed in him, is the
thing, which they should endeavor to obtain.

Now, this does not displease me, to be used, at sometimes, and in some cases;
but yet, to denide our selves wholly, from the person of Christ our Lord, and to
bring that Divine Body of his, into the account, and company of these
miseries of ours, or even with all the rest of the whole created world, I can
by no means ondure; and I humbly beg of his Divine Majesty, that I may be
able to give my self to be understood.

I will not yet, put my self to contradict them, because they are learned men,
and spiritual persons; who fail not to know well, what they say; and it is
also very true, that it pleases Almighty God, to carry, and conduct Souls,
by several walks, and ways, as he did mine. And now, I will declare some
particulars thereof; for, in the rest, I will not interpose my self, but only
speak of the danger, wherein I found I was, because I conformed my self, to
what I had read. I well believe, that whosoever shall find himself to have
arrived to the State of Union, and not to have passed further on, so far as to
have Rapts, and Visions, together with such other Favors, as our Lord is wont
to impart to Souls, may hold that, which is spoken of, to be better; as I also
did. But yet, if I had continued therein, I believe, I should never have arrived
to that pitch, wherein now I am. For, in my opinion, it is an error, This
seems to have been a foolish, and illfauoured kind of error in those others.
and deceit; though yet perhaps, it may be my self, who am the person
deceived; and yet I will relate, what happened to me. Whilst I was in want of a
Directour, and the while, went reading the Books afforesayd, whereby I thought
I grew to understand somewhat; by little, and little, I came, indeed, to find
afterward, that, if our Lord had not been my teacher, I should have learnt very
little, by those Books; For, really, it was nothing, which I understood, till
his Divine Majesty was pleased to make me know it, by experience; nor indeed,
did I know, what I did. But, when afterward I came so far, as to have some
kind of Prayer, which was Supernatural (I mean, the Prayer of Quiet) I
procured to dismiss my self of all kind of Corporeal Objects; though yet, I
durst not go raising, and exalting my Soul. For, considering that I was
always so very wicked, I saw, that this was to be a great presumption, in me.
But then I came to think, that I felt a kind of Presence of Almighty God, in
me, after a particular manner, as indeed I did; and I procured, to recollect my
self, with him. And this is a very sauourie, and gustfull kind of Prayer, if
our Lord assist a Soul particularly therein; and the delight of it, is great;
and when both the profit, and pleasure, which it gives, is once observed by the
Soul, there could be then, no means, to make me return again, to the
Humanity of Christ our Lord; because, in realitie of truth, I conceived, that
it was an impediment to me.

Othou Lord of my Soul, and my Good! thou, Christ our Lord, who were
Crucified; I never call to mind the opinion, which I entertained in this case,
but I am afflicted by it. For I conceive my self, to have committed a huge
Treason therein, against thee; (though yet my ignorance may peradventure have
been some excuse) I having been so particularly devoted, to the person of
Christ our Lord, throughout the whole course of my life; for, this other
proceeding of mine, occurred in the very latter part thereof; I say, in the
very latter part, immediately before our Blessed Lord vouchsafed me those
Favors, of Rapts, and Visions.

I continued a very little while, in this opinion; and so I ever came quickly
back, to delight my self, with this dear Lord of mine; and especially, when I
received the Blessed Sacrament, I ever desired to have some Picture of him, in
mine eye, since I was not able to carry him so deeply engraven, or stamped
upon my Soul, as I could have wished. But is it possible, O my dear Lord,
that ever any such thought, as this, should be able to get in, to my heart,
even for one single hour, as that thou were to have been able to hinder my
obtaining my greatest Good? Alas, from whence came all the Benedictions, and
benefits, which ever I received, but only from thee? But I will not so much as
think, that really I was faulty heerin; but rather I am to pity my self for
that, which certainly proceeded from ignorance in me. And so, thou did
vouchsafe, through thy goodness, to redress, and assist me, by helping me to
one afterward, who might deliver me out of this error; and besides, also, by
making me able to see thee so often, That was, by several Visions.
as I shall declare hereafter; that so I might the more clearly understand, how
great that ignorance of mine, was; and finally, to the end, that I might
publish the same, to many, as I have done already; and that now, I might also
record it here.

For my part, I conceive, that the reason, why many Souls get not forward, in
the way of Profit, and why they reach not to obtain some very great liberty
of Spirit, when they ariue to use Prayer of Union, is this very thing. And I
conceive, that there are two reasons, upon which, I may well ground this
opinion; and though perhaps, that be of no moment, which I am going to utter,
yet I will not forbear to do it; because I have found by experience, that it
went very ill with my Soul, till it pleased our Blessed Lord, to give me
light. For, all those Joys, which she took, came to me, but by supps, and
gulps; and when once I was past the present occasion, I found not my self, to
have such company, and strength, for the enduring of tribulations, and
temptations, as yet I met with, afterward. But one of these reasons, why men
get not forward, is, that there may peradventure go a dram of some certain
little want of Humility, which lies hidden, and plaistered over, in such sort,
that even the person, who is so faulty, may, perhaps, not so very easily, find
it. And who now, will ever be so proud, and wretched, as I; yea and that, when
he should have labored, throughout the whole course of his life, and made as
many Prayers, and suffered as many Pennances, and endured as many
Persecutions, as might be imagined, would not yet find himself rich enough, and
abundantly rewarded, and paid for them all, when our Lord should give him
leave, to remain at the foot of the Cross, with S. John? Nay I know not, into
what brain it would sink, but mine, not to be content, with such a felicity,
as this; who was ever a looser so many ways, in all those things, whereby I
ought to have been a gainer.

But now, though our miserable frail condition, or else, perhaps, our sickness,
should not permit us, to be always reflecting upon the Passion of our Blessed
Lord; yet at least, what should hinder us from remaining with him, now, that he
is risen again, to Glory; since we have him so near us, in the Blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, where we see him glorified now? Nor need we behold him
there, so distressed; and so afflicted; so torn in pieces; so ouerflowing with
blood; so wearied in those rugged Highways; so persecuted by those, whom he
benefited so highly; and the while, not so much, as to be believed in, by his
very Apostles. For, it is most certainly true, that one has not always the
heart, to be even able, to reflect upon so excessive afflictions, as he felt.
But now here, we have him without pain, and full of glory, giving strength of
body to some, and courage of mind to others, before he ascended up to Heaven.

He makes himself even our Companion, in the Blessed Sacrament; yea and seems,
as if it had not been in his power, to depart any one moment from us; and that
now it should yet have been in mine, to part from thee, O my Lord! yea and
this, that I might serve thee, so much the better. A svveet, and just
complaint, and vvorthie of the Saint who made it.
Let it pass, my dear Lord, if it please thee, that when I sinned against
thee, I did not know thee; but that now, when I come to know thee, I should
fancy a means to my self, of growing a greater gainer by this way! O what an
ill way was that? and now I find, that indeed I had utterly lost my way, if
thou, O Lord, had not restored me to it; for, in seeing, that thou art near
me, I have seen, that I have all good things, with thee. Nor do I ever meet
with any affliction, or trouble, but as soon as I consider, in what kind of
miserable posture thou were carried, and placed, before those Judges, it grows
instantly, to be very easily borne. With the presence of so dear a Friend, and
under the conduct of so good a Captain, as was pleased to put himself in the
foremost rank, that so he might suffer most, and first, there is nothing,
which may not well, be endured. He assists, and gives strength, and courage;
yea and never fails. He is a very fast, and true Friend; and I see clearly,
and I have seen it yet again, that, to the end we may be able to content
Almighty God, and that he may power great Favors down upon us, he is
pleased, that all should pass, by the hands of this most Sacred Humanity; in
which, his Divine Majesty has declared, that he was much delighted. I have
seen this truth, by experience, very, very many times; besides, that our Lord
himself, has told By Vision.
me so. I have also clearly seen, that we are to enter in, by this gate, if we
desire, that his Sovereign Majesty should communicate great secrets to our
Souls.

So that, Sir, I wish your Reverence, not to put your self upon any other way,
then this; though you should be even upon the very highest topp of
Contemplation; for here, you shall find your self safe; since this Lord of
ours, is he, by whose means, we are to receive all Benedictions; and he will
address your life, by your Meditation, upon his; for he is the best Original,
and Pattern, which we can possibly have. And indeed, what can we desire more,
then to have so perfect a Friend, at hand, who will never give us over, in our
afflictions, and tribalations; as they, of this world, are wont to do? Most
Blessed is that man, who loves him, with all sincerity of truth; and who is
always carrying him, close, to himself.

Let us look upon the Glorious S. Paul, who seems, as if he could not suffer,
that ever the name of Jesus, should be able, to fall often enough, from his
mouth; as one, who did not fail, to carry it well imprinted, upon his heart.
And since I understood of that other abstracted course, whereof I spoke, I have
reflected upon diverse great Contemplative Saints, with much care; and I find,
that they went no other way, then this. S. Francis she was it plainly, by the
Wounds; S. Anthony of Padua, by the Infant; S. Bernard delighted himself much,
in the Humanity of our Blessed Lord; and so also did S. Katherine of Sienna;
together with many other Saints, as your Reverence knows, better, then I.

This departing, and abstracting ones self, from all Corporeal Objects,
should, as it seems, be good, since persons, who are so Spiritual, affirm
it; but yet, in my opinion, this must be understood of Souls, who are very
Proficient in Spirit; for, till then, it is evident enough, that the Creator
is to be sought, by means of the Creatures. But yet, I will undertake nothing
in this case, since all depends upon the Favor, which our Lord is pleased to
show, to any Soul. That, which I would feign give to be understood, is, that
the most Sacred Humanity of Christ our Lord, must not be made to come into
that account; and let this point be well understood, wherein I would feign
know, how to declare my self. When God is pleased to suspend all the Powers of
the Soul, in those kinds of Prayer, which are related, we have seen plainly,
that this Presence of Christ our Lord, is taken from us, whether we will, or
no; and let it then, be gone, in a good hour; for, that kind of loss, is a
happy one, whereby we come to enjoy more of that, which we conceive our selves
to have lost; for then, the Soul employes her self wholly, upon loving him,
whom the Understanding has already endeavored to know; and she loves that,
which she did not fully comprehend; and now joys in that, wherein she could
not also have ioyed, but only by loosing her self, for her greater gain. But
now, that we should, by tricks, and of sett-purpose, accustom our selves, not
to procure, with our whole power, to carry always in our eyes (and I would to
God, it were always) this most Sacred Humanity of Christ our Lord; this, I
say, is that, which I like not; since it is a way, of making the Soul walk in
the Air, as we use to say. For it seems, that she has no firm, and stable
resting place, howsoever she may make her self believe, that she is full of
God. It is a great matter, whilst we live, and are humane, to procure, to bring
God to our selves, Humane; for, this is that other inconvenience, which I say,
there is; for, the first, I began to say, was a little want of humility, in
presuming to raise the Soul, before our Lord raised her, and not to content
her self, with meditating upon a thing so precious, but that she will needs be
a Marie, before she have taken the pains of Martha. If our Lord himself be
pleased, that we be Marie, there will be nothing to be feared, though it should
be, upon the very first day, of our doing him Service. But yet, let us
consider well, of the matter, as I think I was saying before; for, this small
moate of little humility, will make a shift to do a great deal of hurt,
against profiting in the way of Contemplation.

But, to return now to the Second point, We are no Angels, but we have
Bodies; and to desire, to make our selves Angels, whilst yet we are upon
earth, (and especially if they be so earthly, as I was,) is a kind of folly,
or madness. But our thoughts, in the ordinary way, have need of a kind of
leaning, or resting place; though yet sometimes, the Soul may go so out of
her self, yea and many times, may be so full of Almighty God, that perhaps
she has no ned to recollect her self, by means of any thing created. But
this is not a thing so ordinary; and in businesses, and persecutions, and
troubles, when she cannot enjoy so much Quiet; and in the times also of
Dryness, and dullness, Christ our Lord is wont, to be a very good friend. For,
we consider him, as man; and we behold him, full of weaknesses, and
afflictions; and he is company, fit for all good occasions; and when once, we
are a little accustomed, we shall find him very easily kept close, to us;
though yet some such times will occurr, as that we shall not be able to do,
neither the one, nor the other.

Upon this reason, it will be well, to do that, whereof I have spoken already;
namely, not to pretend, and procure any sensible consolation of Spirit, but let
any thing ariue, that will; for it is no toy, or trifle, to embrace the Cross
of our Lord. This Lord of ours, was forsaken, by all manner of comfort; and
they left him all alone, in his afflictions; but yet let not us do so. For he
will reach us his hand, which can raise us better up, then all our own
diligences, would have been able to do; and yet he will absent himself also,
when he shall think fit; and when he shall think it fit, he will also draw
the Soul out of it self, as I have said before. Our Lord is very well pleased,
to see a Soul, with Humility, introduce his Son, for her Intercessour; and
he loves her so very much, that even, when his Divine Majesty shall have an
inclination to raise her-vp to great Contemplation, the same Soul may yet hold
her self unworthy, and cry out, with S. Peter: Depart from me, O my Lord; for
I am a sinful man. I have tried this very thing, by experience; and thus
has God conducted my Soul. Let others therefore go, by some other short
cut, as they please; but that, which I have been able to understand, is, that
all this Ciment of Prayer, is grounded upon Humility; and Believe and consider
this most certain Truth.
that, the more the Soul is abased in that holy exercise, the more is it
exalted by Almighty God. Nor do I remember, that ever he showed me any of
those singular Mercies, of which I shall speak afterward; but when I found my
Soul, even as it were annihilated, with observing my self, to be so very
wicked. Yea and sometimes, his Divine Majesty took care to give me to
understand certain things, toward the making me know my self, so much the
better, which I could never have told, how to imagine.

But I am of opinion, that when the Soul does any thing on her part, to help
her self on, as afforesayd, toward that Prayer of Union; how soever, for the
present, it may seem to do good, yet the building will quickly fall, as
wanting any sound foundation; and I am afraid, that she will never ariue to
true Poverty of Spirit, which consists, in not desiring so much as comfort, or
gust, in Prayer; (for, all those of this world, are forsaken already, except
consolation in affliction; and that, for love of him, who ever lived in them)
but to remain also quiet in those very afflictions, and aridities; for though
they fail not, to have some little trouble thereat; yet is it not so far, as
to give them any such disquiet, and pain, as some give themselves, by
conceiving, that, if they be not always laboring with their Understanding,
and to have sensible devotion, all is lost; as if they could deserve so great a
good, by the pains they take. I say not, that they should not procure, and
maintain themselves with much care, in the Presence of Almighty God; but, if
yet they be not able to obtain, no not so much, as one good thought (as I have
said else where) yet let them not torment themselves; because we all, are
unprofitable Servants; and what can we conceive, that we shall be ever able to
do? Our Lord is much better pleased, that we may come to know this truth; and
that we may hold our selves fit, to be treated, like some poor little Asses,
to turn that wheel about, whereby the said Water is to be gotten; who though
they be put in, blindfold, and do not so much as know, what they do, will yet
get-vp more water, then the Gardner, with all the diligences he can use. No, we
must walk in this way, with liberty of Spirit, and put our selves into the
hands of Almighty God. If his Divine Majesty shall be pleased, to advance us,
to be of his Chamber, and Council, we must go with a good will; but if not,
we must be content to serve, in inferior employments, and not to seat our
selves, in the best place, as I have said else where.

Almighty God has more care of us, then we have of our selves; and knows,
for what, every body is fit; and for what therefore does it serve, for him,
to govern himself, when already the whole Will is disposed of, and given away,
to Almighty God? In my opinion it is less to be tolerated, or endured here,
then in the First Degree of Prayer; and it does vsmuch more harm, if any such
error be committed by us; for, these are Supernatural blessings. If a man
have an ill voice, how much soever he shall enforce himself to sing, the voice
will not be made good by it; but if God shall once have made it good, he needs
not be crying out, before hand. Let us therefore always humbly pray him, to
show us favor; and let the Soul be wholly resigned, but yet withal, confiding
in the greatness of God.

And now, when she has gotten leave, to remain at the feet of Christ our
Lord, let her not stir from thence, but continue, in what sort soever it may
be; and let her imitate the Magdalena; for when he shall find her strong, he
will take her up, with him, to the Desert. So that your Reverence shall do
well, to keep your self in this way; till you meet with some other, who may
have more experience, then I; and may know it better. Only, if they be persons,
who were but beginning to have gust in Almighty God, do not believe them; for
they conceive, that they profit themselves more, and have more gust, when they
help themselves in such sort, as is declared before. O, how Almighty God
comes clearly, and openly enough, in, without these little pretty helps, when
he has a mind to it? and so, as that, whether we will, or no, he eleuates,
and hurries-away the Spirit, even as some Giant would dispose of a straw; and
so, as that no resistance can be thought of. But what a kind of impertinency is
it, for a man to believe, that whenever he lists, a Toade should be made able
to fly, of it self? And I hold it to be a more difficult, and absurd kind of
thing, that the Spirit should be able to raise, and exalt it self without being
exalted, and raised by Almighty God; for, it is, all, laden with earth, and
with a thousand impediments; and it will prove, to be of little use, to it,
that it have a mind to fly; for, though flying be more natural to a Soul,
then to a Toade, yet this Soul, is already all plunged in a great bed of dutt,
and mire, as haueing lost that other quality, by her own fault.

I will therefore conclude with this, that whenever we dispose our selves, to
think, and meditate upon Christ our Lord, we must remember the love, wherewith
he did us so many Favors; and now greatly, Almighty God was pleased to show
it to us, by giving us so high a pledge, and pawn, of his love; for, one love
begetts, and breeds another. And though we should he mere poor beginners, in
this holy exercise; and though we should withal, be very wicked, yet let us
still procure, to be looking upon this Object, and still be stirring our selves
up, to love. For, if once our Blessed Lord vouchsafe, to imprint this love into
our hearts, all things will grow easy to us; and we shall quickly fall to
work, and that without any trouble to our selves, at all. I beseech his
Divine Majesty, that he will vouchsafe, to bestow it upon us, since he knows,
how very much the same imports us; for, we beggit, by the great love, which he
bore to us, and for the sake of his Glorious Son, who also loved us all, so
extremely, to his own cost, Amen.

One A doubt. which cannot easily be solued.
thing I would feign ask your Reverence, how our Lord, beginning to do
Favors to a Soul, and those so eminent, and high, as to bring her to perfect
Contemplation (which Soul were therefore, in all reason, to grow, and remain
entirely perfect, even at that instant; for certainly, it ought to be so; since
whosoever receives so very great blessings from Heaven, should be extremely
far from careing for any such delights, as concern this life) can possibly
bring to pass, that when she grows to have Rapts, and so to receive more
Favors, and higher Effects thereof, (and that so much the more, as she
falls-out to be more untied from the world; and considering yet withal, how,
in the very first instant, when our Lord ariues to a Soul, he can leave her
entirely sanctified) how, I say, our Lord can abandon this Soul afterward, in
process of time, without maintaining it, in the perfection of virtue. This, I
say, would I very feign know; for I understand it not yet; though I know well,
that it is a very different case, what proportion of strength, Almighty God
leaves in a Soul, when his visitation, at the first, lasts no longer, then the
opening, as it were, and shutting of an eye; (for then, in effect, it is scarce
felt at all, but only by the very effects, which it leaves behind it) and when,
on the other side, this Favor continues, to be of much longer extent. But it
occurrs to me often, to doubt, whether the cause of this, may not be, that the
Soul disposes not her self entirely, for God, till his Divine Majesty bring
her up, and breed her for himself, by little, and little; and so, bespeake her
to resolve her self, all at once, and give her the very strength of a grown
man; to the end, that she may cast all, as it were, a thousand miles off; as he
instantly did with S. Marie Magdalen, and as he also does with others, after
the rate of their cooperating with him; and as they suffer his Divine majesty
to dispose of them wholly, according to his own good pleasure; for else, we know
not, how to believe, that, even in this life, Almighty God gives a hundred for
one. I thought also of this Comparison, That, supposing the thing to be all
one, which is imparted both to Beginners and Proficients, it would be like to
some one only food, whereof many feed, all at once; and that they, who eat
little of it, preserve no more memory, and remain with no more effect of it,
then only some little savor, or smack, for a while; but they, who feed more
largely, it gives them help to subsist; and they, who feed plentifully on it,
receive increase of strength, and spirit, by it; yea and a Soul may feed so
often, and so fully, upon this food of life, that she may come, not to endure
any thing at all, which shall not taste, just like that. For she finds the
very great benefit, which she receives by it; and she has her taste already, so
wholly made to that sweetness, that she had rather even leave to live, then to
feed upon other things; which, were all, to serve, in fine, for nothing, but
only to take away the good taste, which the former excellent food left in her
mouth.

Besides, no conversation, with holy company, is wont to be of so much use,
and benefit, in one day, as in many; but we may be in it, so long, as that we
may grow, to be even like them, our selves; if our Lord will be pleased, to do
us so much favor. But, to conclude, the main business consists, in what his
Divine Majesty vouchsafes to do, and to whom he will be pleased, to allow
it; though yet withal, it grow to import very much, that whosoever will
pretend to receive this Favor, must fully resolve himself, to be absolutely
dis-engaged, and untied from the whole world, yea and to esteem that Favor of
our Blessed Lord, as highly, as the thing deserves.

It also seems to me, as if his Divine Majesty, were resolving to try, who
they are, that love him; Namely whether it be this Soul, or that; and that he
would also discover, who himself is, by imparting so high, and sovereign a
delight, to quicken, and fortifye their Faith, if it should chance to be dead,
or weak, in the belief of those great blessings, which he means to give her;
saying: Behold, this, is but a single dropp, of that huge, and vast Sea of
benedictions, which I mean to give to such, as I love. And when he sees, that
they receive it, as he gives it, he gives not only it, but himself with it. In
fine, he loves them, who love him; And O, what a good Lover, and good Beloned,
is he?

Othou, the Lord of my Soul! O that I could find any fit words, whereby I
might give to be understood, what thou bestowest upon such, as trust thee,
home; and what they loose, who ariue to this condition, and yet will needs
remain still, with themselves. But do not, O thou my Lord, permit this;
since already thou do more, then this, for our sakes, in coming to so base,
and wicked a lodging, as this of my heart. Blessed may thou be, for ever, and
for ever, Amen.

And now I return, most humbly to beseech your Reverence, that, if you mean
to impart these things, which I have written, concerning my Prayer, they may be
very Spiritual persons to whom you do it. For if they understand no more,
then some one way; or if they have remained in the half way; they will never be
so well able, to hitt right. Now, there are some, whom Almighty God carries
instantly, by a very sublime kind of address; and they perhaps will conceive,
that others, may also profit there, and may quiet, and calm the Understanding;
and not serve themselves, at all, of the means of any Corporeal object; but
yet, these creatures, with all this, shall come, in fine, to remain as dry, as
a stick. And some, who have grown to enjoy a little Quiet, grow also to think
of this fancy, that, Why, forsooth, may not they be able, to obtain, as well
the one, as the other. But such as these, in stead of advancing, in the way of
profiting their Souls, shall really disadvantage themselves, as I have said.
So that, in all this business, there will be need, both of experience, and
prudence; and I beseech our Lord, grant them to us, through his own goodness.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She returns to declare the course of her life; and how she first began to
think of growing to greater perfection; and by what means, she did it. This
Chapter is very profitable, for such, as are to govern Souls, in order to
Prayer; and to make them know, how they are to behave themselves in their
beginnings; and of the benefit, she reaped, by knovving it her self.

I will now return to that place, where I gave over the Discourse of my Life;
(for I have detained my self, perhaps, longer then I ought) to the end, that
yet that, which follows, may grow to be the better understood. From hence
forward, this will be another new Book; I mean, another new Life; for
hitherto, it was mine; but the Life, which I have lived, since I began to
declare these things of Prayer, is that, when God lived in me, (forasmuch as I
could conceive) since I hold it to be impossible otherwise, for me, to have
given over, both such ill actions, and conditions, in so short a time. Let our
Lord be everlastingly praised, for delivering me, in such sort, from my self.

But I beginning now, to free my Soul from the occasions of ill, and to give
my self more, to Prayer, our Lord began also to do me Favors; as one, who,
in all appearance, desired but that I would be content to receive them. His
Divine Majesty, did therefore then, very ordinarily, give me the Prayer of
Quiet; and, many times, that also, of Union, which lasted very long fitts of
time. But now, when I understood, that there had occurred great Illusions of
certain women, and deceipts, which the Devil put upon them, I began to be
afraid, as considering the delight, and sweetness, which I felt, to be so very
great; yea and that, many times, it was such, that I could not avoid it;
though yet withal, on the other side, I saw cause of very great security,
that it was God; especially when I was in Prayer; and I found also, that I was
much bettered by it; and still remained with more strength of Mind toward
Virtue. But yet, whenever I grew to be a little diuerted. I returned again
to fear, whether the Devil might not have a mind, to make me conceive, that
it were good for me, to suspend the use of my understanding, and so, deprive my
self of the exercise of Mental Prayer; and that I might not be able to think
upon the Passion of Christ our Lord, nor to serve my self (as I was saying) of
my Understanding part, which seemed to me, a very great inconvenience. But now,
when his Divine Majesty was pleased already, to give me light, to the end that
I might offend him no more; and might also grow able to know, how much I owed
him for this goodness, this fear came now to increase, in such sort, that it
put me, upon a diligent She grows now to make serious enquiry after a good
Directour.
search, after some persons of Spirit, with whom I might communicate my
affairs; and already I had gotten notice of some. For, by this time, they, of
the Society of JESUS, were come hither; to which Order (though I yet knew no
one of them) I was very affectionate, upon the only reason of my
understanding, what kind of life they led, and what Prayer they used. But I
found not my self worthy enough, to speak with them; nor constant, and strong
enough, to obey them. And this, gave me yet greater fear; for, in fine, to
treat with them, and yet to continue still, what I was, represented it self to
me, as an odd, and ill-fauoured business. In these cogitations of mine, did I
pass some time; till now, by the much battery, which I made upon my self, and
through the fears, to which still I was subject, I resolved to treat with one,
who was a Spiritual person; and to ask him, what kind of Prayer that was,
which I used; and to desire him, to give me light, if he found me to be in
error; and I resolved to use all possible diligence, not to offend Almighty
God; for, the want, which I found, in my self, of courage, did continue me
still, in my fears. O my dear God! and how great a deceit, and error was
this, in me, to separate my self from good, that so I might grow to be good.
The Devil, it seems, is willing to labor much, upon this point, in the
beginning of our aspiring to Virtue; for I could not, in fine, conquer my self
heerin. He well knows, that the means of doing good to a Soul, consists, in
that she resolve to conferr, in particular manner, with such, as are the
friends of Almighty God; and therefore I would never set any time, to
resolve upon this. I expected to reform my self first, as I had also done
before, when I left my Prayer; and perhaps I should never have gone through,
with it; for I was already declined so low, toward certain little things, of
ill custom, and consequence, (which yet in fine I would not conclude, to be
ill) that I was in need, to be assisted, by some other, who might reach me out
his hand, to raise me up. And now, Blessed be our Lord; for, in fine, his own,
was the first.

When now I saw, that my fear came-on so far, (for I proceeded, and
increased in Prayer) I conceaned, that there was either some great good, or else
some excessive mischief, inuolued in it; for already I understood, very well,
that it was a Supernatural advantage, which I had; since sometimes, I was not
able to resist it; and to obtain it also, when I would, could not possibly be
done. Upon this, I grew to resolve, that there would be no remedy for me, if I
The only excellent course.
procured nor, to have great purity of Conscience, and if I quitted not all
occasions of ill; though it were but of Venial Sins. For, if my exercise of
Prayer, were of the Spirit of Almighty God, the benefit did very evidently
appear; and if it were of the Devil, yet he could do me no hurt at all, but
rather would be put to sit down with loss, if I should procure to please
Almighty God, and not offend him at all. And now, having resolved upon this,
and ever humbly praying our Blessed Lord, that he would assist me; and taking
the same course several days; I yet found, that my Soul, had not strength
enough, all alone, to go through, with the obtaining so great perfection, in
regard of some inclination, and liking, which I carried to certain things;
which, howsoever they were not very ill, of themselves, yet they served the
turn, to spoil all. They told me then, of a certain Priest, in this place,
who was a learned man; and whose virtue, and good life, our Lord began to
discover to the world; and I procured, by means of a holy This holy man,
enters often into the Story of our Saint.
Cauallier, dwelling in the same place, to acquaint my self with him. This
Cauallier is a married man; but yet leads a life, so very full of example, and
virtue, and he is of so great Prayer, and Charity, that his perfection shines
brightly, in the eyes of all men; and with much reason, in regard of the great
good, which is grown to many Souls, by his means; as also by his great
tale^ts. And though he be not forwarded a whitt, by any plenty in his
Fortune; yet he cannot choose, but employ the means he has, that way. He is
of great understanding, and of an excellent nature. His conversation, is no way
troublesome; but so agreeable, and delight full, (together with his being just,
and holy) that it gives gust to all such, as treat with him. He ordaines, and
gouernes all things, for the great good of such Souls, as he conuerses with;
and seems, indeed, to have no other endeavor, or aim, then to do good to
all them, whom he finds to be any way capable thereof; and, finally, to give
contentment to all. Now, this holy, and blessed man, do I esteem, to have, by
his industry, and charity, laid the foundation, for the salvation of my
Soul. And I am confunded, to think of his humility, in that he would be
content, to see me; for there were, as I conceive, little less then forty
years, wherein he had exercised Mental Prayer (they might perhaps be fewer,
by two, or three years,) and he led his life, with all that perfection, which
his condition, and state, might seem to permit. He has a Wife, who is so great
a Servant of Almighty God, and a woeman, so full of charity, that he looses
nothing at all, by possessing her. In a word, he chose her for such a kind of
Wife, as whom Almighty God, knew to be fit for so great a Servant of his.
some of his kindred, were married to some kinswoemen of mine. And besides, I
was also acquainted with another great Servant of God, who was married to one
of my Cosen-Germans; and I had much acquaintance, there; and, by this means, I
procured, that the Priest, who was his great friend, and withal, so great a
Servant of God, might come, and speak with me; for I intended to Confess my
self to him; and to have him, for my Directour. And now, that Cauallier
conducting him to me, to the end, that we might speak together, and I,
remaining with extreme confusion, to see my self in the presence of so holy a
man, gave him some knowledge of my Soul, and of the Prayer, which I used; for
he excused himself, from taking my Confession, as telling me, that he was very
full of business; and so indeed, he was. As for him, he determined with a
holy kind of resolution, to conduct me, as a person, who was confirmed, and
strong (for indeed I was to have been so, in all reason, according to the
Prayer, which he saw, I held) that so I might no more offend Almighty God, in
the least degree. But when I so quickly found his resolution, concerning those
little things, from which, as I said, I had not the courage to depart
instantly, with so great perfection, I was much afflicted; and when I also
found, that he meant, to carry the business of my Soul, after such manner, as
if he would make an end, as it were, all at once, by disposing, and settling
thereof, I saw, that I had need of much more consideration, and care, to be
used toward me, then that. In a word, I was of opinion, that the means, which
he prescribed, were not they, whereby my remedy was to be procured; for they
were proper for a Soul, which had been more perfect, then mine. But as for me,
though I had proceeded very far (in as much, as might concern the Favors of
Almighty God, to my Soul) yet for as much, as concerned Virtue, and
Mortification, I was but in the very beginnings thereof. And certainly, I
conceive, that if I had not been to treat with any other then him, my Soul
would never have improued, and thriued. For, through the affliction, which it
gave me, to see, how I did not, yea and how (as I thought) I could not, do
that, which he prescribed, it was enough, to make me loose my hope, and to
giueouer the whole business. Sometimes I am apt to marvel, that Almighty God
was not pleased, to let this Scruant of his, the holy Priest, receive a
perfect knowledge of my Soul; nor to encharge himself, with the care thereof;
since he is a person, who has a particular facility, and grace, in beginning
to gain Souls to his Divine Majesty. But I see, that all this, happened for my
greater good, that so I might come to know, and converse with so holy men, as
they, of the Society of JESUS, are.

But, in the mean time, I remained in agreement with that Cauallier, of whom
I spoke, that now and then, he should do me the Favor, to visit me; and here,
I discerned his great humility; since he would be contented, to converse with
so wicked a Creature, as my self. He began therefore then, to visit me, and
to encourage me, and to tell me, that I must not think, to deliver my self,
from all my imperfections, in one day; but that, by little and little,
Almighty God would do it; and that himself, had remained some whole years,
in reforming some very little light things, as not being able to finish the
work, sooner. O Humility! how great blessings do thou bestow upon them,
with whom thou remainest? yea and even upon those others also, who do but
even approach, to the possessours thereof.

This Saint (for, in my opinion, I may well give him this name, with great
reason) related certain particulars to me, concerning himself, which, through
his humility, seemed weaknesses, to him; but he did it, for my remedy, and
redress; and, considering his condition, and way of life, they imported
neither fault, nor imperfection; but, as for me, it was a very great one, to be
subject to them. Nor do I say thus much, by chance, though perhaps I extend my
self too far, in speaking of these very little things; but they import so
much, for bringing a Soul, into the way of profiting in Spirit, and for
getting her out, to fly, which has scarce gotten yet, any feathers, that no
body, who has not experience of it, will believe it. And I affirm these
things here, the rather, because I hope in Almighty God, that this, which I am
saying now, will do much good. For, all my help, and hope, consisted in
finding out the way, how to cure me; and in their exercising Humility, and
Charity, toward me; yea and to have patience also, in perceiving, that I did
not instantly, and entirely, amend my self. And this man, went with discretion,
by little* and little; and showed me diverse ways, how to overcome the Devil.
In the mean time, I began to carry so entire an affection to him, that I
could not receive a greater ease, and joy, then to live that day, when I might
see him; though they were but few. When he delayed his Visits, I was very much,
and very quickly troubled at it; as doubting, that he forbore to see me,
because I was so wicked. When he came to know my so great imperfections (yea
and even they might reach, to be Sins; though yet, after I had begun to
treat with him, I was somewhat mended) and when I informed him also of the
Favors, which Almighty God had been pleased to do me, to the end that he
might give me light, he told me, that all those several things, did not suite
very well, with one another; and that those Regalo's were not belonging, but to
persons, who were already very much improued, and mortifyed; That, for his
part, he could not forbear, to be much afraid, because it seemed This was no
improbable opinion, though it were no true one.
to him, that there appeared an evil Spirit, in some things, though yet he
would not absolutely resolve it; but he wished that I should consider very well,
of whatsoever I understood, concerning my Prayer, and so relate it to him. Now
here, the great trouble was, that I could tell him nothing at all, of what my
Prayer was; for indeed, it is not long, since Almighty God has done me the
Favor, of knowing, either how to understand it, or declare it.

But, as soon as he had expressed himself to me, the affliction, which I had,
was great; and the tears, which I shed, were many, through the fear I had.
For certainly, I desired to serve, and please Almighty God, and I knew not how
to persuade my self, that it was of the Devil; only I feared, least, for my
great sins, our Lord might blind me so far, as that I could not understand
it. But then, turning over some Books, to see if I could meet with any thing,
concerning my Prayer, I found in one, which is called: The Ascent to the
Mountain, (in that particular, which concerns the Union of a Soul with
Almighty God) all those signs, which I had, in that state, of my not being
able, to think of any thing; for, this was that, of which I spoke most; that,
Namely, I could not think of any thing, in distinct manner, when I had that
Prayer; and I marked, and noted those places, with certain lines, wherein that
passage was contained; and then I delivered him the Book, to the end, that
both himself, and that holy Priest, and Servant of God, of whom I spoke
before, might consider it, and make me know, what I was to do; and whether,
perhaps, they might be of opinion, that I was to giue-ouer my Prayer,
altogether. For, in fine, to what purpose, was I to thrust my self, into those
dangers, if now (after I had used this Prayer, for almost twenty years
together) I had made no other benefit thereof, but to be subject, to the
deceipts of the Devil; and that therefore, it were better for me, not to use
this Prayer at all; though yet, it be also true, that this, showed it self, as
a very sad, and hard case, to me, since already I had found by experience, how
ill it went with my Soul, without the exercise of Prayer. So that now, I could
see nothing but misery, on all sides; like one, who were cast into a River,
and to which side soever he should go, he might still have the more danger to
fear; and were so, come, to the very point, as it were, of drowning.

This is a very mighty affliction; and, of this kind, I have endured many; as
I shall declare afterward. For though, perhaps, it may seem, not to import, yet
peradventure, it may indeed prove to be of use, toward the understanding, of
how, a Spirit, is to be tried. For certainly, the affliction, which uses to be
endured in these cases, is very great; and there is need of a nice hand, and
of, a warye foot, especially, when men treat with women; for, our weakness is
very great; and much mischief may chance to ariue, by telling us, that such, or
such a thing, is certainly the Devil, without considering it, first, very well,
and removing us from those dangers, which may occurr; and aduising us, to keep
things very private; and that they also be careful thereof themselves; for
this is fit. And heerin, it is I, who speak, as one, who have endured
affliction enough, for not having had fit persons, with whom I might,
conferr, about my Prayer, but by asking, first one, and then another, what
might do me good; which has done me hurt enough. For now, diverse things have
grown to be public, which might well have remained very private, since they
are not, for every body's understanding; and besides, it may have seemed, as
if they had been diuulged by me. I well believe, that those others did it,
without any fault in them, but that our Lord was pleased, to permit it, to the
end, that I might suffer by it. I am far from saying, yea or so much as
thinking, as if any of them, related any such particular, as had passed from
me to them, in Confession; for there was no such matter; but yet, in regard it
came from me, to such persons, as to whom, in the way of conference, I gave
account of my fears, to the end, that they might assist me, with giving me
light, me thinks, they might have kept my counsel. But how soever, I durst
never conceal any thing, from such persons, in such occasions, as those. I
say therefore, that such as I was then, must be counseled, with much
discretion; and animated; and time must be expected; for our Blessed Lord will
help them, as he did me; which if he had not done, the prejudice, which I
should have suffered, would have been extreme, by reason of my being so full
of apprehensions, and fears; and especially, considering to how great
palpitations of heart, I was subject, I wonder, how this other accident, did me
not more hurt.

When therefore I had delivered this Book, and made a relation of my Life, and
of my Sins, the best I could, (though yet in gross; for I did it not, in the
way of Confession, in regard he was a Secular person; though yet still, I made
him understand, how wicked I was) those two Servants of Almighty God,
considered with great charity, and love, what might be convenient for me, to
do. Now, the Answer being ready, which I expected with fear enough; and I
having recommended my self, at that time, to many persons, that they might
recommend me over, to Almighty God; and my self also having been much in
Prayer, with affliction enough of heart, to my self, the Cauallier came to me at
length, and told me, that, in the opinion, both of himself, and of the other,
it was the Devil; and that the thing, which would be fit for me to do, was,
to treat about this business, with a certain Father of the Society of JESUS;
who, if I would call him to me, and declare, that I was in necessity of his
help, would not fail to come; and that I should give him an account of my
whole life, by way of making a General Confession, as also otherwise, of my
condition; and that I must proceed, in all things, with much clearnes; and that
then, in virtue of the Sacrament of Confession, Almighty God would give him
more light, where with to direct me; and that they were men of great
experience, in matter of Spirit; but that I should do well, to be very
careful, not to swerve a whitt, from what he said; for that I would find my
self, in much danger, if I wanted one, to govern, and direct my Soul. As for
me, he put me now into so great fear, and pain, that I knew not, what to do
with my self; and now, there was nothing with me, but weeping. And being one
day, very much afflicted in an Oratorie, I fell upon reading a certain Book,
which it seems, our Lord brought to my hands; and S. Paul is cited there,
saying, That God is very faithful; and that he never suffers them, who love
him, to be tempted, above their strength. This comforted me very much; and I
began to consider, about making my General Confession; and to So good a
beginning, was almost, a kind of perfecting the work.
put in writing, all the Sins, and Blessings, with the course, and proceeding
of my whole life, the most clearly, that I understood, and knew, how to do;
without leaving any little thing out. And I remember, that, when I read over,
what I had written, and saw so many Sins to have been committed by me; and,
in effect, no good at all, to have been done; it gave me an extreme
affliction, and sorrow of heart. It also put me to some trouble, that they of
the House, should see me treat, and converse with so holy people, as they, of
the Society of JESUS, are; for I was afraid of mine own wickedness; and me
thought, I should be obliged, by that means, to be wicked, no more; and to
giue-ouer my entertainments, and passetimes; and that, if I did not this, it
would be worse with me; So that I procured, both with the Portresse, and with
the Sacristin, that they should not speak thereof. But this served my turn,
to little purpose; for there chanced to be one at the Gate, when I was called,
who published it, over all the Convent.

But now, what difficulties, and troubles, and fears, does the Devil use to
provide, for such persons, as dispose themselves, to approach to Almighty God?
When I was treating with that Servant of his Divine Majesty (who was greatly
so, and a man also of very good discretion) about the passages of my whole
life, and of my Soul, he declared to me, what every thing was; as a man, who
understood that language, very well; and he encouraged me much, and told me,
that it was evidently, the Spirit of Almighty God, which wrought in me; The
Saint begann here, to be happy.
But that I must return again, to the exercise of Prayer, because I was not
well grounded therein, nor had so much as begun to know, what Mortification
meant, (and this, was very true; for I had hardly ever well understood, so much
as the name) but that I should, by no means, giue-ouer my Prayer, but rather
employ my self, with more diligence, and endeavor, therein; since Almighty
God, had been pleased, to do me so particular Favors; and what (said he)
could any body tell, whether it might not please our Lord, to do good to
many, even by your means? Other things also he said, in such sort, as that he
might seem, even to have prophesied then, concerning those things, which our
Lord was pleased to grant, and effect, afterward. And I should be subject, to
very great blame, if I corresponded not with those Favors, which our Lord
vouchsafed to show me. In all things, it seemed to me, that the Holy Ghost
spoke to me, by this Father, in order to the Cure of my Soul; so distinctly
grew every thing, to be imprinced therein. He put me to great confusion; and
directed me, by such means, to proceed, that he seemed to make me absolutely,
even another Creature: So great a thing it is, to understand a Soul. He willed
me, every day, to meditate upon some passage of the Passion of our Blessed
Lord; and that I should help my self thereby; and that I should not think,
but upon his Holy Humanity; and that I should resist those recollections, and
gusts, as much as I could; and not give place to them, till he should express
himself to me, by some other order.

He left me, both comforted, and strengthened; and our Lord assisted both me,
and him, to the end, that he might understand my condition, and in what sort, I
was to govern my self; and I, remained with a resolution, not to swerve at
all, from any thing, which he had, or should command me; and therein, have I
continued, till this very day. Our Lord be blessed, and praised, for having
given me grace, to obey my Ghostly Fathers, though yet, after an imperfect
manner; and they, have, in effect, ever been, these blessed men, of the
Society of JESUS; howsoever (as I was saying) I have followed them, after an
imperfect manner. But now, my Soul began to receive an evident kind of
amendment, and improuement; as I will here declare.

THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the former Discourse; and shows, how her Soul went
profiting, when once she had begun to obey. She also declares, for how
little purpose it served, to resist the Favors of Almighty God; And how his
Divine Majesty went daily imparting them to her, after a more complete manner.

But now my Soul remained so supple, and tractable, by means of this last
Confession of mine, that I thought, there could be nothing, to which I would
not dispose my self; and so I instantly began to change, in many things,
though yet my Ghostly Father did not This was a wise man, and likely to
work wonders upon a Soul.
press me much, but rather seemed to make little account of them. And this,
wrought even so much the more upon me; for he carried me rather on, by way of
giving me certain liberty, in little things; then of pressure; vnlosse my
self could find in my heart, to do it for Love. In the mean time, I
continued, upon the point of two months, using all the diligence, that
possibly I could, to resist the Favors, and Regalo's of Almighty God. As for
my exterior conversation, and proceeding, there was already an apparent change
to be seen, in me; for already, our Blessed Lord, began, to give me courage,
to do certain things, which the persons, who saw, and knew me, held to be
extreme; and even, in the very House it self, and in respect of what I was
wont to do before, they might, indeed, be accounted, to hang that way; though
yet still, it all, fell short enough of that, to which I was obliged, both by
the Habit, which I had taken, and by the Profession also, which I had made.
From that resistance, which I made, to the gusts, and Regalo's of Almighty
God, I gained thus much, that his Divine Majesty came to be pleased, to be my
Instructour himself. For before, it seemed, that, for the disposing me, toward
the receiving of any such Regalo's, as those, there was need, that I should
retire, and shut my self, as it were, up, into corners; and I also durst not,
as it were, move, or stir. But afterward, I quickly found, how little, all
that, served to the purpose; for, when I procured to divert my self most, so
much the more did our Blessed Lord cover me, as it were, all over, with that
kind of Suauitie, and glory, as seemed, even to compass me in, on every
side; in such sort, as that it was not possible for me, to escape from it. And
really, so it was; for, as for me, I took so much care to decline it, that it
did even put me to pain; and yet our Lord was pleased, even still, to have
more care, to be doing me Favors; and to express himself, that way, (in those
two months I say) much more, then he had formerly done; to the end, that I
might, the better, know, that this business did now, no longer, depend, any
way, upon my self.

And now, I began to grow to carry a new, and fresh kind of love, toward the
most Sacred Humanity of our Blessed Lord; and my Prayer began to settle it
self, like a Building, which now had mortar in it, that might make the parts
stick together; and I began also, to incline my self more, to the doing of
Penance, wherein I was grown a little slack, by reason of my so great
infirmities. For, that holy man, to whom I made my Confession, told me, that
some kinds of Penance, which he named, would do me no hurt; and that,
perhaps, Almighty God gave me sickness, in the quality of Penance, since I
would impose none, upon my self. He willed me also, to do certain acts of
Mortification, which were not very pleasing to me; though yet, I went-through
with them all; because it seemed to me, as if our Lord himself had commanded
them; and his Divine Majesty, gave him also grace, to direct them, in such
sort, as that I should be glad to obey him. My Soul went then greatly feeling
every offense, which I might committ against Almighty God, how light, or
small soever, the same might be; in such sort, and to so high a proportion, as
that, if I did but wear any one little superfluous thing about me, I was not
able to recollect my self, till I had put it off. I made much Prayer to our
Blessed Lord, that he would be pleased to protect me still; and that, since I
conuersed, and treated the business of my Soul, with his Servants, he would
never permit, that I should return back again; for I conceived, that that,
would be a strange offense in me; yea and that even they, would grow to loose
credit by it, upon my occasion.

At this time, came to this place, Father Francis Borgia, who had been Duke of
Gandia, and who already, some years before, had left all, and had entered into
The Society of JESUS. And now, my Ghostly Father, as also the Cauallier, of
whom I spoke before, came to me, with desire, that I would speak with Father
Borgia; and that I would also give him account, of the Prayer I held; for they
knew, that the said Father Borgia, was a person, He lost nothing, by leaueing
to be a Duke, for Gods sake.
far advanced, in being much favored, and regaled, by Almighty God; and
that, as one, who had left very much, in this world, for the love of our Lord,
he was resolved to pay him for it, even here. When Father Borgia had heard me,
he told me, that it was the Spirit of Almighty God; and that he was of
opinion, that now, it was fit, no longer to resist his Favors; though yet,
till then, he thought it to have been well done. But that I should always
begin my Prayer, with the consideration of some passage of the Passion; and
if afterward, our Blessed Lord would eleuate the Spirit, I should not resist
it, but suffer his Divine Majesty to carry it away; provided always, that my
self should not have any hand, in procuring it. But he, in fine, as being a
man, who had travailed far already, in that way, did give me, both counsel,
and physic. For, experience is a great matter, in these affairs; and he said,
it was an error, to resist the Favors of Almighty God, now, any longer. My
self was greatly comforted by this; and so also was the Cauallier; and he
rejoiced much to hear Father Borgia say, that it was of Almighty God; and he
also advised, and assisted me, in what he could; which was very much.

About this time, they changed my Ghostly Father, from that place, to another,
which I resented extremely; for I thought, I was to turn wicked, again; as
also, I conceived, that it would not be possible, that ever I should find
another, like him. My Soul was full of discomforts, and fears, even as if it
had been planted in a kind of Desert; nor did I know, in fine, what to do with
my self. A certain Kinswoeman of mine, procured then; to carry me along with
her, to her House; and I procured also to go, the rather, that so, I might get
another Confessarius, of the Society of JESUS. Our Lord was also pleased then,
that I should make freindship with a certain Lady, a Widow, who was both of
much quality, and of great Prayer, and she conuersed very much, with the
Fathers of the said Society; and she drew me also to Confess, to her
Confessarius. I remained a good while, in her house; for she lived near me; and
I was glad, to treat much with those Fathers; for even by the only
understanding, which I came to have, of the sanctity of their conversation,
and way of proceeding, the profit, which my Soul found, and felt, was great.
This Father, began to address me, and engage me upon ways of more
Perfection. He told me, that, for the giving Almighty God entire contentment,
and gust, there was nothing to be lest undone; But this This must needs have
been, a holy, and a wise man.
he said, with a great deal of prudence, and sweetness; for my Soul was not
yet, any thing strong, but green, and tender; especially in the point of
giuing-ouer certain freindships, which I maintained at that time; for though I
offended not Almighty God thereby, yet the affection, which I bore them, was
very great; and I held it, to be a kind of ingratitude, to give them over. And
so I also told him, that since Almighty God was not offended by it, what
reason could there be, why I should become ungrateful? He said, I should do
well, to recommended it, to Almighty God, for some days, and to recite the
Hymn of Veni Creator Spiritus, etc, that so the Holie-Ghost might give me
light, to do that, which was best. Having therefore been, one day, much in
Prayer, and humbly beseeching our Blessed Lord, that he would assist me, to
please him, in all things, I began the Hymn; and whilst I was saying it,
there came a Rapt upon me, so insta^tly, and so suddenly, that it took me, as
it were, out of my self; and of this, I could not doubt; for it was very
evident; and it was also, the very first time, that our Lord showed me the
Favor of Rapts; and then I heard these A little of this, goes far.
words from him: I will not have thee now, hold conversation with men, but
with Angels. This gave me a great amazement; for, the commotion of the Soul
was great; and those words were spoken to me, in the very interior part of
the Spirit; so that they made me afraid; though yet, on the other side, they
gave me also great consolation, which, upon the very flight of that fear,
(which had, in my opinion, caused that strange novelty,) did still remain
with me. The truth is, that this Speech of our Lord, has been very well
accomplished, and performed; for, never have I been even able, any more, to
establish any friendship at all, nor to feel any consolation, nor entertain
any particular love toward any other person, then such, as I understand, and
know, to love Almighty God, and to procure to serve him. Nor is it now, any
longer, in my hand, or power, nor serves it a whitt, to the purpose, whether
any of them be kindred, or friends, or no; for, if I understand not, that he is
the Servant of Almighty God, or a person addicted to Prayer, it is no less,
then a heavy cross for me, to converse much, with any Creature. And this is
certainly true, to the uttermost of what I can judge of my self.

From that day forward, I have remained full of courage, and resolution, to
leave the whole world, for Almighty God; in regard he had been pleased, in
that very moment (for it seemed no more to me, then a very moment) to make
this Servant of his, become wholly, another Creature, then what she had been. So
that now, there was no longer need, that they should command me, in that
particular, any more; for, when my Ghostly Father, had found me, to be so
fixed upon this point, he had not yet adventured to will me expressly, to do
it. For he did, without all doubt, expect, that our Lord should be pleased, to
do it himself, as, indeed, he did; nor yet could I ever imagine, that it would
prove to take effect with me, as yet it fell out to do; because already, I had
used some endeauours that way; and the affliction, which I received by it, was
so great, that I resolved to give over the attempt, as being a thing, which I
held not to be inconvenient, to continue. But now here, our Blessed Lord,
imparted both liberty, and strength to me, to put it in execution. I told this
very thing, to my Ghostly Father; and I gave over that freindship, according
to what I had been commanded. And it did them no little good, with whom I had
been wont to converse, to see this resolution grown in me. Almighty God be
ever blessed, and praised, who gave me that liberty, and power, in one So true
it is, that God is God.
moment, which I had not been able to purchase, and obtain of my self, by the
multitude of those great diligences, which I had used, many years, in order
to this end; though yet, I had employed my self, so earnestly, upon this
attempt, that it had cost me, a good part of my health. But now, this having
been wrought, and granted by him, who is the Omnipotent, and true Lord of all
Creatures, it put me not, even to the least pain, or trouble, at all.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She treats here, of the way, and manner, of understanding those words, or
speeches, which Almighty God is pleased to utter to the Soul, though yet
without hearing any voice, or sound; and of some errors, or abuses, which
may happen heerin; and, how the right, may be known, from the vvrong. It is
of much use, and profit, for such, as see themselves in this Degree of Prayer;
for it is declared very well; and the Doctrine contains great instruction.

ME thinks, it should do well, to declare, what kind of thing, this Speech
is, which our Lord expresses to the Soul; and what she also feels; to the
end, that your Reverence may understand it; for, from this very time, when our
Lord did me this Favor, (as I have said) the same thing is very usual with
me, even till this very present; as I shall let you see, by that which
follows. I say therefore, that they are certain Words, very distinctly
formed; and that, howsoever they be not heard, with our ears, of flesh and
blood, yet are they understood, much more expressly, and clearly, then if they
were so heard. And to seek to forbear to understand them, yea and to resist
the understanding them, (how much soever it may be) is a vanity, and a most
impossible thing. When, in this world, we have a mind, not to hear, we may
stopp our ears, or else attend to other things, if we will; in such sort, as
that, although, peradventure, we may hear the words, yet we shall not, in that
case, understand them. But The mighty force, and power of any one
Supernatural word.
now, in this discourse, which Almighty God makes to the Soul, there is no
remedy at all, but they make me harken to them, whether I will, or no; and
they oblige the Understanding, to be very entire, and attentive, for the
co^prehending thereof. For he, who is able to do all things, is resolved, that
we shall understand him; and that, which he resolves, must be done; and so he
comes to be known, to be the true Lord of us all. I have very well
experimented this truth; for, the resistance, which I made him, did last, upon
the point of two years, through the great fear, wherein I was; yea and even
now, I make those trials sometimes, but it serves me to little purpose. I
would feign declare the errors; and abuses, which may here occurr; though, for
a man, who has much experience, me thinks, there should be few, or none. But
indeed, the said experience, would be great; as namely, to know the difference,
when the Spirit is good; and when it is ill; and when perhaps, the thing may
also be, but an apprehension of the very Understanding it self, which may
occurr; or when the very Spirit it self, may speak, to the very self-same
Spirit; and I know not very well, whether this may happen, or no; though even
this very day, I had a kind of opinion, that it might.

When these Words are indeed, of Almighty God, I have found the truth thereof,
in many things, which were told me, two or three years before; and they all
fell out, to prove true; and till now, not any one of them, failed. There are
also other things, whereby it grows to prove, very plain, that the Spirit is
of God; as I will declare afterward.

To The infinite difference, betvvee^ Supernatural words of God, and all other.
me it seems, that a person, recommending a thing to Almighty God, with great
earnestnes, and apprehension, may grow to make himself conceive, that he comes
to understand, in some sort, whether the thing shall be done, or no; and this,
I say, is very possible; but he, who understands things, after this other
manner, will clearly discover, what it may be; so great a difference there is,
between the two. And if indeed, it be a thing, which the Understanding devises,
and makes, (how subtily, and how delicately soever, the matter go) he
understands, that there is some part of himself, in that, which is ordained,
and said. For, it is no other thing, then for a man to set a Discourse on foot;
or to harken, to what another man says; for then, the Understanding finds,
that it does not harken then, because it works; and the words, which it goes
framing, in that case, are, as it were, fantastical, and mute, and confused;
and are not delivered with that clearnes, which those others have. And now
here, it is in our own power, to divert our selves, or else to hold our peace,
when we speak; but in this other case, we have no such power at all.

Another sign there is, which is of more importance, then all the rest; for,
these things, which are said by our selves, have no manner of operation, and
work no effect, at all; But the other, when our Lord is pleased to speak, is
not only of words, but works; and though they be not words of devotion, but of
reprehension, they instantly dispose the Soul, and they enable her, and make
her relent; and they give light, and regale her, and appease her. And, if she
were in state of drynes, and commotion, and disorder, these Words take all
away, as if it were, with the hand; yea and yet, much better, then so; for it
seems, that our Lord's business is then, to show his mighty power; and that
his Words, are deeds. Me thinks, there is such a difference, as there is
between our speaking, or hearing; neither more, ^orlesse. For that which I
speak, I go ordering (as I was saying) with my Understanding; but if another
speak to me, I do no more then hear, without any trouble at all, to my
self. One of these kinds of Words, is like some thing, whereof we cannot well
determine, whether it be not, as of a man, who is half asleep. But this other,
is found to come from a voice, so distinct, and clear, that not one single
syllable, of all that, which is said, can be lost. And yet, these things happen
sometimes, when the Understanding, and, indeed, the whole Soul, is in so great
distraction, and disorder, that it would never be able, to hitt right, in the
framing of one little piece of good discourse; but she finds in this other
way, certain great, and weighty sentences, which are imparted to her, so
strangely well ordered, and dressed, that, though she were never so deeply
recollected, she were not able to reach them; and yet at the very first word
thereof (as I was saying) they begin to make a total mutation of her Soul.
And especially, if she be brought into Rapt, when the Powers of the Soul, are
suspended, how shall those things, ever come to be understood by her, after a
natural way, which were never exposed before to her Memory; as they come to
be then, when it works not, in effect, at all; and when her Imagination is
now, upon the matter, as it were, all turned fool.

But here it is to be understood, that whenever either Visions are seen, or
any of these Supernatural Words, or Speeches, be heard, it is never, in my
opinion, at such times, as when the Soul is wholly united, in the Rapt it self;
for, at those times (as, I think, I declared already, in my Discourse of the
Second Water) all the Powers of the Mind, are entirely lost; and so we cannot
(at such times, as those) either see, or hear, or understand. For, the Soul
is wholly in the power of another, at that time, which yet uses to last very
little; and, me thinks, our Lord leaves her not in liberty, to do any thing
at all. But when that short time is past, the Soul remaining still in the
Rapt, this happens, whereof now I speak; because the Powers remain in such
sort, at that time. And though they be not lost, yet, in effect, they operate,
and act nothing at all; but are, as if they were absorpt, and no way able to
discourse, by the assembling, and composing of reasons. But there are so many
ways to understand the differe^nce, which occurrs here, between the true, and
the false, that if the Soul should chance to be deceived some once, she would
not be so, very often. Nay I say further, that if the Soul have had any
experience, and be careful to observe, what passes, she will evidently
discern this truth. For, besides all other means, whereby that, will appear,
which I have said, these strained words will work no effect, at all; neither
will the Soul, ever admit them; as yet, she must, these other true ones,
whether she will, or no. Nor gives she any credit to the thing, at all; but
rather finds, and knows, that it is but a kind of idle imagination; just so,
in effect, as we would not make account of any thing, which were said to us,
by a frantic person.

But this other, is, as if we heard some person speak, who were very holy,
and learned, and of great authority; and such an one, as we are sure, would
not lie. Yea and this, is but a mean, and base Comparison; because indeed,
these very Words, do bring with them, sometimes, so great a Majesty, that
even (without so much as reflecting upon, who it is, that speaks them) if they
be words of reprehension, they make men tremble; and if they concern the Love
of God, they make Souls even dissolve, and, as it were, annihilate themselves,
in love. And they are things, in fine, which (as I have said already) are very
far then, from our remembrance; and there use to be so high, and so great
sentences, so clearly, and so suddenly pronounced, as that there would have
been need, of a very great deal of time, for the putting them in order; and,
for my part, I think, it is wholly impossible, that then, such things as those,
should be even conceived by us, to have been made, or framed, by our selves. So
that there is no cause at all, why I should detain my self heerin, any
longer; for it would look, like a kind of wonder, in mine eye, if any
experienced person should be able to be deceived heerin, unless he would even
have a mind, to deceive himself.

It has happened to me, very ^^^en, not fully to believe that, which these
Words tell me, if I be in any doubt at all thereof; but to conceive, that it
was no more, then mine own fancy. This I do, when the occasion is past; for,
at the present, it is impossible; but I have seen it fulfilled, long after;
because our Lord is pleased, that the same should remain still, in the
memory; for it is not possible, to forget it. Now that, which is wont to
proceed from our own Understanding, is, in effect, but the first motion of our
thoughts, which quickly passes away, and is forgotten; whereas this other, is a
Work, rather then a word. And though some part of it, may be forgotten, in a
long tract of time, yet the Memory cannot loose it, so far, as not to know,
that it was said, unless the time may have been very long; or else, if they be
Words of Favor, or of Doctrine, and Instruction; but if they be of Prophesye,
they never happen, in my opinion, to be forgotten; at least, this never happened
to me, though yet, I have a very ill memory.

And now I return to say, that, me thinks, if a Soul be not, as it were, so
base, and wicked, as even, in effect, not to be a Soul; and unless it would
counterfeit, and feign (which were mischief, and misery enough) and would
say, that she understands things, when yet really, there were no such matter,
it is impossible but that she should see clearly, that it is she her self, who
composes, and frames those Words, and speaks them to her self; especially if
she have had any understanding at all, of the Spirit of God; for, if she have
not, she may very well remain in this abuse, or error, all the days of her
life; and may perhaps conceive, that she understands those Words, as spoken by
some other; though yet, for my part, I confess, that I cannot ariue to know,
how this should be done; for, either this Soul will understand them, or not.
If she be dismissing her self of that, which she understands, and would feign
understand no part of it, (for a thousand fears, besides many other reasons,
which she may have, to continue quiet, in her Prayer, without such accidents,
as these) how comes she to allow so much time to the Understanding, as may
serve for the composing of these reasons? For, in fine, there must be time, for
that. But now, in this other way, we remain instructed, without any loss of
time, at all; yea, and we grow to understand certain things, at an instant;
when yet otherwise, a month would have been time, little enough, to ordain
them. Yea and the Understanding remains no less then amazed, at some things,
which we understand. This is the very truth; and whosoever has any
experience, will find, that every word of this, which I have said, is
literally certain; and I bless Almighty God, for enabling me to declare it,
as I have done. And now I end this part of the Discourse, with saying, that me
thinks, when such Words proceed from our own Understanding, we may easily
come to know it, if we have a mind to it; and every time, that we are in
Prayer, we shall conceive, that we understand them. But in this other kind of
Words, or Speeches, it is not so; for it will be many days wherein, though I
should desire to understand somewhat of that kind, it would be absolutely
impossible; and when, at other times, I have no thought that way, I must yet
understand it; as I have said. And me thinks, that whosoever had a mind to
deceive others, affirming himself to understand that, from Almighty God, which
is from himself, might as well (and it would cost him as little) affirm, that
he heard it, with his ears. And it is a most certain, and real truth, that,
for my part, I never thought, that there was any other way, then that, for the
hearing, and understanding any thing, till I found, in mine own case, that
this, which I have now delivered, is true; and it has cost me, as I said, much
trouble.

When these things proceed of the Devil, they do not only, not work any good
effects, but leave also very ill ones, behind them. But this, has not happened
to me, above twice, or thrice; and I have instantly been advertised, by our
Lord, that they were of the Devil. And, besides the great drynes, which they
leave behind them, they also give the Soul much disquiet, after the manner of
those many other times, when our Lord has permitted me, to have great
temptations, and troubles of Soul, in different kinds; and that I should
often be tormented, as I will declare hereafter. But this is a certain kind of
disquiet, of which we know not, how to understand, from whence it comes; but it
seems, that the Soul resists it, and is put into great disorder by it; and is
afflicted, without knowing for what; in regard that the Devil says, that such,
or such a thing, is not ill, but good. I conceive, that if one Spirit may be
able to find, and feel another, the gust, and delight, which this Diabolical
Spirit gives, is different, in my opinion, from the other, after a most evident
manner. The Devil may well deceive some such person, by giving him gusts, as
never received any before, from Almighty God; for, these latter, are gusts
indeed, which import a sweet, strong, well-imprinted, quiet, delightful kind
of pleasure, and joy; for, as for those little pretty devotions of the Soul,
and certain other slight feelings, which be like little young flowers, that
are shaken off, and lost, upon the least little wind of persecution, I do not
call them Devotions; though yet they are good beginnings, and holy motions,
but no way sufficient to determine, whether the effects proceed from a good
Spirit, or a bad; and therefore it will be very necessary, to walk, in this
kind of things, with huge caution; for, such persons, as shall not have
proceeded further, in Prayer, then thus far, may easily grow to be deceived,
if they fall out to have Visions, or Revelations. For my part, I never had of
these last, till God, through his own only goodness, gave me Prayer of Union;
unless it were that first time, whereof I spoke; and it happened to me, many
years ago, when I saw Christ our Lord; and I would to God, it had pleased his
Divine Majesty, that I had understood, at that time, that it was a true
Vision, as I understood it, to be, afterward; for, it would not have been, of
small advantage to me.

But now, upon these illusions of the Devil, there never grows any sweetness,
or softnes, and supplenes, to the Soul; but she remains, as if she were
frighted, and with much disgust. And I hold it for very certain, that
Almighty God will never permit the Devil to deceive any Soul, which puts no
confidence at all, in her self, and which is fortifyed in the right Faith, and
resolves thus much, for her part, that she would dye a thousand deaths, for the
least Article thereof; and who, together with this Love, and Faith, being
infused into the Soul, by Almighty God (which is a Lively, and strong Faith
indeed) procures always to go, in conformity with that, which is taught by
the Holy Catholic Church; informing her self further, by several ways, as
a person, who is strongly seated in this truth, That all the imaginable
Revelations of the whole world, no not, if she should see the very Heavens
open themselves, could make her vary in the least point, from the Doctrines,
and Decrees of the said Church. But if she once come so far, as but to shake,
or waver, even in one single thought, against this; or entertain her self so
far, as to say: But now, if God himself say thus to me, as he has said such
other things, to Saints; this may also be true; I say not, that she believe it,
but that the Devil begin to tempt her, by this motion; and that she be
content, to continue her self a little therein; a body may see already, that
this is stark naught. But for my part, I believe, that many times, even these
other first motions, will hardly ever come so far, as even but to set upon
such a Soul; if she be already so strong, as our Blessed Lord is wont to have
made such, as to whom he uses to impart these Favors. For, me thinks, she
might be able to tear those Devils, even to fitters, whenever there might be
question of any one single little Truth, which the Church holds. I say, that,
if the Soul do not find such a strength, as this, in her self; and that the
devotion, or Vision, which she had, do not assist, and help her-on therein,
let her not hold any such Vision for safe; because, though the hurt of it, be
not instantly understood, it may perhaps grow, by little, and little, to be
great. For, (to the uttermost of what I can discern, and know by experience)
the reputation, and credit, that such a thing is of the Spirit of God, is
settled, and assured, in such sort, as that it also goes, in conformity to
Holy Scripture. And when it should be found to vary from this Rule, though it
were never so little, I think I should be then, much more sure, without
comparison, that it were of the Devil, then now I have assurance, that it is of
Almighty God; how great soever I might find that assurance to be. For, in that
case, we should have no need at all, to go in search after signs; nor to
enquire, of what Spirit it were; since this is so clear a sign, to make us
believe, that it is of the Devil, that if all the world should endeavor to
assure me, that it were of God, I would not believe it.

The matter is, that, when these things are of the Devil, it seems, as if all
kind of benediction, did hide it self, and even fly from the Soul; so
untoward, and unquiet, and in so great disorder, does she remain, without any
one good effect, at all. For, though there may be a seeming, as if there were a
planting of good desires, in her; yet they are not effectual, or strong. The
humility, which he leaves behind him, is false, unquiet, and without any
suauitie at all; and me thinks, this may be easily enough understood, by any
Creature, who has experience, of what a good Spirit, is. But yet, the Devil is
very able to play many tricks; and therefore there is nothing of this kind so
certain, and clear, but that somewhat may still be feared, at his hands. And
so it will ever be well done, to proceed with caution, and advice; and to have
a Directour, who may be learned; and to conceal nothing from him; and so the
Party shall be sure to take no hurt; though yet, I have had my part thereof,
through the excessive fears, to which some of them were subject.

In particular, it happened to me once, that many persons meeting together, in
whom I had belief enough, (and there was reason, that I should have it; and
though I proceeded heerin, after the manner of entire confidence, but with one,
yet when he commanded me, I spoke also with others) they treated much, about
finding remedy, for all my inconveniences. For, they loved me very much; and I
doubted, that I might, perhaps, be deceived; and I was also subject to extreme
fears, whenever I was not in Prayer; for when I was, and when our Lord
vouchsafed to do me any Favor therein, I grew presently, into good
assurance; and I think, they were five, or six of them; and they were all,
great Servants of Almighty God. But then, my Ghostly Father told me, that
they A strange encounter.
all, had grown to resolve, that it was the Devil; and directed me, not to
Communicate so often; and that I should endeavor, to divert my self, in such
sort, as that I might not be much alone. Now, I was extremely timorous in these
cases, as I have said; and the palpitation of my heart, helped me on, therein;
so that I had not the courage, many times, to be alone, in my room, even by
day. But when I found, what so many of them affirmed, (which yet I could by no
means believe) I grew to have an extreme scruple, as conceauing, that this
was a sign, of very little humility, in my self, since they all, were
incomparably of better life, then I; and, besides all this, they were learned;
and, in fine, why should not I believe them? I forced my self the best I could,
to do it; and I thought much, of mine own wicked life; and how, (considering
that) it might be likely enough to be true, which they said. Upon this, I went
into the Church, with this affliction; and passed on, into an Oratorie, having
forborne, many days, to Communicate; and avoided also to be alone; which yet
had formerly been my total comfort; and all this, without having one person,
with whom I might treat; for, they were all against me. Nay some of them, me
thought, made themselves, as it were, merry with me, whenever I would be
telling them, what I thought; and others would be aduising my Ghostly Father,
to take heed of me; nay some would go so far, as to say, that it was clearly
the Devil. Only my Ghostly Father, though he conformed himself with those
others (as I grew to understand afterward) so far, as to have me tried, did
ever give me comfort, and told me, that, though it should be the Devil, yet I,
not offending Almighty God, he would be able to do me no hurt; That the
difficulty would grow to be removed; That, in the mean time, I should pray
heartily to Almighty God; and that he, and all those others, and many more
also then they, would do the like; and all my Prayer, and theirs, whom I
conceived to be the Servants of Almighty God, aimed at this; That his Divine
Majesty would be pleased, to carry me on, by some other way. And this kind of
making continual intercession to our Lord, might last, about a matter of some
two years.

As for me, I was capable of no comfort, when I thought once, that it was
possible, for the Devil, to be so often speaking to me, and in me; but in
regard, that now, I employed no more hours of my time, in Solitude, for
Prayer, our Lord gave me Recollection, even when I was in conversation; and so,
as that I was not able to avoid it; and he said such things to me, as he
pleased; and I, in the mean time, was troubled, that I was feign to hear him.
But once, being all alone, without having any Creature by me, upon whom to
ease my self, I could neither pray, nor read; but was like a person, even all
amazed, at so great tribulation, as I endured; and with so much fear, to
consider, whether the Devil were to have power, to circumuent me, in this
manner, or no. And being all disordered, and even tired, without knowing what
to do with my self (for I had seen my self, in this affliction, and that very
often, though yet never, to my thinking, in so great extremity, as then) I
remained four, or five hours, after this manner? For there seemed to be no
comfort at all, for me, either upon earth, or yet from Heaven; but our Lord
left me so, in suffera^ce, and under the fear also, of a thousand dangers.

O my dear Lord! and how truly art thou a true friend? and how powerful art
thou, to do what thou will? and do never leave, to love them, who love thee,
if they love thee indeed? Let all things praise thee, O thou Lord of the whole
world; and O, that I could cry out, loud enough, through that whole world, to
declare, how faithful, and true thou art, to thy friends! All other things
grow to fail us; but thou, who art the Lord of them all, do never fail; and
it is little also, which thou permittest such, as love thee, to suffer for
thee. O my dear Lord! how delicately, and how smoothly, yea and how sauourily
also, do thou know, how to treat such Souls! O that a Creature, whom I
know, had been so happy, as never to have detained her self, upon loving any
other thing, then thee! It seems indeed, O Lord, that sometimes, thou tryest
such, as love thee, with a kind of rigor; to the end, that, by that extremity
of trouble, they may afterward, come the better, to find, and feel thereby,
the great excess of thy love. O my God! that I had understanding, and
learning, yea and new words; so to be able, to exaggerate thy works, according
to that intelligence, which my Soul has, thereof! All this, is wanting to me,
O my dear Lord; but yet, if thou forsake me not, I will never be wanting to
thee. Let all the learned men of the world rise-vp against me; Let the Devils
of Hell, torment me; yea, Let all creatures persecute me; but only, be not thou
wanting to me, O my dear Lord; for I know, by good experience, with how much
advantage, and fruit, thou deliuerest all such persons, as put their confidence
in thee, alone. For, when I was in this great, and miserable affliction of
Spirit, at a time, when I had not enjoyed any one Vision, at all, these only
few Great power of our Lord.
following words, were sufficient to free me from all trouble, and to quiet me
entirely: Fear not, O my Daughter for, it is I, and I will not forsake thee;
Do not fear. It seems to me, that, considering what kind of Creature I was,
then, there would have been need of a long time, to persuade me to quiet my
self; and that no body would have been able, to do it; and yet now, behold me
here, all quieted, and composed, by these few words; and I was endued with
strength, with courage, and with security, which was accompanied with a kind
of repose, and light; in such sort, as that, at that very instant, I saw my
Soul become a direct other thing, then it was before; and, me thinks, I could
even have disputed against the whole world, in proof, that this, proceeded
from Almighty God. O what a good dear God, is this! O what a good dear Lord
is he, and how very powerful! for not only does he give the counsel, but the
remedy also. His very Words, are Works; and O, how does he, both strengthen
our Faith, and increase our Love? It is really very true, that I often called
to mind, how our Lord had commanded the winds, to compose, and quiet
themselves, at Sea, when a Tempest had been raised. And so also, did I say: Who
is this, whom all the Powers of my Soul obey? and who, at an instant,
brings-in light, to chase so great an obscurity away; and makes that heart,
grow soft, and supple, which seemed to have the very hardness of stone; and
knows, how to drive, and draw-downe the water of sweet tears, where there was
so great a drougth, so long before. Who is he, that can inspire these desires?
Who can imprint such a courage? what was I about, to doubt? and what can I
fear? What is this? I desire, to serve this Lord; and I pretend no other
thing, then to please him; I renounce all contentment, and ease, or any other
good at all, but only the accomplishing of his Will. For, of this, I was very
sure, in my opinion; and that I might safely affirm it; that, since this Lord
is so powerful, as, I see, he is; and as I know, he is; and that all the
Devils of Hell, are his Slaves; and of this, there can be no doubt, since it is
matter of Faith; and I being the Servant of this Lord, and King, what hurt can
they all, be able to do me? and, why may not I have strength enough, to fight
with all the Powers of Hell?

I then, took a Cross into my hand; and really, I thought, God gave me
courage to conceive, that I should be shortly, another kind of woeman; and
that I was not to be afraid, to wrestle a Fall, with the How quickly she got
courage against the Devils.
Devils; but conceived, that, together with that Cross, I should be easily
able, to overcome them all; yea and once, I provoked them thus: Come toward
me, as many of you, as dare; for I, being the Servant of our Lord, will see,
what you all, can do against me. And it is most certain, that I thought, they
were afraid of me; and, for my part, I remained so, in quiet, and so totally,
without fear of them all, that all the fears, which I had formerly conceived,
till that very present time, were removed from me. For, though I saw them
sometimes, (as I shall declare afterward) yet I never feared them more, but
conceived that they were rather affrayd of me. I possessed a dominion over
them, which had been given me, by the Lord of all Creatures: and I make no more
reckoning of them, then of so many Flies; and they seem to be, of so cowardly
a nature, that, when once they come to find, that they are not esteemed, they
have no power at all. For, this kind of enemy, knows not, how to set upon
any one, who renders not himself up, to them; or else; when Almighty God
permitts, for the greater good of his Servants, that they may tempt, and
torment them. I would to God, it might please his Divine Majesty, that we
would fear, whom indeed, we ought to fear; and that we might perfectly
understand; that we shall receive more prejudice, by committing any A most
certain truth.
one single Venial sin, then by all the power of Hell, put together; for,
this is a most certain truth. How extremely do these Devils carry us
frighted, up, and down, because our selves indeed, will needs give occasion
thereof, by our being so close fastened, as we are, to our Honors, to our
Estates, and to our Delights? For then; we being joined together, with these
impediments, by loving, and desiring to possess them, who are our contraries,
and whom we ought to abhor, they grow able, to do us much hurt. For, we
enable them, to fight against our very selves, with our own weapons, which we
put into their hands; though indeed, we were to defend our selves, thereby,
against them; And this is both pity, and shame. But now, if, on the other
side, we shall resolve to abhor all those things, for the love of our Lord,
and embrace his Cross, and pitch upon doing him service, in good earnest, he
flies as fast away from these solid truths, as a man would do, from the
Plague. In fine, he is a friend of Lies; yea and a very Lie, himself. He is
easily kept from meddling much, with such persons as walk entirely according to
Truth; but when once he can discover, that a man's Understanding grows to be
obscured, he has a particular grace, in procuring to break the very strings
of his eyes; and if he see one, already prove so blind, as that he will needs
build his rest, and ease, upon vain things, (and so vain, as that, being
things of this world, they are no better, then toys, fit for children) he
finds already; that such a person, is a very Child, and so he treates him
like such an one; and wrestles with him, more or less, as he sees cause.

I beseech our Blessed Lord, that I may never prove to be one of these, but
that his Divine Majesty, may be pleased to do me so much Favor, as that I
may understand that, to be ease, and rest, which is, indeed, true ease, and
rest; and that, to be honor; which is true Honor; and delight, which is true
delight; and not the direct contrary, to all this; and then, a figg for all
the Devils in Hell; for then, they shall be, all of them, afraid of me. For my
part, I understand not those fears of the Devil, and the Devil; and I know not
what; when we may be able to say, God, and God, etc. and so make those
Wretches, tremble. For already, we know well enough, that the Devil is not able
to stir, unless our Lord permit him. What then, may be the ground of all
these disorders? It is certainly, that I am more afraid of them, who are so
frighted by the Devil, then of the Devil himself; for he is utterly unable, to
do me hurt, whereas these others (especially, if they be Ghostly Fathers) may
put Souls to much disquiet; and, for my part, I have passed some years,
through so great trouble, that now, I am even amazed to consider, how I have
been able to endure it. But Blessed be our Lord, who has assisted me, in so
good earnest;

Amen.
THE SIX AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the same Discourse; and goes relating, and declaring such
things, as happened to her, which made her loose fear; and to be strengthened in
a belief, that it was a good Spirit, which spoke to her.

I Esteem the courage, which our Lord has vouchsafed to give me, against all
the Devils of Hell, to be one of the great Favors, which it has pleased his
Divine Majesty, to do me; since for a Soul to go cowardly on, and to be
fearful indeed, of any thing, but only to offend the Majesty of Almighty
God, is an extreme inconvenience. For, since we have a King, who is
Omnipotent, and so great a Lord, that he can do, what he listes, and who
brings all things into subjection, under himself, there is no fear at all, to
be had; and therefore, as I was saying, we have no cause to doubt; so that we
walk sincerely, and with purity of conscience, in the presence of his Divine
Majesty. And in order to this end, I shall be glad, to have all the fears in
the world, to offend him, in any one instant of my whole life; who is able in
the very self-same instant, to destroy, and annihilate us all. As long as his
Divine Majesty is pleased with us, there is no Creature, who can stand against
us, without having his head broken, for his pains. You will, peradventure,
say, that this is very true; but yet now, on the other side, where shall we
find that Soul, which stands so straight, as that she may be wholly pleasing to
him? and because she is not so, she is in fear. I answer, that I am sure,
that, that pure, and innocent Soul, is none of mine, which indeed is very
wretched, and unprofitable, and surcharged even with a thousand miseries. But
yet still, we have this comfort, that Almighty God does not proceed with such
rigours, as men do; for he knows, and considers our frailties; and the Soul
has ways of understanding, and finding in it self, by great conjectures,
whether, really, she love his Divine Majesty, or no; for in such, as ariue
once to this state, our love to him, is not now, a kind of dissembled, or
disguised love, as it uses sometimes to be, in the beginnings; but it is
accompanied with so great impulses, and even impetuosities of desire, to see
Almighty God, as I shall afterward declare; or rather, as I have declared
already; and all things are wont to afflict; all things to weary, and tire;
and all things do even torment her, unless it be only God, or for God. There
is not so much, as any repose, which does not displease her; because she
finds her self absent, from her true repose; and so it falls-out to be very
evident, that things pass not here, in a dissembling way.

It has happened to me, in former times, that I found my self, in great
tribulations; and I was subject to many detractions, (by occasion of a
certain business, whereof I may have cause to speak afterward) from all that
House, where I live, yea and from my Order; and I was afflicted, upon many
accidents, which occurred then; at which time, it pleased our Lord, to utter
these express words to me: Of what art thou afraid? Do thou not know, that
I am Omnipotent? I will accomplish all that, which I have promised thee. And
indeed, he accomplished it afterward, very well. But even instantly, there
remained such a kind of strength in me, that, me thought, I could presently
have put my self, to adventure upon other things, though they should cost me
much more trouble, for the doing him service; and could have suffered also much
more, for him. And this very self same thing, has happened to me so often, that
I am not able to count the times; and he has made me, and makes me still, such
reprehensions (by occasion of those imperfections, which I commit sometimes)
that they are able, even, as it were, to annihilate the Soul. At least, they
bring so much in their company, as that she is mended by them; for, his Divine
Majesty (as I have said) does not only give us the counsel, but the remedy.
At other times, he brings back to me, the memory of the Sins of my former
life; and this, he most ordinarily uses to do, whenever he intends, to
vouchsafe me any extraordinary Favor. And he does it in such sort, that the
Soul discernes her self, as if she were really planted, at the very Day of
the Last Universal Judgment; and the truth is represented to her, with such a
kind of perspicuitie, and claritie, that she knows not, what to do with her
self. At other times, he is pleased to inform me of certain dangers,
concerning both my self, and others, about things, which do not happen, till
three, or four years, after; but they all, were ever fulfilled; and some of
them, might also be named, if there were cause. So that, there are so many
particulars, whereby it may be understood, that these things are of Almighty
God, as that, in my opinion, they cannot but be known, and acknowledged. The
most secure proceeding consists, in that, such a person do not fail, to
impart her whole Soul, to her Ghostly Father; and that he be a learned man;
and that she do entirely obey him. At least, this is the course, which I take;
and without this, I could have no rest; nor were it indeed fit, that we
women, should have any; since we have no learning; and there can be no hurt
at all, in this, but many advantages, and benefits; as our Lord himself has
told me, many times; I say, many times.

I had once a Ghostly Father, who mortifyed me very much; and sometimes, he
did even afflict me; and brought me a great deal of trouble; and disquieted
me, in extraordinary manner; and yet it was he, who, in my opinion, did me the
most good, of them all. And though I loved him very much, yet I had some
temptations, to leave him; for it seemed to me, that I was much prejudiced, by
those inconveniences which he was wont to give me concerning my Prayer. But yet
ever, when I was determining to do this, I instantly understood, that I was to
forbear it; and I received such a reprehension from our Lord, as defeated,
and, as it were annihilated, me more, then all that, which my Ghostly Father,
could lay upon me. And sometimes, he tired me outright, with asking me
questions, on the one side, and making me some reproof, on the other; and I
had need of no less, then all this; so double, and so weak a will I had. He
told me once, that it was not to obey, if withal, I were not resolved to
suffer; and that I was to cast mine eyes, upon what he had been content
toendure for me; and that so, the hardest things, would become easy.

Another Ghostly Father of mine; to whom I was wont to Confess my self, in
the beginnings, gave me once this advise, that, since it had been found by
trial, that the Spirit was good, I should now carry things, in absolute
silence; and not give notice thereof, to any Creature; for that it was better,
to wrap-vp these kinds of things in that manner. As for me, I misliked not
this; for, whenever I was to declare them to my Ghostly Father, I grew to be
so much troubled, and conceived my self to be so much affronted by it, that I
had much less difficulty, to Confess my greatest Sins. And especially, if
I were to declare those highest Favors, which our Lord vouchsafed to impart, I
thought, they were not likely to believe it, but to make a jest, and scorn
of me. But indeed, I was chiefly troubled so much at it, because it seemed to
amount to a kind of irreuerence, toward the wonders of Almighty God; and for
this reason, I would have been glad, to conceal them. But I quickly came to
understand, how that Ghostly Father had given me This was a very ill advise
indeed.
very ill advise; and that I was, by no means, to conceal any thing, from
him, who was to receive my Confessions; because there was much security for
me, to deal clearly with him; and that, if I proceeded otherwise, I might
perhaps fall into error, at one time, or other. Whenever our Lord commanded
me any thing, in my Prayer, if my Ghostly Father chanced to bid me do
otherwise, our Lord would return to command me, to obey my Ghostly Father;
and yet again afterward, his Divine Majesty, would direct him, to command me,
to do that very thing, which our Lord himself had commanded me to do, before.

When once they took many Books, written in Spanish, from me, that I might
not read them, I was much troubled at it; for, some of them, served me for
recreation; and now I was not able to read them, because there were none left
there, but in Latin. But then, our Blessed Lord said these words to me: Be not
troubled; for I will give thee a Living Book. I could not, for my part,
understand, why this had been said to me; for then, I had never had Vision; but
within a little while after, I understood it very well; for I have had so much
to think of, and to recollect my self about, concerning those things, which I
saw before me, and our Blessed Lord has showed me so great love, as to
instruct me, by such a multitude of ways, that I have had very little need of
Books, or rather, in effect, none at all; for, his Divine Majesty, has been
that true Book to me, wherein I have, indeed, seen Truths. And now, blessed be
such a Book, as this, which leaves that, imprinted in the very heart, which is
to be read; yea and so, as that it can never be forgotten. Who can over, see
our Blessed Lord, all couered-ouer with wounds, and afflicted with persecutions
of all kinds, and yet, not be contented, to embrace them; yea and to desire
them, and to love them? Who can see, though but a very little, of that Glory,
which he gives to such, as serve him, and not come instantly to know, that all
that, which we can possibly ever, either do, or suffer here, is directly
nothing; since we hope for so high a reward? He, who sees the torments, which
the damned Souls of Hell, endure, how can he choose, but esteem all the
torments of this life, to be a kind of delightful thing, in comparison of
those others? and how can he choose but know the mighty obligation, which he
has to our Blessed Lord, for having delivered him, so often, out of that sad
place.

But because I mean hereafter, by the Favor of Almighty God, to speak more
of some particular things of these kinds, I now intend to declare, the process
of mine own Life; and for the present, I beseech Almighty God, that I may
have known, how to express my self in that, which I have said already. I well
believe, that whosoever shall have had experience, will have understood me; and
will have seen, that I have happened upon saying somewhat, which is to the
purpose; but I shall not wonder a whitt, if such, as have none, shall conceive,
that I have been talking idly, all this while. It suffices me, to say, as I
have said, that so I may remain free, from fault; nor yet, will I blame any
other, who shall be of a different opinion. Our blessed Lord give me grace,
that I may never fail, in fulfilling his holy will,

Amen.
THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She treats of another way, how our Lord instructs a Soul and gives her to
understand his Will, after a very admirable manner, without any speech at
all. She also declares a certain Vision, and great Favor, which our Lord
shevved her; and this Vision, was not Imaginary. This Chapter is very much to
be noted.

But now, (returning to the Discourse, or Historical part of my Life) I
remained with much affliction, and trouble, but it was accompanied with many
prayers (as I was saying) which were made to our Lord, that he would be
pleased, to conduct my Soul, by some other way, which might be more secure;
since they told me, that the former, was, to be suspected. Yet, true it is,
that, howsoever I begged it much, of Almighty God, yet considering, how
evidently my Soul was improued, by the course which I held before, I could
never find it in my power, to desire it heartily, and home, (though yet still, I
did it, in some sort) unless it were sometimes, when I was even distressed,
and all tired out, by the things, which they said to me; and by the frights,
into which they put me. For now, I was wholly grown, to be another Creature;
and therefore, I could not cordially desire it. Only I put my self into the
hands of Almighty God, beseeching him, that since he knew, what was fittest
for me, he would be pleased, to accomplish his holy Will, in all things,
concerning me. But now, I saw plainly, that, by this way of mine, which they
suspected, my Soul was even carrying-vp to Heaven, which formerly was dropping
down to Hell; And why therefore, should I desire, that this course might be
changed? For, as for beleiuing, that it was of the Devil, it was not in my
power, even to constrain my self to it; though yet, I did what I could, to
desire, that I might be able to believe it; but it was not (as I said) in my
power. I offered, to this end, some little, poor, good works, which I did, if
I did any. I became devoted to some Saints; to the end, that, by their means,
I might be delivered from the Devil. I performed the Devotions of Nine Days; I
reco^mended my self to S Hilarion, and to S. Michael also, the Archangell, for
I had lately applied my self to him, for this purpose; and I importuned also
mame other Saints, that our Lord might be pleased, by their intercession, to
conduct me, in the way of Truth; I say, that they would find some means, to
perfect this business of mine, with his Divine Majesty. In fine, after the end
of two years, which, both I, and other persons, had wholly employed, with all
their prayers, and mine, in order to this end, that our Lord might be pleased,
either to conduct my Soul by some other way, or else vouchsafe to declare, that
this way, wherein I went, was right, (for now, those Words, and Speeches,
which I have related, that our Lord would be uttering to me sometimes, were
grown very ordinary, and even continual) that chanced, and occurred to me,
which I will now declare.

As I was in Prayer, one day (and it was upon the Festiuitie of the Glorious S.
Peter) I saw, standing very near me, or rather, (to say better) me thought I
felt (for indeed I saw nothing at all, with the eyes, either of my Body, or of
my Mind) that Christ our Lord was close by me; and I found, in fine, that it
was he, in my opinion, who was speaking to me. But now I (who was extremely
ignorant, till then, that there might be any such thing, in the world, as such
a Vision) fell, at the first, into a mighty fear; and I could do nothing but
weep; though yet, through his giving me assurance, by his speaking but one
only word, I found my self; as I had formerly been, not only without fear,
and very quiet, but even with Regalo, and delight. Me thought, that Christ
Jesus, our Lord, went ever close to me, on one side; but the Vision not being
Imaginary, or represented in any Form, I perceived not, in what shape he was.
But as for his being ever, on my right side, I found, and felt that, very
clearly; and that he was the witness, of whatsoever I did; and that I could not
be recollected, though it were never so little, (or rather indeed, unless I
were much diuerted, or distracted) but I must needs, in fine, understand, that
he was very near me. I then went immediately to my Ghostly Father, being
sufficiently vexed, and greiued, that I must let him know it. He asked me, what
Form, or Figure he had, when I saw him; and I told him, that I had not seen
him. Upon this, he enquired then, how I knew, that it was Christ our Lord. To
this I answered, that I knew no more, but that I could not possibly fail, or
forbear, to understand, and know, that he was close to me; and that I found,
and felt it plainly; and that now, the recollection of my Soul, in Prayer of
Quiet, was far greater, and more continual; and that the effects were very
different from those others, which I had formerly found; and that the thing was
very certain, and clear. For my part, I could do no more, but bring diverse
Comparisons, whereby to give my self to be understood; but yet certainly, in my
opinion, there is none, which can suite very well, to express this kind of
Vision. For, as this is one of the highest kind (as I was told afterward, by a
certain holy man, and of great Spirit, called Fray Pedro de Alcantara, whom
I shall mention afterward, more at large; (and the same has been also told me,
by other great learned men) and that this, is one of those Favors, where the
Devil can least intermeddle, or intrude himself, of all others) so have we here
no words, or terms at all, wherewith to declare it; at least we, who know so
little; though such as are learned, will, peradventure, be able to do it
better. For, when I say, that I neither saw this, with the eyes of the Body,
nor of the Mind (because it was no Imaginary Vision) how come I to
understand, and how can I undertake, and affirm, more clearly, and certainly,
that Christ our Lord was standing near me, then if I had seen him, with my
very eyes. For it seems indeed to be, as if a person were in the dark, who
sees not another, that stands by him; or as if the same person were blind. Some
resemblance, I say, this carries; though yet, not very much. For in this last
case, a man may come to know it, by the way of several Senses; because he may
hear the other speak, or stir; or he may touch him; But here, there is
nothing of all this; nor is there here, any darkness at all; but only the thing
is represented to the Soul, by a certain notice, which is more clear then
the Sun. I say not, that any Sun is seen, nor any clearnes, or brightness
at all; but only a certain light, which illuminates, and informs the
Understanding (though yet without seeing any light) to the end, that the Soul
may enjoy so high a good. Now, this brings great benefits with it. Yet is it
not like such a Presence of God, as many times is felt in the Mind; and
especially by such persons, as be arrived to Union, and Quiet Prayer; who, in
resolving to begin to make that Prayer, seem to find the person ready at
hand, to whom to speak; and we seem to understand, that he hears us; by the
effects, and spiritual feelings, which we find, of great Love, and Faith, and
other firm purposes, and resolutions, accompanied with much tenderness of
Denotions. This is a great Favor of Almighty God; and let him esteem it much,
who has it; for it is a very elevated, and high Prayer; but yet, it is no
Vision; but here it is understood, that Almighty God is there, by the effects;
which, as I have said, he works in the Soul; for, in this manner of Prayer,
does his Divine Majesty vouchsafe, to give hemself, then, and there, to be
felt. But now, here, it is clearly found, that Christ Jesus the Son of the
Virgin, is present. In that other manner of Prayer, there are certain
influences of the Divinity represented; but here, together with them, we
find, that the most Sacred Humanity also of Christ our Lord, does accompany
us, to do us favor. My Ghostly Father then asked me this question: Who told
you, that it was Jesus Christ? Himself told me so, (answered I) and that many
times; but yet, even before he told me so, it was im printed upon my
Understanding, that it was he; yea and even before this, he told me so; and yet
still I saw him not. If any man, whom I had never seen, but only had heard
news of him, should come to speak with me (I being either blind, or in the
dark) and should tell me, who he were, I should believe him; and yet I could
not so resolutly affirm him, to be that person, as if I had seen him. But yet
now, in this other case, I could; for here, there is imprinted, so clear a
notice of him, in the Mind, without seeing him, that it seems a kind of
impossibility, to doubt it; for, our Lord will have it so engraven upon the
Understanding, that it can no more be questioned, then even that, which we see;
no nor yet so much; for, in things, which we see, there remains, sometimes, a
suspicion, whether we might not have fancied such a thing, and so mistaken it.
But here, though upon the sudden, and, as it were, by way of surprise, one
may begin to fall upon a kind of suspicion, or doubt, yet still, upon the
whole matter, we remain in so great a certainty, as that the doubt continues
not, to have place. And so also, does it fall out; though yet, in a different
manner, that God instructs the Soul, and speaks to it, but yet without
speaking at all, in such sort, as I have already declared.

This is a certain kind of language, which has so much of the Celestial in
it, that it cannot well be given to be understood by us here, how much soever
we may desire it, unless our Lord himself be pleased to teach it, by
experience. For, our Blessed Lord conueyes, and places that, in the most
interior part of the Soul, which he is pleased, that the same Soul shall
understand, and know; and there, does he represent it, without either any
image of his person, or any form of words; but only after the way of that
kind of Vision, which I have already touched. And now, let this manner of
Almighty God's making the Soul understand, what he will, in the way of great
Truths, and mysteries, be much observed. For, many times, that, which I
understand, when our Lord declares any Vision, which his Divine Majesty is
pleased to represent to me, is after this manner; and me thinks, it is in such
occasions, as where the Devil is least able to intermeddle, or intrude himself,
for these reasons; and if they be not found, I am likely enough, to be
deceived. Now, this kind of Vision, and language, is so inwardly a thing of
Spirit, that here, there is no kind of springing, or even stirring, in any of
the Powers of the Mind; nor yet in any of the Senses of the Body, in my
opinion; by which means, the Devil may be able to make himself the gainer.
Thus, I say, it happens sometimes; as namely, when it lasts but a very little
while. For, at some other times, me thinks, that neither the Powers of the
Mind, are suspended, nor yet the Senses of the Body disabled, but that they
are all, at home, and in use. The other, happens not always in this degree of
Contemplation, but rather very seldom. I say, that, when they are so lost, we
neither operate any thing, nor do any thing; but all seems, to be the work
of our Lord. It is, as when a food is already conveyed into the stomach, without
either our having eaten it, or so much as knowing, who laid it there; but only
we understand well, that there it is; though, in that case, it be neither
known, what the food is, nor who carried it thither. But here, it is very
differet; for here, the food is known, though yet, how it got thither, I
cannot tell; for neither did I see it; nor understand it; nor was I ever moved
to desire it; nor had it ever come to my knowledge before, that such a thing,
could possibly be.

In the Speech, upon which I touched before, Almighty God makes the
Understanding observe, and reflect, upon that, which is said; whether it desire
to understand, or no. For there, it seems, that the Soul has some other kind
of eats, wherewith to hear; and that he makes her harken, and not, the while,
to think of somewhat else; as if one, who could hear well, were not suffered,
to stopp his ears; and that they cried out alowd, to him, who would therefore
be feign to hear them, whether he would, or no; but somewhat, in fine, he
does, since he is attentive to understand, what they say. But here, the Soul
does inst nothing; for, even that little, which was done in the former way, and
which was only to harken, is taken from her now; for now, she finds all
dressed, to her hand; yea and all eaten by her, too. So that now, there is
nothing to be done by her, but to enjoy. Just so, as any one, who, without
ever having learnt, or so much as endeavored to read, and much more, without
any studying at all, should find that whole Science already possessed by
himself, and that, without knowing at all, either how, or whence it came, since
he had never procured to acquire it, with so much, as learning his A. B. C. And
this last Comparison, me thinks, declares some part of this Celestial gift;
for, the Soul finds her self here, to be grown wise, upon a sudden; and
that the Mystery of the most Holy Trinity, and other most sublime Articles,
are so exactly declared to her, that there is not any Theologue, or Divine, in
the world, with whom she might not adventure to dispute, concerning the truth
of those high points.

The Soul remains here, in such an amazement, that some one such Favor, as
this, suffices, to work a total change in her; and to make her love nothing,
but only him, who, without any labor at all, of hers, has made her capable
of so unspeakable blessings; and to whom he communicates his secrets; and
whom he treats with arguments of so great, and dear friendship, and love,
that they The incredible dear sweetness of our B. Lord to a Soul.
endure not, so much, as to be written. For he does some such kinds of Favor,
as might even bespeake a kind of suspicion, and doubt, in the hearer; in
regard, that they are of so great admiration; and have been imparted to a
person, who has deserved them so very ill. And, in fine, if we bring not a
very Lively, and even lusty Faith with us, they cannot be believed; and
therefore I resolve, to speak of few of those, which our Lord has been
pleased to vouchsafe me, unless I be expressly commanded; and unless it be of
some few Visions, which perhaps, may ferue, to do good, in some kind: To the
end, that any such persons, as to whom our Lord may be pleased to impart the
like, may not wonder, and think it impossible, as I did; or else, that so, I
may declare the manner, and way, by which it has pleased our Lord, to conduct
my Soul; that being the very thing, which they have commanded me to write.

Returning therefore now, to this manner of understanding these kinds of
things; me thinks, our Lord is pleased, that, by all means, this Soul of
ours, should have some notice here, even of that, which passes in Heaven; and
that, as Souls do there understand one another, really, without speaking,
(which, for my part, I never knew before, (and this is most certainly true)
till our Lord, through his goodness, made me see it, and showed it me, in a
certain Rapt of mine) So also should it be here, in this world; and that so,
Almighty God, and the Soul, might be able to understand one another; and
that, upon this sole cause, and reason, in regard that his Divine Majesty is
pleased, that they shall do so, without any other artifice, or means; that
so, the mutual love, which these two dear friends carry to one another, may
be given by them, to be mutually understood. Just so, as in this world, when
two persons love one another very dearly, and be endued with a good
understanding, and wit, they seem able to understand themselves together; even
without, so much as signs; and by only, looking well, upon one another. Thus
ought it to be, in our case, since, (without our knowing expressly, how) these
two Lovers look earnestly, upon one another, in the face; as the Spouse says
to his Beloved, in the Canticles; for so, I think, I have heard, that it is
expressed there.

O admirable benignity of thee, O Lord, who permittest thy self, to be looked
upon, by those eyes, which have abused their sight, so much, as these of my
Soul, have done! At least, O my dear Lord, let them now, be accustomed (after
this sight of thee) to look no more, upon any inferior, and base Objects;
nor let any thing be able, to please them, out of thee. O great ingratitude of
mortal Creatures! how far, will thou be able, to atiue? For now I know, even
by experience, that this is literally true, which I am saying, That,
whatsoever is possibly able to be expressed by me, is no more, then the very
least part of that Favor, which thou impartest to any such Soul, as thou
vouchsafest to bring to such a State, as this. O Souls, which have begun to
use Prayer; and you, who have really Faith, and firm Belief; what blessings,
and benefits are you possibly able to seek, and get, which may, any way, be
compared, even to the least of those, which are obtained, by the Servants of
Almighty God, even in this mortal life of ours? And consider, (for it is most
certainly true) that Almighty God imparts himself thus, even here, to such,
Observe this, well.
as forsake all things, for love of him. For, he is no accepter of persons, and
he loves all men; nor has any one of them any excuse, how wicked soever he
may have been; since our Lord has proceeded, after this manner, even with me;
and advanced me to such a condition, as you see. Consider also, that this,
which I am saying now, is not so much as a little Cipher of that, which were to
be said; but, only so much is here delivered, as is necessary, for the giving
this manner of Vision, and Favor; which Almighty God, is pleased to do to a
Soul, to be, in some sort, understood.

But now, it is in no power of mine, to declare that, which she finds, and
feels, when our Lord is pleased, to impart those secrets, and greatnesses of
his; together with that delight, which is so highly superior to all those
others, which can possibly be imparted by this world; and that they do, with a
mighty deal of reason, make them, who possess the same, even abhor all the
pleasures of the earth; which, when they be all, clapped together, are no
better, then mere dung, and dirt; nay it is, after a sort, even to give one a
Vomit, to bring these, into any comparison at all, with those others; even
though they should be able to last for ever. And yet, of these Celestial
joys, what kind of poor proportion of them, is that, which he is pleased, to
impart, in this world? No more, then, as it were, one slight, single drop of
water, of that huge full, flowing River, which is prepared for us, in Heaven.
It is a very shame, and scorn; (and really I employ it all against my self;
(and if it were possible, for Souls to be affronted, even in Heaven, I should
have cause to find my self ashamed when I were there, more then any Creature)
to think that we should expect, to enjoy. This Saint you see, was certainly
no Protestant.
so great benedictions, and delights, and glory, as is to be infinite in that
next Life, and all, at the only cost, of our dear Lord JESUS. And shall we
not weep, perhaps, at least, with the Daughters of Jerusalem, since we will hot
help him to carry the Cross, as Simon Cyreneus did? Or can we ever think of
coming to enjoy that, by the way, and means of pleasures, and passetimes,
which he vouchsafed to get, and gain for us, upon the price of his own most
precious Blood? This is absolutely impossible. And can we think, by our
aspiring to vain Honor, that we may be able to remedy, and redress that
huge contempt, and scorn, which he endured for us? There is no manner of
sense, in any such co^ceipt. No, no; the course is utterly mistaken; and we
shall never be able to ariue, at that iourneys end, by any such erroneous way,
as this. Your Reverence must cry-out alowd, to make these truths be heard, and
believed, by the world. And since it has pleased Almighty God, to take this
power, and liberty, from me, I would always be crying them out, to my self;
but both he heard me, and I came also to understand him, so very late, as may
be seen, by what I have written here; and it is no less, then matter of
extreme confusion to me, to speak of it; and therefore I will now hold my
peace; and, for the present, will only say that, which I have been considering
sometimes; which is, that I humbly beseech Almighty God, to bring me once, to
such terms, as that I may enjoy this immense Good. O what an accidental
glory, and gust, will it be, for the Blessed Saints of Heaven, who enjoy this
felicity, when they shall find, that, although it were late, yet at length,
they left nothing unperformed, which it was possible for them to do, for the
love of Almighty God? Nor did they fail, to present him, with the very
uttermost of whatsoever they could offer, in all kinds, according to the
power, which they had, and to the condition, wherein they were placed; he
giving them still more, who had more. How rich will he then, find himself to
be, who left all the riches he had, for Christ our Lord? How full of honor,
who rejected all honor; and took no pleasure, in any other thing, then to
find himself abased, and despised, for the love of him. How wise will he see
himself then, who rejoiced to see the world, hold him for a fool; since they
called Wisdom it self, by that name? But how few of such, as these, are there
now, in the world, by reason of our great Sins? Alas, it seems, that all
they, are spent, and gone, long ago, whom the world was wont to estee^ for
madd fools, when they saw them perform those heroical acts, of true Lovers
of Christ our Lord. O world! O world! How do thou go gaining Honor, by
procuring, that few may have the wit, to understand thee right? But now, to
what a pass are we come, since some will needs conceive, that God is the The
Masque of Pride.
better served by them, when they get themselves to be held, for discreet, and
wise? yea this indeed, must needs be so, as now we are grown to understand the
word, Discretion. For, now, we will needs make our selves believe, that it is
matter, forsooth, of small edification, not to go, up, and down the world,
with great authority, and composition of clothing, and dressing; every one,
according to his condition. Nay even to the Friar, and Priest, and Nun, some
are now grown to be of opinion, that, to wear any thing, which is old, or
peiced, were a kind of novelty, and a giving scandal to the weak; and so it
is also now, if they live with much recollection, and use Mental Prayer. To
such a pass, the world is grown. But the study, and practice of Christian
Perfection, and the great impulses, which the Saints were wo^t to have, for the
obtaining thereof, is the thing, which, I believe, does more harm to the
miserable, and wretched actions, which are committed by evil men, in these
times, then it could possibly be of scandal, to any Creature, that such, as
are Religious, should publish that, to the world, by their works, of which
they talk by their words; to the end, that so, Mankind might grow to hold
this world, in mean account. For, out of such kinds of scandal, as these,
our Lord would draw great service, for himself, and good, for them. And if some
men would needs be scandalized at it, others would yet have remorse; and at
least, we should remain with some little design, or draught of that, which
Christ our Lord, and his Apostles, endured for us, since we have now, more need
of it, then ever.

But O, what an excellent example, did Almighty God take lately from us, in
the person of that Blessed man, Fray An admirable example of Penance.
Pedro de Alcantara? The world was now no longer able, even to endure such a
Perfection, as his; for now, forsooth, they say, that the health of men, is
grown weaker; and that now, we do not live in those former times. But that
holy man, lived in this time, and yet, he had as full, and great Spirit
toward Almighty God, as men had in the days of old; and so, he trod the
world down, under his feet. And though every body do not go barefoot, nor
perform so sharp, and strict penance, as he, yet are there many other ways,
as I have said before, whereby a man may tread the world, under his feet; and
our Lord, will teach us these ways, when he finds, that a man's mind is
fit, and well-prepared for them. And how great an one, did Almighty God
bestow upon this Saint, of whom now I speak; to go, through seven and
forty years of his life, with so sharp, and rigourous penance, as is
generally known? And I will say some little thing of it, because I know, that
it is all, most certainly true.

He told me a certain particular, and so he also did an other, from whom he
was as little curious to conceal himself, as from me; but as for me, the only
reason, why he did it, was the love he bore me; because our Lord, would have it
so; to the end, that he might help me, and encourage me also, in a certain
time, of so great necessity, as I have related. And now I will declare, how,
to the best of my remembrance, he said, that he had slept, but one hour and a
half, in the four and twenty hours, of day, and night, for two and forty
years together; and that it was the greatest mortification, and trouble of
penance, that he had felt, in those beginnings, to overcome himself, in point
of sleep; and that, in order also to this end, he was always, at other times,
either standing upon his feet, or else kneeling; and that only, when he slept,
he satt; and that with his head, leaning aside, upon a certain little piece of
wood, which was fastened for that purpose, in the wall. To extend his body at
length, in his Cell, was not possible for him, though he should have a mind to
it; for it is known, to have had but four foot, and a half, in length. In all
these two and forty years, he never put on his Capouch, or Hood, how hot
soever the Sun, or how great soever the rain might be; nor did he ever wear
any thing upon his feet; nor was his body clad, but only with a Habit of
thick, course Sackcloath, without any other thing at all, upon him; and this
was so very straight, as that he might be only able, to put it on, with a
little short Mantle of the same, upon it. He told me, that, when the weather
was extremely cold, he was wont to put off his said Mantle, and to leave also,
the door, and the little window of his Cell, open; that so, when afterward, he
put the Mantle on again, and shut his door, he might give his body, so much
contentment by it, as that it might be quieted, without more clothing. It was
a very ordinary thing with him, not to eat, till the third day, after he had
eaten last; and he told me (by way of answer, to the wonder, in which I was at
it,) that this, was a thing very possible, for one, who would accustom himself
to it. And a certain Companion of his, also told me, that it happened for him
sometimes, not to eat any thing at all, in eight days; but that, perhaps,
might happen, when he was in Prayer; for, he used to have great Rapts, and
vehement impulses, or impetuosities of the love of Almighty God; whereof my
self was once an eye-witnes. His poverty, was extreme; and so also was his
Mortification, even from his youth. For he told me, that, in his time, it had
happened to him, to live three years, in some one House of his own Order, and
yet, not to know any one of the Religious, of the same House, but only by
their speech; for he never lifted-vp his eyes; and so, whenever he was to
go, of necessity, to any place, either in the streets, or upon highways,
he could, by no means, tell, how to do it, but by following the other
Religious. As for women, he never looked upon any of them, for the space of
many years; and told me, that it was just all one with him, to see any
body, or not to see them. When I came at length, to know him, he was very old;
and his weakness, and leanenes so extreme, that he seemed, not to be composed,
and made, but as even of the very roots of trees. With all this sanctity of
his, he was very affable, though yet he were wont to express himself, in very
few words, unless it were by occasion of some questions, which might be asked
him; and in that case, he was excellent company, for he had a very choice
Understanding. I could have a mind, to say very much more of him, if I feared
not, that your Reverence would ask me, why I put my self upon this kind of
discourse; yea and I have not written even this little, without some fear. And
therefore I say no more, but only, that he dyed, as he lived, in preaching, and
admonishing the Religious of his Order. And when he saw, that he was even come
to an end, he said the Psalm of: Laetatus sum in his, quae dicta sunt mihi: in
domum Domini ibimus; I have rejoiced in that, which they have said to me: we
will go into the house of our Lord; and so, stooping dowe, and kneeling, he
dyed.

After this, our Lord has been pleased to let me enjoy more of him now, then I
did, when he was alive; for, he gives me counsel, in diverse occasions; and I
have seen him many times, in extreme glory. The first time, that he appeared
to me, he said: O how happy penance was that, which has obtained so high
a revvard! with many other things of that nature. A year before he dyed, he
appeared to me, when we were absent, from one another; and it was declared to
me, that he should dye; and I advertised him thereof, whilst he was distant
some leagues, from me. At the instant, when he expired afterward, he also
appeared to me, and told me, that he was then going to rest. I did not believe
the thing; but yet I related it to some; and within eight days after, the
news came to us, that he was dead; or rather, to speak more properly, that he
had then, begun to live for ever.

And here, behold, how the severe Penance of his life, was finished in so
large a proportion of glory, that me thinks, he is of more comfort to me now,
then when he was here. Our Lord told me once, that men should not ask any
thing, in his name, wherein he would not hear them; and my self have
recommended many to him, to the end, that he might beg them of our Lord; and
I have found them granted. Let the same Lord be Blessed for ever; Amen.

But what a talking have I kept here, that so I might stir your Reverence up,
not to make the least account at all, of any thing, in this world, as if you
knew not this, already? or, as if you were not resolved to leave it all? or
rather, as if you had not already put all this, in execution? But I see such a
deal of perdition in the world, that howsoever my saying it, serves for
nothing, but only to weary me, by writing it, yet withal it is a kind of
vnwearying, and ease for me, to do it; and so, all that, which I am saying,
proves to be against my self. Our Blessed Lord forgive me, whereinsoeuer I may
have offended, concerning this particular; and I beseech your Reverence also,
to pardon me, for incommodating you, to little purpose; but it seems, that I
will needs make you do Penance, for that, wherein my self commit the Sin.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She treats of the great Favors, which our Lord did her; and how he appeared
to her, the first time. She declares, that it was a Vision, which shevved it
self by way of the Imagination; and discouers, the great effects, and
testimonies, which such things leave in the Soul, when they are of Almighty
God. This Chapter is of great instruction, and deserves to be noted, much.

But now, to return to our purpose, I had that kind of Vision aforesaid, for
some few days, after a kind of continual manner; and it was so useful to me,
that I never went then, out of Prayer; and besides, whatsoever I then happened to
do, I procured it might be in such sort, as that it should not displease him,
whom I evidently saw to be there, as a witness of all that, which passed. And
though it be very true, that sometimes, I had some fear, through the multitude
of those things, which they would be saying to me, yet that trouble would not
use to last long; because I was well assured, and satisfied, by our Lord
himself.

Being one day in Prayer, it pleased our Blessed Lord, to show me his Hands,
and nothing but his Hands; and they had such an excess, and height of beauty
in them, as I am not able, by any means, to express. But this, struck me
into a very great fear; as, indeed, every novelty is wont to bring me, in
the beginnings of any Supernatural Favor, which our Lord is pleased to do
me. Within few days after this, I saw also his Divine Face; which did totally,
me thinks, leave me absorpt. For my part, I could not understand, why our
Blessed Lord showed himself to me so, by little and little; since afterward,
he resolved to do me the Favor, that I might see him, all; till I came to
understand, that our Lord went guiding, and conducting me, according to my
natural weakness. And let him be eternally Blessed for it; since so great, and
high Glory, as that, all together, encountering with a Subject, which was so
base, and wicked, as my self, would never have been endured; and thus our
Blessed, and Merciful Lord, went so disposing of things, as I have here
expressed. Your Reverence will, perhaps, imagine, that there was no need of
much courage, and strength of mind, for the beholding of a Face, and Hands,
which were so beautiful. But yet it is to be understood, that such Bodies, as
are Humane frailty, and celestial glory, are not compatible.
glorified, have so very great a height of beauty, that the glory, which they
bring, to behold a thing so delightful, and Supernatural, does even, as it
were, exceed our capacity; and so, consequently, I grew to be all, in much
disorder, and trouble; though yet afterward, I remained with certainty, and
security, and such other effects, as that all fear did quickly vanish.

Upon a certain day of S. Paul, whilst I was hearing Mass, the whole
Humanity of Christ our Lord, was represented to me, as it uses to be painted,
after the Resurrection; but with so great Beauty, and Majesty, as I wrote
once to your Reverence, when you commanded me so expressly to do it; and I
remember, that I was troubled enough, at it. For, in fine, those things cannot
be done, without a body's even annihilating her self, who does them; but yet
howsoever, I did, what you commanded me, the best I could; and therefore I need
not take care, to repeat it, so parparticularly, now. Only I will declare thus
much, that, if there were no other thing, even in Heaven, to give delight, and
gust, to our sight, but only the excessive beauty of Glorified Bodies, that
felicity would be even immense; but especially, to behold that most Sacred
Humanity of Jesus Christ our Lord, must be matter of incomparable Glory. For,
since the Majesty thereof, is discovered to be so great, whenever it is
represented to us here, according to that proportion, where of our misery, in
this mortal life of ours, is capable; what, do we think it will then occurr
to be, when we shall so very entirely be admitted, to enjoy so high a Good.
This Vision, though it be Imaginary, (or representing it self, by way of
Mental Image, to the Imagination) was never seen by me, by these eyes of my
Body; nor indeed, was any other Vision, that I ever had, but only, by the
eyes of my Mind. And they, who know these things, better then I, affirm, that
the former Vision, is of a higher, and more perfect kind, then this; and this
also much more, then those others, which are seen, by these eyes, of Flesh, and
Blood. For, these latter, they say, are of the lowest Imaginary Visions
represented to, and by the senses are of the lowest rank, and most subject to
danger.
kind of all, and wherein the Devil is able to induce and impose most
Illusions; though yet then, I could not understand any such matter; but rather
desired, that, when I was to receive any Favor of that kind, it might be so,
as that I might see it, with my corporeal eyes; to the end, that my Ghostly
Father, might no longer tell me, that I did but fancy such things. And so it
happened also to my self, as soon as it was past (but it was even, as it were,
but at the very instant) that even my self also conceived, that I did but
fancy it indeed; and so I was a little troubled sometimes, for haueing told my
Ghostly Father, as I did; as doubting, whether I had not deceived him. And
now, this was the occasion of another lamentation of mine; and so I went to him
again, and told him of it. Upon this, he asked me, whether indeed, I had
thought so, before; and whether I had any purpose to deceive him. As for me, I
told him, what I held to be the truth; I, who (forasmuch as I am able to
understand of my self) had no mind at all, to lie; nor intended any such
matter, as that; nor would I, for the whole world, have told him any one
thing, for another. Now this, did he know very well; and so he did his best, to
quiet me. But I had so great auersion from going to give him trouble with these
things, that I know not, how the Devil could make me, for my greater torment,
conceive, that I had feigned, in what I had said.

But our Lord made such have to do me a Favor, and to unfold this truth to
me, that I grew quickly, to be out of all doubt, whether it were a thing of
fancy, or no; and since that time, I see my folly very clearly. For though I
should employ many years, in conceiving, how I might be able, to figure a
thing of so extreme beauty, I should never have either the power, or the
wit, to do it; for, it did far exceed all that, which can possibly be
imagined in this world, by the very clearnes, and brightness thereof. Nor yet
is it any such brightness, as dazles; but a brightness, which is accompanied,
with a most sweet kind of beauty; a brightness, I say, there is infused, which
gives extreme delight to the sight, and which is far from wearying it; nor
does the light thereof, also offend, whereby we see this object of so Divine
Beauty. This, I say, is a light, so very different from all that, of this
inferior world, that even the brightness of the Sun it self, which we see, is
so dim, and dull a thing, in comparison of that claritie, and light, which is
represented to our sight, by this means, that even the eyes would searce open
themselves, to behold it. For it is, as if it were a most pure water, running
all upon Crystal, with the Sun reflecting upon it, and striking through it;
in comparison of some other, which were of a muddie kind, and in a clowdie day;
and which were running also upon earth. Not yet, that there is any Sun
represented in it; nor is that Light, like the Light of the Sun; for, in
fine, this Light of the Vision, seems a very natural Light; whereas the other
is but a kind of artificial thing, in comparison thereof. This is a Light,
which never sets; but as it is ever Light, so is there nothing, which can
disturb it; but in fine, it is a thing of such a kind, as that, how sublime
soever the understanding of any Creature might be, he would never, in all the
days of his life, be able to conceive rightly, what kind of thing it were. And
it pleases Almighty God, to set it before us, so very speedily, that we cannot
open our eyes so soon, if that were needful for the seeing it; but it helps
us indeed, no more, in this case, to have them open, then shut. For, whenever
our Lord is pleased, we see it, even whether we will, or no. Not is there any
distraction in the world, which may be able, to divert us from it; nor is there
any power, which can resist it; nor is there also, on the other side, any
manner of care, and diligence, which may suffice to procure it; and I have had
good experience of this, as I shall find a fit time to declare.

But that, which I would feign relate now, is the manner, how our Blessed Lord
is pleased to show himself, by these Visions. I say not, that I will declare,
in what sort, this so strong a light may be able to convey it self, into the
inward sense, and to imprint so exact, and clear an Image, upon the
Understanding, as to make it directly seem, to be very there; for, this point
belongs to such, as are learned; and our Lord has not been pleased, to give me
to comprehend the manner of it; and, in myself, I am so very ignorant, and of
so gross an Understanding, that, howsoever men have endeavored much, to
declare it to me, I have not yet, been able to conceive the way, and manner of
it. And this is very certain, that, howsoever it may seem to your Reverence,
that my Understanding is lively, and quick, yet there is really no such thing;
and I have found, what I am about to say, to be true, by the experience of
many particulars; that, namely, it embraces, and comprehends no more; then
just that very thing, upon which they will have it feed. Yea and sometimes,
he, who was my Confessarius, would be even amazed, at my ignorances, in many
kinds; and he never made me understand. nor did I, indeed, desire to know, how
Almighty God did this; or how this could be; nor did I ask him about it.
Though yet, as I have said, I treated many years, with men of great learning,
to know, whether this, or that, were a Sin, or no; for in this, I was not
wanting; but as for the rest, I then had no need, to stand thinking of more,
then that Almighty God was the Author of all; and I saw, that I was now, not
to wonder at aniething, but only to consider, how many reasons I had, to
praise him. Nay, the things, which carried difficulty with them, did breed
devotion, in me; and the more difficulty, the more devotion. But I will
therefore now, declare that, which I am come to understand, by experience;
namely, how our Blessed Lord does this; and your Reverence will express it
better, and will unfold all that, which you may find obscure, and I, not know,
how to deliver.

It seemed to me, indeed, in some respects, that it was an Image, or distinct
representation, which I saw; but, in many other; no; but rather, that it was
Christ our Lord himself; considering the excessive kind of claritie, wherewith
he vouchsafed, to impart himself to me. And yet sometimes, it was after so
vndistinct a manner; that me thought, it was a Representation, or Image; but
yet still, not like those designs, and draughts, or Pictures of things, which
are made here, how perfect soever they may be; for I have seen, both very
many, and very good ones, of this kind. But it is a very great impertinencie,
to conceive, that any one of them, comes home, to the life; but, how well
soever they be drawn, they will never yet ariue to reach the Natural in all
respects; for, in fine, the one is alive, and the other, is dead But, let us
lay this aside, though yet the relation of one, to the other, hold very well.
And still I say not, that I frame a Comparison, between Christ our Lord
himself, and that, which I said I saw; for, Comparisons never agree so
perfectly, and entirely, as these two things did. But the truth is, that there
is the same difference, in what I saw, from any Image, which there is between
a thing, that lives, and a thing, which is painted. And if you will needs have
this, to have been an Image, I am sure, it was a living Image, and not a dead
man, but Christ alive; and it gives me also to understand, that he is both God,
and Man; and that, not so as he was laid in the Sepulcher, but as he was
afterward, in the Resurrection. And sometimes, he comes with such an immense
kind of Majesty, that no Creature can be able to doubt, but that it is our
very Lord himself; and especially, after my receiving the Blessed Sacrament;
for, then we know well, that he is there, since we understand it by Faith; and
this seems, to be the same Lord, with that. An he shows himself then, for so
true, and entire a Lord, of that little house, that the whole Soul, sees her
self, to be even dissolved, consumed, and annihilated, in Christ our Lord.

Dear JESUS! and how should one be able, to give the height of that Majesty,
to be understood, wherewith thou come to show thy self, in these occasions?
and how absolutely does the Soul resolve, that thou art the Lord of the whole
world, and of the Heavens; and of a thousand worlds; and of innumerable
Heavens, and worlds, which thou caust create; considering that high Majesty,
with which thou representest thy self, to her? For then she knows, that all
this world is just nothing, in respect of that, whereof thou deseruest to have
dominion. Here, O my JESUS, does the Soul see very clearly, that it is but a
beggarlie kind of power, which the Devils have, in comparison of thine; and how
he, who is so happy, as to please thee, may tread all the power of Hell, under
his feet. Here the Soul finds the reason, which the Devils had, to tremble,
when thou did descend to Limbus Patrum; and how they would have wished, to
have been rather, in thousands of other, and lower Hells, then to have endured
the sight of so high a Majesty, as thine. But I perceive, that thou art here,
disposed, to let our Souls see, how potent thou art; and how great, the power
of thy most Sacred Humanity is, when it is accompanied by thy Divinity. The
great effects of an admirable, and most sublime Vision.
Here is it well represented, what kind of thing, the Day of Judgment will be,
where we shall see the mighty Majesty of this King; and behold his great
rigor, toward the wicked. Here, is true Humility laid up, and left in the
Soul, by seeing her own misery, whereof now she can be ignorant no longer.
Here, that confusion, and true repentance for Sin; where, even when she is
seeing, how greatly our Lord shows her his love, yet knows she not, where to
dispose of her self, but is, as it were, even annihilated, outright. I say,
this kind of Vision, is of so excessive power, and strength, when our Lord is
pleased to show a Soul so eminent a portion of his Majesty, and greatness, by
it, that I hold it for an impossible thing, (unless our Lord should be pleased
to assist her, by making her remain in Rapt, and Extasis, and so to loose the
Vision of that Divine presence, by the act of enjoying) that any mortal
Creature, should be able to endure it, at the present; though yet afterward, it
is no impossible thing, to forget it. And yet, still, this can not be wholly
forgotten; in regard, that that Majesty, and Beauty, is so very deeply
imprinted there; but only, when our Lord is pleased, that the Soul shall
suffer some such great kind of drynes, and solitude, as I will declare
afterward; for then it seems, that even one forgets Almighty God himself. But
howsoever, the Soul is grown now to be clearly, another kind of thing, then
what she was before; and is always, as it were, even steeped, and bathed, in
Almighty God; and there seems, in my opinion, to be a new, and more lively
kind of Love, communicated to her, in a very high degree. For, though that kind
of Vision aforesaid (which I declared, to represent Almighty God, without any
Image) be a thing more sublime, and high, in it self, yet, for the making it
continue long, in our memory, and to entertain, and keep our thoughts well
employed, so great is the weakness of our condition, that it makes very much to
our purpose, when so Divine a Presence, as that, of our Blessed Lord, is
represented, and lodged, in the Imaginatiue part of our Mind. And therefore,
these two kinds of Visions, are wont to come always, together. And indeed, it
is thus, that they come. For, the excellency, and beauty, and glory, of the
most Holy Humanity of Christ our Lord, is beheld, with the eyes of the Soul.
And by that other way, which is now declared, we grow to be given to
understand, that he is God; and powerful; yea and omnipotent; and that he
commands, and gouernes all things; and that his love, does even replenish them
all.

This kind of Vision, is to be valued, at a very high rate; and it is also, in
my opinion, without danger; for, in fine, it is discerned by the effects, that
the Devil has no power at all, heerin. And yet it is true, that three, or
four several times, he has had a mind, to represent our Lord himself to me,
after this manner; that is to say, by way of such a false kind of
representation. For, he takes the form of Flesh; but it comes not within the
compass of his power, to counterfeit it, with any such kind of glory, as
when it is indeed of Almighty God. The Devil is wont to make certain
representations, for the destroying of some true Vision, which the Soul has
seen; but so also does she her best, to resist the vexations, which he gives
her; though then, she be so disquieted, and disordered, even by this very
diligence, that she looses that devotion, and gust, which she had before; and
remains also, without any Prayer at all. This happened to me, three, or four
times, in the beginning, as I was saying. But this, of the false Vision, is so
very different a kind of thing, from the other, that, whosoever has arrived to
the only Prayer of Quiet, will, I believe, understand this business, by the
very effects, which have been spoken of, in that Discourse, which concerns
those Words, or Speeches, which sometimes are imparted to, and imprinted in,
the Soul. And I hold this assertion to be a most certain thing; and unless a
Soul should have, even a kind of mind, to be abused, and deceived, I believe,
the Devil will not be able to do it, if she walk with humility, and
simplicity; that is; with sincerity of mind.

Whosoever, I say, has received any true Vision from Almighty God, will
instantly perceive, and judge The difference is easily found, both betvveen a
true Vision, and a false; and betvveen a true Vision, and a Fancy.
of another, which is contrary, and false; for, though any such false one,
may begin, to give a kind of Regalo, and gust, yet the Soul will shake that
off; and besides, in my opinion, the gust will be, even different, in it self;
and, not carrying so much, as an appearance of a Love, which is pure, and chaste,
it grows to be soon discovered, from whence it comes. So that, wheresoever
there is any experience, the Devil will not be able, to do any Soul hurt,
in this kind.

But now, that all this kind of Vision, should be be but a mere Imagination, or
conceit, is clearly, and entirely, an impossible thing; and has no color at
all. For, the high beauty, and fairenes, of one only hand, does absolutely
outstripp all Imagination. And besides, without our ever haueing thought of
any such object, or reflecting upon any one of this kind, to see such things
present, and all at an instant, which could never have been so fitted, and
adiusted, by the Imagination of man (in regard, that it is so mightily of a
superior kind, as I have said, from that, which we are able to comprehend in
this world) it must also be impossible, for the aforesaid reason. And yet,
though we could do somewhat of this kind (not withstanding all that, which is
said) it would yet, not be possibly done, upon this other reason, which I will
now declare. For, if we should represent any such thing, in the strength of
our own Understanding (besides, that it would not have any such great
operation, as this true Vision has; nor indeed would it, in effect, have any
at all) it would be at the most, but as one, who would very feign grow to
sleep; whereas yet, he should, indeed, be awake; because he cannot yet fall
asleep. But if he desire to sleep, and have need of it, and withal, have any
infirmity, or weakness, in his head, which forbidds it, he yet procures, of
himself, to get into a slumber, and uses all his diligences, in order to that
end; and sometimes, he even half thinks, that he does somewhat. But still, if,
in very deed, it be not true, and real sleep, it will not sustain him, nor
give strength to his Head; Nay rather, it will, sometimes, fall out to be so
much the more idle. And just so, is it also partly, in this case; for then,
will the Soul grow empty, and idle, and not be sustained, and strong, but
rather disordered, and disgusted; whereas, in the other former case of ours, it
is past any power of mine, to declare, what treasures are acquired; when not
only the Soul is enriched, but even the Body also it self, gets temper, and
health.

Now, this reason, with others, did I allege, when they told me, sometimes,
that those things were of the Devil; and, at other times, that I did but fancy
them to my self. And this happened often to me, and I would also, be bringing
certain Comparisons, the best I could; and our Lord made me light upon them;
but yet all served me still, to little purpose; for, there being very holy
persons, in that place, and I being even misery it self, in comparison of
them, and our Lord not guiding them, by this way, they would instantly be
growing into fear, that my sins, in all appearance, were the means, to
produce those effects; and so, it went, up, and down, from one to another, in
such sort, as that they came to be acquainted, with these secrets of mine;
though, for my part, I discovered them to no Creature, but only to my Ghostly
Father; or to such, as he directed me, to impart them.

But I remember, I said to them once, that if they, who told me these things,
had related to me, that some person, with whom I had been much acquainted, and
with whom I had spoken but very then, had not yet, been that person indeed,
but that I had only fancyed it to my self, and that they knew it for certain;
I should without all doubt, have much more easily believed them, then even the
very thing, which I saw. But A plain demonstration.
yet now, on the other side, if that person had left certain Jewels with me,
and that they remained still, in my hands, as pawnes of the great love he bore
me, and that formerly I had been the owner of no such Jewels, whereas now I
saw, I was rich, who before, had been so poor, I should then, not be able to
believe them, even though I desired it, especially, when I could show these
Jewels of mine, to others. For every body knew me well enough, and they saw
clearly, that my Soul, was grown to be another kind of thing, then before;
and so I told mine own Ghostly Father. For, the difference was come to be
great, in many kinds, and not in any doubtful, or disguiseable manner; but
so, as that all Creatures might discern it clearly. And I remember, also, that
I was wont to say, that I could not tell, how to believe, that the Devil would
do this, to deceive me; and how, since he would be glad to carry me away with
him to Hell, he could serve himself of this means, which was so very contrary
to his own end; Namely, to roote-out Vice, and to plant Virtue, and strength
of Spirit, in place thereof; for I found, and that very clearly, that I grew,
once, at an instant, to be wholly another Creature, then I was before.

My Ghostly Father, as I was saying, was a Father of the Society of JESUS,
and a very holy man; and he also made the same answer to others, as I came to
understand afterward. He was a person of much discretion, and of great
humility; but yet, that humility of his, grew to cost me a great deal of
trouble. For, though he were a man of much learning, and besides, of great
Prayer, yet put he In order to the guideing of others, a Directour may easily
have too mean an optnion of himself.
no trust at all, in himself; and, our Lord not guiding his Soul by this way,
he was subject to much trouble with me, in several kinds. And afterward I came
to know, that they wished him to take heed of me, and to be careful, least the
Devil should deceive him, by making him believe any part of that, which I
should tell him; and to this purpose, they would be alleging the examples of
some others, to him. All this gave me vexation enough; and, by degrees, I came
so far, as to fear, that I should grow scarce able, to find any body, who
would hear my Confessions; but that every one would be flying from me, in
this kind. So that, for my part, I did nothing but weep; and it was the
providence of Almighty God, that this Father, would yet still continue to
hear me. But indeed, he was so great a Servant of our Lord, that there was
nothing which he would; or suffer, or his sake; and so he would still be
aduising me, to be sure, not to offend Almighty God; nor to swerve from the
directions, which he gave me; and that I should not fear, that he would fail
me; and still he would also be animating, and quieting me; and ever he would,
in particular, command me, that I should conceal nothing from him; which I
always observed; and I doing thus, he would always tell me, that the Devil
would be able, to do me no hurt; but rather, that our Blessed Lord would not
fail, to draw good, out of that ill, which the Devil would be attempting, to
do my Soul. This Soul of mine, did I procure to perfect, to the uttermost of
my power; and, as for my Ghostly Father, I did (through the fear of
Illusions, wherein I was) obey him, in all things; though yet, but after an
imperfect manner. But he had trouble enough with me, when I confessed my self
to him, in these difficult times, which lasted above the space of three whole
years; for, in the great persecutions, which I had, and in many things,
wherein our Lord permitted, that the world should make ill judgments of me,
(and many of them, without any fault of mine) I would ever be coming with
them, to him; and he was blamed, in respect of me; whereas yet he was in no
fault at all. I think it would have been wholly impossible, that he should have
endured it, so long, if he had not been a man of much sanctity; but our Lord
did animate him greatly, and enable him to endure so very much. For he was
still, to make answer to all them, who held me to be a lost Soul; but they
believed him not; and on the other side, he was also to take care, to quiet me,
and to recover me out of that fear, wherein I was, by frighting me, with a
greater; and besides, he was also to endeavor to satisfye me, in another
respect; in regard, that, upon every Vision, which was new to me, our Lord was
pleased to permit, that afterward I should be subject, to very great fears.
Now, as all this proceeded, both from my being, and haueing been, a very great
Sinner: so yet would he comfort me still, with much pietye, and compassion. But
yet still, if he had confided as much in himself, as he might well have done, I
had not suffered so much. For, our Lord gave him to understand the truth, in
all things; and I am persuaded, that the very Sacrament of Penance, which I
frequented with him, gave him light.

Those other Servants of Almighty God, who could not make themselves sure of
my well-doing, were wont to be very conversant with me. And when I would
casually be speaking, now, and then, of some things, they would be
understanding them, after a different manner. Now This Saint was hugely vexed,
by the insatisfaction which she received from many Spiritual men.
there was one of these, whom I particularly loved; for, my Soul was
infinitely obliged to him; and he was a very holy man. For my part, I was
extremely troubled, to see, that I could not make my self be understood
rightly, by him, whilst he also, on the other side, did extraordinarily desire
my good; and that our Lord might once vouchsafe, to give me light. And so, when
I would be relating some things to them, without much reflection upon what I
said, it would seem to them, to be a sign of little humility, in me; and as
soon, as afterward, they discerned me, to commit any one single fault
(whereas they might very easily have discerned many) all grew instantly to be
condemned by them. Sometimes, they would be asking me certain questions; and I
would answer them, with plainenes, and without much reservation, yea or even
reflection; and then, forsooth, they would be thinking, that I had a mind to
teach them; and that I held my self, for some shrewd woeman; and upon this,
would they all, go instantly to my Ghostly Father; for certainly, they
desired my good; but yet then, would he grow, to chide me. And this, lasted a
long time, I being afflicted many ways, on the one side; and yet, being, on
the other, so visited by the Favors of out Blessed Lord, as I found my self
to be, I was indeed very well able, to endure that other miserye.

And now I relate all this, to the end, that it may the better be understood,
how very great a trouble it is, not to have some such person at hand, as has
experience, in the way of Spirit. So that really, if our Blessed Lord, had not
favored me, in such sort, as he did, I know not what would have become of me,
at length; since there were occasions enough, to have put me, even out of my
wits; and sometimes, I saw my self in such terms, that I knew not, what to
do, but only, to lift-vp mine eyes, to our Lord. For, as the contradiction,
and opposition of such, as were good, and worthy men, toward a poor, weak,
and wicked woeman, like my self, and so timorous, as I also was, may, perhaps,
seem, to be scarce worth the relating: so yet, I having passed through very
many, and great troubles, in this life of mine, I have found this last, to
have been of the greatest. I humbly beseech our Blessed Lord, that I may have
been able, to do his Divine Majesty, some little Service, even in this; for
that they, who accused, and condemned me, did him Service in it, I am very
sure; and that it all, has turned to my good.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the Discourse, which she had begun; and relates some high
Favors, which our Lord was pleased to do her; and what his Divine Majesty
did further, for the securing, and encouraging her mind, and for the enabling
her, to answer her Contradictours.

I Have swarued very much, from my purpose; for I pretended to declare the
reassons, whereby to prove, that the thing, whereof I spoke, was not matter of
Imagination; for, how should we be able, by means of any endeavor, or study
of ours, to represent the Humanity of Christ our Lord, to our selves; and to
go ordering, and disposing of his great beauty, for which there would be need
of a large time, if we would pretend, to frame any thing, which should be like
it. Well may one represent it, to his own Imagination; and stand looking upon
it, for some time; and consider his shape, and complexion; and so go
perfecting it, by little and little; and recommending that Image over to his
Memory; for, who can take this power, from the mind? And thus much am I able
to do, by the strength of mine own Understanding; But in that other, whereof
we were speaking, there is no means for this; for we must behold that, just
then, when our Lord is pleased, to represent it to us; and just also, what he
will, and how he will; Nor is there, in this case, any means, either to add,
or diminish any thing, how much soever we may endeavor it, either toward the
seeing it, or forbearing to see it, when we will. For, This is very fit to be
known
whensoever we shall dispose our selves, to fix our sight fast, upon beholding
any particular thing, the sight of Christ our Lord is instantly lost. It
happened to me, two years, and a half, that very ordinarily, Christ our Lord was
pleased to vouchsafe me this Favor; and it is now, more then three, since he
has deprived me of the so continual use of this Vision, by affording me
another, of a higher kind; as perhaps I shall declare afterward. And I finding,
that he would be speaking to me; and I, the while, beholding that extreme
beauty of his, and observing the suauitie, with which he uttered those words,
by that most Lovely, and Divine mouth; and sometimes also, with rigor; whilst
I, in the mean time, had a kind of extreme desire, to see the color of those
eyes, and the size, and shape, which they had; to the end, that I might be able
to relate the same, to my Ghostly Father, I could never yet, obtain to see
them; and my diligence would not serve to procure it, but the Vision was rather
absolutely lost. And though This is a true Fortiter sed Suauiter.
it be very true, that sometimes, I see, he looks upon me, with a kind of
sweetness, and compassion; yet this spectacle is of so mighty a force, that the
Soul is not able to endure it, but remains in so high a Rapt, that, to the
end she may the better enjoy the whole, she wholly looses the sight of this most
beautiful object. So that, in fine, and in order to this end, it serves to
little purpose, either to will, or not to will, any thing here; and it grows
to be clear enough, that our Lord looks for nothing, in these cases, but for
humility, and confusion of our selves; and for a mind, to take that, which is
given; and to praise him, who is pleased to impart it. And it holds, in all
true Visions, without exception, that a Creature can do nothing at all, either
toward the more, or the less; and that all our diligences, put together, are
neither able to do any thing, nor undo; for, our Lord will have us see, very
clearly, that this is no work of ours, but only of his Divine Majesty; and
so, as that we are little moved, to be the prouder, by them; but they rather
make us more timorous, and more humble; whilst we find, that as our Lord
depriues us of a power, to see that, which we desire, so he can also, take
these Favors, yea and his grace, from us too, in such sort, as that we may be
utterly lost. We must therefore be, always, walking on, with fear, as long as
we shall live here, in this bannishment.

Our Lord has almost ever, represented himself to me, as after his This Saint
was most strangely familiarly, and supernaturally visited by our B Lord.
Resurrection. He has also done it sometimes, in the Sacred Host. Sometimes,
for strengthening me, when I chance to be in tribulation, he shows me his
Wounds. And sometimes also he vouchsafes that I should see him just so, as he
was upon the Cross; and sometimes, as in the Garden; yea and also, some
seldom times, with his Crown of Thorns, upon his Head; and at other times,
carrying his Cross. Yet this, as I was saying, uses to occurr, but in the time
of some necessity, either of mine own, or of others, but yet always, as a
Glorified Body. And I have suffered affronts, and vexations enough, in declaring
these things; and have grown subject thereby, to great persecutions, and
fears. They made themselves so very sure, that all this, was the Devil, that
there wanted not certain persons, who wished, that I might be Exorcifed, for
that purpose; yet this gave me very little trouble. But the thing, which I
felt, in good earnest, was either, when my Ghostly Fathers were afraid to
hear my Confessions, or else, when I came to know, that they were told tales.
But yet still, upon the whole matter, I know not how to make my self sorry,
for having seen these Celestial Visions; nor would I give any one of them
all, for all the greatnesses, and delights, of this whole world; for I ever
held these things, to be a very great Favor, of our Lord; and I esteem them,
to be an excessive kind of treasure; yea and our Lord himself has assured me
thereof, many times. Withal, I found my self grow heerby, to love his Divine
Majesty very much; and so, to him, would I ever be going to complain, of all
the troubles I had; and I always came out of Prayer, both with comfort, and
addition of strength. As for them, I would not presume, to contradict them; for
I saw, it made things worse, as seeming to them, that it was want of humility,
in me; but I communicated them still, to my Ghostly Father; and whenever he
found me afflicted, he was careful, that I should receive much comfort, from
him.

As my Visions grew-on to increase, one of them, who assisted me before, who
was a man, that used to Confess me sometimes, (when the Sub-Rectour was not in
the way, to hear me) began to tell me, how it was most certain, that it was
the Devil; and then, they grew to A strange Task, which was put, even by
holy men, upon this Saint.
command me (since there was no other means, to resist him) that I should
always be Crossing, and blessing my self, when I should chance to see any
Vision; and that I should use some exterior action, or sign of scorn, that
so he might be sure, I held him certainly, to be the Devil; and that, perhaps,
by this means, he would come no more; but that yet, I should be afraid of
nothing, because God would keep me still, and would also take that temptation
from me. Now, this was painful enough to me; for, considering that I could
not possibly believe, but that it was Almighty God, this proceeding was very
terrible for me to undergo. Nor was it also possible for me, as of my self,
to desire, that it might be taken from me; but yet, in fine, I performed all
those acts, which they commanded; and I besought our Blessed Lord, with much
instance, to free me from it; and I did it, with abundance of tears. I begged
it also, by the prayers of S. Peter, and S. Paul; in regard, that I having had
the first of all my Visions, upon the Day of their Festiuitie, our Lord himself
vouchsafed to tell me, that they would so take care of me, as that I might not
be deceived. And accordingly, I have often seen (and that very clearly, though
yet not by way of any Imaginary Vision, or represented person) these two
Glorious Saints, who are so much my good Patrons, standing by me, upon my left
hand; and that, after a very evident manner. But now, this order of those
others, to make signs of contempt, and scorn, whenever I had that Vision of
our Blessed Lord, did put me to a mighty kind of pain; for, when I saw him
present, before mine eyes, it was impossible for me to believe, that it was the
Devil, though they should have torn me into a thousand pieces, to make me do
it; and therefore, it was a strange kind of Penance, which they put upon me.
But now, to the end that I might not be so perpetually Crossing my self, I
took a Cross into my hands; and this, I did, in effect, always; but, indeed,
I used not those signs of scorn, so very often; for, that afflicted me, too
much. For I well remembered the affronts, and injuries, which the Jews had put
upon our Lord; and so I humbly besought him, to pardon me, if I did the like,
since I did it, by way of Obedience, to them, whom he had appointed, in his
own place; and I prayed him, not to lay it to my charge, since they were the
persons, whom himself had placed in his Church. He told me then, that I should
not be troubled at it; and, that I did well, in obeying them; and, that he
would bring them, at length, to understand the truth. But when they for bad me
to use Prayer, me thought our Lord was grown angry at it; yea and he bad me
tell them, that this was a very tyran^ie in them; and he gave me also ways,
how to make me know, that this was not a work of the Devil; and I will touch
upon some one of them, afterward.

When once I had the Cross in my hand, which was at the end of my Rosarie, he
took the same, into his; and when he gave it me again, it consisted of four
great Stones, incomparably more precious, then Diamonds; for, there is no such
thing, in this world, as that, which goes in the Supernatural way; and a
Diamond, is but an imperfect, and counterfeit kind of Stone, in comparison of
those others, whereof I speak. Now, these Stones had the Five Wounds of our
Blessed Lord, in them, after a most curious making; and he told me, that I
should see him, just so, from that time forward; and so I did; and now, I no
longer saw the wood, whereof the Cross was made, but only these precious
Stones; and yet so, as that no other saw them, but my self.

When The more she was discountenanced, even by good men, so much the more
highly was she favored by our Lord.
they began to command me, to make these trials, or proofs, and to use
resistance to those Favors, they grew on, to a higher increase; for, though I
might have a mind to divert my self, yet I never was out of Prayer; nay, me
thinks, I was in Prayer, even whilst I slept; for here, all was growing-on,
and growing-vp, in the love of our Blessed Lord; and the making also of a
pitiful kind of complaints, which I uttered to him; and my not being able to
endure it; nor was it in my power (though I had desired it; and least of all,
when I procured it) to give over, my thinking upon him. But yet still, I obeyed
them, as well, as I could; though yet I were able to do little, or nothing
therein. Now, our Lord did never free me, from obeying them; but, howsoever it
be true, that he commanded me, to do as they bad me, he yet gave me assurance
otherwise, yea and instructed me also, about what I should say to them; and the
same he does also, to this day; and he taught me so concluding reasons, of all
things, that they gave me all sufficient assurance. And now his Divine Majesty
has begun, very lately, to perform, what he had been pleased to promise me
before; as namely, to assure me yet better, that it was he; for there grew in
me, so great a love of Almighty God, that I knew not, how it could get into my
heart; and it was of a very Supernatural kind; nor was it I, who procured it. I
then found my self, even as it were, to dye, through a desire, wherein I was,
to see Almighty God; nor could I come to know how I might be able, to
seeke-out this kind of life, but by the way of death. There came upon me so
great impetuosities, or impulses of this love, that, howsoever they were not so
insupportable, not yet altogether of so high value, as those others were,
which I related before, yet knew I not, what to do with my self; for, nothing
could now give me satisfaction; nor was I able, even to contain my very self;
but really, it was with me, as if my Soul had been directly torn out of my
Body.

O most admirable kind of artifice of our Lord! what manner of choice, and
delicate industry, is that, which thou art pleased to use toward this
miserable Slave of thine? For, thou did hide thy self from me; and yet
withal, did even then, presle upon me, so very close, with thy love, by
giving me such a delightful, and sauourie kind of death, as that the Soul, by
her good will, would never be delivered, from the same. Whosoever has never
tried, and felt, these so great impetuosities of Divine Love, it is impossible,
that he should be able, to understand them; for, this is not a kind of
restlesnes of the breast, or heart, nor any of that kind of devotions, which
are wont sometimes, as it were, to stop the breath; in such sort, as that the
Soul is not able to contain her self; But, this is an inferior kind of
Prayer, to that; and heerin we are to procure, to remove such kind of
promptitudes, and vehemences, as those; and to endeavor, to retire them
sweetly, into themselves; so to appease, and calm the Soul. For, this A rare
Comparison.
is, in some sort, as when little Children cry, and sobb sometimes, so thick,
as that they are even ready to choke; and when the Nurse gives them drink,
that excess of their passion, and expression, begins to cease. And so in
this case also, is Reason to take the bridle into the hand; for perhaps, the
very natural condition, and constitution of the person himself, may be the
thing, which contributes somewhat, to this state of mind, at that time. And
therefore, let consideration be used, for fear least all should not be
perfect; and least a very great part thereof, fall out to have some what of the
Sensual, in it; and let this Child be stilled, by some Regalo, or other, of
Love, which may induce it, to exercise, and express the love it self, which he
also bears, by a moregentle, and sweet kind of way; and not thus, as it were,
by going to cuffes. But let them go retiring that very love of theirs, into
the more inward part of the Mind; and not suffer it to pass on, and out, so
far, like some Pott, Still, more and more excellent comparisons.
which does first, so boil up, and then, so boile-ouer, as that the broth, or
water, is quite spent, and lost, because no discretion was used, in the
quantity of wood, or coals, which was put under it. And thus, let them
procure, to appease, and slake the flame, which is fed by that vehement fire,
with sweet, and gentle tears, but not with such, as are forced, or painful,
as they are wont to be, which proceed from such a vehement kind of sense, as I
have formerly expressed; for, such are wont to be of very great inconvenience,
to the Party. My self used to have such as these, in my beginnings; and they
would ever leave my head, in such disorder, and my Spirit, in such a wearines,
and weakness, that I was not able, sometimes for a day, yea and sometimes for
more days then one, to return to the exercise of Prayer. So that An
excellent, and most necessary Advise.
we are to use great discretion, in those beginnings of ours, to the end, that
all may go on, with much sweetness; and that the Spirit may be taught the way
of operating, and exercising it self inwardly; and we must diligently procure,
that the exterior may be avoided, as much as we can. But now, these other
impetuosities, and impulses, are of a most different kind, and condition; for
here, it is not we, who bringin the wood; but; the fire seems to be made
already, to our hands; and instantly we are ready, to cast our selves into it,
that so we may be wholly consumed. The Soul does not here procure, to make her
self feel the wound, which grows to be made in her, by the absence of our
Lord; but they drive sometimes, a sharp Arrow into the very liueliest part of
the heart; in such sort, as that the Soul her self, is not able to tell
distinctly, either what she ails, or even what she desires; only she knows
very well, that she desires, and loves our Lord; and that the said Arrow seems
to be touched, and rubbed-ouer with some bitter herb, or other, to make her
even hate her self, through the love of this Lord, and to wish, with all her
heart, that she might loose her very life, for his sake.

It is A strange mixture of affections, but such as God knovves how to give.
not in our power to express, and, much less, to relate with advantage, the
manner, how God approaches, and ariues to such a Soul, as this; or the
excessive pain, that he gives; which makes her not to know, even what to do,
with her self. But yet, this very pain, is such a sauourie kind of thing
withal, that there is no delight in this whole world, which is able to give
her more gust. For, the Soul, as I was saying, would always be very glad, if
she might be ever dying, of this Disease. This pain, and glory together, did
carry my Understanding into such such distraction, and disorder, that I knew
not, how they both, could possibly consist together. O what a thing it is, to
see a Soul so wounded! for, it is just in such sort, as that one may very well
affirm it, to be wounded; and that, for a most excellent cause; for now she
sees very clearly that she her self did contribute no part of the reason, why
this Love should grow; but only it seems, that some little Spark fell down
upon her, from that immense Love of our Lord, which set her, so totally, on
fire. O how often do I remember that Verse of David, whenever I find my self
in this case? Quem admodum desider at ceruus ad fontes aquarum, ita desiderat
anima mea ad te, Deus meus; As the Heart desires to plunge himself, into the
Springs of water: so does my Soul desire thee, O my God. For really; me
thinks, that this is even literally fulfilled then, upon my self. Whenever
this comes not upon me, with great violence, me thinks, I can a little appease
my Soul; and at least, she is proving to find some remedy. For, as for the
performing of certain Pennances, she finds not almost, in that case, for what
they serve; for, they all are felt by her no more, nor puts it her to any more
pain, to shed her blood, then it would, if she were directly dead. But, in
that case, she is in earnest search, after the finding-out some new ways, or
means, how she may be able, to suffer much, for the love of our Lord; but, so
great is that other former This grief is after the rate of the love.
grief of mind, that I know not what Corporal torment can possibly be able to
drown it; for, the remedy thereof consists not, in such things, as these,
since these medecines, are of too inferior a kind, for the perfect cure of so
deeply-rooted a Disease. We receive, indeed, some little ease; and the
affliction passes away, to some small proportion, by this means, and by
begging also the remedy of her misery, at the hands of our Blessed Lord;
though yet, for her part, she knows not, how to find any at all, but only, in
death; for, by that means, she hopes, entirely to enjoy her Sovereign Good.
At other times, this pain falls upon a Soul, so feircely, that neither this,
nor any thing else, can be done; for it peirces the whole body, through, and
through; and neither can the hands, or feet be stirred; nay, if we chance to be
on foot, and may happen sometimes to sit down, we do it, like a kind of
transported Creatures; Nor can the Soul so much as breath, but only utter
certain profound, lamenting sighs, which yet are not great in show, because
she is not able to express them, though yet they be very great, in themselves.

It pleased our Blessed Lord, that I should have sometimes, this following
Vision. I saw an Angel very near me, toward my left side, and he appeared to
me, in a Corporeal form; though yet I am not wont to see any thing of that
kind, but very rarely. For, though Angels be represented often to me, it is
yet, without my seeing them, but only according to that other kind of Vision,
whereof I spoke before. But, in this Vision, our Lord was pleased, that I
should see this Angel, after this other manner. He was not great; but rather
little; yet withal, he was of very much beauty. His face was so inflamed,
that he appeared to be of those most Superior Angels, who seem to be, all in
a fire; and he well might be of them, whom we call Seraphins; but as for me,
they never tell me their names, or ranks: yet howsoever, I see thereby, that
there is so great a difference in Heaven, between one Angel, and another, as I
am no way able to express. I saw, that he had a long Dart of gold in his hand;
and at the end of the iron below, me thought, there was a little fire; and I
conceived, that he thrust it, some several times, through my very Heart, after
such a manner, as that it passed the very inwards, of my Bowels; and when he
drew it back, me thought, it carried away, as much, as it had touched within
me; and left all that, which remained, wholly inflamed with a great love of
Almighty God. The pain of it, was so excessive, that it forced me to utter
those groans; and the suauitie, which that extremity of pain gave, was also
so very excessive, that there was no desiring at all, to be ridd of it; nor can
the Soul then, receive any contentment at all, in less, then God Almighty
himself.

This is no Corporal, but a Spiritual pain; though yet the Body do not
fail, to participate some part thereof; yea and that, not a little. And it is
such a dear, delightful kind of intercourse, which passes here, between the
Soul, and Almighty God, as I beseech him of his infinite goodness, that he will
give some touch, or taste of it, to whosoever shall believe, that I lie. During
the time, when I was in this state, I went, up, and down that world, like an
odd kind of transported Fool; neither cared I, either to see any thing, or to
speak; but contented my self to consume, with burning-vp in my pain, which
was to be the greatest glory for me, that this whole world could affoard.

In this state was I, now, and then, when our Blessed Lord was pleased, that
these so very great Rapts, should come upon me, which I was not able sometimes
to resist, even when I was in presence of Secular people; and so they grew to
be public; and this gave me a very great deal of trouble. But, since the
time that I am grown to have these Rapts, I feel not this pain so much as
that other, whereof I spoke before; though yet I cannot call the Chapter to
mind. But that pain, is different in many kinds; and of more value also,
then this; Or rather, when this begins, whereof I am speaking in this place,
it seems, that our Lord does ravish, and run away, as it were, with the
Soul, and put her into Extasis, out of hand; and so, no too me is left, for
the letting her feel any pain, because instantly, the time of enjoying,
comes in. Let him be Blessed for ever, who vouchsafes to impart so high
Favors, to a person, who corresponds with him so ill, for so great benefits.

THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She returns to recount the course of her Life; and how our Lord gave
remedy, to many of her troubles, by bringing that holy man, Fray Pedro de
Alcantara, of the Order of the Glorious S. Francis, to the place, where she
was. And she declares the great temptations, and inward troubles, which
sometimes she endured.

But now, when I came to observe, the little, or nothing, which I was able to
effect, toward the enduring, of those so great impulses, or impetuosities,
whereof I was speaking, I grew to be in great fear of having them; for it was
past any power of mine, to understand, how Pain, and Joy, might be possibly
able, to consist together. That, Corporal pain, and Spiritual joy, could be
compatible, I know well, might be possible enough; but, that so excessive a
Spiritual pain, should be compatible with so excessive a Spiritual gust, did
put me half, as it were, out of my wits. And still I did not giue-ouer to
procure, to resist the ariuall thereof; though yet I had so little power that
way, that sometimes I grew weary, even of the endeavor. I defended my self,
by the Cross, and so procured to help my self, by that means, from him, who
gave us all defense, and succor, by the same Cross. I saw, that no Creature
understood me; and this I understood very clearly, though yet I durst not say
so, to any body, but my Ghostly Father; for, that, indeed, might have
authorized them to say truly, that I wanted humility.

But our Blessed Lord was pleased to recover me, from a great part of my
trouble; yea and even at that time, from it all, by bringing that blessed man,
Fray Pedro de Alcantara, thither, of whom I made mention before, when I spoke
somewhat of his great Penance. And now I also remember, that, amongst other
things, I have been informed, that, for twenty years together, he had worn,
upon his bare Body, a certain Garment of Lattin, in form of a Hair Cloth.
This man was the Author of certain little Treatises, concerning Prayer,
written in Spanish; and they are now in the hands of many. For he, as being a
person, who had accustomed himself much, to that holy exercise, wrote very
profitably thereof, for them, who live in the Observance of the First Rule of
the Blessed S. Francis, according to the full rigor of the same. When
therefore a certain Widow, of whom I spoke else where, (who was a great
Servant of Almighty God, and a particular friend of mine) came to know, that
so great a man was there, with me; and knew also the great necessities, wherein
I was, (as having been the witness of my afflictions) and had comforted me, in
several occasions, (for, her Faith was ever so great, that she could never, in
fine, believe, but that it was the Spirit of Almighty God, which all the rest,
would needs have to be the Devil) and considering also, that she was a person
of very good understanding, and of great secrecy withal, and one, to whom
our Lord vouchsafed to do great Favors in Prayer) his Divine Majesty was
pleased, to give her knowledge of those things, whereof they, who were Learned,
were wholly ignorant. My Ghostly Fathers then gave me leave, that I might ease
my self, in some things, with her; for she was capable, many ways, to
understand them; for sometimes, it had come to her turn, to enjoy even some of
those very Favors, which our Lord had also vouchsafed to affoard me,
together with certain aduertisments, which he had also given her, for the
good of her Soul. But now, as soon as Fray Pedro came to know of my design,
he did (without saying any thing to me) desire, and get leave of my
Provincial, that I might remain with her, in her House, for a matter of some
eight days; and so, both there, and in several Churches, I spoke with him,
diverse times, in that first occasion of my being there; for I communicated my
affairs with him also afterward, in sundry occasions, at which time I gave him
likewise account of my life, (though yet, but in a Summarie way) and of the
manner of my proceeding in Prayer; and this, with the greatest claritie, which
I could possibly use; for, this property I ever had, to treat with all
claritie, and truth, with them, to whom I imparted my Soul; yea and I still
desired, that even the first motions of my heart, might be made known, to them;
and as for such things, as might be subject any way, to suspicion, or doubt, I
still was wont to argue them, A very safe and wise way of proceeding.
against my self, with the strongest reasons, that I could bring. So that I
imparted my Soul to this Father, without any manner of duplicitie, or
disguise at all; and I found, that he understood me, almost even at the very
first, by experience; which was indeed, the only thing, whereof I had need, at
that time; for then, I could not give my self so well, to be understood, as now
I can; at least not so far, as to express it home. For, since that time, it
has pleased our Lord, to enable me to understand, and to declare to me, the
Favors, which his Divine Majesty does me; but formerly, it was necessary
enough for me, to find a person, who had passed through the same things, by
experience; if I would hope, that he should perfectly understand me, and
declare to me, what every thing was. Now, this Father gave me very great
light; for I could not, by any means, understand, what that could be, which
concerned those Visions, which were not Imaginary, or represented by the
Imagination; and me thought also, that I understood as little of those others,
which I saw with the only eyes of my Soul, for, as I have said before, those
only, which were visible, by our Corporeal eyes, seemed to me, to be indeed,
of importance; and of these, I had received none at all.

But now, this holy man, gave me light in all; and declared it to me; and
required me, not to be troubled any longer; but that I should bless, and
praise Almighty God; and that I was to be very sure, that these were true
effects of his Spirit; and that, although it were no Article of Faith, yet
nothing could be more certainly true, nor which I might more firmly believe.
And he comforted himself very much, with me; and showed me all courtesy, and
favor; and ever after, he had great care of me; and he communicated diverse of
his affairs, and businesses, with me. And finding, that I had the self-same
desires of those things, which he had already put in practice, (for indeed, in
as much as concerned desires, our Lord had given them to me, with great
resolution) and finding also, that I was so full of courage, in order to that
end, he took particular contentment, to treat with me. For, whenever our
Blessed Lord is pleased to bring one to this State, there is This is a most
certain truth.
no joy, or comfort, which can be equal to the meeting with some such other
person, as to whom our Lord has been pleased, to vouchsafe some beginning
thereof; for then perhaps, I had not much more, then a beginning, by what I may
be able to conceive; And I beseech our Blessed Lord, that I have it vet. But as
for him, he had extraordinary compassion of me, and told me that one of the
very greatest afflictions of this life, was that, which I had endured; Namely,
the opposition, and contradiction of good men; and that still, I would be a
little obnoxious, in the same kind; because I must ever be in need of help; and
that he feared, there was no body in that City, who would understand me.
But, that he would speak with my Ghostly Father, and to one also of those
others, who was wont to give me most discomfort; which was, that married
Cauallier, of whom I spoke before. For he, as being a person, who loved me,
perhaps, more then the rest, did continually make war upon me; and he was a
man of a tender, and holy Soul; and considering, how lately before, he had
found how wicked I was, he knew not, how to make himself sure, that all was
right.

But now, the holle man Fray Pedro, grew to talk with those two persons,
afforesayd; and he showed them causes, and reasons, why they should, both
quiet, and assure themselves, and disturb me no more. As for my Ghostly
Father, there was no very great need of much diligence; but as for the
Cauallier, it suffised not for him, to hear what Fray Pedro said; though yet,
it were a means, to keep him from frighting me, so very much, as he had done
before. But then, we resolved together, that I should write to Fray Pedro, of
all that, which might succeed to me afterward; and to recommend one another
much, to Almighty God; for, so great was his humility, as to make some little
account of the prayers of this miserable Creature; which gave me confusion
enough. But he left me, with extreme comfort, and gust, and directed me to
proceed securely on, with my Prayer; and to make no doubt at all, but that it
was of Almighty God; and that, whenever I might be in any doubt, for mine
own greater security, I should impart whatsoever occurred, to my Ghostly
Father; and that then, I should hold my self for safe. But yet, notwithstanding
all this counsel, I was not able, to be entirely secure; because our Lord was
pleased, to guide me still, by the way of fear; which sometimes made me apt to
doubt, that the Devil had a hand in the business, whenever they would needs
tell me, that it was so. And thus indeed, upon the whole matter, no Creature
was able to give me, either so much security, or so much fear, as to make me
yield more credit to either of them, then our Lord was pleased to infuse into
my Soul. So that, howsoever this holy man did help me, both to quiet, and
comfort, yet did I not so entirely believe him, as to remain without any
fear at all; especially, when our Lord came, sometimes, to leave me in
certain troubles of mind, which I shall instantly relate; yet howsoever, (as
I was saying,) my comfort was then much increased. But I could not then
satisfye my self, with giving humble thanks enough to Almighty God, and to that
Glorious Father of mine, S. Joseph, who (as I was apt to think) had brought
Fray Pedro thither; for he was Commissarie General of the Custodia of S.
Joseph; to whom, as also to our B. Lady, I used to recommend my self much.

Now it had happened to me formerly, sometimes, (yea and so it does also yet,
though not so often) to find my self in so excessive troubles, and afflictions
of Mind, together with feirce infirmities, afflictions, and torments of Body,
that I knew not, which way to turn my self. At other times, I have been
subject to corporal miseries, which were more greiuous; but yet, not finding
my self subject then, to the sense of such sorrows of mind, as now I have, I
passed with much alacrity, through them all. But whenever they, of both
kinds, came together, the misery of it was so great, as that it gave me
affliction enough. And as for those great Favors, which our Lord had been
pleased to do me, I then forgot them all; and there only remained but such a
kind of memory of them, as of a thing which I had dreamt; and this served but
to give me so much the more pain. For, the Understanding grows, in those
cases, to be all obscured, and dulled; in such sort, as that it made me enter
into a thousand suspicions, Here follows a whole world of sad temptations
and troubles.
and doubts, as if I had not formerly understood things well; and that perhaps,
I followed fancies, in stead of truths; and that it might have been misery
enough, for me, to be deceived my self, without seeking to abuse, and cosen so
many good men; and I seemed to be so very wicked, that me thought, all the
mischeifs, and Heresies, which had been raised, and brought lately into the
world, were but the fruits of my Sins. But, this is a false kind of
humility, which the Devil invented of purpose, for my disquiet, to try, if he
could bring my Soul to despair. And I know so well, by experience, that this
is a trick of the Devil, that now, when he finds, that I understand him, he
torments me not so often heerin, as he was wont. The certainty of this truth,
is clearly found, by the restlesnes, and disquiet, wherewith he begins; and
by the bussling, which he keeps in the Soul, all the while it lasts; and by
the obscurity, and affliction, which he brings to it; and by the drynes, and
indisposition to Prayer, which he leaves after it; and, in fine, because it
produces no good effect at all; for he seems even to stifle the Soul, and to
bind even the Body also up, that so it may be good for nothing; whereas, by
true Humility, though the Soul know it self to be wicked, and is in pain, to
consider what we are; and makes us hold our Sins to be as great, and as
greatly to be exaggerated, as has been said; and that they are felt indeed to
be such; yet comes not this kind of sense, with any tumultuous disorder; nor
does it disturb, and vex the Soul, nor obscure her, nor give drynes to her;
but rather it regales her, and behaues it self in a very contrary way; with
gentleness, with suauitie, and with Light. She The difference betvvee^ Divine,
and Diabolical grief of mind.
is troubled in some sort, on the one side, even for that she is comforted, to
see, how great Favor our Lord imparts to her, in letting her feel that pain;
and to consider, how well employed it is; and the sorrows, for whatsoever she
has done, against Almighty God; But yet, on the other side, she exalts, and
admires his mercy; she has light, wherewith to put her self to confusion; and
to praise his Divine Majesty, for vouchsafing to endure her so long. But in
that other kind of Humility, which the Devil brings, there is no light, for
any thing, which is good; but it seems, as if God were ready, to put all the
world, to fire, and sword. The Devil represents the Divine Justice to the
Soul; and though he permit her to believe, that God has mercy, (for the
Devil has no such power, as to destroy her Faith) yet has she even that, in
such sort, that it is no comfort to her, at all; but rather, when she beholds
God's great mercy, he makes it serve her, for so much the greater torment,
because she seems to have been obliged thereby, to have served Almighty God,
so much the more.

This is an invention of the Devil, and that of the most painful, and
subtle, and disguised, that I have ever found; and therefore I would wish your
Reverence (if perhaps, he may procure to tempt you hereafter, in this kind) to
look upon it, with a Light in your hand, and to procure to know him well, if
he leave you understanding enough, for doing it. And believe not here, that
Knowledge, and Learning will serve the turn; for though I be in want enough of
all that, yet now, when I am gotten out of his reach, I am grown to understand
very well, that all his discourse, is but foolerie; And that, which I
understand also, is, that sometimes our Blessed Lord is pleased to give way,
and permit it; and he allows him leave, to do this, as he did, that he might
try, and tempt Job; though, because I am so wicked, he permits not, that it be
done to me, with so much rigor.

It happened to me once, (and I remember very well, that it was upon the day,
before Corpus-Christi Eve, (a Festiuitie, to which I am devoted, though yet,
not so much, as were fit) and at that time, it lasted with me but one day, but
at other times, for a week, and a Forthnight, yea and sometimes, three weeks,
and peradventure more, and especially in the Holy Weeks, which were wont to
be my Regalo, in point of Prayer) that me thought, he The way and manner of a
great desolation.
catched-vp, and even carried-away my Understanding, at an instant, for
certain things sometimes, so very triuiall, and light, that, at other times, I
would but have laughed at him, for his pains; and then he makes her stoop, to
whatsoever he lists; and the Soul remains, as it were, nailed to the place,
without being Mistress of her self, or being able to think of any thing, but
those impertinent fooleries, which the rempration represents; and indeed, they
have no substance at all; nor do they either bind, or loose, but serve only to
choke the Soul, in such sort, as not to suffer her to subsist, in her self.
And really, it is true, that it has happened to me sometimes, to conceive, that
the Devils go playing with a Soul, as men would do with a Ball; and she,
the while, is without any means at all, to deliver her self, out of their
power. Nor can it be expressed, in what a deal of sufferance she is, by this
means. She walks in search of some defense; and Almighty God permits, that
she may find none. She only, and ever remains, with the Faculty, and Power of
her Free Will; though yet, not fair, and clear, but as if a man had eyes,
which were shut; or as if some person, who had gone very often, by any way,
and so, though it were night, and dark, yet, by the marks, which he had
formerly taken, knows where he may be in danger to stumble; because formerly
he had seen the same paths, by day, and so, he secures himself from that
danger. In like manner, does it occurr to the Soul, which now seems, but
merely by custom, not to offend Almighty God; for, I speak not here, of that
protection, which our Lord affords her, though yet, that be the thing, which
imports most. But, in the mean time, our Faith is deaded; or at least, laid
asleep; as the other virtues also are, in such times, as those; though yet,
they be not utterly lost; for, she well beleiues, even then, that Doctrine,
which the Church teaches; and she pronounces it also with her mouth; whereas
yet, on the other side, the Devil does so press, and dull this Faith, that she
seems to have but such a kind of knowledge of God, as men have a notice of
things, which are spoken of, in their hearing; but yet, from very far off.
Her Love also, is so very Lukewarm, that, if she chance to hear Almighty
God spoken of, she harkens in such a kind, as to believe indeed, that he is
that, which he is, because the Church declares it; but yet, she has utterly
lost all memory, of whatsoever she has experimented of him, in her self. For
her, to go and pray, and remain in Solitude, is but to increase her
affliction; for, the torment, which she feels in her self (and yet, without
knowing very well, why) is an unsupportable thing, in my opinion; and indeed,
it is a kind of picture, in little, or rather a pattern of Hell. And this is
most certainly so; as our Lord himself was pleased to give me to understand,
once, in a certain Vision. For here, the Soul does even burn her self up, of
her self, without her knowing, either by whom, or by what way, she is set on
fire; or yet, how to escape from thence; or finally, how to quench it; for, as
for seeking to help her self by reading, she will be able to profit by it, no
more, then if she could not read at all.

It happened to me, one day, to read the Life of a Saint, so to see, if I could
swallow the juice, and substance thereof; and thus to comfort my self, with the
consideration of what he had suffered; and so, I read half a dozen lines of it,
four or five times over; and yet, though all were written in mine own
Mother-Toung, I understood them less, in the end, then I did in the beginning;
and so I gave it over. This happened to me many times; but I more particularly
remember this one.

To apply ones-self to conversation, in such times as these, is yet worse; for,
the Devil fills us then, with such an untoward, and harsh kind of spirit of
anger, that it seems to me, that I could even eat folks up, since I can do
nothing else; yea and me thinks, I acquitt my self well, in that I forbear to
do it; and that God also shows him, who is in this case, a particular Favor,
in preserving him from doing, or saying somewhat, against his Neighbor,
whereby he might prejudice him, and offend Almighty God.

And now, as for going to my Ghostly Father, at such times; it is certain,
which I shall here relate; and it has happened to me, very often; That,
notwithstanding they were some great Saints, with whom I have dealt, and yet
deal; they uttered such harsh words, and chidd me after so sharp a manner,
that, when afterward, I would take occasion to repeat them, in their own
hearing, themselves would be even amazed, at themselves; and they told me, it
was no longer, in their power, to do otherwise. For, though they fully
resolved within themselves, not to do it; and at other times, that they had
not only compassion of me, but even a kind of scruple also, in themselves, to
treat me thus, when I was so full of affliction, both in Body, and Mind; and
though they had even resolved, to comfort me, with much compassion, and pity,
yet, in fine, they were not able, to do it. Not yet, that they gave me ill
language, in such sort, as to offend Almighty God, by it, but they would use
words, as full of disgust, as could possibly be heard, from Ghostly Fathers.
But belike, they intended to mortifye me; which though at other times, I could
pass over, or at least, endure, yet then, it grew all, to be a torment.

But yet sometimes, I came also to be of opinion, that even I had deceived
them; yea and my self would go to them, and advise them, in very great good
earnest, that they should take heed of me, least I deceived them. Not, but that
I knew well enough, that I would not do it, on set purpose, and upon design,
nor tell them, by any means, any lie; but the truth is, I was affrayd of all
things. There was one, who hearing of this temptation of mine, advised me, not
to be troubled at it; for, A pretty humor.
though I should have a mind to cosen him, yet he had wit enough, to defend
himself, from me.

That, which sometimes gave me great comfort, and, as it were, constantly, or,
at least, most ordinarily, was, that I used to have some kind of respit, after
I had Communicated; yea and sometimes, even in approaching to the Blessed
Sacrament, at the very instant, I should grow so very perfectly well, both in
Body, and Soul, that it did even amaze me. For, it seemed, to be no other
thing, then that all the darknesses of my Soul, were dispersed, and discharged
at an instant; and that, upon the approach of the Sun, I quickly came to
discern those fooleries, wherein I had found my self, all that while.

At other times, by the hearing of some one word, which our Lord was pleased to
say to me, and with only expressing himself thus; Be not afflicted; and be not
afraid, as formerly I have related, I remained most perfectly well; and
sometimes, by seeing some Vision, I became, as if I had never felt any
inconvenience. And in those cases, I would be entertaining, and regaling my
self, with Almighty God; and would, even kindly complain to him, against
himself, for permitting me to suffer so great torments; though yet I must
confess, that he had first meant, to make me very good amends; because, these
difficulties, did never use to ariue, but after a great abundance of Favors.
And me thinks, he ordaines things so, to the end, that the Soul may appear
like gold, which comes refined, and pure, out of the Crusible; and that so, she
may see our Lord, in her self; and then, do those troubles, which ariue, grow
to be accounted little, though they seem insupportable, at the time. And we
desire, that we may return again, to suffer, if our Lord may be served the
better, by it; yea and to admit also of more tribulations, and persecutions;
Provided always, that they may happen, without offense of our Lord. Nay, we
rather will rejoice in suffering for him; for, all will, in the end, bring more
profit; though yet, for my part, I could never bear them, as I ought, but
rather with abundance of imperfection. At other times, these troubles would
come upon me, in other kinds; and so, as that me thinks, it is absolutely a
kind of impossible thing, for me to think then, of any thing, which is good;
yea or so much, as to desire, to do any such thing; for that I have both a
Body, and a Soul, which is absolutely untoward, and good for nothing. But at
those times, I am not subject to those other temptations, and disquiets, but
only to a disgust in all things, though I know not, why; so that nothing can
give contentment to my Soul. And then I would be sometimes procuring, to
divert, and employ my self, upon the performing of some good works, in the
exterior way; and I would do so, even half, whether my self would, or no.
But, in fine, I am come, at length, to know, by such means as these, how very
little any Soul is worth, whenever the grace of Almighty God, is hidden
from her. And this kind of consideration, used not to put me to any trouble at
all; for, the beholding mine own baseness, after this manner, was wont to give
me a kind of satisfaction.

At other times, I find my self so, as that I am utterly unable, to frame any
distinct, or formed conceit of Almighty God; nor indeed of any good thing,
after a stayed manner. Nor am I able then, to put my self in Prayer, though I be
never so much alone; though yet, I feel still, that I know there is a God; and
I find also, that it is my Imagination, and my Understanding, which do me so
much hurt, in these occasions, and cafes; for, as for my Will, me thinks, it
stands right in me, and that it is disposed to all goodness. But this
Understanding of mine, is so entirely lost, that it seems to be no other
thing, then some furious, and madd kind of Fool, whom no body is able to
bind; nor am I so far Mistress thereof, as that I can make it quiet, for one
Credo.

Sometimes I fall on laughing; and yet then, do I know my misery, and stand
looking upon my Soul, and permit her to do, what she will; and yet, our Lord
be thanked, she never, by any means, applies her self to any thing, which is
ill, but only about things, which are indifferent, if there be any thing,
which may occurr, to be done, either here, or there, or any where else. But
thus, I come to know better, the incomparable mercy, which our Lord is pleased
to show me, upon his tying-vp this madd fool, when we are in perfect
contemplation. And here, I consider, what would become of me, if such persons
as hold me now for good, could discern me, to have these idlenesses, and
impertinencies, which I have described here.

But now, I have very great compassion of a Soul, to find her, in so ill
company, as this. I would feign see her rather, in liberty; and I express my
self, in this manner, to our Blessed Lord: When, O my God, shall I ariue, to
see my Soul, all conjoined, and united together, in celebrating thy praise;
that so, all the Powers thereof, may admire thee? Permit not heerafrer, O Lord,
that she wander, up, and down, by pieces; for now it seems no otherwise, then
as if every one of the same Powers, were running, up, and down, in a several
way. These things pass thus, very often; and I understand also very well, that
sometimes, the little corporal health I have, contributes much, to these
inconveniences. I also reflect much, by these occasions, upon the hurt, which
the Sin of our First Parent, has done us; for, me thinks, it is grown from
thence, that we are incapable to enjoy so great a good; and mine own sins,
are a great part of the cause; for certainly, if I had not committed so many,
I should have remained more entire, and free, toward the doing of good.

I was subject also, by times, to another very great inconvenience; for,
conceauing that I understood all the Books, that treat of Prayer, which I came
to read, and that already, our Blessed Lord had done me some such kind of
favor, as that I needed them not; for this reason, I did not read them, but
applied my self to read the Lives of Saints. And finding my self also very
short, in that, wherein they had so heroically served Almighty God, this
seemed to do me good, and give me strength; but yet, me thought, this was a
sign of little humility, for me to think, that I was already arrived, to hold
that degree of Prayer. And not being able, to quiet my self otherwise, I
continued much in pain, till certain learned men, and particularly, that
blessed Creature, Fray pedro de Alcantara, declared to me, that I was not, to
be troubled at that.

I am not ignorant, that in the serving of Almighty God, I have not yet so
much as begun; though yet, the way, which his Divine Majesty has held, in
doing me Favors, is the same, which he has used toward such, as are good;
whereas, for my part, I am no more, then a direct downeright mere imperfection,
unless it be, in my desires, to love him; for, in this, indeed, I see well,
that our Lord has done me Favor, that so I may perform some little thing,
for him. I confess, me thinks, I love him; but my actions, and the many
imperfections, which I discern therein, give me great discomfort.

At other times, my Soul falls into a kind of Foolerie; for so it is, when, me
thinks, I do neither good, nor ill, but follow on, after the walk of others
folks; and this, neither with pain, nor glory; nor with thought of life, or
death, nor gust, nor trouble; yea, me thinks, she feels nothing at all, but
rather seems to me, to walk on, like some little Ass, who seeds, and
sustaines himself, because they give him somewhat to eat; and he eats, almost
without thinking, what he is doing. For, the Soul, when she is in this state,
is not likely to be without feeding, upon some great Favors of Almighty God,
since she is not troubled, with living in so miserable a life, as this, but
passes through it, with patience, and equality of mind; but yet, these
motions, and effects, are not found by her, in such sort, as that the Soul is
made to understand her self by them.

It seems now also to me, to be, as when men sail at Sea, by the breath of a
sweet, and gentle Wind; for then, we ridd much way, though we scarce know how;
Whereas, in those other conditions, the effects are so very great, that the
Soul does almost instantly* discern her own improuement; for instantly do
her desires boil up, and the Soul can never satisfye her self; but they, to
whom Almighty God imparts such impetuosities of Love, do find such
operations, as these. This is like certain little Springs, which I have
observed to rise, and where the Sand never ceases to move upwards. And this
example, and comparison of Souls, which be arrived to this state, seems very
natural to me. For, Love will be ever boiling upward, and considering, and
devising, about what it may be able to do; and can, by no means, be contained
in it self; as it seems, the water, whereof I spoke, is not able to continue
in the earth, which still is casting it up, from thence. And just so, is it
very usual for the Soul, not to be at quiet, or in contentment with her self,
through the love she bears to Almighty God; but she is so bathed, and soaked,
and filled with it, that she wishes, that others would drink too, (since, for
her part, she cannot want) that so they might assist her, to sing the praises
of Almighty God.

O how often do I call to mind, that living Water, whereof our Lord spoke to
the Samaritan; as, indeed, I am very much devoted to that Gospel. And really,
it is most true, that I was so, even from my childhood, though I did not then,
understand this benefit, as now I do; but I often besought our Lord, to bestow
of this Water upon me; and always, I had the Image, or Figure of it, at hand,
with this Motto, or Word of hers, when he was so near the Well: Domine da mihi
hanc aquam; O Lord, bestovv this water upon me. It seems also to me, that as
a Fire which is very great, needs matter upon which to work, to the end that
it may not be extinguished: So also for those Souls, whereof I speak, it is
necessary that they be bringing wood, how dear soever it may cost them; to the
end, that this fire may not go out. For my part, I am so miserable a Creature,
that I would be content, if I had but strawes, to cast in.

And so it happens to me sometimes, yea and very often, that, one while I would
be laughing, and at other times, much afflicted. For, a certain interior
motion, and impulse, which I have, is ever inciting me, to serve God, in
somewhat; and (since I am not fit for greater matters) to do it, by gathering
Flowers, and making Posies, and applying them, in decent manner, to holy
Images, and Pictures; to sweep, or dresse-vp some Oratorie; or in doing such
other little, and poor things, as gave me confusion, to see, that they were no
greater. And so also, if I chanced to do any Penance, it was all, so very
little, and so poorly done, that unless our Lord should vouchsafe to accept
the Desire, for the Deed, I saw plainly, that I was good for nothing; and, in
a word, I did even laugh at my self.

But now, it gives no small trouble, to such Souls, as it pleases Almighty
God, through his goodness, to endue, with the fire of his Love, in great
abundance, if they be in want of corporal health, and strength, whereby they
may be able, to do somewhat for him; since this gives a very great pain. For,
in regard that we want strength, to carry still, more and more wood, to this
fire, (and such Souls do even dye, for the fear they have, least the Fire
should go out) it seems to me, that she does even consume, and burn her self
up, into ashes; or else, even dissolve her self into tears, and so breath her
self away, into nothing; and this is a strong kind of torment, though it leave
not, to be sauourie withal. Let such a Soul, as this, give great thanks to
Almighty God, if she have arrived to this A happy State.
state; and if our Lord have given her person, corporal strength, to do
penance; or if he have imparted Learning, and talents, and power, to Preach,
and hear Confessions, and win Souls to Almighty God. For she knows not,
nor understands not the great benefit, which is possessed by her, unless she
be grown so far, as to feel the affliction which it brings, to be ever
receiving much, at the hands of our Lord, and never to be able withal, to be
doing his Divine Majesty any Service. Let him be ever Blessed for all; and
let the Angels give him glory, Amen.

I know not, whether I do well, to be writing of so many little things; but
since your Reverence has commanded me yet again, not to esteem it any
trouble to enlarge my self, and that I must be sure to omit nothing, I
therefore go discoursing with clearnes, and with truth, of as much as I can
call to mind. And it is impossible, but that I should omit many things; for
else, it would grow to cost me much more time, whereof I have very little, as I
have said; and then, when all were done, it would perhaps, be of no benefit at
all.

THE ONE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She treats of certain exterior temptations, and representations of the
Devil; and of the torments, which he gave her. She speaks also of other
things, which are very fit, for the advice, and instruction of such persons,
as are vvalking on, in the way of Perfection.

AS I have spoken of sorne interior, and secret temptations, and disturbances,
which the Devil brought upon She makes along Discourse of the Diabolical
Temptations. and troubles, to which she was subject.
me: So now will I speak of some others, which, in effect, were public, and
wherein I could not be ignorant, but that it was he. I was once in a certain
Oratorie, and he appeared to me, on my left side, in an abominable kind of
figure; and in particular, I observed his mouth, because he was speaking to me;
and it was of a most ugly form. It seemed to me, that a huge flame, came out
of his body; and it was all, a very bright one, without any obscurity at
all. He told me, after a most hideous manner, that howsoever I had freed my
self once, out of his hands, he would yet find means enough, to fetch me back
again. I was in a mighty fear, but I blessed my self, as well as I could;
and so he vanished a way; but yet he instantly returned; and this happened to me,
two several times; Nor did I know, in the world, what to do; only I had
Holie-water, near at hand; and so I sprinkled it toward the part, where he
was; and he never returned to me, any more.

Another time, he was some five hours together, tormenting me, with very
terrible pain, and both exterior, and interior disquiet; in such sort, that
it was even past enduring. The women, who were then at hand, were astonished,
to see, what passed; but neither could they tell, what to do, nor I, how to
serve my self; of their help.

My custom is, whenever any corporal sickness, or pain, is very
intolerable, to make certain Acts within my self, the best I can, beserching
our Blessed Lord, that his Divine Majesty, will give me patience; and that, if
it shall redound to his Service, I may continue, to suffer so, even till the
very end of the world. And therefore now, when I found my self put to suffer,
with so much rigor, I applied my self to get help, by making some such acts,
as those, and diverse good purposes also; that so, I might bear the burden,
the better. And our Lord was pleased then, that I should clearly understand it,
to be the Devil; for I saw a certain little abominable Negro, or Black-More,
hard by me, gnashing his teeth, even like a despairing wretch; but yet, in
fine, he lost, by what he hoped to gain; for, as soon as I saw him, I fell a
laughing, and had no fear of him, at all; but there were some persons by, who
knew not, what to do, in this case, nor how to procure any remedy, for such
pain, as they saw me endure; the blows being so great, which he made me give
my self, both upon my Arms, and my Head, and my whole Body; and I, not having
any power at all, to resist him; yea and (which was worse, then this) I was
subject to so great an inward kind of restlesnes, and disquiet, as I could, by
no means, appease; no nor yet durst I, so much as call for Holie-water, for
fear of giving them apprehension, who were there, and so, to make them know,
what the matter was.

For my part, I have found, by much experience, that there is not any thing,
from which, the Devils do so certainly fly, (and so, as to return no more) as
from The excellency of Holy Water.
Holie-Water. They fly also from the Cross; but, in that case, they will
presently, sometimes, return again. So that certainly, the virtue of
Holie-water, is great; and for my part, my Soul finds a particular, and
evident kind of comfort, when I take it; and really, and usually, I feel such
an ease, and pleasure in it, as I am not well able to express; for, it is an
interior delight, which comforts my whole Soul; and this is no mere
imagination, or fancy, nor a thing, which has happened to me only once, but
very often; and when I observe it, with most attention, me thinks, it is as if
a body, who were much troubled with heat, and thirst, should drink a draught
of very cold water, which should refresh him, even to his hearts desire. And
heervpon, I also consider, that all those things, which be ordained by the
Church, are of great importance, and moment; and it is matter even of much
Regalo to me, that those words, which the A great, and just consolation.
Church uses, and says, should have the power, to make Holiewater, become of
so very different a condition, from such other, as is not hallowed by the
Church. But, in the mean time, when my torment would not cease, I told them
so, who were present, that so they might not laugh at me; and calling for
Holie-water, they brought me some, and sprinkled me with it; but it did me no
good. Upon that, I sprinkled some, toward the place, where the ill Spirit was;
and then he went instantly away; and I grew as instantly well, as if they had
stroaked my hurt off from me, with their hands; save that I found my self as
weary, as if I had been cudgelled extremely. But now, it did me a very great
deal of good, to find, that when our Lord gives the Devil leave, he is able to
do such a deal of mischief, to a Creature, both in Body, and Soul, even
when they are not his, or absolutely, in his power; for then, what would he be
able to do, when they should be wholly left, to his disposing? This gave me
also, a very great desire, to free my self from so ill Company, as that, of
the Devil, is.

At another time, and that was lately, the selfsame thing happened to me, though
yet, it lasted not long; but I was then alone; and then, I also called for
Holie-Water; and two Religious Women, (who were very well worth the beleiuing,
and would, by no means, be induced, to tell an untruth,) came-in thither,
after the Devil was departed from thence, and declared, that they felt a
filthy stink, as of brimstone. For my part, I smelt it not; but they say, it
continued so long, that others might also perceive it.

Another time, I was in the Quire; and I came into a very great depth of
Recollection; and I went away, from thence, for fear, least somewhat might be
observed. But the Religious in the Quire, who were near the place where I was,
heard a noise of very great blows, which were given; and, for my part, I also
heard those Spirits talk together, close to me, as if they had been agreeing
about some business of theirs, though I knew not, what, in particular, it was;
for I found my self in such depth of Prayer, that I understood them not, in
express manner; neither yet, had I any fear of them, at all.

But these things did ordinarily not ariue, but when some Soul, or other, did
receive benefit, upon my persuasion, and advise. And it is certain, that a
thing happened to me once, which I shall now relate; and there are many
witnesses of it; and, in particular, my Ghostly Father, to whom I Confess my
self now; for he saw it in a certain Letter, without my telling him, who it
was, that wrote it; though yet, he chanced to know it, otherwise. But the thing
was this. There came once a certain person to me, who had been in Mortal
Sin, about some two years, and a balf; and he had committed one, which was
of the most abominable, that ever I had heard of, in my whole life; and, during
all that time, he neither Confessed, nor reformed himself, and yet he said
Mass, all the while. And though he then, Confessed his other Sins, yet
concerning that one, he was wont to ask himself, how it could be possible,
that ever he should Confess so foul a thing; and yet he had a desire, to free
himself from it, but knew not, in fine, how to effect it. For my part, I had
great compassion of the man; and much grief, to see Almighty God so offended;
and I promised him, to beseech our Lord, to give him remedy; and that I would
also entreat diverse others, who were much more likely to prevail, then my
self, to become suitors to his Divine Majesty, for him; and accordingly, I
wrote to a certain person, about it, this man letting me know, that he could
convey my letter. And it is certain, that heervpon, he instantly Confessed his
Sins; and Almighty God was pleased (at the instance of those many other
holy persons, to whom the business had been recommended) to extend his mercy,
to this Soul; and my self also, as miserable as I am, did not fail, to
solicit it, the best I could. But the man wrote a Letter to me, declaring,
that he was reformed, so far, already, as that some good time had incurred,
wherein he had returned no more, to that Sin; but yet, that the torment was
so great, by the temptation, which solicited him that way, that he accounted
himself, to be almost, as it were, in a kind of Hell; so extremely was he put
to suffer by it; and therefore, that I must help him still, with Almighty God.
Upon this, I recommended him again to my Sisters, the Religious of our
Monastery; by means of whose prayers, it seems, our Lord was pleased, to do
me this Favor; for, they took the matter, very much to heart. This man, was a
person, of whom, no one could guess, who it was; and I humbly besought the
Divine Majesty, to appease those torments, and temptations, to which he was
subject; and that those Devils might be suffered to torment me, in his place;
provided always, that I might not offend our Blessed Lord, in any thing, by
it. And it is very certainly true, that shortly after this, I endured most
greiuous torments, for the space of a month. And these two particulars, which
I have now related, did happen then. But our Lord, in the mean time, was
pleased, that they should leave, to afflict that person any more; for so, men
sent me word, because I had already signified to them, what had occurred to me,
during that month. And as for him, his Soul got strength daily; and he grew
to be absolutely free; nor could he satisfye himself, with giving thanks, not
only to our Blessed Lord, but even also to me, as if I had done somewhat
therein. But the truth is, that the opinion, which he had, that our Lord did
sometimes show me Favors, was of benefit to him; for he said, that, whenever
he found himself, to be much assaulted, and pressed, he used to read my
Letters, and that presently thereupon, he should find himself ridd of the
temptation. He grew to be much amazed, to understand, of what I had suffered;
and how also, himself came to be free; yea and even I, came also to wonder at
it; and certainly, I would have suffered many years, for the advantage, and
deliverance of a Soul. Let our Lord be praised for all; for, the prayers of
such, as serve him well, can do much; as, I believe, my Sisters do, of this
House; but yet, because I had been earnest in procuring those prayers, the
Devils would be more enraged against me, then against others; and our Lord also
permitted that, for my Sins.

About this time also, I once thought, that the Devils would even have
strangled me; and it was, by night. But as soon as I had caused Holie-water to
be cast upon me, I saw a multitude of them run away, as if they had been
about to break their necks, from some high rock. And it is so frequent, and
familiar with me, to be tormented by these cursed wretches, and the fear,
which now I have of them, is grown to be so very little, (by seeing, that they
are not so much as able to stir, unless our Blessed Lord give them leave,)
that although it might be of comfort to my self, yet I should not fail to
weary your Reverence, if I related them. But even that, which is said already,
may serve to show, that any true Servants of Almighty God, may need to
trouble themselves little, at these idle frights, and Bugg-beares, which the
Devils are wont to expose, that so, they may make us fear them; and, in fine,
let the world be sure, that every time, when we make them see, that we despise
them, they will remain with so much the less strength, after it; and the
Soul, as being a greater Princess, then she was before, will remain with so
much more power, and profit; as I will not stand here, to relate, for fear of
too much length.

But now I will only declare, what happened to me once, upon an All-Soules Day,
at night; for, being, at that time, in the Oratorie, and having recited Matins,
as also those so very devout Prayers, which are at the end thereof, according
to the Breuiarie, the Devil put himself upon the Book, to the end, that I
might not finish the Prayer; but I blessed my self, with making the Sign of
the Holy Cross, and so he went presently away; but I beginning again, he
also returned; and I think it was no less, that the like happened, then three
times; and till I cast Holie-Water at him, I could not make an end of the
business. But then, I plainly saw, that some Souls went out of Purgatory, at
the instant, who, belike, wanted very little of their deliverance; and perhaps,
the Devil meant to divert it. It is seldom, that I have seen the Devil, in
any exact, and particular Form, or Figure; but many times, without Form, as
I did the Vision; for, a Body sees very clearly, that he is there, as I have
declared already; and I will now relate this also, because it amazes me very
much.

Being one day, in a certain Monastery, and in the Quire, and upon the
Festiuitie of the Blessed Trinity, I chanced to be in Rapt; and I saw a great
contention, and strife, between Angels, and Devils, yet not knowing, what
that Vision might mean. But about some fifteen days before, it was heard,
that a certain great disagreement had happened, between some persons, who were
of Prayer, and many others also, who were not so; and there came a great deal
of harm to the place, where this occurred; for, the strife continued long; and
it bred a very great deal of disquiet.

Another time, I saw a multitude of them, all round about me; but then, it
seemed to me, that I was environed with a great kind of Light, which permitted
them not to approach. And I understood thereby, that our Lord kept them off,
from coming near me, in any such sort, as to make me offend his Divine
Majesty; and by that, which I had found sometimes in my self, I conceived that
it was a true Vision. The matter is, that I now understand so very well, how
little power they have, whenever I go not against God, that, in effect, I
do not fear them at all; for, their strength is directly nothing, unless
they find the Souls, they set upon, to be cowardly, and yiedling to them; but
then indeed, they show their power.

In some of those former Temptations, me thought, they employed themselves,
now, and then, upon awaking, and reviving in me, the memory of all the
frailties, and vanities, of my former time; in such sort, as that I had good
cause, to recommend my self much, to Almighty God; but this, put me to very
much pain, by making it seem to me, that now, it was all, of the Devil, since
those thoughts of mine, returned; till such time, as my Ghostly Father put me
in quiet. For really, it seemed to me, that even the first motions of ill
thoughts, were not so much as to approach any such person, as had received so
great Favors of our B. Lord.

At other times, it tormented me much, yea and even it torments me still, to
see, that men should hold me, in so high account; and especially, that it
should be done, by eminent persons; and that they shoud speak so much good of
me. And in this, I have suffered, and still suffer much; but I quickly cast my
thoughts, upon the Life of Christ our Lord, and his Saints; and, me thinks, I
walk in a way, which is very contrary, to that of theirs; for they aspired to
nothing, but to be subject to injuries, and contempt. And this makes me walk
with such fear, as that I even sarce dare hold up my head; and would be glad,
to get my self out of sight; which yet, I never desire, when I find my self
subject to persecutions; for then, my Soul carries her self like a great
Lady, whatsoever the Body may feel. I know not, how these things can stand;
but yet they pass in such sort, that the Soul seems then, to be as in her
Kingdom; and that she treads, and tramples all things, under her feet. This
occurred to me several times, and the same continued long; and I thought, it
was virtue, and humility, but now I see plainly enough, that it was a
temptation; and a Dominican Father, a learned man, declared it to me, very
well. When I conceived, that these Favors, which our B. Lord was pleased to
do me, would grow to be publicly known, it was of so excessive a torment to
me, that it extremely disquieted my Soul; and it came, at length, to that
pass, that, whilst I was considering the same, I could more willingly have
been contented, to be buried quick, then that any such thing should ariue. And
so, when I came to have those so great Recollections, and Rapts, as that it was
not possible for me, to resist them in public, Iremained so confounded with
shame afterward, that I would have been glad, not to appear, where any
Creature, who knew me, might see me. And being once extremely afflicted, upon
this account, I was asked by our Blessed Lord, what it was, whereof I was so
much afraid. For, A question worthy of him that asked it.
says he, this cannot grow, but from one of these two occasions; Namely, that
either it is, because they will murmr against you; Orels, for that they will
praise, and magnifye me. Meaning, that they, who should believe it, would
praise him; and they, who should not believe it, would condemn me; though yet,
without any fault at all, of mine. But he said, that both those things, would
prove to be of advantage to me; and that therefore I must no longer, be
troubled at it. This quieted me very much then; and it also comforts me now,
whenever I call it to mind.

This temptation came on so far, that it gave me an inclination, to quitt
this place, and to carry my fortunes with me, to another Monastery, which was
very much more enclosed, and shut up, then that, wherein I was, for the
present. And I liked it also the rather, for that I had heard it extremely
praised, many ways; and besides, it was a House, of mine own Order; yea and
also very far off, from my former aboade. And it was a thing, which would
have comforted me much, to remain, where I were utterly unknown; but my
Ghostly Father, would never permit it.

These fears did much deprive me of Liberty of Spirit; but I came to
understand afterward, that it was no good Humility, since it gave me such a
deal of disquiet. And our Lord, upon that occasion, taught me this truth,
that, if, This is a very great Truth; but the Accent must be put, upon the
word Indeed.
indeed, I were resolved, and assured, that nothing at all of mine, were good,
but that it were all, of God, it would follow, that just so, as I would not be
sorry, to hear other persons praised, but rather would be greatly comforted,
and ioyed, that our Lord did show himself in them: So neither would I be
sorry, that his works might be also seen, in me.

I fell also, upon another extreme; and it was, to beg of Almighty God (yea,
and I made particular Prayer to this purpose) that, when by accide^t, any
person should enter into good opinion of me, his Divine Majesty would be
pleased, to declare my Sins to him; to the end, that the man might see, how
absolutely without any merit of mine, it pleased our B. Lord to do me Favors.
And this, do I ever much desire, though my Ghostly Father have commanded me,
And though she should have continued to ask it, I dare say our Lord would not
have granted it.
not to ask it. But hitherto, till very lately, if I chanced to see any
person, who thought extraordinarily well of me, I took the best means I could
find, by some devise, or other, to tell him my sins; and thus I conceived my
self, to find ease. But yet heerby, they have put me into a kind of scruple,
that this proceeded not in me, from humility; and that it rather grew from a
temptation; in regard, that many came to me, and I seemed, to have cosened
them all. But though it be very true that they are indeed deceived, if they
thought, that there was any goodness in me, yet had I no desire at all, to
deceive them; nor did I ever pretend any such thing; but that our Blessed Lord
might have perhaps permitted it. And so, for the self-same reason. I would
never have imparted any private accident of mine, which was no Sin, even to
my very Ghostly Fathers themselves, unless I had found it, to be wholly
necessary; for I should otherwise, have had much scruple to do it.

But now I see very well, that all these little A must certain truth.
fears, and troubles, and superfluities of ill-grounded Humilities, do savor
very sufficiently, of imperfection, and proceed from the immortification of the
Soul. For, to a Soul, which is well resigned, into the hands of Almighty
God, it does not import her a iott more, that they should speak well of her,
then ill; if once she understand well, and home, (forasmuch as God will give
her that grace) that she has nothing at all, of her self; but let her confide
in him, who imparts it, and she shall know, in time, why he discouers it. And,
in the mean while, let her prepare her self, for persecution; for, it will
most certainly ariue, in such an Age as this, upon any such person, as to
whom our Lord will have it known, that he does her such Favors as these.
For, upon any such Soul as this, a thousand watchful eyes will be cast;
whereas there will not be one, upon a whole thousand of such other Souls, as
be of a contrary making. And there is really much cause to fear this; and it
ought to have been my fear, that the other was A wise, and solid Truth.
not Humility, but Pusillanimitie. For, a Soul, which Almighty God permits
to be exposed thus, to the sight of the world, may expect to be a Martyr of the
same world; for, if she will not dye to it, she shall dye, by it.

For my part, I really see nothing, in this thing, called World, which seems
good to me, except only, that it gives not way, that worthy, and good people,
should be permitted to do ill, without being murmured at, for their labor;
and by this means, they grow to perfect themselves. But there is need of more
fortitude, and courage, for a man, who is yet imperfect, to walke-on toward a
way of perfection, then even to be instantly, made a Martyr. For, Perfection is
not so quickly gotten, unless it be by some such person, as to whom our
Blessed Lord may vouchsafe that Favor, by way of a particular privilege. But
the world discerning once, that a man begins to aspire to do well, will
needs account him perfect, at an instant; and then will it presently see any
fault in him, if he have any, though it be a thousand leagues off. Yea and
perhaps, that, which they hold to be a fault in him, shall indeed, be a virtue;
and the other, who condemns him, and is wont, peradventure, to do the
self-same thing, by an impulse of vice, will judge ill, of it, in another. So
that, according to his dictamen, that other man, should neither eat, nor
sleep, nor even, as it were, draw his breath. And the more also they esteem
such persons, the more apt are they to forget, that, how perfect soever their
Souls be, and how absolutely soever they tread the whole world under their
feet, yet still, they are in the Body, and live upon Earth, and are subject to
the miseries of their condition. And therefore still I say, that there is need
of a great deal of courage; because, such men have a mind, that the poor
Soul, which has not yet begun to walk, should already fly. She has not
yet overcome, and mortifyed her passions; and yet these men will needs expect,
that she should remain as entire, and firm, as they have read of Saints
themselves, after they were confirmed in grace. The particulars, which occurr
in this kind, are to give a man cause to wonder; and withal, even to afflict
us to the heart, to see so many Souls turn back again, which know not (poor
Creatures, as they are) what shift to make for themselves; and so, do I
believe, that mine had also done, if our Lord, with such an abundance of
mercy, had not dispatched all that business, alone. For, till he, out of his
own goodness, did so, your Reverence will already have seen, that, on my part,
there was nothing at all, but only rising, and falling, over and over. I would
feign express this point, home; for I believe, that many Souls, grow to be
abused, and deceived, because they have a mind to fly, before Almighty God
give them wings.

I conceive, that I have formerly used this Comparison; but it comes also very
well in, here; for I find, that many Souls, are much afflicted, upon this
occasion. As namely, when they begin, with great desires, and resolutions, to
go forward in the way of virtue (and some do even giue-ouer all, for love
thereof, forasmuch as concerns exterior things) and yet, see more
aduantagious effects, and fruits of such virtues, as our Lord has infused into
the Souls of others, who are more proficient, then into theirs; and that they
cannot perform certain things, which are set down in those Books, which are
written of Prayer, and Contemplation, which men are advised to use, so to make
themselves ascend up, the better, and the higher, to this dignity. And, in
fine, when they cannot instantly, obtain these things, they discomfort, and
afflict themselves. As, for example, not to care a straw, if any body should
speak ill of us; but rather to take more contentment in it, then when they
praise us; To have very little esteem of our honor; To be perfectly untied
from the care of kindred, and friends; and not to desire, to converse with
them, but rather to be weary of their company, unless they be persons of
Prayer; And many other things of this kind, which must, in my opinion, come
from the gift of Almighty God, because I hold them for Supernatural
blessings, and very contrary to our own Natural inclination. And therefore,
let them not be afflicted, but put their trust in our Lord; that so, what now
they have in desire, his Divine Majesty may be pleased, to give them
afterward, with effect, and fruit, by means of Prayer, and by their doing, on
their part, what they can. For, it is a most necessary thing, for this weak,
and poor Nature of ours, to place a great confidence in our B. Lord; and not
to put our selves out of heart, nor to think, but that, if we will proceed with
courage, we shall be victorious; and, because I have much experience heerof, I
will speak a word or two, by way of advise, to your Reverence. For, you must
not think (though it may appear, as if it were true) that any virtue is
already gained, unless it be first compared, and experimented, by the Vice,
which is contrary to it. And we must always remain doubtful, and
suspicious, and not cast off our cares, as long as we are the owners of our
lives. For, our weaknesses stick close, and fast to us; unless (as I was
saying before) the whole benefit be imparted to us, by Divine grace; to the
end, that we may know, what all the things of this life, are worth; and that
there is never any such thing, as can be termed all, but in company of many
dangers.

It seemed to me, some few years ago, that not only I was not inordinatly
tied, to the love of any of my kindred, but rather that I was weary of them;
and it is really very true, that there were times, when I would not so much as
endure their conversation. But yet afterward, there occurred a certain business
of much importance, which obliged me to remain, with a certain Sister of
mine, whom formerly I had loved, with very extraordinary affection. And now,
being come again, to converse with her, we suited not so very well, with one
another. For, though she were better, then I, yet being of a different
condition from mine, in regard that she was married, the conversation was not
always that, which I could have wished; and therefore, I liked to be alone, as
much as conveniently I might. But yet, after a while, I found, that her
troubles, and affairs, brought me more resentment, and care, by much, then
such others did, as belonged to any Christian neighbor of mine, at large; and
this gave me some little disgust, against my self; for, so, in fine, I came to
know, that I was not so very free, and untied, as I had formerly conceived; and
that moreover, I was to have avoided the occasion, to the end, that so, this
virtue, which our Lord had begun to give me, might have gotten strength; and
I have procured, through his Favor, to proceed in this manner, ever since.

When our Lord begins to impart a virtue to a Soul, it is to be held in
great account; and by no means, are we to expose it, to the danger of being
lost. So is it in those things, which concern reputation, and honor; and so
also, in others. And your Reverence may well believe, that not all they, and
we, who esteem our selves, to be absolutely untied from all things, are yet so,
indeed; and we have need enough, not to be slack, or negligent heerin. For,
whatsoever person there be, who feels any care at all, of any one point of
Honor, in himself, let him believe me, if he mean to profit in Spirit, that
there is ever a certain tie, at the end of it; and it is, by such a kind of
chain, as that there is no File in the world, but God, and Prayer, and very
much endeavor, on our part, which will possibly be able, to divide it; and it
seems to be so fast a knot, that I am amazed, to see the mischief, which it
brings.

Sometimes I see certain persons, who seem to be even Saints, by their works;
for, they do so very many, and so great ones, that the world does even admire
them, and exclame, after this manner; Dear God! and how comes it to pass,
that such a Soul as that, does still inhabit the Earth? Is he not already, at
the very top of Perfection? What is this? And what can detain such a man,
from being a direct, and downright Saint, who does so great things for God?
But my answer to this question, is, That this man, has yet, perhaps, some
little consideration, and care, of preserving some point of Honor, for
himself; yea, and the worst of this business, is, that he will, by no means,
believe, that, in very deed, there is any such thing. And that happens,
because sometimes, the Devil makes him conceive, that he is even obliged, to
have a great care of it. Well; yet let them harken to me, I beseech them; and
Exercise of Prayer, and love of Honor, agree not well together.
even for the love of our Blessed Lord, I beg of them, that they will believe
this poor little miserable Ant, whom our Lord commands to speak; That,
unless they free themselves from this Caterpiller, though perhaps it may not
destroy the whole Tree, because some other virtues do still, peradventure,
remain, yet even all those very virtues, will be wormeeaten; nor, will it
ever be a beautiful Tree; nor will it either thrive, or prosper, in it self;
no, nor yet so much as suffer such others to thrive, and prosper, as shall grow
near it; for, the fruit of Good-Example, which it can give, will not be
wholesome, or sound; nor last long. And I say, and say again, that, when there
is any point of Honor to be maintained, how little soever that may be, it is
like the Stopp of the Organ, whereof, when the Point, or Compass, is in fault,
the whole Music is also then, in disorder. It is a vice, which is always
procuring hurt enough, to the Soul; but in the way of Prayer, it is the very
pestilence it self.

For then, we are going to procure to join our selves, by way of Union, with
Almighty God; and we say, that we dispose our selves, to observe, and follow
the Counsels of Christ our Lord, whom we find to be all laden with injuries,
and false testimonies, against him; and yet we must, forsooth, be careful, to
hold-vp our own reputation, and honor, very right, and straight. But it is
not possible, ever to ariue, at that iourneys end, without going by the same
way, which he went. And our Blessed Lord comes approaching then, to a Soul,
when we endeavor to concur with him, and procure to depart, and descend, in
many things, from that, which is even our right.

But now some perhaps will say, I know not wherein that should be; and I have
nothing of this kind, to offer up, for his sake. Yet, for my part, I am apt to
believe, that, whosoever has indeed so generous a resolution, as this, his
Divine Majesty, will ordain him, so many different ways, for the gayning of
this virtue, that perhaps, he would not wish, to have had so many. Let us all
therefore, put our hands to work; for, I am able to tell you, that the
Nothings, and poor Littlenesses, or some of them, at least, (which are those
miserable Strawes, whereof I have spoken, and which I cast into the fire; for,
I am fit for nothing else) are all admitted, and accepted, by our Blessed Lord;
and let him be praised for ever.

Amongst the rest of my imperfections, I was subject to this, for one. I had
very little knowledge of the Breuiarie, and of all that, which was to be
performed in the Quire; and this happened, by my being so very careless, and
given to vanities; and the while, I saw other Nouices, who were able to have
instructed me. Now, I forbore to ask them any questions, for fear least they
should know of my ignorance. But shortly after, a good example came before me
(for, this mercy, is usually vouchsafed, by Almighty God) and so, when he had
a little opened mine eyes, I would then be content to ask, whatsoever I knew
not most perfectly well, though for the most part, I knew it; and thus, both I
lost, forsooth, no honor, by the bargain, and afterward, it seemed to me,
that our Lord was pleased, to give me a better memory. I also knew, the
Singing part, very ill; and I was troubled, if I did not learn, what I was
bidden; yet, not this, because I failed, in what I should have performed, as in
the presence of our Lord (for, that had been virtue in me) but in regard, that
there were so many, who heard me; and thus, I was so disordered, upon the mere
point of looking, forsooth, to mine honor, that really, I acquitted my self
much worse, then I knew how to have done, before. But afterward, I thought it
fitter, to tell them plainly, that I could not do that well, which, indeed, I
could not do. At the first, I had some difficulty also, even in this; but
afterward, I took contentment in doing it. And really, it is very true, that,
when once a body begins not to care, that she be known not to know a thing,
she shall perform it much better. And when this base, ugly Honor, is once
put out of the way (this Honor, I mean, which every body places, where, and
in what he will) by these Nothings, which are really Nothing (and I am sure, I
am Nothing enough, whom such a Babble, could put to so much pain) I was able
to do those things, better; and thus, by performing such poor acts, and such
miserable little things, as these, his Divine Majesty vouchsafes to give them
strength, and value, as having been performed, for his sake. He also helps us
on, toward greater things; and so did it happen to me, in matters concerning
Humility, by my seeing, that they all profited, except my self; for, I was
never good, for any thing. But only, when they went from the Quire, I would
stay to fold-vp their Mantles; for it seemed no less to me, then that they
were, as so many Angels themselves, who sung the praises of Almighty God; and
still I used to do it, till they came to hear of it; but then, I was not a
little ashamed. For, my virtue did not ariue so far, as to desire, that they
might know of it; not yet, because I was humble, but only, that they might not
laugh at me, for my labor, and for my being so absolutely good for nothing.

O my dear Lord; how mere a scorn, and shame is it, to see so great
wickedness, as mine; and find me reckon-vp such poor, and paltrie little
grains of sand, as these, which yet also, I raised not out of the earth, for
thy honor, and service, but all was wrapped up, in a thousand miseries; for, the
water of thy Grace, had not yet sprung, and boyled-vp in me, to make them
rise. O thou, my dear Creator, that I had something of worth, and substance,
which I might recount, and present to thee, amongst so many sins of mine;
since I am commanded, to relate those great Favors, which I have received from
thee! It is true, O my Lord, and my God, that I know not, how this heart of
mine, can endure it; not how any Creature, who shall ever read this Story,
can fail to abhor me, when he sees such immense Favors, as thine, so ill
acknowledged, and thy self, so ill served, for them; and that I am no more
ashamed, to relate, in fine, these little services, as if they were mine. And
yet, O my dear Lord, I am ashamed, but only, my not haueing any thing else, to
recount, with any color, of being mine own, makes me unfold these, so base
beginnings of mine; to the end, that, whosoever may have laid his own, more
solidly, and substantially up, for thy service, may well have good hope, by the
means; since he, who has vouchsafed to accept my poor beginnings, in part of
payment, will certainly receive those others, better, which are greater. I
humbly beseech his Divine Majesty, to give me grace, at length, that I may not
still continue in these things, which are but beginnings;

Amen.
THE TWO AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She treats, hovvit pleased our Lord, to put her in Spirit, into a place of
Hell, which she said, she had deserved for her Sins. She relates, what was
represented to her there; which was but a kind of shaddovv, of such things,
as are suffered in that place. She begins also, to declare the way, and
manner, how that Monastery was founded in Auila, under the name of S. Joseph.

AFter a long time, when our Blessed Lord had already done me many of those
Favors, which I have here related; as others also, which were very great; I
found one day, whilst I was in Prayer, though I could not tell, how, that I was
placed in Hell. And I understood, that our Lord was pleased, that I should see
the place, which the This is not to be literally understood; for the Devil
can prepare no place for a Soul in Hell, but by the Decree of Almighty God,
upon the particular Judgment given at the death of the Party.
Devils had prepared for me, and which I had deserved for my The Sins of
Ingratitude, discorrespondence, and inordinate affection to Creatures, which
she did committ; and the greater and mortal Sins, which she would most
certainly have committed, if the Mercy of our Blessed Lord, had not prevented,
and vvithheld her.
Sins. This lasted but a very little space of time; but yet, if I should live
many years, I hold it for an impossible thing, that ever I should be able, to
forget it.

The entry thereof, seemed Hell is represented to her in Spirit, after a most
subtle manner, and it was shevved to her, and described by her, in such sort,
as that such Creatures, may be capable thereof, as are endued not only with
Minds, but with Bodies.
to me, to be, after the manner, of a long, and strait Lane; or rather, as if
it had been, a low, narrow, long, and dark Oven. The ground seemed to be, as
if it had been like water, all thickened with dirt; and it was both very
filthy, and of a most pestilentiall smell, and had a multitude of loathsome
vermin, as flies, and worms, and such other ugly creatures, in it. At the
end of it, there was a certain hollow place, as if it had been a kind of a
little Press, in a wall; into which, I saw my self crowded, with great
constraint. Now all that, was even delightful to the sight, in comparison of
what I felt there; and this, which I have said of it already, I also find to be
very imperfectly described. But, as for the Feeling part, the very beginning
to say what it was, is a thing, which can neither be well, no nor even almost
at all, related, as it was indeed; in regard that I felt a certain fire, in my
very Soul, though yet I know not, how to declare it, as indeed it was. For,
all those almost insupportable torments, which I have felt, with all extremi
tie, in this life, and whereof the Physicians are wont to affirm, that even in
the Corporeal way, they are the greatest, which can be suffered in this world;
(as namely, that shrinking-vp of all my Sinnewes, when I instantly grew lame by
it; besides many other torments, in several kinds; as also that I have been
vexed much, by the Devil) are all no more, then absolutely just nothing, in
comparison of what I felt, in that place; besides my knowing, (with all this)
that no part of it, was ever to cease, but to continue, without ever haueing an
end. And yet, even all this, which I have said, is also nothing, in comparison
of that continual agonizing of the Soul, that pressing, that stifling, which
is so very sensible an affliction, together with that desperate kind of
discontent, and disgust, and repining, which I am, no way, able to express.
For, to say, that it is a continual tearing of the Soul into fitters, is to
say little; since, in that case, it seems, that it must be some other body,
who tears it; but, in this, the Soul it self, is the very Executioner, which
even tears it self. There is, besides all that, another strange Ingredient,
which is, that interior kind of fire, and that unspeakable despair, upon
those intolerable torments, and sorrows. I saw not, who it was, that
inflicted these things; but, me thought, I found my self to be sliced, and
minced, and pressed, and burnt, all at once. And I say, and say again, that that
interior fire, and despair, is the very worst of it all. Whilst I was in this
most pestilentiall place, and that, without any possibility of ever so much,
as once hoping for any comfort at all, there was no such thing, to be thought
of, as sitting, or extending my self; nor is there any place void, to receive
one; though yet they had put me into that thing, which is like a hole in a
wall; because even those very walls, which are also most hideous to the sight,
do even press their very selves close, toward, and upon one another; and
every thing there, helps to choke. There is also no light in that place; but
all is gross, and even palpable darkness. For my part, I understand not, how
this can be; for, with having no light at all, yet all that, which may be able
to give any vexation to the Sight, is discerned, and seen. Our Lord was not
pleased, at that time, that I should see any more of Hell; but afterward I had
another Vision, of most fearful things, and of the punishment of certain
particular vices. And, forasmuch as I might be able to discern, and judge of,
by the sight, these seemed to be even more hideous, then the former; but yet,
in regard, that I felt not the pain of it, they made me not so much afraid.
For in this other present Vision, our Lord was pleased, that I should really
feel those torments, and afflictions in Spirit, even as if my very Body, had
been suffering them there.

The excellent fruits, which this Saint did gather from this great Favor,
which seems to be the sole cause why our B. Lord was pleased to impare this
Favor.
I know not, how all this could be; but yet I understood well enough, that it
was a very great Favor; and that our Lord was pleased, that I should discern,
as even by the very sight of mine own eyes, from whence his great mercy, had
delivered me. For it is nothing, to have heard talk of it; nor that, at other
times, I had considered several sorts of torments; (though yet I did it not
often; for I liked not that, very well, in regard of the fear it gave me) nor
yet, that the Devils are wont to tear men in pieces, with hot pincers; nor
any other thing, whereof I had read; for, all, in fine, is nothing, if once it
be compared to this; Since this is wholly another kind of thing; and the
torments of this world, (compared with this) are no more, then a mere Picture,
in comparison of the Life; the very burning, which is felt in this world,
being but a very trifle, in respect of that other. For my part, I remained
astonished, and amazed at it, and so I am, even whilst I am writing these
things, though it happened to me six years ago. And it is a most real truth,
that even now, in the very place, where I am but thinking of them, the
natural heat of my body, begins to fail me, even for very fear. Not do
I ever remember, what passed then; but that all my afflictions, and troubles,
and whatsoever can be suffered in this life, seemed nothing to me; and so also,
me thinks, it seems, that, in part, we complain here, without reason. And
therefore I say again, that this was one of the greatest Favors, that I ever
received, in my whole life, at the hands of our Lord. For it The great benefit
of this Favor.
has benefited me very much, both toward the making me loose all fear, and
care, concerning the tribulations, and contradictions of this life; as also, to
give me strength, toward the enduring them; and finally, to render thanks to
our Blessed Lord, for delivering me (as now I may hope) from those terrible,
and perpetual torments.

Since that time, as I was saying, there is nothing, which seems not easy to
me, in comparison of one moment of that, which is to be suffered there. And I
was in a very great wonder, that, having so often read diverse Books, which
give me some notice of a part of the torments of Hell, I feared them so little,
and held them in so small account, considering in what case I was then, and how
it was possible for me, to receive contentment in any such thing, as finally
was to carry me on, to so wretched a place, as that is. Be thou eternally
Blessed, O my God; for, how well have thou made it appear, that thou louedst
me incomparably better, then I do my self? How often, O my dear Lord, have
thou delivered me; from that dark, and horrible Dungeon? and how often have I
returned, to cast my self in, thither, again, even against thy will? From
hence also I got a facility, to be in very great pain, for the many Souls
of these Lutherans, which are condemned to Hell; and especially, because they
had once been members of the Holy Catholic Church, by their Baptism. I
gained also great impulses, to do good to Souls; and really, it seems to me,
to be very certain, that, for the saving of any of them, from so greiuous,
and everlasting torments, I could suffer many deaths, with a very good will.
For, I consider, that if we see a person in this world, whom we love, undergo
any great affliction, or pain, it seems, that even our natural disposition
inuites us, to have compassion of the case; and so much as that pain is
greater, so much the more. And therefore, now, to see a Soul, which is, for
ever, to be enchained, to the enduring of that supreme affliction, and misery
of all miseries, who shall be able to bear it, and what heart, can ever brook
it, without strange trouble? And since we are moved here, to so much compassion
of men, whose miseries have yet a term prefixed, (and at the furthest, they
are to end with their lives) how shall we be able to get patience, for thinking
of the infinite torments of those others, considering, what a huge number of
Souls, the Devil is daily carrying into Hell? This consideration also makes me
desire, that, in a business of so mighty importance, we may not be satisfied
with less, then the doing of the very uttermost we can, on our part; and that
we leave nothing at all, unattempted, to secure our selves by that means; and
I humbly beseech our Blessed Lord, to give us all, his grace, for this purpose.

When I consider, that, howsoever I were formerly most wicked, yet had I some
little care, to ferue Almighty God; not yet, did I then commit certain
things, which are taken and swallowed down, by the world, as familiarly, as to
turn the hand. And, with this, I endured huge sicknesses; and I did it, with
that great patience, which our Lord was pleased to give me, for that purpose;
and I was also not inclined to murmr, and detract, or to speak hardly of
any Creature; nay, it seems to me, as if I scarce had power, to with any
body any ill; nor was I covetous, nor envious, (for any thing, that I could
ever remember) at least, to any such proportion, as might result to the great
offense of Almighty God. And some other things also there are, wherein (though
I were very wicked) I had usually, the fear of Almighty God before me. And
yet, notwithstanding all this, I see where the Devils Vide supra fol: 471.
had taken up, and provided my lodgeing; and it is true, that, considering what
my faults had been, it seemed to me, that I yet deserved more punishment.

But howsoever, upon the whole matter, I declare, that it was a most horrible
torment; and and that it is a dangerous thing, that the Soul should take
contentment, and be at rest, which is falling, every minute, into Mortal
Sin. Nay rather, for the love of Almighty God, let us remove all the
occasions thereof; for, our Lord will help us all, as he has done me. And I
humbly beseech his Divine Majesty, not to give over, to hold me fast, in his
hand, least, if he do, I return to fall; for, in that case, I see already,
what is to become of me for ever; but I beseech our B. Lord again, not to
suffer it, even for his own mercies sake, Amen.

But now, after my seeing all this, as also many other great things, and
secrets, which our Lord, through his own mercy, was pleased to show me,
concerning the Glory, which is designed in the next life, for the good, and
the Torments, for the wicked; and I procuring now, to light upon some way, or
means, whereby I might do Penance, for so much ill, as I had committed, and
might be able also, to do somewhat, toward the obtaining of so great a good,
I desired, even to fly out of the sight of mankind, and now at length, once for
all, to divide my self from the world, and to part from it. And my heart would
now be quiet no longer, but yet was not that disquiet of mine, any troublesome
kind of thing, but rather of contentment, and gust; and it was evident, that it
came from Almighty God; and that his Divine Majesty had given heat enough,
to this Soul of mine, for the disgesting of other, and stronger meats, then
she had formerly taken. A svveet Effect, of a sad Cause.
And now, I began to consider, what I might possibly he able to do, for
Almighty God; and the first thing, I thought, was to follow that first Call,
which his Divine Majesty had given me, to lead a Religious Life; and that, by
the Observance of my Rule, with the greatest perfection, that I could practice.
And though there were, in the Monastery, wherein I found my self at that time,
many Servants of Almighty God, by whom he was very much served, in that
place, yet in regard, they wanted temporal means, many of the Religious
women, were cast into a kind of necessity, to go abroad sometimes, for
releife of the House; but yet they did it so, as to pass, with all kind of
chastity, and piety. And besides, that House was not founded according to the
first rigor of the Rule; but only the same Rule, was observed, in conformity
with all the rest of the Order, according to the Bulls of Relaxation, and
dispensation. There were also, some other inconveniences; and besides, it
seemed to me, that the place was of much Regalo, in regard, that it was, both
large, and pleasant. But especially, the inconvenience of going sometimes out
of the Monastery, was grown to be a very great one for me; though formerly, I
had been one, who made most familiar use of it my self; in regard that
sometimes, some persons, whom the Superiors (being importuned) could not well
refuse, took contentment, that I should accompany them, who went abroad. And,
by this means, according to the use, which was held, I might grow by degrees,
to remain very little in the Monastery. The Devil also would be sure to
help, to be partly a means, that I might remain little at home; for always,
by my imparting to some of the Religious there, those good things, which I had
learnt of others, with whom I used to converse, they received much advantage
and good. But yet once, being there with a certain person, it happened, that she
said, both to me, and others: What say you, if we should become, like those
Religious women, who go barefoot; for perhaps, it may be possible, in time,
to make some Monastery of that kind? But now I, having also these very same
desires, began to treat the business, with that Widow, my Companion, and
Friend, of whom I spoke before; who had also the same desire with me. Upon
this, she began to cast, how to endue it with Rent; but I came quickly to
find, that there was no great probability of that; though the desire, which we
had thereof, made us yet believe, that it might perhaps, take effect. But I, on
the other side, (finding great contentment, in the House, where I was, because
it was much according to mine own mind; and the Cell, wherein I lived, was of
very great conuentences for me,) suspended my self, from being earnest, in the
execution of that other design; though yet, we did resolve, to recommend it,
in particular manner, to Almighty God. And one day, as soon as I had
Communicated, his Divine Majesty commanded me, in earnest manner, to endeavor
it, to the very utter most of my power. And he was pleased to make me great
promises, that the Monastery should not fail to be made; and that he would be
served much in it; and that it should be called by the name of S. Joseph; and
that himself, would keep us safe, at one of the gates, and his Mother our B.
Lady, at the other; and that Christ our Lord would continue with us; and that
the place should prove, to be even a Star, which would yield great brightness,
and splendor, of it self; and that, though other Religious Orders, were then
relaxed, men must not think, that he was but little served by them; and what
should become of the world, if it were not for Religious persons? And that I
should tell my Ghostly Father, that he had commanded me all this; and that he
wished him, not to oppose it, nor to divert me from it. And this Vision, which
our Blessed Lord was pleased to give me, was followed by so great effects, that
the Speech, which was used therein, was such, and uttered in such a manner,
that I could not possibly doubt, but that it was he. How soever, I was still,
in extreme pain, because the great disquiets, and troubles, which I was sure
the thing would cost, did partly represent themselves, to me; and considering,
how extremely well content I was, in that first House; and though formerly I
had treated of this other business, yet it was not with any such resolution,
and certainty, as if it might be sure, to take effect.

Now, here it seemed to me, that the reward set it self instantly before me,
for the doing it; but yet, when I saw, that it was likely to be a thing of
very great disquiet, and trouble, I was still in a kind of doubt, what I would
finally do. And yet, they were so many several times, that our Lord renewed
his Speech to me, upon this subject, (representing so many causes, and
reasons, for it) that I saw clearly enough, that it was his will. So that now,
I thought no more of any thing else, but only to acquaint my Ghostly Father,
with it; and so I gave him all that, which had occurred, in writing. As for
him, he durst not resolutly will me, to give it over; but saw, that there was
little appearance, to carry it through, according to the discourse of natural
reason; in regard, that my Companion, and Friend, who was the only person, who
was to do it, had very little, or no means, to effect it. He wished me, to
treat of it with the Prelate, who was my Superior; and that I should do
therein, what he ordained. But I spoke not of these Visions, with that Prelate;
but that Lady treated with him, and told him, that she desired to erect a new
Monastery; and the Provincial did very gladly give way; for he was a friend
of all Religious Observance, and Piety; and so he afforded all the favor,
which was needful; and told her, that he would admit, and accept the House.
They spoke then, of the Revenue, which it was to have; and we never inclined,
to let it consist of more, then Thirteen Religious; and this, for many
reasons. But, before we began to treat of the matter, thus far, we wrote to
the holy man, Fray Pedro de Alcantara, and acquainted him, with all that,
which passed; and he counseled us to proceed in this design; and he sent us
his opinion, upon the whole business.

But now, this purpose of ours, was no sooner known over the Town, then there
did instantly grow, to be such a persecution against us, as cannot be written,
in few words. The scoffs, the icares, the laughing, the saying that it was a
Foolerie, and senseless toy; That, for my part, I was well enough in my
Monastery; but for my Companion, and friend, they cast such a load of
persecution upon her, that they even ouerlayd her. As for me, I knew not, what
to do; for me thought, that they had partly some reason.

But being thus distressed, and recommending my self one day, to Almighty God,
his Divine Majesty began to comfort, and encourage me, and told me, that now
I might see, through what difficulties those Saints had passed, who had founded
the Religious Orders of the Church; and that we were to pass through many
more persecutions, then I could imagine; but that yet, we should not be
troubled, at all. He told me also some things, which I was to deliver to my
Companion; and the thing, at which I wondered most, was, that instantly we were
comforted, in respect of all that, which was past; and encouraged for all that,
which was to be future. And it is certain, that there was not, in all that
Town, any one person of Prayer; nay, in fine, there was scarce any one at
all, who did not oppose us, at that time, and who thought not this design, to
be a most senseless thing. There were so many ieasts, and learings, and
stirs, in our very Monastery, that now even the Provincial opposed himself
stiffly, against us; and he changed his former opinion, and now would no longer
admit the House; but said, that the Rent was both little, and besides, not very
secure; and that there was very great contradiction. He seemed to have reason
in all; and, in fine, he gaue-ouer the business, and would not admit the House.

Now we, who had already received the first blows, upon our own heads, were
greatly troubled at it; but particularly, it struck me much, that the
Provincial was now found, to be opposite; for if he had still liked it, my
self had been excused, and discharged, with all the world. But yet, they were
not so favorable, to my Companion; for, her they would not absolve, but left
her to her self; yea and they said, that she was obliged to take away the
scandal.

She went therefore, to a great learned man, and a great Servant of God, of S.
Dominick's Order, to tell him, what had passed; and, indeed, to give him
account, of the whole business. And this was, before the Provincial had given
it over; for, now there was no Creature in the whole Town, who would give us
any opinion, in the Case; and therefore, they might well affirm, as they did,
that we proceeded, in all this, of our own heads. But that Lady made relation
of the whole business, to this holy man; and acquainted him with the Rent,
which she meant to settle upon it, out of her own Estate, with much desire,
that he would assist us; for, he was the greatest learned man, in all that
Town, at that time; and perhaps, there were not many, more learned, in his
whole Order. I told him also, of all that, which we intended to do, and some
motives thereof; but I acquainted him not, with any Revelation of mine, but
only with those natural reasons, which moved me. For, I desired not, that he
should give us any opinion, but according to them; And he, on the other side,
wished, that we would give him the rearme of eight days, wherein to answer. He
asked us also then, whether we were resolved to do that very thing, which he
should direct; and I told him, we were. But though I said thus much; and, me
thinks, I would have done, as I said, yet did I never loose assurance, that
the Monastery, in fine, would be made. My Companion had yet a stronger Faith;
for, whatsoever they might say to her, she would never giue-ouer to execute the
design. But now, though I held it impossible, but that the work would be done
(so assuredly did I believe, that the Revelation aforesaid, was true, (provided
always, that it were found to contain nothing, either against Holy
Scripture, or the Decrees of the Church, which we are bound to believe, and
observe) yet (howsoever (as I said before) I conceived that that Revelation was
really of Almighty God) if still that learned man had told me, that we could
not effect the thing, without offending his Divine Majesty, and that we should
have sinned against good Conscience, by procuring it, I conceive that I should
instantly have given it over, and sought-out some other means, for my releif;
but, for the present, our Lord imparted none, but this, to me.

But now, this Servant of Almighty God, told me, that he had taken this
business into his care, together with a full resolution, to employ himself
earnestly, in procuring, that we might giueouer our purpose; because the
clamor of the people against it, had already come to his notice; and so also,
had it appeared to every Creature, to be an impertinencie; and besides, that a
certain Cauallier of the Town, as soon as he had understood, that we
intended to speak with the Father, sent to him, to advise him, to consider
well what he did; and that by no means, he should help us; yet, that now,
himself, beginning to consider, what he was to answer us, and to reflect
seriously upon the business, and upon the intention, which we had, and with what
good order, and Religious manner we proceeded, he resolved, in fine, that it
would be a thing, resulting much, to the Service of Almighty God; and that we
should, by no means, forbear, to put it in execution. And, in conformity to
this, his answer was, That we should make what have we could, to conclude it;
And he also let us know his opinion, of the way, and manner, which we were best
to hold in it; and that, though the Rent were little, yet Almighty God was to
be trusted with somewhat; And that for his part, he desired, that whosoever
should contradict, or oppose it, might be sent to him; for he would know very
well, what to answer; And accordingly, he assisted us ever, as I shall declare
hereafter.

With this, we went, much comforted, away; as also, in that we found, how some
holy persons of that place, who formerly had been opposite to us, grew now to
be appeased; and some of them, did also assist us; and amongst them, was that
holy Caualier, of whom I made mention before. Who, in regard that our
pretense seemed to aspire to great perfection, as indeed it does, (because it
is wholly grounded in Prayer) he gaue-vp this opinion, and Vote, That, howsoever
the means, whereby things must be effected, seemed to carry much difficulty
with them, and to be without great appearance of success, yet perhaps, that it
might fall-out to be of Almighty God. Now, it may be, that our Blessed Lord
disposed him, to be of this mind; and the Doctor also, that Priest, and
Servant of Almighty God, whom I related to have voted first, and who is the
very Mirror of all that Town, and the person, whom Almighty God perserues
there, for the good of many Souls, was now also grown already to assist me
in the business. And thus we were come to this condition, by the help of many
Prayers; and now already, we had bought the House, in a good part of the Town,
though but a poor one; but I value not that, at all; for, our Lord had told me
before, that I should enter, as well as I could, and that afterward, I should
find, what his Divine Majesty would do; and that, have I seen well performed.
And so, although I found, that we had but little means, yet I believed, that
our Blessed Lord would take order, that we should be favored, by other ways.

THE THREE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She proceeds in the same Subject of the Foundation of the Monastery of the
Glorious S. Joseph. She declares, how she was commanded to attend to that
business; and of the time, when she forbore to follovv it; and of some
troubles, which she had; and how she was comforted in them, by our Blessed
Lord.

THis business being now in such case, and so near the point of final dispatch,
that they were to draw-vp the Writings the very next day following, it fell
out to be just then, when our Prouincial grew to change his latter opinion, and
return to his former, and I believe, he was moved to it, by Divine ordination,
as we shall see afterward. For, our Prayers, having been so many, as indeed
they were, it seems that our Blessed Lord went perfecting the work, and
appointing that it should be dispatched, though after a different manner, from
what we conceived. But when once the said Prouincial had formerly refused to
admit of the House, my Ghostly Father gave me a commandment, that I should
now, think no more of that matter. And yet, our Lord best knows, what
troubles, and afflictions, it had cost me, before I could ever bring it to that
state, and condition, wherein then it was. But now, the thing being given over,
all that former imputation was confirmed; Namely, that it was nothing, but an
impertinencie of women; and their murmurings came particularly upon me;
though, till that time, the Prouincial had commanded it, to be done. In the
mean while, I grew to be very ill beloved, in the Monastery, because I went
about to make a new one, which might be of more strict Enclosure. For they
said, That I affronted them, by it; and, That God might be as well served
there; and, That there were better amongst them, then my self; and, that now,
they discovered well enough, that I carried no true love, to that House; That
it had been much better done, to procure to get Revenues, and Rents, for that
place, then for any other. Yea and now, there wanted not some, who advised,
that I might be carried to Prison; and there were but very few, who did, in
any kind, take my part. As for me, I saw, that they had reason, in very much,
of what they said; and sometimes, I would be making my excuses, though yet I
were not able to tell them the chief motive thereof, which was, that I had been
commanded to do it, by our Blessed Lord. I knew not therefore well, what to
say; and so I thought it fitter, to hold my peace. At other times, it pleased
our Lord, to do me very great Favors; for, this of the Monastery, put me
now, to no disquiet at all; but I gave it over, with as much facility, and
gust, as if it had never cost me any pains, or care. Yet this, could no
Creature believe, no not even those persons of Prayer, with whom I conuersed;
but they conceived, that I was full of trouble, yea and of shame; and even my
Ghostly Father himself, did not absolutely believe the contrary. But, as for
me, when I considered, that I had done whatsoever I could, on my part, I
thought I was no further obliged, to the effecting of what our Lord had
commanded me. I remained still, in the Monastery; and I found my self with
much contentment, and gust; yet even still, I knew not well, how to imagine,
but that the thing, would be done, sooner, or later; and of this, I had no
fear at all, though I knew not, either how, or when; but only I believed, that
it would be certainly done.

That, which troubled me extremely, was, that once my Ghostly Father gave me a
great Mortification, as if I had done somewhat against his will. But, it
seems, our Lord was pleased, that I should be in some affliction, even by
occasion of that, which was most tender, and dear, to me. For, whilst I was in
this multitude of persecutions, when I expected, that some kind of comfort
would be coming toward me, he wrote me a Letter, to this effect: That A sad,
and strange proceeding.
now he hoped. I saw, by what occurred, that all had been nothing, but a
Dream; That I should do well, to reform my self hereafter, so far, as not
to pretend, to meddle any more with any business, nor to be talking any more of
this, in particular; for that, I could not, but see well enough, what a
scandal was grown upon it; and other things he also said, which did all serve
for nothing at all, but only, to put me to pain. This, I confess, gave me
more trouble, then all those other things, put together; as conceauing, or at
How one suspicion, u wont to third it self close, upon another.
least, as doubting, whether I might not have been the occasion, of all the
ill, which had happened; and whether I might not have committed some such error,
as whereby Almighty God, might have been offended; nay, whether these Visions
of mine, had not been Illusions; and so consequerly, whether my whole course of
Prayer, had not been of the Devil; and whether, finally, I were not then, in a
plain state of error, and perdition. This, I confess, oppressed me, with so
great extremity, that I grew to be all, in disorder, and subject to extreme
affliction. But our Lord, who was never wanting to me, in all those troubles of
mine, which I have expressed, was often pleased to comfort, and strengthen me;
though I need not stand here, to relate it. And he told me also then, that I
should not vex my self; That I had greatly served his Divine Majesty, in that
business; and not offended him at all; That, for the present, I should do, what
my Ghostly Father had commanded me, in holding my peace, till it should be
fit to renew the business. And, in the mean time, I remained full of
contentment, and consolation; and I held all that persecution, for nothing,
which had come upon me, till then.

But now, by this means, I was taught, by our Blessed Lord, what a very great
benefit it is, to endure troubles, and persecutions, for his sake. For, so much
was the love of Almighty God increased in my Soul, by this means, as were
also many other virtues, that I was amazed at it; and this, in fine, is the
reason, why I cannot but desire afflictions, and troubles. But the while, those
other persons, thought, that I was extremely out of countenance, with what had
happened; and certainly I should have been so, indeed, if our Lord had not been
pleased, to comfort me so highly, with that great Favor. But then did those
strong impulses, and impetuosities of the Love of Almighty God, whereof I have
formerly spoken, begin to increase, more and more; and I also came to have
greater Rapts; though yet, I acquainted no Creature, with the gain, which I
had gotten by it.

In the mean time, that holy man, the Dominican, did never giue-ouer to
believe, that the business would be sure to take effect, even as well, as I
believed it, my self. But I would take no knowledge of that, because I was
resolved, not to swerve from what I had been commanded, by my Ghostly Father.
The Dominican negotiated also the Business, together with my Companion, and
friend; and they wrote about it, to Rome, and made their Propositions, there.
And the while, did the Devil here, by carrying things, from one person to
another, procure to make it known, that I had had some Revelation, in this
business. Upon this, some came to tell me, with a great deal of apprehension,
and fear, that I should do well, to look to my self; and that the times were
strict, and shrewd; and that, perhaps, men might lay some things to my charge,
and go on, even to the Inquisitours, by way of complaint. But this, I
confess, made me sport, and I began, to laugh at it; for it was never my
case, to be afraid of any such thing as this; as knowing very well, of my
self, that in all things, which concerned Catholic Faith, yea even to the
least Ceremony of the Church, I was totally, for it; and that also, for the
least word of Holy Scripture, I would expose my self, a thousand times, to
death. And therefore I desired them, not to trouble themselves, concerning me,
in this point; and that my Soul were miserable enough, and too much, if any
such thing could be found in it, as might put me into any fear of the
Inquisition; That, if I thought, there were any ground, or cause, my self
would be the first, to go thither; and that if it were a slander, raised up
against me, our Lord would deliver me, from it; and I should prove the Gainer,
by that Bargain.

Now, I treated of this matter, with the Dominican Father, who (as I said) was
so very learned a man, that I might well assure my self, upon whatsoever he
should declare to me heerin. And I told him then, upon this occasion, with the
greatest clearnes, that I could possibly use, of all the Visions, which I had
had; and of the manner of Prayer, which I had used; and of the great Favors,
which our Blessed Lord had been pleased to do me; and I humbly prayed him, to
consider all these things, very well; and to let me understand, if there were
any thing at all, in any of them, against Holy Scripture; and that also, he
would acquaint me, with the judgment, which he made thereof. Now, all this he
did; and so, settled and secured me, very much; and I grow to be also of
opinion, that this accident, was of much advantage, even to him. For, though he
were formerly, very good, yet he gave himself, much more to Prayer, from that
time forward; and withdrew himself, to a certain retired Monastery, of his
own Order, which was a place of great Solitude, and silence; to the end, that
so, he might exercise himself the better, in Prayer. He remained there, above
two years; and then, Obedience to his Order, took him from thence; for which
he was sorry enough. But they had need of such a man, as he was; and I was no
less greiued, when he went from me, through the great want, which I was sure,
I should have of him; though yet I knew, withal, that he would be a gainer, by
it. And whilst I was in pain, about his journey, our Lord bad me be comforted,
and not troubled, for that he went away, to good purpose. And indeed, he came
back again afterward, with his Soul, so well improued, and advanced, in the
way of Spirit, that himself told me, at his return, how he would not, for any
thing of this world, but that he had gone. And I also, could say the same; for,
whereas he had formerly given me assurances, and comforts, but only by his
Letters, he was now grown able to do it also, through the great experience,
which he was come to have in Spirit, and of Supernatural things. And it also
pleased Almighty God, to bring him back to us, at such a time, as when his
Divine Majesty saw, that there would be need of him, for assisting his work
concerning this Monastery, which, his will was, should go forward.

But, in the mean time, I remained in silence, for a matter of some five, or
six months; not hearing, or saying any thing, of this business; nor did our
Blessed Lord command me any thing, about it; nor understood I the reason
thereof; but yet still, I could not part with the belief, but that the business
would be done, sooner, or later.

But at the end of that time aforesaid, the Rectour of the College of the
Society of JESUS, who had been there, till then, being now to remove from
hence, his Divine Majesty brought another to be in his place, who was a very
Spiritual person, and of great courage, and understanding, and Learning; and
he came, at a certain time, when I was in very great need of help. For, in
regard, that he, who was my Ghostly Father, had a Superior over himself, and
by reason that they have this virtue in perfection, not so much as once to
stir, but in conformity to the will of their Superiors; and though this
Ghostly Father of mine, had a very good understanding of my Spirit, and
desired, that I might profit, and proceed, he yet adventured not to conclude
some things, with a firm resolution, for diverse reasons, which he had for it,
And on the other side, my Spirit did press already, to pass on, with certain
impulses, and impetuosities, which were so great, that I found it a very
troublesome thing, to be tied short; and yet for all this, I resolved, not to
exceed those bounds at all, which he had prescribed. And being one day, in much
affliction, as conceauing, that my Ghostly Father did not believe me, it
pleased our B. Lord, to require me, not to trouble my self; affirming, that
that difficulty would be soon at an end. For my part, I was much ioyed by
this, as conceauing, that I was quickly to dye; and I was wont particularly to
rejoice, when I remembered it. But afterward, I saw clearly, that his Speech,
concerned the coming of this new Rectour, of whom I spoke; and afterward, I
never had any occasion to be in pain, in regard that this said new Rectour,
contradicted not the Sub-Rectour, who was my Confessarius; but rather A holy
and wise man.
directed him, to give me comfort, and scope; and that there was no cause of
fear; and that he should not conduct my Soul, by such straight, and narrow
ways, and with such restrictions; but should permit the Spirit of our Lord, to
work in me. For indeed, at some times it seemed, that by reason of those great
impetuosities of Spirit, the Soul had scarce room, for so much as to breath.

I went then, to visit this Rectour; and my Ghostly Father required me, to
treat with him, with all liberty, and clearnes. As for me, I was wont, to find
very great difficulty, to declare my self in that kind; but yet really, it is
very true, that even at my very first entrance into the Confessionarie, I felt
a kind of, I cannot tell, what, to call it, in my Spirit, which I remember not,
my self to have ever found, by occasion of any Creature, either before, or
after; nor can I distinctly tell, how it was; nor yet am I able, to express it
fully, by any way of Comparison. But it was a certain Spiritual joy, and a
kind of understanding, which my Soul had, that the Soul of that man, would be
able to understand me; and that there would be a kind of conformity in
judgment, between us two, although (as I was saying) I understood not, how. If
indeed, I had ever spoken with him before; or if others had peradventure given
me any great news of the man, it had not been very strange, that it should
joy me, when I came to understand, that he was to hear me. But neither he, nor
I, had ever spoken word to one another; nor was there any one, by whose
means, I had ever had any notice at all, of him; and yet, since that time, I
have seen very well, that my Spirit deceived me not; because it has been of
great advantage in all kinds, both to my Soul, and me, to treat with him. For,
his kind of conversation, and way of conference, and communication, is a thing
of great importance, for such persons, as our Lord seems to have forwarded
much, in the way of Spirit; for, he makes them runne-on apace, and not go,
foot by foot. And his manner is, to untie them soundly, and totally, from all
Creatures; and to put them, to the exercise, and practice of Mortification;
for, in this, our Blessed Lord has imparted a most particular talent to him,
as he has also done, in many other things. Now, as soon as I began to
communicate my affairs with him, I instantly understood his style, and way of
proceeding; and I found, that he had a holy, and pure Soul; and that our Lord
had given him a particular tallent in the trying, and knowing of Spirits. So
that I was comforted, both much, and very soon, after I had once communicated
with him; and our Blessed Lord began again, to press me, toward a treating
of the Business of the Monastery; and that I should declare, both to my
Ghostly Father, and to this Rectour, the many grounds, and reasons, why they
were not to dissuade, and divert me from it; and some of them, made them
heartily afraid to do it. For, this Father Rectour, never did so much as doubt,
but that it was the Spirit of Almighty God, because he had beheld, and
considered the effects, with very great study, and care. In fine, after the
consideration of many things, they durst not presume to divert me; and my
Ghostly Father did again give me leave, to use all the endeavor I could; and
yet, I was able, to see very well, what a great deal of trouble it would give
me, in regard I was so utterly alone, and had very little power, to effect any
thing. But we agreed, that it should be carried with great priuacy; and
therefore I procured, that a certain Sister of mine, who lived els-where,
should buy, and build the House, as if it were for her self; and that it should
be done with money, which our Lord found means. by certain ways, wherewith
to pay for it. But it would be a long business, to tell you, how his Divine
Majesty, went providing it; for, as for me, I desired to be very sure, to do
nothing, which might be against Obedience. But I was not then to learn, that,
if I told any thing to the Superiors of my Order, the whole Business would be
lost, as it was before; yea and that, if I did so now, it would fallout to be
worse. In the point of getting money, for making the bargain for a Seat, and
for building also the House, I endured many troubles; and some of them, all
alone; though yet my Companion, and friend, did also the best she could. But,
in fine, she could do little, and indeed so very little, that, upon the
matter, it was a kind of nothing, but only to take upon her the name, and to
lend it her countenance; for, all the rest of the trouble, I was mine; and it
came upon me, so very many ways, that I do even wonder, now, how I was able,
to endure it, then.

Sometimes, when I was full of affliction, I would be uttering my self, to
Almighty God, after this manner: O my dear Lord, how come thou to command
me things, which seem impossible? For, though I be a woeman, yet if I had
liberty, perhaps something might be done; but being tied up, in all respects,
without money, and without knowing, where to get any, whereby either the
Breue, or any thing else, may be had, what can I do, O Lord? But being once in
a certain necessity, and not knowing, which way to turn my self; and not
being able to pay the workmen, S. Joseph, my true Father, and Patron, appeared
to me, and told me, that, money would not be wanting to me; and therefore, that
I should make the agreement; and so I did, even when I had no money at all; and
afterward, our Blessed Lord provided it, by so strange ways, that they, who
heard of it, were amazed.

But now, me thought, the House showed to be very little; and indeed, it was
so, and in that extremity, that it seemed not capable, of being ever able to
be a Monastery; and I had a good mind, to buy another House; but neither had
I, wherewithal to do it, nor otherwise, any means to procure it; though
there were yet, a very little one, joining to it, whereof a Church might be
made. But after I had Communicated, one day, our Lord said thus to me: I have
already willed thee, to begin, as thou may. And then, after the manner of
exclamation, he said thus also to me: O the touetousues of the race of
mankind; which thinks, that it shall want even earth, upon which to tread!
How often have I slept in the open air, as not knovving, where to lay my
head? Upon this, I was amazed, and found that he had reason; and so I went to
that little House, and ordered it. And though it were very little, yet it was
just fit, to make such a kind of Monastery; and I made it no more my business,
to compass a larger Seat, but procured, to build upon that, in such sort, as
it might be fit to be inhabited, all course, and rude, and without any other
misterye, but only, that it might not be hurtful, in point of health; and so
it shall ever remain.

Upon the day of S. Clare, I going to receive the B. Sacrament, she appeared to
me, in very great beauty, and bad me be of a good courage, and go on, in the
work which I had begun; and that she would assist me. And this has proved
so true, that a Monastery of Religious women, of her Order, which is near
this; does help to sustain, and feed us; and (which yet is more) she has, by
little and little, brought this desire of mine, to such perfection, that the
self-same poverty, which that Blessed Saint established in her House, is
exercised also in this; and we live of Alms; which point, has cost me no
small trouble, in getting it confirmed, by His Holiness; and to be further also
established, in such sort, as that no innovation may be made, not the House be
ever capable of Rent. And now does our Blessed Lord even more then this; and
perhaps, the same may grow, by the intercession of this Blessed Saint; for, his
Divine Majesty prouides us with all things necessary, in most complete
manner, without our ever asking any thing, of any Creature. Let him be
Blessed for all things, Amen.

But I, being about that time, upon the Day of the Assumption of our B. Lady,
in a certain Monastery of the Glorious S. Dominick's Order, I was considering
the many Sins of my former time, (which I had Confessed in that House) and
the accidents of my wicked life; and suddenly, there came so great a Rapt upon
me, that it took me, in effect, wholly out of my self. I then sat down; and
yet it seemed to me, that I was not able, either to hear Mass, or so much, as
to see the Elevation; for which, I remained afterward, with some scruple. Now,
it seemed to me, that, whilst I found my self in that condition, I was
apparrelled with a certain All these things, and the like; as namely, Darts,
or Chains, or Crowns, or Ievvells etc. are not to be vnderstoood after a
gross. and material way, but yet, that really they have truth, in their
being represented distinctly, and clearly, to the Imagination of the Parties;
and they chiefly serve, as testimonies, and Signs, of those interior graces,
and virtues, which use to be imprinted upon Souls, at those very times, by
the mercy of our B. Lord.
Garment of much whitenes, and clearnes; and at the first, I could not tell,
who it was, that clothed me; but afterward, I saw our B. Lady, on the right
hand, and my Father, S. Joseph, on the left, who apparelled me then, with that
Robe; and it was given me to be understood, that I was now grown, to be
cleansed, from my Sins. When thus I was apparelled, and found my self full of
joy, and glory, it instantly seemed to me, that our B. Lady laid hold upon
me, and told me, That it contented her much, to see me serve the Glorious S.
Joseph; That I was to believe, that, what I pretended, concerning the
Monastery, should be effected; and, That our Lord, and they two, would be much
served, there; That I must not be afraid, that ever there would be any failing
therein, howsoever some commandments, which might fall out to be imposed upon
me, would not be according to my gust; for, even themselves, in fine, would
defend, and keep us; That her Son had already promised, that he would be, and
remain with us; and in testimony that all this should prove true, she cast a
fair, and bright Chain of gold about my neck, with a Cross fastened to it, of
great value. But this Gold, and these Precious Stones, are so very different
from those of this world, that there is no manner of comparison between them;
for, the beauty of these, is far other, then any thing, which we can
imagine here. Nor does humane Understanding ariue to know, of what the Garment
was made; nor how to fancy that clear whitenes to it self, which our Lord is
pleased to represent; for, all that, of this inferior world, is no better,
then a kind of scratch, with a coal, as a man may say, in respect of the
other. The beauty also, which I saw in our B. Lady, was excessive, though yet
I could not determine the form, or figure of any particular part, which I
might assign her, but only the frame, and air of the whole face together.
She was apparrelled in white, with excess of splendor; but yet of no such
kind, as dazles, but most dearly sweet. As for the Glorious S. Joseph, I saw
not him so clearly; though yet, I well perceived, that he was there; like those
Visions, whereof I spoke, which are not seen. Our B. Lady, was extraordinatily
young; and she remained with me, a very little while; and I had excessive
glory, and gust by it; and more, in my opinion, then ever I had enjoyed
before; and I would certainly have been glad enough, if I might never have left
it. It seemed to me, that I saw them both, ascend to Heaven, with a very great
multitude of Angels; and I, the while, remained in much Solitude; though yet
withal, so comforted, and elevated, and even dissolved, and recollected in
Prayer, that I remained, for some space of time, in such sort, as not to be
able, either to speak, or stir; but I was wholly, as it were, out of my self.
And I continued with a great impulse of desire, to be even as it were,
annihilated, for Almighty God; and I found also such effects thereof; and the
whole, passed-on in such sort, as that I was never able, (though I endeavored
much) to doubt, but that this Visitation was of Almighty God.

The Queen of the Angels left me topp-full of comfort, and of profound peace,
by what she said to me, of Obedience; and the Case, was this. For my part, I
was very unwilling, not to give this House up, to the Order; and indeed our
Lord himself had told me, that it was not fit, that they should have it; and
he also delivered me the reasons, why it was not, by any means, fit; but
that I should send about it, to Rome, by a certain way; and he also made me
know, that he would cause it to be dispatched, from thence; and so it was. And
it was sent by that very means, whereof our Lord had told me; but we should
never have finally been able to dispatch it, of our selves; and upon the
occasions, which succeeded afterward, it was very fit, that it should be
submitted, by way of Obedience, to the Bishop. Yet then, I knew him not, nor
understood, what kind of Prelate he was; but our Lord was pleased, that he
should be so good, and should favor this House, as much as was fit, yea and
even necessary, for the encountering of that great co^tradiction, which
occurred heerin; as I shall declare afterward; and to put it into that state,
wherein now it is. And let him be ever Blessed, who has so disposed of all,

Amen.
THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She declares, how at this time she was necessarily to go from that place;
and she shows the cause thereof; and how her Superior commanded her to go,
for the comfort of a certain Lady, who was much afflicted. She begins to
treat of that, which happened to her there; and of the great favor, which it
pleased our Lord to do, by her means, in stirring-vp a very principal
person, to do him great service; and how afterward, she received much
favor, and protection from him. This is an admirable Discourse; and very much
to be noted.

But, notwithstanding all the care I took, that men might not know, what we
were doing, this whole Business, could not be carried with so much secrecy, but
that many, must needs understand it; and some of them did believe it; and
others, not. For my part, I was heartily afraid, that, if the Provincial should
come, and they chance to tell him of it, he would command me to give it over;
and then, the whole design would be at an end. But our Lord ordained things,
in such sort, that, about a matter of twenty leagues off, it occurred, that
there was a certain Lady, very much afflicted, by the death of her Husband;
and she found her self, in such extremity thereby, that her health was much
concerned; and feared. Now, she had gotten some notice of She means her self.
this miserable poor wretched Sinner; for it seems, that our Lord had
ordained already, that they should speak well of me, in her hearing, for the
effecting of other good things, which depended upon this. This Lady was very
well acquainted with this Provincial; and he, considering, what a principal
person she was, and that I was in a Monastery, which kept not Clausure, our
Lord gave her so great a desire to see me, (as conceauing, that she should
receive comfort, by my means) that it was almost no longer now, in her power,
not instantly to procure, by all possible endeavor, to get me thither; and so
she sent to the Provincial, who was very far off, at that time; and
accordingly he also sent me an express commandment, under Obedience, that
forthwith I should transport my self thither, with a Companion. Now, I came to
know of this, upon a Christmasse-Day, at night; and it put me into much
disorder, and gave me a great deal of pain, to find, that they resolved to
carry me away, as conceauing, that there was some goodness in me. For,
considering how wicked I knew my self to be, I could, by no means, endure it;
but so, recommending my self much to Almighty God. I remained, during all the
time of Matins, or at least the far larger part thereof, in a very great
Rapt. Our Lord declared to me then, that I should not fail to go, and that I
was not to harken to the opinions of others; for few would think, without
rashness, that they could advise me to go; but that, howsoever the journey
might be of much trouble to me, yet that he would be greatly served thereby;
and that it would be also very convenient, that I should absent my self from
hence, till the Breue were come; because the Devil had a great plott provided,
against the time, when the Provincial should be there, but yet that I must be
afraid of nothing, for that, in fine, he should assist me, in the business. Upon
this, I was much comforted; and encouraged; and I related the whole Story; to
the Rectour, who told me, that I must, by no means, forbear to go; but
others said, that I must not do it, by any means; and that it was but an
invention of the Devil, to the end, that some mischeife might happen to me;
and that my best way would be, to reply upon the Provincial. But I obeyed the
Rectour; and considering also, what had passed in Prayer, I began my journey,
without fear; but yet, not without extreme confusion, to consider, under what
title, and occasion, they called for me. And finding how much they were
deceived, it made me even importune our Blessed Lord, so much the more, not to
forsake me. Now it comforted me extremely, that there was in that place,
whither I was going, a College of the Society of Jesus, and that I might be
subject to that, wherein they should direct me, when I was there; for, by this
means, I conceived, that I was to be in a kind of safety.

But when I arrived there, our Blessed Lord was pleased, that the Lady should
receive so much comfort, that her amendment was quickly seen; for she was,
every day, better and better. And this was the more esteemed, because (as I
said before) the pain, wherein she was, did hold her in great difficulties,
and straights. And it is likely, that our Lord granted her ease, at the
instance of the many prayers, which certain holy persons, whom I knew, did
make in my behalf, that so, all might succeed happily to me. She had also,
even in her self, a great fear of Almighty God, and was so full of virtue,
and goodness, that her much Christianity, and piety, supplied for that, which
was wanting in me. Now, she grew into a great love of me; and I remained, not a
whitt in her debt, when I saw her goodness. But yet, in effect, even all, was
trouble to me there; for, the Regalo's, which they gave me, were no less, then
so many torments to me; and their making so much account of me, as they
showed, did put me into a great deal of fear. I therefore carried my Soul so
restrained, and so retired within my self, that I durst not be, any way,
careless in that kind; and so also was not our Lord unmindful of me. For, he
did me, whilst I was there, most excessive Favors; and they endued me, with so
true, and so great liberty of Spirit, as to make me undervalue, and despise
all those testimonies of estimation, and honor, which I found there; and the
more, the more; and so, as that I failed not, to treat with those Ladies, who
were so great, with as much liberty, as if I had been equal to them; whereas
yet they were of such quality, that I might, without any dishonor at all to
my self, have been even their domestic Servant. I drew a great advantage, and
benefit from thence; and so I told her. I found that she was subject to some
weaknesses, and passions, as my self am; and how little she was, in reason, to
esteem her greatness, and power; which still, the more it is, so much the more
trouble, and care, it draws after it. And they are feign to take such thought,
for living in such a form, and method, as is fit, forsooth, for their
greatness, and rank, that, upon the matter, it scarce gives them leave to live.
For, they eat out of time, and out of order; because all, forsooth, must go in
conformity, to the state, which they hold, and not with any regard, to their
constitution, and health; nay sometimes, they must feed upon such meats, as
are more agreeable to their greatness, then to their gust; and so, as that, for
my part, I wholly abhorred, so much as even to desire to be a great Lady. God
deliver me from such ill-fauoured gravity, and greatness, as this; for, though
the Lady, of whom I speak, be one of the greatest of this Kingdom (and I
believe, there are few, more humble, and more affable, then she) yet really, I
had, and have compassion of her, to see, how she passes, many times, not in
conformity, even so much as with her own inclination, but to comply with her
condition; for even, in point of Servants, there is very little trust to be
reposed; and though she had them good, yet must she not speak more
confidently, and kindly, to one of them, then to another; and if she do,
whosoever is most favored by her, must be sure to be less beloved by others.
In fine, this greatness, is a great subjection; and indeed, one of the greatest
Lies, which ever the world can tell, is, when it calls such persons as these,
Lords, and Ladies; for, as for me, they all seem to be no other thing, then
even Slaves; and that, a thousand times over.

Our Lord was pleased at that time, whilst I remained with that Lady, in her
House, that the domestics also there, improued much in the service of his
Divine Majesty, though yet, for my part, I was not free from some troubles,
yea and certain enuies also, which were expressed, to my disadvantage, by
certain persons, in regard of the great affection, which that Lady bore me;
and perhaps, they were so ill advised, as to imagine, that I had some thought
of interest, by what I did. But our Lord was pleased to permit, that they
should give me some few little troubles, both in this kind, and also in others,
least else, I might perhaps, have grown to be intoxicated, by the Regalo, which
was vouchsafed to me, on the other side; but he was pleased, to fetch me out of
all those accidents, and adventures, with the advantage, and improuement of
mine own Soul.

Whilst yet I remained there, a certain Religious man, and a very eminent
person, with whom I had treated sometimes, (though it were maine years
before) did chance to ariue in that place. And I being, one day, at Mass, in a
Monastery of his Order, which was near to the place where I kept, was taken
with a kind of inclination, to know, in what condition, or state, that Soul
was; for I desired, that he might be a very great Servant of Almighty God. I
rose then from siting where I was, that so I might be going toward him; but
yet, having been already recollected in Prayer, it seemed to me then,
afterward, that it would be no better, then lost time; and what, forsooth, had
I to do with him? and so, I then disposed my self, to sit down again; and
(as I now remember) I did the very same thing, no less, then three several
times. In fine, the good Angel was stronger, then the ill; and I went, and
required him to be called; and so he came. I then began to ask him diverse
questions, as he did me, (because many years had slipped away, since we met
last) concerning the several Lives of one another. And I began to tell him,
that as for mine, it had been subject to many afflictions of Mind. Upon this
he pressed much, to know, what those afflictions might be; and I told him, that
it was neither greatly pertinent to be known, nor very fit for me, to relate.
But he replied, that, since the Father of S. Dominick's Order knew them, that
Father (whom I had affirmed, to be so much his friend) would presently let him
know them; and therefore, that I needed not trouble my self to relate them.
But, in fine, the Case grew to be this, that neither was it in his power, to
forbear to importune me; nor in mine, to forbear to declare my self heerin,
to him. For, with all that trouble, and shame, which I used to have, whenever
there was discourse of things, like this, yet, when I treated of them with this
man, and with the Rectour also of the Society, of whom I spoke before, it put
me to no trouble at all, but rather, it was of comfort to me. I therefore
unfolded my self to him, but yet under the Seal of Confession; and me
thought, he was more advised, then ever; though I always held him, to be a man
of very great understanding. I considered the many talents, and parts he had,
wherewith to do a huge deal of good, if he would give himself entirely, to
Almighty God. And it is true, that I have had this quality, for diverse of
these latter years, that I cannot see any Creature, who contents me much,
This Saint was an excellent person, to make a friend of.
but I must instantly desire, to have him wholly given to Almighty God; and I
wish it, even with such an extremity of appetite, that I know not, almost in
those cases, what to do with my self. And though it be very true, that I would
feign have all the world do him Service, yet I desire, with very great
impulse, and even impetuositie, that the persons, who please me best, should
do it most; and so I often use, to importune our Lord extremely, in their
behalf. But, as for that Religious man, of whom I was speaking, he besought
me, that I would recommend him earnestly to Almighty God; but that was more,
then needed; for already, I was so gone with the man, that I could not possibly
do otherwise. And so I went to the place, where I was accustomed to put myself
in Prayer, all alone, and being then, in deep recollection, I began to deal
with our Blessed Lord; and it was in a style, so very familiar, that it was
even half foolish; for I treat with him, many times, without knowing almost,
distinctly, what I say. For then, it is not so properly my person, as my Love,
which speaks; and the Soul is so alienated even from her self, that I scarce
discern the difference, which then there is, between Almighty God, and me.
For, the great love, which my Soul knows, that his Divine Majesty bears
her, makes her forget, what she is in her self, as conceauing, that she is
then, in him. And so, as if both she, and he, were one, and the self-same
thing, without division, or distinction, she vtters but impertinencies, and
roauings. I remember, that I told him thus much, (after I had begged of him,
with abundance of tears, that the Soul of that Religious man, might apply it
self, to his Service, in great earnest) That, although I held him already, for
good, yet that would not serve my turn; for, I must have him very good; and
accordingly, I said further, thus, in plain terms: O Lord thou must not
deny me this favor; but consider, that this man will be very fit, to make
afreind for us both.

O great Humanity, and Bounty of Almighty God! nor does he so much consider
our words, but the desires, and affections, wherewith they are spoken! But now,
how can he come to endure, that such a miserable Creature, as I, should speak
to his Divine Majesty, with so much boldness? But, let him be Blessed, for ever.

The while, I remember well, that in those hours of Prayer, wherein I
exercised my self that night, our Lord gave me a great affliction, by my
doubting, whether I were in his favor. But now, I desired not so much, to know
that, as I did even desire to dye, rather then to continue in such a life, as
wherein I might not be sure, whether I were dead, or no. For, it were not
possible for me, to endure a sharper death, then to think, that I had offended
Almighty God. And this pain, put me into such straights, that, being all
regaled, as I was, and even melted, and dissolved in tears, I humbly besought
his Divine Majesty, that he would not permit it. And so I came then to
understand, that I might well be comforted, and confide, that I was in state of
Grace; for that such love of Almighty God, and the imparting of such Favors,
and feelings, as his Divine Majesty vouchsafed to me, were not compatible with
any such Soul, as should be in Mortal Sin.

But, in the mean time, I grew into a kind of assured hope, that our Lord
would grant the thing, to that other person, which I humbly begged at his
hands. He commanded me also, to deliver certain words to him. But at this,
indeed, I was troubled much, as not knowing, how I should be able to utter
them. For, the point of carrying a message to a third person, in such sort as I
was saying, is a thing, which does always afflict me; especially, when I know
not, how it will be taken; or, whether the person will not laugh at me, for my
labor. This put me to a great deal of trouble; but yet, in fine, I think, I
was so far persuaded, as to promise Almighty God, that I would not forbear
to impart them; and through the great confusion, and shame, wherein I was, I A
very strange demonstration of a most civil, noble, and freindly heart.
wrote them, and so delivered them to him. And now, this well appeared, to be
an action of Almighty God, by the great effect it wrought. For, he resolved to
give himself to Prayer, after very a serious manner; though yet, he did it not
so very soon. But yet, our Lord designing to make him wholly his own, was
pleased to declare certain truths to him, by my means; which, howsoever I
understood them not my self, did yet fall out so fitly for him, that he was
even amazed. And our Lord disposed him to believe, that they came from his
Divine Majesty; and I, on the other side, (though I be that poor miserable
Creature, which I am) did humbly, and earnestly beseech our Lord, that he would
perfectly, and entirely, convert that man to himself, and make him abhor all
the contentments, and Creatures of this life. And so (for which let him be
Blessed for ever) he has been pleased to do it, and that in so very perfect a
manner, that, whenever this Servant of his, is speaking to me, it makes me,
in effect, turn half fool; and if I had not seen it, with my very eyes, I
should hold it for a doubtful thing, how Favors could possibly be heaped-vp,
so very high, upon a Creature, in so short a time; and should hold him, so
busily, and continually employed, upon Almighty God, that already he seems
not to live, for the use of any thing of this world. I humbly beseech his
Divine Majesty, to keep him in his protection, still; for certainly, if he
proceed after this rate, (as I hope in our Lord, he will,) his Spirit being so
deeply rooted in the knowledge of himself, he will grow to be, of the most
eminent Servants he has; and will be able to do good to many Souls. For he
has gotten great experience, concerning things of Spirit, in a very short
time; and these are gifts, which Almighty God imparts, when, and how, he
will, without any precise respect, either to the time, which has been spent,
or else, to the quality of the Service. I say not yet, but that this may also
import much; but that our Lord forbeares sometimes, to give that, to a person,
in twenty years of Contemplation, which yet he forbeares not to bestow upon
some other, in one. Our Lord knows the reason of this. And it is also a
deceiptfull error, which abuses us, when it seems, we may understand, and
obtain that, by account of yeates, which can, by no means, be had, without
experience of the very things, as they are. And so, many err, as I have said,
in thinking that they are fit to judge of Spirits, without having any
themselves. I say not, but that a learned man, though he have no great
knowledge of Spirit, may govern another man, who has Spirit. But this is to
be understood, both in the exterior, and in the interior way, so far, as it
may carry a conformity, with the Natural Powers, by the work of his
Understanding; and as for those things, which are Supernatural, he must be
careful, that all go on, with consent to Holy Scripture. And for the rest,
let him not vex himself; nor conceive, that he understands that, whereof,
indeed, he knows nothing; nor stifle, and choke those Spirits, which,
forasmuch as concerns these things, are governed by another, and a higher
Lord; for, in fine, they are not, without a Superior of their own.

Be not amazed at this; nor let these things seem impossible to you; for, all
is very possible to our Lord; but procure you, to reinforce your Faith, and to
humble your self, when you see, that our Blessed Lord knows, how to make a
poor, old, ignorant woeman, become a more knowing Creature, perhaps, in this
Science, then he, who may be otherwise, a very learned man. For, by means of
this Humility, one shall be able to do more good, both to the Souls of
others, and his own, then if he grow to be Contemplative, without that Virtue.
And I say, and say again, that if he be not a man of experience, or if, at
least, he have not very abundantly of Humility, wherewith to understand, that
he understands not the business, (and that yet, it is not impossible, but that
the thing, in question, may be true;) he shall both gain little himself, and
enable him also less, to gain, with whom he deals. But, on the other side,
if he have Humility, he may be well out of fear, that our Lord will ever
permit, that either the one, or the other, shall be deceived.

But now, concerning this Father, of whom I speak, as our Lord has given him
experience, in many things: so has he also endeavored, to acquire all that,
which may be gotten by study, in this kind. And whensoever his own experience
falls short, he informs himself by their means, who have more. And here, our
Lord comes to assist him, by giving him a great proportion of Faith; and by
this means, he has done very much good, both to his own Soul, and those
also of others; and mine, is one of them. For, our B. Lord, considering the
many afflictions, which I was to endure, it seems would provide, that sice
some of them would be brought upon me by such as were to govern my Soul,
there yet, might be others found, who would help me, to go through with those
troubles, and assist me much.

But as for this Religious man, of whom I have spoken so much, our Lord has
so entirely changed him, that, upon the matter, he is no longer to be known,
for the man he was. He has now also, given him much corporal strength,
whereby he is now enabled to do Penance, which was impossible for him,
before; for, he was ever sickly. And he is also full of courage, toward the
performing of any thing, which is good; and besides, he has variety of other
excellent things, which make it well appear, that his Vocation came most
particularly, from our Lord; And let him be Blessed, for ever.

For my part, I believe, that all this good is come to him, by the Favors,
which our Lord has done him in Prayer; for they are not painted things, or put
loosely on; but our Lord has been pleased, to have him brought to the Touch;
and he has proved therein, as one, who understands very well, the true value
of that merit, which is gotten by the well suffering of persecutions. And I
trust in the greatness of our Lord, that much good will accrue to some of his
Order, by his means; yea and even to the whole Order it self. Already this
begins to be understood; and my self have seen great Visions; and our Lord
has told me some particulars, both of him, and of the Rectour of the College
of the Society of JESUS, of whom I spoke; and they are things of great
admiration; as also of two other Religious men, of S. Dominick's Order; but
especially of one; for whose proceeding, and profit, in the way of Spirit, our
Lord has already manifested some things to the world, by real proof. I had
also heard formerly of him; but they are many instances, which concern the
person, of whom I spoke before; and one of them, I will here recount.

I was once with him, in a Locutorie, or Speaking-place of a Monastery; and so
very great, was the love of Almighty God, which my Soul, and Spirit
understood, to be even burning, in his, that I was even, as it were, absorpt by
it. For I went considering the greatnesses of Almighty God, and in how short a
time he had sublimed a Soul, to so admirable a State. He put me to much
confusion, when I heard him give ear, with so great humility, to those
things, which I would sometimes be saying to him concerning Prayer; I, who had
so little to say thereof, to such a person, as he was. But our Lord was content
to endure it, through the earnest desire I had, to see him a great Proficient,
in that kind. And it did me so much good, to be with him, that still he seemed
to inflame my Soul, with new fire, and with new desires, to serve our Lord,
even as if I had been but then to begin.

O my dear JESUS! what things are they, which a Soul can do, when it is all,
inflamed with thy love? and we ought to esteem such an one, very much, and
humbly beseech our Lord, to let it continue long, in this world. For, whosoever
ownes the same kind of love, should follow such a kind of Soul, as fast as he
can. It is matter of much comfort to a sick man, to find another, who is
touched, and tainted, by the same disease; for it serves him, in the way of some
consolation, to see, at least, that he is not alone. They help one another
excellently well, both to suffer, and to merit; They join back, to back, and
so support, and succor one another, like valiant, and resolved persons, to
venture a thousand lives, for the love of Almighty God; and, They aspire to no
other happiness, then to meet with some such occasion, as wherein they may offer
themselves in Sacrifice, for his Service. They are like gallant Soldiers; who,
to the end, that they may gain the Spoil of their Enemies, and so grow rich,
by that means, desire, that there may still be Wars; as understanding, that
there is no way, for them, to thrive, but by that means; for it is no less,
then their very occupation, to labor, and to suffer.

O what a great thing it is, when out Lord gives light to know, how much is
gained, by suffering for him? This point is not understood, well, and home,
till all be given over, and left. For, whosoever keeps any thing to himself,
gives a sign, that he esteems it to be worth somewhat. And if he esteem it
worth somewhat, it will be necessary for him, to be sorry to leave it. But
now here, all is imperfect, yea and even lost; and here comes the Proverb well
in, that He is a kind of lost man, who looks after that, which is lost. And
what greater loss, and perdition; what greater blindness; what greater misery,
and misfortune can there be, then to put a great value upon that, which is
absolutely worth nothing at all?

But (to return, to what I was saying) when I was extremely ioyed, by
considering the Soul of that man, (wherein it seems, that our Blessed Lord
was disposed, that I should clearly see those treasures, which he had
depositated therein) and discerning also the high favor, which he vouchsafed
to do me, in regard, that it had happened by my means, I found my self very
unworthy of it; but withal, I held those Favors, which our Lord had been
pleased to do him, in a much higher kind of account, then if he had vouchsafed
them to my self. And I paid our Lord an abundance of praise, to see, that his
Divine Majesty went so fulfilling my desires, and vouchsafed to hear my
prayer; which was, that he would vouchsafe, to stirre-vp such kinds of
persons, to his faithful Service.

And my Soul being then in such condition, as that it could no longer bear so
greatioy, she went directly out of her self, and lost her very self, to be the
greater gainer by it. She lost, I say, those cogitations, and considerations,
and the hearing of that Divine tongue, in which the Holie-Ghost seemed to
speak; and then I fell into a great Rapt, which made me, at it were, forgo
the use of my Senses, though it lasted but a very little while.

I saw Christ our Lord, with an excessive kind of Majesty, and Glory,
expressing much contentment, in that which passed there. And so himself was
pleased to tell me; as also, that I might see very clearly, that he loved to be
ever present, at such discourses; and how much he esteems himself to be
served, in that men take such delight, to speak of him.

Another time, when I was far off from hence, I saw him lifted-vp by Angels,
with much glory; and I understood by this Vision, that his Soul was advancing
apace.

But so it was, that a certain person in the world, to whom he had done much
good, and repaired some breaches in his reputation, and given also comfort to
his Soul, did yet raise a great false testimony against the honor of this
holy man; and he endured it, with much contentment, as he also did other
persecutions; and performed many actions, which were greatly for the Service
of Almighty God. Me thinks, it is not fit, to declare more of these things,
at this present. If afterward your Reverence shall think otherwise (because
your self knows, what they are already) they may also be set down here, for
the glory of Almighty God.

But now, of all these things, which I have delivered, about the Prophecies
concerning this House; and of others, which I shall also relate; as also of
several instances, in different kinds; they were all accomplished, and
fulfilled, about a matter of some three years, before they were known; some
more, and some less; as our Lord had declared them to me. And I ever told them
over, to my Ghostly Father, and to this Widow, my friend, to whom I had
leave to impart them, as I have said; and I understand, that she told them yet
to others; and they all know well, that I lie not. Nor will Almighty God, I
hope, permit me to be ever so miserable, as, in any thing, to speak other,
then truth; and much less, when it concerns things of such importance.

But a Brother-in-Law of mine, dying suddenly, and I being much troubled at it
(because he had not had time, to Confess before,) it was told me, in my
Prayer, that my Sister would also dye, after that manner; and therefore, that I
should go thither, and procure to dispose her to dye well. I told this, to my
Ghostly Father; and he not permitting me to go, I heard the self-same thing
again, and again. But when now I told him thus much, he willed me to go; and
said, that nothing would be lost, by the bargain: This Sister of mine, was at
a house of hers, in the Country; and I, going thither, to visit her, without
telling her of the particular cause, I gave her the best light I could,
concerning all things; and I persuaded her to go often to Confession, and, in
all things, to keep the accounts of her Conscience, very right, and straight.
As for her, she was a very virtuous woeman; and did, as she was desired, for
four or five years together, before her end; and then she dyed, upon a
sudden, without being so much as visited, and much less Confessed. But the
happiness was, that, according to the custom which she had held, there was
little more, then eight days expired, after her last Confession. This made me
a very glad woeman, when I knew of her death; and she stayed a very short time,
in Purgatory. Nor is it yet above eight days, since our Lord appeared to me,
after I had received the Blessed Sacrament, and was pleased, to let me see, how
he carried my Sisters soul, into glory.

In all these years, from the time, when the particular, concerning her, was
told me, till her very death, I forgot not that, which had been given me to be
understood, concerning her; as neither also, did my Companion. For, as soon as
she had heard of my Sisters death, she came toward me, with much admiration,
to see, how all had been fulfilled, Let our Lord be praised for ever, who
vouchsafes to take such care of Souls, to the end, that they may not perish;

Amen.
THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the same Discourse, about the Foundation of this House, of our
Glorious Father, S. Joseph. She speaks of the degrees, by which our Lord came
to appoint, that holy Poverty should be ordained there; and of the cause,
why she came from that Lady, with whom she was; and of other things also,
which succeeded.

But now, whilst I was with that Lady, of whom I have spoken, and with whom
I had remained, more then half a year, our Lord did so ordain, that a
certain holy woeman of our Order, fell out to come from a place, which was no
less, then threescore and then leagues off, from this; and to ariue here; and
to lengthen her way, by some leagues, on purpose, to speak with me. Our Lord
had moved her to this, in the self-same year, when he moved me, to make
another Monastery of this Order. And as soon as she had entertained this
desire, she sold whatsoever she possessed, and went her self, barefoot, to
Rome, to get, and bring-away the Dispatch of this Business. This woeman, is a
person of much Penance, and Prayer; and our Lord did her many Favors; and
our B. Lady appeared to her, and required her, still to do, what she was
doing; and she served our Blessed Lord, so incomparably beyond any thing that
I could do, that I was in confusion, even to appear in her presence. She
showed me the Dispatches, which she brought from Rome; and, in those fifteen
days, which she stayed with me, we took order, how we would make these
Monasteries; and, till I had spoken with her, it never had come to my
knowledge, that our Rule, till it was relaxed, did ever command, that none of
the Religious Houses of our Order, should have any propriety, in any goods.
Nor had my self had any purpose, to found any Monastery at all, without
Revenue; for, my intention was, that we should be free from the care of
procuring any such thing, as we might be in necessity, to use.

But this Blessed Woeman, having been instructed by our Lord, was grown to
understand that truth, very well, without being able so much, as to read; of
which truth, I was ignorant, even after haueing taken so much pains, to read
over the Constitutions of our Order. And as soon, as she acquainted me with
her purpose, I liked it well; though yet, I was afraid, that it would not be
yielded to; but that they would say perhaps, that these were but
impertinencies; and wish, that I would not do any thing, whereby others might
be put to suffer, through my fault. Though yet, in very deed, if I had been
alone, I would not have been detained one minute, from doing it; since it
would be a Regalo, to my Soul, to observe, and follow the Counsels of
Jesus Christ our Lord; for really, his Divine Majesty had already given me
great desires, to observe Poverty. So that, for my part, I made no doubt, but
that this was best; yea and I had long desired, that it might be possible, and
compatible with my state, that I might go begging my bread, for the love of
God, without having so much, as a house, or any thing else. But only, I was in
fear, that if our Blessed Lord should not give the self-same desires to
others, which he gave to me, they would live, perhaps, with disgust; and
consequently, that it might prove a cause of some distraction, or division. For
I saw, that there were some poor Monasteries, which lived not with much
recollection; and I considered not, that their not being recollected, was the
cause of their being so poor; and not their Poverty, the cause of their want
of Recollection. For, distraction makes them not more rich; nor is ever
Almighty God wanting to such, as serve him. In fine, my Faith was weak; which
that, of this Servant of God, was not.

But now I, (who would be taking the opinion of so many persons, for every
thing, which I was to do) could find no body of this mind; no nor even my
Ghostly Father himself; nor yet those other learned men, whom I consulted in
the case; but they brought me so many reasons against it, that I knew not,
which way to turn my self. For I, for my part, who knew already, that it was
the Rule of the order, and knew also, that it was a point of more perfection,
could not persuade my self, to have Revenue. And though sometimes, they
convinced me, toward their opinion, yet still, when I returned to Prayer, and
considered Christ our Lord, so very poor, and naked, upon the Cross, I was
not able, so much as to find patience, for being rich. But I humbly besought
him with tears, to ordain things, in such sort, that I might be poor, like
him. And I found so many inconveniences, even in having Revenue, and found it
to be so great a cause of disquiet, yea and even of distraction also, that I
did nothing but dispute the business, with those learned men. I wrote also about
it, to that Religious man, of S. Dominick's Order, who assisted us; and he sent
me two sheets of Paper, which he had written, by way of contradiction, to me;
and he grounded himself in Theology, for the persuading me, not to do it; yea
and he told me, that he had studied the point very well. To which I answered
him, that, for not following my Vocation, and for not performing the Vow, which
I had made of Poverty, and embracing the Counsels of Christ our Lord, in all
perfection, I meant not to make use of his Theology, nor of his Learning; and
therefore, that in this case, he might be pleased to excuse me.

For my part, I was very glad, when I found any Creature, who would help me;
and the Lady, with whom I was, assisted me particularly, heerin. There were
others also, who told me instantly, at the first, that they liked it well; but
afterward, when they considered it better, they found so many inconveniences,
in it, that they were earnest, in persuading me, not to proceed therein. But
now, I told them heervpon, that if they changed their opinion so soon, I would
hold my self fast, to the first.

At this time, upon my entreatie, and because this Lady had never seen that
holy man Fray Pedro de Alcantara, our Lord was pleased, that he should come to
her house; and he being so great a lover of Poverty, and having observed, and
practiced it, so many years, was not ignorant of the riches, which it
contained; and so he assisted me much; and commanded me, that I should, by no
means, forbear, to carrie-on my desire. And now, through his opinion, and
help (he being a person, who could best give counsel in it, as understanding
the matter in hand, by long experience) I resolved, that I would go seeking no
further. And being, one day, recommending the matter earnestly to Christ our
Lord, it pleased him, to tell me expressly, That I should, by no means,
forbear, to make the Monastery, poor; That this was both his Father's will,
and his; and That he would help me in it. Now, there were so great effects
heerof, in a Rapt, which I had, that I could, by no means, doubt, but that it
was of Almighty God. Another time, he told me, that there was confusion, in
having Revenue; and he said also other things, in praise of Poverty; assuring
me, that no such thing, as was necessary for the life of man, should ever be
wanting to such as serve him; of which want (as I was saying) I never was in
fear, for my part. Our Lord did also turn the heart of the Religious man of S.
Dominick's Order, of whom I said, that he wrote, to forbid me to make the
Monastery without Revenue. And now I was very well pleased, upon the
understanding of this; and upon having also got some other Votes, me thought I
possessed all the riches in the world, by resolving to live on Alms, for the
love of our Lord.

About this time, did my Provincial discharge his commandment under Obedience,
which he had imposed upon me, for staying there; and left it in mine own
choice, either to return, or else to stay, for a certain time. But there was
now, an Election of a Prioresse, to be made, in our Monastery; and they
advertised me, that there were many, who desired to impose that Charge upon
me; whereof the only thought, was of so great torment to me, that I could
easily have resolved my self, to endure any other Martyrdom in the whole
world, for the love of God; but, by no means, persuade my self to this. For,
besides the great trouble, in regard, that they are so very many in the House,
(which point I never liked) and for other reasons also, which did occurr
(besides, that I never loved to have Office, but did ever refuse them all it
seemed to me, that it was to put my Conscience it self, in great hazard. And so
I blessed Almighty God, for my not being present, in the place; and I wrote
also, to some friends of mine, that they would not give me their Vote.

But when now, I was so much pleased, not to find my self there, in that noise,
our Lord told me, that I should by no means forbear to go. And that, since I
desired a Cross, there was now, a good great one, provided for me; and that I
must not throw it away, but go on, with resolution, and courage; and that he
would help me; and therefore that I must instantly go. At this, I was mightily
troubled, and did nothing but weep; for I thought, it had been the Cross of
being Superior; and (as I was saying before) I could not persuade my self,
that this could possibly be good, for my Soul, in any kind; nor could I find
any reason at all, to induce me to it. I related all this Story, to my
Ghostly Father; and he commanded me to be gone; for it was evidently, of more
perfection, to do so; but only, because the heates were great, I might yet
stay where I was, some few days; for fear, least else, the journey might do
me harm; and that, in substance, it would suffice, if I were there, when the
Election should be made.

But, our Blessed Lord having ordered things otherwise, the business of my
journey, was instantly to be dispatched, and done. For, the restlesnes which I
had in my self, was very great, together with my even wanting power, to make
my Prayer; and it seemed also to me, withal, that I fell short, in the
performance of what our Blessed Lord had expressly commanded me; and the while,
I did but pass my time there, in ease, and pleasure; That it might seem, as if
I had no mind at all, to labor, and suffer; and That all, was, upon the
matter, but talking, whenever there grew to be question of serving Almighty
God. For else, I being able to be, where it was more perfection for me to find
my self, why did I forbear to effect it? And if I should dye, by the way; in
God's name, let me dye. But, in the mean time, (besides all the rest) I found
my self, with a great pressing upon my very heart; and our Lord, had wholly
deprived me, of all kind of gust, in my Prayer. In a word, I was brought to
such a condition, as that now, I was in a great deal of torment; and I humbly
prayed the Lady, where I was, that she would allow me her leave, to be gone.
For already my Ghostly Father, when he found me to be in that case, willed me
also, to begin my journey; and our Lord had also moved him, as well as me.
But the Ladic had so great a sense of trouble, for my departure, that the same,
grew also to be another torment to me. For, she spoke, of how much trouble it
had cost her, to obtain this favor of leave, at the hands of the Prouincial,
by means of a great deal of importunity. And really, I held it for a kind of
very strange thing, that she would be content, to give way, heerin;
considering, how very much, she was troubled at it; save only that I considered
her, as a very great Servant of Almighty God. And so, I telling her once, that
my going, imported his Service much, with many other things, of that kind;
and letting her also know, that it was possible, that I might return to see
her again, she grew (with trouble enough) to be yet content, at last, that I
should go.

But now I, for mine own part, had no difficulty at all, in doing it. For,
when once I came to understand, that the thing was of more perfection; and that
it more imported the Service of Almighty God, that I should go, then stay, I
did (by the contentment, which it gave me, to content him) pass easily over,
the pain of leaving that Lady, whom I saw so much troubled, at my journey;
as many other persons also were, to whom I was obliged there, very much; and
especially to my Ghostly Father, who was of the Society of JESUS; for, I
found my self very happy, in him. But yet, when I saw, that I was to want that
comfort, for the love of our Lord, it gave me contentment, to loose him. And
yet still, I could not well understand, how this might be. For I saw plainly,
that these contraryes, were in me, at once: To be delighted, To be comforted,
and To be ioyed, by that, which yet, did cost me sorrow, at the very heart.
For, on the one side, I was eased, and accommodated, with means, and time, to
have many hours of Prayer; and on the other, I saw plainly, that I was to
cast my self, into a kind of fire. For already, our Lord had foretold me, as
much; and that I went to undergo, and carry a heavy Cross; though yet,
indeed, I never conceived, that it could possibly have proved so very heavy,
as I found it to be, afterward. But yet, howsoever, I went so cheerfully on,
that I accounted my self even to be destroyed, in regard, that I could not cast
my self, instantly, into the battle, since our Lord had a mind, that I
should undertake it; and so, his Divine Majesty gave me strength; and fetched
it, even out of my very weakness. I knew not well, (I say,) how this could be;
but yet I grew to think upon this Comparison. If, I possessing some rich
Jewel, or any thing else, which gave me great contentment, it should happen to
me, to know, that some person, whom I loved, even better then my self, desired
to have it, and that I aspired more, to content him, then to please my self, it
would fall out, in that case, that I should enjoy more contentment, without
that very thing, then I enjoyed before, by the possession thereof, since it
proved to give contentment to that person. And therefore now, since the
contentment, which I have in contenting him, exceeds mine own proper
contentment, the trouble, which I might have, by wanting the Jewel, or even
any other thing, which I could love, were taken away; and so also, would the
sense of that contentment be, which it gave me before. So that, howsoever I
should have been in pain, to leave such persons, as were so greatly troubled
for my parting from them (the rather, in regard, that I am, even in condition,
and nature, so very grateful, for the Favors, which are done me, and
therefore this accident, if it had arrived, at some other time, would have
afflicted me much), yet now, the case was such, that I could not be troubled at
it, even though I would. It fell out also, in very deed, to import so very
much, that I should not have stayed there, one day longer, for as much, as
concerns the business of this Blessed House, that I know not, how it could
possibly have been concluded, if I had not gone away, just at that time.

O greatness of Almighty God! for I am even amazed, when I consider it. But
now, I discern very well, that his Divine Majesty, had a particular care, to
help me; to the end, that we might settle, and secure, this poor little
Corner Our Blessed Lord, is still as good as his word.
of God. For really, I hold it to be such; and that it is a Habitation, wherein
his Divine Majesty is delighted; as he told me himself once, when I was in
Prayer, That this House was even the very Paradise, of his delight. And so,
very agreably to this, he has brought certain Souls hither, in whose
company now I live, with very great The great Charity, and Humility of the
Saint.
confusion to my self. For it would not have been in my power, to have so much
as wished for such, as they are, in order to this holy end; they being persons
of so great Austerity, and Poverty, and Prayer; and carrying all this weight,
with such a deal of contentment, and gust, that there is not one Creature, in
all the Company, who does not hold her self, for wholly undeserving, to have
approached to such a place, as this; and especially some, in particular, whom
our Lord was pleased, to call, from out of the gallanterie, and vanity of the
world; where (according to the laws of this life) they might have had
contentment enough. But now, our Blessed Lord has given them the same
contentment, so far enlarged, and increased, as makes it to be most clearly
seen, That even here, they have a hundred, for one, in comparison of what they
left, for his sake. And now they can never satisfye themselves, with giving him
most humble thanks, for so high a Favor. He has also changed others, from
good, to better. To such, as are very young, he gives both courage, and
knowledge; to the end, that they may desire nothing else; and that they may
truly understand, that, to be severed from all things of this life, is even
here, a very enjoying, of more repose. To them, who are of more years, and
less health, he gives such a degree of strength, as that they may be able to
endure the same austerities of Penance, which the rest of the Community
undergoes.

O my dear Lord! and how well does it now appear, that thou art powerful?
Nor is there any need, to seek out reasons, and ways, for thy doing,
whatsoever thou desire. For even, above the Discourse of our Natural Reason,
thou make all things very possible; and give us to understand very well,
that, in fine, we have need of no more, then to love thee, in good earnest; and
to leave all things, in good earnest, for thee. But indeed, it must be done, in
good earnest; to the end, that thou, O my Lord, and my God, may make all
things easy to us. And here, it may come handsomely in, that thou do, but as
it were, feign, or counterfeit, the infusion of a kind of difficulty, upon
the observing of thy Law. For, as for me, I cannot find, O my Lord, where
indeed, that difficulty is; nor how that way can be accounted strict, or hard,
which conducts us to thee. But I rather plainly see, that it is a fair, and
Royal way; and no obscure, and paltrie little path; but a way wherein every
body goes safe, who will put himself, in good earnest, upon the journey. For,
all doubtful passages, and rocks, wherein one may be in danger to catch a
Fall, are found to be very far off, from hence; in regard, that here we are
so very remote, from all occasions of Sin. But I call that other, a path, and
a wicked path; and a narrow, and very dangerous way; which, on the one side,
has a huge deep valley, into which one may fall; and on the other, a hideous
rock, with a precipice, from whence, upon a very instant, ere he be aware, he
may break his neck, and his bones, into a thousand pieces.

He, who loves thee, O thou, my eternal Good, with realitie of truth, goes
securely, by a Royal, safe, and large way; which lies far from all such
precipices of danger. And no sooner has such an one, tript never so little,
but instantly, thou, O Lord, lendest him thy hand, to help him up. Nor will,
even a Fall, nor many Falls, be his ruin, if he love thee, and not the things
of this world. Such an one, walks by the Valley of Humility; nor am I able to
understand, why any Creature should be afraid, to put himself into this way of
Perfection. And I beseech our Blessed Lord, (even by what he is) that he will
give us rightly to understand, how ill, that security is, which we look for,
in the midst of such manifest dangers, as where, one is to be still, trudging
on, in the rank, and row of the world; and that we may believe, our true
security, and safety, to consist, in our procuring, to be still going on, in
the way of doing Service, to Almighty God. Away, away; let us all fix our eyes
upon him; and let us not have any fear, that this Sun of Justice, will set,
or ever permit us, to walk in such sort, by night, as that we may grow to be
lost, unless we first resolve to leave him. Nor let us fear to walk, even in
the midst of Lions, of whom, every one seems greedy, to be carryingaway his
several piece; and these are certain things, which the world is wont to call,
by the name of Honors, and great Estates, and Delights. And the Devil, on the
other side, seems also willing here, to fright us, with certain frivolous
toys. A How devout, this dear Saint is.
thousand times over, I am amazed; and ten thousand times, would I desire, even
to dissolve my self, with pouring forth my tears; and to cryout to the whole
world, all at once, to proclaim mine own great wickedness, and blindness; so to
try, if that, might do any good, toward the making men, at last, open their
eyes. Let him open them, through his own infinite goodness, who knows how to
do it; and not permit, that ever mine, may turn blind again,

Amen.
THE SIX AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
She prosecutes the Subject, which she had begun; and declares the final
conclusion of the Foundation of this Monastery of the Glorious S. Joseph, of
Auila; and of the great contradictions, and persecutions, which the Religious
women were put to suffer, even after they had taken the Habit; and of the
many troubles, and temptations, which she was feign to undergo; and how
his Divine Majesty drevv her out of all, with victory, to his own praise,
and glory.

BEing parted from that City, where I was, I passed with much contentment, by
the way, resolving to undertake, and go through, with all things, which our
Lord should be pleased to lay upon me; and that, with a most frank, and entire
submission, of my whole heart. Now, the selfsame night, when I arrived at Auila,
our Dispatch, with the Breue from Rome, arrived also there. So that, I was
amazed at it; and so also were all they, who knew of the have, wherewith our
Lord had solicited me, to come away; when they also knew withal, the great
necessity, which there was thereof, and the coniuncture also otherwise, which
appeared then. For, I found the Bishop there, and that holy man, Fray Pedro de
Alcantara, and a certain Caualier also, a very great Servant of our Lord, in
whose house, that holy man Fray Pedro, was lodged. For, that Caualier, was a
person, with whom, generally, the Servants of Almighty God, were ever wont,
to find a safe retreat. Now, both those persons, joining together, obtained so
much, at the Bishop's hands, as that he was content to admit of the Monastery;
which was not a thing of small importance, considering that it must live upon
Alms. But the Bishop was really a friend to such, as were indeed resolved to
serve our Lord; for instantly, he would apply himself to do them favor. But
the approbation of that holy old man, and his dealing earnestly, with several
persons, to assist us, was the thing, which made an end of the work.

If I had not chanced to ariue in this very coniuncture, as I have said, I
know not, how the besines could possibly have been dispatched; for, this holy
man stayed a very little while, here; and I think, not above eight days; and
even then, he was very ill, at ease; and shortly after that time, our Lord
took him out of the world, to himself. And it seemed indeed, that his Divine
Majesty had preserved him, in this world, till just this business might be
dispatched; for it had been long, (that is, I think, a matter of two years,)
since he had been very ill, in point of health.

But all that, which they resolved now, was to be governed with a great deal
of secrecy; for else, nothing would have taken effect; so ill was the people
conceited of it, as appeared afterward. Now, our Lord disposed things so, that
a Brotherin-Law of mine, should be sick, at that very time; and that his wife
should not be here; but that he must be in so very great need of help, that
they gave me leave to go, and be with him; and so, by occasion of that, there
was nothing known; howsoever somewhat grew to be suspected, concerning some
persons, though yet it were not fully believed. And it is a thing, to make men
wonder, how my Brother-in-Law, continued no longer sick, then seemed to be just
necessary, for our business; and should recover his health, just as soon as it
was fit; to the end, that so, both I, might be disengaged, and he might leave
his house free. But our Lord, as I was saying did instantly restore his health;
at which, the Patient was in wonder. Yet even then, had I difficulty enough to
procure, by means of many different persons, to make them give way, that the
business might go forward; and; both with the sick man, and with the workmen,
that the House might be finished, out of hand; and be put into the Form of a
Monastery. For, there was very much of it unfinished, at that time; and my
Companion was then, not here; for we held it indeed more convenient, that she
should be absent, for the better hiding of the business; and I saw, that it was
of extreme importance, that all should be dispatched, with diligence, for
many reasons; and for this, amongst the rest, because it was feared every
hour, that they would send me away.

In the mean time, I had so many occasions of vexation, and trouble, that I
might have cause to doubt, whether this were not that Cross, whereof I was
warned; though on the other side, it seemed, that this was but a little one, in
comparison of that other great Cross, which our Lord had formerly said, that I
was to bear.

But yet, all being now concluded, our Lord was pleased, that some should take
the Habit, upon S. Bartholomews day; at which time, the B. Sacrament was
exposed, with all the Solemnity, and devotion, which we could possibly use. And
so, the Monastery of our most Glorious Father S. Joseph, fell out to be
erected, and made, in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand, five hundred,
seauentie two. And it came then, to my turn, (together with two others of our
former Monastery, who, by accident, were abroad, at that time) to give them
the Habit. But now, since the House where the Monastery fell out to be made,
was that, wherein my Brother-in-Law, had dwelt before, (for he, as I said, had
bought it, the better to disguise this business) I had leave to stay there. And
I did nothing at all, but by the opinion of learned men; that so I might be
sure, not to depart, one hairs breadth, from my Obedience. And when they saw,
that the thing was to be so aduantagious to the whole Order, in many respects,
they told me, I might do as I did; though yet, it were fit to proceed with
great reservation, and secrecy; and to take care, that my Superiors might not
know, what I was doing. For, how little soever the imperfection had been, which
I must have committed therein, I conceive, that I would have giuen-ouer the
erecting, I say not, of one Monastery, but of a thousand, rather then have
fallen into it; and this, is certain. And though I desired, to sever my self,
wholly, from the world, that so I might follow my Profession, and Calling, with
more perfection, and Clausure, I desired it yet, in such sort, as that,
whenever I should come to understand, that it was to be, for the greater
Service of Almighty God, to give it over, I would instantly have been sure, to
do it, with entire peace, and repose.

But the while, it was a kind of being even in glory, for me, to see the B.
Sacrament exposed; and that, four poor They were very noble, though they
were poor.
Orphans were provided for, since they were taken without Dowry; and they were
very great Servants of Almighty God. For, this was much endeavored, at the
beginning, that such persons should enter, and be received, as might lay a good
foundation, by their example, for the better effecting the intention, and
design, which we had, to carry all things on, with much perfection, and
Prayer; and that such a work, in fine, might be finished, as were to prove,
for the Service of our Blessed Lord, and in honor of the Habit of his Glorious
Mother; for upon this, did all the anxieties of my care, work, and beat. And
it gave me also great comfort, to have done expressly that, which our Blessed
Lord had been pleased to command me; and that there might be one Church more,
(and the same be dedicated, under the name of my Glorious Father, S. Joseph)
then there was before. Not yet, that I conceived my self, to have done any
thing in it, at all; for, I never had any such conceit; neither have I yet;
but I ever understand, that it is our Blessed Lord, who did it; and that, as
much as concerned my part, was accompanied with so great imperfections, that I
rather plainly see, that there is much more, for which to blame me, then to
thank me. But yet I must confess, that it goes with me for a great Regalo, to
see, that his Divine Majesty was pleased to use me, as an instrument (I being
so very wicked, as I am) for so great a work, as this. So that, in fine, I
remained with much satisfaction, and gust, in this behalf; and, as it were,
even out of my self, in great depth of Prayer.

But now, upon the end of all this, which might last about some three, or four
hours, the Devil procured to give me such a kind of Spiritual battle, as I
will now declare. He The Devil is still, himself.
represented to me a doubt, whether that, which I had done, had been well done;
whether I had not gone against my obligation of Obedience, by procuring to
effect certain things, without having been directed therein, by my
Provincial; That I might very well imagine, that my carriage had been of
disgust to him, in regard, that I had submitted the business, to the Ordinary,
and that, without having acquainted him with it, before; though yet, on the
other side, it be true, that when he would not admit of the Foundation, and
saw, that I did not alter my course, I might probably enough imagine, that he
would not care much, though it went on; and Whether these new Religious, would
be content to live in so great restraint; Whether, they were not to want bread,
to eat; Whether the whole business, were not an absurd, and foolish thing; and
Who, in fine, must put me upon it, since already I had a Monastery of mine
own.

But now, all that, which our Blessed Lord had commanded me; and all those
opinions of the learned men, whom I had consulted; and all the Prayer, which I
had caused to be made, and that, in effect, without ceasing; yea and also for
the space of more, then two whole years; all this, I say, was as absolutely
slipped out of my memory, as if it had never been there; and I only remembered
now, that I did it according to mine own opinion. But all the virtues, and
Faith, which I had before, were suspended in me then, without my having
strength, either to act any thing, or even so much, as to defend my self,
against so many assaults.

The Devil was also tampering with me, and examined me, how it came to pass,
that I would needs go shut my self up, in so straight a House; and that, with
so many infirmities upon my back; and how I would be able to undergo so great
Penance, and give over to live, in so goodly, and delightful a place, as the
other was, where I had always had so much gust, and so many friends; and
perhaps, these others, would not prove so; That I had taken very much upon me;
That, perhaps, it would cost me despair, at the last; That the Devil had
pretended, but to deprive me of repose, and peace, that so I might not be able
to frequent Prayer; and to make me grow disordered, and disturbed; and so, by
those degrees, to loose my Soul.

Such things as these, assembled in such sort as I have related, did the Devil
take care, to set before me; and so, as that it was not almost in my power, so
much as once to think, of any thing else; and by this means, did he bring
such an affliction, and obscurity, or rather downright darkness upon my heart,
as I am not able to express. But now, when I found my self to be in this case,
I went to visit the Blessed Sacrament; though yet I was not able to recommend
my Soul, to it; as finding my self, in my opinion, with a certain kind of
profound affliction, as if then, I had been, in no less, then the very agony
of death. To treat with any body, about it, I was not yet to presume; for
there was not yet so much, as a Ghostly Father appointed for me. O my dear
Lord! what a miserable kind of life is this, which we lead, where there is no
secure contentment, nor any thing, which is not subject to change? It This is
such a kind of world, as wherein, things will ever go thus.
was so very very lately, that, me thought, I would not have exchanged my
condition (in the way of being content) with any Creature of the whole world;
and now, the self-same cause, even of the self-same contentment, did so torment
me, that I knew not what to do with my self. O that we would look, with
attention, upon the things of this world! for, every body would then be
quickly able to find, by experience, how little he were to lodge, either his
contentment, or coffeehouse, upon it. It is most certain, in my opinion,
that this was one of the feircest kind of fitts of affliction, that ever I had
endured, in my whole life. And it seems, as if my very Spirit, had half
prophesied, how, much did still rest behind, to be endured; though yet, that
arrived not so far, as this, if it had continued.

But now, our Blessed Lord did not permit this poor Servant of his, to suffer
long; nor did he ever fail, to succor me, in my tribulations; nor did he
also, in this. For now he gave me a little A true answer to all the Devils
Objections.
light, wherewith to see, that all this, was of the Devil; and that I might
discern the truth; and that the whole business, was but to put me into a
fright, by lies; and so, I came, by degrees, to call to mind, and to recover
the great resolutions, which I had formerly conceived, toward the Service of
our Blessed Lord; as also my desires, to suffer for him. And so I grew also to
consider, that if, really, I intended to fulfill them, I was not to busy my
self, about procuring rest, and ease; but if I would endure afflictions, that
this was the true way, to merit; and that, if I would goethrough with them, for
the Service of Almighty God, they would be in stead of Purgatory, for me; and
of what was I afraid? and that, since I desired afflictions, these, which were
offered now, would be very fit, and good; and that, where the greatest
contradiction was felt, the richest gain would be found; and why should my
heart fail me, for his Service, to whom I owed so much? And by these, and
other considerations, and employing all the courage I had, I made a promise, in
presence of the B. Sacrament, to do all the very uttermost, that I could, to
get leave to come to this Monastery; as also, if I might do it, with safe
conscience, to promise Clausure.

But now, at my resolving upon this, the Devil fled instantly away, and left me
very quiet, and contented; and so I have remained ever since. And all that,
which is observed in this House, either by way of Enclosure, or Penance, in
any kind, has made it self both very delightful, and seems very little. And
the contentment, on the other side, is so extremely great, that I am thinking,
several times, if I were able to find any thing, in the whole world, which
could be of so much gust to me, as this. I knew not also, whether, perhaps,
even this, might not be the true reason, why I enjoy better health now, then
ever; or else that, perhaps, our Lord would have it so, because perhaps, there
might be some necessary use thereof; and because it is but reason, that I
should also do thosethings, which are performed by all the rest; and
therefore, that he is pleased, to give me so much comfort, as to be able to do
it, though yet, it be with some little trouble. But certainly all they, who see
it, and are privy to the great infirmities, to which I am subject, be amazed
at it. Blessed be our Lord, who gives it all; and has power enough, wherewith
to do it.

But I failed not, in the mean time, to be very well wearied, with such a
stiff contention, and strife, as this, though yet, I laughed at the Devil; for
I clearly saw, it was he. And I conceive, that our Blessed Lord would permit
it, because I never knew, till then, what it was, to be in any disgust, for
being a Religious woeman; Nor did I ever find any, during the space of eight
and twenty years, and more, that I had been one. But now, his Divine Majesty
permitted it to come upon me, to the end, that I might the better understand
the great Favor, which it had pleased our Lord, to do me in that State; yea
and the torment, from which he had freed me; as also, to the end, that, if
afterward I saw any one, who should be afflicted in the same kind, I might not
be frighted at it, but might both have compassion of her, and know also, how to
give her comfort, if there should be cause.

But now having passed this brunt, and being desirous to rest a little, when I
should have dined, (for, in all the night before, I had taken none; as also in
many other nights, I had not failed of care, and trouble enough, when yet I
was also tired out, in the days; as they knew, very well, what passed, not
only in the Monastery, but in the City, there was grown, to be a great
deal of noise, and disquiet, upon the occasions, which have been formerly
touched, yea and there seemed, to be some color, for the same) just then, the
Prioresse required me, to be called; and that I must go to her, at the
instant. And meeting with her commandment, I left my Religious, full of pain,
and care, and so, instantly, went to her. But I then perceived well, that I was
to be sure of troubles enough; though yet the House, being then dispatched, I was
not in very much pain. Howsoever, I betook my self to Prayer, beseeching our
Blessed Lord, to be good to me; and begging of my Father S. Joseph, that he
would bring me back again, to his House; and, in the mean time, I offered-vp
all that, which I might chance to endure, for his sake; and I was to be very
well pleased, if it fell out, that I might suffer any thing for him, or be
able to serve him. And so I went away, with opinion, that they would instantly
commit me to Prison. Whereby I yet conceive, that they would so, have done me,
a great deal of pleasure; for then, I should not have been vexed with their
talking; and I should have enjoyed a little Solitude, whereof I was in very
great want; for they had even, as it were, grinded me to dust, by forcing me,
to converse so long, with such a multitude of people.

But being then arrived, and having given account of my self, to the Superior,
she was a little appeased; and they all agreed, to send me to the Prouincial;
and so the Cause was to depend, before him. And as soon, as I was come
thither, for Judgment, I found my self with much contentment, to see, that I
was suffering somewhat, for the love of our Lord. For, as for having done any
thing, either against his Divine Majesty, or yet against the Order, I
conceived not, that I had offended, but rather had endeavored to augment it,
to the uttermost of my power; and would be glad, with my whole heart, to dye for
it. For, all my desires were, that it might be fulfilled, according to the
uttermost perfection. But in the mean time, I called to mind the Sentence,
which was passed upon Christ our Lord; and I acknowledged, what a Nothing this
was, in respect of his. I accused my self then, as in fault, yea and as very
faulty; and so I make no doubt, but I was, in the opinions of all them, who
knew not very much, of the Cause. And after they had given me a great
reprehension, (though not yet, with so much rigor, as the fault might seem to
deserve; and as many of them told the Prouincial, that I had committed) I was
absolutely, for my part, resolved, to hold on this course. And so I rather
desired, that they should pardon me; and then punish me, if they would; but by
no means, remain unkind, or ill-affected, toward me.

In some things, I plainly saw, that they had no reason at all, against me; but
that they condemned me, without cause; as when they said, I had done,
whatsoever I had done, to the end, that I might be held in great opinion, and
to be talked of; and such other toys, as that. But in others, I saw clearly,
that they said true; as namely, that I was much worse, then the rest; and that,
since I had not kept the Obseruances of that House, which were maintained, with
so much piety, and devotion there, how could I come to think of performing
another Rule, of more rigor? and, that this, was but to raise-vp novelties in
the world, and to scandalize the people.

But yet, all this, caused no tumult in my heart, nor put me to any pain at
all; though yet I showed to be in some; least otherwise, they might conceive,
that I undervalued what they said. But, in fine, the Prouincial commanded me,
to give account of my self, to them of the former Monastery, and that I must
necessarily do it. And so, being at great peace within my self; and our Lord
assisting me therein; I gave such a discharge of my actions, as that neither
the Prouincial, nor the Religious Women, who were in that Assembly, found
any thing, for which to condemn me. After this, I spoke more plainly to him,
in private; and I did it also more at large; and he was very well satisfied
with me; and promised me, that, if the City should proceed toward a being
quiet again, he would give me leave to go to my Monastery. But the disorder,
and distemper of the City, was so very great, as I shall now declare.

Within two or three days, after that time, the Governor, and other
Magistrates of the Town, and some also of the Chapter of the Cathedral
Church, met together; and they all declared jointly, That, by no means, they
must permit the work, to go forward; That it would result, to the evident
disadvantage of the Commonwealth; That they must not fail, to remove the B.
Sacrament, from thence; and, by no means, permit the business, to proceed. One
only Doctor of S. Dominick's Order, although he were of a contrary opinion
to us (I mean not, in that point of the Monastery, but in that other, of
being incapable of Revenue, and Poor) said, that there was no cause, why the
House should instantly be dissolved, after that manner, but that it ought to be
well considered; That there would be time enough, for this; That it was a Case,
which belonged to the Bishop; and diverse other things, of this kind, which did
very much good to the business. For, considering how great the fury of the
people was, it was happy, that they did not put the dissoluing of the House,
presently, in execution. And this showed, that the thing, in fine, was to take
effect; and that our Blessed Lord, was pleased, to have it so; and that they
all could do little, against his will, and pleasure; but yet, they all
assigned their reasons, and expressed good zeal, in what they said. And yet
thus, without their giving offense to Almighty God, they made both me, and
diverse others suffer, who favored the Business.

The tumultuous disposition of the people, was so great, that now there was no
talk of any thing else; and they all agreed, in condemning me; and in going to
complain of me, to the Prouincial, and to my Monastery. As for me, I was no
more troubled, at what they said, then if they had not said it; but the only
fear I had, was, whether, or no, they would dissolve the House; for, this put
me to a great deal of pain; and so also did it, to see, that the persons, who
assisted me, lost credit, and were otherwise also put to much inconvenience by
it. But as for that, which they said of me, I was rather glad of it, then
otherwise. And if I had had any Faith, it would have made no alteration in me
at all; but when there is a want in some one virtue, all the rest are wont to
be cast into a kind of slumber. And so I was much troubled, during those two
days, wherein the two Assemblies, whereof I spoke, were made amongst the
people. And I being very much afflicted, our Lord said these words to me: Do
thou not know, that I am powerful? Of what art thou afraid? And thus did he
assure me, that the House should not be dissolved; whereby I remained full of
comfort.

But then, did they dispatch their Agents, or Sollicitours, to the Council
Royal, with their Informations; and so, there came order from thenc, to send a
Relation thither, of the whole proceeding. So that heet, we might behold the
beginning of a great Suite in Law; for already, some were gone to the Court, on
the part of the City; and others were instantly to go, on the part of the
Monastery; and, on the other side, neither had we any money, nor did I know,
what to do; but our Lord provided all things, for us. And as for me, my Father
Provincial did never forbid me to deal in it; for he is so true a friend to
all Virtue, that, although he did not assist in the work, yet he would not be
against it; though yet withal, it be very true, that he would never give me
leave, to pass to this new Monastery, till he might see, what kind of end the
Business would have. In the mean time, the Servants of God, were all alone, and
did more, with their prayers, then all that, which I was able to do, by way of
negotiation; though yet still, it were necessary, to use diligence enough.
Sometimes it would seem, that all was wanting; and especially one day, before
the Provincial came hither, when the Prioresse commanded me, not to treat any
more, about that business, but to give it utterly over. But then went I to
Almighty God, and said: O my Lord; This House is not mine, but it was made for
thee; and now, there is no Creature, to negotiate the business for us; and
therefore, thy Divine Majesty must be pleased to do it. Heervpon, I found my
self really, and instantly, at so great ease, and so without any manner of
trouble, as if I had had the whole world, on my side, to employ it self for me;
and so I held all the business, to be in safety. Upon this, a certain Priest,
a very great Servant of Almighty God, who had assisted me always, and was a
great friend, and favorer of all Perfection, went to the Court, to follow the
business; and labored in it very much; and so also, that holy Caualier, of
whom I made mention before, did very much therein, and showed it favor, in
all kinds. He endured also great troubles, and persecutions for it, otherwise;
and I found him ever, like a Father, to it; and so I do also, to this day. And
our Lord did still inspire them, who were our friends, with such a deal of
fervor, that every one of them, took our business to heart, as much as if it
had been properly, his own; and as if his whole honor, and life, had been
concerned in it; though yet, they had indeed, no other interest, then only, in
regard, that they thought, it did import the Service of Almighty God.

But now, it seems clearly, that his Divine Majesty, assisted the good, and
virtuous Priest, who was also a Doctor; and he indeed, was one of them, who
helped us most; for, the Bishop employed him about it, in his name, in a
certain great Giunta, or public Meeting, which was framed about it; and
therein, he stood alone, for us, against them all; and, in fine, he found
means to appease them. For, he made a kind of ouerture, by a certain way,
which was sufficient, to entertain, and suspend their proceeding; and indeed
there was not any one, who could otherwise have sufficed, to keep them from
resolving instantly, to employ even their very lives, for the overthrowing of
the Business. This Servant of God, of whom I speak, was also the man, who gave
the Habit to the Religious, and set-vp the B. Sacrament there; and he was
subject to persecution enough, for his labor.

This battery continued about half a year; and, to relate in particular
manner, the great troubles, which passed in all that time, would be along
business. For my part, I wondered extremely, at what a coil the Devil kept
against a few poor Women; and how every body could understand, that,
forsooth, twelve Religious, and a Prioresse (for, they were no more) could be
thought, to be of such mischief, to a whole City. I mean, such mischief to
them, who opposed it; but as for the Religious, they were, indeed, of so
austere life, that, if any hurt, or error, were to grow by that design, it
must be only to them. And as for being of prejudice to the place, it carried
not so much, as any appearance; and yet they could meet with enough, who would
find means (and that, forsooth, with good conscience) to cross it. But yet
now at length, they came so far, as to affirm, that (provided always, that
they would get Revenue, and live upon it) they were content to give way, and
that the Business might go on.

For my part, I was then so weary, to see all them, who assisted us, in so
great trouble (which I regarded much more, then mine own) that I grew to be of
opinion, that it would not be very ill done, to accept their License, under the
condition of having Revenue, till the times might grow quieter by degrees; and
that so, we might get to be without it, afterward. At other times, I, being
very imperfect, and wicked, began to think, that perhaps our Lord would not
mislike, that it should be so, since we could not obtain our end, otherwise;
and therefore, I was already grown, to consent to this Accord. But being in
Prayer, the night before the final conclusion thereof, when the Accord was
even already begun, our Lord commanded me, that I should consent to no such
thing, as they intended; and that, if we began to take Revenue, they would
never give us leave to forgo it; and diverse other things, he also told me.
The self same night, that holy Creature, Fray Pedro de Alcantara, appeared to
me; for then he was dead. And before also he dyed, he wrote to me; and taking
notice of the great opposition, and persecution, which was raised against us,
he said, he was heartily glad, that this Foundation was made with so great
contradiction, and how that, served him for a sign, that our Lord would grow
to be greatly served in this Monastery, since the Devil took such pains, to
hinder it. But yet, he persuaded us still, that we should, by no means, accept
of living upon Revenue; yea and he pressed this point, in two or three several
parts of the same Letter; and told me, that if we persisted therein, we should
grow to effect the Business, according to our own desire. I had already seen
him, at two other several times, after his death; and I beheld the much
glory, wherein he was; and he gave me no apprehension of fear at all, but
rather ioyed me much; for he never appeared to me, but in the quality of a
Glorified Body; yea and full of excessive glory; and so accordingly, he gave
me great joy to see him; save, that he partly showed himself, with a kind of
severity, or rigor, when he told me, that, in no case, I should accept of
Revenue; and why would I not follow his counsel? And so he instantly
vanished; and I remained amazed. I went therefore, the next day, to that
Caualier (he being the person, to whom we still carried all the business, as to
one, who assisted us most, therein) and I told him, what had passed; and that
he should, by no means, agree, to take any Revenue, but rather, to let the
Suite go on. Now, he was even much more earnestly of the same mind, then I was
my self; and was very glad, to find me of his; and afterward told me also, how
unwillingly he ever spoke, about making any agreement, or composition.

But a certain other person, began again, ere long, to declare himself
against us; and truly, she was a good Servant of Almighty God; but yet she
wished (though she might have good intentions therein) that since the business
was in so good state, they might do well, to put it into the hands of Lawyers.
Upon this, I had a great deal of disquiet; for, some of them, who assisted
megrew also to be of that opinion; though yet, indeed, it were a very trick of
the Devil; and perhaps, it was a morsel of the hardest desgestion, of all the
rest. But our Lord assisted me in all; for, that, is the sum of the business;
and it is no easy thing, to give all that, to be well understood, which
passed, between the beginning, and finishing, of this Monastery; although this
last half year, and the other, which was the first, were the most troublesome
parts of the whole time.

Yet now, the City being grown, in some sort, to be appeased, that Father of
S. Dominick's Order, who was a Graduate in Theology, laid so handsomely about
him (though he were not present then) that he assisted us much. Our Lord
brought him also afterward, in a certain coniuncture of time, when he did us a
great deal of good; and it seemed, that his Divine Majesty had induced him to
that journey, for that only purpose. For, himself told me afterward; that he
had no occasion at all, to come, but only, by haueing heard of this business;
and that he grew to know of it, merely, by chance. He stayed here, as long as
was necessary; and when he was returning home, he procured, by certain
means, which he used, that our Father Prouincial should give leave, both that
I, and some others also, might come to stay, at our new Monastery; which yet
seemed a kind of impossible thing, for him to grant, so soon; yea and that I
might also do the office of teaching, and instructing such, as were there
already. But the day, when I got thither, was of extreme comfort to my heart.
For, being in Prayer in the Church, before I entered into the Monastery, and
being in a kind of Rapt, I saw Christ our Lord appear; and, me thought, he
received me with great love, and put a Crown upon my head; and gave me thanks
for the Service, which I had done to his Mother. At another time also, we being
all, in the Quire, and in Prayer, after Compline, I saw our B. Lady, in
excessive glory, with a white Mantle, upon, and about her; and she seemed to
shelter, and protect us all, under that Mantle; and I understood, how high a
degree of glory, our Blessed Lord would vouchsafe to the Religious of that
House.

When we came once to celebrate the Office of the Church, the devotion, which
the people began to carry toward us, was very great; and already, there
grew to come more Religious to us; and our Lord began also, to incline even
them, to do us most favor, and, most bountifully, to impart all things to us,
who had persecuted us most. And they came to approve that, which they had
misliked before; and so, by little and little, they let their Suite fall. And
they said, that now they were come to understand, that it was the work of
Almighty God, since his Divine Majesty had been pleased, that it should
proceed, and prosper, in despite of so great contradiction. Yea now, there is
not a Creature, who conceaues, that it had been well done, to desist from the
Work; and accordingly, they take much care, to provide us with Alms, even
without our desiring any thing, at any time, of any body. So that, it
seems, our Blessed Lord stirs them up, to send it to us, of themselves; and
so we pass without the want of any thing, in the world, which is necessary;
and I hope in our Blessed Lord, that it shall, for ever, be so. For, being so
few, as we are, if withal we shall do our duty, (as now his Divine Majesty
gives us grace to do,) I make my self very sure, that we shall want nothing;
and so, have no occasion, to be troublesome, or importunate, toward any
Creature; but that, as I was saying, our Lord will take care of us hereafter,
as he has been pleased to do, hitherto. And Note the description which the
Saint makes here of her Religious.
for me, it is an excessive comfort, to see my self settled here, with such
Servants of Almighty God, as are so totally untied, from all the persons, and
things of this world. Their conversation, and discourse, is only, how they may
be able, to proceed best, and fastest, in the Service of his Divine Majesty.
Solitude is the greatest Solace, they can enjoy; and to think that they shall
see any Creature, but only such, as may assist them, toward the enkindling;
and inflaming their hearts, to the love of their Spouse, is the greatest trouble
they have; yea though it should be, from the nearest kindred they know. And so,
there comes no body hither, but such as love to treat of that business; for,
neither would he content them; nor they, him. And their language being only to
speak of our Blessed Lord, as it is, they neither understand, nor be
understood, unless the same language be spoken.

We keep, and observe the Rule of our B. Lady of Carmel; and this, entirely,
as it ought to be, without any manner of relaxation; but just as it was
ordained, by Albertus, Patriarch of Jerusalem; and confirmed, by Pope
Innocentius the Fourth, in the Fifth year of his Pontificate; and in the year
of our Lord God, 1248.

So as now, me thinks, all the troubles, and vexations, which have been
endured, about this Business, will fall out to have been very well employed. And
though the Rule be of some rigor (for, they never eat Flesh, without
necessity; and they This Fast of the Order, is not so strict, and rigorous, as
that of the Church; but is rather a forbearance of half the Meal, then a Fast.
Fast, eight months, in the year; and observe such other things also, as may
be seen in the Original Rule) yet most of the particulars, seem to be of
little difficulty, to the Religious; and they observe also other things, which
have seemed necessary to us, for the more exact performance of the said Rule.
And I hope in our Blessed Lord, that this, which is begun, will proceed, and
prosper, according to what his Divine Majesty has told me.

The other House, which the Beata, of whom I spoke before, procured to erect,
is now already made, in Alcala; and there wanted not also oppositions, and
great afflictions, and troubles, to them, who labored in it. I know, that all
Religious Observance, is performed there, according to the first Institution of
this our Rule; and I beseech our Blessed Lord, that all may turn to his
honor, and praise; and of the Glorious Virgin Marie, whose Habit we wear;
Amen.

I well believe, that your Reverence will have been wearyed, with the long
Relation, which I I have made you, of this Monastery; which yet, in some
respect, will fall-out to have been but very short; considering the many
afflictions, which were endured; and the great wonders, which our Blessed Lord
wrought therein; whereof there are many witnesses, who can auerre them, by
Oath. And now I beseech your Reverence, for the love of our Lord, that,
howsoever you may tear what you will, of all the rest that I have written,
your Reverence will keep safe, what I send you here, concerning this
Monastery; and that, when I shall be dead, you will deliver it over, to the
Religious here. For, it will greatly serve to animate such, as shall succeed in
the Service of Almighty God; and to make them procure, not to let that fall to
the ground, which is begun; and so, to be still passing further, and further,
on, when they shall see, how carefully his Divine Majesty blessed it, in the
erection thereof, by means of so wicked, and base a Creature, as my self.

And since our Blessed Lord has showed, in so particular a manner, that he was
resolved to favor, both the beginning, and finishing of this Monastery, it
seems to me, that they shall do very ill, and that they will be severely
punished, by Almighty God, who shall endeavor, at all, to slacken the
perfection of this Rule. For here, our Blessed Lord has already begun, so to
assist, and strengthen us, as that this kind of Cross, is carried with
extraordinary suauity, and is very well discerned, to be tolerable enough; and
that, great preparation is also used, and provision made, for every one of
them, who shall desire to enjoy their Spouse Jesus Christ, our Lord, hand to
hand, by living cheerfully, and everlastingly, in the said Rule. For, this is
that very thing, which they are always to resolve. They alone, with him
alone; and they are to be no more, then thirteen; for I see, by the opinion of
many, that this is fit; and I have found it also to be true, by experience,
That to preserve that Spirit, which they have, and to live of Alms, This Point
of haueing so very fevv, in a Monastery, was partly meant, for them who were
to live in any place, on Alms; and partly because the Saint had seen some
disorders by haueing too many Religious in other Houses; and yet the Saint her
self came afterward, to admit of twenty, in stead of twelve; and would
perhaps have admitted more, if she had found reason for it.
without asking any thing of any Creature, there will not be means for more.
And ever, let them be believed best, who, with many troubles of their own,
and by means of the many prayers of others, procured, that that might be
done, which was best. And so also, by the consideration of the great
contentment, and joy, and the very little care, and trouble, which we see
every body to have in this House; as also by the much better health, which
now they have, then formerly they were wont to enjoy, it may be held, and
hoped, that this course will fall-out to be most conuenie^r. And, whosoever
shall still conceive, that the way of life here, is too severe, and sharp, let
him rather apply the fault, to his own want of Spirit, then cast it upon that
Discipline, which is observed here; since persons, who are of delicate
constitution, and have no health, of which to brag, do yet so easily observe
this Rule, because they have Spirit. And let those others go, in God's name,
to some other Monastery, where they also may be saved, according to the
Spirit, which they shall have.

THE SEVEN AND THEIR TIETH CHAPTER.
She treates of the Effects, which used to remain in her Soul, when our
Lord had done her any Favor; and she accompanies this Discourse, with very
profitable Doctrine. She declares also, how we are to procure, and greatly
esteem the gaining of one degree of glory more; and how we must not, for
any trouble, or pains, forsake those benefits, and blessings, which are
everlasting.

I Am loath to recount any more of those Favors, which our Lord has done me,
then such, as I have related already; yea and even they, are more, I doubt,
then need to be thought, to have been showed, to so miserable a Creature, as my
self; but yet, to obey our Lord, who has commanded it, and your Reverence
also, who expect it, I will declare some things here, to his glory. And I
humbly beseech his Divine Majesty, that it may serve for the profit of some
Soul, to see, that our Blessed Lord would vouchsafe, so highly to favor so
wretched a thing, as I am; for then, what will he not do for such others, as
shall procure to serve his Divine Majesty, in good earnest? And every body
will so be encouraged heerby, to give our Lord contentment, and gust; since,
even in this mortal life of ours, he vouchsafes to impart to us, such
assurances, and even pawnes of his love.

But first, it is here to be understood, that in all these Favors, which
Almighty God is pleased to do to a Soul, there is ever; more glory, or
less; as he himself is pleased to impart it more, or less. For, the glory,
and gust, and comfort, which he imparts, is so much more, in some Visions, then
in other, as that I was even amazed, to find so great difference of enjoying,
even in this life. For it happens, that there is so great an excellency,
belonging to some one Regalo, or gust, which our Lord imparts, in some one
Vision, or in some one Rapt, that it seems an impossible thing, to be able so
much as to desire any thing, beyond it, in this life; nor does the Soul,
indeed, desire more; nor would even wish, for more joy, and gust; though yet,
since our Blessed Lord has been pleased, to give me to understand, how great
the difference is, in Heaven, between the glory, which is enjoyed by some, and
that, which is enjoyed by others, I am come to see very clearly, that even here
also, there are no set limits in giving, when our Lord pleases. And so could I
also wish, that there were no limits set, in my doing Service to his Divine
Majesty, but that I would employ my whole strength, and health, and life, upon
it; that so, I might not loose the least imaginable proportion, of my enjoying
any Celestial blessing, through any fault of mine. And heerin I declare my
self, thus far, That, if this choice should be offered me, Whether I would be
subject to all afflictions of the world, even till the end of the same world,
and then ascend, by that means, to the enjoying of never so little more
glory; or else, without any affliction at all, to enjoy a little less glory;
I would most willingly accept of all those troubles, and afflictions, for a
little more enjoying; that so I might also understand more, of the greatness of
Almighty God; because I see, that he, who understands more of him, does both
praise him, and love him, so much the more. I say not, but that I should be
fully contented, and should esteem my self, very happy, to be in Heaven,
though it were but in the most inferior place thereof; for our Blessed Lord
would show an abundance of mercy thereby, to such an one, as had been designed
to Hellfire, as I was; and I humbly pray his Divine Majesty, that he will not
cast his eye upon my great Sins, but that, in fine, I may go to Heaven. But
that, which I say, is this, That, if our Lord would give me grace, to labor
much for him, and if I were able, to do it, I would not, upon any terms
(how much pain soever, it might cost me) forgo the gain of any thing, in
the way of Celestial glory, by my fault, (miserable Creature, that I am) who
had once lost it all, through mine own great Sins.

But here it is also to be noted, that, in every Favor, or Vision, or
Revelation, which our Lord allowed me, my Soul did still remain, with some
great advantage, or gain; and sometimes, with a gain, which was very
extraordinarily great, by means of some of my Visions. For, by my seeing Christ
our Lord, his admirable, and excessive beauty, remained imprinted in me; and I
have it, even to this day; for, in such a case, as this, one only time serves
the turn; and therefore, how much more, when it happens so very often, as our
Lord has vouchsafed to impart it to me. In particular, I remained with one,
which was extremely considerable; and it was this. I was subject to a very
great fault, by which, much hurt came upon me, whenever I began to observe,
that any one had a good inclination to me. For if I liked him well, I grew to
carry so much affection to him, as that my memory, would bind me, after a
sort, to be still thinking of him, though yet, it were not, at all, with any
intention to offend Almighty God; and I would also be very glad to see him,
and to think of him, and to consider the good parts, which I found in him; and
this, was so prejudicial a thing, that it did my Soul a great deal of hurt.
But when once, I was come to behold the great Beauty of our Blessed Lord, I
saw no Creature after that, which might seem passable, in comparison of him;
nor, who was able to take-vp my thought, for one minute. For, by casting the
eye of my consideration, upon that Image, or Picture of him, which is engraven
in my Soul, I have remained with so much Liberty of Mind, in this respect,
that, every thing, which I have seen, since that time, makes me ready,
almost, to cast the gorge, in comparison of the excellencies, and air, and
grace, which I discerned to abound in this Lord of mine. Nor is there any
knowledge, or comfort, which I can, at all, esteem, in comparison of that,
which grows by the hearing of one single word, which proceeds out of that
Divine mouth of his; and much more, when I have heard so many, and so often,
from him. Nay, I hold it to be a kind of impossible thing (unless our Lord
should permit it, in respect of my Sins) that ever I can loose the memory of
this blessing; or that any Creature can ever so possess me, as that I shall
not instantly be free, by recovering the remembrance of this Lord.

It happened to me sometimes, with some Ghostly Fathers of mine, (for I always
love them much, who govern my Soul, in regard, that I take them truly, as in
the place of Almighty God himself; and me thinks, it is ever there, where I
employ my affection, most) that esteeming my self to be in security with them,
I would be apt to show them extraordinary ciuilityes; whereas they, on the
other side, (as being great Servants of Almighty God) would be, not only
careful, but fearful, least I should fasten, or tie my self, too much, to
them, though it should be, in a most innocent manner; and they would show
themselves, even to be displeased at it. Now, this grew in me, after I had made
my self subject, to be be directed, and even commanded, by them; for before, I
did not bear them so much love. But the while, I confess, I would be laughing
sometimes, within my self, to consider, how extremely they were deceived;
though yet, I would not always be telling them, so clearly, how little I used
to tie myself to any Creature, as I was sure of it, in myself. But yet, I gave
them certainty enough of it; and when once they were grown to be more inward,
and more confident with me, they came to know, how particularly I was obliged
to our Blessed Lord, in that kind. But these suspicions, which they had of me,
were never wont to occurr, but in the beginnings.

Besides, there grew to be, both more love, and more confidence, between this
Lord of mine, and me, after I had seen him; as one, with whom I was come, to
have a kind of continual conversation. I saw, that though he were God, he was
also Man; and that he did not wonder, at our weakness; for, he well knows our
miserable condition, and composition, which is subject to take Falls of so
many kinds, by that first Sin of Adam, which he, was come to repair, Nay I
see, that, although he be my Lord, I may yet treat with him, as with a Friend;
because he is not such a kind of Lord, as we are wont to meet with, in this
world, who pin all the Lordlynesses, which they have, upon a certain kind of
changeable; and remoueable demonstrations; and who must give, but particular,
and set days, for Audience; and so, the persons, whom they will hear, must
be appointed, and named. And if perhaps any poor Creature have a business,
there must be use of labor, and favor, and a walking in By-ways, before it
can be ever negotiated, or concluded. And if perhaps they have any thing to
do with the King himself, alas poor folks; for they, who touch not upon the
Caualier, or great man, must not so much as presume to approach, but be content
to ask, who the Favorites are. And now, they will certainly, not fall out to
be such, as use to tread the world under their feet; because such persons as
these, are wont to speak real truths; for, they neither fear any thing; nor
owe any thing; nor, in fine, are any part of the Palace. For there, these
things are not used; but to dissemble, whatsoever they dislike; nay, they
scarce dare so much as think, for fear, least they should grow by it, into
less favor.

O King of Glory, and Lord of all the Kings of this world! how true is it,
that thy Kingdom is not guarded by Sticks, and strawes, since, in it self, it
has no end? How true is it, that there is no need of third persons, to
introduce us, to Audience with thee? For, by our very seeing thy self, we
instantly see withal, that thou, only, do indeed deserve, to be called Lord;
So great is the Majesty, which thou show. Nor is there here any need at
all, of Assembles, and Guards, in Court, whereby thou may be known to be
King. Whereas, if any Earthly King were left alone, he would hardly be known
to be King; and how much soever himself might desire it, yet the people would
have difficulty to believe it. For, in himself, he is no more, then others
are; and therefore, we must either see him so adorned, and attended, first, or
else, we shall hardly belieiue afterward, that he is the King. And he has
therefore, so much more reason, to serve himself of these external advantages,
and helps; for else, they would not hold him in account; because his seeming to
be so powerful, depends not upon the inward, and innate dignity of his
Person; but his State is derived to him, from others. But, O, thou, my Lord,
and my King, that I were able now, to represent that Majesty, which thou have?
For, it is impossible to forbear to see, that thou art the great Emperor of
the whole world, in thy self; and that thy Maistie does even astonish the
beholders. But yet, it puts me to more amazement, O my Lord, to see, in
company thereof, the great humility, and love, which thou bear to such a
wretched Creature, as my self. For, we may ever speak, and treat with thee,
about all things, even as we will our selves, when once we shall have lost that
first amazement, and fear, to see the Majesty of thy Presence; though yet
then, we shall have more fear to offend thee, then to see thee; yea and yet,
even that, not so much for being, O Lord, afraid of thy punishment, (for, we
do not esteem that, at all) as in respect of the misery, which it is, to
loose thy very self.

Behold here, the benefits of this Vision; besides many other great ones,
which it leaves in the Soul. And if it be of Almighty God, it makes it self
be understood, by the effects, whenever the Soul has Light; for, many
times, as I have said, our Lord is pleased, that it should remain in darkness,
and not see this Light; and therefore, it is not so strange a business, which so
wicked a Creature as my self, may come to see.

On the other side, it is but even now, that it has happened to me, to be eight
days, in such a case, as that I seemed, neither to have knowledge of what I
owe to Almighty God, not yet, any memory of his Favors; but only, that my
Soul was even half besotted, and estranged, and employed upon I know not
what, nor how. Not yet, upon any ill thoughts; but I was so very untoward, in
respect of good ones, that I did even, as it were, laugh at my self; and took
a kind of gust, to see the great baseness of a Soul, whenever our Lord
vouchsafes not to be working, in it. But she yet understands very well, that
she is not without possessing him, even in this State; for it is not (as I have
formerly said) as it uses to be, in our great afflictions; but, though we bring
wood thither, and do also, all that very little, which we are able to do on
our part, there is yet, no such thing, in the world, as the kindling, at that
time, of any fire, of the love of our Lord, in our hearts. And it is no small
mercy of his, that we can so much as find, that there is any smoke; for, at
least, we know thereby, that she is not dead; and our Lord returns to kindle
it again, afterward. But then, this Soul of ours (though we break our very
heads in blowing, and weary our selves also otherwise, in ordering, and
composing the wood) seems to be in such a condition, as that every thing
serves, to choke us, the more. And so, I think, the best of our case to be
then, to render our selves wholly up; and to know, that we are able to do
nothing of our selves; and then to apply our endeauours, to the doing of some
external, meritorious things. Yea and perhaps our Blessed Lord is pleased, to
take Prayer from us, at that time; to the end, that the Soul may exercise her
self in those other actions, and so understand, at length, by good experience,
how little she was able to do, of her self.

But now I have, this very day, regaled my Soul, with our Lord; and presumed
to complain to his Divine Majesty, even against himself, to this effect: How
comes it to pass, O my God, that it seems not enough for thee, to keep me in
this miserable life; and that I resolve, to endure it all, for thy sake; and
that I content my self to be, where all is vexation, and trouble; and that I
may not so much as enjoy, even thee; but that I must also eat, and sleep, and
dispatch business, and treat with every Creature, according to the occasion,
and that I suffer all this, for the love of thee? And now, O my Lord, thou
know, that this is an extreme torment, to my heart; and that yet, in those
few little moments of time, which remain to me, for the enjoying thee, thou
yet art pleased to hide thy self, after this manner, from me. And how can this
be compatible with thy mercy? and how can the love, thou bear me, permit
it? I believe, O my dear Lord, that, if it were a possible thing for me, to
hide my self from thee, as thou do thy self from me, I think, I say, and I
believe so much, of the love thou bear me, as that thou would not endure
it at my hands. But thou art still with me; and ever see in what case I am.
Yet permit not longer, O my Lord, that this kind of course be held, but I
humbly beseech thee to consider, that it is a kind of wrong, to proceed after
this manner, with one who loves thee so much. This, and the like, has occurred
to me, to say; though yet I considered first, how that place, which had been
provided for me, in Hell, was appointed me, after a kind of favorable way, in
comparison of what I had deserved. But yet sometimes, the love I bear to our
Blessed Lord, is so very extrauagant, that I scarce can tell, what I do; and
then, with all the little understanding I have, I make such complaints, as
these; and our Lord endures them all, at my hands; and therefore, let so good a
King, as this, be ever praised. But now, might we, perhaps, be able, to
approach any King of this world, with such audacities, as these?

And yet I wonder not much, that we may not presume, to talk, after this
manner, to our Earthly Kings, whom we have so much reason to fear; yea or
even to such great Lords, as are the superior parts of the State. For, She
inueighs with much reason, against vain Complements, and especially amongst
Religious people.
now we find the world so changed, that our very lives should be longer, then
now they are; to the end, that we might have time enough, to learn the
Punto's, and new customs, and fashions, of good Manners of the world, if there
be any meaning withal, that we should also, have any time to spend, in the
Service of Almighty God. For my part, I even bless my self, to see what
happens; for, the truth is, that even already, I scarce knew, how to live in
the world, when I came to this place. For, now it passes, I can assure you, for
no jest, whenever there is any little omission, to treat men, even with much
more Style, and ceremony, then they deserve; but they do really so take it,
for an affront, that you must, forsooth, interpret your intention, and profess
your desire, to make satisfaction, if there be (as I was saying) any omission;
yea and I pray God, that they will vouchsafe to believe you. But, in the mean
time, I return to affirm, that really, I did not know how to live; so
miserably do these things afflict a poor ouerlaboured Soul. For she sees,
that, on the one side, they command her to employ her whole thought, upon God;
and that it is necessary for her, to do so; to the end, that she may be
delivered from many dangers; and, on the other side, she also finds, that it
concerns her, not to loose a Punto, even in the Puntilio's of this world, upon
the price, of not chanceing to minister occasion, of giving temptation, and
trouble, to them, who place their Honor, in these Punto's. For, as for me,
they tired me, even outright; and I could never be at an end, of making
satisfactions; for, it was never in my power (how much soever I endeavored it)
to forbear the making many faults, in this kind; which, as I said, are not
held, to be little, in the account of the world. And it is true, that, in
Religious Orders, (which, in all reason, should be excused, and discharged, in
such kinds, as these) there is really a very true discharge. Not yet that they
affirm, that our Monasteries ought to be a kind of Court, for good breeding,
and to know, what belongs to good Manners, (for I confess, I understand not
this kind of language) but because I have been thinking, that our Saints had
anciently affirmed, and taught, that a Monastery should be a kind of Court, to
instruct such persons, as had a mind, to make themselves Courtiers, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. But now, things are understood in the direct contrary way;
because they, who should be continually employed, in pleasing Almighty God,
and in procuring to abhor the world, must now, forsooth, be obliged to all
attention, and care (in stead of pleasing God) to please such, as live in the
world; yea and that, in certain things, which are every day so subject to
change, that I know not, how our performances could pass vn-reproued; yea
though it were possible, that all might be learned, in one Lesson, without any
loss at all, of more time.

Yea, and even for the Titles, which are expected, upon the Superscription of
Letters, it were now, it seems, not to be unfit, that there were some
Doctours-Chaire erected (as one may say) where they might instruct, and teach,
how such, and such Titles, were to be used. For sometimes, men leave the Paper
empty, on one side of the page of the Letter, and sometimes on the other. And
now he, who was not wont, to be Worshipful, must be called Honorable; and I
know not, in fine, where things will rest. For, I am not yet fifty years old,
and yet I have seen such changes in my time, that I cannot tell now, how to
live. But then, how will they, who are now borne, know, how to carry
themselves, if they chance to live long?

I have really great compassion of Spiritual persons, who are obliged to live
in the world, for certain holy ends; for, I hold it to be a kind of terrible
Cross, which they are feign to carry, even in this respect. If they could all
come to agree in a tale, and profess themselves to be ignorant, and be content
to be held for such, in this kind of art, or science, they might free
themselves, from a great deal of trouble.

But now, into what kind of fooleties, have I cast my self? For, by treating of
the greatnesses of Almighty God, I am grown, by degrees, to speak of the
basenesses of the world. And since our Lord has done me the Favor, to make me
able to leave it, I am resolved to go out of it, now at length. Let them fit
themselves to it, as they list, who sustain, and hold-vp these toys, with so
much trouble to themselves; and I pray God, that we may not pay dearly for
them, in the other world, where there is no change to be found,

Amen.
THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER.
Wherein she treats of some great Favors, which our Lord was pleased to do
her, as well, in acquainting her with certain Secrets of Heaven, as by
giving her other great Visions, and Revelations. She declares also the effects,
which they left in her Soul; and the great benefits, which she obtained by
them.

BEing so very ill at ease, one night, that I thought fit to excuse my self
from Prayer, I took a Pair of Beads, or Rosarie, into my hand, to employ my
self Vocally, by that means. And I procured not to recollect my Understanding,
in any very serious manner; though yet, forasmuch as concerned my exterior, I
was sufficiently recollected, and in my Oratorie. But when our Blessed Lord
has a mind to any thing, these diligences of ours, to the contrary, are not
wont to serve to any great purpose. For, I remaining a while, after this
manner, there came a Rapt of Spirit upon me, with such an excessive impulse, or
impetuositie, that there was no power in me, to resist it. It seemed to me,
that I was carried up, and placed in Heaven; yea, and the first persons, whom
I saw there, were my Father, and my Mother; and I also saw some things besides,
so very great, and all, in so very short a space of time, as wherein an Aue
Maria might be said, that I was amazed; as conceauing, that it was too very
great a Favor for me. In this circumstance, of the times haueing been so
short, I may perhaps be deceived; for it may have been a little longer; but at
least, it ran speedily away, and seemed short enough. For my part, I was in
some fear of an Illusion; but yet, supposing that it should prove none, I
found my self in an extreme deal of shame, with considering, how I could ever
be able to declare any such thing, as that, to my Ghostly Father. Not yet, in
my opinion, that I was to receive trouble by it, in respect of any such thing,
as Humility, in me, but because I thought it likely enough, that he would
make some jest at it, and say: Lord, what a kind of S. Paul, or S. Jerome, is
this woeman grown, that she, forsooth, must see things of Heaven! yea and
besides, in regard, that these Glorious Saints, had participated, and been
admitted to such things, as these, I grew to be in so much the more fear of my
self; and really, I did nothing but weep bitterly, in regard, that, in my
opinion, there was no appearance of reason at all, that these things were to
pass, after this manner.

But yet howsoever, in fine I resolved, that I would go to my Ghostly Father,
notwithstanding all the auersion, which I had; and that I would acquaint him
with all things; for I never durst conceal any thing, from him, through the
very great fear, wherein I was, of being abused, and deceived. Yet when he
found me to be so greatly afflicted, he did procure to comfort me much; and
told me of many good things, to free me from the pain, wherein I was.

But afterward, that which follows, happened to me; and the same occurrs to me
often. For, our Lord went showing me yet, greater Secrets; I say, he went
showing them to me; for, that a Soul should ever be able to see any one iott
more, then is represented to her by our Lord, is absolutely an impossible thing;
and for my part, I never saw more, then merely, what he was pleased to show me,
at every several time. But that, was so very much, that the least part
thereof, sufficed, to make me remain all amazed, and my Soul to be very much
improued, toward the undervalue, and dis-esteem of whatsoever thing might be
in this world.

I would be extremely glad, if I could tell, how to give some little part of
the least of that, which I knew, to be understood; but I find, that it is wholly
impossible. For, though this Light, which we see here, and that Light, which is
represented there, be, all of it, Light: yet still, there is so great a
difference withal, as that there is no manner of comparison. For, the
claritie, and brightness, even of the very Sun it self, is a thing of mean,
and poor appearance, in respect of this. In fine, the very Imagination of man,
how subtle, and refined soever it may be, is yet unable to reach to the
describing any thing of this Light; nor yet of any other thing at all, which
our Lord was pleased to give me to understand; and that with such a sovereign
kind of delight, as cannot possibly be declared. For, all our Senses enjoy such
a superior degree of sweetness, that it can no way be fully expressed; and
therefore I think it will be best, to say no more.

I had once been above an hour, in this condition, when our Lord showed me
admirable things; and seeming not to depart, from being near me, he spoke these
very words to me: See here, my Daughter, what they loose, who are against
me; and do not thou forbear, to let them know it. But, O my dear Lord; what
good will my saying it, do to them, whom their own actions blind so deeply,
if thy Divine Majesty do not give them light? Some there be, to whom thou
have given it; and they have profited much, by knowing those greatnesses of
thine; but yet, O my Lord, they see, in such sort, withal, that they are
showed to such a wretched, and miserable thing, as my self, that I cannot but
esteem it a strange thing, to find, that any Creature should believe me.
Blessed be thy name, and thy mercy; for, at least, I have plainly seen an
evident amendment, in mine own Soul; and I would be glad, if I might still
remain there, and not come back to live here, any more. For, the contempt,
wherein I held this whole world, was very great; and it seemed to be no better,
then even dung, to me; and now I find, how basely we be employed, who are
detained therein.

Whilst I remained with that Lady, of whom I spoke before, it happened to me
once, when I was ill, and even sick at the heart, (for I have formerly been
subject to this misery, though nothing so much of late) she considering me
with much charity, and compassion, commanded, that one day, certain Jewels
of hers, should be brought forth, which she had, of very great value; and one,
in particular, of Diamonds, which was prized at a very high rate. Now she
conceived belike, that this would recreate, and reviue me; but I smiled
inwardly at her, the while; and had compassion to see, how mean things men
esteem, when I considered, what our Lord has layd-vp for us; And I thought,
how impossible a thing it would be, for me, to put any manner of value, upon
such toys, as those, even though I should endeavor it, unless our Lord
should first deprive me of the memory of those other treasures.

But now, this kind of Favor, gives so great a dominion to the Soul, that I
know not, whether it can possibly be understood, but only by such persons, as
possess it. For it is the proper, true, and natural discharge, and untying of
the Soul, from all things created; and this grows absolutely, without any
labor of our own; and Almighty God does it all; and then, his Divine
Majesty shows these Truths; and that so, as to make them remain imprinted,
and engraven, in the Soul; and they serve also, to make us see clearly, that
it was not possible for us, to acquire them, especially in so short a time, by
any diligences of our own.

Upon this, I also came, to have very little fear of death, which formerly,
had been great in me; but now it is grown, to seem to be a thing of very much
facility, and ease, for such as apply themselves to the Service of Almighty
God. For, by death, the Soul flies out of prison, in one moment; and is not
only put presently into liberty, but enioyes an everlasting rest, and glory.

Now, this way, which is held by Almighty God, in carrying the Spirit up, to
show her so excellent things, in these Rapts, seems to bear a very close kind
of conformity, with the passage of a Soul, out of a Body, at the hour of
death; since it grows, even at one instant, to be so entirely inpossession of
this Eternal Good. But here, I lay aside, the consideration of those sorrows,
and pains, which are felt, when the Soul is torn out of the Body; for, we
are to make little account of that, and they also, who love God, in good
earnest, and have shaken hands with all the contentments of this life, are
certainly wont to dye, with more sweetness.

It also seems to me, that these Favors did me very much good, toward the
bringing me into a knowledge of our true Country; and to see, that we were
mere Pilgrims here; and it is a precious kind of thing, to find what passes
there above; and to understand, where, in fine, we are to live, for ever. And
whenever one goes to settle, and stay, for good and all, in any Country, it
gives a great assistance, toward the enduring all the incommodities of the
journey, when we know, that the end of it, is to be such, as that we may, in
fine, be in great repose, and happiness, when we get thither. It is also here
obtained, that, with case, we may grow able to consider Heavenly things, that
so our conversation may be there. And this is a great kind of gain, since the
only thinking of Heaven, recollects the Soul; in regard that our Lord being
pleased to show us somewhat, which passes there, we are induced to pawse, and
think upon it. And sometimes it so falls out, that they whom I know to live
there, are the Souls, who accompany me, and in whom I receive most comfort;
and these indeed are they, who seem to be truly alive; and those others, on
the other side, who live here, seem to be so very deadly dead, as that this
whole world, put together, cannot amount to be any company at all, for me.
And especially, when I find any of these impulses, or impetuosities, in my
self, the whole world seems to be, but a very Dream; and all the objects, of
these corporeal eyes of mine, a mere jest, and toy; but that, which already I
have seen, with the eyes of my Soul, that, I say, is the thing, which she
desires; and because she finds her self, to be yet far off from thence, this
is that, which is no less, then even death it self, to my Soul.

In fine, the Favor is excessiuely great, which our Lord vouchsafes to that
Soul, to whom he gives such Visions, as these; for, they help her much, in
all things, and particularly, to the carrying of a certain heavy Cross,
which lies upon her. For, nothing can satisfye her now; but every thing
disgusts, and checks her. And if our Blessed Lord did not give way, that we
might forget it sometimes, (though yet we remember it again afterward) I know
not how we should be able to live. Let him be Blessed, and praised, for all
Eternity; and I humbly beg of his Divine Majesty, even by that very precious
Blood, which his own Son shed for me, that, since he has vouchsafed, that I
should understand somewhat of these benefits, and blessings, and that I should
begin to enjoy them also, in some kind, even in this life, it may not happen
to me, as it did to Lucifer, who lost all, by his own fault. Do not permit
this, O my Lord, I humbly pray thee, even by all that, which thou art; for, it
is no small fear, which I have sometimes; though yet at other times, yea and
usually, the mercy of Almighty God, gives me a very confident hope, that,
since he has been pleased, to draw me out of so many Sins, he will not
forsake me so now, as to let me be lost. And this do I humbly pray your
Reverence, that you will ever desire, in my behalf. But, in the mean time, me
thinks, that those precedent Favors, were not so very great, as this, which I
will now apply my self to relate; and that, for many reasons, and many
blessings also; and, in particular, for that great courage, and strength, which
have still remained in me, upon that account. And therefore, if those former
may be considered, every one by it self, this other, which I am going to
relate, will be found to be so very great, as that there will be no comparison
at all, between them.

I was one day, and the same fell out to be upon the Vigil of Pentecost, or
VVhitsontide, after Mass; and I went to a more remote place, where I often
used to pray; and I began to read in a certain Book of this Feast, which
had been written by a Carthusian. And meeting there, with those signs, which
both Beginners, and Proficients, and Perfect Souls, use to have; and how they
may come to understand, whether the Holie-Ghost do inhabit their hearts, or no;
as soon as I had read these three States, it seemed to me, that Almighty God,
through his goodness, did not leave, or fail, to be present with me, after a
particular manner, for as much as I might be able to understand. And whilst I
was praising his Divine Majesty, for that blessing, I remembered, that I had
read the same thing formerly, when I wanted very much of that condition of
mind; and then I saw, that I wanted it, as plainly, as now I understand the
direct contrary, concerning my self. But thus I came to know the great Favor,
which our Blessed Lord had done me; and from thence, I grew also to consider
the Place, which my Soul had deserved, in Hell, for my Sins; and I gave
great praise to Almighty God, in regard that now, me thought, my Soul was so
extremely changed, that I could hardly almost conceive it, to be the very
self-same thing, which it had been before.

Being then, in this consideration, there came a great impulse, or impetuositie
upon me, without my being able, to understand the occasion thereof. Me thought
my very Soul had a mind, to get instantly, out of my Body; for now she
could not possibly contain her self any longer; nor found she her self, at
that time, to be able to stay any longer here, in the painful expectation of
so great a Good. Now, this was so excessive an impulse, or impetuositie, that I
could not possibly tell, even what to do, with my self; nor so much, as what I
ayled; so extremely was I grown, to be in disorder. And though I were sitting
then, yet was I not able, even to sit; and so I applied my self a little, to
lean; for I found, that all my natural forces, began to fail me. But
perceauing my self to be in this case, I saw a Dove, upon mine own head; but
such a Dove, as was very different from them of this world; for she had not of
our kind of feathers; but the wings were, as of certain little shells, which
darred a huge splendor from themselves. This Dove was much greater, then any
ordinary Dove; and me thought, I heard a noise, which she made with her wings;
for, she was fluttering, about the space of an Aut Maria. But my Soul was
already, in such condition, that growing to loose her self, she also lost the
sight of the Dove. My Spirit did then begin to quiet it self, upon the
entertaining of such a Guest, as she had gotten; though yet, for my part, I
imagined, that so wondrous an encounter, and accident, as that was, might well
have disquieted, and frighted it. But she beginning already to enjoy, laid
quickly all fear aside; and, together with the self same joy, grew to have
quietness withal, but yet still, remaining in the Rapt. Now, the glory of this
Rapt, was extremely great; and I remained, during the most part of the whole
Festiuitie of Pentecost, so stunned, and even, as it were, besorted, and
befooled, that I knew not, what to dot with my self; nor was I able, by any
means, to understand, how so high, and great a Favor, as this was, could
possibly find a resting place, in me. I neither heard, nor saw, in effect; by
reason of the great excess of my interior joy I understood, how, from that
day forward, my Soul remained with a very great increase of improuement, by
enjoying a more sublime love of Almighty God; and that my virtues also, had
gained a great increase of strength. Now, let him be blessed, and praised, for
all eternities, Amen.

I saw also, at another time, the same Dove, upon the head of a certain
Father, of S. Dominick's Order; save that, me thought, both the beams, and the
brightness of the very wings, did spread, and extend themselves, much further;
and it was given me then, to understand, that he was to win Souls to God.

Another time, I saw our Blessed Lady, putting a white long Garment, upon the
back of a certain Graduate, of the same Order; of whom I have spoken
formerly, diverse times; and she told me, that she had given him that Mantle,
for having assisted in the Business of this House; and that his Soul should be
defended, and preserved, for the future, in such purity, as that he should not
fall into Mortal Sin. And I assure my self, it proved so; for he dyed,
within few years, after; yea and he did both line, and dye, with so great Per
nance, and sanctity, that there can be no doubt thereof, for any thing, that
we are able to understand. And a certain Religious man, who had been at his
death, told me, that S. Thomas of Aquin, had been with him; and that he dyed,
both with great joy, and with desire also, to be delivered from this
bannishment, wherein he was. Since that time he has appeared to me, in very
much glory; and told me, diverse things. He was a man of so great Prayer, that
when a little before he dyed, he would gladly have forborne the exercise
thereof, through his great weakness, he was not able to do it; for even then,
he had many Rapts. He wrote to me, a little before he dyed, about what course
I thought he were best to take, for help, because ever, as soon as he had
done Mass, he used to fall into Rapts, which would last long, without his
being able to forbear them. But our Lord gave him, at length, the reward, of
the great Service, he had done him, during his whole life.

Of the Rectour of the Society of JESUS, whom I mentioned before, I have seen
some things, concerning great Favors, which our Lord did him; but I will not
insert them here, for fear of being too long. There happened a great trouble to
him once; for he was persecuted, and found himself greatly afflicted; and I
hearing Mass, one day, saw Christ our Lord, upon the Cross, just then, when
the Priest elevated the Sacred Host; and he spoke certain words to me,
wherewith I was to acquaint him, for his comfort; and others also he spoke, by
way of prevention of some future inconvenience, which might ariue; and he
represented also to him, how much himself had suffered for his sake; and that
therefore, he should prepare himself to suffer. And this gave him both much
comfort, and much courage; and all happened to him, just so, as our Blessed Lord
had foretold.

Of the Religious of a certain Order, yea and of that whole Order together, I
have seen great things. For I have seen them sometimes in Heaven, with white
Banners in their hands; and I have seen, as I was saying, other things of great
admiration. And accordingly, I have this Order, in much veneration; for I have
treated, and communicated with them much; and I see, that their life is
agreeable to that, which our Blessed Lord has given me to understand,
concerning them.

I being one night in Prayer, our Lord began to utter some words to me, which
brought me to remember, how wicked, my life had been; and they gave me
confusion, and pain enough; for although they imported not any rigor, yet
they endued me with such a tender kind of feeling, and grief, that the Soul
was even dissolved by it. And we use, in such cases, to find more benefit, in
the way of knowing out selves, by some one such word as these, then we are able
to acquire, in many days, by our own consideration of our misery; for, it
brings such a truth to be eue^ ingraue^ in our Soul, as we cannot possibly
deny. He represented to me also, those inclinations of mine, which I had
formerly entertained, toward Creatures, with so much vanity; and told me,
that I was to put a great value upon the desire, which he had, that I would
lodge all my affection, upon him, which formerly I had employed so ill, since
he would accept thereof. At other times, he bad me remember, that formerly, I
had sometimes esteemed it for a point of honor in me, to go against his
Honor; And yet, at other times, that I should remember, how much I owed him;
for that I used to commit the greatest offenses against him, whilst he used to
be doing me Favors. If I have any faults (which are not few) our Lord gives
them so, to be understood by me, at those times, that it makes me even, as it
were, annihilate my self; and because I have many faults, he uses me so, many
times. It happened to me once, that a Ghostile Father reprehended me; and when I
thought to comfort my self in Prayer, it was there, that I found indeed, my
true reprehension.

But now, (to return to that, which I was saying) when our Lord began, to
bring my wicked life to my remembrance, which cost me a world of tears; and
when I also considered, that I had done no good thing lately, which might even,
in my opinion, deserve his Favor. I began to consider a while, whether he
might not, perhaps, intend some new expression of goodness, to me; because,
whenever I find my self receive any particular Favor from our Lord, it is,
ordinarily, after I have even defeated, and annihilated my self. And I
conceive, that our Lord proceeds thus with me, to the end, that I may see the
more clearly, how far I am out of the way, of deserueing his Favors.

Shortly after this, my Spirit was so absorpt, and snatched away, that, in
effect, it seemed to be absolutely out of my Body; at least, it was not
understood, that it lived in it. And then I saw the most Sacred Humanity of
our Blessed Lord, in much more excessive glory, then ever I had discerned
before. Now this was represented to me, by a certain admirable, and clear
notice, of his being placed in the very bosom of his Father. Nor yet do I
know what to say, of how this was; for it seemed to me, that I saw my self
present, before that very Divinity, and yet, without seeing my self; and I
remained so amazed, and every way, indeed, in such sort; that I think there
passed some days, before I was able to return to my self. For, still I was
conceauing, that I had the Majesty of the Son of God, present with me,
though it were not yet, like the former; for, this I understood well enough.
But how soever, it remained so engraven in my Imagination, that I cannot be
ridd of it, how short soever the time were, wherein it was represented to me;
and this is matter, both of great comfort, and of great benefit to my Soul.

Now, I have seen this very Vision, at three other times; and this, in my
opinion, is absolutely, the most sublime Vision, which ever our Blessed Lord
gave me; and it brings the greatest improuement, and profit, with it. For it
seems, that the Soul is greatly purifyed by it; and that it does utterly take
away all strength, from the sensuality of our Self-Loue. It is a vehement
flame, which seems to burn up, and even annihilate, all the desires of this
life. And since (God be blessed for it) I had already no inclination, to idle,
and impertinent things, it was here declared to me, in distinct manner, that
all was vanity; and in particular, how vain, all the Superiorities, and
Signories of this world be. And it falls out also, to be of mighty
instruction, for the raising-vp of our desires, to be lodged upon the purity
of Truth; and there remains a high kind of adoration, and reverence of God,
imprinted after a certain manner, which I know not how to describe; but it is
of a very different kind, from whatsoever we can acquire, in this world. It
creates also, a huge amazement in the Soul, to consider, how she ever durst,
or how any creature can presume so far, as to think of offending such a
Supreme Majesty of Almighty God.

I have declared sometimes heertofore, the effects of Visions, and such other
things; but I have also said already, that a Soul receaues more, or less
profit, according to the proportion, and manner of the Vision, as the same may
be, either more, or less. But in this, it was extraordinarily great, when I
came to receive the Blessed Sacrament; and I did then, record to my self, that
incomparable Majesty, which I had seen, and understood, to be the very same,
which is in this most Holy Sacrament. And, many times, our Lord is pleased to
let me see him, in the Sacred Host, where upon the very hair of my head
would stand on end; and, me, thought. I was even annihilated, outtight. O my
dear Lord and if thou did not ouershadow, and even hide thy greatness, who
would ever presume to approach so often, as we do, toward the joining of such
wretched, and filthy things, as we are, to so high a Majesty, as thine. But
Blessed be thou for ever, my dear Lord; and let the Angels, vea and all
Creatures, praise, and glorifye thy holy name, who do so measure, and weigh
things out, together with our great weakness, as that we may be able to enjoy
those Sovereign Favors of thine, without being frighted, by thy infinite
power; though yet we be so miserable, and unworthy Creatures.

Me thinks, it might happen to us here, as once it did to another; and this I
know to be true. A certain Labouring-man found a treasure; and the same
falling out to be greater, then could get room in his straight, and
narrow-hart, he comeing to have this treasure in his power, grew withal, to
have such a melancholy in his mind, that he came, by little and little, to
dye, by the very care, and affliction of his thoughts, for not knowing, what
he were best to do, with his treasure; Whereas, if he had not found it all
together; but that some one had given it him, by little, and little,
accommodating him, and sustaining him by degrees, the poor man would have
lived contented, and it would never have cost him his life.

O thou, who art the riches of the poor! and how admirably do thou know, how
to sustain Souls? and how careful art thou, to show them treasures, by
little, and little; and that they may not see too much at once; when I see so
great a Majesty, as thine, dissembled, as it were, and disguised, in so small
a thing, as the Sacred Host? It is true, that in these latter times, and since
I have been partaker of these Visions, I am even in admiration, at so great a
wisdom; nor do I know, how our Lord gives me strength, and courage, to
approach it. But if he, who has done me, and does me still, so great Favors,
did not govern me also heerin, it were not possible, that I could dissemble
the matter any longer, but must cry out, and that alowd, at the sight of so
great wonders, as these.

And what now is it then, that so miserable a Creature, and so laden with
abominations, as I am, and who have spent my whole life, in so little fear of
Almighty God, ought to find, with all reason, in her self; to see, that she
approaches so great a Majesty, even when he is pleased, that my Soul should
behold him, with her very eyes? How shall this mouth of mine, which has
uttered so many words, against the Service of that very Lord himself, presume
to touch that most Glorious Body of his, so full of piety, and purity; since
the love, which that Divine Countenance, of so much beauty, suauitie, and
affability, discouers to us, does more afflict, and wound the Soul, then
does, even that fear, and terror, which is bred in us, by the consideration
of his high Majesty. But what then, should I feel in my self, who have seen
all this, whereof I speak, two several times? I am really about to say, O
thou my dear Lord, and the very Glory of my Soul, that I have, in some
kind, done thee Service, by the great afflictions, which my Soul has felt in
her self; and yet, alas, alas, I can hardly tell even what I say, who am, in
effect, writing this, without knowing, almost, what I do, For I find, that I
am all troubled, yea and half besides my self, when I go back, to bring these
things to my remembrance; though I might seem to have some little reason, for
what I say; and that I had done some little thing, for thy Service, O my Lord,
and my God. But since I am not the owner of so much as one good thought, if
thou impart it not to me, there is nothing, for which I can pretend to be
thanked; but I am still the debtour, O my Lord; and still, thou art the party
offended.

Going one day, to receive the B. Sacrament, I saw two Diuelis, with the eyes
of my Soul, more clearly, then if I had seen them with the eyes of my Body,
in a most abominable figure. And, me thought, their horns did encompasse the
very throat, of a certain poor Priest; and I saw also my Lord, with that
great Majesty, whereof I have spoken, placed in those hands of that Priest,
which he was going to minister to me, with the same sinful hands of his; for
I understood that Soul, to be then, in the state of Mortal Sin. But now,
what kind of Object, must it be, to see thy Beauty, O my Lord, in the midst of
so abominable figures? Those Devils were, as all amazed, and frighted, in thy
presence, and willingly enough, would have been gone from thence, if they could
have gotten thy leave. This gave me such an excessive trouble, that I knew not,
how I should be able to Communicate, through the great fear, wherein I was; as
conceauing, that, if it had been a true Vision, his Divine Majesty would never
have permitted, that I should discern the misery, wherein that poor Soul
remained. The same dear Lord of mine, commanded me to pray for that Soul, and
told me, that he had suffered, what I had seen, to the end, that I might know,
of how great power, and force, the words of Consecration were; and that
Almighty God would not be kept from thence, how wicked soever that Priest
should be, who pronounced them; and to the end, that I might also discern his
great goodness, in not forbearing to put himself into the hands, even of his
greatest enemies, for the good, both of me, and of all men. And I also
understood thereby, how much more, Priests are obliged to be virtuous, and
good, then other men; and how terrible a thing it is, to take the B. Sacrament
unworthily; and how absolute a Lord, the Devil is, of any Soul, which is in
Mortal Sin. In fine, this passage did me a great deal of good, and gave me
a most particular knowledge, of the very great obligation, wherein I was, to
Almighty God; And let him be Blessed, and praised, for all eternity. Amen.

Another time, I happened to see another thing, which amazed me extremely. I was
in a certain place, where a certain person dyed, who had lived very ill, and
that many years; but during two of them, he had been sick; and, in some
things, he also seemed to be reformed. This man dyed without Confession; but
still, it seemed to me, that he was not to be damned; though yet, whilst men
were shrowding him, and preparing him for Burial, I saw many Devils possess
themselves of that Body; and they seemed, as it were, to play with it; and yet
withal, they used diverse cruelties upon it; for they did, with certain great
hooks, both tear, and toss it, from one to another; and this struck me into
a very great fear. When afterward I saw him carried to be buried, with all the
ceremony, and honor, which is allowed to others, I considered the goodness of
Almighty God, in not permitting the Soul, even of that man, to be defamed,
but that it might be concealed, that he was an Enemy of his.

For my part, I was even turned half fool, by what I had seen; yet, during
all the performance of the Office of the Dead, there was no more Devil, to be
seen; but when afterward, they put the Body into the Grave, there was such a
multitude of them, ready to receive the Body, that I was even out of my self,
with beholding it; and it was no little courage, which I needed, for enabling
me to dissemble the seeing it. And I considered, how those Devils were likely
to treat that Soul, when they exercised such an absolute dominion, even over
that woeful Body. And I would to Christ, that, what I saw, had also been seen
by such, as are in Mortal Sin; for, me thinks, it must have been of much
effect, and force, toward a making them mend their lives.

Now, all this obliged me to know, more and more, what I owed to Almighty
God; and from what he had delivered my Soul, But yet I went on, with fear
enough, till I had imparted these particulars to my Ghostly Father, as
conceauing, that, perhaps, it might have been some Illusion of the Devil,
whereby to defame that Soul, though yet the man had not been held to be of
very good life. But yet, it is very true, that whether it were an Illusion, or
no, I am sure, I never remember it, but it makes me afraid.

And now, since I have begun to speak of Visions, which have relation to
some such persons, as are dead, I will also declare some things, concerning
some other kind of Souls, which our Lord has been pleased, that I should see.
But I will speak only of few; both to be the shorter, and because it will not
be necessary to say much, in order to the receiving of benefit thereby. They
told me once, that a certain man was dead, who had been Provincial of his
Order; but when he dyed, he was Provincial of another Province. Now, I had
communicated much, with this man; and had been obliged to him, for some good
offices, which he had done me. This man was of much, and many virtues; but yet
when I came to know that he was dead, I was greatly troubled at it, because I
was in fear, and doubt, of his Salvation, in regard, that he had been a
Prelate, or Superior, twenty years; which really, is a thing, that I am apt
to fear, as holding it, to be a matter of much danger, to have charge of
Souls. And so I went, with trouble enough, to an Oratorie, and gave him all
that little good, which I had ever done, in my whole life; which yet was little
enough; and I humbly besought out Blessed Lord, that he would supply, out of
his infinite merits, for as much, as that Soul might wat, toward the freeing
it self, out of Purgatory. And whilst I was begging this Boon of our Blessed
Lord, in the best manner I could, me thought he rose, as from some deep part,
out of the earth, on my right side; and so I saw him mount-vp to Heaven, with
very great joy. The man was very old, before he dyed; but yet now, he seemed to
me, to be but of thirty years old, or rather somewhat less; but with much
brightness, in his face. This Vision passed away, very speedily; but yet I was
so extremely comforted by it, that the death of that man, did put me now, to
no more pain; though I had troubled many others, about him; for he was very
well beloved. And thus also the comfort of my Soul, being so great, I could
not possibly doubt; but that the Vision was true; and no illusion. This happened
but fifteen days, after his death; but still I was not slack; in procuring,
that he might be recommended to Almighty God; save that, I could not do it so
heartily; as before I saw this Vision. For, when our Lord shows me such things,
and that yet I will pray for them afterward, I cannot choose but conceive, that
it is, as if I gave an Alms to a rich man. But now, I came to understand
afterward, (for the man dyed very far off) that the death, which our Lord
granted him, was of so great comfort to him, by the knowledge of himself, and
by the humility, which he expressed, that it was of very great edification.

Now, a certain Religious Woeman dyed at home with us, about a day and a
half, before that occurred, whereof I am going to speak; but she had been a
good Servant of Almighty God. And another Religious Woeman reading one of
those Lessons, which belong to the Office of the Dead, which was recited in the
Quire, for her Soul, it was my turn, to stand by; and assist, in repeating
the Versi^^e; but in the midst of the Lesson, me thought, I saw the Soul rise
up, as the other did; and so went to Heaven. Now, this was no Imaginary
Vision, like the last; but like others, which I recounted before. Yet these be
no less certain, then those others are.

There was also another Religious Woeman of between eighteen, and twenty
years old, who dyed at home, in our House. Now she had been always sickly,
and a great Servant of God; and very diligent in the Quire; and, in fine, a
very virtuous woeman; and really, I was apt to think, that she should not have
gone to Purgatory at all, but rather, that there would have been
supernumerarie merits, in regard of the many sicknesses, which she had
endured. But yet, when we were reciting the Office, before she was buried, and
some four hours after she dyed, I understood, that her Soul sprung up, out
of the same place, and went to Heaven.

Being one day, in a College of the Society of JESUS, with those great
afflictions, and troubles, which I have declared my self sometimes to have
had, and still have, both in Body, and Soul, I found my self, to be in such
condition, that me thought I was not able, so much as to entertain one good
thought. There dyed, that night, a Brother of the Society, of that House; and
I recommending him, the best I could, to Almighty God; and being at the Mass
of another Father of the Society, for his Soul, I was seized by a very great
Recollection; and I saw him goe-vp to Heaven, with much glory; yea and I
understood, that our Blessed Lord himself, did accompany him, by way of
particular favor.

A Religious man of our Order, who was a very good man, was fallen very
dangerously sick; And I, being then at Mass, grew to be in very great
Recollection, and saw, that the man was dead; and that he went, instantly, to
Heaven, without touching upon Purgatory at all; and he dyed in that very
hour, as I was told afterward. Now I wondered, that he had never entered into
Purgatory; but I understood, that he, having been a Religious man, and having
well observed the Vows of his Profession, the Bulls, granted in favor of his
Order, had auailed him, toward his escape of Purgatory. Now, I know not, why
this was given to be understood, by me; but, me thinks, it may be very well,
to make me know, that a man's being a Religious man, does not consist only in
his Habit; I mean, not in the only wearing it, as if that very thing, did
endue him with more perfection.

I will now relate no more of these things; for there is no great cause, why I
should; though yet our Blessed Lord have done me the favor, to show me very
many. But amongst all those Souls, which I have seen, I have not understood
of any one, which escapes the going at all, into Purgatory, but only this
last Father, and that holy man, Fray Pedro de Alcantara, and that Dominican
Father, of whom I spoke before. Our Lord has also been pleased to let me see
the several degrees, which they have of glory, by representing the places to
me, wherein they are; and I find, that there is a great deal of difference,
between some, and others.

THE NINE AND THEIR TIETH CHAPTER.
She proceeds in the same Subject, of shevving the great Favors, which our
Lord had done her. And she declares, how he was pleased to promise his Favor
to them, for whom she should beg it; and she relates some important
particulars, wherein his Divine Majesty had done her particular Favors, of
this kind.

BEing once very importunate, with our Blessed Lord, that he would be pleased,
to give sight to a certain person, to whom I had obligation, and who was
almost grown to be utterly blind, I had much compassion on him; and I feared,
least our Lord would not hear me, in regard of my Sins. But yet he appeared
to me then, as he had also done, at other times, and began to show me the
Wound of his left hand; and, with his right hand, he drew out the great nail,
which had been thrust into it; and me thought, that some of the very flesh,
came out, with the nail. I saw well, how great pain it did import; and it
afflicted me much. But he told me, that since he had endured so much for my
sake, I should not doubt, but that he would more easily be drawn, to harken to
this Suite of mine; and so he promised, that he would grant, whatsoever I
should desire; but, he knew very well already, that I would beg nothing of
him, but only to his own honor, and glory; and that I made this present
Suite, under that condition. He willed me also to remember, and consider, that
even, when I did him not true Service, I had not desired any thing of him,
which he had not granted, even better, then my self had desired; and therefore,
how much more would he be sure enough, to do it now, when he knew I loved him;
and therefore, that I should bannish all doubt. And, I think, eight days did
not pass, but that our Lord restored sight, to that person; and this was
presently known, by my Ghostly Father. Now, peradventure, as I thought at
first, this did not happen, by means of any prayer of mine; though yet, since
I saw this Vision, I have remained with some little certainty, that the thing
was done, by the Favor of his Divine Majesty, to me; and accordingly, I have
presented him with my thanks.

Another time, there was a person sick, of a very painful infirmity; which,
because it was of an odd condition, and way, I forbear to particularize it
here. But it was a kind of insupportable thing; and he had been troubled with
it, two months; but he endured a torment by it, which did even tear him in
pieces. Now, my Ghostly Father went to visit him; and that, was the Rectour of
the College, of whom I spoke; and he had great compassion of the man; and
told me, that, in any case, I must also go and give him a Visit, for that he
was a person, to whom I might handsomely do it, in regard, that he was my
Kinsman. I went, and had so much pity of him, that I began to beg his
health of our Lord, after a very importunate manner. And in this, I saw clearly
(by the very uttermost, of what I am able to imagine) how much Favor our Lord
was pleased to do me therein; for instantly, upon the very next day, he was
absolutely well.

I was once in a great deal of trouble, because I came to know, that a
certain person, to whom I was much obliged, was resolved to do a thing,
which was greatly against the honor, both of Almighty God, and himself; and
yet he was very much bent, to do the thing. Now, my trouble for this, was so
great, that I knew not, which way to find remedy, and means, to make him
leave it; and indeed, it rather seemed, that there was none. But then, I
besought Almighty God, and that with my whole heart, that he would help us; and
till I could find it done, I should be in pain. Being therefore now in this
case, I went to a certain Oratory, a little remore from where I was; for there
are diverse such, in this Monastery; and finding a Picture of Christ our Lord,
as he was bound to the Pillar, I humbly begged of his Divine Majesty, to do
me that Favor. And presently, I heard one speak to me, in a most sweet voice;
but it was framed, as if it had been, in the manner of whistling. For my part,
I was all in a fright; and the very hair of my head, stood an end; and I had
a great desire, to hear, what it said to me. But when once my fear was gone,
(which was also quickly), I remained with rest, and joy, and so great an
interior kind of delight, that it amazed me, how the only hearing of a voice,
(and that, with the only ears of flesh, and blood; yea and without the
articulation, or framing of any one word) was able to produce so powerful an
operation in the Soul. But, in the mean time, I found even thereby, that the
thing, which I had desired, should be done; and so it was; and the pain,
wherein I found my self, concerning it, was utterly removed, in a thing, which
was not yet, as if I had found it, to be certainly granted, as it happened to be,
afterward. And I related the whole accident, to my Confessors, who, at that
time, were two; and they both, were very learned men, and the Servants of
Almighty God.

I knew also of a certain person, who had resolved to serve his Divine
Majesty, in very good earnest; and he had used Prayer, some days; and
therein, his Divine Majesty had done him many Favors; and yet he gaue-ouer
his course of Prayer, upon certain occasions, which occurred to him; and those
he did not quitt, although they were full of danger. This put me to a great
deal of pain; because the man, whom the matter concerned, was a person,
whom both I loved much, and whom I also was much obliged to love. And, I
believe, it had been more then a month, wherein I did almost nothing else, but
beg of Almighty God, that he would bring this Soul back, to himself. And
being in Prayer, one day, I saw a Devil hard by me, with certain papers in his
hand, which he was tearing; and he seemed to be in a very great rage. But this
put me into much comfort; because I conceived thereby, that my Suite was
granted; and so it was, as I came to know afterward. For, the Party had been
at Confession, and had done it, with great Contrition; and he returned, in so
very good earnest, to Almighty God, that I hope in his Divine Majesty, he
will ever go advancing in his Service. And let him be Blessed for ever, Amen.

In this particular, of procuring our Blessed Lord, to bring Souls out of
greiuous Sins, upon my humble suite; and of others, who were brought, many
times, to more perfection; and of freing Souls also out of Purgatory; and of
doing other things also of great importance, the Favors of our Blessed Lord,
have been so great, that I should both weary my self, and my Reader, if I
would pretend to relate them. And these things have happened oftener to me, for
the benefit of Souls, then of Bodies; and this is so very well known, that it
has many witnesses. But then instantly, there grew a kind of Scruple upon me,
since I could not choose but believe, that our Lord was pleased, to do diverse
things, through my Prayer, (for, in this case, and at this time I abstract from
his goodness, and mercy, which is ever the chief cause of all things) but for
the rest, these are now so many particulars, and so well known by others,
that I have no difficulty at all, to believe them; and I bless his Divine
Majesty, for the same; and they put me to great confusion; because I still
find my self, to be, more, and, more, a debtour. But that consideration makes
my desire to serve him, increase; and reviues my love. And (which yet amazes me
more,) those things, which our Lord finds not to be convenient, I can scarce
beg of his Divine Majesty, even almost, although I would; and if I do, it is
with so little strength, and spirit, and care, that, although I would feign
force my self, yet it is even impossible for me, to do it in these, as I do
it in those others, which his Divine Majesty has a mind to effect; for,
such, I see, I am able to beg often, and that, with great importunity; and
though I carry not the particular care of them, about me, yet me thinks, they
come before me, of themselves. So that the difference, between these two ways
of asking, is so very great, as I am not able to declare. For, though I ask in
one of these kinds of things, wherein, I forbear not to urge my self to beg
them of our Lord; (howsoever I feel not that kind of fervor in my self, which
I do in those other) and though they chance to import mine own particular
very much, yet is it, in effect, but as when a man chances to be toungtyed; who
although he would feign speak, yet he cannot do it; and if he speak, it is
but in such sort, as that he sees, it cannot be understood; whereas the other;
is, as when a man speaks clear, and plain, to a man, whom he finds very
willing to hear him. Or else, let us say, that one of those Favors, is begged,
as by a Vocal Prayer; and the other, as in a way of Contemplation, which is so
very sublime, that our Lord represents himself in such sort, as that we
understand, that he understands us; and that his Divine Majesty is ioyed to
see, that we beg any thing of him, that so he may do us favor. Blessed be
he for ever, who gives us so much; and to whom I give so little. For what, O
my Lord, does any man, who does not even defeat himself wholly for thee? and
yet, how much, how much, how much, and a thousand times more, I might say,
how much, am I wanting heerin? And now, upon this reason, I should not so
much, as once desire, even to live (though yet, I have other reasons also, not
to desire it) because I live not, according to my obligation toward thee. Nay,
how full do I see myself of imperfections, and with what faintnes, and
baseness, do I serve thee? And really, me thinks, sometimes, I wish, that I
were even deprived of sense, that so I might not understand so very much ill of
my self, as I do. Yet I beseech him, to redress it all, who knows so well,
how to do it.

But I remember, I spoke before, of my being in the House of a certain great
Lady; where, I assure you, folks had good reason, to have their wits, well
about them, and always to be considering the vanity, which worldly things
carry with them. For she was a person, very much esteemed, and very much
praised; and there were temptations enough, toward less perfection, through
much distraction; whereby one might easily, have been shrewdly taken, if I had
looked upon nothing, but my self. But he who judges rightly, and looks upon
us, with true sight indeed, was careful not to give over the keeping me, ever,
safe, in his hands. And now, when I am speaking of having a true, and real
sight of things, I remember, and consider, the great trouble, which any such
person, as whom it has pleased Almighty God to endue with a knowledge of
that, which indeed is Truth, must needs be put to, when he is forced to treat
with others, about things, which concern this transitory, and troublesome
world; where, all, in fine, is much disguised, and masked, as our Lord himself
told me once.

But, in the mean time, many of those things, which I write here, are by no
means, of mine own head; but they have been told me, by that Heavenly
Master of mine. And because, in all those things, which I am wont to affirm,
after a direct and positive manner, I use to express my self, by these words:
This I understood; or else, Our Lord told me this; I find my self with a very
great scruple, of either adding, or, any way, altering, so much as any one
syllable thereof. And so, whenever I do not most expressly remember every
circumstance of any thing, of this kind (which is to be related by me) I am
wont to deliver that, always, as in mine own name. Or else, because sometimes
they proceed from mine own particular dictamens, I use not to call any thing
mine, which is good in itself; because indeed, I am far enough from being
ignorant, that any such thing, as is in me, is good; but I affirm only those
things, as in mine own name, and they are delivered, as by my self, which did
not come into my understanding, and knowledge, by way of Revelation.

But O my dear Lord, and my God! and how often does it happen to us here, that
even, in the most spiritual occasions, we are resolved, many times, to
understand things, but just so, as we have a mind to understand them our
selves; and even they are wrested much, from the true sense. And so we also
do, in things of this world; and we will needs make our selves believe, that
we must tax even our own profit in Spirit, according to the measure of the
time, wherein we have had any exercise of Prayer. Nay it seems, that we have
had a mind, to put a tax, and limit, upon him, who, by no means, will be
subject to any, when there is question of imparting his Favors, which he is
wont to dispose, when he will, and who can impart more benedictions to one, in
six months, then to another, in a great multitude of years. And this is a
most certain truth, which I have seen so expressly verifyed, even with my very
eyes, upon the instance of many persons, that I wonder, how we can so much as
detain our selves, in the least doubt thereof. But I am very apt to believe,
that a man, who has any talent, in trying, and knowing Spirits, and to whom
our Blessed Lord shall have given true Humility, will not be able to fall, and
continue in this error. For, such a man will judge of things, by the effects,
and by the strong purposes, and firm resolutions, and love of the party, who
is chiefly concerned. And besides, our Lord is wont to give such a person
light, whereby he may be able to understand it; and by that very light, he
also discernes, the profiting, and proceeding forward, of Souls; and not by
the number of years, wherein they have attended to these things. Because some
one Soul, may, as I said before, have obtained that, in six months, which
another shall not have been able to get, in twenty years. For, as I said also
before, our Lord bestows those things, to whom he will; and commonly he does
it to such, as dispose themselves best, to receive them. And in proof heerof,
I see, that there come now to this House of ours, certain Gentlewoemen, and
Ladies, who are very young; and yet, when our Blessed Lord vouchsafes once to
touch their hearts, and to give them a little Light, and Love; and when, in a
very short time, he is pleased to allow, and impart some Regalo, and gust of
Spirit, to them, they have not stayed, and pawsed; nor was any difficulty
able to offer it self against them, which could stopp them; but they would be
going on, without so much as remembering, that they were to live, by eating
their meat; and they shut themselves up, for ever, in a House, without having
so much, as any Revenue, upon which to live; like persons, who put no manner
of esteem, upon any thing of this world, for the love of him, who, they know,
loves them. And they give over, even all things, all at once; nor have they
any will at all, which is merely their own; nor do they understand it, to be
possible, that ever they can receive disgust, by enduring such a straight
shutting up; but all of them, offer-vp their whole selves, in Sacrifice, to the
honor, and glory of Almighty God.

And now, how willingly, and justly do I allow them, to have gotten the Start
of me heerin? and how mightily ought I to be ashamed, and even confounded, in
the presence of Almighty God, to see, that, what his Divine Majesty could not
finish in my Soul, through my fault, in such a multitude of years, since I
used Prayer, and wherein he began to do me Favors, he has yet been able to
accomplish in them, within three months; yea and even, with some of them, in
three days, with doing them also far less Favor, then to me. Though yet
withal, it be very true, that our Blessed Lord, pays them so well, for their
pains, that they are all, very far, from being sorry, to have done,
whatsoever they have done, for the love of him.

For this purpose, I could wish, that we might call to mind, how many years
they are, since we made our Profession, and have used Mental Prayer. Not yet,
for the giving them any trouble, by making them turn back, who have made a
great deal of way, in a short time, and to get them to go, but our pace,
which is as much as it would be, to make them, who fly like Eagles (through
the Favors, which it has pleased Almighty God, to do them) to walk the
slow dull pace of a shackled Hen; but to the end, that we may grow, to carry
the honor of his Divine Majesty, in our eye. And then, if we find these
Sisters of ours, to be humble, whom we see, to be so forward, in the way of
Spirit, that we should give them, still, the raynes. For certainly, our Blessed
Lord, who has done them so great Favors already, will never suffer them to
break their necks, by falling down, as from some dangerous rock. They commit,
and trust themselves, in the hands of Almighty God; for, this benefit do they
reap, by the truth, which Faith teaches them; and shall not we also trust them
there? but An excellent and most useful Document.
must we limit, and confine them, by our narrow measure, according to the
meannesse, and straightnes of our own poor minds? No, no; this must not be;
but rather, if our selves cannot ariue to be owners of those strong affections,
and firm resolutions, which abound in them (for, these things cannot be well
understood, without experience) let us procure to humble our selves, and not
condemn them? For else, by seeming to have a care of their advantage, and
profit, we shall deprive our selves, of our own; and we shall also loose the
occasion, which our Lord shows us so fair, for our own greater humility;
and that we may the better understand, how much is wanting to us; as also, how
much more absolutely, those other Souls are likely to be untied, and freed,
from worldly things then ours; and how much nearer, they are approached to
Almighty God, then we; since we see, that his Divine Majesty, is come so much
closer up, toward them, then us. For my part, I can understand no more, in
this case; neither indeed have I any desire to understand more, then that I
had rather have such Prayer, as having been obtained, and exercised but a short
time, might be found to have great effects, and which instantly appear, (for
it is impossible, that a Creature should be content, to throw away a whole
world at once, upon the only reason, of pleasing Almighty God, without a
mighty force of love) then such an other kind of Prayer, as should have
continued many years; and yet never, in fine, have made an end of resolving
upon any more, at the last, then at the first, to do aniething, for the pure
love of Almighty God, unless it be some poor, little, fidling babble, which
is no bigger, then a grain of Salt, which has neither bulk, nor weight, but
is such, as that any Bird might be able, to carry it away, in her Bill. For,
I confess, we hold it not, for a matter of much effect, and mortification,
when a great account is made, of doing such, and such things, for the love of
our Lord, which indeed, it is both pity, and shame, that we should
understand, and value, at any rate, though perhaps we should do never so
many, of that kind. For my part, I am but one of these, and am apt, not only
to forget the Favors of Almighty God, but even to ouervalue mine own poor
endeauours. I say not yet, but that his Divine Majesty will vouchsafe to put
some value even upon little things, through his own great goodness; but as for
me, I would make no account thereof; nor, in effect, so much as see, that I do
them, since they are but a kind of Nothing. But yet, pardon me, even heerin, O
my dear Lord; and blame me not, if I procure to comfort my self, with thinking
of this little kind of Somewhat, since I am able to serve thee solidly, in
Nothing; but if really I found my self able, to serve thee, in things, which
were indeed of weight, and moment, I would be far from making account of
these things, of Nothing.

O how happy are those persons, who are able to do thee Service, in great
matters? And certainly, if having envy of them, and entertaining earnest
desires, of being able to do the like, inight be taken by thee, for good
payment, upon true account, from this poor Servant of thine, infallibly I
would not sitt-out at pleasing thee. But the truth, my dear Lord, is this,
That directly I am good for nothing; though yet, thou may well give me value,
since thou love me so much.

But now, it happened lately, by a Breue, which came from Rome, that this
Monastery should be incapable of Revenue; so that now, it may be esteemed to
be finished. It cost us some trouble to effect it; and I remained with much
comfort, to see things settled. And reflecting upon the difficulties, which I
had met; and praising our Blessed Lord, for his being pleased, to have partly
served himself of me heerin, I applied my self a little, to look back, upon
all the passages of the whole business. And really, it is very true, that in
every one of those particulars, wherein there might be any appearance, that I
had contributed somewhat, I find many imperfections, and errors; Sometimes,
of little Courage; and sometimes also, of little Faith. For, till I saw all
that accomplished, which it had pleased our Blessed Lord to tell me before, of
what should be done, concerning it, I did never, in a resolute, and assured
manner, make an end, of fully beleiuing, that it would be, though yet withal,
it be true, that I also could not tell, how to doubt it. Nor knew I, how all
this could stand together; but it seems, that many times, it looked in my
eye, as if it must be impossible, on the one side, and yet, it could not be
doubted, on the other; I mean, it could not be firmly believed, but that the
thing, would be done. Yet, in fine, I found, that there was this advantage in
it, That our Lord himself, did all the good, which was done; and I, all the
ill; and so I would think of it, no more: because, if I did, I should be sure
to stumble upon many faults of mine own. But, Blessed be he, for ever, who,
when he is disposed, knows how to fetch good out of them all; Amen.

I say then, that it is no less, then a kind of dangerous thing, to go
rating, and measuring the only years, wherein any body may have had the
exercise of Mental Prayer. For, though perhaps, there may be a piece of
Humility in the consideration thereof, yet withal, it also seems, that there
is a kind, of I cannot tell what, as if there were a show, that a body would
conceive, that he had deserved some little thing, for his pains. I say not,
that these years of Prayer, have not their worth; and so we shall be well paid
for them; but yet, if any Spiritual person shall conceive, that, for the
many years, wherein he has used Mental Prayer, he deserve those great
Regalo's, and gusts, I hold it for a most infallible truth, that he shall never
get up, to the topp of Liberty of Spirit. But, is it not, on the other side,
enough, that he has obtained so much Favor of Almighty God, that he defends
him so far, as to hinder him from committing such Sins, as he fell into,
before he was a man of Prayer? but that now, forsooth, he will needs proceed
with his Divine Majesty, for the Favors, which he has received from his
holy hand, as those Debtours use to do, who go to Suite with Creditours, for
their own money. Perhaps (as I was saying) this may look, in some lights,
like a piece of profound Humility; but for my part, I cannot think so; but
rather, that it is a part of boldness. And I am sure enough, that I (with being
not humble at all) never durst presume, so far. Yet perhaps, this last is
true, in regard, that I never did God any service; and therefore, I have
begged no such favor at his hands; whereas yet, if I had thought, I had
deserved, I should have been more earnest, then any other, in desiring of our
Lord, that I might be paid, even here, for my pains. And yet, I do not say,
but that a Soul may go increasing, by this means; and that God will make him
amends, if his Prayer have been humble; but yet still, I would feign have that
point forgotten, which speaks of reckoning-vp those many years of our
Service of our Lord. For, all that, which we are, any way, able to do, is
fit to make a man, even cast the gorge, in comparison of the least dropp of
that blood, which our Blessed Lord shed for us. And if, besides, it be most
really true, that, by doing Service to Almighty God, we come to be his
debtours, so much the more, what manner of thing is it, that we should fall
upon begging recompenses of that kind; since, if we pay a Farthing of the old
debt, there returns a Bill of a thousand Ducats upon us, for a new Loan. But,
in fine, for the love of our Lord, let us leave to pass these judgments,
which indeed, ought not to be ours, but his. This course of making Comparisons,
is not excellent, even in temporal, and familiar things; and what then shall
it be, about that, which God only knows? And his Divine Majesty shows well,
that he knows it; for he resolves, when he thinkesfitt, to pay the last
Labourer, as well as the first.

I have written that, which here I have delivered in these three sheets of
paper, at so many several times, and in so several days, (for I had, and
have still, as I have said, so little means, and leisure) that I had forgotten
what I was beginning to say, about this Vision, which follows. But I saw,
whilst I was in Prayer, a great Field, lying open, and all apart, by it self;
and that, much company, of different kinds, was round about me, which circled
me in. And it seemed to me, that cuerie one, had offensive weapons in his
hands, wherewith to hurt me; as Lances, Swords, and Daggers; and others had
also long Staves. In a word, I could not get from thence, by any way, or
means, without danger of death; especially, being alone, and not having any
one Creature, to help me. And being thus, in so great affliction of Spirit,
that I knew not what to do, I lifted-vp mine eyes toward Heaven, and saw
Christ our Lord; not then in Heaven, but yet very high, and far off from me,
in the air, who reachtforth his hand, toward me, and favored me from thence,
in such sort, that I feared neither all that other people, nor yet these; who
all, were unable to do me hurt, how much soever they should desire it. This
Vision seems, at the first sight, to be without any fruit, or good effect, at
all; but it has yet done me a great deal of good, because I have understood
what it signified. For, I saw my self, in that encounter, shortly after, and
knew, that it was nothing else, but this Vision; and I also came to know it, to
be a very picture, or rather Map of the world. For, as many as are in it,
(abstracting ever from those few, who apply themselves, to do our Lord
particular Service) seemed to carry Arms against this wretched Soul of ours;
as namely, Honors, Estates, Delights, and the like. For it is evident, that
the Soul is all ouercast with a Nett, before it be aware; at least, all these
things, do the best they can, to endanger, and wrapp us up, fast enough; as
namely, Friends, Kindred, and (which amazes me more) even such, as are virtuous
people. For, I found my self afterward, to be extremely pressed, and even
oppressed, by them: they conceauing, in the mean time, that they carried
themselves very well; but, the while, I knew not at all, either how to defend
my self, or what to do.

O my dear God! and if now I should stand, to relate the kinds, and
differences of those troubles, which set upon me, at that time, even after all
those others, whereof I spoke before, how well might this, be able to serve for
a means, to make a man wholly abhor all things? It was, me thinks, the very
greatest persecution of all, that ever I had endured. For, I felt my self, at
some times, so straightly set upon, on all sides, that I only found remedy, by
lifting-vp mine eyes to Heaven, and crying upon Almighty God. And I remembered
very well, what I had seen, in this last Vision of mine; and it did me a great
deal of good, toward a not putting confidence in any Creature; for, there is
no one of them firm, and stable; but only God alone, is entirely, and truly
so. But, in these great afflictions, our Lord has ever used to send me some
person, or other, who, in his name, might lend me his hand; as he signified to
me, that he would; and as he did also let me see, in this last Vision; and so I
tied not my self to any thing, but only to please our Blessed Lord; and this
has served to sustain this poor little virtue, which I had, in desiring to
serve him; And let him be Blessed for ever.

But finding my self once, very unquiet, and in great disorder, yea and in
skirmish, or rather, in a very battle, without being able to recollect my
self; yea and my thoughts being scattered, and dispersed, upon things, which
were not very perfect; and withal, not seeming, to be so utterly untied from
all things, as I used; and being still, so wicked, as I was, I grew afraid,
that the Favors, which our Blessed Lord had done me, might fall-out to be
Illusions; and, in fine, I then remained, with a very great obscuritic of
mind. But now, whilst I was in this pain, our Lord began to speak to me,
and told me, that I must not be thus afflicted; but that, finding my self in
that case, I might well understand even thereby, in how great misery I must
remain, if once he should depart from me; and that there was to be no
security at all, as long as we should continue in this world. I was also given
to understand, how well our labor was employed, in this strife, and war,
since it would not fail to be followed, with so high a reward. And, me
thought, our Blessed Lord had compassion of them, who live in this world; but
that I must not think, that he had forgotten me; yea and that he would never
leave me; but yet so, as that still I must also do my part, in helping my
self. And this did our Blessed Lord declare to me, with a kind of tender
compassion, and Regalo, accompanied with certain words, whereby so high Favor
was done me, as I need not stand here to relate. And these others, which follow
here now, his Divine Majesty says also often to me, with demonstration of
most particular love: Thou art now, grown to be mine; and I am thine. And
those words, which I am ever wont to say (and to my thinking, I say them, with
much truth) are these, which follow: What care I, O my Lord, for my self but
only for thee? But I confess, those words of his, to me, are of great Regalo
to my heart; though yet withal, they be of excessive confusion, when I
remember, what kind of Creature I am. But A true noble, and most generous heart.
it seems, that I have need of more courage, for the receiving of those high
Favors, then even for the enduring of unspeakable afflictions. But now, when
these things are in motion, all the poor good actions of my life, are utterly
forgotten by me; and then, it is only represented to my mind, how wicked I am;
and that, without any discourse at all, of my understanding; so that even this
also, does seem, at certain times, to have somewhat of the Supernatural in it.

Sometimes, there come also upon me, so earnest, and even eager appetites, of
receiving the Blessed Sacrament, that I know not, whether it can be possible
for me, to express them to the full. It happened to me one morning, that it
rayned so extremely, as to seem no way fit for me, to go out of doors. But
yet, being once gotten abroad, I was already grown also, to be so far out of
my self, through that desire of Communicating, that although they had set
Lances, even pointed, and held fast against my very Breast, me thought I could
have passed, even through them all; and how much more then, through water. And
as soon, as I arrived at Church, I was taken with a very great Rapt. For, me
thought, the very Heaven was open, and not by one ouerture only, as I had seen
it, at other times; and I saw another also above that, upon which I understood
(by way of a certain notice, which I am not able to express) the Divinity it
self to be, though yet I saw not the Divinity. And, me thought, it was vpheld,
by certain Mysterious Beasts; and I was considering, whether they were not
those of the Evangelists. But yet, I neither saw, how the Throne was seated,
nor who was sitting in it; but only a great multitude of Angels, about it;
which seemed to me, of much more beauty, beyond comparison, then those others,
which I had seen in Heaven, before. And I have been thinking, whether they
might not have been Seraphins, or Cherubins; for, they are very different, in
point of glory; and they seemed, to be mightily inflamed. And as for the
glory, which then I felt in my self, it can neither be written, nor spoken;
nor is any one able, even to think it, but such as had been made partakers of
it, by seeing it. But I understood, that absolutely all that, which possibly can
be desired, was there; and that, all together. I there, saw nothing at all,
distinctly; but they told me (yet I know not, even who they were) that the
thing, which I might there be able to do, was, to understand, that I could
understand nothing; but that I might see from thence, the direct Nothingnes of
all things, in comparison of that. And really, it is very true, that my Soul,
from that time forward, has found it self, as if it were extremely affronted,
and confounded, to observe, that it was able to pause at all, upon any thing
created; and how much more then, to be affected, either by it, or to it. For,
all things seem to me, ever since, to be neither better, nor more, then the
very nest of an Ant. But I Communicated; and was at Mass; though yet I knew
not, how I could be so. I conceived, that the time had been very short; and
wondered, when the Clock struck; and so found, that it was two hours, wherein
I had remained, in Rapt, and glory.

I was amazed after this, to know, how, by approaching so near to this Fire,
which seemed to come from above, out of the true love of Almighty God, it was
yet, in no power of mine at all, to get the least spark thereof, but only,
when his Divine Majesty was pleased to impart it. For, how much soever I
desire it, and how earnestly soever I procure it, and would defeat, and even
destroy my self for it, there is yet no means at all, to obtain it. But now,
this Rapt of mine, seems even to have consumed the faults, and lukewarmnesse,
and miseries of the old man, as the Phoenix is said to do her self, out of
whose ashes, when she is burnt, springs another Phoenix. For just so, does a
Soul become absolutely an other kind of thing, with desires wholly different,
and with a courage so increased, that now she seems not, to be, what she was
before; but now begins to walk, with a new kind of purity, in the way of
our Lord. And I just then beseeching his Divine Majesty, that it might prove
to be so, in my case, and that I might now, at least, begin, as upon a new
account, to do him service, he spoke these words to me: Thou have made a good
Comparison; and see, that thou forget it not; that so, thou may ever procure
to improve thy self.

And being once, in the self-same doubt, whereof I spoke even now, whether
these Visions were of God, or no, our Lord appeared, and spoke these words, to
me, with some rigor: How long, O ye Sons of men, will ye continue to be
hard of heart? And he also willed me then, to examine my self well, upon this
one Interrogatorie: Whether I were entirely given to him, for his, or no; and
that if I were given so, and was so, I should believe, that he would not
suffer me to be lost. And whereas I afflicted my self much, upon his uttering
that exclamation aforesaid, he returned with great tenderness, and Regalo, and
told me, that he would not have me afflict my self; and that he knew already,
that I, for my part, would not fail, to apply my self wholly to that, which
might be for his Service; and that so, he would also do all that, which I
desired of him, against Illusions; and so he was pleased to do that thing in
particular, which then I humbly begged, at his hands. For he willed me, to
look in, upon the Love, which went increasing daily, in me; for, thereby, I
might best understand, that the Devil had no part in it; and that I must not
think, Almighty God would consent, that the Devil should have so much power
over the Souls of his Servants, as to be able to give me such a claritie of
understanding, together with such a depth of repose of mind, as I possessed.
And he gave me also further to understand, that such, and so many men, having
told me, that these Visitations were of Almighty God, I should do ill, if I
did not believe them.

Being also another time, in Prayer, upon S. Athanasius's Creed, of Quicumque
vult, etc, I was given to understand the manner, how there was one only God,
and three Persons; and this, in so perspicuous, and clear a kind, that I was
no less comforted by it, then amazed at it. This also, did me very much good,
toward the giving me increase of knowledge, concerning the greatness of
Almighty God, and of his wonders; and for all such occasions, also, as wherein
I think of the Blessed Trinity, or hear speech thereof. And now, me thinks,
I conceive, how all that Mystery stands, very well; and it contents me much.

One day, upon the Assumption of our B. Lady, the Queen of the Angels, our
Lord was pleased to do me the Favor, in a certain Rapt, that her rising up,
into Heaven, was represented to me, together with the solemnity, and joy, of
that Celestial Court, wherewith she was received; as also the place, which she
held. To tell, what kind of thing this was, I am no way able. The glory, which
even my Spirit had, to see, that hers is so great, was even extreme; and I
remained with great effects, and improuements, by it, toward a wish, of
undergoing yet, greater afflictions, for the love of our Lord. And so it also
gave me increase of desires, to serve our B. Lady, since both her dignity,
and merit, was so great. And being one day, in a College of the Society of
JESUS, and the Brothers of that House, being then in act of receiving the B.
Sacrament, I saw a very rich Canopie, over their heads; and this, at two
several times; but yet, when others Communicated there, I saw it not.

THE FOVRTIETH CHAPTER.
She proceeds in the same Discourse, by relating the great Favors, which our
Lord shevved her; whereby, good instruction is to be gotten. And with the end
of this Chapter, she ends also the Discourse of her Life.

BEing once in Prayer, the delight, and gust, which I felt within my self, was
so great, and I found my self so unworthy of so high a Favor, that I began,
upon that occasion, to consider, how much better I had deserved to possess
that place in Hell, which was prepared for me; for I could never forget, in
what manner I had seen my self there. And now, by means of this consideration,
my Soul began to be so much more inflamed, that my Spirit grew to be in
Rapt; and so, as that I know not, how to express it. For, me thought, I was
put, and plunged, into that Majesty, which I had formerly understood; but yet
so, as that I know not, how to declare it. In this Majesty, a certain Truth
was given me to be understood, which indeed, is the accomplishment of all
Truth; but yet still, I know not how to relate it. For, I saw nothing at all
distinctly; but they told me these words, though yet I saw not, who spoke them;
only I knew, that it was the very Truth; This, which I do for thee, is no
small matter; but rather, it is a thing, for which thou ovvest me much;
because one of the mischeifs, which grows to the world, proceeds from not
knovving the Truths of Scripture, with clear truth; but, one tittle thereof,
shall not fail. Now, as for me, I conceived, that my self had always believed
this; yea and that all Catholics, had also believed it. But then, he said to
me again: Alas, my Daughter, there be fevv, who love me, according to Truth;
for, if they did, I would not conceal my secrets, from them. But, do thou
know, what it is, to love me, according to Truth? It is, to know, that all
is a Lie, which is not acceptable to me. Thou shall be able, to see this
clearly (which now thou do not understand) by the profit, which thy Soul
shall get. And so accordingly, I have seen it performed; our Lord be ever
praised, for it. For, all things, which are not addressed to the service of
Almighty God, do, of late, seem to me, so hugely to be vanity, and a lie,
that I am no way able to express, how much I understand thereof. And it moves
me to deep compassion, to see men live, in so great obscurity, and ignorance,
as they are in, of thy Truth; but, by this means, I have benefited my self, in
many kinds, whereof I will here relate some; and some I shall not be able to
relate.

But our Lord said one word to me here, in particular, with very great favor;
though I know not also, how this was. For I saw nothing; but I remained in such
sort, after it, as I know not also, how to declare, even that. Only I am sure,
I remained, by this means, with a very great kind of fortitude, and firm
purpose, of accomplishing even the least part of Holy Scripture, with the
uttermost of all my power. And nothing, me thinks, could offer it self to me,
through which I would not pass, for the making this good.

There remained also a truth, of this Divine Truth, which was now represented
to me (though yet still, I know not how) so deeply engraven in my heart, that it
made me carry a new kind of profound reverence to Almighty God. For it
imparts a notice of his high Majesty, and great Power, after such a manner, as
cannot be described; but I can only understand, that it is a mighty kind of
thing. I now remained also, with a very great desire, never to speak at all,
but of things, which were substantially true; and which might justly take
precedence of all that, which uses to be treated of, in this world. And so I
then began, to find it pain enough, even to live in it. This Vision left me
with a Regalo of great tenderness; and with humility also. It seemed to me,
that our Blessed Lord did give me to understand much, in this vision, though
yet, without my understanding the manner of it; but, at least, I was satisfied
well enough, that it was no Illusion. I saw nothing; but yet I understood the
great benefit, which there is, in not making account of any thing, which
brings us not nearer to Almighty God; and so I came to understand, what kind
of thing it is, for a Soul, to walk in Truth, in the presence of the same
Truth. That, which I understood, is, that our Lord gave me to understand, That
he is very Truth it self. And all these things, at which I have now pointed
here, I understood sometimes, by their being spoken to me; and at other times,
without speech; but yet, some of this latter sort, with more clearnes, then
those others, which were imparted to me, by words. I understood very great
truths, of this Truth; and better, then if many learned men had taught me; and
at least, it seems to me, that they could, by no means, have so imprinted
them, in my mind, nor so clearly have given me to understand the vanity of
this world. This Truth, which, I say, was given me to be understood, is very
Truth, in it self; and it is both without beginning, and without end; and all
other Truths, depend upon this Truth; and all other Loves, upon this Love; and
all other Greatnesses, upon this Greatness; though yet, all this be delivered by
me, with much obscurity, in comparison of that clearnes, wherewith our Blessed
Lord was pleased to impart it. And, how very well does this become the great
power of that Majesty, to leave such things as these, imprinted upon the
Soul, whereby such advantages are obtained? and that, in so short a time? O
Greatness, and Majesty of my Omnipotent Lord! What is it, which thou art doing?
Consider who it is, to whom thou art vouchsafing such Sovereign Favors? Do
thou not remember, how this Soul has been a very Abyss of Lies, and even a
deep Sea of vanities? and all this, through faults of mine own? For,
notwithstanding that thou gave me an inclination, which, naturally, did
abhor lying, yet I made my self apt to treat, in many things, after a
deceiptfull kind of manner. How art thou able, O my God, even to endure me? and
how can so great goodness of thine, be showed to one, who has so ill deserved
it? and how can so much Sin against thee, be compatible with such Favors, as
these?

Being once reciting the Hours of the Divine Office, with all the rest of the
Religious, my Soul began to be suddenly recollected; and it seemed to me,
that it was like some clear, and pure Looking-glass, without having any
thing, either on the back, or on the sides; or yet, either above, or below,
which was not all, extremely clear. And in the very Center thereof, Christ our
Lord was represented to me, just so, as I am accustomed to see him. It seemed
to me, that I saw him clearly, in all the parts, and portions of my Soul, as
in a Looking-glass; and so also (though I know not how) our Blessed Lord
himself, was engraven therein, with such a certain kind of enamoured
communion, or communication of himself, as I cannot possibly express. Only I
know, that this Vision has been of very great benefit to me; and is so,
whenever I remember it; and especially, after I receive the B. Sacrament. But
it was given me heerby to understand, that the being of a Soul in Mortal
Sin, is to make this Glass be covered, with a great Cloud, and so, to
become very dark; and that so, though our Blessed Lord be ever present with us
(yea so very present, as that he gives us our very Being, thereby) yet then,
he is not so represented, as to be seen by us; And that, when the Case
concerns Heretics, the Looking-glass is directly broken, which is far
worse, then to be obscured. But now, there is a very great deal of difference,
between my seeing it, and my relating it; for it is no easy thing, to give it
well to be understood. Yet this has done me a great deal of good, and has
affected me with much pity, and grief, for those times, wherein my self did
obscure my Soul, in such sort, as that I was not able to behold, and see this
Blessed Lord of mine. It seems also to me, that this kind of Vision, is very
useful to persons, who are of much recollection, to teach them a way of
thinking of our Blessed Lord, as in the most interior part of their Souls;
which is a consideration, that will stick closest to then, and will be of much
more benefit, then if they were considered; as any way our of the Soul,
according to what I have said else where; and it is contained also in some
Books, which are written of Prayer, about the way, how we are to seek
Almighty God. In particular, the Glorious S. Augustine speaks much, of, how
Almighty God is not to be sought, either in pleasures, or external places;
and that he could be no way found so well, as in our selves; and this is
certainly the best way; nor have we need, to go further off, then to our very
selves; and much less, to clime-vp as high as Heaven, for this purpose; for,
this will but distract the Soul, and weary the Spirit; and do us nothing
near, so much good.

I will also give an aduertisment here, to the end, that if any body have
any such thing, as that, he may know the better, how to carry himself. It
happens in some very great Rapts, (when the time is past, wherein the Soul
remains in Union; and when all the Faculties, and Powers thereof, are absorpt;
and which lasts, as I have said, but a little while) that the Soul remains
recollected, and is not able, in the exterior way, to return to it self; but
those two Powers, and Faculties, namely the Understanding, and Memory,
remain, as with a kind of frenzy, in great disorder. This, I say, happens
sometimes; and especially, with Beginners. And I have been thinking, whether it
may not proceed, from this, That our condition is naturally very weak, and not
able to admit, and endure so great a strength of Spirit, and that the
Imagination is weakened also much; and I know, that this happens to some. Now,
for my part, I am apt to think, that it were not ill, to oblige them, in such
cases as this, to leaue-off their Prayer, for that time, and to go recovering
that, afterward, which they loose then; that so, all come not on together; for
it may chance prove an occasion of much inconvenience. And of this, we have
experience; and that it will fall out, to be of better proof, to consider very
well, how much our state of health, and strength, is able to endure. But in all
things, there will be need of good experience, and of a good Directour; for,
when once the Soul is grown to be in these terms, many things will come to
offer themselves, wherein there will be need enough of some body, with whom
it may be fit, to consider them. And if any such man can not be found, when
he is sought, our Blessed Lord himself, will not be wanting to him, since he
would not be wanting to me, I being the wicked Creature, I am. For I believe,
there are very few, who are come to have experience of so many things; and if
there be not experience, it is in vain to think of any remedy, which will
not rather serve to disquiet, and afflict the Soul. But the best is, that our
Blessed Lord will take even that trouble of ours, in account, for some
satisfaction of himself; and therefore it will fallout, to be better done, to
conferr thereof, as I have formerly said; and so will it also be, to proceed,
after this manner, in all those things, whereof I am speaking, now. For I see,
that this imports very much, (especially if they be women, who are concerned)
and that they do it, with their Ghostly Father; and that he also be such, as
is fit. At least, there use to be more women, then men, to whom our Lord
imparts these Favors; and this I understood first, from the holy man, Fray
Pedro de Alcantara; and I have also seen my self, that they proceeded, and
profited more, in this way of Spirit, then men do. But he gave excellent
reasons, for his opinion, which need not be inserted here; for they all, are in
favor of women.

Being, one day, in Prayer, there was suddenly represented to me (but it was
without my seeing any thing formed; and yet it was with a very extraordinary
kind of claritie) how all things, are seen, in Almighty God; and how he has
them all, in himself. To know, how to set this down, is in no power of mine;
but it remained deeply imprinted in my Soul; and it was one of the greatest
Favors, that ever had been done me, by our Blessed Lord; yea and of those
also, which put me to greatest confusion, and shame, when I considered the
many sins, which I had committed against him. I well believe, that, if our
Blessed Lord had been pleased, to let me see this Vision, at some other time of
my life; or if they could see him now, who are sinning against him, they would
never have the heart, and courage, to do, as they do. It appeared to me, as I
said; but yet so, as that I cannot expressly affirm, that I saw any thing
distinctly; but yet somewhat, me thinks, must needs have been seen by me,
since I am able to make this very comparison; but that it fell out, to be
signified, by so delicate, and subtle a way, as that the understanding is not
able to reach it; or else, that I have no skill of all those kinds of Visions,
which seem not to be Imaginary; but yet, in some of these, I verily think,
that perhaps there may be somewhat of the Imaginary, or formed appearance, and
that only the Powers of the Soul, being then in Rapt, they are not able
afterward, to assign any Form, in what manner our Lord represents himself to
them there; and how he is pleased, that they shall enjoy him. But yet,
supposing it to be the Divinity, in the form of some bright Diamond, which
were bigger, then the whole world; or else, of some Looking-glass, after the
manner of what I said before, concerning the Soul, in that other Vision, (save
that this is in so superior a kind of manner, that I am not able to express
it) and that all that, which we do, is seen in this Diamond (it being such, as
that all things are shut-vp in it, because there is nothing, which can get out
of that greatness) it was a thing extremely to amaze me, to be able to see, in
so very short a time, so many things together, in this bright Diamond. And so
was it also matter of extreme compassion, and grief, for me (every time, that
I remember my self) to have seen, that things, so very ugly, and foul, as my
sins were, should be representted, and showed, in that so clearnes of light.
And the truth is, that whenever I remember it, I know not, how it comes to be
possible for me, to endure it; and I did really then remain, so extremely out
of countenance, and ashamed, that, me thinks, I could not tell, where to hide
my head.

O Great effects of a Vision.
that some Creature, or other, were able to give this Truth to be well
understood, by these people, who commit dishonest filthy sins; that so they
might come to know, that they are not secret; and that Almighty God, has
reason to be very sensible of those wrongs, since they are acted so truly, in
the presence of his Divine Majesty; and that we carry our selves, with so
base irreuerence, before him.

I saw here also, how justly Hell is deserved, for any one Mortal Sin;
because it is past our power, to understand, what a most greiuous crime it is,
to commit it, in the presence of so great a Majesty; and what an unspeakable
distance, and dissimilitude, is found, between that, which he is, and that,
which our Sins are; and how it appears even heerby, so much the better, how
great his mercy is, since, notwithstanding he knows all this, he yet endures
us.

It has also made me consider, that if such a Vision, as this, can leave the
Soul so extremely astonished, and amazed, what kind of thing, will the Day of
Judgment prove to be, when this Majesty of Almighty God, will show it self,
with all clearnes; and so we shall also clearly see, what kind of things, our
sins were, which we committed against him. O my dear God! what blindness is
this, which has seized me? And I have often been amazed, even whilst I have
been writing this; and your Reverence need be amazed at nothing, but how I am
able even to live, whilst I am looking both upon these things, and my self. But
let him be eternally blessed, who has vouchsafed to endure such things, at my
hands.

Being once in Prayer, in very great recollection, and with much quietness, and
sweetness, me thought I was all emcompassed with Angels, and very near to
Almighty God; and I began to be an humble Suitor to his Divine Majesty, for
the benefit, and advantage of his Church. And he gave me to understand, the
much good, which a certain Order should do the world, in these latter times;
and the great courage, wherewith the Members thereof, should defend, and uphold
the Catholic Faith.

Being once in Prayer, near the Blessed Sacrament, there appeared to me a
certain Saint, whose Order was in some decay. He had a great Book in his
hands, which he opened, and willed me to read certains Letters in it, which
were very legible, and large; and they said thus: In future times, this Order
shall flourish, and have many Martyrs.

Another time, being at Matins in the Quire, six or seven persons were
represented, and set before me; and I held them to be of the same Order, and
they had Swords in their hands. And I conceive, that I was given thereby to
understand, that they should defend the Faith. For, being in Prayer, another
time, and rapt in Spirit, me thought, I was in a very spauous field, where
many were, who fought; and they of this Order, did also fight, with great
fervor. They had their faces beautiful, and much inflamed; and they beat
multitudes of men, down to the ground, and killed others. This battle seemed
to be given against Heretics; and I have seen this Glorious Saint, diverse
times; and he has told me some things, and given me thanks, for the Prayers,
which I make for his Order; and he has promised, that he will recommend me to
our Blessed Lord. I specifye not the several Orders here, least some should be
offended at it; and if our Lord shall think it convenient, he may declare
them. But every Order should procure, and so should every particular man of
every Order, that, in so great a necessity, as that, wherein the Church is,
at this time, they might be able to serve her. For, happy are those lives,
which may come to loose themselves, upon this occasion.

A certain person desired me once, to beg of Almighty God, that I might
understand, whether or no, it would be for the Service of his Divine Majesty,
that he should take a Bishopric. I did so; and our Lord made me this answer,
after I had Communicated: When he shall understand, with all clearnes, and
truth, that true Dominion consists, in possessing nothing, he may take it,
then. Giving thereby to understand, that, whosoever is to be a Prelate, must be
very far, from so much as desiring it; and yet further, from procuring it.

These Favors, and many other also, have been, and are still, very ordinarily
showed, by our Blessed Lord, to this sinful Woeman; which, me thinks, are
not very necesarie, to be related; since by those, which are delivered already,
my Soul, together with the Spirit, which our Lord has given me, may be
understood. But let him be ever blessed, who has had so much care of me.

He told me once, by way of comforting me, that I must not afflict my self (and
this he did, with most tender love) for that, in this life of ours, we could
not possibly, be always after the same manner; but that sometimes, I would be
in fervor; and sometimes, without it; Sometimes, with unquietness, and
temptations; and Sometimes, without them, and in peace; but that I must hope in
him, and fear nothing.

Being one day in thought, and doubt, whether it were not a kind of being tied
to Creatures, to be glad to be with such persons, as with whom I treat the
business of my Soul; and to love both them, and others also, whom I find to be
the Servants of Almighty God; and to receive comfort, by being with them; he
told me, that, if when a man is dangerously sick, the presence of a Physician,
seems even to restore him to health, it would not be a virtue, to forbear to
be glad of him, and to love him. And what (said he) would thou have done, if
it had not been, for such, as they? That he disliked not, that conversation
should be held with such, as were good, but that my words must ever be well
considered, and holy; and that so, it would be rather profitable to me, then
hurtful, not to giue-ouer communication with them. Now, this imparted a
particular comfort, to me; for sometimes, it would seem, to be a having too
great a tie, upon creatures, which made me once incline, to giue-ouer the
custom I had, to converse with them. But our Lord did ever counsel me, in
all things; yea so far, as even to tell me, how I should carry my self,
toward weak persons; and some others also; and he never lays the care of me,
aside, But I am much troubled, to find, that I am good for so little, in his
Service; as also, that I can do the less, through my spending more time, then
I wi^h, upon so weak, and wasted a body, as mine is.

As I was once in Prayer, and the hour of our going to rest, came on, I found
my self, in a great deal of pain; and knowing, that my ordinary Vomits would
ariue; and obserueing my self to be so tyed-vp, to these cares; and the Spirit,
on the other side, desiting to have some time, for it self, I grew to be even
so tired, that I began to be greatly afflicted, and to weep much; and that
happens very often to me. And this condition puts me to such a kind of anger,
that, me thinks, I do, in those times, even abhor my self; though yet it be
true withal, that I do not abhor my self indeed; nor yet am wanting, in
what is necessary for me; and I rather pray God, that I take not more care of
my self, then I should; and so, I fear, I do. But now, whilst I was in this
grief, our Lord appeared to me, and regaled me very much; and told me, that I
must endure these troubles, and goe-through with them, for love of him; and
That my Life, was necessary, yet; And so, me thinks, I never see my self in
any very great pain, which I value, since I resolved to serve this Lord, and
Comforter of mine, with all my power. For, though he permitted me to suffer a
little, yet would he still be assisting me so withal, that I esteem not my
self to do much, in desiring to suffer afflictions, for his sake. So that
now, me thinks, there is no reason, why we should even desire, so much as to
live, but only, to the end that we might suffer; and accordingly, this is the
thing, which I beg, with most affection, of Almighty God. And sometimes, I am
saying to him, with my whole heart: O Lord, let me either suffer, or dye; for I
beg no other thing of thee, for my self. And now it uses to comfort me, to
hear the Clock strike; for so, me thinks, I am grown, a little nearer, to
the seeing of God (though it be but a little) because one hour more of my
life, is past. At other times, I find my self in such sort, that I neither take
much pleasure, in living; nor yet, me thinks, have any great mind, to dye;
and so, in the mean time, I remain with a kind of stupiditie, and darkness of
mind, in all things; and, many times, I also have some troubles. And since
our Lord was pleased, that those Favors should be publicly known, which his
Divine Majesty vouchsafed to show me (as he himself had told me, some years
ago, that they should be; which gave me vexation enough; and it is not a
little, that I have endured therein, as your Reverence knows; for every
body, will understand things, as he listes) I comfort my self yet, with this,
that it has not arrived by my fault; because I never spoke of any such thing,
but either to my Ghostly Fathers, or others, who I knew even by them, had
understood thereof. For of this, I was very wary, even to extremity; though
yet perhaps, I abstained not, so much, for respect of humility, as in regard,
that I had pain enough, to tell even my Ghostly Father thereof; and
therefore, how much less would I impart things of this nature, to others.

But now, I earnestly desire, that Almighty God may receive glory by it;
howsoever there be some, who murmr at me, very much, upon this occasion;
though even yet, I think, they may peradventure do it with good zeal. And
there are others, who are afraid, even to treat with me, in any kind; yea and
even to receive the Confession of my Sins; and others, say also other things.
But how soever, since I understand, that it has pleased our Blessed Lord, to
reduce many Souls, by this means; and because I see clearly, and remember
continually, how much, himself would be pleased to endure, for the gaining of
one Soul, I allow my self to take little trouble for any thing, which men can
say of me. And I know not, whether or no, this may not have been a part of the
cause, why his Divine Majesty has placed me, in this little Corner of the
world, where I am so shut up; and where I thought, there would be no more
memory of me, then of a thing, which was dead. But their forgerfulnes, was not
so great, as I wished; and so I have been constrained, to speak sometimes,
with some persons. Yet howsoever. I am not now, where the world may easily, see
me; for it seems, that our Lord has been pleased, to drive me from Sea, to
this Port; and I trust; in his Divine Majesty, that it will prove a very safe
one, for me. And since now I am out of the world, and find my self, in the
company of few (but they, holy Creatures) I look down, upon the world, as
from a place, which is very high; and so, it is grown to be of little moment
with me, what they, below, do either say, or think. And I would make much
more account, to understand, that any one Soul should have profited to the
weight of one little grain, in God's Service, by my means, then of all, which
can be said of me, in any kind. For, since I have found my self, in this
place, our Lord has been graciously pleased, that all the desires of my heart,
might have no other aim, but this. And he has also given me, even a kind of
sleep, in this life, which makes me find, that whatsoever I see, is but
dreaming; nor am I able to say, that I reap, either much contentment, or
trouble, by any thing of this world. And if yet some things give me any, it
passes away, with so very great speed, that I even wonder at it; and it makes
but just, such a kind of impression upon me, as a thing would do, whereof I
had dreamt. And it is a most perfect truth, that although I should afterward
have a piece of a mind, either to be glad of any contentment, or to be sorry
for any misaccident, and trouble, it is really no more now, in my power, but
just so, as any man, who were discreet, would take, either trouble, or joy,
from a dream of his own. For now, our Blessed Lord has already been pleased,
to awake, and open the eyes of my Soul, from out of that folly, wherein it
was. And whereas, by my not being mortifyed, nor dead, to the things of this
world, I was wont to have much feeling of such things, as happened, his Divine
Majesty is pleased now, that I should loose my true sight, no more.

In this sort, Sir, do I live now; and I beseech your Reverence, my good
Father, to beg of Almighty God, that he will either take me quickly to
himself; or else I beseech his Divine Majesty, that he give me power to serve
him. In the mean time, I humbly beseech Almighty God, that what I have written
here, may be of some use, to your Reverence; and I have not done it, without
some trouble, in regard of the little conueniences, which I had. But happy
shall this trouble be, if I have chanced, to hit any thing, right; and if our
Blessed Lord may receive some one only Act of praise, by occasion thereof, I
shall esteem my self to be fully paid, though your Reverence should burn it
all, immediately after. And yet I could not wish, that this should happen, till
those three persons had seen it, of whom you know; since they are, and have
been, my Ghostly Fathers. For, if the thing be not right, it will be fit,
that they giue-ouer the good opinion, which they have of me; and if, on the
other side, things go well, I know, that they are good, and learned men; and
they can not be ignorant, from whence it comes; and they will give him glory,
and praise, who has done it, though he have served himself of me, therein. I
beseech his Divine Majesty, that he will ever keep your Reverence, in his
holy hand, and make you so great a Saint, as that you may, with Spirit, and
Light, illuminate this miserable Creature, who has so little of the humble, in
her, and so much of the bold, as that she has presumed to write of these high
things. I beseech our Lord, that I have not erred therein, whilst my aim, and
desire was, to hitt right, and to obey; and that, in fine, there might be
somewhat, for which our Lord should be praised. For, this is that great Suite,
which I have made to him now, these many years; and, since I have wanted
works, whereby to comply with this aim, I have adventured, upon commandment,
to see, if I could put this irregular, and confused Life of mine, into some
order; though yet, without employing, either any more attention, or time, then
that, which was merely necessary, for writing it. And so I have only set those
things down, which have occurred to me, and passed in me, with all plainnes,
and truth, to the very uttermost of my endeavor. And I humbly beseech our
Blessed Lord, that, since he is so powerful, as that, if he will, he can; he
may be pleased, to make me wholly, hitt the mark, in performance of his holy
will; and not permit, that this Soul be lost, which his Divine Majesty has
been pleased, by so many ways, and even cunning industries of his, yea and
that, so many times, to deliver, and bring out of Hell, and to draw up, so
very close, to himself;

Amen.
Benedictus Deus.
This Book was finished (the first time) in June, in the year of our Lord
God, 1562. It was written then, without distinction of Chapters; but
afterward, it was written by this glorious Saint, again, and then it was
divided into Chapters; and many things also were added by her, which happened
afterward; and particularly, that, which concerned the Foundation of the
Monastery of S. Joseph, of Auila.

A Letter, written by the Glorious S. Teresa, to her Ghostly Father, who had
commanded her to write her own Life, for as much as might concern her
manner of Prayer, and the Favors, which our Lord had shevved her. And this
Letter did she send to him, together with the Book it self.
THe Holie-Ghost be always with your Reverence, Amen. It would not be amiss,
even almost to exaggerate the Service, which now I am doing to your Reverence,
that so you may, even hold your self, to be the more obliged, to take very
particular, and great care, to recommend me to Almighty God. And this, I may
well presume to do, since it has cost me so very dear, to see my self thus,
set down in writing; and to have brought, by occasion thereof, so many of my
great miseries, to my remembrance; though yet withal, I can affirine with much
truth, that I have had far more auersion, and trouble, upon my declaring the
Favors, which it pleased our Blessed Lord to do me, then it would have been
for me, to discover, even the offenses themselves, which I have committed
against his Divine Majesty. But, in the mean time, I have done, what your
Reverence has commanded, in order to the enlarging my self, in this Discourse;
though yet withal, it be upon condition, that your Reverence will also do,
what you promised, in tearing whatsoever you shall not like. I had not finished
so much, as the very reading it over, after I had written it, even now, when
your Reverence sent to me, for it; and therefore, it may very well chance, that
some things are ill declared; and others, very unnecessarily repeated; for, the
time, wherein I was able to do it, did prove so very straight, and short, that
I could not so much, as look over, what I had written. I beseech your
Reverence, to reform my errors heerin; and to command it, to be coppied out,
and sent to Father Auila; for else, perhaps, the hand may be known to others.
But I desire very much, that such order may be taken, as that he may see it;
since I partly began to write it, upon that design. For, when he shall once
conceive, that I go in a way, which is right, I shall be very much comforted
by it; and so, when I shall have used this diligence, there will be, on my
part, no more to be done. I humbly pray your Reverence, to do, in all things,
as you shall think fit; and consider, that you are even obliged, therein, for
such an one, as trusts her Soul in your hands, after so confident a manner. As
for yours, I will be recommending it to our Blessed Lord, all the days of my
life; and I beseech you therefore, make great have to serve his Divine
Majesty, to the end, that you may be the better able, to do me also favor,
with him; since your Reverence will easily see (by that, which goes in company
of this) how well, all your endeauours will be employed, in going on, as you
have already begun; and in bestowing your self totally, upon him, who has
given himself, so wholly to us, without any limits at all. Let him be blessed,
and praised, for ever; and for my part, I hope, through his mercy, that both
your Reverence, and my self, shall, one day, grow to understand more clearly,
the great blessings, which he has been pleased to show us both, that so, we
may be able to praise him, for all Eternities,

Amen.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
1. CHAP. THe Saint shows how our Lord began to stirr-vp her Soul, in her
Childhood, to the performeing of virtuous actions; And of the help, which it
gives, in order to this end, to be borne of virtuous Parents. 2. CHAP. She
shows how she went looseing in the way of virtue; And how very much it
imports, to converse, in Childhood, with virtuous persons. 3. CHAP. She
treats, how her falling into virtuous company, was the occasion of her
returning to awake good desires in her self; And how our Lord began to give
her some light, of the error, wherein she had formerly been. 4. CHAP. She
relates, how our Lord assisted her to force her self to take the Habit of
Religion, and of the many infirmityes, which our Lord began to bring upon her.
5. CHAP. She prosecutes the relation of the great infirmityes which she had,
and of the patience, which our Lord gave her in them; and how benefits are
drawn out of mischeifes; as will be seen by a certain particular, which
happened to her, in the place, vvhither she went to be cured. 6. CHAP. She
treates of how much she ovved our Lord for his giueing her conformity, to his
holy will, in so great afflictions; And how she took the Glorious Saint
Joseph for her Intercessour, and how aduantagious that Devotion proved to be.
7. CHAP. She shows, by what degrees, and means, she went looseing the
Favor which our Lord had done her, and how ill she began to live. And she
also declares the harm there is, in not maintaining Clausure, in the
Monasteryes of Religious women. 8. CHAP. She treates of the great good it did
her, toward the not looseing her Soul, not to have wholy given over her
Prayer; As also, what an excellent remedy that is, toward the gaining of
whatsoever good thing; which is lost. She persvvades all Creatures to use it;
and declares the great benefit thereof; and although we should afterward
leave it, yet still it would prove a great good, to have used so great a
help, for some time. 9. CHAP. She declares, by what means our Lord began to
awake her Soul, and give her light in so great darkness; and to strengthen
also her virtues, that so she might offend him no more. 10. CHAP. She begins
to declare the Favors, which our Lord did her, in Prayer; and speaks of
that, wherein we may be able to help our selves; And how much it also
imports us, to understand the said Favors, which our Lord is pleased to do
us. She humbly desires of him, to whom she sends this account of her self,
that whatsoever she shall declare, from hence forvvard, may remain in secret
with him, since he had commanded her to set down, in so particular a manner,
the Favors, which our Lord was pleased to do her. CHAP. 11. She declares,
in what the fault consists, of not obtaining to love God with perfection, in
short time. She beginns to deliver it by a Comparison, which contains Four
Degrees of Prayer. And she treats here of the first, which is very profitable,
for beginners; and for those also, who have no sensible delight, or gust, in
Prayer. 12. CHAP. She prosecutes her Discourse of the first State, or Degree of
Prayer, and declares, how far we may ariue, of our Selves, by the Favor
of our Lord; And of the hurt it brings, to desire that our Spirit may rise to
Supernatural, and Extraordinary things, till our Lord himself be pleased to
ordain it. 13. CHAP. She proceeds in this First Degree, and State of Prayer,
and gives advise against some temptations, which the Devil is sometimes wont
to bring. This Discourse is very profitable. 14. CHAP. She beginns to declare
the Second Degree of Prayer, wherein our Lord is already pleased, to give the
Soul more particular gusts; which she declares, to the end, that she may make
them be understood to be Supernatural. This Discourse is very much to be
noted. 15. CHAP. She prosecutes her Discourse of the same matter, and gives
some advise, how persons are to carry themselves, in this kind of Quiet
Prayer. She treates, how, many Souls come to ariue to this Degree of Prayer,
and that fevv pass beyond it. The particulars which are touched beer, are not
only very profitable, but very necessary. 16. CHAP. She treates of the Third
Degree of Prayer, and goes declareing some very high points; and what a Soul
which ariues thus far, may be able to do; and what effects, these so great
Favors of our Lord, are accustomed to work. The sense heerof is very fit to
raise the Spirit high, in the praises of Almighty God; and it is also of great
consolation for the Soul, which ariues to this State. 17. CHAP. She
prosecutes the same Argument about this Third Degree of Prayer; and finishes
the declaration of the Effects; which works, and declares also the
disadvantage, which the Memory, and Imagination, are wont to bring, in this
case. 18. CHAP. She treates of the Fourth Degree of Prayer. She begins here,
to declare, in excellent manner, the great dignity, to which our Lord aduances
that Soul, which is exalted to this State. It serves to animate men much, to
endeavor that they may ariue to so high a condition, since it may be obtained
in this world, through the goodness of our Lord, though it cannot be deserved.
Let this be read with consideration, and care. 19. CHAP. She prosecutes the
same Discourse, and beginns to declare the effects, which this degree of
Prayer, works in the Soul. She persvvades men earnestly not to turn back,
nor to giue-ouer their Prayer, though they should happen to fall, even after
they had received these Favors. She speaks of the great harm, which will
ariue to them, if they do otherwise. This Discourse is much to be noted; and
it is of great consolation, for vveake persons, and Sinners. 20. CHAP. She
treates of the difference betvveen Union, and Rapt, and declares what kind of
thing a Rapt is. She speaks also of the blessing, which that Soul has,
which our Lord, through his goodness, brings thither, and of the effects,
which Rapts use to produce. This Discourse is of much admiration. 21. CHAP.
She prosecutes, and finishes this last Degree of Prayer. She declares what the
Soul finds therein, when she returns to live again, in the world; and the
light also, which our Lord gives, concerning the deceipts, and errors of the
same world. This Chapter delivers excellent Doctrine. 22. CHAP. She treats of
how secure a way it is, for persons who give themselves to Contemplation,
not to raise-vp their Spirit to high things, unless our Lord raise them up;
and that the Humanity of Christ our Lord, is indeed to be the means, toward
the highest Contemplation of all others. She speaks also of an error,
wherein once she was. This Chapter contains matter of much profit. 23. CHAP.
She returns to declare the course of her Life, and how she first began to
think of growing to greater perfection, and by what means she did it. This
Chapter is very profitable for such as are to govern Souls in order to
Prayer; and to make them know, how they are to behave themselves in their
beginnings, and of the benefit she reaped, by knovving it her self. 24. CHAP.
She prosecutes the former Discourse, and shows, how her Soul went
profiting, when once she had begun to obey. She also declares, for how
little purpose it served, to resist the Favors of Almighty God; and how his
Divine Majesty, went daily imparting them to her, after a more complete
manner. CHAP. 25. She treates here, of the way and manner of understanding
those words or Speeches, which Almighty God is pleased to utter to the Soul,
though yet without hearing any voice, or sound; and of some errors, or
abuses, which may happen heerin; and how the right may be known, from the
vvrong. It is of much use, and profit, for such as see themselves in this
degree of Prayer; for it is declared very well, and the Doctrine contains
great instruction. 26. CHAP. She prosecutes the same Discourse, and goes
relating, and declareing such things, as happened to her; which made her to
loose fear, and to be strengthened in a belief, that it was a good spirit,
which spoke to her. 27. CHAP. She treates of another way, how our Lord
instructs a Soul, and gives her to understand his will, after a very
admirable manner, without any Speech at all. She also declares a certain
Vision, and great Favor, which our Lord shevved her; and this Vision was not
Imaginary. This Chaepter is very much to be noted. 28. CHAP. She treates of
the great Favors, which our Lord did her; and how he appeared to her, the
first time. She declares, that it was a Vision, which shevved it self by
way of the Imagination; and discouers the great effects, and testimonies,
which such things leave in the Soul, when they are of Almighty God. This
Chapter is of great instruction, and deserves to be noted, much. 29. CHAP. She
prosecutes the Discourse, which she had begun, and relates some high
Favors, which our Lord was pleased to do her; and what his Divine Majesty
did futher, for the securing, and encourageing her mind, and for the enabling
her to answer her Contradictours. 30. CHAP. She returns to recount the course
of her life; and how our Lord gave remedy to many of her troubles, by
bringing that Holy man Fray Pedro de Alcantara, of the Order of the Glorious S.
Francis, to the place where she was. And she declares the great temptations,
and inward troubles, which sometimes she endured. 31 CHAP. She treates of
certain exterior temptations, and representations of the Devil; and of the
torments, which he gave her. She speaks also of other things, which are very
fit, for the advice, and instruction of such persons, as are vvalking on, in
the way of Perfection. 32. CHAP. She treates how it pleased our Lord, to put
her, in Spirit, into a place of Hell; which she said she had deserved for her
Sins. She relates what was represented to her there; which was but a kind
of shaddovv of such things, as are suffered in that place. She begins also to
declare the way, and manner, how that Monastery was founded in Auila, under
the name of S. Joseph. 33. CHAP. She proceeds in the same Subject, of the
Foundation of the Monastery of the Glorious S. Joseph. She declares, how she
was commanded to attend to that business; and of the time, when she forbore to
follovv it; and of some troubles, which she had; and how she was comforted
in them, by our Blessed Lord. CHAP. 34. She declares, how at this time, she
was necessarily to go from that place; and she shows the cause thereof; and
how her Superior commanded her to go, for the comfort of a certain Lady,
who was much afflicted. She beginns to treat of that, which hapened to her
there, and of the great Favor, which it pleased our Lord to do, by her
means, in stirring-vp a very principal person to do him very great Service;
and how afterward she received much Favor, and protection from him. This is
an admirable Discourse, and very much to be noted. 35. CHAP. She prosecutes the
same Subject, about the Foundation of this House of our Glorious Father S.
Joseph. She speaks of the Degrees, by which our Lord came to appoint, that
holy Poverty should be ordained there; and of the cause why she came from
that Lady, with whom she was; and of other things also, which succeeded.
36. CHAP. She prosecutes the Subject, which she had begunn, and declares the
final conclusion of this Monastery of the Glorious S. Joseph of Auila; and of
the great contradictions, and persecutions, which the Religious women were
put to suffer, even after they had taken the Habit; and of the many troubles,
and temptations, which she was feign to undergo; and how his Divine
Majesty drevv her out of all, with victory, to his own praise, and glory.
37. CHAP. She treates of the effects, which used to remain in her Soul,
when our Lord had done her any Favor, and she accompanies this Discourse,
with very profitable Doctrine. She declares also, how we are to procure,
and greatly esteem, the gaining of one degree of glory more; and how we must
not, for any trouble, or pains, forsake those benefitts, and blessings, which
are everlasting. 38. CHAP. She treates of some great Favors, which our Lord
was pleased to do her, as well in acquainting her with certain Secrets of
Heaven, as by giueing her other great Visions, and Revelations. She declares
also the effects, which they left in her Soul, and the great benefitts,
which she obtained by them. 39. CHAP. She proceeds in the same Subject, of
shevving the great Favors, which our Lord had done her. And she declares,
how he was pleased to promise his Favor to them, for whom she should beg
it; and she relates some important particulars, wherein his Divine Majesty
had done her extraordinary Favors, of this kind. 40. CHAP. She proceeds in the
same Discourse, by relating the great Favors, which our Lord shevved her;
whereby good instruction is to be gotten. And with the end of this Chapter,
she ends also the Discourse of her Life. 41. A Letter, written, by the
GLORIOUS S. TERESA, which she sent, together with the Book, to her Ghostly
Father.
APPROBATIO.
HAec vita S. Teresae, primum Hispanico sermon a se conscripta, and postea
taliter edita, nunc vero felicissime Anglice reddita per Illm virum M. T. iussu
Rmi Antuerpiensis, a me attente perlecta fuit; and in eadem nihil dum reperi,
vel contra fidem, vel quod possit, meo iudicio, pias and Christianas aures
offendere; imo, cum amore^ eius seraphicum, vndique lucentem ac inflammantem,
Lector experiatur, censeo dignissimam, vt in communem etiam Catholicorum
Anglorum vtilitatem imprimatur.

Antuerpiae 5. Augusti M. DC. XLII. RICHARDVS WAKE I. V. L.


