THE NEW BIRTH: OR, BIRTH FROM ABOVE. Presented in Four Sermons in Margarets
Westminster, December, 25. and January, 15. 1653. and June 11. 1654.

By EDWARD THARPE, Minister of the Word at Street in Somersetshire.

Ideo Filius Dei factus est homo, ut homines faceret Filius Dei. Non nascimur,
sed renascimur Christiani. 2 COR. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature.

JOHN 3. 3. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be borne from above,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Web, and Will: Grantham, at the black Bear in S.
Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door. 1655.

TO HIS HIGHNESS, OLIVER, Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
MY LORD,
NOt long since attending upon your Highn^sse and the sick bed of your Dear
and Noble Mother (who has lived to see you as high in the world as ever you
were in her tender and careful thoughts) with a Heart and a Tongue full of duty
and thankfulness; as for your first favors in my childhood, wherein I tasted
deeply of your goodness, so for your last timely favor now in my Age, wherein
I tasted in part of your goodness and greatness together. And taking a
solemn and submissive leave of your Highness, I entered into some serious
consideration (being thereunto moved by your free, noble, and benevolent
expressions (which indeed my Lord did silently command me to speak again) how I
might express to your Highness, and manifest to the world some apparent
testimony, as of my gratitude to you, (now sitting at the stern) so of my
improvement under you in the University: And therefore immediately after my
departure from you (in December last) my pains being desired in Margarets
Westminster. and willingly and readily accepted, and as well approved as accepted by
some worthy and judicious Auditors, I was seriously importuned and solicited
for the Notes: Which opportunity, with some difficulty I waved, fearing if
communicated they might steal to the Press, and so being but mean and
inconsiderable in themselves, unworthy of such account, being likewise
imperfect and unperused, they might by the hasty printing of them be made
worse: And being persuaded, that your Lordship might hear something of them, I
am bold, most Noble Lord, having viewed and digested them, *between hope and
fear* Humillima cordis and corporis inclinatione, to dedicate them to your
Highness, and to set them forth in your Lordships name.

2. It was by your Lordships means, or your much honored Mothers, (my worthy
and noble Friend and Lady) that I was ever made capable of any Churchpromotion,
or entered into this sacred and holy Function, being sent by her and your most
worthy Father* that well deserving and esteemed Patriot, long since with the
Lord) to wait upon your Highness in Cambridge; where and at whose feet I did
imbibe such principles, as have in a mean and moderate way enabled me to carry
some of that light which shone gloriously there, and in some splendor in
Sidney Sussex College, where your Highness was a Fellow-Commoner and Student
(under a godly, learned, and reverend Master) into the world. So that next to
God, I owe my self, (and the best of my self, my Labors) unto you (my Lord)
Ingenuum est fateri per qu^s pr^fecimus, and I am in very good hope your
Highness* will please to taste of the fruit of that tree which was of your
own planting, (though the fruit be not so exquisite and pleasant as that which
had a warmer and longer influence) and no^ suffer it to wither, or be pulled up
by the roots.

3. They were framed under your Highness protection, and therefore by another
right they justly claim your tuition; and if there be any good at all in them,
it is to be ascribed (next unto Him who is the Giver of every good and perfect
gift) to your Highness goodness, which procured me those quiet,* peaceable,
and silent hours, in the which they were composed.

Such therefore as these rude Meditations are, I most humbly present and
dedicate to your Highness, earnestly beseeching you to credit them and me with
your gracious favor and benevolent aspect, under whose countenance they will
certainly find easy acceptance, and may do some good abroad.

Thus with my fervent, frequent, and constant prayers for your Highness, that
you may do as you do, (and have promised to do) make it your work to honor
him who has so highly advanced you, and abundantly satisfy the expections of
many thousands of people, especially ours of the Clergy, whose eyes are upon
you for good, our calling being once honorable, (and so we hope by your means
it may be again) and we may live to see Trajan's days, in whose time they say
a good man never wanted, nor a learned man begged: (For surely they will honor
Learning, whose actions require and deserve a learned pen) though it be now
abased and abused by many ignorants, faring herein like the Master of the
calling, who in such eyes had neither form nor beauty. It was a Jeroboam my
Lord) you know that made Priests of the lowest of the people, (which makes him
carry that infamous brand and train nineteen times after him in Scripture)
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, etc. by committing and imposing the trust* of Gods
sacred Oracles into such unclean and unholy hands, and now the lowest of the
people make themselves Priests; This brass coin, as Ignatius calls them,
bearing their own stamp and impression. And it is not unknown to your
Highness, that the despising of the Ephod was the rot of Saul's Kingdom: That
Israel was without God, when it was without a Priest to teach: That faithful
Pastors and teachers are the guard, the safeguard, the lifeguard of a Church
and State, confessed so by a King, and enemy to Sion: That it was great
Constantine's word to his Clergy, Adjuvate me precibus, ego vos gladio; Help me
with your prayers, I will help you with my power. That pious and devout Lord in
this Land and Commonwealth, accounted the prayers of faithful Ministers the
walls of his house.

Let it be the shame, and indelible blot of the Romish Synagogue, the Malignant
Church, to have Golden Chalices and Wooden Priests, Mendicant and begging
Priests, or their Priests beggars. It is the honor and dignity of a Christian
Magistracy and Commonwealth, when and where they that labor in the Word and
Doctrine, are accounted worthy of double honor, and have both countenance and
maintenance, regard and reward. I most humbly kiss your hand, (for an Epistle,
as Seneca says, should not fill the hand) craving pardon for my prolixity and
presumption, which I hope, good my Lord, having had some early experience of
your Highness candor and condescension you will easily grant, accounting it
my great happiness that ever I had any dependence upon you, and my honor and
credit to have been, and to be,

(My Lord) Your most humble Orator, and at your Highness command and service,
Edward Tharpe.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I May be by some wondered at, for sending such rude and unpolished lines to the
Press, which even groans under the burden of multitude of books; of the
greater part whereof we may say with Socrates, The Paper is more worth than the
matter: For there are scarce any that Preach that Print not, insomuch as the
Press may say to the Pulpit in the words of Esau to his brother, Keep that
thou have, I have enough my brother. And secondly, it may be objected, that I
make too much use of other men's sentences and sense, and so seem to boast in
other men's lines made ready to my hands: To whom I answer no otherwise, than As
the Spiders fine web is never the better, (it may be the sooner swept away)
because it is spun out of her own bowels; So the Bees honey is never the less
(it may be the more) sweet, because it is extracted and gathered out of many
flowers. Thirdly, I hope the subject will make an easy way for the acceptance,
treating of a through change and reformation. And it is to be hoped and
desired, nay expected, that amongst so many changes and mutations which have
been abroad in the great world, Man himself, that little world, will not still
remain quite unchanged. For where Gods judgments are out in the world, the
Prophet gives it as granted Gods people will learn righteousness. Again,
howsoever art may move affection, it is the plain Word in the evidence and
power thereof which must remove corruption. Fourthly, I could add, they were
preached in a very populous, orthodox, and judicious Auditory, and desired
earnestly of men of judgment and note, of worth and parts, whose respects I
have rather satisfied in the printing of them, than mine own desires. Besides,
I have not read any that have so fully treated or discoursed of this material
and necessary subject; and therefore I request every Reader in the words of
Isocrates to Nicocles, Aut hisce praeceptis utere, aut tu ipse inveni meliora:
Either make use of these wholesome Doctrines and Exhortations with me, or else
publish better thy self; if thou art able to publish better in the future, yet
it will profit thee to make use of these for the present. I am bold therefore
for the reasons aforesaid to send that to the eye which was at first presented
to the ^are; hoping that some way or other they may get to the heart, and with
Naamans poor servants send some to that Jordan which may cure them of their
native leprosy. Which that these distracted Meditations may help to do, I
leave and commend thee in my prayers and devotions to God, and to the word of
his grace, which, etc. Act. 19. 32. So prays,

Thy servant in Jesus Christ, EDWARD THARPE.

HORAT. -- Si quid novisti rectius is it is,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
Reader, if better things be known to thee,
Impart them, or make use of these with me.
THE HEAVENLY BIRTH: OR, BIRTH from ABOVE.
JAM. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we should
be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.


THis General Epistle of St. James so called, not because it is more general,
or authentic than other of the Epistles (all being of equal authority and
holiness) but in regard of the dedication (it being directed and dedicated to
the twelve dispersed Tribes, ver. 1.) is full of very useful, and practical
doctrine, especially this first Chapter; which treates of diverse Graces and
Virtues, and presses many heavenly precepts.

1. It persuades to comfort in afflictions, nay even to joy in tribulation, and
that by a sweet, loving, and insinuating compellation ( My brethren:) James was
the Brother of our Lord, and for his virtues and holiness called, James the
just: yet out of Apostolical kindness and humility, that his exhortations might
be the more prevalent and persuasive, being seasoned with meekness and love he
calls them Brethren; My brethren Ver. 2.
count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations. That is, esteem it
matter of chief joy and exultation to tread in their Mat. 5. 12.
Masters steps: Rejoice, and be glad; for, etc. This lesson Paul and Sylas
learnt out of the School of the Cross, who went away Acts 5. 41.
rejoicing that they were counted worthy etc. The birds of Paradise sing
sweetest in a cage, knowing that to them it is given (as a great blessing) not
only to believe, but to suffer for Christ's sake; and that through many
tribulations we must enter into Philip. 1. 29.
the kingdom of God. The more we suffer, the liker Christ; and the longer, the
greater will be our reward.

Secondly: In the two next verses it exhorts to Faith and Patience, the two
Legs of Christianity, the two supporters under the cross; the only cordials in
heavy and calamitous times (such as those were.) For Faith believes the
promises, and Patience attends and waits for the accomplishment; and indeed, as
the Apostle says, We have need of patience, that when we have done the will of
God, (in doing whereof we shall find great Heb 10. 27.
opposition) we may receive the promise. Faith holds up a Christians head, but
Patience and Perseverance crowns it: He that believes makes not have; for he
knows that in good time he shall reap, if he faint not. Knowing that the trial
of your Ver. 3, 4.
faith, etc. And, let patience have her perfect work.

The nature of Afflictions is, they are probations and trials. The effect of
them, they work Patience, they bring the quiet Heb. 12. 11.
fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised therein.

The finest Gold is put into the hottest furnace; witness the three children:
Peter's faith was tried by Satan's winnowing, and Paul's by his buffeting; but
Christ's prayer was sufficient for the one, and his grace for the other: And the
Son of God walks with his children even in the ho^t^st fire, and restrains the
heat and flames. Therefore whatsoever our sufferings are, we ought to kiss Gods
rod, and to embrace his chastisements upon our knees; like the Camel, to take
our load stooping, and not to make those afflictions which are bitter enough of
them* selves, to be far more bitter by our impatience.

3. In the 5, 6, 7, and 8 verses the Apostle directs us how we should direct
our prayers to God, that we may speed in our suits, and not be sent empty away.
If any man want wisdom, that is, the wisdom to behave himself quietly and
Christianly under Gods correcting hand (which requires great wisdom and
prudence: A Christian being so much a Christian as he is in temptations and
trials) let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraids not,
etc. But let him look to the manner of his asking which God regards more then
the matter, looking not so much at the thing, and duty done, as at the mind and
affection with which it is done: regarding not so much quam bonum as quam been;
looking more at the heart then the hand: My son give me thy heart. Let him ask
in faith nothing wavering. They must be confident in then petitions, the heart
must be firmly se^led upon Gods promises without any doubting or w^vering: For
the crew, and effectual prayer is the prayer of Mat. 15. 28
Faith: Whatsoever ye ask in prayer believe and you shall receive it. This was
that made those Jews prayers miscarry, they James 4. 4.
were unmannerly and sensual: Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye might spend it upon your lusts*

4 In the 9th verse it teaches the man of low degree how to carry himself
under the burden of his poverty anu want, so as to have an eye to his
exaltation; Let the brother of low degree rejoice that he is exalted. Bless God
with Job as well when he takes away, as when he gives. Gods own dear children
are often placed in the lowest forms: but here is their comfort, m^n may be
base and low, in a mean* and despicable condition in the eye of the world, and
yet be high in Gods account; who looks not as man looks, man at the habit, God
at the heart. Though he be re pauper, spe dives, a poor Christian may be arich
Saint: Rich in inward, and spiritual endowments and qualifications, which alone
God values. And many times a man has most of these riches, when he has least
of the others; Peter had no silver nor gold, but he had that power from above
to cure the criple which silver and gold could not James 2. 5. Mat. 5. 3.
do. And God (as James says) has chosen the poor of the world rich in faith,
and heirs of his kingdom. Nay, he must be poor in spirit who expects that
kingdom. A poor man may be (nay often is) heir to a heavenly kingdom: If he be
as poor in spirit as he is in purse.

5. It teaches a man of high degree, a rich man how to carry himself upon his
mountain* and not to think with Babylon never to be moved and shaken, but in
his greatest height and altitude Ver. 10. 11.
to think and fear he may be brought down: But let the rich rejoice that he is
brought low* or made low, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass
away: For the sun no sooner rises with a burning heat but it withers the
grass* and the flower thereof falls, and the grace and fashion thereof
perishes; so also shall, etc. In which two verses we see that all humane
things stand upon two lame legs, Incertainty, and Insufficiency, or
unsatisfaction. They are uncertain to continue, and unsufficient to content.
Their eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. Again, he
that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver: Eccles. 2. 8.
They are uncertain too; trust not in uncertain riches but in the living God;
and if riches increase set not your hearts upon them. How does St. James in
those two verses shadow out the uncertain and frail condition of all worldly
luster? Even Scepters and Diadems have their periods, and the greatest
Preferments, and Honors upon earth their appointed dates, Empires and Crowns
have their mutations and alterations, their trepidations and terminations, and
like other inferior bodies their growth, declining and expiring. Two deadly
enemies do always attend all earthly Crowns, Death, and Disturbance; the one
uncrowns the head, or, the other un-heads the crown. There is nothing
permanent, nothing sure or certain under the Sun, nor will be in this wayning,
and waxing Moon, until with the true faithful sons of our Mother (the
Church) we have this Revel. 12. 1, 2.
Moon, this world under our feet, and be clothed with that Sun of
righteousness which never sets, and crowned with that Crown which Christ the
just Judge shall set upon the head of them which fight his battails, and follow
the doctrine of the twelve Apostles (which do indeed imbellish that Crown.) Let
not the rich therefore grieve or pine that they are brought low; because as the
flower of the grass they shall pass away, so easily, and so surely. The
lowness of man's mould should therefore take down the highness of his mind;
and the consideration of his frail and fading estate, be a strong motive to
humility and lowlyness: Neither beauty, nor honor, nor riches, nor pomp, nor
power, nor any outward splendor and luster, should, or do elate a true and
wel-grounded Christian, but seriously pondering the vain, frail, and fading
condition of all these, he will withdraw his heart from an high esteem of all
excellencies and greatness; live in a constant, and continual expectation of,
and preparation for a change.

Note this well I pray you you who pride your selves in earthly honors,
beauties and worldly braveries: All flesh is grass, and the glory, the
goodness, the beauty, and comeliness as the flower of the grass. The flower is
the beauty of the grass, and beauty and favor are the flowers of the flesh,
but both fade Note.
and wither. All flesh is so; the fairest, the comeliest, the loveliest, the
highest, and strongest, the honourablest: It is not only grass which continues
longest, but as the beauty and flower of the grass which fades soonest; for the
grass often stands and remains when the flowers are cropped and withered. And it
is worth your noting too, to bring you unto the love and longing after another
birth, which my Text treats of, How soon the flower fades, withers, and
miscarries. The hand crops it, or the worm eats it, or the sun scorcheth it, or
the wind blasteth it, or the frost pincheth it, or else those timely and early
blossoms fall off of themselves, as May flowers. How soon I pray you do all
earthly beauties and honors like flowers fade and wither? Even as soon almost
as they are displayed, they do but open and show themselves, and are gone and
vanished; just like Jonah's Gourd, does come up in an night, and withered in a
day: The Sun does but shine, as the Apostle says, with a scorching heat, and
they wither; they, and their riches, and honor, and excellency, and power,
pass, and are gone, and that with as easy a turn, and motion of providence as
the flower fades. All is vanity, and it were well if men felt not the other,
vexation of spirit. This was excellently, and elegantly figured, and shadowed
Dan. 2. 30, 31.
in Nebuchadnezar's Image, Dan. 2. which had a head of fine gold, and breast
and arms of silver, thighs of brass, and legs of iron, but his feet were of
dust and clay. The highest, the mightiest, the noblest, the strongest, let them
carry their heads never so high with Babel (the hammer of the world) build
their nests in the clouds, or higher amongst the stars, and (in vain
confidence) boast with her, I sit as a Queen and shall never be moved* yet they
go^ all upon feet of dirt and clay, which will quickly fail them, and lay their
honor in the dust: Though they have golden beginnings, and prosperous, and
succesfull proceedings, long, and strong continuance, yet these great bodies
are mortal too, they go the same way as small ones do, only they make a
greater noise in their rise and fall: They have their beginning and ending,
their infancy, youth and age, as those great Monarchies had prefigured in that
great Image: For God sets them their bounds, as he does to the sea, which they
cannot pass and says to them (as to that) Hitherto shall thou come, and no
further, here will I stop thy proud waves: But in this new Birth, this Birth
from above of which my Text treats, we are begotten from above by a Father to
an Inheritance immortal, and undefiled, which fades not away, and to a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, as all worldly Kingdoms are.

6. In the 12. verse the Apostle shows the happy and blessed Ver. 12.
condition of affliction patiently born, they terminate, and end in happyness:
In much suff^rance is ease, and the Cross leads to the Crown: Affliction and
Blessedness do often meet in the same person; an afflicted man is a blessed
man, if he despise not the chastening and correction of the Lord, but
patiently, and willingly welcome it, with the words of Jerem. It is my sorrow,
and I will bear it. Blessed is the man* etc.

The 13, 14, 15, 16 verses set forth unto us the true Father of a false child:
The child is sin; the father, with some, is in some controversis: For as
notorious, and common Strumpets do some times lay their Bastards at the Church
door, so there are some profane, and Atheistical persons which lay their sin
and iniquity at heaven gates, and would make God the author of sin: Which the
Apostle takes away in the four former mentioned verses: Let no man when he is
tempted, say, I am tempted of God; for God tempts no man to evil, neither is
tempted: But every man is tempted, etc.

God is no ways to be thought the Parent of such a base brat: For as
Fulgentius, surely Deus non potest esse illius author cujus est ultor; God
cannot be the author of that which he is the revenger. To make a hell, and to
cast into that hell, stands not with the Nature, Wisdom and Mercy of God: This
false, and erroneous opinion the Apostle takes away in the 16 verse; Err not
dear brethren. We should be dear to one another, though divided; Dear, and
Brethren in affection, though divided in opinion: For, It is a good and joyful
thing for etc. But howsoever Psalm. 13 3.
you err in other things, let not this damnable error so far possess you, as
to make God the author of sin. Mistake not so far as to say, Because God
concurs in sin, the action of sin, he has any hand in the evil of it: Nor
say, If God would not have me sin, why does he not hinder me? The action indeed
is Gods, because in him we live, move, and have our being: But Acts 14.
the evil of the action that is Satan's, and our own. The devil is the
father, and sin his own, no other mother then our own lusts. Indeed nothing is
so truly ours as our sin, which is evident enough by our cockering of it, and
our indulgence over it, and by our lothness to part with it: we dandle it, and
hug it, and feed and foster it, and cry with the Harlot, Ne dividatur, Let it
not be divided, let that live though said she, although it be an eyesore to
God, and a plague sore to the soul; and if we kill not sin in us, then sin in
us will kill us: Yet many men will part from their souls rather than their sin.
How comes it else to pass, that Hell has so many souls, if their sin was not
dearer to them than their souls?

Man is the active author, God the permitter, and sufferer of sin: God
sustaines the motion of the will, man he defiles, and pollutes the act of
willing: God conforms and agrees to the action, men to the pravity and
deformity of the action. As darkness necessarily follows when the Sun
withdraws his light, and yet the Sun is not the cause of the darkness, but the
absence of the light; so when God withdraws his grace sin follows, but not as
an effect, the cause, but as a consequent to the Antecedent: Therefore, err
not my dear brethren; God is so far from being the author of sin, that he is
the fountain and August.
original of all graces and virtues. Verse 17. Every good etc. Nostra bona
sunt Dei dona; Our goods are from his goodness; they are the enumerations and
rays of that Sun of Righteousness. Then comes in the Text; for from whence
does every good and perfect gift proceed, but from the (...), the good will and
pleasure of God, which ^s the fountain and original of all Graces and goodness?

This is the Inference, and Coherence of the words; wherein if I have been too
tedious, and entrenched upon your patience: If I have made too long and large
an entry or porch to so small a house, pardon my boldness my intent was to
bring in my Text in order and method: Let us now look into that house we all
desire to be of, and in.

Of his own will he begat us with the word of truth, that we should be as the
first fruits of his creatures. With reflection therefore of your eyes to the
5th verse, which is more remote, especially to the 17th verse, which is more
near, and to which indeed the words of my Text have relation: Consider, I pray
you* that of all those gifts and graces which God of his free love has given
to the children of men; of all those evidences and testimonies of Gods good
will and pleasure, of all those divine expr^ssions of his goodness and mercy,
this of our New Birth* or Birth from above is the greatest, and chiefest. Of
our R^generation I say again, or second Birth: For man in his first birth, Man
born of a woman has but a short time to live, and Job 14. 1.
is full of misery. His life (poor man) is not short and sweet, but short and
sharp: though he has want of days, yet he has store of miseries. And
miserable he is, not only in regard of the calamities and sorrows he is born
to, but in regard of the sin, and iniquity he is born in: For being first ab
immundo conceptus semine, born of unclean seed, and nursed in ^ sinful womb,
ubi prius incipit macula quam vita, where he is stained and polluted before he
be conceived or quickened. How can that be clean which is born of a Woman? I was
born in iniquity (says David) and in sin has my mother conceived me. As if h^
Psalm 51. 5.
had said, True it is, O Lord, and I do freely, and feelingly confess it, that
I have been overspread with corruption ever si^ce I saw the light: Nay, which
is more, no sooner was the substances whereof I was framed and made, warm in my
Mothers womb, but I was stained and tainted with original corruption.
Therefore v^ry necessary and needful is a new, and another Birth to cover the
stains and pollutions of the first, of the old: A second birth to sanct^fie our
first; a birth from above to make holy our natural birth; Regeneration to
bless our Generation; as necessary and needful as light is unto darkness, as
heaven to the immunity and freedom from hell, as reparation to a ruinous and
rotten building, as the soul to give life unto the body. Nay so necessary and
needful, that without it we cannot see the Kingdom of God. Verily, verily I
say unto you, that I had two births my self, one by an eternal Joh. 3. 3.
generation, which no man can declare: Another in the fullness of time being
made of a woman, etc. You must have two births too, Gal. 4. 4.
one from Heaven, or your earthly and carnal birth can do you no good.

The Italians have a prudent proverb, it is good to be born^ wise, or twice;
wise no man can be borne, Ne^^ nascitur summus, or sanctus. No man is borne a
Saint, but made so, virtus non est ex traduce, goodness is not by generation,
it must be therefore by regeneration: Better a thousand times not be borne at
all, than not borne again; we shall very bitterly curse the day of our first
Birth, if we have not a second. Many solemnize and keep festival their
Birthday (which they have little reason to do, if they look upon their
Birth-sinne.) If their natural condition be considered, they have little cause
to rejoice or be merry upon their Birthday, it calls rather to Lamentation or
Tears. The newborn Babe seems to cry down that joy and exaltation, who comes
crying into a troubl^som^ Aust.
world. N^ndum nascitur sed proph^tat, It is the day and blessed time of our
New Birth, wherein we should rejoice and be glad, which we should keep holy to
the Lord, wherein as in our Baptism (the Laver, and Seal, and Sign of
regeneration as in our earthly Registers) our names are written in the book of
life, wherein we are borne to live for ever; whereas in our Birth we are
damnati antequam nati, damned before we be borne: being filii terrae we are
filii irae, we must therefore be renati, if we would not be damnati, renewed
and converted, if we will not be condemned.

Doct.
From which consideration, take this observation and comfortable Doctrine; He
that is borne twice, shall dye but once, but he that is but once borne shall
dye twice.

The second Birth shall free us from the second Death, the first, and none but
that, shall make us liable both to the first and to the second death: But what
do I say, that the regenerate person the Believer shall dye? no, he shall not
dye at all: Quicunque sermones m^^s custodiverint, etc. Whosoever keeps my
sayings, he shall not taste, he shall not see death. Death may buz and keep a
noise about his ears like an angry Wasp, but he has lost his sting, the sting
was left in Christ Jesus body, he does victoriously triumph over it; O Death
where is thy sting? O Grave, etc. He may exult and rejoice over Death; O Death,
my Savior has been thy death, and thou can not be mine: My Savior dyed for
me, I cannot dye by thee: Christ has killed thee, and thou can not kill me;
if kill me, not hurt me. I have made my peace with my Judge, and I fear not
the Baily; my Redeemer has made my peace with my God, and being justified by
Faith, I have my Qui^tus est, I have peace with God, and therefore neither
Death, nor Hell, nor he that has the power of both can hurt me; and therefore
to every regenerate person I may pronounce that blessing, which Saint John
does, to them that have part in the first resurrection (which is nothing else
but regeneration.) Blessed and Rev. 20, 6.
holy is he that has his part in the first resurrection; for on such the
second Death shall have no power, but they shall be as Kings and Priests unto
God: Of this supernatural and Heavenly B^rth does this birth treat, and of all
the 4. causes thereof. 1. The Formal, 2. The Efficient, 3. The Isntrumental,
and 4. the Final cause. 1. The formal cause and that is God, progenuit D^^^,
God begets us.

2. The Efficient, that is his will, he begets us of his will; for why he saves
one and not another, why he softens this wax upon which he will instamp^ his
Image, and why he hardens that clay, which he will cast away, there is no
reason can be given hereof, but the good pleasure of his will; Romans 9. 18. He
will have mercy, etc.

3. The Isntrumental cause is verbum veritatis, the word of truth, called so
for 4. Reasons. 1. Because it has God, the God of Truth for its Author. 2.
Because it has Christ the Truth it self, for its Witness: 3. Because it has
the Spirit of Truth for its composer; and 4. Because it teaches all truth, and
leads into all truth: I will pray to the Father, and he shall send the spirit
of truth, which shall lead or guide you into all truth.

This word of Truth is the seed of our New Birth, By the grace of God, says
Paul, I have begotten you by the Gospel, where you have again the instrument,
the means and the Author, the Instrument, I Paul for though you have ten
thousand instructors, I am your Father in Christ, and^.

The means, the Gospel or Word, the Author Christ Jesus, whose word it is, and
who himself is the supreme work in our regeneration.

Then fourthly, here is the final cause why we are regenerate and borne again
to b^ holy and sanctified, to be as the first fruits of his Creatures, i. e.
that as amongst the Jews in the Law, the first fruits were consecrate and set
apart for God, so regenerate persons and believers amongst and above all others
are sequestered and set apart for the services and purposes of God; and this end
and effect of Regeneration, shows the Honor and Dignity, the privilege and
prerogatives of the sons of God, as you shall here anon; otherwise as in
other Births, so in this you may please to observe 4. things more. 1. Partus.
2. Vterus. 3. Semen. And 4. Fructus. The Birth, the Womb, the Seed, and the
Fruit.

1. Partus.
The Birth, and that is a holy Birth, prog^nuit Deus, God begets us. The Spirit
of the Almighty over-shadowing the Soul, as it did the Body of the Virgin Mary,
sanctifies it, and begets a new Creature; for as Christ was conceived by the
holy Ghost, so must every Christian be.

2. Vterus.
The Womb, and that is a holy Womb too, the Womb of the Morn, as David calls
it, the dew of thy Birth is etc. or Psalm. 110 3.
thy Birth from the Womb is as the morning dew, (a holy transposition of the
words) which enlivens and exhilerates all things, Dr. Andr.
refreshes and renews them.

3. Semen.
Here is Semen, the S^ed, and that is a holy seed too, We are borne, says the
Apostle, not of mortal, but immortal, not of corruptible but incorruptible
seed, even of the word, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 23. A seed which Saint Paul calls
living, both because it quick^ns them that are dead in sins and trespasses,
and because it makes us heirs of eternal life. Note.
A seed clean contrary to humane seed, for as that begets sinful man, this
kills him.

4. Fructus.
Lastly, here is Fructus the fruit, and that is a holy and heavenly fruit too;
for being regenerate and borne again unto God We have, as the Apostle says,
our fruit unto holiness, and the end is everlasting life, Romans 6. 21.

Thus we see in part, the nature, manner, causes, ^ff^ct, and end of our New
Birth, or Birth from above.

This unto flesh and blood seems very strange; tell the natu^al man of his
regeneration, and new Birth, that he must of necessity be borne again, and you
speak to him a parable and mystery. You can never fasten any thing upon him,
but what is made evident by demonstration: He will not believe that he sees
not, and therefore certainly he shall never see that which he cannot or will
not believe: As Nic^d^^us before his conve^sion hearing Christ speak of the
necessity of Regeneration, he makes it a matter of impossibility; How can a man
be borne when he is old, can he enter into his Mothers womb and be borne
again^. A strange, nay, an impossible thing he thinks it is, to be borne
again, by the word or spirit of God: Words thinks he, may beget words (as they
do too often) but not creatures. And that Posthumus should be Primitiae, the
last creature made the first fruits, this seems altogether impossible: But
Faith is not captivated to sense, it exceeds reasons limits, it is not the
Natural, but the Spiritual man. Nor the Natural but Spiritual eye, which
discernes how God is our Father.

Indeed many ways does the Lord challenge unto himself this loving attribute
of Paternity and Fatherhood, but principally three: 1. By Creation, 2. By
Regeneration, and 3. Adoption; Between which there are these differences in our
Creation.

1. We were filii facti, made Sons; In our regeneration we are filii geniti,
begotten Sons.

2. Our Creation, that was out of Gods council, Faciamus hominem, let us make
man after our Image.

Our regeneration, that is, out of his will, voluntary nos genuit.

3. In our Creation; Dixit Dens and formati sumus, God spoke the word, and we
were formed and made; in our Regeneration, Operatur Spiritus Sanctus and
reformati sumus, Gods spirit works, and we are reformed, re-made.

4. In our Creation he gave us our selves; in our regeneration, he gave
himself for us, his life for us: He gave his soul a sacrifice for sin, that
he might see his seed, Esaias. 53. 10.

Our Creation as I hinted, cost him but a few words, he spoke and we were made,
he commanded and it was effected: But our Redemption through his blood, cost
him many words and blows, many wounds and sufferings, that he might see his
seed he made his soul an offernig for sin; He took upon him our sins that
we might be taken for Sons.

We were lost in Adam, by our generation in Adam we all dye, but in Christ we
are all made alive.

We fell in Adam, and his fall has wounded and bruised us, but Christi liv^r^
sanati sumus, by Christ's stripes we are healed. A strange way to be healed by
wounding. To kill the Physician to recover the Patient: That God should dye, to
preserve man from death: To tame a Lion, they say they beat a Dog, but here
the Lion is beaten for the Dog, the Lord for the Servant, he humbled himself
and took our nature upon him, to sanctify, nay to glorify our Nature, in
which nature he suffered, for this only end, to make us accepted; Ideo filius
Dei factus est homo, ut homines faceret filios Dei, Therefore was the Son of
God made the son of Man, that the Sons of Men might be made the sons of God.
Behold then and admire what love the Father has showed unto us, that we should
be thus made and called the Sons of God, 1 John 3. 1.

1. Cause the Formal cause.
But to proceed in order: I will begin with the first cause of our
Regeneration: The formal cause; God.

Progenuit Deus, God begets us: And the word the Apostle uses here to beget is
worth your serious observation: it is (...), peperit, a word which the Learned
give to the soul as well as unto the body, to the spirit as well as to the
flesh of man: For we must understand that the soul and spirit of man has its
birth and children, as well as the flesh and body:

As for example: Memory that is the birth of the Brain, thoughts they are the
birth of the Heart, and Grace that is the child of the Spirit; I, and there are
dolours and pangs, tribulations and sorrows, throbs and throws, gripes and
convulsions in this our second Birth, as many (if not more) and as great (nay
greater) than in our first. Note.
The mourning weed, the melting eye, the pale countenance, the voice of
lamentation, the broken heart, the contrite spirit: Mary Magdalen's tears,
Jerusalem's sighs and groans, who wept continually in the night, with David,
who washed his bed, and watered his couch with his tears; Jacob's wrestling;
Paul's combat, and complaint, Miserable man that I am, who, etc. (It being as
painful for a man to be delivered of his sin as ever it was for a poor,
wracked mother to be delivered of her burden) that judgment being laid upon
our Spiritual conception, which was upon our Natural, I will greatly multiply
the sorrows of thy conception, in labor, and sorrow, etc. All these does the
Lord cause, and raise in a man before this new man can be conceived in him, or
born of him. When the eyes are red with tears, and the heart does ache with
groans, when the soul and body like the Virgin Marie's is ready to be divided
as with a sword: when with David we roar and cry for the very disquietness of
our hearts; with Rebecca feeling the old man and the new, ^s she did Jacob and
Esau struggling in her womb, we cry out, Why am I thus? when with the woman in
the Rev. 12. we cry out, and are pained, ready to be delivered; the great red
Dragon striving to hinder our conversion, as he did her conception; Then, then
does this New man begin to conceive and quickend: For as no birth of the
creature can be without sorrow, and pain, No death without dolor, no incision,
or cutting of the flesh without sharp, bitter, or grievous dolours: So cannot
the heart be circumcised, our regeneration or new birth effected without much
grief and anguish of spirit. You know that the Babe that has lien but nine
months in the Mothers womb cannot be born without sharp pain, and does any
Christian think to be rid of his sin, in which he was conceived and born, which
also has conceived and bred in him, and which he has nourished and fostered
many years in his bowels, without great dolor and sorrows? No, no, but as
Pharaoh then burdened, and t^xed the Israelites soarest when they were near
their deliverance out of his bondage: And as the dumb Devil then vexed and tore
the young man most, when our Savior was ready to cast him out; So Satan
always troubles the Godly most uncessantly and grievously when their
deliverance from his bondage is nearest: and as St. John says, Has greatest
wrath because he knows his time is but short. Which doctrinal Observation has
a threefold Application.

1. It may comfort the dear children of God when they feel such inward pains
and dolours, and assure them they are but the sanctified troubles of
conscience, and the pangs of their New Birth; and therefore not to faint or be
discouraged though they feel them in a plentiful manner: And if man never
feel these sorrows, nor are acquainted with this bitterness of spirit, with
this contrite heart, with these wrestlings and fightings: If the New man and
Old, the Flesh and Spirit never make a mutiny, nor are together by the ears in
the members; If they find not the law of the members rebelling against the law
of the mind (for they be these inward Civil Wars which make the best
Reformation) surely the Enemy possesses all, all being in p^ace always, and
such may fear they are not yet in the state of Regeneration. Fortier est qui
se, etc.
And though fears and faintings, diffidences and doubtings, these inward
terrors and sorrows be found and felt in a plentiful manner, the heart is not
to be cast down, nor the spirit to be disquieted (although disquieted) for as
I said, these pains and pinchings, and contractions of heart, are but the pangs
and throws of the New Birth, these tears, and gemitus columbini, Dove-like
chatterings are sure evidences of a supernatural conception: for Satan's
closest, and hottest, and fiercest siege is ever laid to the Castle of the most
rich and precious souls.

Secondly; It is a note of Instruction to such as think the work of their
conversion to be an easy work, or such a work as may be effected with peace
and pleasure (whereas that sin that was contracted with peace and pleasure must
ever be dissolved with pain) Conversion is called the difficult work of Faith,
and the duty of Christianity, a working out of our salvation with fear and
trembling (and fear has pain) a very hard and difficult work it is; For there
must be a cutting off the right hand, and a pulling out the right eye, casting
away those sins and pleasures which are most dear and near unto us. H^re must
be leaving and forsaking Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and
Sisters, Lands and Livings, renoun^ing all dearest, and nearest relations,
abandoning all cou^ses which have been pleasurable and profitable to us, and
cleaving close to Christ and his Faith and Truth; according to St. Hieroms
stout and Christian resolution; If my Mother that bare me hung about my neck
weeping and wi^ling if my Brethren stood about me beseeching me to continue in
my wicked course of life, I would cast my Mother to the ground, I would tread
and trample upon my brethren to serve my Lord and Master; I would leave and
contemn all to enjoy him; For he that loves Father and Mother more than me is
not worthy of me.

Thirdly, it is a note of confutation and reproof to them who think they can by
their own power and strength induce or incline their hearts to grace and
goodness; We cannot reform our selves: Indeed easily enough (God knows) we did,
and do deform our selves, but none but God can reform us: It is Gods only
proper and peculiar work to regenerate and reform* By him we are renewed into
our first image. Non^ can change the heart but he that made the heart; none but
the hand that made us can mend us. It is Gods work, and it is mavelous in our
^yes, or should be so. It is he that brings to the birth, and gives strength to
bring forth: For, Shall I cause others to bear, says God, and my self remain
barren? No, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh* etc. I^ is God that
works in us to will and to do^ of his good pleasure: It is he that does
create in us new hearts* and renews right spirits within us, Dabo illis cor
novum, I will give them a new heart and spirit, and cause them to walk in my
statutes. It is not in the power of man to add one cubit to his spiritual
stature, to make a hair white which is black: Far less can he change his heart
to make that clean which is foul, holy which is unholy, and naturally the sink
of sin and all uncleanness. It is from God we become his Sons: He sends his
spirit into our hearts, his spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans
8. 15. But Adoption is where there is no g^niture or begetting, that does
filium facer^, not gign^r^: It makes a son, it begets none, it is not after
likeness but liking; it is not of nativity but nuncupation* Adoption, that is
Gods acceptance of sons: Generation is the impression of the Image God in
those sons adopted. Now Generation is twofold, according to Nature, and
according to Grace: According to Nature, and so Christ alone is the natural
begotten Son of God: According to Grace, and so every man is his son: Obedience
to Gods Commandments, conformity to his will be apparent Testimonies of our
Sonsh^p. To as many as b^le^v^ his word to them he gives power to be the Sons
of God.

From that that has been spoken arise two general propositions to be spoken of
out of the first cause of Regeneration. 1. That the state of a Christian is a
new Gen^niture and Birth. 2. That God himself is the author and cause of this
Birth.


1. That the state of a Christian is a new Geniture and birth: Whosoever is in
Christ, is a new, or another creature.

Poets feign of Baccbus, that he was the son of Semele, and the son of Jupiter,
of Semele an earthly Woman, and of Jupiter a God. And Plautus writes of
Hercules, that he was the son of Amphitruo, and so mortal; and the son of
Jupiter, and so immortal: What was but feigned in them, is true in us. In every
Regenerate man, there are two men:

The first is from the earth, earthly, as St. Paul speaks, and so he may say to
corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my sister and mother.
The second is from heaven, and so he may call God Father, and has full
interest and power to call Christ his elder brother: Being the first born
amongst many brethren.

2. In our first birth we are born men by the will of men; In our second birth
we are begotten Christians by the will of God.

In our first birth our mortal fathers beget us to succeed them; we are born to
die: In our second our immortal Father begets us to live and abide with him
forever.

In our first birth our Fathers must die before we the sons can inherit. In our
second the children must die before they can obtain their heavenly Fathers
Inheritance.

3. In our first birth we are conceived and born in sin, and so by nature are
children of wrath. In our second we are the workmanship of God, created in
Christ to good works, and so consequently the heirs of grace and glory: In a
word, a double Pedigree is in every Saint, one of mortality, another of
eternity. Cum peccatorem dico duo dico, says St. Austin, when I speak of
sinner, I mean two men, a sinner and a Saint, a man, and a Christian man: One
born after the flesh, called the old man, another after the spirit, called the
new.

From which Doctrine arise three considerations, or observations. 1. The verity
and truth of our new birth. 2. The similitudes and likenesses between our first
and second birth. 3. The eminency and dignity of a Christians new birth.


1. The verity and truth of our new birth: We are as truly said to be renati,
as nati, born again, as born at all. For if the wicked be damna^i antequam
nati, damned before they be born; is it a harder thing, being once born, to be
born again? Surely in sense and reason it is harder far to make something of
nothing, then to make that better which was something. It is as easy to mend
as to make, especially when God is the workman; else it is a great deal easier
to mar then to make or mend: Difficilius est struere quam distruere. I know (as
I said before) that this unto flesh and blood seems very strange, because the
natural man's faith goes not beyond his eye: But (as a Father well notes) If in
the second resurrection (the raising of the body out of the grave) God can
restore that which was consumed to nothing, and make it a more perfect and
sound body then ever it was. Surely in the first resurrection from sin to
grace, he can renew and reform that body and soul which he first made and
inspired, and he that first created them, can renew and amend them.

Strange it seems to the eye of reason, but consider the agent, and the wonder
will cease: Ille suscitabit te qui creavit te, says the Father; Ille
reformabit qui formavit te, say I, ille reficiet te qui fecit te: he that
formed thee* will reform thee; he that made thee will mend thee: Reason sees
not this. But ubi ratio desinit, fides incipit, where reason ends, faith
begins, and therefore creed quod non vides, and videbis quod non credes;
Believe what you see not, and you shall one day see what you would not believe.
But is there no Sun, because he that wants his sight sees it not* so is there
no regeneration or new birth, because the carnal man wants faith, which is the
souls eye* by which it is discerned. Stephen when he was going to be stoned, he
saw Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father (which none of his
persecutors could do) In like manner the regenerate man (even in his most heavy
afflictions, and at the point of death he) sees how God is his Father, which
the natural man cannot see, because it is spiritually discerned.

But since the knowledge of regeneration is so needful, and the work so secret
and mystical, how may any Christian know that he is regenerate, and what are
the truest signs and evidences thereof? For the first who require and request
to be instructed and taught in this saving doctrine; and which the Disciples
demand what is the meaning of this Parable? I answer, First by defining,
secondly by showing the evidences and infallible signs and tokens of it.
Regeneration then is this; It is the change of the whole man from one thing to
another, the change of the body and soul from sin to sanctification, from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. It is a
Sanctifying throughout, as St. Paul speaks, Now the very God of peace, etc. But
not any ways to confound Regeneration with Sanctification (for that may be a
mistake) Regeneration is defined by the Learned to be this, It is an act or
work of Gods wonderful power, begetting the elect by the Ministry of the word
(through the operation of the spirit of God) that of children of wrath by the
desert of sin, we are by grace made the sons and daughters of God; or more
briefly, It is a grace of God whereby the corruption of nature in believers is
daily renewed to the image of G^d; it is I say again, a grace of God, 1 Pet. 1.
3. Who according to his abundant grace has begotten us to a lively hope, by
which (corruption of nature (for that is the proper object of it, called in
Scripture the old man, or flesh) is renewed *which is a word of religion
opposed to the old corruption drawn from the old Adam (for so is the new birth
by the spirit opposed to the old birth by the flesh, John 3.) to the image of
God, see Phil 3. 10.

Again, the word (renewed) imports a complete work upon the whole subject;
for as in the birth of a child, not one part, or more parts and members, but
the whole child is born; so is this new birth, the whole man is born again; as
we are sanctified (and as David prays to be purged and washed) so we are
regenerate throughout, the whole man must be a new creature (for whosoever is
in Christ is so) which is not the framing of something out of something, but of
something out of nothing. And I pray you consider, that as in every mutation
and change, one thing removes, and another succeeds. So in this generation or
new birth, one thing comes in the room of another; and in this birth from
above, one thing dies which is corrupt nanture, which must die, or we must die
(if we kill not the sin in us, the sin in us will kill us.) (This is called the
old man) that which is changed, renewed, and quickened, is the new man, and
therefore whosoever is in Christ will put off the old man which is corrupt
through deceiveable lusts, and will put on the new, which after Christ is
created in righteousness and true holiness True holiness, note the word, for
there is great emphasis in the word true, and a great deal of feigned and false
holiness in the world. The Axiom of the Politician being too much in request,
Religio ad morem non ad rem attinet. True religion is for the manners, not for
the main, it is something for his credit, nothing for his profit, Machiavels
lesson is learned over and over, the show of goodness and virtue is profitable
and needful, but the use and practice a trouble, it does aggravare animam,
burden the soul, and hinder men's projects too much. Beloved, it will ask a long
time, and much labor in many, to unlearn those two Lessons. But this let me
tell them who live by them, Dediscere quod malum est, est doctrina optimo. To
unlearn what is evil, is the best learning; and without all question, Piety is
the best Policy; or as a King once said, Honesty is the best Policy; and as
David, though a man after Gods own heart, says that the best wisdom is to be
wise to salvation; The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, a good
understanding have they that do thereafter. A man never begins to be
intelligent until he begins to be obedient, and the best plot is to save a
soul, to lose which, he that knew the price of souls well tells us, the gain or
purchase of the whole world cannot recompense; he that to gain the whole world
would lose his soul, makes but an unwise bargain; which bargain was wise
enough, were not the poorest despised soul of a greater value, the regenerate
and true Christian knows the value and worth of his soul and therefore desires
to be renewed in the spirit of his mind, and he desires to know what the good
and acceptable mind or will of God is.

And indeed in the mind, or spirit of the mind, the work of regeneration is
first wrought; as God in the creation began first with the light, Fiat lux, Let
there be light: so in our new creation he begins with illumination, he first
strikes up one light into the mind, and they that were once darkness, are now
light in the Lord Christ Jesus, speaking to the mind and understanding, as he
did once to the blind man in the Gospel, Ephatha, be opened, and this new
created light instantly banisheth all the darkness of the mind and
understanding (blinded before by the god of the world) as the rising of the Sun
dispels all foggs and mists, and as the Apostle speaks in another place, Phil.
3. 10. He presently puts off the old man with his deeds, and puts on the new
man, which is created in knowledge after the image of God: Oportet enim eum qui
alteram vitam incepturus est pecori fineas imponere: It behooves him who is
beginning a new life, to put an end to the old.

And give me leave I pray you a little seriously and earnestly to insist upon
this Point, this saving Point.

Conceive I pray you that to be regenerate and new born, to be a new creature,
or as my Text says, the first fruits of Gods creatures, is not to become new
in substance, but in qualities, and does not consist in multiplying bodies by
generation, but in changing of souls or minds into a new form: For non
nascimur, sed nascimur Christiani nec tam generatio quam regeneratio spectanda
est: We are not born, but we are made Christians; neither is generation so much
regarded as regeneration, because in our new or second birth we are not made
the sons of man, but the sons of God.

As when the spirit of magnanimity and valor, and Princely Government came
upon Saul, it carved him into a new man.

So when the spirit of sanctification and holiness descends upon any, it quite
changes and turns them into new creatures, it makes them, as we say, new men,
and they will answer their former sins and pleasures, their wanton and vain
Dalilahs, with whom they have formerly spent too much of their precious time,
as that young Convert answered his enticing and tempting Mrs* soliciting him
to their wonted folly, Ego non sum ego, I am not I, I am not what I was, I was
not what I am; he was changed in his mind, or his mind was changed in him. They
will resolve with St. Peter's converts, The former part of our time, or the time
past of our lives, is enough to have spent, or rather misspent after the lusts
of the Gentiles, we will spend the rest of our time to the honor and glory of
him that died for us. Beloved Christians, thus is a man in his regeneration
converted and changed quite and clean into another man, as Christ when he gave
sight to the blind man in the Gospel, he made him no new eyes, but gave sight
and light to them he had, and as when he raised Lazarus and the widows son, one
out of his grave, another going to it, he created no new bodies, but put life
and spirit into the sad.

So in our regeneration and new birth, God makes us no new souls or bodies, but
renews, reforms, amends, and changes them we have. He takes not the eyes out of
our heads, but the vanity, lust, and sin of the eyes, moving us inwardly to
make a covenant with our eyes, not to look upon any tempting object, and we
will pray earnestly with David, Turn away mine eyes lest they behold vanity;
and indeed David might well pray to God to turn away, open, or amend his eyes,
for both were naught*

One was bloudshot with the murder of Vriah, and the other had Bathsheba the
Pearl in it; and indeed occuli sunt in amore duces, as in love, so in lust, the
eyes are as leaders or windows to let sin into the soul, Eve saw the beauty of
the fruit before she lusted after it, and Achan the wedg of gold, and the
Babylonish garment before he c^veted it.

Not our ears but the pravity and sin of our ears, the deafness and dullness
thereof; and to say truth, the first sense sanctified in our regeneration, is
the sense of hearing, because it was the first that was corrupted; our first
parents by harkening and listening what the Serpent said, were brought into a
love and liking of sin, and a regenerate Christian by hearing what the spirit
says, is brought into an hatred and detestation of sin: These are the senses
of discipline and knowledge, therefore of* grace: God opens our ears before he
opens our eyes, if we will not hear God, we shall never see him: The ear is the
principal sense sanctified to receive spiritual and saving instructions, as you
may read in the Proverbs; and St. Paul makes it an impossible thing to believe,
if we will not hear: The speech of Lactantius is worth the noting and quoting
too, Plus est in auribus quam in oculis situm quoniam doctrina and sapientia
percipi auribus s^lis potest occulis solis non potest. The Lord begins his
Sermons to his people, Hear o Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. and upon the condition of
hearing and harkening, all blessings are promised, If thou will hearken unto my
Commandments, all these benefits or blessings shall overtake thee. And when God
had sent his Son (whom he promised long before to send) the great Doctor and
Preacher of his Church. All the entertainment and receipt of him all the
reverence and respect called for, is but audience, ipsum audite: Hear him, Hear
my beloved sons, and it will make you sons dearly beloved, Mat. 17.

Hear then and your souls shall live. If the Prophet should bid thee do some
great matter, says Naamans servant to his Master, would thou not do it to
be cleansed of thy Leprosy, muchless when he bids thee but wash and be clean
(when he went away in a puff and snuf (as too many do from the saving word) So
if God should command us (and we his poor Ministers beseech you in his name) to
do some greater matters then we do, would you not do them to save your
precious souls? muchlesse would we hear and be happy, Hear and our souls shall
live; hear him here, whom we desire to see hereafter. Beloved, auditus est
gradus ad visum: Hearing is a degree to seeing; if we will not hear God, we
shall never see him; and therefore as John the Divine exhorts like a Divine, so
do I, but in his words, He that has an ear let him hear, and he that will not
hear what the Church, says, let him be anathema, accursed.

Indeed, omnis habent aures audiendi pauci, obediendi: All have ears to hear
with, but few to obey with, ears of attention, with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears; or like David, I will hear what the Lord will say unto me; or
with Mary, who sat at Christ's feet to hear his Preaching, or like the Spouse
in the Canticles, Hark, it is the voice of well-beloved.

We see in my Text, what an honor and dignity God has put upon his word, to
beget us to himself; of his own will he begets us with the word of truth; and
shall not we willingly give it the hearing? The Apostle in the next verse makes
the only use and application of the Doctrine and lesson here taught. Since the
word of truth is the seed of our new birth, therefore let every man be swift to
hear, of a tractable, docible, and meek spirit, ready to wait upon God in his
Ordinances, and to receive with meekness the ingra^fed word, which being so
received, is able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21.

Again, God takes not the tongue out of our heads, but he takes away the sin
and iniquity of the tongue (within a man unregenerate, is a world of
wickedness (as St. James says) The world is not fuller of wickedness, than
the tongue of sin, if unreformed; he takes away therefore in our regeneration,
and pulls out the venom and sting, and violence of the tongue (which is indeed a
small member, but does great mischief, blasphemies, oaths, railings, revilings,
curses, imprecations, lies, perjuries, dissimulation, all corrupt
communication, filthy and froathy speeches, which are not once to be named
amongst Saints.

And as the holy Ghost when he came down upon the Apostles, they spoke with new
tongues (as the spirit gave them utterance) So whom the holy spirit sanctifies
and regenerates, it gives a new and another language, and though it gives them
no new tongues, yet it gives the tongues they have a new dialect, their tongues
are touched with a coal from Gods Altar, neither have the gift given them of
praising God, and speaking well of their neighbor: As the regenerate person
will not listen to false tales, or tale-bearers, which are flabellum Diaboli
and flagellum justi, the Devils Bellows, and the Saints scourges (for the
tongue kills more then the sword, the sword of the mouth, more then the mouth of
the sword) as he will not receive a false report against his neighbor (as
David speaks, and makes one of the ten notes of a righteous man, of a Citizen
of heaven;) So he will not rashly nor hastily judge him before he know him, or
hear him speak, knowing that he that carries a false report, and he that
receives and believes it, the one carries the Devil in his tongue, the other in
his ears: And therefore they which are born from above, will set a watch before
their mouths, and guide the door of their lips, as the Kingly Prophet says,
They will take heed to their ways that they offend not in their tongue, and
they will utterly purpose that their mouth shall not offend. They will
therefore open their mouths with wisdom, and guide their words with
discretion, as Solomon speaks of the good house-wife, as she will keep her
self, so she will keep her words at home within her own doors: The tongue
indeed has a double hedge, teeth and lips, to show it should not easily or
commonly straggle or wander, or run over. The law of grace, as Paul says* will
be in the lips of the righteous* his mouth will show forth Gods praise*

It Is worth noting, that David will take heed to his ways, that he offend not
in his tongue; intimating, that the safety and security of a man's ways of his
whole life and conversation consists much in the government of his tongue: Qu^
facile violat, quae facile volat, as easily sins as moves, and it moves often
too easily, no arrow or bullet out of a gun, or bow* wounds more speedily or
quickly, or pierces more deeply or deadly, then a tongue primed with the
powder, and set on fire with the fire of hell. And therefore James tells us,
that he is a perfect man (that is) in a great part regenerate, that can rule
it; for it is the opinion of a Father, That half the sins committed in the
world, are committed through the licentiousness and unrulines of the tongue.
Qu^tidiana fornax is humana lingua, The tongue of evil men is a continual
Furnace wherein the names of righteous men are tried. And therefore to end this
point, The government of the tongue is an infallible note and evidence of some
progress and perfection in grace: But a regenerate heart, and a wicked tongue,
a sanctified heart, and a virulent, venomous, blasphemous tongue, never go
together: For if the spring or fountain the heart, be clear and pure, needs
must the streams be so; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
When Socrates would know the disposition and condition of one that came to be
his Scholar, he bid him speak that all might know him: Sermo virum indicat,
the speech shows the man, it is animi index, the interpreter of the mind.

We may easily know what is in the heart* by that which comes out of the mouth:
He is of Galilee, says the girl of Peter, for his speech bewrays him: A man
is easily discerned by his language what Countreyman he is, of Canaan, or
Ashdod.

Certainly beloved, a stinking and strong breath does not more evidently
declare ill lungs, and corrupt inwards, then evil language an evil liver;
Metals are known by their tinkling and sound, and men by their tunes, and
tongues, by their languages.

This is very certain, Gods children have always Godly language, and their
speeches and words are seasoned with wisdom as with salt, as St* Paul says
(For wisdom seasons our actions; as salt does our meat) their words ever tend
to edification, to the building up their brethren in the faith of Christ.

In a word, in the work of regeneration, God takes not the heart out of our
bodies, but he takes corruption out of our hearts: He heals by his spirit and
grace, that deadly and poisoned fountain, as Elisha by his handful of salt
cured the unwholesome waters of Jericho: And indeed their sanctification and
regeneration begin ever: As Nature in forming, so grace in reforming begins at
the heart, and makes a through change there; as when the Adulterer and
Fornicator becomes chaste, and considers that his body is, or ought to be, the
Temple of the holy Ghost, and therefore not be made a stable for Bacchus, or a
s^ew for Venus, but to be preserved in purity, in holiness, and honor, and not
in the lust of concupisence, as the heathen which knew not God, abstaining from
all appearance of evil, not entertaining lust into his heart by any inordinate
desires, Mat. 5. 26. Nor into his eye by wanton and lascivious looks (for you
shall read in 2 Pet. 1. 14. of eyes full of Adultery, or the Adulterers) nor
into the tongue by filthy and rotten speech, nor by any means into the act by
committing that great wickedness, as Joseph calls it, Genesis 39. and therefore
will daily sweeten and perfume this Temple of God with the incense of prayer
and supplication, watering it often with the unfeigned tears of contrition and
sorrow with David (that devout penetent) who made his bed to swim, and watered
his couch with his tears, and sweeping it with the besome of repentance,
leaving no foul corner or spiders web within the heart or house.

2. When he considers, that in other sins a man may peccare, and perire solus,
sin and perish alone, but in this sin of uncleanness, he carries company to
hell with him.

3. That the arms and lips of a harlot are like the Iron Idol, which crushed
the cursed sacrifice to pieces; or like the Ivy which embracing the Tree, kil^
it.

4. That in these sins, he sins, first against God the Father who created him
in holiness and righteousness, and in that manner to serve him. Secondly,
against Christ the son which redeemed him by the inestimable price of his
most precious blood, and to this end he redeemed him that he might glorify him
in his soul and body, who had redeemed both. 3. That it is against the spirit
of Christ, which is a pure and clean spirit; and none but the pure in heart
shall see God.

5. That it is against our reasonable service of God, for in all reason we
should make them the members of righteousness which are thus redeemed, and give
up our selves, souls and bodies, a living sacrifice unto God, which is our
reasonable service of him, glorify him both in our souls and bodies, which
has redeemed both.

6. That it is against our Covenant in our baptism, and against our calling,
for having as the Apostle says, such precious promises, as to be called the
sons and daughters of God, we should cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 6. last c. 1. and perfect holiness in the fear of God.

7. Lastly, that it is against a man's own body, which no other sins are, and
gives a deep stain and blemish, not only to his own name, but to the name of
his seed: and that they that do such things shall not enter into the Kingdom of
God. But the fire of lust shall have the fire of hell, and the sins of
uncleanness, shall be punished in Gehinom, a place of unbelievers: Secondly
when the glutton and intemperate person puts a knife to his throat, as Solomon
advises, moderatenesse, and restraining his appetite in full provocations,
remembering even that moderate precept of St. Paul, Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever else ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

3. When the drunkard becoms civil and sober, walking honestly as in the day,
not in surfeiting or drunkenness, accounting them dear pleasures which we
repent on the morrow, and remembering that saying of the Poet, If the pains and
aching, and grief of the head came before drinking, as they come after, no man
would be drunk. If the Rhumes, Catarhs, Apoplexes, Dropsies, and infinite other
Diseases, the natural offspring of that unnatural sin were considered, no man
would exceed.

Fourthly, When the covetous and worldly man, who made his money his God, and
gain his godliness, the tenacious and griping miser is become merciful and
liberal, and of a lover of the world, a lover of God and his word, and
concludes that godliness is the best gain, having the promises of this life,
and of that which is to come, and trusts to that word of truth, primum
quaerite, regnum coeli, etc. First seek the Kingdom of God, etc.

Caetera aut aderunt aut non oberunt, other things shall not be wanting, or if
they be, the want of them shall not hurt us: For if we have not wealth, the
riches of the world, we shall have contentation and patience, the riches of the
mind: For he is not rich that has much, but he that is contented with that he
has.

5. When the envious and malicious man is become loving and charitable,
considering that God is love, and the more loving any man is, the liker God;
that envy and malice are the very characters of the Devil (you are of your
Father the Devil, says Christ's to the envious Jews) for his works ye do.

6. When the angry, froward, and wrathful man is become meek and patient,
possessing his soul in patience, in the midst of the greatest troubles, knowing
that by faith we possess Christ, by love, our brethren, but by patience our
selves, that anger rests and abides in the bosom of fools, and suffers not
therefore the sun to go down in his wrath, remembering that he which sleeps
in anger or malice, has the devil for his bedfellow; is therefore slow to
anger and wrath, considering well that the wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God, v. 20.

7. When the proud man is become lowly and humble, knowing that God resists
the proud, but gives grace to the humble; that the meek shall possess the
earth, and the humble God will teach his ways, that they are they shall find
rest to their souls. That pride cast the Angels out of heaven, Adam and Eve out
of Paradise, the King of Babel out of his name and nature, and therefore cannot
bring any man to heaven; for humility goes before honor; but pride goes before
a fall: Humilitas claritatis meritum, claritas humilitatis praemium: Humility
is the desert of glory, glory the reward of humility: si vis capere
celsitudinem Dei prius cape humilitatem Dei. In a word, when every sin does
return as he is commanded from his evil way, does cease to do evil, and learn
to do good, when in a holy anger and indignation that they have been the
servants of sin so long; they cast off their old Livery of sin, as blind
Bartemeus cast off his old Cloak, and with Ephraim, smite upon their thigh,
asking and enquiring, what have we done, wretch as I am, I am in way to be
undone? when he smites upon his breast with the Publican (his breast the ark
and chest of all iniquity) and in faith and feeling cries out, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner, when weary of his sinful course, he does resolve
with the prodigal, to leave it and return home to his Fathers, with words of
unfeigned sorrow and contrition, I will go to my Father, a happy thing we have
a Father to go to, and such a father, tampater nemo.

When with Eliphas in Job, a man seriously resolves, and resolvedly purposes,
If I have done wickedly, I will do no more (which was the caveat Christ gave to
them he healed) considering that Inanis est paenitentia quam sequens culpa
coinquinat, That true repentance is not only a repentance for sin, but a
repentance from sin, as the Apostle calls it, Repentance from dead works, then
is this great work wrought, this man is a new creature.

2. To assure our selves that we are regenerate and born of God, observe
farther, that as Elizabeth, John the Baptists mother did assure herself that
she was with child, when she felt the babe to leap and spring in her womb.

So when we find our wills conformable to Gods will, when it is our meat and
drink to do our heavenly Fathers will, when we are ready to answer to the call
of every heavenly motion, as the echo to the voice of man, and answer with
Samuel, Speak Lord, thy servant hears. With David, It is written I should do
thy will, I am content to do it, O my God, thy Law is in my heart. When the
word of God is to us as it was to him, our longing and our love, this is a sure
evidence of our new birth; for where there is a new birth, there will be a new
life; where there is a spiritual and heavenly birth, there will be a spiritual
and heavenly life, if we be born of God, we will with Enoch walk with God, and
will be followers of God as dear children. The natural child, they say, lives
not until forty five days after the conception be expired; but the regenerate
and newborn Christian begins to live as soon as he is conceived, there will no
longer be a life led after the will of the flesh, or of our own lusts, but
after the will of God, and the will of God is our holiness.

He that is born from above, will resolve to spend the remainder of his short
time to the honor of him that died for him, and it will appear whose heeis by
a life led in holiness and righteousness, in faith and a good conscience, he
will walk worthy of the calling whereunto he is called, and will say with David
when he was moved to some undecent and uncivil action: Is it nothing to be son
in Law to a King? If we be the sons of God, our carriage and conversation will
be according; Our light will so shine before men, etc. Mat. 5. 14:

God begets to holiness and righteousness, and by this heavenly generation we
are made partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption which is
in the world through lust.

(...), We are the offspring of God, and therefore the life led after our
conversion, is called the life of God, to which the unregenerate are strangers.
And it is called the life of Christ too; now that is after my conversion, I
live no longer, but Christ lives in me, 1 Cor. 4. He that is Gods son, will do
Gods work, and the work of God is constant and universal obedience.

A second note and evidence of our regeneration is, a through change and
reformation of heart and life. The new man is of a renewed mind, old things
will be cast away, and all things will become new, he will cleanse himself from
all wickedness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

1. As first, there will be a new light struck up into the mind and
understanding, they will be illuminated to conceive the things which be of God
(which the natural man cannot do) as the further obduration or occecation, and
banding of a man is the note and sign of a reprobate, when the God of the
world blinds the eyes, as* St. Paul speaks.

So it is an evident note of one begotten of God, of one born from above, when
he is renewed in knowledge and understanding, and knows the mind of Christ, Col.
3. 9.

2. Secondly there will be a new quality in the will, ready to hearken to the
voice of Christ in all things, and to obey it, He that is born of God, hears
Gods word, says the Apostle.

3. Thirdly, there will be a new conversation in the life, and this holy
conversation will be manifested by the fruits and effects of the spirit, love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, patience, meekness, etc. characters and stamps of
holiness, still led in the practice of any reigning sin, after the lusts of the
flesh, is a manifest note of a carnal man; but he that is born of God sins not,
as you shall hear anon; sin is in him, but it reigns not in him; Inest, but
non praeest or obest, it is in him, but not over him, nor does he obey it in
the lust and power thereof; he sins indeed, but yet not he, but the sin that is
in him. In his mind he serves the law of God, though in his flesh the law of
sin; it is against his heart and intention, his will and purpose. Again, he
lives not, nor lies in any known sin, but his course and endeavor is after
the Commandment.

4. There will be new affections, as the love of God, hatred of all sin, for it
is not enough to leave sin, but to loath it and hate it; as Ammon (when he had
satisfied his lust upon his sister Thamar) it is said, He hated her afterward
more then ever he loved her. Thus will Gods child deal with sin, and desire to
purify himself, as God is pure, cast off his sin as a menstruous cloth, and
say, Get thee hence.

5. There will be constant and holy means used to preserve and improve all
these graces, to keep alive this heavenly fire* is the spirit of prayer and
supplication the bellows of the Sanctuary.) The child of God will speak the
language of God. Prayer is the Saints language on earth, as praise is in
heaven. An infant is no sooner born into the world, but present^y it cries
after the breast for the mothers milk (that which does not, is still born, or a
dead child) So a man is no sooner born of God, but he will desire the sincere
milk of the word, that he may grow thereby. It is the note of a wicked man* of
one dead in sins and trespasses (that he calls not upon God) that is, casts off
the fear and worship of God. If some were tried by this rule, it would appear
of what breed and birth they are, they are of Babels breed, and therefore the
Church of Rome (above all) withhold their milk (this word from the people)
which withdraw these two Paps of the two Testaments (which are as the dugs to
nourish Gods children) or gives them this milk mingled with their own
traditions (pretend and boast as she will) is but a strumpet and stepmother,
and not the true spouse of Christ.

So much of the verity and truth of our new birth, and of the evidences and
signs thereof.

Come we now to similitudes and likenesses between our first and second birth,
which are many, but I will reduce them to seven.

1. In our first birth there is mutatio a non ente ad ens, a change from a no
being into a being. Thus it is in our second birth; there is a change from a no
being in grace, to a being in grace; new seeds of grace are sown in the heart,
where before they were not, and the man which was dead in sins and trespasses,
is now quickened; mutat quod erat and incipit esse quod non erat. It changes
what it was, and begins to be what before it was not. I know the Papists
alleadg this saying of the Father to prove and uphold their I^ol of Tran*
substantiation, but the Father uses it to prove the manner and truth of our
regeneration.

2. In our first birth there is many times the similitude and likeness* the
form and favor of the parents (of them that do beget) this always holds* true
in our second birth (in our birth from above) God begets no son or daughter,
but he begets them after his own Image and likeness, as we read Genesis 5. 3. That
Adam begat Seth after his own image and likeness, that is, sinful and corrupt,
and mortal as he was, and needs must be, for that which is born of the flesh is
flesh. So whosoever are begotten of God, whosoever are his offspring and image,
his sons and daughters, are as Peter says, made partakers of the Divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. or as Paul, We are the offspring of God, Acts 17. 28, 29.
Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, That which is ^orn of the spirit
is spirit; but herein stands the difference between heavenly and earthly
generation, between the natural and spiritual birth between the adoption of God
and man; man in adopting man to be his son, may bestow upon him his lands and
goods* but he cannot communicate to him his graces or goodness; but Gods
adoption has not only in it an approbation and acceptance for ^ons, but he
instamps upon them his own nature and image, he makes them (as I said)
partakers of the divine nature. They are merciful as their heavenly Father is
merciful, holy as he is holy; holy so, not so holy, merciful, and holy
according to the manner* not the measure of Gods holiness, or mercy, according
to the quality, not the equality; perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect,
in aim, intent, purpose, endeavors and desires; they pray and petition with
David, O that my ways were made so direct that I might keep thy statutes. They
press hard toward the mark of their high calling, they serve God truly and
sincerely, though weakly and infirmly; and what is wanting in the perfection of
their obedience, is made up in the truth and sincerity of it. Neither will God
see weakness where he sees truth in the inward affections, where the heart is
right and good, the obedience thereof is graciously and mercifully accepted,
for God looks at, and calls for the heart, My son, give me thy heart, Give it
me, who first gave it thee, give me thine, who gave thee mine nay, the blood of
my heart, Non minus tuum quia meum, It is nevertheless thine if it be mine; nay
it cannot be thine comfortably, except it be mine perfectly; for as Samuel
says, this is all that God requires of his people, only to fear the Lord, and
to serve him with all their heart, 1 Jam. 12. 24.

Again, they that are Gods sons are loving as God is loving, God is love, and
the more loving any man is, the liker God, the liker their Father which is in
heaven; they are loving and peaceable that are born of God, peacemakers, and
peacetakers; and S. John gives it as granted, that whosoever loves not his
brother, is not born of God, for God is the God of love and peace; Note.
the multitude and number of believers are of one heart and of one mind. They
question their saintship and sonship, who are enemies to love and peace.

Let us therefore for application of this point, for it needs close
application, in these divided times, take St. Paul's council, Be followers of
God as dear children, and walk in love Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Love is the Christians
walk, not his talk* Gods children, as John says, love not so much in word and
in tongue (which is most of the love in these days, a little warm breath) as
indeed and in truth. Let us follow him in these paths of love and mercy, and
truth, and holiness; and though we cannot go his path, let us go as fast as we
can, Let us run the race that is set before us, and if we cannot run, go, if
not go, creep, follow God though it be but slowly, and easily, though it be
with limping and halting, as Peter followed Christ along afarr off, and as
Ascanius his father Aeneas, Non passibus aequis, with no equal paces. If we
cannot write after our copy, yet let us look to it and upon it, endeavor our
best, and God will accept the will for the deed.

Applic.
A Note of Doctrine to be taken of in this hateful and hating age, wherein
iniquity abounds, and the love of many (as Christ the truth prophesied) is
grown cold, so cold that it cannot be felt. Brothers at dissension (as if they
were no brethren) Christians without love and charity (as if they were no
Christians.) It would make the heart of a righteous Lot to lament and bleed,
when there wants no more instance than what Philip said to Nathanael, veni and
vide, come and see. Love is the badge and cognizance of Gods children* By this
ye are known to be my Disciples, if etc. It is the Christians Cloak and Livery,
therefore the Apostle bids us put on love. This Cloak will cover many sins, it
is both indumentum and ornamentum, not only a cloak to cover and hide, but an
ornament to adorn; it was wont in times past to be the comprimis^r and
determiner of all Lawsuits; Let not us fall out, for we are brethren, says
Abraham to Lot, the greater to the lesser: What brethren and fall out? No, it
is a good and joyful thing for brethren to dwell together in unity. It was the
harlot would have the child divided, the true mother would have it live: they
show of what house they came, of what descent they are who love to live in envy
and malice* in hatred and division* you are of your father the devil, says
Christ to the envio^^ Jews, for his works ye do; profess wh^^^ ^^^y all, they
have not God for their Father, nor the Church of God for their Mother, nor
Christ for their Savior who are enemies to peace* for as I said, True belie^^^
are of one heart, and of one mind, of one soul. Give me leave to give you a
strong, pathetical, and effectual motive to love and peace, the character of
Gods children. God is the God of peace, Christ Jesus is the Prince of peace,
the holy Ghost is the Spirit of peace, the Gospel is the Gospel of peace, your
calling in general is a calling of peace ye are called to peace: Ours who are
the poor despised Ministers of Christ, is a calling and commission of peace;
and we are commanded, nay charged, into what house soever we come, to preach
and pray for peace to that house (how well and faithfully some have done their
errand, let the world judge.)

When Christ came into the world he brought it; there was peace over all the
world, the Temple of Janus was shut, and wars were ceased at every gate, and
the blessed Angels of heaven sang at his birth and nativity, Glory be to God on
high, on earth peace, good will toward men (and therefore surely there is
heavenly music in it) David says, God will give unto his people the blessing
of peace: So that peace is a blessing; nay the blessing of blessings, the sugar
and sweetning of all blessings; for nothing is a blessing without it; what are
our sweetest comforts, our dearest and nearest relations, our riches, honor,
magnificence, or any worldly accommodations, if not enjoyed in peace? It was
therefore prophesied in Esaias, That when Christ should be born (Christ the
Prince of Peace) the peacemaker, that men should break their Swords into
Ploughshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; that is, there should be
unity and peace in the world, all animosities and hostilities should be laid
aside (and so they are where Christ is born in us.) Nay even the Soldier with
a sword in one hand, and fire in the other, he cries and speaks aloud, Sic
quaerimus pacem. Thus we look for and seek for peace, peace being the end of
war; when Christ lived in the world he taught it, Beati pacifici, Have salt in
your selves, and have peace one with another. And if a man smite thee upon one
cheek, etc. And if he take away thy Cloak; etc. When Christ went out of the
world he made peace, his Legacy, Peace I give you, my peace I leave unto you;
and when he rose again, he made it his salutation: He came in unto them, the
doors being shut, and said, Peace be unto you; and when he had so spoken, he
showed them his hands and his side, as if he had said, see here, my dear
friends, how dear your peace cost me (even these wounds in my hands and side)
ne rumpatis eam, break not that so easily which cost me so dear, upon every
poor and slight occasion, or for the love of every base sin or pleasure, make
not me to bleed again: Enough I think to cool the fiery spirits.

If this will not serve to take the sting of envy and malice out of the minds
of many, but still like Salamanders they will live in the fire and heat of
contention, I will send such down to the place of utter confusion, for an
argument of peace, and they shall hear even the Devil himself pleading hard for
that which he continually breaks, Mat. 8. 30. What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God, art thou come to torment or trouble us before the time?
They that trouble all the world, you see, would not be troubled themselves.
Enough to cool the fiery spirits of such as make division their music, and
love to fish in troubled waters, nay that first trouble the waters themselves,
and then complain of the Lamb that comes to drink of them; let me send such to
meditate upon that speech of Christ, That Beelzebub is not divided against
Beelzebub, if he were, his kingdom could not stand; That seven devils agreed in
Mary Magdalen, a legion in another; whereas with grief be it spoken, three
scarce agree with us in a Family, or ten in a Parish. But were our State and
Commonwealth as strong as the kingdom of Satan, division and contention (if
continued) must needs bring it to desolation and ruin.

As Joseph therefore when he sent his brethren home to their father, gave them
this godly advice, Fall not out by the way, the same I exhort and beseech in
the bowels of our blessed peacemaker (looking all toward Jerusalem, let not
Babylon have our hearts) let us go on in love and peace, and the God of love
and peace will be with us: O let not division of hearts hinder the building of
Christianity, as division of tongues hindered the building of Babel. Filia
dissentionis desolatio, The daughter of dissension is dissolution, yea and
desolation. The factions and divisions between Simeon, Eleazar, and Jehochanon,
foretold and prophesied by Christ, and faithfully recorded by Josephus, a
fellow-sufferer and eyewitness, laid the Temple and City, and the houses of
Jerusalem desolate, and not one stone upon another. The Temple of Solomon, you
know (who was a Prince of peace, and type of Christ) was built in peace, there
was not the sound of an Axe, Hammer, or any other instrument heard in the
erecting of it: Indeed it was beaten down with Axes and Hammers (as David
dolefully complains) but it was set up without them. The mystical and spiritual
sense you easily apprehend. The spiritual Temple and house of God in us, is, or
should be built in peace and unity, without clamor, stir, or noise, we should,
as the Apostle says, edify one another in love and peace: for Si collidimur
frangimur, If we be broken and unbound, we are undone, signified by Scelurus
faggot, a known story, Divisum est c^^ ^orum jam jam interibunt, says the
Prophet. Their accord is gone, their cord is untwisted, they cannot stand,
Iscouedo the Spanish Poet, being demanded by his Master, Philip the third, by
what means he might become Master of the Low Countries, he gives him this
shrewd and subtle council, Divide them amongst themselves, according to
Machiavels precept to his Caesar Borgia, Divide and impera, make a division and
get the Dominion. It is observed by many learned men (and lame^^ed by more)
that the unkind and needless division of Christian Princes amongst themselves,
have added more Lands and Territories, more Dominions and Principalities unto
the Turks Empire, then their own Sword and Bow, As Phrahartes, one of Pompey's
chief Captains said of Julius Cesar's Conquests, Nostra ruina factus est
magnus, By our ruin he is raised and made great, his gain has been our loss,
his rise our downfall; our breaches and divisions (which like Reubens) have
caused great grief of heart, have been his utmost advantage: Whilst we wory and
fight, and sheath our swords in one another bowels; they say with the
Edomites, There, there, so would we have it: they sing and laugh with Nero
(having set Rome on fire) When I am dead, let all the earth burn: And therefore
(for conclusion of this point) in which I have been something earnest and long
(being very seasonable and needful to press in the condition we are in) let us
but advisedly and soberly consider the many mischiefs which factions and
divisions have brought into the world, and closely lay them to heart, and it
cannot but warm us with that heavenly fire of love (the image of our Father)
and account it with David (who though a fortunate and valiant Warrier, yet a
man of peace, nay altogether for peace) a man much versed in battle, and sing
it with him, It is a good and joyful (or a pleasant and joyful thing) for
brethren to dwell together in unity: For our own particular, let the men of our
famous Nation give me leave to speak to them, and put them in mind of their own
strength and honor, in intimating unto them the memorable words and
observations of Henry the fourth, the Champion of Christendom, Monsieur Roan,
the Champion and Marshal of France, in the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, walking in his Gallery with Roan, and being in
serious discourse of the unity of the Queen with her Subjects, of their
unanimity and strength, of the wealth and strong situation of the Island
(which he said was impregnable, and unaccessible, being walled with a Wall of
Brass) (he meant environed and compassed with Seas) Roan answered like a
prudent observer, Angle le terra grand animal. The Land of England is a strong
and mighty body, which can never die except it kill it self.

And surely they deserve more then one death, who willingly and desperately go
about to be their own murders, with Nero, to kill, and rip up the bowels of
their own Mother.

And to me it seems a mystery (indeed the mystery of iniquity is in it) that
many have, and will have order in their own houses, and it is the Item and
injunction they give to their servants, (when they hire them) this is the order
of my house, and thus and thus you must do and obey; and yet would have none
in the great House (the Church and Commonwealth) neither Magistrate nor
Minister. I will say no more to such, than the great Apostle has spoke before
me, If any man be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of
Christ, and that God is the God of order, not of confusion: And how can he
serve God that is the God of love and peace, without peace and love: His Name
is love, and his Law is love.

And therefore to conclude this Character of a Christian, and strongly (once
more) to move to unity and peace. Take three pathetical and emphatical motives
and persuasions from the Doctor of the Gentiles.

The first is, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech yor brethren, by the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ (by which you are named or called) that you all speak the
same things, and that there be no divisions amongst you, but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment. Love and
unity are the Cement and Glue of Christianity and Religion, the unity of the
spirit is best kept in the bond of peace.

The second is Phil. 2. 1, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, any
comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, any bowels of mercy, fulfill my
joy, and be ye like minded hrving the same love, being of one mind, and of one
accord, and let nothing be done in strife or contention (for that undoes all)
God came to Adam in the cool of the day, and to Elias, not in the thunder, or
fire, or storm, or tempest (but in the quiet sound) 1 Kings, 19. 11. And it is
worth your noting upon what persons, and at what time the holy Ghost came down,
Acts 2. 1, 2. He came down upon the Apostles whilst they were all in
supplication and prayer, and (of one mind) in an upper Chamber in Jerusalem.

The spirit of unity descends upon none, but upon such as have unity of spirit.
Beloved, if ever we find an enlargement of spirit, or feel the descent of
spiritual blessings in an ample and plentiful manner, we shall find it to be
when we are in unity and unanimity: And therefore if we will have a sensible
apprehension of the spirits communion and benediction, let us (in the name of
God) meet in one Assembly in the same mind of those primitive Christians ^to
which we pretend did, and be in the same posture and devotion they were, Acts
4. 31. Who being of one heart, and of one mind, the place moved where they met:
When we hold one of Paul, another of Apollo, another of Cephas, are we not
divided? and divided prayers are fruitless (when the River is divided into
many streams and currents, it cannot carry our Vessels) our hearts wanting love
and unity, and our Altar fire, the incense of our prayers cannot ascend.

3. Note that place well, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally my brethren farewell: be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace shall be with you; and if God be with us, and for us, we need not
care who can be against us: God is the God of love and peace, and the Godly are
peaceable, and loving. By those characters, men show their heavenly birth,
their birth from God, whose name is Love, and whose Law is Love.

3. In our first birth, Generatio unius est corruption alterius, the generation
and begetting of one, is the death and corruption of another: until the old
man be dead, the new man cannot quicken, As it was prophesied of Jacob and Esau
when they were in their mothers womb* that the elder should serve the younger:
So until the elder man be brought into subjection to the younger, there can be
no peace in the members, neither is this work wrought.

4. In our first, some are more easily conceived and brought forth into the
world, some with much more difficulty and pain, with greater sorrows and
anguish, with many throbs and throws, crying and roaring, and (being pained
with the woman in the twelth of the Revelations, ready to be delivered.) Thus
it is in our second birth, some are more easily converted and turned to God, as
the Jews at Peter's first Sermon; and Lydia and the Jailer at Paul's. Acts 16.
Some cost their spiritual Parents a great deal more pain and labor, as the
Galathians Paul, My little children, cries he, of whom I travel in childbed
again until Christ be framed in you, Gal. 4. 19. and the Prophet Jeremiah
considering and grieving at the obstinacy and rebellion of Gods people, cries
out, Ah my belly, my belly, how am I pained? which complaint signified nothing
else but the extreme sorrow and heartbreaking which the Prophet suffered, to
reduce and bring the disobedient Jews into the Fold of Christ, to regenerate
and convert them.

5. In our first birth there commonly goes an espousage and contract before the
marriage, to make the issue and act legitimate and lawful: So Christ, to make
himself a lawful seed, marries himself first unto the Church; Conglutinabo, or
desponsabo te mihi fide, I will marry thee, unto me in faith; faith is as it
were the marriage-ring (and that is the reason I think after the covenant and
contract, that the Ring was given in marriage.) Now being thus married unto
Christ, we are no more two, but one flesh, Genesis 2. 24. and never did any man
hate his own flesh, Ephesians. 5. 29.

6. In our first birth we grow and are framed in our mothers womb by degrees:
first the heart (for that is primum vivens) then the brain, then other arteries
and members, until we come to be a perfect and entire birth: Thus it is in our
second birth (as Nature in forming, so grace in reforming, begins at the heart)
that is first reformed, and renewed, and then all the parts of the body, and
faculties of the soul, will be amended and reformed: David therefore (though
polluted and defiled throughout, yet he prays for the sanctifying and purging
of no part but his heart. Create in me, etc. Purge my heart, and I am clean all
over. As therefore Jehu said, in his travel, to Jonadab (when he met him in the
way) est ubi cor rectum, is thy heart right as mine is? The same in effect God
speaks in truth, est vobis cor novum.

Is your heart good, is it renewed? Then come up into my Chariot, come ye
blessed children of my Father, etc. For the new heavens, nor the new name (the
name of Filiation and Sonship) are for none but new creatures.

7. Lastly, in our first birth we are born babes, and ^ot men. It were a
monstrous thing to see a newborn child at his full grouth the first day or
week: Thus it is in our second birth, we are born babes* and not men: Babes,
and need the sincere milk of the word; and then come to be stronger men by
degeees, and to have need of stronger meat: N^mo nascitur artifex, No man is
his Craftsmaster the first day. This I note, against the sudden grouth of many,
who boast of their soon acquired grace and goodness, and think they are at the
height of religion, before they know the foundation, or have learned the
Principles: There were steps and stairs to Solomon's Throne, and so there are
to Gods, to heaven: No man can step thither at one stride; we come to heaven
per gradum, non per saltum; by degrees, not by leaps. How comes it to pass
then that many think they are at the highest pitch of grace, when they have
scarce made one motion or step toward it.

Certainly many that are such Saints on a sudden, that think they are so high
above others, are carried up, or rather hurried by their own fancy and
imagination: For neither holiness nor heaven are got, but by gradual and
orderly walking; Gods Statutes being a way, continually leading to some
glorious end.

There is an orderly going up the stars in Jacobs Ladder, a leisurely going
forward by degrees, a daily profitting, and proceeding in grace and goodness,
as the young babe grows daily and hourly toward his full pitch and grouth,
see 2 Pet 2., 6, 7, 8.

Add to your faith virtue, to your virtue knowledge, to your knowledge
temperance, to your temperance patience, to your patience godliness, to your
godliness brotherly kindness, to your brotherly kindness love Sudden
growthes are ever suspicious: Remember Jonas's gourd; what came up in a night,
withered in a day: Come but a little persecution for righteousness lake, and
this forward seed is scorched, this hasty corn is blasted, they have no root,
as our Savior spe^ks, Mat. 13. or as Saint Paul, They are not rooted in
knowledge, nor well principled, and therefore can never come to perfection: As
Isaac therefore demanded of Jacob in another sense, How is it you found it so
quickly my son? Genesis 28. 20. So may I say of these forward ones, which like
young lapwings run into the world with the shell on their heads; how is it you
found grace so quickly, that you are so good, and heavenly so suddenly, that
you know more in a day, than your Teachers in all theirs. Heaven is a penny,
and it must be wrought for; he must endure the heat of the day, that will have
the wages at evening: It is a Pearl that must be dug for, he must sweat and
take pains that will find it; it is a Garland that must be run for, a Crown
that must be fought for: it must be got sudore, not sapore, by sweat, not by
sloth, superantibus dabitur: To them, and none but to them that overcome shall
this Crown of life be given: Be thou constant, or faithful unto death, and
etc. None but conquerors over sin and Satan, shall ever wear this Crown. And
this fight is not easy or short, we must resist unto blood: There is the Law
of sin in the members rebelling, etc.

Christianity (as I told you) is called the difficult work of faith, and a
working out our salvation with fear and trembling: It is no easy thing to
believe; but so hard, that when the Son of man comes he shall hardly find faith
upon earth.

From this that has been spoken, an useful Doctrine presents it self; Namely,
That there must be a grouth in grace; a proceeding and going forward in
holiness and righteousness: For children and babes grow in stature as they
do in years; so must Christians. It were a wonder, nay a miracle almost (for
any) to see a young child born to day, at the same growth and pitch seven years
hence: And very lamentable I am sure it is to see many aged men, and men well
stricken in years, going out of the world before they knew why they came in: to
die before they knew how to live to see elementarium sem^n, an old man in his
A. B. C. young, old men: Gray before they are good (as we say) a man well gone
in years, not at all improved in grace. The Prophet Esaiah speaks in his time
of children of an 100. years old, 65. 20. We may apply his Prophecy to our
times; And Seneca, that divine Heathen tells us, That it is a shame for a man,
an old man, who to show he has lived long in the world, has no other witness
to produce but his gray hairs. And Diogenes the Cynick* as bitterly as wittily,
told one that boasted of his age and eldership (and therefore scorned to be
reproved) that he had put off pueritiam, but not puerilitatem, he had put off
his childhood, but his childishness he had not put off. Beloved, though we
should be as new born babes (in desire to the sincere milk of the word) yet we
should not always be as babes new born, stand at a stay like a horse in a Mil,
which is all the day going about, and yet at night in the same place he was. If
we proceed not, nor make any progress in grace and goodness, we have no grace
nor goodness at all; like Scullers, or Oars, if we go not forward, we go
backward Examine we then the truth of our spiritual birth, by this of our
natural (I mean by this likeness and ^imilitude to our natural) Art thou a
stronger man in Christ now then formerly, this day then yesterday? are thy sins
more mortified and weakened, and thy graces more strengthened? is it between thy
old man and new, the flesh and spirit, as it was between the house of David and
Saul? Does David's house grow stronger and stronger, Saul's weaker and weaker?
Does the old man die daily, and the new grow and quicken? Try and sift thy
heart and the graces thereof by this rule, for minime sane est bonus, qui
melior esse non vult: good that man or woman cannot be, which endeavors not
every day to be better: Si dixeris sufficit periisti: if thou ever say thou art
good enough, thou art in a manner undone; for in the ways of virtue and
goodness not to go forward, is to go backward: Grace and goodness never
were in us, if they are not improved in us, as I said; He was never good at all
that desired not every day to be better. And therefore though we be never a day
good as we should be, yet let us be every day better then we were; every day
break one thread of that net in which we are ensnared, every day grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, the second of Peter, the 3. and
last: For howsoever we shall not find it profitable* nor it may be commendable,
in these evil days (wherein grace and goodness is ashamed of it self, and the
name) yet I am sure we shall find it comfortable: Indice nos sentire meliores,
every day to find our selves better and better. For faith and a good
conscience, a regenerate and holy life, had it no further or future reward, it
is it self praemium sui, its own reward, and gives such unspeakable peace and
quietness to the soul and mind, that none know it but they that have it. It
was the commendation of our blessed Savior, Luke 1. That as he grew in years,
he grew in favor with God and man; and it will be our exceeding comfort to
see, that our last days be our best days, and that our latter end be better
then our beginning. They that are planted in Gods house says David, are
flourishing and well liking, and will bring forth most fruit in their age. Yea
and even thenw hen their Almond Tree does flourish, their hearts will be (as
near as they can) as white in innocence, as their hairs are with age; and
indeed herein is our heavenly Father glorified, if we etc. Jo. 1^. 8. As the
little child, then grows in every member of the body, so the regenerate grows
in every affection, in every grace: for graces and goodness (like the babes
milk) are so sweet to the souls of them that taste it, that they do, they must
needs long for more.

As Then the woman of Samaria, when she heard Christ speak of a water of which
whosoever drank, should never thirst more, cries out, Lord give me evermore of
this water. And the Disciples hearing Christ speak of a bread of which
whosoever did eat, should never hunger more, desire, Lord give us evermore of
this bread. So whosoever does once taste how good and gracious the Lord is (as
David speaks) must needs pant after him as the heart, etc. and as a new born
babe desires the sincere milk of the word, that he may grow thereby: for no
growth, no grace.

So much of the similitudes and likenesses between our first and second birth.
Follows now the eminency and dignity of a Christian new born, and truly very
superlative, and great is the dignity and honor of a Christian born of God; as
the Ambassadors of Pyrrhus said of the quondam Senators of Rome, Quod vidi
Senatores, tot vidi reges: So many Senators as I saw, I saw so many King.

The same, and more, we may say of them that are born of God, Quot vidimus in
terris renatos, vedebimus in coelis regnantes: So many as we see on earth
converted, we shall see in heaven crowned. See a little into this dignity.

He that is born from above has God for his Father, and Jerusalem which is
from above, to wit, the Church for his Mother, Christ Jesus the son of Gods
love for his Brother; the Noble blood of Jesus Christ runs in the veins of
every true Christian: He is of the bloud-Royal. For as I told you before, they
are by this heavenly birth, made partakers of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
and so a noble generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, etc. the
noblest born of any in the world, are they that are born from above. It was the
religious and pious speech of Theodosius, an Emperor of Rome, Mallem esse
membrum Christi quam caput im^erii, I had rather be a member of Christ then
Head of an Empire. And Luther to that purpose, Mallem esse Christianum
rusticum, quam paganum Imperatorem: I had rather be a Christian clown, then a
Pagan King. Rejoice not (says Christ) in these and these things, that you have
preached in my name, and in my name have cast out devils* but in this rejoce,
that your names, etc.

So boast not so much that you are born of these and these houses, of that high
and noble blood, as that you are born from above. Look not so much to your
natural generation, as to your spiritual regeneration, Civis aequat omnes
impares nascimur, etc The dust equals all. Look therefore to that birth by
which we are made heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. The true honor (I
say again) is to be born again; by which birth we are allied to Christ, and
made of his alliance and lineage: For he that does the will of my Father (which
is in heaven, says Christ) the same is my sister and brother, and mother; and
when some came and told him that his mother and brother were without to speak
with him; he answers (as I told you) Mat. 12. and Luke 8. by pointing to his
Disciples, Mat. 12. 49, 50. He stretched forth his hands toward his Disciples,
and said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever does, etc. The same
Luke 8. My mother and my brethren are they that hear the word and do it, verses
21. By which places of Scripture we see plainly and evidently, that Christ's
respects are greater, and he is dearer and nearer to them that are united* to
him by faith, than by blood, by spiritual regeneration, than by natural
generation. And St. Austin from hence is bold to affirm, Felicior Maria
credendo in Christum quam concipi^ndo carnem Christi: Mary was more happy in
believing in her Son, than in bearing him, in believing in him in her mind,
than in bearing him in her womb. They are dearer and nearer to Christ, that are
allied to him by faith, than by the flesh: and this our Savior mildly
intimated to the woman, who looking too carnally and sensually upon his outward
and natural generation; and crying out, blessed the womb; and he corrects her
in these words, Nay more blessed are they that hear the word of God and do it.
It is not the conception of the body, but the conception of the mind, which
unites us to Christ; for howsoever by the body we are born at first, by the
mind we are born again: The womb, of which conception lies higher, namely in
the heart, where the seed of the word is sown to receiv the ingraffed word, and
to conceive the new man, and by faith to impregnate and bring him forth. This
is the work of regeneration, and this unites us to Christ, makes us bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh. The word of God (which is called the seed of our
new birth) goes in at our ears, from thence down to our hearts, and there (as I
said) it does i^pregnate and fructify, and bring forth the new Men. God begets
us of his will by the word of truth. I will conclude this Point with the Prayer
of St. Augustine before one of his Sermons, beseeching God that Quicquid
meditatum est cor meum: whatsoever my heart has profitably meditated upon this
divine Subject, may enter (from my mouth into your ears, from your ears into
your hearts, from your hearts spring forth in your lives and be fruitful; so
that receiving the ingrafted word with meekness, it may be able to save your
souls.

As you have in part seen the eminency and dignity of a Christian (of which you
shall hear more anon) so I pray you note three great and singular privileges
and prorogatives of one born of God; they are worth your noting and observation.

I. First, They that are born of God, sin not, 1. John. 3. 9. He that is born
of God, does not commit sin: Sin not (may some say) how can you make that good?
since the most righteous sin seven times a day; and there lives not a man upon
earth that sins not? If we say we have no sin, says St. John, We, I for one,
we are not only deceivers, but liars, 1 John 1. In many things we offend all
(says James, We, he puts himself in, James, called the Just) puts himself into
the number of sinners (We offend all) all of us in many things, and many of us
in all things.

Verebar omnia opera mea, says Job, I feared all my works, knowing that in the
best of them is weakness, in the worst, wickedness, error in all.

David cries out, Who knows how often he offends? (The highest form of
believers are not without the actings of sin, though the lowest forms are not
under the dominion of sin) And what were Noah's drunkenesses, Lots incest,
Abraham's dissimulation, David's Adultery, Solomon's Idolatry, Peter's Apostasy,
Thomas ^^s ^^credulity, were not these sins? Noah was a just man in his
generation, Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and friend of God; David was a
man after Gods own heart, nay the Father of Christ (according to the flesh)
Solomon, a type of Christ and Prince of Peace. Peter the prime Apostle, upon
whose faith Christ did build his Church. Thomas vouchsafed that never man was
to put his finger into the hole of our Saviors side, and to handle his wounds;
yet these tall Cedars were not only shaken, but overthrown: Et si non timuit
lupus illum gregem intrare: If the Wolf feared not to enter into the ^old of
which Christ was the Shepherd, how may we fear our standing, since these strong
ones were ever taken with faults, no small ones, and infirmities, not a few:
Let him that stands take heed. It Is true, peccatum inest in electis, non
praeest, It is in them, not over them; remanet non regnat, it remains in them,
it reigns not in them; Vivit, non vincit, it lives in them, but it conquers
them not, bellat, not debellat, it wars, but it wins not. They are not so
perfect, so thoroughly sanctified here in this life, that ye fail not, or fall
at all, nor sin at all, that peccatum non sit, or nisit, that sin should not
be; or be in them; but they are so upheld and preserved by the power of God
unto salvation; ut peccatum non praesit non obsit, that sin should not reign
in them, nor ruin them; because (as I said) God keeps the feet of his Saints,
and his seed, that is, his spirit and word remains in them. So that though they
fall, yet they fall not foully, or finally, though sin be in them, yet it
reigns not in their mortal bodies, that they should obey it in the lusts and
desires thereof; because they be born of God, and by faith lay hold upon the
Lamb of God, which has taken away, etc. and they have an Advocate with the
Father, etc. But we are to know that this Advocate, this Jesus who was so
called because he should save, though he has taken away the strength and sting
of sin, the guilt and condemning power thereof, yet he has not taken away the
being of sin: The site of sin, that Christ has not stirred* but the spite
and might of it, that he has quelled; the might that it should not regnare,
reign; the spite of it that it should not damnare, damn: Sin is in the best
and holiest, but it condemns not them that are in Christ, Romans 8. 11 They
commit no wickedness (says David) that walk in thy ways, that is willingly,
purposely, or resolvedly: They sin indeed out of weakness and frailty, and
error, out of negligence and carelessness, and rashness, but not out of
wickedness, intention, or presumption, out of infirmity, and inadvertency;
they sin, but not delightfully, or desperately, willingly, or constantly; they
sin not finally, or to death, with their mind they obey the Laws of God, though
with their flesh the Law of sin: or as one says upon the place, They live not
unto sin, but unto Christ who died for sin; or (which is the truest and the
most comfortable exposition of all) They sin not, because their sin is not
imputed nor laid to their charge. They are looked upon in the face of Gods
Anointed, and so God sees no iniquity in Jacob, etc. Thou art all fair my love,
says Christ, and there are no spots in thee: spots she has, as there be spots
in the Moon, she has sin in act, but her sins are not imputed: Thou are fair
says Christ, through the beauty that I have put into thee. In this sense they
that are born of God, sin not; they have sin in them, but not ruling or
reigning in them, Romans 6. 4* As Christ said to his Disciples when he found them
asleep, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: And the Spouse of her
self and her drowsinesse, I sleep, but my heart waketh: So the Saints of God,
the best have their nods and neves but the heart wakes when the eyes are
closed; even in their falls and weaknesses they have a desire to stand and to
be strong in the Lord: and as I said, With their mind, etc. Romans 7. last. They
sin, I sry again, but i^ is not their work or trade; It is not they, as St.
Paul says, but sin that remains in them. Secondly, It is their desire and
intention to do good; 3. They lie not, they continue not in sin, but their
course is after the Commandment, and a walking in and by the spirit: whereas
the wicked and unregenerate, they sin purposely with delight and pleasure, and
they continue in their sin, making it their work end trade; they make it
their Plough (as Job says) They plough iniquity (and therefore they must needs
reap misery,) They work it, and cannot sleep except they commit it; they love
it, and live by it; it is not only their love, but their life: and as it is
their trade and their work, so it is their sport and pastime, their mirth and
recreation, this fool (the sinner) makes a sport of sin: a fool indeed; for
have they any understanding that work wickedness (says David) whereas the
regenerate man grieves and mourns, and laments for it, his righteous soul is
vexed at it; and he never finds rest or quietness, until he feels in his
conscience the assurance of his pardon in* Christ. Augustine in his Book de
civitate Dei, sets forth the difference between the sins of the regenerate and
unregenerate, very learnedly and comfortably, by a comparison and instance in
Tarquin and Lucrete, where speaking of her ravishment by him, he says thus,
There were two bodies* and yet but one Adulterer, and concludes, peccatum
factum est de illa, non ab illa: sin was done with reluctance and striving, and
strong opposition upon her; it was not done willingly or delightfully by her:
The same may we say concerning the sins of the regenerate; sin is done with
reluctance, and striving, and opposing, and resisting upon the Godly, it is not
done willingly, or purposely, or readily, or pleasingly by them: Like men
spiritually oppressed by the potency and power of the enemy, by the strength
and power, and violence of Satan, The good they would do they cannot do it, but
the evil, etc. Romans which makes them heavily and dolefully to complain,
Miserable men that we are, who etc. and concludes the point, having showed the
difference between the sins of the godly and ungodly, in two sentences, which
deserve your observation: 1. Verus p^nitens semper est in timone and dolor; a
true penitent is always in fear and grief. In fear lest he sin; 2. In grief
for sinning. Try thy self by this; Art thou afraid when thou go forth into
the world (where men walk as amongk snares) lest thou sin, and be ensnared; and
if thou be overtaken with a fault, do thou grieve and lament thy folly and
weakness, and art never at rest until thou have made thy peace with thy God?
It is a certain sign of thy sonship, that thou art the child of God: thy sin
shall not be imputed. The second observable note of the Father there, is this,
Peccata non nocent quae non placent: T^^se sins do never hurt, which do not
please; they damn not any man that delight him not, because they be not
committed with the heart, mind, or will, for it is a true rule, Quod cor non
facit non fit: What the heart does not, is not done. So much of the heart and
mind, as is in any sin, so much it is a sin, where they are not, there is no
sin, formally or evangelically, at least condemnatory: These things I write
unto you, says St. John, that you sin not, which is an impossible thing in a
strict and legal sense, as I have said; but in an evangelical and Gospel sense,
it is possible: You must not sin as wicked men do, who do nothing else but sin.
(Their life being a continual and continued course of sinning) who make it
their work and trade, work it with both their hands, and all their heart,
earnestly and constantly, which they do not who walk in Gods ways, and who
are Gods children; but he that is born of God, does righteously, 1 John 2. 29.
And he that is born of God, hears Gods word, John 8. 47. He carries a
flexible and docible heart unto the word, which is the seed of our new birth,
and preserves a man from sin.

Carry we our selves therefore like holy persons, like men born from above: and
if David thought it a great honor to be son in-law to a King, Let Christians
think it a transcendent dignity and honor to have God the King of Kings for
their Father. shall such a man as I fly, says Neh^miah? So shall such a man as
a regenerate man sin wilfully, or presumptuously offend such a Father as God is
to him? whose eyes are over him to protect him, and his hands under him to
support him, who numbers his very hairs, and si sic curat superflua in quanta
securitate est anima: They that are Gods children cannot, will not sin: they
have the blessing of impotency and weakness in their regenerate part, that they
cannot sin strongly: though they have not that blessed liberty in the
regenerate part, that they cannot sin at all. Mephibosheth, though he was lame
in his feet, yet he was of the bloudroyal, son to a Prince, and grandson to a
King so may a Christian be the child of God though he be lame and weak in holy
duties and performances. He walks uprightly, that walks sincerely, and with a
good heart. And as I said before, God will not se^ (...) where he sees truth in
the inward ^ffections: It was the happiness of Adam in Paradise, P^tuit non
peccare: He could not have sinned: God gave that power and strength unto the
soul in the Creation, that he was able to have preserved himself from sinning:
It is our unhappiness now after his fall: Non possumus non peccare: We cannot
choose but sin, being born in iniquity and conceived in sin: sinners from the
womb.

It will be our happiness in heaven, Non possumus peccare: We cannot sin at
all. In a word Not to sin at all is the happiness and holiness of heaven: Not
to sin wilfully or presumptuously, is the holiness and happiness on earth.

This then consider and apply, for the conclusion of this comfortable
privilege, That to be preserved from sin (from the hurt and danger of sin) is
a great privilege and blessing: He shall give his Angels charge over thee to
uphold thee, etc. And this blessing and privilege God promised, Job 5. his
faithful servant, and obedient child, That he should not sin, which is the
greatest comfort the world can afford: It is (if considered) the next privilege
to God, and the highest privilege of man, of mortal man: And when in a full
sense man shall be taken from sin, he shall be received to joy, to fullness of
joy, and the more we empty of sin by repentance, the more we are filled with
joy, which is found and felt here by the testimony of our own consciences,
which is the very beginning of heaven and of happiness in this life: The more
holy, the more happy. Pray we then to God who is the only cleanser and purifyer
of the heart, our only sanctifier, and pardoner of sin: To make us so happy
here as to be holy (that is, not to have our sin imputed* For blessed is he
whose iniquity is forgiven, etc.) and so holy here, that hereafter we may be
eternally happy.

The second Privilege.

He that is born of God, does overcome the world. It is Saint John's Doctrine
too, 1 John 2. The world is too base for their high-calling in Christ Jesus:
They are born from above, and therefore should not mind things below*

The world God set and placed under man's feet to tread and trample upon, not to
set his heart upon: God made the world for man, and therefore he made man
himself, for a better thing then the world is, for himself and his Kingdom: and
therefore the Church of Christ, the mother of us all is described, Rev. 12. 1.
To be clothed with the sun, and to have the moon under her feet, and upon, etc.
the meaning is, she was clothed with Christ the Sun, that is, with Christ the
Sun of righteousness, according to that saying of St Paul, Put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ: Indeed he is indumentum and ornamentum, our garment and our
glory: She had the moon under her feet, that is, she had all earthly and
worldly things under her, which are compared to the moon for its waxing and
waning, changing, decreasing, and increasing, for her continual variations and
uncertainties, she treads them all under her feet, she makes light of them,
knowing that she is born from above, and there is her inheritance, she
therefore regards not, nor values earthly things in comparison of heavenly: for
he that is clothed with the sun, cares not for the light of the moon, which
has all her light from the sun: So he that has God, what need he care for the
world: he that dwells in the sun, what need he care for any light from the moon,
which is Gods creature, and made only for man's use and service: God has set
all things under his feet, as David says, Given him rule and authority over
all the creatures: He has given the earth to the sons of men: It was the
observation of the Poet, Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos, etc.
Whereas all other creatures were framed with dejected and cast-down
countenances, with faces hanging downwards: he made man with an erect, lofty,
and stately countenance, that he might by the consideration of his feature and
composition, be put in mind of the end of his creation: and as S. Paul says,
Quae sursum sunt quaerere, Seek those things which are above: So that these
Eagles (Christians) should not catch at flies, nor these Herculeses, the
offspring of God. Sit at a distaff, and do such drudgery and base services as
the world and flesh (like Omphale) shall prescribe unto them* The world I say
God placed under man's feet, that his head and heart should not be where his
feet troad and trampled.

Since then the Creatures were all made for Man's use and delight, for their
encouragement to, and in Gods service, making them all constantly and willingly
to serve Man, that Man might so serve his Maker with cheerfulness and
willingness; Shall Man make himself so base, so dishonor his high calling,
so degenerate, as to make himself a slave to his slave, a servant to his
servants, with cursed Cham whose curse it was to be a servant of servants:
Amare res suas plus quamse, to love the Creature more than the Creator, which
is blessed for ever?

No marvel then that God, who is a jealous God, and will not give his honor
to another, nor love, affect, or este^me any thing in the world more than him,
or above him, many times drops gall and bitterness into our creature comforts,
and imbitters our earthly blessings, when he sees us dote too much upon them,
and place that contentment and satisfaction in them, which we should place in
him; set them in his throne, and make Idols and images of them, falling down
to them, and worshipping them, as Israel did to the Calfe, as the covetous man
does to his Gold, calling it his god, and the wedge of gold his confidence, the
amorous and lustful man (the Sampson to his Mistress) the proud man to
himself and honor.

Beloved Christians, the next way to lose any thing is to love it too well; and
'Almighty God when he sees us set too deep an ^ff^ction and love upon any
creature, and prefer any earthly creature in our affections before him, he
either takes it quite away from us, or else drops some bitterness into it to
make it dis^^stfull.

Let God therefore have the prime and principal, the strength and constancy of
our affections, and let us love all other things with a subordinate and
inferior love, and all he gives us to enjoy, let us love for the givers sake
(as his gifts and blessings) and so we cannot err in our love. Let us love
other things with a subordinate affection to him, and with a willing
resignation of them to his Divine will and pleasure to his disposal: But the
only measure of loving God is to love him without measure; we cannot love God
too much.

Secondly* Remember thy self (O Man) whence thou art and the place whither thou
aimest and tendest. Thy face is toward Jerusalem let not Babylon have thy
heart. For will thou, which art borne for a better inheritance, which shall one
day feed of the food of Angels, which shall sit with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God, will thou so far disgrace and debase thy self,
thy Father, Friends, and Country, as to spend they self and lay out thy self
upon earthly and transitory things? Lay out thy labor for that which is not
bread, etc. Isa. 55. 2. No, let Babylon feed upon these dishes, let the
Prodigal eat these husks. The testimony of Christ has given thee no such
legacy, his Kingdom, as himself a testifies, is not in this world, and so
consequently ours, and therefore not our Crown. Thou art borne from above,
therefore set not thy affections on things below. They are below thy birth and
breeding, thy condition and calling. Set them not therefore above thee, make
not thy Servant thy Lord, (the World, and the things therein l^ke Fire and
Water, are good Servants, but bad Masters) let them not therefore rule over
thee.

But say what we can or will, men will, most men set their affections upon
these worldly things, which S. Paul (upon good grounds) disswades we will
fasten our minds upon these transitory substances, we will spend our shafts at
these flying fowls, which have wings like an Eagle, and are vanished as soon
as possessed; like little children we will hunt these shadows, and let real,
substantial, and enduring substances go. Persuade we what we can, (had we the
tongues of men and Angels) we could never persuade men from doting upon these
vain, transitory, deceitful, and uncertain riches. But we will build where
we cannot stay, and anchor where we cannot harbor, and feign would we set our
rest here in this restless place, this troublesome and unquiet world, (whose
whole composition is nothing but commotion and tumult) although Saint Paul tells
us, That we have no continuing City here, and the Prophet calls upon us to
arise and be gone in our affections, for here is not our rest. And
notwithstanding that urgent precept and counsel of Saint John, Love not the
world, nor the things of the world, If any man, etc. But his words are but
wind, and spoken only to the air, What not love the world, nor the things of
the world? You shall as soon get the heart out of men's bodies, as the love of
the world out of the heart. They are as impatient for riches, as Rachel was for
a better wealth and substance, Give me children or I die: So give me Riches or
I die, (and in deed many die in the too eager pursuit of them, (as she did in
her travail.) God gave her children, but one was her death: So God gave some
Riches, but it is for their ruin: As God gave Israel a King in his anger, and
took him away in his wrath. Thus though we call God Father, and profess our
selves his children, yet in our courses and ways we show our, selves Terr^
filios, Earth-bred and worldly minded men.

We savor and sm^l too much of the earth, our very breath is earthy, and our
language and talk of nothing but the world and worldly things. All our
labors, talk and discourse tend downwards, and earthwards. We bury our selves
almost alive, and dig and delve like moles and hogs, and ants in the earth; and
all for that which cannot profit us or fill us, (except it be with cares and
crosses, with troubles and vexations.) We make our way through thorns, to get
nothing but thorns, which pierce us through with many sorrows; and many times
like slippery and false friends, forsake us when we have most need of them;
like Physicians, fail us and forsake us at the point of death; or like
Absoloms Mule, which ran from him when he had most need of him. I dare say,
many men had been more happy if they had been less great and rich. The
greatness and riches of many have been their ruin. The rich travelers life
and money have often been a prey to the cruel and covetous thief.

Remember therefore thy original, O Man, it is from Heaven; Let thy thoughts
therefore be heavenly, thy speeches heavenly, thy conversation heavenly. In all
thy earthly businesses, carry a heavenly mind, and when thy hands be upon thy
work, let thy heart be above, where thy Father is, thy Redeemer is, where thy
Country* Friends, and inheritances all are: For as Noah's Dove (being out of the
Arc) could find no rest for the soale of her foot until she returned to the
Arc again; so the soul being come out of heaven from God, can find no rest
or content here in this troublesome world, in this sea of glass, until it
return to God that gave it.

The third Privilege.

Thirdly, If God be our Father, and we his children, then are we sure of
paternity and fatherhood; we are sure of a Father, though departed this life;
we are sure of friends, and patrons, though gone before us; and it may be their
affections gone before them; we have a provident, and able Father in heaven,
though we be here many of us forlorn and forsaken, and none cares for us;
which makes Christ give that Cordial to his Disciples, when he left them (as
sheep amongst Wolves) I go to my Father, and to your Father, etc. And though
you wander up and down on earth as pilgrims and strangers, as all your Fathers
were, yet in Heaven you shall have a Father and an inheritance which cannot be
taken from you.

Again, I go, says Christ, to prepare you a place, and in my Fathers house,
(who by my merits I have made yours) are many Mansions: mansions a manendo,
from continuing, for we have no continuing City here, but we look for one to
come: Houses I confess we have, as Foxes have their holes, and Birds their
nests, and Beasts their Dens, quickly to be turned out of them: But in Heaven
are eternal and everlasting habitations prepared for Gods children.

Here (in this strange Country) we have hunger, and want, and necessity
enough, but in our Fathers house we shall have plenty and abundance; we shall
do well therefore (with him) having such ill usage here to resolve: I will go
to my Father, A blessed thing it is we have a Father to go to, tam pater nemo,
tam pius nemo, This was David's comfort, when Father and Mother forsook him, God
took him up: when my Father, etc. Again, I was poor and needy, and the Lord
cared for me; And indeed this Father God forsakes none, until he be forsaken,
if he do then; for I am sure he raines his blessings unto the mouths of them
that are open to blaspheme him: Again, David tells us, that when his people
were hungry and thirsty, and their souls fainted in them, when being in this
case, they cried unto God in their trouble, he delivered them out of their
distress, he brought them forth into a wealthy place, set their feet in a
large room, and when they wanted ^read, gave them bread enough; He rained
Manna, and Quails, and feathered fowls as the dust of the earth: was best to
them in the worst times, and when they were bad enough to him (God knows)
murmured and complained, even when their mouths were filled and stuffed with
plenty.

And for his own particular he tells us, that after many sensible experiments
of Gods mercy and loving kindness, his mighty and constant protection, and
prov^dence (in his preservation) all the days of his life, when the hands of
his people were ready to stone him, and destroy him (they knew not why) then
David com^o^ted himself in his God, and was delivered. And in the 23. Psalm,
he thankfully acknowledges, that in his greatest extremity and need, and in the
most b^rren place (the Wilderness) God spread him a Table, and replenish^d i^,
and filled his Cup. And the children of Isra^l, Gods chos^n and children, with
whom he had made a covenant, when they were all at the red Sea (at the very
brink of destruction) and when there was but a st^p between them and death,
whom he had led as a Father his children by the hand, in the day time by a
pillar of a cloud, and in the night by a p^llar of fi^e, guiding him by the
special providence; sh^w^d himself a careful and powerful Father indeed,
who when the earth denied them bread) rained it upon them from Heaven as dust,
and feathered ^ouls* as I said, as the sand of the Sea etc. when they were not
only thus miraculously supplied in their hunger, but in their thirst brak^ and
clave the rocks, and gave them water out of the rocks as out of a River;
clothed them with garments which waxed not old, but endured without mending or
wearing 40 years, made great and mighty Kings to give them room, and the Sea
to give them way; I say again, when they were in this great straight, and
exigence beyond all hope and expectation of deliverance; before them the S^a
roaring, behind them Pharaoh (the cruel tyrant) rageing and following them
with a mind ben^ to destroy them: on each side the H^ls and Mountains
inaccessible: Then I say again, did they pray unto the Lord in their trouble,
and he delivered them, etc. and they did see the goodness of the Lord, in
their sudden and unex^pected deliverance: Necessitas humana, opportunitas
divina, man's necessity is Gods opportunity, and then does God commonly lay to
his hand, when all other hopes and expectations of any assistance from the arm
of flesh are past: Who would not honor such a Father, that honors them that
honor him? He that serves me, him will my Father honor, who would not honor
such a Father, and trust in such a God, who so undeservedly dignifies, and so
mightily defends and preserves, and so carefully and indulgently provides for
them?

If then he be our Father, let us give him our honor, and if our Master, our
fear; This is that he calls for by his Prophets, and presses it strongly and
powerfully. 1. By way of concession, A Son honors his Father, etc. 2. By way
of exprobration or redargation: If I be a Father where, etc. as if he had said,
I will be neither Father nor Master to them that will not give me honor or
fear: But now this very term of paternity and Fatherhood, and the thought of
these transcendent prerogatives, 1. That he preserves us from sin. 2. That he
purchases an immortal and glorious inheritance for us in Heaven. 3. That (as a
Father) he leads us through all the change and chances of this life, should the
more stir us up to constant filial and universal obedience; At all times to
serve him, who at all times and turns (every day hour and minute) serves us,
cheerfully to serve him in reverence and fear, and whose eye is on us and over
us, and whose promise is richly and liberally to remunerate our short service,
and imperfect obedience into our bosom. This was a spur to Moses
faithfulness, he had an eye to the recompense of reward, and it is a part of
the Catechism and Creed, which S. Paul taught the Hebrews, to believe that God
is a plentiful rewarder of them that serve him: Without this hope and
faithful assurance, a man can perform but a dull and faint obedience and
service to God, therefore Christ made it a motive, not only against distrust
and carfulness, but to ready, diligent, and faithful obedience: If an
earthly Father knows how to give, etc. Thus we see the honorable relation we
are invested with, in our regeneration we have God for our Father, we see our
honor and privileges, and let this serve for them, and for the first
doctrine, That the state of a Christian is a new geniture and birth.

Come we now to the second, that God himself is the Author and cause of this
Birth. 11. H^ begets us, It is the work^ of God, his proper and principal, and
peculiar work; We are his workmanship, says the Apostle, created to good
works, Gal. 2. 10.

We say in Philosophy, that Sol and homo generant hominem, That the Sun with
the help of Man, does generate and beget a Man: But Christ alone, (the glorious
Sun of righteousness) begets us without the help of any Lunary or sub-lunary
substances: we are not able of our selves, so much as to think a good thought
toward our regeneration, how much le^^e can we perform the work: we cannot
change a hair of our heads, much less the frame of our hearts, or convert our
selves. Convert us O Lord, cries Jeremiah, and we shall be converted, chang^
us, and we shall be changed: we cannot tell many times when we have grace, much
less can we affect it: No Man living can make a living Fly, much l^sse a
living Soul, an immortal essence: It is God alone that forms and frames us
after his own Image, which works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure. We are begotten, says John, not of Blood, nor of the will of Man,
nor of the Flesh but of the will of God: Not in any outward impure way of the
flesh, or in any carnal manner, as Nichodemus conceived, which is meant by
Blood and by the will of the Flesh but by the will of God: It is the work of
the Spirit in which we are merely passive, ask again, we work, being wrought
upon: It is God that makes us, and not we our selves. But why then says the
Apostle, by the grace of God that is begotten in you; 1 Cor. 4 15. It Is true,
Ministers of the Gospel may be called spiritual parents, and said
instrumentally to beget; as Paul speaks of our Sins, whom he begets in his
bonds, so that many times the Word is full, when the Preacher is not, and runs
when he cannot, Phil. 10. God uses sometimes to pull that dignity and honor
upon the isntrumental, which works with him, and for him. As he g^ves them
(sometimes) his own name, and calls them Gods, and accounts the neglect and
disesteeme done to them, as done to him. So he sometimes gives them his Sons
name, calls them Saviors, Obadiah the last, I will raise up a Savior says
God, in the last days; because as Paul says, By giving diligence to reading,
exhortation and doctrine, he saves himself, etc. 2 Timothy 2 last. And in the
Acts you read, that God daily added unto the Church (by the Ministry of the
word) such as should be saved, Act. 4 last. Thus (you see that God himself is
the Author and cause of our new Birth, it is the proper and peculiar work of
God to beget, voluntary nos genuit, of his will he beg^te us. And yet you may
please to observe, that as this act of regeneration is attributed to God the
Father, as it is in this place: So sometimes it is attributed to God the Son,
as Esai. 53. 10. Believers are called his seed, that he might see his seed, he
made his soul a sacrifice for sin: Sometimes to the spirit of God, as in Jo.
3 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and the wind blows it, so
is every one that is borne of the spirit* It is God the Fathers will, he begets
us of his will: Christ the Sons merit, Gal. 4 4. When the fullness, etc. to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of the
Son. God the Holy Ghosts efficacy and power, by the Spirit of Gods
sanctifying and over-shadowing the Soul, the new Man is quickened and made;
sometimes it is attributed to all the three persons in Trinity together* as in
that notable place, Tit. 3* and 7. By his mercy he saved us, by the renewing of
the Holy Ghost, which he abundantly shed in our hearts through Christ Jesus.

There we have the three persons together in two verses, and here all the cause
of our regeneration in one, a parallel whereunto you shall hardly find in the
whole New Testament.

But God (as I said) he is the principal author and cause; His Ministers but
isntrumental: yet as his Ministers, they are and may very well be called
Fathers. And this near relation should warm the hearts of Ministers with an
indulgent and paternall care and affection to bear great good will toward
them, and (as Moses is commanded) to carry them in his bosom: And as Aaron
when he went up to pray* or to sacrifice, he went up with the names of the
twelve Tribes written upon his breast* plate. So the Ministers of the New
Testament (the Pastors of Christ's Church) according to that Typ^, ought to put
up in all his devotion, the prayers and supplications, the wants of his people,
with his own: As Saint Paul calls his people his Epistle written in his heart;
so shall the people be in their Pastors. A^ S. Paul's ^^^^ts desire and prayer
to Israel wa^, etc. Indeed the New Testament is nothing else but Jesus Christ's
Letter, and Epistle writ from Heaven unto his Church; the mind of God expressed
to Man by Christ, who sit^ at the right hand of the Father, making those
Prayers and Petitions of ours which are imperfect in themselves, to be more
perfect by his mediation. And as these instruments of Regeneration are called
Fathers both in the Old Testament, ( My Father, my Father, etc. cries Elisha to
Elias, Jehoram to him, a wicked man, yet h^s had more grace than some have now,
to call the Prophet his Father. (Worse names now must be digested.)

So Saint Paul calls them Nurses, or Mothers too, 1 These. 2. 7. There he put^
upon himself the indulgence of a Mother, as afterward the affection of a
Father, v^r. 11. sh^wing that as he did not occasionally forget to use the
gravity of a Father in his exhortations and instructions, so other whiles he
puts upon him the meekness^, and softness, and tenderness^ of a Mother, or of
an affectionate Nurse; Mothers and Nurses having a sympathy and fellow-feeling
of their Childrens estates; the Mother knowing by natural instinct when the
child is sick, and diseased, when it is distempered and pained, and will
accordingly apply her self to give it ease, and not always give it its
humor, nor what it cries for: So Gods Ministers should be willing to free
their people from distemper and disorder, from the corruption and error of the
times, feeding them with wholesome and sound doctrine, with the sincere milk of
the Word, that they may grow thereby, not with fancies and humors, and their
own inventions and imaginations, (for with grief be it spoken, we are fallen
from the worshipping of Images, to the worshipping of Imaginations) which as it
breeds sicknesses in young children to let them ea^^ what they will, so it
breeds factions, and divisions, and ^xtreame distemperatures in States* when
they are suffered to b^ carried about with every wind of doctrine, and every
windy doctrine, (as the Israeli^es by Aarons permission and sufferance
worshipped the Cllfe of their own making.)

And it teaches the people again, since they stand in so n^^r a relation to
their Ministers, (as Children to Parents) to carry a filial and dutiful
affection toward their Pastors, as they carry a loving, careful, and
paternall heart and eye toward them and their good. The want of which
reciprocal loving kindness and affection, when Father and Children, M^nister
and People, Master and Servant, have had a greater desire to have their humors
fed, than their souls edified, have not only caused great r^nts and
div^sions, (which with R^^bens caused great gr^efe and sorrow of heart) but I
dare say has gr^^ved the blessed and holy Spirit of God, the sole worker of
our Regeneration, and by whom we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, the
Spirit of God witnessing to our spirits, that we are the sons of God, Romans 8.

Thirdly, this calls upon the great Fathers of the Commonwealth, who are called
Gods, (being next to him) and Patres Patriae the Fathers of this Country* nay
of the Commonwealth and State, to see with what meat their Children, their
Subjects are fed: for as I said, they are Pastors and Fathers too. Isaiah
calls them Nursing fathers, and Nursing mothers, and prophesies that in the
great Reformation, Kings should be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers.
That is, God would raise up the great Potentates and Princes of the ^arth, to
provide that the people should be fed with wholesome food, that living waters
should flow abundantly from the threshold of the Sanctuary* and that all people
should know the Lord, from the greatest to the least.

Hence it follows necessarily, that the Supreme Magistrate ^e seasoned with
Religion, and what a sweet perfume follows such Princes, see in the ^xamples
of Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon* Asa, Josiah, H^z^kiah, etc. and not
irreligious or Popishly affected, but soundly and firmly grounded, (for which
we may bless God) that he be a sincere worshipper, and server of God, the
fear of God being the beginning of wisdom, and a man being never truly
intelligent, until he be obedient. The best Plot is to save a soul. For if
that be true which they say in nature is true and certain, That what disease
or infection the Nurse has, the sucking child will partake of; and as the
Parent is affected, so for the most part is the Child's inclination and
disposition; Surely, and without all question it will fare so in this: If God
please to give us a Magistrate which is godly and religious, (and which he
promises to give to his people) Zealous and forward in the Duties of
Christianity, a lover and maintainer of the truth. Certainly, for the most
part, the people will be so affected: That way which the Master Be ^^es, all
the rest follow, and it is as true as old: Regis ad exemplum* Nothing is more
effectual, or persuasive with the vulgar, than the example and president of
their Governors; who, if they be godly and religious, are notable means to
draw men to Religion and Godliness. Confessor Papa, Confessor populus (how
true that is in the letter, let the world observe:) But surely where the Prince
or Governor is a true Protestant, all will be of his profession; Josuah is an
excellent example and pattern for a Ruler to walk by (and certainly his
holiness made him without compare, successful in this life, and happy in the
other) who in the midst of an Idolatrous, froward, humorous and pe^v^sh people,
resolves like a pious Ruler indeed, I and my house will serve the Lord: walk
others which way they will, I will walk this way, the way of Gods
Commandments. When Religion, or (as into Zacheus) Salvation is entered into the
great house, it cannot be long out of the little ones. Having spoke something
largely of our Father, let us spend a word or two about our Mother, because
there is great controversy about her in the world; some repudiating her, some
spitting in her face, some making her an Idol and Puppet, some a Slut, some
Nothing; I dare say most of the controversies of this late age, have been
about dressing the Bride, some would have her a painted and gaudy Puppet; a
finer Religion than the Protestants, as a vain Lady once said, some a homely
Slut, without Form and Beau^y, (as her Husband was accounted in the days of
his flesh) whereas, as God will be worshipped of all in his holy Temple, and
(as David says) in the beauty of holiness: so he would have comeliness and
order, decency and beauty in his house. The spouse of Christ being indeed
black, but comely; something obscured in her Beauty by the morphew of Faction,
and the Sun of Affliction, and the Tan of Persecution, but amiable and lovely
for all that: we are begotten (you see) and by whom, by God the Father, and by
the Word of Truth: but of whom are we begotten? I answer, As God is our Father,
so the Church is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4 16. Of all the Children of God,
so says Saint Paul* Jerusalem which is from above, is Free and Mother of us
all: What is Jerusalem but the Church? For as the City was the Seat of David,
Psalm. 12* 2. 5. so is the Church, the throne of Christ signified, and figured
by the Kingdom of David, Rev. 3. 7. Therefore of both these God proclaims,
here shall be my rest for ever, Psalm. 132. And rightly and justly, is the
Church called our Mother.

First, Because her Maker is her Husband, Esaias 54. she is the spouse of our
Father betroathed to him in Faith, Hos. 2. 19. I will marry thee unto me in
Faith and Righteousness, coupled together and made one, by the unity and bond
of the Spirit, Love being the matri^oniall bond: I am my Beloved, and my
Beloved is mine, (he feeds among the Lillies) amongst the Innocent and
Faithful, not amongst Briars and Thorns* Hemlock or Nettles.

And secondly, Because we are children borne of her: This teaches us to honor
our Mother, and like little children, hang upon her breasts for maintenance and
succor, Esa. 66. 14. Suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolation, milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory: It is
the Church, which by the blessing of God brings forth Children unto God (by the
Ministry of the word) as it is in my Text, he begets us by the word of truth.
And if we be her children, we must feed of that milks, the word, which still
holds forth to us: As new born^ babes, 2 Pet. 2. 2.

In a word, out of the Church there is no Salvation, who have not the Church
for their Mother, shall not have God for their Father, was the saying of old;
and good reason, for out of the Church, there are no means of Salvation: No
word to teach, no Sacrament to confirm, no Prayer to bless: But all these
(and all other means) are in the womb of the Church. It is here (and here
only) where the spirit of immortal seed begets grace, and holiness in the
heart, and so a man is newborn, 1 Pet. 1. 23. we are borne not of mortal,
etc.

Thirdly, Having God for our Father, and the Church for our Mother, we ought to
be children of peace: For our Father is the God of peace, and our Savior the
Prince of peace, and the Gospel a Gospel of peace, and our Calling a Calling
of peace* etc. ut dixi* It was the Harl^t would have the child divided, etc.
you know what Church it is that delights in blood, which make themselves drunk
with the blood of Saints, and with the Martyrs of Jesus.

They that are Gods children are of one mind, in one house, (and all believers
are so as those primitive were, Act. 4. the last.) They will not fall out
because they are Brethren, for we know it is a good and joyful thing, etc. But
my sheets swell to a bigger bulk than was intended, what is spoken therefore
shall suffice for the proof and demonstration of the two doctrines, out of the
first cause of our Regeneration.

First, That the state of a Christian is a new geniture and birth, a new
formation or Creation.

Secondly, That God himselfeis the Author and cause of this Birth: He begets
us, no farther have I gone, no farther dare I or will I go, until I see what
entertainment these poor and unpolished meditations shall receive in a froward
and carping age. But yet out of these two doctrines, I shall desire two things
more to be obsered, for use and application. 1. The Christians Dignity. 2. His
Duty, and then I shall commit you to God and the Word of his Grace, the Word of
Truth, which is able to build you farther, etc. Act. 19. 32.

First then for the Christians dignity, which is three fold, To be regenerate
and born again. 1. Dignity above men. 2. It is a dignity above the Angels. 3.
It is a dignity above the Creatures; I will begin with the last.


First, It is a Dignity above the Creatures, for all the Creatures which God
made have not his Image; but all that he does bege^ have: he made Man Lord, and
Master of all his Creatures; he made them for Man, but Man himself for
himself.

Secondly, It is a Dignity above all Men, the wicked have nothing to do with
this honor, (such honor have all Gods, etc.) none ^lse. They are the Lords
portion, his peculiar people, his first fruits. Israel is my first borne, Jer.
2. 2. The first fruits of my increase, Israel is h^linesse to the Lord. They
are his treasure, the people that he only looks at and after, upon whom he
sets his love, his eyes are always upon them for good. The eye of the Lord is
over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers, The World are his
goods, the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the round world, etc.
But they are his treasure: and as where a man's treasure is, there his heart
will be: so is Gods heart upon his treasure upon his secret ones, upon his
peculiar. He writes them upon the palm of his hand, he s^ales them upon his
heart, they are as dear and near unto him as the Apple of his Eye; A book of
remembrance is written for them that fear the Lord, Mal. 3. 16. God will
certainly remember the services of his children, and not forget the labor of
their love, nor the good they do, Heb. 6. 10. Saint Peter, as you you have
heard, gives the Jews an eminent and transcendent Title, having honored them
with these Denominations; a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy
Nation; he adds (what the Apostle here intimates) a peculiar people: populus
acquisitionis, a peculiar people.

And two reasons may be given of this appellation:

1. They are a peculiar people, because God has every way fashioned them for
himself.

2. Because (as I told you) they are a peculiar people, or the first fruits of
his creatures; set apart and consecrate for his service and worship. They are
his treasure, his only treasure* all he has, the righteous comprehend all
Gods gett^ngs: All other men are Gods creatures, but these are the first fru^ts
of his creatures; and as they are consecrate to him, so they often consecrate
and bless them: and (I am sure) if they be not bettered by their conversation,
they are blessed by their protection.

3. Which is a bold assertion, it is a dignity above the Angels, to be the sons
of God by regeneration, and to be redeemed by Christ. For,

1. The Angels fell, he lets them lie in their fall, he reserv^s and keeps them
in chains of darkness till the judgment. Man fell, and God presently sends
him, nay gives him (by word of mouth) a promise of a Redeemer, That the seed of
the woman, etc. So that God did more in our restoration, and redemption in our
regeneration, than he did for the Angels of Heaven.

2. To which of the Angels said he, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee? He (that is, Christ) took not the seed of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham. And again, He was made of the seed of David, Romans 1. 3. He in no sort
took the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. Christ (to fit himself for Man's salvation)
took upon him an humane body, (the nature of Man) and in this kind dignified
and honored Man's nature above the Angels. And this (I dare say) seems to be
a greater pre-eminence and dignity of the children of God above the Angels, in
regard there is a nearer conju^ct on between Christ and us, than between Christ
and the Angels, (I mean in nature and person, not in place.) In place indeed
the Angels are nearer unto God than Man, being in Heaven, and seeing the face
of God, his glorious face; but in nature the children of God are nearer than
they are; for you have it expressly said, That Christ was made of the seed of
David.

3. Add hereunto that he took upon him this seed in the womb of the blessed
Virgin in his Incarnation, so that by his Conception and Incarnation, he was
made one with us, and we with him. And why did he take our nature upon him, and
not ou^ nature only, but the contumelies of our nature, (so base and mean
that they are not to be named) why did he this, but to redeem us that were
lost, when our fall in Adam made us liable to eternal death, and left every
mothers child of us in the merit and guilt of condemnation? When he took upon
him to deliver Man, he did not abhor the Virgins womb.

Surely the Virgins womb was not so pu^e or clean a plac^, but the glorious
and great God might have abhorred and despised it, (but when he took upon him
to deliver Man, he did not.) Blessed be his Name therefore, who was borne that
we might not die, who was made the Son of Man, that we might be made the sons
of God. Ide^ Filius Dei factus ^st homo, ut homines faceret filios Dei.

Add hereunto, that the Angels of Heaven desire earnestly to look into this
mystery of our Redemption, and do attend it, 1 Pet. 1. 11. it does them good
at the heart to see their places filled and supplied by men, from which the
evil Angels by their Apostasy and pride fell.

Lastly, (to honor the Regenerate yet farther) the Angels are charged and
commanded to attend and wait upon them, He has given his Angels charge over
thee, etc. Psalm. 91. 11. They are not only Fellow Servants with the Angels (as
John the Divine calls them) but they are servants to the children of God, for
it is said, They are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to them that
are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. last.

Thus have you seen the dignity of the Regenerate, the superlative honor of
the children of God in some kind above the Angels. For

1. Christ took not the seed or nature of Angels, but the s^ed of Abraham and
David, (men subject to infirmities.)

2. He was conceived in the womb of a Virgin, and in the fullness of time made
of a woman, and made under the Law, etc. So that by his blessed Incarnation he
is made one with us, and we with him; he sits at the right hand of his Father
glorified and blessed in our nature: Vexit in coelum carn^m nostram, etc. He
took our flesh into Heaven with him, as the pledge and token of his love and
favor, and has sent down his Spirit unto us, as the pledge and seal of his
love. Now Gloria capitis est sp^^ corporis, The glory of the Head is the
Members hope; and if the Head be crowned, the whole Body is honored.

3. The glorious Angels, and them blessed Spirits in heaven, desire to look
into the mysteri^ of our Redemption, and indeed they themselves receive some
benefit by it, for they are thereby confirmed, that they cannot fall.

4. The Angels are commanded to be our Guardians and Protectours. Never had any
King or Prince such Protectours as the sons of God have: For the heavenly
Angels pitch their tent^ about them, Psalm. 34: 11. and they have charge given
them (of their Father which is in heaven) to bear them up in their hands, that
they dash not their feet against a stone. Oh how fearful should we be to
offend, having such eyes over us, and such hands under us, and such glorious
spirits about us! Who cannot but admire the great love and mercy of God, in the
words of Da^id, Lord what is man? Psalm. 8. Thou made him little lower (in
some degrees higher) than the Angels, and have crowned him with dignity and
honor: And in the word^ of John 3. 1. Beh^ld we love the Father, etc.

Well, considering our transcendent and high D^gnity, let us observe now some
duties yet; for surely that God* that so much honors us, we ought by some duty
to give him the honor due unto his name. Since he has done so much for us,
let us do something for him, namely, give him our homage and service; for
Christ will be a Jesus and Savior to none, but to such to whom he is a Lord
and King: Magnes amoris am^r: The lodestone of Love, is Love, and Durus est
qui amorem non rependet, He is hard-harted, who will not return Love for Love.

1. Then let us do^ nothing to make our heavenly Father ashamed of us: It is
not for Kings O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong
drink, Prove. 31. 2. It b^seems not Saints to be sinners, it becomes not us to
call God Father, as the Jews called Christ King, and spit in his face and
revile him: You know how Jacob chid and reproved his Sons, coming from the
murder of the S^ch^mites. You have made my name to stink* Genesis 34. the last.
Number est haec tunica fratris vestri, (says Jacob to his Sons) Is this your
brothers coat? Is it the Livery and guise of Brethren of the Sons of God to
be hard-harted, and cruelly minded, one toward another? When Caesar was
stabbed in the Senate house ^y Brutus and Cassius, he cries out unto Brutus,
what will thou my Son? as if he had said, The cruelty of others I regard not,
I care not for so much but for ( Brutus) my adopted Son, one whom I have made
my heir, for thee to lift up thy hands against me. O hold thy hand, thou
killest me without a blow. So for Indians and Pagans, Turks and Barbarians,
and such as were heard of Christ, for such to deny and blaspheme him, and so
shoot out their arrows, oaths are bitter words (as they say the Indians do
at the Sun because they feel no heat of it at noone day) it is not so much: But
for Christians, for professed Christians, such as call God Father, to abuse the
name of their Father in cursing and swearing, and fearful imprecations, and
lies, and perjuries, how unfit and uncongruous is it to them?

2. If we be the children of God, we will meekly bear our heavenly Fathers
corrections, we will as I said, kiss his rod and embrace his chastisements
upon our knees: for if we endure chastening, and deal with us as with Sons,
for what Son, etc. Heb. 12. 7. There is no Son whom the Father chastises
not. Even the beloved Son (the Son in whom he was pleased) was Vir dolorum
the man of sorrow, and one experienced in infirmity: Vnicum Deus habet filium
sine peccato, nullum sine flagello: God had one Son without sin, but never
had he Son without sorrow; even Christ the Son of Gods love, and of his
desires, Qui peccatum non novit, Qui peccatum non fecit, He that knew no sin,
nor did no sin, knew sorrow enough from his Cradle to his Cross, from his
Birth to his Grave, and he learnt (and taught) us obedience by those things he
suffered (although he was the Son.) Now shall the General suffer, nay bleed,
and shall we that fight (or at least pretend we fight) under his banner go
free? shall the head suffer, and the Members escape? No* pudeat membrum
deliciari sub capite spinis coronato, It is a shame for the members to spor^
and play under the head, which was crowned with Thorns. A delicate and fine
member, does not well agree with a crucified head. If then the world crown
Christ with Thorns, shall we think it will crown us with Flowers? If it
Crucified Christ, do we think it will glorify us? No, he that is exempted
from the number of them that are corrected, he is exempted from the number of
Sons; and they are not Sons but Bastards* whom our heavenly Father
chastises not: Heb. 13. Afflictions are sure evidences of our sactification.

3. If God be our Father, and we his children, let us live as always in Gods
presence, and so living fear to offend him: we must observe this toward our
natural and civil parents, that we dare not offend before their face: No man
will steal in the face of his judge, who has power and authority to punish
him, and (fools as we are) do^ dare commit sin in the presence of our
heavenly Father, commit any evil in his sight, who will certainly bring every
work into judgment, etc. we dare do that in the face of Heaven, which we dare
not do if a child s^es ^s. It was a holy practice of David, I set the Lord
always before my eyes, therefore I shall not fall: And it was Asephs holy and
pious resolution, How can I do, etc. Genesis 39. It is (without question) a
strong Bit and Bridle to restrain the most licentious and wicked man living
from sin, when he considers that he sees him that shall judge him, and that
he acts and does all under his Fathers eye: God is in this place, says Jacob,
and I was not aware of it, so God sees us, though we will not see it nor know
it: Went not my heart with thee whilst thou wentest after Naaman for a bribe,
says Elisha to Gehezi, 2 Kings 5. So go^ not Gods eyes with us, whilst we go
into such and such places, and about such and such sins.

Quaere locum, says Austin, seek out if you can, O sinne^ a place where God
sees you not, and sin and spare not. But if Gods eyes be in every place, his
7. eyes go throughout the world. As a well-drawn^ picture (which seems to eye
all in the room) God looks upon and beholds all the world. Cave quid agas Deus
t^ vidi^. Take we heed what we do for God ^ees us, and what need we care, if
no man sees us doing any evil, when he sees us that shall Judge us.

4. If God be our Father, and we his Children, let us often pray unto our
heavenly Father, fall upon our knees and ask him blessing: we expect this, and
teach it our children daily to crave our blessing; shall we expect, and desire
that from our children, which we will not do to God? look that our children
should do it daily to us, and we do it so seldom to him. God loves to see us
daily and constant suppliants, to behold us upon our knees; and if we know not
how to pray as we ought, his spirit will help our infirmities, etc. Romans 8. He
that bids us take words into our mouths, puts words into our mouths, and bids
us say no more than this in faith and full assurance (or to this effect) Take
away our iniquity, and receive us graciously.

But some may object, what needs words, since our heavenly Father knows
whereof we have need (as Christ says) before we ask, what need words to God,
who knows the secrets of all hearts, and tell us by his Prophets: Antequam
clametis ego exaudiam, Before you call or cry I will hear; and David did but
cry, he would confess his iniquity, and God forgave him his sin, Psalm. 32.
It is true, 1. God needs no words, but we do, to stir up our hearts and
affections to God: and 2. Because he would have us take shame and confusion to
our selves. 3. He has given us our tongues as Instrments to glorify him, and
therefore God will have our glory, our tongue (as David calls it and often
awakens it) used in our Petition and thanksgivings, our affections and desires
are the more inkindled and freed by words, and Gods graces are excited by
prayer. And though God knows the heart, yet he will leave the hid M^n of the
heart manifested to man, for his edification and example. 4. Besides God will
be glorified by the inward as well as by the outward Man, he made both, and
redeemed both, and therefore will be glorified with both. By Prayer we
entertain Familiarity with our heavenly Father, it is the language of the
Saints, yea his Childrens Dialect, such a prevailing language it is, that it
ever prevails, and is never sent empty away: what was vain gloriously spoken
by a Kings Favorite, may be truly spoken of the King of Kings, God can deny
prayer nothing: It is the hand that takes any thing out of Gods treasury, it is
the Key that opens Heaven, by it Elias opened and shut Heaven as his private
chest: There is much spoken of it, that I can add nothing but a desire to
learn to be so well exercised in it, (as some as have wrote very worthily of
it) only give me leave from a Father to say thus much of it: It is, Deo
sacrificium, ^ranti subsidium, Diab^lo flagellum, A sacrifice to God, who
styles himself a God that hears prayers, a succor to the Soul, and
therefore to thee (says David) shall all flesh come: It is a scourge to the
D^vill, for as one well, Gravis aequidem nobis est illius tentatio, sed long
illi gravior nostri ratio: His temptations are griaevous to us, but our prayers
are more grievous to him, what shall I say? If we pray unto God, he accounts it
a desert, and if we praise him, a reward; he that will not give thus much (or
rather thus little) to his heavenly Father, deserves nothing at all from him:
For Rivers of Gods goodness, let us give him some drops of our thankfulness,
and follow him with our prayers, who follows us with his blessings. This is
all he requires at our hands, who receive all from him.

Lastly, if God be our Father, and we his children, Let us as Christ counsels
us, Mat. 6. and God commands us Cast our care upon him, (for he cares for us)
and has given his word five times in his holy Book, That he will never fail
us nor forsake us. Which for the comfort and confidence of Gods children is so
often pressed and repeated, Whosoever trusts in God, (says David) wants
nothing that is good; and he speaks it by his own experience, I have been
young, etc. Read the 6. of Matthew, and you shall see there, how our Savior
chides and reproves the diffidence and distrust of his children, by sending
them to the fowls of the air the grass in the field, the sparrowes upon the
house top, to the ravens and lillies etc. A sparrow, nay a hair of our heads
falls not to the ground without Gods providence. Et si sic curat super^lua, in
quanta securitate est anima^ If God care thus much for our superfluous things,
in what great security and safety are our souls! And if he feeds the young
Ravens that call upon him, will he not much more feed you* O ye of little
faith? Certainly he that provides meat for the fowls of the air, will cause
the fowls of the air to provide meat for Man, before he shall starve or want.
And he that clothes the l^llies of the field with a far more gloriou^ mantle
than ever covered the corpse of Solomon; shall he not much sooner cloathe you?
etc. We profess that we rest upon God and trust in him for remission of sins,
for the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting: Certainly (for
conclusion) I shall never believe that those persons do or can trust in God
for these spiritual blessings, who will not trust him for a piece of bread, or
lock of wool. Cast therefore your care upon God, who has begot you by his
Word, and feed upon that Word, and let that Word feed you. Man lives not by
bread alone etc. Vita vera est vita fidei, The true life is the life of faith,
and the Just shall live by faith. Trust in the Lord, and be doing of good, walk
diligently and carefully in your callings, and you shall be fed. David spoke it
by experience, I was poor and needy, etc. Trust I say in him, commit thy self
to him, and he will bring it to pass.

Surely if men that are evil, know how to give good gifts unto their children,
(and a bad man may be a good father) shall not the God of all comfort and
consolation, the Father of Spirits, provide for us? Yes, God has given his
Word, (and good is the Word of the Lord, or the Lord will be as good as his
word) (in which word let us rest and repose) I will never fail nor forsake
thee.

Thus if we bear filial and dutiful respects to our heavenly Father, who
has begotten us to an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and which fades not
away, 1. By being obedient to him, 2. By doing nothing to make him ashamed of
us, 3. By meekly bearing his chastisements, 4. By living in his presence, and
so living in fear to offend him, 5. By daily praying unto God, for by daily
praying we shall learn to love and to fear him: Lastly, by relying and
depending upon him for all things necessary both for body and soul: when we
shall go hence to be no more seen, we shall go to our Father, receive and
obtain the inheritance of sons, and be welcomed with that blessed Venite of
Christ our Judge and elder Brother, Come ye blessed children of my Father,
inherit, etc. Mat. 25.

To which Kingdom, he for his Name sake bring us, which so dearly bought us,
and that Kingdom for us, Jesus Christ the righteous. To whom with the Father
and the blessed Spirit, be all honor, praise, power, might, majesty and
domonion, now and for evermore. AMEN, AMEN.
Soli Deo gloria.

