THE MERCHANTS and MARINERS Preservation and Thanksgiving. OR, THANKFVLNESSE
RETVRNED, for Mercies received. Set forth in A SERMON OF Thanksgiving, Preached
at S. Andrews Undershaft, Sept. 6. 1649. To the R. Worshipful, The Comittee
of Merchants, trading for the Eastern India, upon a late Return of seven of
their Ships together. By EDWARD TERRY, Minister of the Word, (who was sometime
in their service, there) now Rector of the Church at Great-Greenford, in the
County of Middlesex.

In winged ships who passage make,
And through vast Seas their journeyes take;
See, (while their ships on billows keep)
Gods works, and wonders in the deep.
The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the
mighty waves of the Sea. Psalm. 93.4. Qui nescit orare, discat navigare. October.
4. 1649. Imprimatur. John Downame.

London, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. 1649.

To the Right VVorshippefull, WILLIAM COKAYNE Esquire, Governor of the
Company of Merchants of London, trading into the Eastern India WILLIAM
METHVVOLD Esquire, Deputy Governor, JOHN MASSINGBERD Esquire, Treasurer, and
to all the re^^ of the Commi^tee for the some Company.
Right Worshipful:
YOU were pleased of la^e, when I expected it not, to put me unto that most
willing t^ske, of Preaching this following Sermon; and now besides your
expectation, to testify my respects to you, for your Nobleness when I had
done my Work, do I offer it (with the addition of some few particulars then
omitted, for fear of being over tedious) to your eyes, now it has passed your
ears, that so it may sink further, and not rest, neither return void, but
prosper in the thing for which it was intended.

I know that there are a number of things Printed already, more then needs,
poor innocent Paper daily receiving such blurres and stains from the Press,
that make it fitter for the fire then for any thing else But arguments of this
kind shall never be but useful, though the iniquity of times should arm
thousands with Pen-knives, as J^hoiakim was, when he cut, and so canceled, and
then burnt the Roll of Jeremiah the Prophet, because it told him the truth,
which never was, nor ever will be, for every man's turn.

This I presume may be for yours, wherein through your many streights, perils,
extremities, you may clearly read, your escapes, preservations, and
deliverances; what you have received from, and what you must return to God for
his manifold multiplied, renewed mercies, which are to be seen every where,
but most of all in the Mount.

I do not go about to counsel you as a Merchant, as a Divine, I will, to
keep God always in your eye, ever in your sight, that whatsoever your
Adventures are, whithersoever you send or go, your way may be prosperous, for
they that reckon without God, must reckon again; and they travel too far,
that leave God behind them; adventuring themselves out of his protection.

One of the Ancients tells us, that there are four sorts of men, who seem to
take four several ways, that in conclusion meet, and bring them all to
happiness.

Some steal Heaven (as it were) and they are such, as can give an Alms
without a Trumpet, and can pray without a Witness, who had rather be good,
then seem so; and these performing unto God much service in secret, are
afterward openly rewarded.

There be others again, which are compelled (as it were) to take Heaven, and
they are such as are wearied with, and weaned from the World by afflictions,
and having the happiness to be taught, as well as chastened, they turn unto
him that smites them, they seek the Lord, and by seeking find him enjoy him.

Some will have Heaven (as it were) whether God will or no, they will have it
by force. These carry their Estates, Names, Liberties, Lives, in their hands,
and will part with them all, rather then with that. The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it: Ibi rapina non est crimen, crimen
est non rapere; it is not a fault to be violent in the pursuit of Heaven, of
salvation; it is a fault, I and a great one too, not to be so.

Lastly, there are some that buy it (as it were) and they are such wise
Merchants as the Gospel mentions, that will have that Pearl of great price,
whatsoever it cost them. That hidden Treasu^e, though they pay never so much
for the F^eld where it is laid up. And this is a justifiable covetousness,
which I dare commend unto you, to covet spiritual things, to covet earnestly
the best things: To follow peace and holiness, as having them always in
chase: To labor after godliness, which brings contentment and gain, great
gain, the greatest gain. It Is excellent counsel that Solomon gives: Buy the
truth, but sell it not, be at any charge for it, but do not part with it for a
World, Non Priamus tanti -- because there is nothing in the World that can be
put in the Balance, with it, against it: And when you have tried all
Commodities, ye shall find Heaven the best bargain, and worth the having
upon any terms.

It Is well observed of Jacob that he got one blessing from his Brother by
purch^se; a second from his Father by policy; a third and the chiefest of all
from God by contention: If by purchase, or policy, or strife, we can get this
Blessing, the Blessing, we are happy I shall add nothing further, but my
heartiest wishes for your present and eternal welfare, which shall be some of
the Petitions daily sent up, from him who is, most Worthy Sirs:

Yours in all Civil and Christian respects, most ready to do you Service,
EDWARD TERRY.

Dum in vita, sumus in via.
THis life's our way, in which where ere we be,
We miss our Path, if that felicity
Be not our utmost aim; toward which we meet
With Crosse-wayes, rubs, and streights that cause our feet
To faint, or else to stumble; yet must we on,
What ere we meet, until our journey's done.
We seek a Country, cannot find it here,
Here, in this Pilgrimage, in the whole world, where
The streightest, evenest paths traced by the best,
Are ways of Labor, trouble, not of rest.
Our God, and Country too, are both above,
We keep our way, while that we thither moove;
Lose it, when we do not. Let Us on, and know
We have a further journey still to go.
For though we could with weary Paces get,
The Worlds great round our tyresome progress yet
Were not at end; we must not therefore lie
Still, and loyter, till God say rest, that is dye.
In Europe, Asia, Afric, have I gone,
One Journey more, and then I am at home.
EDWARD TERRY.

THE PREFACE.
Right Worshipful:
YOU that are the Representatives, and into whose hands and trust, the managing
of that great business of Trade is put, by that most Worthy Company of
Merchants, trading for the Eastern India; you are here met this day to offer
up a voluntary, and a willing sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving unto
Almighty God, for a great, and an unexpected mercy, in safely returning, and
that of late, seven of your Ships together, from that long, and tedious, and
hazardous Voyage. A greater return at once, for number of Ships, then ever you
had, since you looked that way, since you knew that Trade. Now, as I cannot but
presume you have already, more then once, sent up your private and particular
acknowledgements to God for this great mercy: So you do well, very well, now
in Public to give him thanks for it, in the great Congregation.
Thankefullnesse to Almighty God being a debt, which as it is ever owing, so it
must be always paying, as it is continually due. And truly this is a time of
good tidings for you, and you should do very ill if you held your peace; but
seeing you do not so, and you have been pleased to make me your mouth to God,
as (by his most gracious assistance) I must be his mouth to you this day, in
the performance of this public duty: I beseech you (that we may presently set
upon this work) to turn and to fix your eyes upon that portion of Scripture,
unto which God has directed me to speak on, upon this particular occasion;
which will first remember you of the cause of your present joy and gladness,
and then tell you that you ought, and therefore must be very thankful for it:
the Argument for both these, lies written in

PSALM 107. V. 30.31. Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he brings
them to their desired Haven, [ or to the Haven where they would be.] Oh that
men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to
the children of men: [ Or as it is more properly to be read from the Original:
[Let men praise the Lord for his goodness, etc.


IN this Psalm there is mention made of four kinds, or sorts of men, who are
marvelously engaged in that duty of thankefullnesse unto Almighty God, for
deliverances from perils.

The first of these are such as have escaped a dearth, in the 4.5.6.7.8.9.
verses of this Psalm. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them, verse
5. And this Famine, this want of food is a most heavy want; Does the wild Ass
bray when she has grass? (says Job) Or the Ox low when he has fodder? Job
6.5 But if ye take grass from the one, and fodder from the other, ye shall
hear them roar; this want of food tameing man and beasts. It is the easiest
thing in the world for a man to pray for daily bread, while he sees it in his
Cupbord, but when our own provision fails, when our Oil and Meals are both
quite spent; Oh then it goes hard. This want of food being the keenest, the
sharpest of all temporal judgments, because bread must be had, it is the
staff of life; the Prop, the Pillar, that next under the Giver thereof, keeps
up these houses of clay: The Pestilence spares some; and some may run away, and
make their escape from the sword; but there is no defense against Famine:
Poverty may be borne, and pain endured, but the want of bread is intolerable.
Many and great afflictions may be digested with Patience, if they be applied by
wisdom, but who can stand against hunger? And this was the sad condit^on of
the first sort of distressed ones mentioned in this Psalm, who when they were
ready to faint, to fail, to swoune, like the people of Jerusalem, Lam. 2.1^.
to fall, to dye in the streets for want of food, they cry unto the Lord in
their distress, verse 9. and are heard, relieved, filled, satisfied.

The second of those mentioned in this place are Prisoners, or Captives
enlarged; and their story is laid down from the beginning of the 10. to the
17. ver. These Prisoners or Captives they sit in darkness, v. 10. They are
lodged in dungeons, clothed or clogged with iron,; are in very great extremity,
enduring most miserable and hard bondage; and being in this sad condition, when
men in general stand a loofe, a far off from their help, when enemies will not
when friends cannot relieve them, they look further, they look higher, They
cry unto the Lord in their troubles, and he saves them in their distresses, v
13.

The third sort of those which are mentioned in this Psalm, are such as are
recovered out of some dangerous disease, they are sick men that languish, that
pine away upon the bed of weakness, from the beginning of the 17, to the 23
v. and these sick men here spoken of, are stomacklesse, their soul abhors all
manner of meat, v. 18. they did nausceat, loath it, because they had no
appetite to it. The first we mentioned could not eat because they had no
food, these because they had no stomach; let me tell you by the way, these are
great mercies both; meat for our stomachs, and stomachs for our meat, which
these poor sick souls wanted, their stomachs gone, their spirits gone, for
they drew near to the gates of death, v. 18. and in this extremity, when they
were almost quite spent, visited with some sad disease, out of which few
escape; they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them out of
their distresses, v. 9.

The last mentioned in this Psalm are Seamen, delivered out of some fearful
and hideous tempest; and their story is laid down from the beginning of the
23, to the 32. v. They that go down into the Sea in ships, etc. as Merchants,
Mariners, others whose business is in the Seas, in the mighty Waters; whose
travels are on the watery Maine, these see the works of the Lord, opera and
mirabilia ejus in profundo, his wonders in the deep, verse 24.

The Lord says the wise man, Prove. 30.4. holds the winds in his fists, which
when he is pleased to let out, the winds they raise the waves, the waves they
raise the Ships, and these winds and waves by their impetuous opposition, many
times boil up the unruly waters to such an height, put the Mariners into such
extremities, that they know not what to do: They mount up unto the Heavens,
says the Text. v. 6. it is an Hyperbolicall speech, that is, they are carried
up very high, then they go down again to the depths; that is, they fall very
low: Their soul melts because of trouble, they reele to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end, v. 27. (There is no such lively
comment on this place, as the seeing or enduring of an hideous tempest.) They
are at their wits end, says the Text: all their cunning in Navigation, yea
their wit and judgment fails them, they being in such sort astonished, that
their art and knowledge stands them in no stead, it is gone from them. They
reele to and fro like a drunken man, their feet, and hands, and heads
forgetting to do their offices, they reele to and fro, without any government
or stay of themselves. In this their straight and extremity, aggravated and
increased by their own fears, when they look every minute to be buried in
those rolling graves, under those huge heaps, those mountains of water, when
all hope of deliverance fails, when it is with them as it was sometimes with
Israel brought to the Red Sea, Exodus 14. when they had the Sea before them, and
the sword behind them, environed, or surrounded (as it were) with death; when
their case seemed to be such, as one of the Ancients observes of Jonah, laid
up, or buried in the Whales belly, Jonah 1.17. as if salvation it self could
not deliver him; They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them
out of their distresses, v. 21. The Lord now appears in the Mount, in those
Mountains of Water, and will let these poor distressed ones know to their
great comfort, that all things are so far from being impossible to him, that
nothing is hard. He who before let forth the winds, calls them in again; he
who before raised up the waves, commands them to be still, for both winds and
waves obey him, Mar. 4 the last verse: so that when these poor men in
distress seemed to be past all hope, all probability of help, then does God
appear for their succor, for their deliverance: He makes the storm a calm,
so that the waves thereof are still, v. 29.

Then are they glad, because they be quiet, so he brings them to their
desired Haven. [or to the Haven where they would be.]

Let men praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to
the children of men.

And these last words are delivered, repeated, four several times in this
Psalm, set up as a Standard at the end, the close of all the forenamed great
deliverances, to stir up all those that partake of these several mercies, unto
particular thankefullnesse.

Celebrant apud Jehovam benignitatem ejus, and opera ejus mirabilia apud filios
hominum. Let them praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. Let them do it
secretly, openly, privately, and before the Congregation. Celebrent apud
Iehovam. Let them acknowledge this mercy privately unto the Lord. Et apud
filios hominum. Publicly before the Congregation, before the sons of men:
Let them take all opportunities, at all times, in all places, to confess the
goodness of the Lord, to extol and magnify his great and glorious Name for
all his benefits, to give him the honor and praise that is due to him for all
his mercies. And this I must tell you before hand is the general use to be made
of this Text, and the principal end of this days solemn meeting. Then are
they glad because they be quiet, etc. from which words we may observe:

First, a preservation or deliverance and this is first employed, and then
expressed in the Text; employed in the beginning of the former verse, under the
word quiet, which presupposes some foregoing trouble, then expressed in the
latter end of the verse, in enjoying a desired Haven after a fearful storm.

Secondly, we have the Parties that partake of this preservation or
deliverance, and they, we told you before are Merchants, Mariners, Seamen,
they are glad he brings them to their desired Haven.

Thirdly, we have here the Author of this preservation or deliverance, the
Lord, He brings them, etc.

And lastly, we have the result of all these particulars.

1. In joy and gladness, that comes to men by it.

2. In praise and thankefullnesse, which must be returned to God for it. And
now we will wrap up all these foregoing particulars within the compass of these
two following plain and unforced observations.

1. To be delivered from perils, or any streights whatsoever, to enjoy a quiet
harbor after dangerous storms, and fears of shipwreck, are mercies that
cannot chose but fill the heart with joy and gladness. Then are they glad, etc.

2. Almighty God, who alone can preserve and deliver in streights, in
extremities, must have the honor and praise of all preservations, of all
deliverances: Let them praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. These are the
particulars upon which through Gods most gracious assistance, I shall enlarge
my self: first of the first:

To be delivered from perils or any streights whatsoever, to enjoy a quiet
harbor after dangerous storms, and fears of shipwreck, cannot choose but fill
the heart with joy and gladness.

Joy or gladness is a sweet motion of the soul arising from some present or
hoped for good; from some good in hand, or some good in hope, from some good in
expectation, or some good in possession: For as hope deferred makes the heart
sick, Prove. 13 12. So hope accomplished makes it glad.

Food, ye know, is not so welcome to any, as to the hungry and empty; not so
welcome to any, as to those, whose bellies sound like pipes for want of bread:
For as the full soul loatheth the honey Comb, Prove. 27.7. so to the hungry
soul every bitter thing is sweet; a good stomach making the meanest flesh,
the coursest bread dainty to the hungry, and when in this case the hunger is
satisfied, how are the spirits refreshed? And how welcome a good
entertainment is? how pleasant a soft and a sweet lodging after a tedious and
tiresome journey, every one knows?

A long continuance in the enjoyment of mercies detracts very much from the
true valuation of them, and therefore our God only wise, as the Apostle styles
him, Romans 16.27. whose good providence orders and disposes of every thing
according to his infinite wisdom and will, has joined bitter and sweet,
mourning and joy; trouble and peace together, that after we have had a sense
of both, our miseries might make us to taste our happiness the better.

For certainly it is a truth that Bona carendo, good things are never so
truly, and so fully valued, as by their want: I might instance in abundant
particulars, but some few shall serve. As,

In the time of a bloody, oppressing, undoing War, when a free borne people
are enforced to live under the power of brutish, absurd, imperious,
unreasonable men, as the Apostle phraseth them, 2 These. 3.2. (...). Then they
can consider what an happiness there was in the enjoyment of peace, and
liberty, when they sat quietly without disturbance, dwelt safely, and neither
felt, nor feared evil, under their own Vine, under their own Fig Tree, as
Judah and Israel did all the happy days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25. And in this
case, when God is pleased to turn the Captivity of a people, to rebuke the
multitude of the speare-men, and to scatter them that delight in War, as the
Psalmist prays, Psalm 68.30. how comfortable is it for all those that have
lived under the power of such, as carry Laws, Liberties, Religion, all upon
their swords points, to be freed from that Bondage?

When a man lies roaring under the extremity of the Toothach, or the Gout, or
Stone, or Strangury, then he can consider what the enjoyment of health and ease
was, what the freedom and exemption from those most sharp tortures and
torments is. The consideration of which sometimes made a Mighty, a Potent, and
a rich King, to envy the happiness of a poor unregarded Shepherd, because he
the poor man enjoyed his health and ease, but the King did not. Non vivere,
sed valere vita, it is health that sweetens, and makes life, life; without it,
life is a burden, rather then a benefit; and therefore without all doubt, if
Death and Sickness could be bribed, they would be too rich. But in this case,
when after tortures, and weakness of body health and ease comes, what joy and
gladness come with them?

It Is well observed of Naaman, 2 Kings 5.1. that he was a Captain of the Host
of the King of Syria, a great man with his Master the King, and an honorable
man, that he was a mighty man in valor, but he was a leper: That stain of
Leprosy did so sauce the honor, and valor, and power of this man, that the
poorest man in Syria would have been loath to have had all his honor, and all
his power, to have had his skin too boot: in whose example we may clearly
see, that there is no greatness that can exempt a man from the molt wearisome
conditions. While Naaman was a Leaper, he must needs contemplate the joy and
happiness of those which were not so: And therefore what joy and gladness
must needs he himself partake of, when his flesh came again to him like the
flesh of a little Child, and he was cleansed from his leprosy, 2 Kings 5.14.

When men are bound in setters of iron, and holden in the cords of affliction,
says Elihu, Job 36.8. Then they will come to know, and remember, and consider
themselves, As it is well observed of Manasses, that he never knew himself till
he was bound in chains, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. But when their chain it loosed, and
their fetters taken off, their minds must needs be changed from sadness to
cheerfulness, with their condition. Such instances as these might be infinite.

But to come up particularly to you, who are Merchants and Mariners, your
dangers and deliverances are laid down at large in this Psalm, and
consequently your fears and joys. You, I say, who are Merchants, and by being
so, hold a correspondency by Traffic, with all places that are famed for
Trade the world over: You by your Adventures can bring India, and Turkey, and
Egypt, nay Europe, Asia, Africa, America, I mean all parts and places the
World over, that know Commerce, in their rich and useful Commodities home unto
us. Certainly, as your calling is honorable, so it is very profitable and
useful to all Kingdoms and Commonwealths; a calling very lawful, while
lawfully used.

The state of the World cannot stand without buying and selling, Traffic and
Transportation; Non omnis fort omnia, tellus. No Country in the World yields
in sufficiency all kinds of Commodities, and therefore there must be a path
from one Kingdom to another, as there was from Egypt to Assyria, and from
Assyria to Egypt back again, to make a mutual supply of their several
wants. Mesech the King of Moab was anciently famous for Sheep, and
consequently for Wool. 1 K. 3.4. And Hyram King of Tire had abundance of
Timber and workmen, 1 K. 5. Ophir was famous for Gold; Chittim for Ivory;
Basham for Oaks; Lebanon for Cedars; Saba for Frankincense, etc. They
anciently called the Island of Sicily the Barn of Rome, and Egypt by reason
of the fatness of the River Nilus, the Granary of the World. They write
proudly of Italy, and I wonder not at it, for there is the chair of pride,
filled by the Pope, plena ipso, and the Throne of Satan. They write of Italy
that it affords the best Corn, and Wine and Oil in the world, and that it is
so planted, that it looks throughout like a Garden or Orchard: We should not
do well to envy either the plenty or pleasantness of that Land, when we
consider the wickedness of them that dwell therein; for there is certainly a
worm in their pleasant Gourd, that will, when they think not of it, mar all
in an instant.

For us that are Inhabitants of this Island, we may most truly, and
thankefully acknowledge in the words of the Psalmist, that our lot is fallen
unto us in a fair Land. I am sure that we inhabit a Kingdom that is too good
for us; for us, that overpasse the deeds of the wicked, the Prophet Jeremy
speaks it, Jer. 5.28. etc. we may apply it. For us, that have been blinded
with Light, and have been sick of being well: For us, that considering the
abundant means we formerly enjoyed, to help us to know God, till the gross
mists and fogges of Error so thickened upon us, and the wings of Schism and
Heresy so blinded our Light: (Though blessed be God we are not without light
still, if we can but see it:) For us, that considering the variety of mercies
we formerly enjoyed, till we sinned them away; to provoke us to love God,
these two particulars seriously considered, we may conclude against our
selves, that the Sun shines not upon a more vile, wretched, ungodly people,
then we of this Nation are, considered collectively, and together; though we
may boldly say too, that if God have a people in the World, he has a people in
this Kingdom, and were it not for these, we should be as Sodom, be as
Gomorrha. Oh England, once the Glory, sometimes the Honor, and the envy of
other Kingdoms, how sad will thy condition be, if thou shall live, to become
the scorn, the shame, the contempt of Nations? if thou shall receive by thine
own continued and in bred contentions, so many scarres and blemishes, that may
make thee look like the man in Lucan, -- totum pro vulnere Corpus, who was all
wound.

Yet notwithstanding all our misdeservings, Almighty God suffers us still to
live in, to enjoy this good this very good Land, and such a one, that as one
sometimes spoke of Athens, that it was (...), the Greece of Greece: So it may
be said of England, that rightly considered in it self, it is a Kingdom of
Kingdoms, and there is not a Canaan to be found in Europe, no not in the
World, if not in this Island; we enjoying here all the most natural and
necessary Commodities, for raiment, and nourishment, that can be desired: A
place rich in it self, and for what we want from other parts, God has made us
a way in the Seas and a path in the mighty Waters to bring it in. You that are
the worthy Merchants, who with your hazard abroad, supply our wants at home:
You know those paths and ways, we named to be deep and dangerous, by reason
of Tempests and other Casualties, and though a number of your Mariners are not
at all troubled at Tempests, because they have seen, and felt, and out lived
so many of them; and therefore are many times insensible of their dangers, yet
you that are owners and imployers of them, cannot but see their daily
deliverances, and therefore you owe very much unto Almighty God for the
preservation of their lives, your ships, and Commodities.

Certainly, what returns you make come to you with very much hazard, as David
called ^he the water of the Well of Bethelem blood, 1 Chronicles. 11.19. because it
was brought through the Army of the Philistines, with the danger of men's lives.

Those Watery Paths in which you tread, are ways so full of danger, that
Petticus who was one of those who were called the seven wise men of Greece,
could not tell whether he should reckon Seamen among the living, or the dead.
Vbique Naufragium, there being dangers of shipwreck every where, by Tempests,
Gusts, Leakes, Rocks, Flats, Sands, Enemies, besides extraordinary calmes, that
sometime endanger the famishing of whole ships Companies; and sometimes too, by
fire happening in ships, and so prevailing, that the poor distressed
Mariners, if they be alone, if they have no other Company to relieve them in
their most sad condition, are put to this woeful miserable choice, either to
burn, or drown. And when they escape all these forenamed, sad accidents. (as
by Gods Providence they many times do) if their voyage be never so long, they
live continually within a few inches of death. -- Digitis a morte remotis
Quatuor aut sept^m --


Now all these accidents, casualties, dangers put together, when God is pleased
to preserve and to deliver from these manifold perils, the enjoyment of a quiet
harbor, after such choice, such variety of dangers, must needs fill the hearts
with joy and gladness. And not with these only, but with thankfulness also,
unless it be from such, who are most unworthy of the least of the mercies they
receive; because they take all the favors and benefits that come from God, as
blessings that come by chance, of course, and believe that because God has
done much, he is still bound to do more for them.

Now to give you reasons, to confirm this my first observation, were to bring
a torch at noonday to add light to the Sun, were to confirm a truth that
will admit of no contradiction; for as it is not possible for any man, unless
he be like to Solomon's fool, Proverb. 23. the last verse, who could laugh when
he was lashed and feel it not, to have causes to make him miserable, and not
to be sensible of misery: so on the other side, for a man to have arguments, to
raise up and to keep up his spirit, by reason of joy and cheerfulness, and not
to be glad, and cheerful.

Some thing I confess should be here added by way of inference, or
application, on this first point, but I shall reserve that for the close of
this exercise: In the mean time I shall entreat you to keep in mind the
streights, fears, dangers, and deliverances spoken of in the Text, that you may
be the better furnished to return the honor and praise of all your
preservations, of all your deliverances unto Almighty God, who alone in these,
and all extremities, can preserve, can deliver; which is my second observation,
most naturally arising from the Text, which that you may the better remember,
we will name it once more.

2. Obs. Almighty God, who alone can preserve, can deliver in streights, in
extremities, must have the honor and praise of all preservations, of all
deliverances.

I am now in a large field, enco^passed with such variety of matter that I
scarce know where to begin to speak, when to make an end, my short time that I
have now left being too too little for to reap the harvest of so copious a
point, wherein plenty, if I take not heed, will make me poor. And therefore
that I may not lose my self in an endless Repetition of particulars, I shall
in this case imitate the Disciples of Christ in another, and in a large Field
of corn, pluck but a few Ears, to entertain your thoughts, your patience, on
this second part of this solemn exercise.

It Is Almighty God, and he alone, that can, and does deliver, and that must be
praised for all deliverances. For, Whatsoever the Lord pleases, that does he
in Heaven, in Earth, in the Seas, and in all places, Psalm. 135.6. In whose
hands are all the corners of the earth, and the strength of the Hills is his
also. Psalm. 95.4. I, and the ebbings and flowings of the mighty waters, the
storms, and calmes of the Seas are in his hands too. Winds and storms
fulfilling his word. Psalm. 148.8. to do with them, and by them whatsoever he
please.

And therefore it was a most strange, unadvised thing that HERODOTUS writes was
sometimes done by XERXES, that great Persian Monarch, who having receved a
loss by the rage o^ the Helesponte, himself more mad then the Sea, caused
fetters, and manicles to be cast into the waters thereof, as if he meant to
make the Sea his prisoner, and to bind it with links of iron, at his pleasure.
It appears that XERXES knew very little of God to believe, that it was
possible for himself, or for any, but the Almighty God, who made the waters,
to lay commands on them, to give Rules to them. Can thou bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? says God to Job. 38.31.
'Twas as if he had said thou can not. So for a man to think that it is
possible for him to stop the violences of the Seas, is to do like them, that
would go about to make Ropes of sand. To bind up and imprison violent winds in
bags. To make a Black-more white by washing. Or by water to think to wash the
spots out of the skin of a Leopard; all these being labors in vain, things
impossible to be done.

For it is the Lord that rules over all. Psalm. 103.19. that can do whatsoever
he will do, that beholds at one view, all places, and all persons, and all
things. So that if our business be in the Earth, He is God of the whole earth;
of the valleys as well as of the hills: If our affairs ly on the Seas, it is He
that rules in the mighty waters, and appoints that unruly Element its bounds,
which it may not pass. So that wheresoever our business is, whatsoever our
preservations, and deliverances are, our God, who alone can keep us out of
streights, and when we be in them, can deliver us from them, must have the
honor and praise of all these his mercies.

I know that there is none of you (whose particular these truths does in a
special manner concern,) but sufficiently knows already, that it is not the
tallnesse of your Ships, it is not their swiftnes, nor their manning, nor their
ammunition, that can protect them without, or against God. A very learned and
reverend man, famous in his generation, within this City, but long since with
God, helps me to this notion pertinent to our present occasion. You call your
Ships (says he) sometimes by the names of Lions, and Leopards, and Bears; and
sometimes go higher, calling them Angels, and Archangels; but when you have so
done, as Themistocles called the Ships of Athens wooden walls; so these are but
wooden Beasts, wooden Angels, wooden Archangels; and woe be unto them that
say unto a piece of wood, thou art my helper. Ye call them too Boniventures,
and Speedewells, and the like, there being good speed, good hap written upon
their names, but many misfortunes happening sometimes in their labors, in
their successes.

The Navy of Tyrus, as the Prophet Ezekiel describes it, Ezekiel. 27 was one of
the most famous Fleetes that ever furrowed the Waters, but the Eastwinde (says
the story) broke them in the midst of the Seas, v. 26. And their Merchants,
and Pilotes, and Mariners, and men of War were all ruined, overthrown, and
came to nothing, v. 27.

God has dealt otherwise with you at this time, having sent and taken you out
of many Waters, in preserving and returning home to you in safety a great
Fleet at once, and not at this time only, but many other times also; and as
his loving kindness is come down to you; so your thankefullnesse must
return up to him: your thankefullnesse being Gods custom, his tribute, his
due, he looks for it, and he must have it; for as he is a very free, and a
liberal bestower of benefits; so is he a most strict, a most severe exacter of
thankfulness.

And therefore the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 65.1. that praise waits upon God
in Syon, because his people in his Church, are ever waiting and attending there
to tender it; to take notice of the favors and mercies that continually fall
from God, and to take them as it were at the first bound, that they may
presently acknowledge them; the receipt of every mercy making them like Doves,
who at every grain of Corn they pick up, look upward, as acknowledging from
whence it came. Not like the beasts of the field, who take their fill, and
always keep their faces downward, not once eying the place from whence it is
sent.

It Is very well observed of Noah, that so soon as he set his feet upon the
dry Land, after the Waters, that had long prevailed upon the face of the Earth,
were assuaged: that the first thing he did was this, Genesis 8.20. he built an
Altar for God, not an house for himself, but an Altar unto the Lord, that
thereon he might offer a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving unto Almighty
God, who had picked him, with some few others, as so many grains of Corn, out
of a World of Chafe, and preserved them from the deluge.

In the 17. of Exodus, when the Israelites had been complaining against, and
quarrelling with Moses their lawful Governor, and their Rebellion was come up
to that height, that they were almost ready to stone him, v. 4. presently God
sends Amalekites to quarrel with them v. 8. It Is very just that such as love
to draw the sword, should feel the sharpness of it, and have sword enough.
Amalec comes here and fights with Israel, and doubtless had it not been now
for Moses, who knew how to stand in the gap, and for some few others, Esau
would now have revenged his long conceived, and therefore deadly displeasure
upon the Posterity of Jacob, by the hands of his Grandchilde Amalec: But here
let us take notice of the infinite goodness of God, who when Israel in
general had forgotten him, yet God will still remember his Covenant made with
Israel, not to leave, nor forsake them: Amalec is therefore beaten, and Israel
prevails, and what then? The Souldery of the Israelites do not grow high,
swell big upon this their Victory, as if they were able to drive the World
before them, as if no power either in Heaven or Earth could contradict them;
but they build unto God an Altar, and call it Iehovah-Nissi, signifying the
Lord is my Banner, expressing their deliverance in the very name of of the
Altar they built, to offer sacrifices unto God, who was their deliverer.

And thus in those ancienter times the people of God testified their
thankefullnesse for mercies they received, by pitching of heaps of stones,: by
raising of Pillars; by dedication of Feasts, or by writing of Books; all
Trophies of their mercies, their deliverances, that their childrens children by
asking what those things meant, might be instructed by, and in the remembrance
of Gods ancient mercies.

Arguments or reasons to press home this truth, this duty, yet further might
be more then many; this duty must be performed.

1. Reason, Because it is a good thing, says the Psalmist, to sing praise unto
the name of the Lord, to declare his loving kindness in the morning, and his
truth in the night season, Ps. 92.1.2.

1. It is a good thing in respect of the action; for it is better to bless
then curse, to give thanks then to give out the voice of grudgings.

2. It is a good thing in respect of the act, for God commands it, and besides
we hold all in capite, from the Lord, who is the giver of every good gift, as
the Apostle tells us, James 1.17. and therefore as all Rivers run into the
Sea, from whence they were taken; and all Plants at last fall to the Earth,
that gave them nourishment: So all our praises must return unto God, who is
the God of all our mercies.

3. It is a good thing in respect of the acceptance, he that gives me praise
and thanks (says God) he honors me, Psalm. 50. last verse; and what a thing is
it to consider, that so good, so glorious, so great a God, should think
himself magnified by the praises that proceed out of Polluted lips? And
therefore the reason given by Divines, why David was called a man after Gods
own heart, was, because he had a breast so enlarged in praises, in
thanksgivings unto God.

4. And lastly, it is good in respect of the consequence; for never any lost by
a faithful performance of this duty, offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy
vows unto the most high, and call upon me in the times of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, Psalm. 50.14.15. as if he had said, I that have, will still
deliver thee, it being the only way to have mercies renewed, and continued
unto us, to be thankful for those we have formerly received.

2. Reason, This duty of rendering praise and thanks unto Almighty God must be
performed, because it is a most delightful duty; for first the Saints, the
holy men of God have ever delighted in it, as we have showed, as we might
show further most abundantly: Secondly, God delights in it likewise; for we
told you even now, that he esteems himself honored by it.

Those golden viols of sweet odors, Revel. 5.8. that are so pleasing unto God,
what are they? but the prayers and praises of the Saints. Let me hear thy
voice (says Christ to his Church,) Cant. 2.14. for it is sweet: no tender
father is so pleased to hear the voice of his beloved son, as God is to
hear the voice of his servant.

3. Reason, This must be performed* because it is a most prevailing duty. In
the second of Chronicles the twentieth, when the children of Moab, and the
children of Ammon came up against Jehosaphat in very great numbers, and the
King and people knew not what to do, God instructs them, and encourages them
in the Chapter, and tells them, that they should not need to fight, but stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord, v. 17. And the King appointed fingers
unto the Lord, to praise him whose mercy endures for ever, v. 21. and in the
next verse, when they began to sing, and to praise, The Lord set ambushments
against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against
Judah, and they were smitten, and the King Iehosaphat, and his people delivered.

Lastly, it is a duty that must be performed, because it is a most heavenly
duty, for there shall be nothing heard in Heaven but Hallelujahs, nothing but
praises expressed by new Songs, new Thanksgivings.

Oh thou admirable illimited and unexpressible goodness of Almighty God, what
shall I now say of thee? and what shall I say to thee, oh thou Preserver of
men? The Prophets praise thee; The Apostles praise thee; The Martyrs praise
thee; The Church of God throughout the World, have, and shall for ever
acknowledge thee.

The Lord (says the Prophet Esaiah) spans the Heavens, Esaias. 48.13. he keeps
the Earth and Waters within a Circle: The Mountains upon the Balance; The
Sun within Tropicks; but what number, or measure, or bound, can be set to the
goodness of God? He that had wisdom like a flood, that Preacher of Preachers,
Solomon, who considering the emptines that is in all sublunary things, calls
them vanity of vanities, all but vanity, Eccles. 1.2. How everlastingly might
he have preached upon the goodness of God, so great, so admirable, that no
affection in Nature, no height, breadth, depth, in any of the creatures can in
any measure express it.

The Majesty of God that astonisheth us; his Glory beats us down; his
Greatness strikes us dead; we adore his Omnipotency; admire his Wisdom;
stand in awe of his Justice; his Vengeance makes us fly; it is his Mercy, his
goodness, his goodness and mercy, and they alone that represent unto us, how
amiable, how good, how gracious our God is.

Grace, grace, as the Prophet Zachary speaks, 4.7. All is grace, all is mercy,
we live wholly upon it; for it is this mercy that formed us in the Belly, and
left us not when we were upon the breast, that accompanies, and grows up with
us from our youth, and forsakes us not when we are gray headed, it is this that
gives us our daily bread, our hourly breath; it is this that preserves from
continual dangers in life, that can comfort us in death, and crown us
afterward.

I shall desire to live and dye in the meditation of mercy, of that mercy of
God which is like a bottomless fountain, which cannot be drawn dry; like the
measure in the Gospel, full, and pressed down, and shaken together, and
running over, Luke 6.36. that is like a f^i^hfull breast, which the more it is
drawn, the more it yields. The Lord, says the Psalmist, is good to all, and
his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. The veriest miscreant
in the world, enjoyes many a mercy from God, which he takes no notice off.
These common mercies, blessings of Gods left hand, Prove. 3.16. they reach all,
for which God is to be acknowledged: But that mercy of mercies, which reaches
to the pardon of sin, is the mercy for which he is to be admired, as he shall
one day be in all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. Now the Angels that retain
their first purity, they stand in no need of this mercy: Those Infernal
Spirits which are doomed to chains in everlasting darkness, with all wicked
and ungodly ones, who have been turned into Hell in their several generations,
are all incapable of this mercy: Oh Lord what will thou do with this mercy,
this great boundless illimited mercy, if thou bestow it upon poor sinners,
which want it, crave it, importunatly beg it, and know they shall perish
everlastingly without it?

Oh, the meditation of this goodness and mercy should make us while we are on
Earth, to be still extolling, and lauding, and magnifying our God in Heaven,
joining our selves to that multitude of the heavenly Host, Luke 2.13. In
praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good
will toward men. Glory be to God on high, who brings peace, and happiness to
Earth, by his good will toward men.

We come now to Application. You had before (for you have heard all along) the
reason of this present meeting: And now in the first place, let me tell you,
that if you be in earnest and hearty in this business, and do not make a
Complement of it, you shall receive comfort in it.

But pardon my jealousy, for I must needs tell you again, and it is a sad, an
horrible truth, that this Land has abundant cause to be humbled, for
Fast-dayes, and Thanksgiving days too: First, for Fast-dayes, because when we
have sinned, and fasted, we have sinned in fasting. It Is a very easy thing to
act the part of a Penitent, to hang down the head like a Bullrush: The hardest
Flint, and Marble will sometimes stand in tears, but they are Flint and Marble
still. Ahab as bad as he was, could play the part of a Penitent. 1 Kings 21.27.
where we may see his sorrow, but not his repentance, a sorrow for the
judgment denounced against him, not a repentance for his sin; the very
Devils houle to be tormented: Grief is not always a sign of grace: Ahab
could rend his clothes, but his heart that remained unbroken still; for he lies
in his Idolatry, while he lies in sack cloth; he put on sackcloth, but not
amendment, and therefore fasts and humbles himself to no purpose. It Is one
thing to Say, another thing to Pray Prayers; one thing to Fast, another thing
to be Humbled. Secondly, for Thanksgiving days; for when we have received
mercies, and given thanks, we have sinned in thanksgiving; these holy, serious
duties, both of humiliation and thanksgiving, having been performed after such
a formal, careless and unholy manner, by a number, by most, whom neither
fullnes of joy for mercies received has made them thankful, nor a fullnes of
sorrow which they should have expressed for sins committed, has made them
humble; but have bin like Cymbals, whose very emptines makes the^ sound. For,
this failing in the manner of doing duty, makes thankfulness, ingratitude, as
Jehu, in the like case, doing what God commanded, was punished as disobedient,
Hos. 1.4.

But I am persuaded much better of you, believing that that God, who put this
resolution in you to perform this duty, will so assist you in it, and carry
you through it, that you shall not lose this days meeting.

I told you before from that part of this Text, which remembers you of that
duty of thankefullnesse, upon the receipt of mercies, that Almighty God must
have the sole praise of them. Celebrent apud Jehovam benignitatem ejus, and
opere ejus mirabilia apud filios hominum, that God must have private and
public acknowledgements for the same. For the latter you are come hither to
perform, and that you may do it the better, let me exhort you to borrow those
words of David, which you may find, Psalm. 9.11. And sing praises unto the
Lord, which dwells in Syon, in his Church by his goodness, presence, power and
providence. He dwells in Syon; he is the Patron the Protector of his Church,
his people where ever they be: Hence it is, that when Empires have fallen, the
Church of God has continued, and shall continue, so long as he has a people
upon earth. Declare among the people his doings, who has now, as many-many
times before preserved you Factours, Pilotes, Mariners, Ships, Goods, in
journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by your
own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the Sea, in perils
amongst false Brethren, as the Apostle speaks upon the like occasion, 2 Cor.
11.26.

And here (though my witnesses are in Heaven, and in my own bosom, that I
have oftentimes done it before this day) I shall take leave in this
Congregation to tender my own particular thankful acknowledgements, for the
very self same mercy, that preserved me, with many others, returning from that
your service, in your good Ship the Anne with that most Noble Gentleman, Sir
Thomas Row, Lord Ambassador to the Great Magol, (a Gentleman of very choice
and eminent parts, that deserved much honor while he lived, and now dead, a
very fair and lasting remembrance) which safe return from those remote parts
was, now this present Month, thirty Years since. And I look upon it as a
very great favor from God, to let me live to acknowledge it thus publicly at
this distance, so long after. And truly I were most unworthy to live a minute
longer, if I did live to outlive the memory of this, or of any other great
mercy I have received.

So that now you may take notice of my preservation, as well as your own; and
many of us here assembled may join together, and literally apply that to our
selves, which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 66.12. We went through fire, and
through water, and thou broughtest us out into a resting place, transivimus
perignem and aquam, we went through fire, in those exceeding hot and parching
Climates, not very agreeable with our constitutions, we went through water,
many waters, through a very long, and a very great part of the vast Ocean,
transivimus, non mansimus, we went through that fire and that water, we did
not continually abide in them. Tu eduxisti nos, adrefrigerium, thou broughtest
us to a place of refreshing, to the place where we would be; and therefore let
us say further with the same Psalmist in the 16. verse of that Psalm: Come and
hearken all ye that fear God, (for such as fear him not, they take no notice
at all of such mercies as these) but come and hearken all ye that fear God,
and I will tell you what he has done for my soul; that is for me, says
David, and for me say I, and for you, and for many thousands more, whom he has
preserved from Shipwracks, and from many sad accidents and casualties beside,
which others have felt, when the Sea in respect of us and them, was as the Red
Sea to the Israelites and Egyptians, it shared life to the one, and death to
the other.

Now I might tell you that there is Naufragium in portu, shipwreck in the Haven
sometimes, shipwreck a shore, as well as at Sea, which most evidently appears
in many thousands in the World, who sail (as it were) upon the dry ground, and
by steering their course, as if they knew neither Coast, nor Compass,
consequently fall upon many dangerous Rocks and Shelves upon which many times
their estates, lives, I and souls too, do most fearfully miscarry.

There are many dangers on shore, as well as at Sea, which would fall upon us
most directly, as most deservedly, were it not for that power and Providence of
Almighty God, which does continually support us: Man in general, being like an
ill calkt Ship, and were it not for this power and providence, he would daily
receive that in through the little poares of his body, which would destroy him.
And besides this, we carry in our bodies a Sea of abounding, noxious humors,
that might daily drown us. And were it not for this power, and goodness, and
providence of God, we should often meet with death in a mouthfull of air, or
in a bit of meat, or in many other small things beside, we take no notice of,
there being nothing so little but can hide death under it.

But there is a more dangerous shipwreck to be met withal on shore then all
these, the worst of all shipwracks, and it is that the Apostle writing to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.19. speaks concerning some of those times, (...), who made
shipwreck of faith, and so consequently of honesty, conscience, Religion; and
in this sense we of this Nation, I, and in this Nation too, have either
known, or heard of abundance of these wracks of late, more by far then any
other former time ever knew, since the light of the Gospel was discovered unto
us; and it is a very great mercy for any of us, in these last, and worst times,
wherein Satan (has as it were) broke his chain, and is more diligent then
ever in seeking whom he may destroy, to be delivered from this shipwreck,
likewise.

Now therefore in the second place we are all hence to be admonished, that
have seen and tasted the goodness of the Lord, after the enjoyment of such
variety of mercies, to take heed of unthankefullnesse, that we do not give
God cause to enter an action of ingratitude against us, that we be not like
unprofitable ground that drinks in, and receives much seed, but returns no
crop. Ingratum si dixeris omnia, Ingratitude is a sin exceedingly sinful,
because the unthankefull man is every thing that is bad; and truly my beloved,
this sin, so loathed both by God and man, is too too common amongst us.
Ingratus est adversus unum beneficium, etc. says Seneca, is a man unthankful
for one favor received? a second will bring it into his remembrance; does he
forget that too? a third will make him remember all: And oh how many single,
double, multiplied favors have we been partakers of, which we have
forgotten? we think our selves sure of what we have, but where is the
tribute of thankefullnesse paid for the mercies we have received?

Ten Lepers are cleansed, Luke 17.18. and but one of them gives thanks, and he
a stranger from whom our Savior did least expect it: When we want any thing
that is good, we are ready to grow impatient under our wants, ready to call
and to cry, Lord make speed to save us, Oh Lord make haste to help us, and
make no long tarrying o God: But where are our thanks, when our turns are
served? Oh this is a wonderful failing in duty, for us all to consider of, to
lay to heart, and lament: Let us consider further, that it is for unrighteous
men to vanish and pine away in their graceless ingratitude, and so become as
the dung on the earth; it is for such to forget the God of Heaven, that the God
of Heaven may forget them: But let the righteous always rejoice, for it
becomes well the just to be thankful, and praise is comely for the upright,
Psalm. 33.1. Early and late let us bless his holy Name, though not with Lutes
and Harpes, and Instruments of ten strings, yet with the best members we have,
with our hearts, and with our tongues, evermore acknowledgeing the goodness of
our God, for present, and fore-passed mercies.

And to you who have been the occasion of this present meeting, give me leave
to speak this further, that as your preservations, and deliverances, and
returns have been real, so must your thankefullnesse be. God I thank thee,
in this case, is not enough, he looks for some farther, and some other
expressions of your thankefullnesse. It was an excellent commendation that St.
Ambrose sometime gave of Theodosius the Emperor, that he then thought there
was a courtesy done to himself, when he was entreated to show favor, and do
courtesy to others: Let this be your commendation, I need not tell you that
these miserable times, which will endure, abide many sad epethites, and do
them no wrong, have brought thousands into most grieveous streights, even to
morsels of bread; you can look no way, but you may meet with many objects of
pity. But in the first place those poor Families should be in your thoughts,
whom your employments have made Fatherless and Widows.

I know how that you which are Merchants are wont to hearken very much after
Advises, and therefore I shall take leave a little further to advice you.
Inferioris concilium aliquando opportunum est, because the counsel of an
inferior is not always to be despised.

Now that which I would advice you too in the first place, that God may bless
you in your Factories abroad, and in your returns home, (which for my part I
shall ever wish and pray for) is, as much as in you lies carefully to take
heed that you employ such Presidents, Ministers of the Word, Factors, and
other servants, residing in all your remote places of Trade, as may take
special care to keep God in your Families there: for let me tell you, that it
is a miserable thing for such as profess themselves Christians in places where
Christ is not known, or if heard of, not regarded, Gentes agere sub nomine
Christianorum, to play the Heathens, nay to do worse, and that under the names
of Christians, per quorum latera patitur Evangelium, to shame Christianity by
professing of it, by whose miscarriages, the Gospel, Christianity it self
suffers.

I never think of that story which you may find in the 20. Chapter of
Genesis, where Abimelec reproves Sarah; but me thinks it is very sad to
consider, that an Abimelec, an heathen should have cause, I, and a just one
too, to reprove a Sarah, Sarah the Wife of Abraham, of Abraham the Father of
the faithful: So for a Mahumetan, or an Heathen in India, observing the very
loose lives of many of the English there, the very foul misdemeanors of those
that profess themselves Christians: to say of Christianity (as I have
sometimes heard) Christian Religion, Devil Religion, Christian much drunk,
much Rogue, much naught, very much raught. I speak this in their language, that
is in that broken English those Indians speak, who live in those places who
most converse with the English: And truly it is sad to behold there, a drunken
Christian and a sober Indian; an Indian to be eminent for devotion in his
seducing way, and a Christian to be remiss in that duty; for an Indian to be
excellent in many moralities, and a Chistian not so, for one who professes
himself a Christin, without which profession there is no salvation to come
short of them, which come short of Heaven, what can be more sad then this?

How therefore does it concern all those that live abroad, and profess Christ
crucified, especially such as live in those remotest parts? in Mese^k, in the
tents of Kedar, if they love God and Religion, to be most exemplary in their
lives, to be blameless and harmless the people of God without rebuke, as
the Apostle counsels, Phil. 2.15. amongst Mahumetans and Heathens with whom
they are mingled; that by this means (if God shall honor them so far* so
much) they may be isntrumental to turn some to Christianity there, now so
many turn Atheists, Infidels, unbeleevers here.

And for you that live here at home, and profess your selves Christians,
indeed in earnest, for to be so only in name, is nothing, it will but further
a man's condemnation, it being all one (as one of the Ancients well observes) to
deny the faith, and not thoroughly, sincerely to profess it; for when the power
of Religion is separated from the profession thereof, I know no great
difference betwixt a baptized English man, upon whose face that precious water
of baptism has been spilt, as well as sprinkled, and an unwashen Indian. The
earth, says the Apostle, Heb. 6.8. that wants neither moisture, nor manu^ing,
yet bears thorns and briars is rejected and nigh unto cursing: it is all one
to be a bramble in the wilderness and a barren tree in Gods Orchard, for both
are to be bound up together in the some bundle of condemnation. For any of you
therefore, or for any others, who have given up their names unto God, to be
charged by debaushed and wicked men, that they are proud, censorious, covetous,
cruel, implacable, unmercifull, irreconcilable, men that love to tarry long at
the Wine: Or the like, and these or any of these charges true, Oh this does not
adorn, but shame Religion!

It therefore concerns every one very much, who can see further then earth, to
look about them. First, in regard that people are not so much led by Precepts,
as by Examples, and therefore a Christian must be circumspect, (...). Ephesians.
5.15. it is a very short but a very full precept; walk circumspectly, or
exactly, that is, go to the utmost, the end, the extremity of every duty that
God requires at your hands, and this must be done. Secondly, because there are
so many eyes upon us, as the eyes of God, the eyes of good, and the eyes of bad
men.

First, the eyes of God who takes a strict notice of us wherever we are, who
does most exactly observe whatever we do, to bless, or not to bless our
actions accordingly. Secondly, the eyes of good men who rejoice when they see
men walk as becomes the Gospel, and greeve when they observe the contrary.
And lastly, the eyes of bad men, who do nothing but lie at the catch to observe
our failings, and consequently mischeive, nay everlastingly undo themselves by
this means.

Now my second advice to you which are Merchants is, in regard that there are
many fears which accompany your hazardous adventures, that you would labor
for to get more and more acquaintance with God, that the Lord may be with you
in your outgoings, and returns, and say to you as sometimes he did to Moses
Exodus 33.14. My presence shall go with you, and then you need not fear.

And further know this for a certainty, that while you tender thankfulness,
you may ask Faith as the Apostle did, 2. Tim. 4.17.18. I was (says he)
delivered from the mouth of the Lion; there is his thankful acknowledgement,
and the Lord shall deliver me; there is his faith. So you making him your
pattern, who have oftentim^s been delivered out of the mouth of dangers shall be
delivered still. Thou have, thou shall deliver; they are sweet arguments which
are drawn from experience. Be thankful for what you have received, and
fear God, and learn more and more to depend on him in the lawful use of
means, and then all your other fears shall be swallowed up in the fear of
Him. Fear not their fears, says God by his Prophet Isaiah, the 8.12. but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and let him be your fear, let him be your dread,
as if he had said, fear not the fears of wicked men, that fear not God, but
learn to fear God more, and then you shall fear every thing beside him less.

Fear him, and then floods and dangers shall fear you, and the Winds shall
blow you happiness, and shipwracks shall not be known in those paths of the
Sea wherein you steer your courses. Fear him, and the Spirit of God, as at
the beginning, Genesis 1.2. shall be ever mooving upon the Waters, for your
support and comfort. Mountains may be remooved, and Hills cast into the Seas,
Psalm. 46.2. But I am sure that those which fear the Lord shall never miscarry.
The fear of the Lord shall harbor your Ships in the Havens where you would
have them to be, and after all your hazards and adventures, harbor your souls
in his everlasting Kingdom.

I am now come to my third and last advice; wherein while I shall (by Gods
further assistance) enlarge my self a little. I will not at all despair of
your Patience; because, as the Feastmaker in the Gospel, John 2.10. kept his
best Wine till the last; so have I reserved my sweetest, my most comfortable
matter for my conclusion.

I know how that you who are Merchants love to hear of places that are most
advantageous for Trade, and I can tell you that there are richer places to be
found then both the Indies, better Ports then Surat or Bantam, or any beside
that can be thought on in the World. In the Land of Havilah, says Moses Genesis
2.11. th^re is Gold. In the Land of the living there is d^rable riches to be
found, which no violence can plunder, nor Rust nor Moth, nor fire, nor time can
consume. There is a New Jerusalem described. Revel. 21. and to make it more
taking, more desirable, the Spirit tells us there, that the very Pavement is
Gold, and the Walls are precious stones.

The Prophet Habbacuck 2.6. speaks thus to covetous worldlings: you that load
your selves with thick Clay, how long? where he calls Gold and Silver, which
are so much doted on, Clay, thick Clay, and so it is indeed rightly
considered, nothing but the self same Earth we tread on better hardened,
refined, and colored. You that load your selves with this thick Clay, how
long? As if he had said* do you ever think to fill, to satisfy your souls
with this? The barren womb the merciless grave, and unsatiable death will
sooner be satisfied, then the soul of man with these things: The heart of a
covetous man being like a bottomless purse, that cannot be filled. And as
those places that afford the richest Mines and Mineralls are most barren; so
are those hearts that most affect them, that most seek after them. Those
Treasures which are concealed in the bowels of the Earth, are there laid up
secretly, and basely; basely that we might not overvalue them, and secretly
that we should not spend too much time in the search after them.

It Is miserable to consider what a very great deal of pains a number in the
World take to go to Hell, what hard labors they undergo, what desperate
hazards they run into, and if you ask them why? they will tell you this to get
means: Now ought we not much more to be industrious for to attain the end,
to attain the end of our being, and that is eternal happiness: And they are
borne in vain, and live to no purpose, that do not most seriously think of,
and most earnestly desire after this.

It cannot be denied, but that there are many places, many things here upon
earth that may seem to give much contentment unto those that enjoy them; but
if we look upon them with good eyes, the sight of them should draw up our
thoughts higher. As Fulgentius, when he had sometimes observed the Glory, of
the Court of Rome, cried, quam pulcrum Caelum. Oh how much more glorious is the
Court of Heaven? These things we sometimes see here may appear very pleasant
and full of beauty; But the things we see not, but believe are much more: And
if the outward Court of Heaven; I mean that which containe^ all the splendor
and glory in the World. does appear, seem to be so glorious, what shall we
think of those parts yet unseene? If the Sun in the Firmament has such
brightness and majesty in it, what shall we think of the Glory of the Maker
thereof? Certainly this place of our Pilgrimage, though it minister never so
much outward contentment, is miserable in respect of our home: And therefore
it is nothing but infidelity which causes a number of men, (who can trust God no
further then they can see him) to make so much of, to be so far enamoured with
Earth, and so little with Heaven; and hence it comes to pass, that most in the
World because they do (as they did in the Market, Mat. 20.) laze and loyter
here, are so doubtful, (as well they may be) of receiving their Penny
hereafter.

The enjoyment of that quiet Harbor in my Text, after so many streights and
fears, fills the heart with joy and gladness. And now to apply this
particular, (as I promised you before) there is another Harbor or Haven, which
these earthly Harbors, and Havens do but point at, the possession whereof will
ten thousand times more glad the soul. An Haven much better then those which
are called (...), the fair Havens, Acts 27 8. which lead into that City of
refuge, which saves from, the destroyer, wherein the Righteous shall for ever
sit, and sing out of a most comfortable experience, that great is the mercy,
the goodness of the Lord. A City whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10.
to which we may apply that (spoken by the Psalmist, Psalm. 87.3. of the
earthly) to that heavenly Jerusalem, Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou
City of God. Glorious great things are spoken of it, but greater things
conceived, where our thoughts far exceed our words, and both of them come
exceedingly short of the thing we would apprehend and speak of: And shall do
so, till the time come, where the Saints in Heaven shall say, enjoying the end
of their hope, as they did in another case, Psalm. 48.8. As we have heard, so
have we seen, (I and abundantly much more) in the City of the Lord of Hosts,
in the City of our God: A City, a place, a rest, an happiness which cannot be
found any where, but there above; and we throw away our lives, if we do not
continually aim at it.

Now while we are in this life, we are but in our way toward that better,
and in this passage we may conceive our selves to be like Passengers in a
Ship under sail, enjoying a fair Gale of Wind; so that whether they eat,
or drink, or sleep, or whatsoever they do beside, are still going on to
their Port. Beloved, there are many of us here assembled that have been far,
we have one journey more before we can be at home; for Pater and Patria, our
God that made us, and the Kingdom for which we were created, if we were not
borne out of due times, are both above. And further, many of us here in this
Congregation may consider that time has Snowed upon our hairs, and the end of
our journey cannot be far off, and therefore it is very seasonable, now after
many travells and troubles to think of, and prepare for our rest, to think of
our anointing to the burial, to think of finishing our course, in bringing,
our lives as well to an happy conclusion, as to an end, to stand carefully
upon our watch, that when we be summoned, we may not be surprised, that when
God shall please for to call any one of us by his messenger Death, we may have
nothing to do but to dye: and thus having a Plaster ready before we receive
the blow, we shall lose nothing by dying, but what we may well spare, our
sin, and corruption.

And that we may be the better prepared for that great business, we must
labor to be like Ships abroad, far from their home, that are well
furnished and fitted, and richly laden, In readiness to return unto their
Country, and want nothing but a wind to carry them thither.

Hence the Holy men of God in all Ages, who were able to look further then
earth, could never find so much comfort in any thing beside, as in the
meditation of Heaven, who having seen the promises (concerning Christ) a far
off, and being persuaded of them, they embraced them, Heb. 11.13. the word is
(...), they kissed them, they hugged them, as resting most abundantly satisfied
with them. And the Ancient Fathers in naming the day of the death of the
Faithful, the day of their Birth, and the day of their Martyrdom, the day of
their Nativity, did show how much esteem they had of the life to come, so
excellent and glorious above this life that is present; be a man's condition
here never so great, so seemingly happy, that there is no comparison betwixt
them.

In this life there is much delight taken in changing of Places, Apparel,
Food, Company, Recreations, and the like, in seeing, and being seen: But in
Heaven our Felicity will consist in rest: Blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord, they rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13. I say the happiness of the
blessed Saints above shall consist in rest, in not longing after any other
condition, because there can be no change of that, what the Saints there enjoy,
without much loss.

Here the thoughts of men are distracted, and disquieted with thousands, and
thousands of actions, and cares and fears, like a Ship at Sea, tossed up and
down by Winds and Waves. Domine cor meum inquietum est, etc, said that
Ancient Father, Oh Lord I am not, I cannot be quiet till I come to rest with
thee: Here in this life one misery overtakes another, as one Wave of the Sea
does another; there is no weeding up of these tares, no remooving of these
annoyances from the life of man; for it is our portion as we be men, more as
we be Gods people to suffer in one kind or other, while we be here; the
Gospel propounds nothing so much as the Cross; the Cross and the Crown are
fastened here together, not to be separated till death part them; man and
misery being terms convertible. Man that is borne of a Woman, is of few
days, and full of trouble, Job 14.1. but this is the comfort of every godly
man, that, as his miseries are great, so his life is short, and no good man
shall carry his own Cross further, then Simon the Cyrenian did the Cross of
Christ, Mar 15.21. to Golgotha, to his Grave: For as death begins the
miseries of the wicked; so it puts an end unto all the miseries of the godly. I
count, or I reckon, says the Apostle, that the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed,
Romans 8.18. as if he had said, when I have considered the Cross, with all its
incombrances, when I have considered profit, and loss, what I may suffer, and
what I shall be sure to gain, it amounts all to this that the eternal weight
of the Crown does exceedingly outweigh the momentary weight of the Cross; so
that when the godly have done that here which God has appointed them either
to do or suffer, when they shall have accomplished as an hireling their day,
then shall they lie down in peace and receive their penny, and take their
rest, after all their labors, troubles, sorrows, sufferings; times of
refreshing will come from the presence of God, and then all tears shall be
wiped from their eyes, all sadness from their spirits.

And therefore how will the souls of the blessed admire themselves when they
shall come to that much desired and longed for Haven we here commend unto you,
and see themselves disburdened of all their Toil, and Trouble, and Fear, and
Care, in a moment? when they shall enjoy Peace without trouble; Joy without any
mixture of grief; Happiness without measure; Felicity without end;
Contentment without any interuption; when they shall enjoy that Good which
satisfies all desires, and excludes all fears. Then Faith shall be no more,
for we shall have Sight, Fruition. And Hope no more; for we shall enjoy the
things hoped for: And Patience shall be no more, for there shall be no more
pain; nor Mercy, because there shall be no more Misery; the only Knowledge of
God shall fill our understandings; and the Love of God shall wholly possess our
affections.

Oh how will the souls of the blessed be then, and there transported with joy!
who after they have gotten safe through the storm, shall see themselves in a
place where they shall hear the holy Name of God no more blasphemed, nor his
dear people scorned; nor his precious Ordinances any more trampled under foot;
nor his sacred Truths any more perverted, nor yet slighted by the groundless
conceivings, and perverse mistakes of men, who are like froward or teachy
children, that deserve the rod rather then the spoone or breast, because they
kick at, or kick down that good nourishment, which if they knew how to taste,
or relish it, might make them thrive.

Oh how will the souls of the blessed be then ravished with comforts, with
contentment! when they shall enjoy the society of the blessed Saints, and
Angels, where they shall have new company, join in new thanksgivings and sing
new songs, which none can understand but those which sing them, when they shall
enjoy fullness of delight, in enjoying God, in whose presence is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
When I shall behold thy Face in Righteousness I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness, says David, Psalm. 17.15. and no marvel for this a Face that is all
eye, a Face that does transform into its likeness all that do behold it; as a
looking-glass exposed to the Sun, seems to have the Sun in it; We shall
be like him, says Saint John 1 John 3.2. for we shall see him as he is, and
they that look upon him are lightened, Psalm. 34.5. they shall not only see
light, but be light; not see light as we see that brightness of the Sun by
our eyes, but as if we were all eye throughout, our bodies shall receive light
on all sides: And this blessedness which God has prepared for his people, non
Minuitur multitudine possessorum, sed tanta universis, quanta singulis, shall
not be diminished with the multitude of possessors; but is shall be as much to
every one as it is to any one, every one above enjoying it, as every one here
below, having eyes, enjoyes the light of the Sun: And as Jonathan (before
faint) received some strength, and had his eyes enlightened so soon as he had
tasted of the honey, 1 Samuel 14.29. So the faithful who have been long wearied,
and toyled with evils here, and been ready to faint under the burden of them,
shall then recover strength, and have the sight of what they formerly believed;
after that they have tasted of the sovereign good, the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living: the meditation of that unexpressible happiness,
prepared for all that live in the Fear, and dye in the Favor of God, is like
that Tree cut by Moses, and cast into the bitter waters which presently made
them sweet, Exodus 15.25. Oh these are thoughts to live and dye in! I might
enlarge my self much more on this most comfortable and copious subject; but
much speech is weariness to the flesh. These are good thoughts to leave you
in, and therefore in this good meditation, I will leave you.

FINIS.

