THE Reconciler OF THE BIBLE ENLARGED: WHEREIN Above Three Thousand seeming
Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament, are fully and plainly
RECONCILED.

A Like Work never yet extant, and may serve for the Explanation of the most
difficult places of the Bible: being useful for all such as desire to
understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto SALVATION.

Humbly submitted to the Censure of the Sons of the Prophets.

By J. T. and T. M. Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, near
the West end, 1662.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
ITS not yours I seek, but you, else I could have facilitated my Expense, and
frustrated your Expectation. The Addition in this Edition may serve you for
other Volumes of greater price; each line being an hint and Compendium of the
larger dictates of the Learned. You will find this to be useful, even in the
explaining of Texts. I always held Contraria juxta se posita clarias
elucescant, None can so well clear the sense as he which considers the
opposition. If you find not resolution in the one place, consult the other, or
a parallel place, and before you judge, consult Authors and the Text. However
the Author may run the Gantlop, yet I hope I shall escape the Lash: But in
regard every man is left to his freedom of Judgment, and men may easily halt
in such flinty way, 'twere but charity to deal kindly with the Augmentor, who
modestly proposes his own, without refuting others opinions: Its my
confidence, this will neither burden your Person or Purse, so it will engage
you to think well of

Your Obsequious Friend S. Miller.

Reader take notice, the Additions in this Book are marked thus [*] throughout
the whole Work.

TO THE READER.
Several places of Scripture compared, sound as several strings in an
Instrument jarring and at odds; but by a more heedfull eye, and attentive ear,
though a fifth and a third are no full concord, yet with a third and an eight,
or a fifth with a first will make a sweet Symphony. Some Scriptures upon a
slight view, seem as much at odds as the Poles, but the context or phrase, the
intent or time may so far facilitate the agreement, that the whole Scripture
may seem without any doubting, to be a Web spun by the same hand. I am not
ignorant, that the climbing up these Hills is a work both tedious and
difficult, even the hardest Piece of Divinity, (other parts being delightful
Valleys, whose variety of matter, and fruitfullnesse in use will be sufficient
reward) this may advantage no further than censure and contempt; and though the
issue be no other, yet it must not be neglected, in regard Atheists,
Antiscripturists, Hypocrites, and the etc. of profaneness, make these seeming
contradictions to be the Catholic Patron for their errors and practice.

I had not adventured on these rough Billows, but that the Stationer, who
formerly had caused the Reconciler to be Printed, (which was no more than
Johannes Thaddaeus Translated) finding that Book to be defective, both as to
multitudes of places which were not handled at all, and as to the obscurity of
several which were there undertaken, he engaged me to make a Supplement, which
might in some measure run parallel with the design. How I have performed you
may best judge, when you have consulted Magrio, Calvin, Doctor Hammond,
Pezelius, Gerhard, Mayer, Musculus, Mannassa Ben Israel, Lorinus, Willet, the
Assembly, Diodat, etc. Some on one, some on another place.

The Quotations of Authors were forborne, to forbear abruption of sense, and
repeating of their very words; the substance being most an end reserved,
without an exact account of the words themselves. Thaddaeus seems to have
lighted his Candle constantly at Scorpius his Sun; what he omitted, is
superadded with the addition of the Authors own opinion, and yet leaving a just
place for every man's own additionall Judgment. This may at the first seem a
work of a few hours. Houses are viewed at a glance, which when one considers
in their several Materials, the Stone in the Quarry, the Beam in the Wood, the
Lime in the Stone, the Workman in his Hewing, etc. will take up the thoughts as
of a larger extent. Books presented as finished, is an easy work for the eye
and understanding: and yet the consulting Authors, examining opinions, leaving
of rubbish, and taking what is fit, both is a labor to the head and hand: Its
easier to read than compose Books, and as easy to censure as either. But no
wise man will censure him, who by writing would help the weak, and by his
weakness invite the strong, to afford the energy of their brains. However the
world may censure the work, I hope they will see it their duty to pray for him,
who is hereby engaged to be

Their assured T. Man.

THE PREFACE.
THE Scripture of the Old and New Testament revealed from God by the Prophets
and Apostles, 2 Timothy 3.16.
since it is the rule of heavenly Doctrine, it ought to be held in high account
amongst us. Gal. 6.16.
For so many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God, etc. But for as much as the enemies of Divine truth are
adversaries to those who continue in the same, it is no wonder that they fear
not, both to resist the Spirit by whom it was inspired, and to accuse the work
of contrariety and imperfection. Though the Scripture have no real
contrarieties indeed in it self, (for the Spirit of God, 2 Peter 1.21. Chrysostom.
in Genesis hom. 1.
by whom those holy men that writ it were led, being not contrary to himself,
did so govern the matter, that it should wholly agree in all parts) yet some
apparent contrarieties there are in it, which cause some difficulty to the
Reader; yet the whole body of the Doctrine is not therefore to be accused of
obscurity, as though the will of God could not thence be certainly known,
concerning things which appertain to Religion. Nothing is searched out there,
which is not to be found easily in some other place, nor is there any
opposition in the Scripture, witness Aug. lib. 5. cap. 8. de Genes. I will
never dare to think, says Justin Martyr, in Dial. cum Tryph. Judaeo, nor
speak, that the Scriptures can be adverse to themselves; but if any Scripture
seem to be so, and has a color as though it did contradict some other
Scripture, I will rather confess that I understand not the things there spoken,
being certainly persuaded, that no part of Scripture can be opposite to any
other part thereof, etc. This is that I undertake to prove in this
Reconciliatory Bible, wherein are Reconciled Three Thousand places of the
Sacred Scripture opposite in appearance, in a plain order, by the Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, (short collections of each Book, and
Chronologicall numbers being set down before them) and the truth of the Divine
word is proved to be uniforme, to the honor and love whereof, all that doubt
of the consent of the same, are modestly invited. Some man perhaps will object,
that some things are borrowed by me from others; which I deny not; for in
compiling this Synopsis, I thought it more safe and discreet, to follow the
steps of the most approved Interpreters, than without the authority of famous
men, in this most corrupt age, which is full of Error and Heresy, to invert
any thing of my own brain, and to publish it to the world. And I hope that the
Courteuos Reader, and the equal censurer, are not ignorant, that in the study
of Divinity, nothing can be said now, that was not said before. And it is most
profitable, Eccles. 1.10 Aug. tom. 3. de Trin l. 1. c. 3.
that many Books should be made by many men, of the same things, in a diverse
style, but not in a different faith. And he shall find that I have
compendiously gathered together in this Concordance, that which the greater
works of learned Men contained more at large; so that here he may, as it were
at a single view, comprehend the matter. Let those famous men have the praise,
who have set forth large handfulls in this harvest. I would not that any one
should derogate from their Orthodox labors, but let them have it rather than
my self. Yet I doubt not, but that he who was, and is effectual in their large
and learned Commentaries, will supply me with his grace, and be present to
these gleanings.

If any one condemn my brevity and rudeness^ ^f my style, I sought to be brief,
but not obscure; because brevity is profitable, and is accounted most
acceptable always; by this there is nothing lost in the substance. My
religious mind bad me stop this little body with solid meat, not with lofty and
windy words (if there be any thing found in it that is not as it should be, I
crave pardon; what is not spoken religiously enough, let it pass as not spoken)
far be it from me that I should arrogate to my self, as though I had exactly
written without error; D. Mart. Luth. in Praef.
for I am not he of whom it may be said, He made it, in the perfect tense, but
I stand in the last rank, who scarce dare say, I would have made it; yet in
great matters it is sufficient to be willing. Wherefore I being much solicited
by some like my self, that is of the meaner sort, and by the most pious desire
of my intimate friends, by this little Book of mine, first intended for private
use; I would, nay I am obliged to do them good; but not them who suppose they
better understand these things, For who is sufficient for these things?

Christian Reader, I do patiently and willingly beg of thee, that according to
thy Piety and Candor, thou would sincerely interpret of this my study, and
duty performed, in collecting these Concordances of the Bible, and would
look upon it with the same mind that I writ it, that is, with a single and good
eye. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Sanctify, reconcile and enlighten us by his holy
Spirit, that being reconciled in him, we may remain for ever, to the praise of
his Divine grace, and our own salvation. Which is the desire and prayer of

Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, J. T.

RECONCILIATIONS Of the Places of the Old Testament.
THE sacred Scripture of the Old Testament is the Word of God, brought down
from Heaven, from the beginning of the World unto the coming of the Messiah,
preached by the Prophets almost 4000 years, written in Hebrew, except some few
things in Chalde, (Esdras 4, 5, 6. Dan. 2, to 8. Ezekiel. 10.11.) called by the
Jews, Esirmve arba, that is, Luke 24.27.
twenty four, divided by Christ into the Books of Moses, the Prophets and the
Psalms.

The Books of Moses.
THe Pentateuch, that is, the five Books. Also the Ocean of Divinity, the
Hebrews call the 1. Bereschit, that is, in the beginning. 2. Velle Semoth,
These are the names. 3. Vajer, He called. The 4. Vajed daber, And he spoke. 5.
Elle hadebarim, These are the words, both in Greek and Latin, 1. Genesis. 2.
Exodus. 3. Leviticus. 4. (...), Numbers. 5. Deuteronomy.

GENESIS.
THE Generation of the World is so called, because of the Creation before the
flood, and the restoring of it after the flood, and the administration of it by
the Patriarchs unto the birth of Moses; it contains the history of 2310 years.

The Places that are seemingly contradictory.

* 1. Genesis 1.1. Elohim Almighties, Genesis 1.1, 2. Bara created. The noun
singular, the verb plural.

To show that not one only person, but the Trinity of Persons in the unity of
essence, three in one, and one in three, created the world, the Father works
and I work; others say, Hoc subtle potius quam solidum, and that its only an
Idiotism of the Hebrew tongue.

* 2. Genesis 1.1. with Genesis 1.8. God created the Heaven, etc. And God called the
firmament Heaven, and the evening and the morning were the second day.

Moses in the first Verse uses two words to comprize the whole Fabric of the
Creation; but afterward he descends to the parts of the Creation, and so
distinguishes the Heaven or Firmament from other parts. Or 2. By Heaven is
meant in the first Verse by a Metonymy, Continens pro re contenta, the
invisible or glorious habitation of Angels, with the Angels themselves, and
afterward by Heaven is meant the visible Heaven.

3. Genesis 1.22. And on the seventh day God ended his work, Chap. 2.4. All
things were created in the day that the Lord God made the Heavens and the Earth.

Reconciling.

God created the world and all things therein contained in six dais, and not in
one day altogether. The first place therefore is meant of certain, natural and
artificial days. The latter contains indefinitely the time of the creation of
things. Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.13.
So this day is put for the time of grace.

4. Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. John
7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given.

In the first place, the treaty is concerning the person and existence of the
holy Ghost: in the latter concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost, and the
miraculous pouring forth thereof in the day of Pentecost, after the
resurrection of Christ.

5. Genesis 1.5. God called the light day, before the Sun was. Ecclus. 43.2. The
Sun when it appears declares the day.

The light which first made the day, was not an other light from the light of
the Sun, but that light which God had dispersed through the hemisphere, which
he collected afterward into the body of the Sun.

* 6. Genesis 1.27. In the Image of God, Psalm 89.8. Who is a strong Lord like
unto thee.

Object. If man was created in Gods Image, he is strong as God, for that is
part of Gods Image, but he was made in Gods Image.

Answ. Likeness is either in quantity or quality; man was made like God in
holiness, knowledge, with dominion over the Creatures; not that he was alike
fully holy, or knowing, or powerful as God, nor yet had man the same natural
holiness as God, for in God holiness is connatural to him and is his nature;
but not so in man, for it is only in him an infused quality, which ab esse and
ad esse potest fine subjecti interitu. 2. Man was made in the Image of God, and
by his fall lost it. 3. The Psalmist speaks of the great power whereby God
excels all others, being compared to them.

Genesis 1.27. and 9.6. God created man after his own Image. Chap. 5.3. And Adam
begat a son in his own likeness after his Image.

The Image of God, after which God created man at the beginning, was depraved
by the fall of Adam, and so he begat such a son as himself, a corrupt sinner,
and blind in spiritual things.

* 7. Genesis 1.27. with Genesis 5.3. In the former place Gods Image in which he
created man, was the spiritual, immaterial, immortal essence of man's soul; in
the natural faculties of it, understanding, memory, reason and will, in the
supernatural gifts of wisdom, righteousness and holiness; in the dominion
over other creatures: all stamps set on man out of the everlasting Model of
Gods Perfections.

The second place in his own likeness, signifies as well in nature, as in the
corruption of it, through sin, he was begotten.

8. Genesis 1.27. God created man, etc. in the Image of God, male and female
created he them. 1 Cor. 11.7. The man is the Image and glory of God, but the
woman is the glory of the man.

The woman was created in the beginning after the Image of God so well as the
man: 1 Pet. 3.6. Genesis 24.5.
Paul considering the distinction of sex, says, that the man came nearer to
the Image of God in respect of his dominion, and the end, because the woman was
made out of the man, and for the man.

* Genesis 1.27. with 1 Cor. 11.7.

Man is said to be the Image and glory of God, in regard of dominion which God
gave him over other creatures. A woman may be considered, either according to
her specificall nature, in which she agreed with man, and in that regard she
was created according to the Image of God, in holiness and righteousness, or
according to her sex, as she was Adams wife and subject to him; and in that
regard she bears not the Image of God, for subjection is not the Image of
God, but rule and Dominion is.

9. Genesis 1.2. and 9.1. Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth. Luke
23.29. Blessed are the barren and the wombes that never bare.

Children before and since the fall are a blessing from God absolutely:
Barrenness is commended by Christ not simply, but by reason of a judgment was
to fall upon the Jews, and of that heavy calamity to ensue, wherein the flight
would be easier for one alone than for a mother and her little ones; so, Woe be
to them that are with child, Matthew. 24.19.
and to them which give suck in those days.

10. Genesis 1.28. Multiply and replenish the earth. 1 Cor. 7.7. For I would that
all men were even as I my self.

Whether Paul were then a Bachelor or a married man, is uncertain; that he was
married his words imply, where he says, Have not we power to lead about a
Sister, or a woman (a wife) as well as the other Apostles? otherwise he had not
been sure of a wife. If he were a Bachelor, he speaks conditionally, unless
the propagation of mankind and of the Church should be hindered.

* Genesis 1.28. with 1 Cor. 7.7. The Apostle does not simply wish that all men
and women led a single life; for so the Church of God could not be propagated,
nor the divine benediction upon the married fulfilled: but that all had the
gift of continency, and were as free from worldly cares and fleshly
intanglements as he, and his gift of continency may stand with holy Matrimony.
As we read of Malcus and others, who though married, yet having the gift of
continency fulfilled the Apostles precepts, verse. 29, 32. Having wives as if
they had them not, and caring for the things of the Lord.

11. Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

All the Creatures are good in respect of the creation, and their nature; but
Ecclesiastes condemns their vain and evil inclination, which is not natural
to them, but came upon them by the fall of man.

* Genesis 1.31. with Eccles. 1.2. All Creatures are good in relation to God, and
in themselves simply considered; but all creatures are vanity in relation to
them that use them, no man finding satisfaction in any of them; that may be
good in it self, which cannot be so to me.

12. Genesis 1.31. All that God made was very good. Romans 8.20. For the Creature
was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected the same in hope.

Before the fall every creature was in a better condition than after the fall;
for contrary to nature, they are become subject to the lust of wicked m^n, and
so to many afflictions, by reason of him who has subjected the creature, that
is, God, under this hope that it shall be at last delivered from the tyranny of
the wicked.

* 13. Genesis 1.31. All that God made was very good. Lev. 11. Many Creatures are
accounted unclean.

The former place speaks of the good of Being and Creation, as the things are
in themselves, or as they have their designations to such and such particular
ends. The latter place speaks of the uncleanness, as to hic and nunc, in
relation to certain persons, the Jews, and certain times under Moses his Law;
God accounted these things unclean, not that they were unclean in themselves,
but in regard of this command as Lord over all, they would have made the
persons which used them unclean and filthy in the sight of the Lord, as having
trespassed on his Majesty by their disobedience.

* Genesis 1.31. all was very good. Es. 45.7. I create evil.

Answ. Evil is threefold, natural, moral, and material; every thing was
naturally good, bonum and ens convertuntur. 2. But that which is morally evil
is deprived of those virtues and perfections which the Law requires, and so
that which is naturally good may be morally evil, as having swerved from the
rule of God. 3. Material evil, such as hurtful beasts, poisons in plants,
etc. which though they be not evil in their own nature and simply considered,
ad hic and nunc, applied to this or that subject are so. Of the first and last,
God is the Author and Cause, I create evil, that is, natural, such as
sicknesses, sorrows, etc. and material, and these I do by way of Judgment, but
I create not moral evil.

14. Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very
good, Mal. 1.3. I hated Esau.

Quaest. ex Epist. ad Romans
Every creature of God is good, and so is man as be is a creature, but not as a
sinner, says August. God therefore hated Esau for his sin, and set him after
his brother Jacob.

Exodus 20.11. Deuteronomy. 14.
15. Genesis 2.2. God rested from all his works that he had made. Joh. 5.17. and
14.10. My Father works hitherto.

God rested from all the works of creation, and of things that should be in
nature: but not from his works of Providence, care and sustentation, for
without that all would return to nothing and perish. Psalm. 104. Acts 17.


* Genesis 2.2. with Jo. 5.17. God rested from making new species of creatures,
but not from upholding those already made, and enlarging the individuals of
these species.

* 16. Genesis 2.4. These are the generations of the Heavens and the earth in the
day, etc. Exodus 20.11. for in six days.

Object. How in one day, and yet was six days in making them?

Answ. 1. In one day as to the whole Chaos and matter, and yet six in producing
the several species. 2. The word day is either to be taken strictly or
largely; strictly, for twelve or twenty four hours, and so God did not make all
individuals in one day; or for a certain tract of time, and so six days are
but one.

17. Genesis 2.15. God put man into the garden of Eden to dress it. Chap. 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread.

If Adam had continuance in innocence, labor should have been pleasant unto
him: but because he sinned, therefore must we labor with much sorrow and
trouble.

18. Genesis 2.18. It is not good that the man should be alone. Mat. 19.10. It is
not good to marry. 1 Cor. 7. To touch a woman.

In the first place God speaks of the good and profit of the whole Species and
the Church, which cannot be propagated by one person alone: In the latter the
Apostle speaks of the personal good, and the more commodious kind of life in
the time of persecution.

* Genesis 2.18. It is not good that man should be alone. 1 Cor. 7.1. It is good
not to touch a woman.

Marriage it felf, as it is Gods Ordinance is good. But Marriage as relating to
the persons which enter into that estate may be evil, i. e. by accident.
Besides evil may be taken for the evil of sin, and so marriage is not
evil; but as evil signifies the evil of punishment, or the privation of
happiness, or a quiet life, so marriage may be evil.

It was good in the Apostles days not to touch a woman, as good signifies less
troublesome or more agreeable to the present necessity, verse 26. more
convenient in regard of the calamities of the Church, which will be so much the
easier born and overcome by the enjoying of liberty; and more profitable also,
by being not so distracted with cares, nor troubled with these distractions,
that by reason of sin accompany the married estate.

19. Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall a man leave his father and mother. Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother.

To leave father and mother here, is not to deny them the honor, love and help
that is due to them; but to leave the house of his parents, and to live with
his wife, and to set up a new family with her.

* Genesis 2.24. with Exodus 20.12. The degrees of love and affection do not vacate
or take away one another. Parents are to be loved by reason of their original,
reverence, obedience, and subjection, more than a wife. Yet wives are to be
more loved, by reason of union or conjunction, (for they two shall be one
flesh,) and also by reason of cohabitation, and serve to domestic society.

20. Genesis 2.24. A man shall cleave to his wife. Exodus 21.4. The servant going
forth shall leave his wife to his master, etc.

The general Law pertains to all, that is the first, but the special Law was
granted to the Jews, for the hardness of their hearts, and so we understand
the latter place.

21. Genesis 2.24. Matthew. 19.5. And they shall be one flesh. 1 Cor. 6.16. He that
is joined to a harlot is one body.

Married people are one body really and indeed, by divine institution; but
carnal copulation with a whore without marriage, though it be actually one
body, yet it is impure, because it is not of divine institution.

* Genesis 2.24. They two shall be one flesh. 1 Cor. 6.16. He that is joined to an
harlot is one body with her.

Object. How can a man that is joined to a wife, and be one flesh with her, be
one flesh with an harlot?

Answ. Marriage makes one flesh two ways.

First, By divine institution.

Secondly, By the act it self.

That which is done beyond the bounds of marriage is making one flesh, by act
not institution, and therefore illegitimate, the act and effect are the same;
of conjunction within, and without marriage are the same, but the cause is
different. The Apostle opposes carnal conjunction to spiritual, and that
which is in Christ.

The agglution being threefold.

1. In body and mind lawfully, as in marriage. 2. In body alone unlawfully, as
in whoredom. 3. In spirit, as in the spiritual conjunction with God, by grace
in Christ.
* 22. Genesis 3.6. She gave unto her husband and he did eat. 1 Timothy 2.14. The man
was not deceived.

The one Text says that Adam received an Apple from his wife, the other says
that Adam was not deceived, i. e. immediately of the Devil as Eve was; so that
both agree in this, that the woman was deceived by Satan, and after her being
deceived, she gave the Apple to her husband, which he not examining, but taking
it upon the account of his wife which he thought loved him, did eat. And so
Adam imputes not the thing to Eve by way of deceit, but only says, The woman
she gave me.

23. Genesis 3.6. The woman saw that the tree was good for food. Verse. 7. And the
eyes of them both were opened.

First she saw with the eyes of her body the tree and the fruit that was good
to eat; but at length both their eyes were opened spiritually, when they knew
their sin, and transgression of the Law of God.

24. Genesis 3.12. The woman gave to the man, of the tree, and he did eat. 1 Timothy
2.14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman.

The woman became for prevarication to the man, for by her he was deceived, and
not by the Serpent as she was. Aug. l. 11. de Genesis ad lit. c. ult.

25. Genesis 3.16. Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee. 1 Cor. 1.2.
1 Cor. 7.4. The husband has not power over his own body, but the wife.

The woman is under the power of the man in oeconomicall government, whilst she
obeys and is subject as the body is to the head; but in conjugall union, the
man has not power of his own body.

26. Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread. Matthew. 6.11.
Give us this day our daily bread.

Prove. 10.22.
In the first place punishment and a laborious life is denounced against man,
idleness is condemned, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 4.4.
and Gods blessing is promised, because a man is born to labor, as a bird to
flying; nor is it repugnant to honest labor, to desire those things which are
necessary for the sustentation of our life, for it is not labor, but the
blessing of God which makes rich: God can feed us without bread, as he fed
Moses, Elias, Christ; but bread cannot feed us without God.

27. Genesis 3.19. For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return. Ecclus.
10.12. A man when he dies shall inherit creeping things, beasts and worms, etc.

Job.
A man though he be consumed by Serpents, worms, beasts, toads, yet at last he
is brought into the dust of the earth.

* 28. Genesis 3.22. The man is become like one of us. Deuteronomy. 6. Hear o Israel the
Lord thy God is one Lord. Psalm 86.10. I am God alone.

When its said, like one of us, in the plural, it intends not a multiplicity
of Gods, but a distinction of persons in the Godhead: and when it is said,
that man is not like this or that person, but like us. In the general it
implies, that the Persons in the Trinity are of the same nature and authority;
and in saying like us, it implies further, that man was like God for
Qualifications not Essence. Man was like God in resembling his power and
holiness not in equalizing either.

These words, Thy God is one Lord, was in opposition to the multiplicity of
vain Gods which had the repute among Heathens to be Gods, but really were not
so.

29. Genesis 4.1. Eve bare Cain, and said, Psalm. 128.
I have gotten a man from the Lord. 1 John 3.12. Not as Cain who was of that
wicked one.

Eve in childbearing acknowledged Gods blessing, and by way of thankfulness
she offered the first fruits of her labors to God: John speaks not of the
person of Cain, which was created by God, but of his wickedness that came from
the Devil.

* 30. Genesis 4.3, 4. Abel sacrificed. Genesis 4.26. Then begun men to call on the
name of the Lord.

Doubt. Seth lived after Abel, and yet Abel sacrificed. How did men then begin
to call on God, when they did it before?

Answ. Questionless Adam, Abel and Cain did offer sacrifice to God; but that
was more obscurely and not so solemnly, as in Seth's time, when it was done
publicly and in the Church of God by Seth, in whose prosperity the Church
remained; and probably the corrupt means of Cain might have enervated the
sacrificing to God, and brought profaneness upon the face of the earth; which
Seth by his public worship of God did restore, so as now men begun openly to
pray and sacrifice to God, which they had not done formerly. Or 2. Men then
more purely than formerly, began to worship God, having separated themselves
from the rest of men, not concerned in the Covenant: lest living in a
continual mixture with the cursed Cainites, their promiscuous meetings might
poison the Saints with such vices, as this offspring of Cain had learned;
therefore now they come out from among them, and began to call on the name, etc.

31. Genesis 4.4. And Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock. Chap. 4.26.
Seth began to call upon the name of the Lord.

Adam with his sons before Seth, offered sacrifice, and called on the name of
the Lord in his family: but public invocation began in Seth, in whose
posterity the Church remained, the Canaanites being rejected.

* 32. Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, sin lies at thy door. 1 John 2.1. If any man
sin, he has an advocate with the father Jesus, etc.

There are two ways of interpreting the former way;

1. Some as holding such a promise, some a threatening; the word used for sin,
may bear the signification of a sacrifice for sin, and so they would make the
words to import: that if thou sin, then there lies at the door of the
Tabernacle or Temple, a sacrifice Christ which was promised Eve. But this would
seem the same much with the former part, in having his sacrifice accepted,
which could not be but by Christ.

2. Sin lies at the door, that is, a threatening to have his secret sin
revealed, so that it should not lurk and lie hid in the bosom, closet, or
chamber, but be made so manifest, as if it were laid at the door, though for a
time; it may sleep as a Mastiff Dog at the door, yet it will not rest long. Not
the Judgment for that sin will lie long, but it will lie in wait for him at
the door, when he steppeth either in or out to set upon him.

If you take it the former way, then they signify the same thing; if the
latter way, then it signifies no more, then that sin will be discovered and
haunt us if we repent not; but if we repent and call upon Christ, then we have
an advocate with the father Jesus Christ, who will stop the mouth of this dog,
and remove this sin.

33. Genesis 4.7. Unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.
Psalm 37.23. Prove. 16.9. Jer. 10.23. The way of man is not in himself.

In the first place it is said what a man ought to do, Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal body. In the latter place it is declared,
that a man of himself can do nothing in divine and saying matters.

34. Genesis 4.15. Whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven
fold. Chap. 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

God is the wisest and freest lawgiver, therefore he would not have Cain killed
by reason of propagation of mankind: after the flood he gave the Law that the
Magistrate should punish the murderer with death.

* Genesis 4.15. with Genesis 9.6. When it is said, He that sheds man's blood, etc.
its meant either ordinarily or extraordinarily; either ordinarily, by the hand
of the Magistrate to whom is committed the Sword of Justice for that purpose;
or extraordinarily, God in his Justice uses the hand of one murderer to do
execution upon another, when humane justice passes it over with impunity; or
he some way shortens the life of the bloody man, so that he lives not half his
days: Gods punishing Cain before the flood in such a sad manner, shows not
that this was against the precept given afterward, or that God upon an
extraordinary occasion might not inflict a Judgment upon an offender another
way, whereby other ends which the Lord proposed might be brought to pass.
Cains blood was not immediately shed, because that he might propagate children
to the replenishing of the world, which then was unfurnished.

35. Genesis 4.16. And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord. Psalm. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

Cain being made a runnagate, left his parents and their habitation, and the
place where they worshipped God. In the Psalms Gods omnipresence is maintained.

* Genesis 4.15. with Psalm 139.7. The presence of God is either the presence of
his essence, and so he is in every place, or the presence of his special face
and manifestation, and so he is present in and with his Saints, especially in
his Ordinances and Assemblies. Some think the former words are fitted to Cains
Atheistical conceit, which was, that he could get out of the reach of Gods
revenging hand; but others more probably say is meant, his going from the place
where God gave evidence of his presence in his conference with him. Or from his
presence, that is, from that part or quarter of the world where God had his
Church, which is the place of his especial presence, which he did as it were
excommunicate himself from.

The other place shows no man can go be he where he will, from the sight and
presence of God, which is in all places, though even in these places they may
go from the presence of his favor. Cain was in the presence of his essence,
not of his favor.

36. Genesis 5.24. And Enoch walked with God, for God took him. Romans 8.8. They
that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

Enoch walking with God, lived according to Gods will; the Apostle by the flesh
here understands men that walk after their carnal lusts.

* 37. Genesis 5.26. And Mathusalem.

The Doubt lies in this, that by this account Mathusalem seemed to live to the
end of the flood in the year 1656, and yet we read not of his entering into the
Ark. But it is answered from the birth of Lamech, to the end of the flood is
precisely reckoned 782 years, and so many it was to that death of Mathusalem.
Seeing then he came not into the Ark, we say the last year of his life was not
complete, but only inchoate; the Hebrews and especially Rabbi Solomon, that
Mathusalem died seven days before the beginning of the flood.

38. Genesis 5.24. Enoch was not, for God took him. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for
all men once to dye.

Enochs translation was a work extraordinary, 1 Cor. 15.53. 1 These. 4.17.
it was to him in the place of death, as the taking away of Elias, and the
translation of those who in the last day shall be saved alive. But the Apostle
shows what must ordinarily befall all men; the consequence is not good from a
singular privilege to a general rule.

39. Genesis 6.3. His days shall be 120 years. Chap. 11.13. Arphaxad and others
after the flood lived above 400 years.

In the first place, the space of time betwixt manifest impiety and the flood,
Aug. lib. 13. De Civ. Dei. 1 Samuel 15.11.
and not the age of man is to be understood, as if he had said, unless the
world repent, they shall perish within 120 years.

* Genesis 6.3. with Genesis 11. Though some lived after the flood longer than 120
years, yet this hinders not the agreement, for the Text is not to be understood
of man's life, but of the time God would give them for repentance, before the
flood came on the world.

* Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. When the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great,
etc. Genesis 8.21. I will henceforth curse the ground, etc. because the
imaginations of his heart, etc.

When the former place tells us, because of the wickedness of men's hearts and
actions, God sent the flood; the latter place tells us that God decreed and
resolved with himself, that he will not again curse the ground, not that by
this he cancelled the general curse inflicted for the sin of man, or give
security against the future consuming the world by fire: but that there should
be no more such general floods as this was.

This word Because, in the second place may signify. Although as 1 Samuel 14.39.
which reading reconciles the Texts; in the first, God threatens to destroy the
world, because the inhabitants were so bad. In the other, where he smelt the
savor of his Sons righteousness in Noah's sacrifice. He is resolved
(although the wickedness of men's unclean hearts are so bad) yet he will never
take that course any more to drown the world.

40. Genesis 6.6. It repented the Lord that he had made man. 1 Samuel 15.29. God is
not a man that he should repent.

Repentance, as it is an argument of man's weakness, so can it not fall upon
God; but the Scripture often speaks of God after the manner of men; Aug. lib.
1. cap. 7. De Civ. Dei. Psalm. 131.
and where it is said that it repented God, there is meant the charge of
things, God still remaining unchangeable.

* Genesis 6.6. with 1 Samuel 15.29. Repentance is either properly or improperly
taken; properly taken, for a passion of nature or change of the mind; or
improperly, only for a change or alteration of actions. God repents not the
first way, not so as to change his mind; but he is said to repent, when he does
as a man which repents, change his actions in this or that particular according
to the purpose of his own will.

41. Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man and perfect (2 Pet. 2.5.) Psalm 13.3. There
is none that does good, Romans 3.12. Heb. 11.
no not one.

Noah was just before God by faith, and unblameable in the sight of men, he is
said to be perfect, not as though he were without sin, but in comparison of
others, he had his conversation holy, and without hypocrisy.

* 42. Genesis 6.9. with Romans 3.10.

Noah was two ways just.

Imputatively, Christ's righteousness being reckoned to him by faith.

2. Inherently, and yet he was not simply just, but in his generation; or he
was not absolutely just, but comparatively, in his generation, compared with
those of his time; or he was inherently just, that is, sincerely just, in his
profession of Religion without hypocrisy; but not perfect, that is, free from
all sin.

There is a justice of parts, and one of degrees. No man is inherently, in
degrees fully, completely, and absolutely just, though Gods children are just
in parts and intentions to be so.

The second place is meant of man in his natural estate; no man is just so,
though by faith and Gods acception and their intention, the children of God are
just.

43. Genesis 7.2. Of every clean beast thou shall take. Lev. 11.1. Moses divided
the clean beasts from the unclean.

The Patriarchs before the flood had a distinction in their sacrifices between
clean and unclean living creatures. By the Mosaicall Law, not only for
sacrifices, but for meat the use of the unclean wat forbidden.

44 Genesis 7.6. Noah was 600 years old when the flood of waters was upon the
earth. Chap. 5.32. Noah when he was 500 years old, made the Arc in 120 years.

The 500 years of Noah were not yet complete when he began to make the Ark; the
Scripture uses often times to reckon the times, though the years be not yet
complete, as Exodus 40.17. Numb. 1.1. Deuteronomy. 1.4. Ezekiel. 1.1. and 8.1. and 20.1.

1 John 3.20.
45. Genesis 8.1. God remembered Noah. Esa. 49.15. I will not forget thee.

In the s ght of God, all things are naked and open, he knows all things;
remembrance and forgetfulness are attributed to him by Anthropopathy, he
remembers when he sends help, and hears our prayers, as Genesis 30.22. 1 Samuel
15.19. Psalm 13.2. and 42.10. Also he is said to forget, when he defers to
help, and seems not to hear us.

* 46. Genesis 8.1. with Esaias 49.15. God is said to remember, when he does as a
man that remembers a thing, either hearing our prayers, performing his
promises, rewarding our works, or punishing our offenses. God remembered Noah
when he helped him.

47. Genesis 8.13. In the year 601 the first month, the first day of the month
the waters were dried up. Chap. 8.14. And in the second month the 27 day of
that month, was the earth dried.

The diminishing of the waters, and the superficies of the earth yet soft and
plashy, is intimated verse. 13, 14. The earth is dried and perfectly solid. The
former speaks of the waters drying, the latter speaks of the earths drying.

Psalm. 103.13.
48. Genesis 8.21. Nor will I any more smite every living creature. Chap 6.13. and
7.21. And all flesh dyed. Chap. 19.24. Sodom overthrown.

Before the flood God judged the world, and he judged Sodom also as a just judge
and revenger: after the flood he promised he would do so no more, as a father
who takes pity of his children.

* Genesis 8.21. with Genesis 19.24. Gods smiting every living creatu^e in Sodom,
does not contradict Gods promise; for Gods promise was, that He would not
destroy the whole Universe, and every creature in it by water: but this hinders
not his destroying any one part of the whole or any one City in the world. He
destroyed Sodom, yet there were thousand places which then had no destruction.

49. Genesis 8.21. I will not again curse the ground for man's sake. Deuteronomy 28.16.
Thou shall be cursed in thy house, and cursed shall thou be in the field, etc.

A general malediction does not take away a special malediction; neither did
God obliege himself, that he would not send his special punishments and
calamities on those who refuse to hear his voice.

A general Covenant with the whole earth is one thing; a particular punishment
of some part of the earth is another.

50. Genesis 8.22. Seed time and harvest as long as the earth endures. 1 Kings
17.1. James 5.17. And it reigned not for three years and six months.

Barrenness and dryness was sent from God on the earth in the days of Elias,
by reason of the Idolatry of the Israelites. He took not away seed-time and
harvest in other places. The ordinance of God, though it was not observed in
one place for man's transgression, yet it found place in an other.

* 51. Genesis 9.2. The fear of you and the dread of you, shall be on every
creature. Prove. 30.30. The Lion fears not for fear of you.

The creature considered in its own strength is one thing, and as it has fear
by a divine imposition is another; in the former sense Solomon speaks to us, in
the latter sense is that of Genesis to be understood.

52. Genesis 9.2. And the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every
beast of the earth. Job 39.9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee?

In the former place the dominion over the creatures is partly restored to man
after the fall; and God has cast a fear on them that they should not dare to
hurt man; but should be afraid of man's countenance. But if the Unicorn or any
beast do violence to man, they do but put him in mind of his fall.

53. Genesis 9.13. I do set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be for a token of a
Covenant between me and the earth. Revel. 4.3. And there was a rainbow round
about the throne, in sight like to an emrald.

The first place is concerning the ordinary place of the rainbow; the second,
of the extraordinary rainbow, and the seat of God.

* Genesis 9.13. with Rev. 4.3. The rainbow was no natural but an instituted sign
of a temporal Covenant, in the general of it to all creatures. Yet it may be
a sign of the spiritual part of the Covenant, with reference to Christ, in
whom all promises of what sort soever, are yea and amen, and who is represented
sitting in his Throne, compassed with a rainbow, in sight like unto an Emrald.
The one was a As the word real is opposed to symbolicall.
real rainbow, the other only symbolicall; the one in the material Heaven,
the other in the beatificall.

* 54. Genesis 10.5. Divided in their Lands every man after his tongue. Genesis 11.1.
The whole earth was of one language and speech.

The former passage is inserted by way of anticipation, to make the History
complete; and the holy Ghost has regard to the thing it self, not to the time,
or method wherein it was done, for that is delivered in the next Chapter.

* 55. Genesis 10.8. Nimrod began to be mighty in the earth. Verse 10. And the
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel. Romans 13.1 Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers.

The tyrannical power of Nimrod was with violence, and violation of government
in families, yet not without Gods ordination; nor does every unlawful
attaining take away the lawful power; from ill beginnings and manners, good
laws and profitable things proceed also. The beginning of the Kingdom of
Judah, was the wantonness and wickedness of the people. The beginning of the
Kingdom of Israel, the sedition of Jeroboam: yet they were afterward lawful
Kingdoms.

Power and authority is one thing, the acquisition and use of that power are
others, a man may come unlawfully by his power, and one may use a lawful power
unlawfully.

56. Genesis 10.22. The children of Sem, were Elam, Assure, and Arphaxad. Chap.
11.10. Sem begat Arphaxad two years after the flood.

In History the order of nature and time are not always observed: therefore
though Elam and Assure are named, Chap. 10. before Arphaxad, yet it follows not
that they were elder than he; and Sem is said to have begotten sons and
daughters after Arphaxad was born, and not before.

57. Genesis 11.7. Let us go down, and there confound their language. 1 Kings
8.27. Jer. 23.24. Do not I fill the earth?

God is not moved from place to place, because he is all every where, Lib. 16.
cap. 15. De Civ. Dei.
says Augustine; but he is said to descend when he does any thing for the
ordinary and usual course of nature, and so he shows his presence in respect
of us, not that there is any thing that he does not see and know, or does
change his place, but this is attributed to God after the manner of men, and in
respect of our sense, as Genesis 18.21. Psalm 14.2.

* Genesis 11.7. with 1 Kings 8.27. God in descending forsakes not the place
wherein he was, but contains in himself all space and place. Yet the
attributes and properties of God are of the very substance of his nature, his
power, his wisdom, his justice, goodness, and providence; wherefore when by
these he manifestly shows his glory, to us inferior creatures, he is rightly
said to descend unto us. For although his power was never absent, nor his
providence in directing that which men did wickedly commit unto his own glory
and the profit of his Church: yet now he descended by his power, when he
shows unto men the force thereof, and by his providence, when he declared
himself displeased with their wicked enterprise.

58. Genesis 11.12. Arphaxad begat Salem. Luke 3.36. Which was the son of Sala,
which was the son of Cainan, etc.

Beda in Luke 3.
The name and the generation of Cainan in Genesis, and the words of the days,
according to the truth of the Hebrews, is not found; but Arphaxad is said to
have begotten Sala, there being none betwixt him; Luke took this genealogy from
the edition of the 70 Interpreters.

59. Genesis 11.26. Terah lived 70 years, and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. Chap.
12.^. And Abram was 75 years old when he departed out of Haran.

Terah did not beget three sons in the same year, but he began to generate at
70 years old, and he lived in Haran to 205 years old; it may be Abram was the
younger son, but because he is so commended in the Scriptures, he is set down
first before his brethren, as Jacob, Mat. 1.3. Judas, 1 Pet. 4.1.

* Genesis 11.26, 27. with 12.4. Abram when he went out of Haran was 75 years,
Chap. 12.4, 5. before which time, Verse 32. of this Chapter, whose age is
summoned up to 205; out of which deduct the age of Abram at the time of his
departing out of Haran, which presently followed the death of his father, and
the birth of Abram will fall out to be about the 130 year of Terahs age. Its
supposed Haran was the eldest, and Abram the youngest, for Sara was Harans
daughter, and ten years elder than Abram. Others conceive Abram the eldest, as
born in the 70 year of Terah, and that he departed from Haran into Canaan while
his Father lived, but had no settled possession till after the decease of Terah

60. Genesis 12.5. Abraham took Sara his wife, and Lot his brothers son. Chap.
13.8. and 14.14. Abraham said to Lot, we are brethren, etc.

Brothers are called by blood, Genesis 27.13. of alliance, Chap. 14.4. of
gentility, Deuteronomy. 15.3. of affection, 2 Samuel 1.26. of unity, of confession of
faith, Jer. 31.34. We are brethren, says Abraham to Lot, persuading him not to
contend with him; but seeing that he is joined with him in the band of religion
and consanguinity, he wishes him to avoid occasion of quarrel, and not to
give scandal to the infidels.

61. Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. All the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him. Gal. 3.14. The blessing of Abraham came on the Gentiles through Christ.

This promise was made to the seed and posterity, Genesis 22.18. Heb. 11.3.
but not to the person of Abraham, so the promises made by God to the Fathers,
are fulfilled in their children, and in individuals.

* 62. Genesis 12.3. In thy seed all Nations shall be blessed. Ephesians. 3.5, 6. In
other ages it was not made known, etc.

The promise of the Gospel was not so hid in other ages, but that some knew the
calling of the Gentiles before, but because very few knew it, and they that did
know it, had it revealed to them darkly, and for the most part under figures in
general and confusedly; it was revealed before, but not so distinctly and
particularly as now it is.

* 63. Genesis 12.5. And they departed to go into the Land of Canaan. Heb. 11.8.
And he went out not knowing whether he came.

The nomination of a Country in general is one thing, the designation of some
particular place of abode in that Country is another: Moses speaks in the
former sense, and the Apostle in the latter. Besides at the first God did not
tell him of the place whither he should go, for the greater trial of his
faith, but when he was come into Canaan, then he told him that was the place.

* 64. Genesis 12.8. Into a Mountain eastward from Bethel. Genesis 28.19.

The place in Abraham's time was called not Bethel but Luz. But the holy Writers
speaking of things and persons that are past, do anticipate, that is, they
speak of them according to the custom of that place and time, in which they
wrote.

65. Genesis 12.18. Abraham told a lie. Psalm 5.7. Thou shall destroy all those
that speak leasing.

Mat. 26. Psalm 32.
Seeing that the Devil is the Father of lying, Abraham denying his wife, sinned
against God by distrust, against Sara and Pharaoh by injustice, for he sought
to save his life by wrong means, as Peter did by denying Christ. God will
destroy impenitent liars, but not whose lies and offenses are pardoned in
Christ, and covered; as Abraham's, Isaacs, and Peter's were, who repented.

* Genesis 12.18. with Psalm 5.7. The latter place speaks of such as tell lies and
repent not; a lie is a sin and punishable where ever it is found. But
repentance takes away the sting of the lie, and so it does not destroy, nor did
it destroy Abraham.

66. Genesis 12.7. and 13.15. and 15.38. This land which thou seek will I give
to thee and thy seed, etc. Acts 7.5. Heb. 11.9. And he gave him n^ inheritance
in it, no not so much as to set his foot on.

Prophesies and Promises are given to some and fulfilled to others; nor are
they always fulfilled to those to whom they are given, but in those for whose
cause they were given. So the Land was given to Abraham according to right, but
to his posterity for possession.

* 67. Genesis 13.15. To thee will I give it. Acts 7.5. Heb. 11.9. And he gave him
none inheritance in it.

Chrysostom has an observation on Hosea 11. that the promises and prophesies
were given to some, and fulfilled to others: being not always fulfilled to
those they were given, but to those for whom they were given. The Land was
given to Abraham as to right, to his sons as to possession, the future being
put for the time past or present. For first the inhabitants of Canaan were to
be dispossessed, but that they were not yet, their iniquity being not then full.

* 68. Genesis 13.17. Arise and walk thorough the Land, and I will give it thee.
Act. 7.5. He gave him no inheritance in it, no not a foot.

The right of living is one thing, the possession another. Abraham had the
right to the land, and he had the possession, but it was in his seed and
posterity.

69. Genesis 13.16. I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth. 2 Samuel 24.9.
And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the King.

The posterity of Abraham, which were and are before the numbering David made,
cannot be numbered, nor had David the complete number of the people from Joab,
who gave the King a less number of the people than they were.

* 70. Genesis 14.13. And these were confederate with Abraham, 2 Chronicles. 19.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that help the Lord.

The Law of God forbids leagues with Infidels and wicked men: but not all
leagues, those are condemned only which are against true Religion, Marriages,
or joining in arms, except in the case of public necessity, as Asa with
Benadab, Josaphat with Achab, etc. but such leagues as are concerning the
defending of their Country, preserving neighborhood, of not making inroads,
of pr^serving the public peace, or mutual commerce, where Religion is not
hurt, are not forbidden, but are adjudged lawful and necessary: such a league
was this of Abraham with the neighboring Cananites.

* 71. Genesis 15.6. Whereby shall I know this? Matthew. 12.39. An evil and
adulterous generation seeks after a sign.

It is one thing to ask a sing for the confirmation of temporal promises,
where the thing was obscure and altogether hid: another thing to ask a sign to
demonstrate a thing which might otherwise be known. Abraham seeking a sign was
a special motion of Gods Spirit, which Christ condemns not; for it has been
permitted to some by a peculiar favor, as to Gideon and Hezekiah, which they
did not so much out of incredulity, as out of a desire to be forfeited against
humane infirmity; or he asked this Question, not so much doubting of the thing
promised, as desiring to know somewhat more particularly, of the manner of
performance. Abraham might well seek a sign in a thing which he had no promise
on before, nor no footstep of the manner of the coming of it discovered, there
being many difficulties to encounter withal before it could be effected. The
Jews they might have sought the Scriptures, and found so clear evidences that
Jesus was the Christ, that they need not seek any signs concerning him.

72. Genesis 15.6. Abraham believed God, and he counted it unto him for
righteousness. James 2.21. Abraham was justified by works.

Abraham before God was justified by faith, and was declared to be just; by his
works before men, offering up his son Isaac upon the Altar.

73. Genesis 15.13. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and
shall serve them 400 years. Exodus 12.40. Now the sojourning of the children of
Israel who dwelt in Egypt was 430 years.

In the Scripture the years are not always precisely numbered, the lesser
number is omitted, and here under the greater round number the less is
comprehended.

* Genesis 15.13. with Exodus 12.40. In a great sum so small a number comes under
no particular account, as the 72 Interpreters are called the 70, and this
account is not to begin lower than the giving of the promise to Abraham, to the
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt; and the giving of the Law were 430
years, Exodus 12.40. Gal. 3.13. of which neither 405, nor 400, nor 430, was
spent under the Egyptian persecution: for though the account end with their
parting thence, it did not begin with their coming thither: but so much of the
time was run before Jacob's coming thither; and so much after that peaceably
passed on until the death of Joseph, so as some account the time of their
rigid servitude to an 140, some to a 121 at the most; the sum of 430 equally
divided, the one half spent before their going into Egypt, the other half in
their abiding there, 215 before their going into Egypt reckoned thus, from the
promise given to Abraham, to the birth of Isaac 25; from the birth of Isaac to
the birth of Jacob 60 years; from thence to their coming into Egypt 130, in
all 215; the other 215 thus, 94 before the death of Levi, 121 betwixt his death
and their deliverance out of Egypt.

Chrysostom. hom. 36. in Genesis
74. Genesis 15.15. Thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace. Joshua 24.2. Terah and
his fathers served other Gods.

To go to his Fathers, that is, to die, it is an Hebrew phrase. Also by the
name of Fathers here may be understood, Adam, Abel, Noah, etc. to whom he went
by faith.

* 75. Genesis 15.16. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again.

1 Chro. There are reckoned six in the Tribe of Judah, from Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Judah, Phares, Hezron, Chaleb; so in the Tribe of Levi, from Abraham to
Moses are reckoned six, from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Levi, Cahath, Amram, Moses.

Answ. In the fourth generation, that is, in the 400 year, 100 year to a
generation; or somewhat about this, which for evennesse and rotundity is not
reckoned. Or

Secondly, By the fourth generation is meant the fourth geniture, or birth of
the Father and the Son, so the fourth generation is to be reckoned from the
descent of the sons of Jacob into Egypt, to their entrance into Canaan, as
in the Tribe of Judah, from Judah to Phares, from Phares to Hesron; from Hesron
to Caleb; so in Levi, Levi, Cahath, Amram, Moses.

Thirdly, It is one thing to begin the reckoning of four generations, from the
day that God made this promise to Abraham, (at which time Abraham had none at
all) and another thing to begin their account from the time that their
servitude in a strange Nation (which God foretold) should determine; before
ever God promised the returning of any fourth generations, he told Abraham they
must first fojourne in a strange Land: then in the fourth generation of them
whom God brings out thence, they shall return to this Land, which account Moses
set down Exodus 6.16. reckoning from Levi, whose first generation was Coath, the
second was Amram, the third Aaron, the fourth Eliazar, who divided the Land at
the time God had foretold Abraham.

76. Genesis 16.9. The Angel of the Lord said unto Hagar, Return to thy Mistress
Chap. 21.12. God commands Abraham to send Hagar away.

First Hagar flying of her own accord was commanded to return to her Mistress,
Gal. 4.22. Chap. 31.
then being thrust out by force, she staid in the desert; the Apostle expounds
that figure, and applies it to the Old and New Testament.

77. Genesis 17.12. God appointed circumcision. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is
nothing.

Circumcision by divine institution in the Old Testament was a sacrament to the
coming of Christ, but in the New Testament it is nothing, nor is profitable to
our salvation; we must therefore distinguish the times of the Old and New
Testament.

78. Genesis 18.25. Thou shall not kill the righteous with the wicked. Ezekiel. 21.3.
I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

Abraham speaks of eternal destruction and cutting off; God speaks of
corporal and temporal affliction of the righteous with the wicked.

79. Genesis 21.9. Ismael played with Isaac. Gal. 4.29. He persecuted Isaac.

Jerome says, That Ismael challenged the primogeniture, insulting over Isaac
in words and deeds, and he calls that the contention of the young ones. It is
certain, if Ismael had not wronged Isaac, he should not have been expelled from
his Fathers house.

* 80. Genesis 21.31. Wherefore he called the name of that place Beersheba. Genesis
26.33. Therefore the name of the City is Beersheba unto this day.

There were two places of that name, the one in the Tribe of Zebulon betwixt
the upper and nether Galilee, so Aducham; the other was in the south part of
Judah, Josh. 15.21, 28. which these Texts speak of. Now there was a Well and a
City of the same name. Abraham gave a name to the Region or Country it self,
Isaac to the City, or else Abraham gave name to the City and Well; but in
process of time it lost it among the Cananites, filling up the Well, but Isaac
opening the Well again, gave it the old name of Beersheba.

* Genesis 21.31. There they both swear. Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at all.

Abraham swear solemnly to confirm what they were about. Christ condemns
vain, rash, frivolous, vicious and ill conceived swearing. He condemns not all
swearing, for Deuteronomy. 6.17. Thou shall swear by his name; and Psalm 53.12. but
that rash ordinary swearing which is used commonly and profanely.

81. Genesis 22.1. God tempted Abraham. James 1.13. Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God.

The first place is concerning outward temptation, sent from God to prove our
faith, patience and hope, and for our good. The latter is concerning internal
temptations from the flesh and the devil, who do allure us to sin, or
concerning temptations for our hurt. Aug. lib. 16. cap. 32. De Civ. Dei.
Abraham was tried to sacrifice his son, that so his dutiful obedience might
appear, not to God, but to the ages that should be; for a man's mind oft-times
cannot be known to himself, unless he make trial of his strength, not by word
but by deeds, when he is examined by temptation.

* Genesis 22.1. with James 1.13.

Temptations are either probations or provoca ions to evil. When God temp^s its
by probation, not provocation, and that probation is either by mercies, Deuteronomy. 8
2, 16. or by afflictions, James 1.2. 1 Peter 2.7. And this God does, not that
he knows not what is in man, but that man may know what is in himself, and that
either as to his grace or corruption, or else that man may see what Gods
preventing, renewing and saving grace is able to do. It Is true, that God may in
a judiciary manner tempt man, or leave him to be tempted, withdrawing his grace
from him. Saint James speaks of temptations, actively, not passively to evil,
not to good; to the evil of sin, not of suffering.

82. Genesis 22.2. Thou shall offer the son whom thou love for a
burnt-offering. Exodus 20.13. Deuteronomy. 5.17. Thou shall not kill.

God gave the Law not to himself but us, this is a command and example which is
singular, of the faith or obedience of Abraham, or of his trial, neither is it
contrary to the precept of the Decalogue, of not killing our neighbor: for the
special dict^tes and commands of God do not derogate from his general
commands.

83. Genesis 22.2. God commanded. verse. 12. God forbad to offer up Isaac James
1.17. With God there is no variableness.

The decree of God which he will bring to effect is immutable: those decrees
that are not fulfilled, are but conditional, and but for trial; such is this
example of a command given to Abraham, and then revoked.

* Genesis 22.2. Take thy son and offer him, etc. 22.12. Lay not thy hand on the
Lad. James 1.17. in whom there is no shadow of change.

God did decree to command Abraham to offer his son, and yet resolved, he
should not be suffered to offer his son, but only tried whether he would
offer him or no, so as God alters not his will, he only prosecutes the decree
he had made.

* 84. Genesis 22.12. Lay not thy hand on the child, etc. Heb. 11.17. Abraham
offered up Isaac when he was tried.

Intention is one thing, real performance is an other; yet God accepts of the
intention for the action. Abraham's intentions were to offer up his son, and
he endeavored it, which made the holy Ghost account his son as offered.

85. Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
Ephesians. 3.5. The mystery of the incarnation of the Son of God, was not known
to the sons of men as it is now revealed to his Apostles and Prophets by the
Spirit!

In the former place God promised to Abraham, that of his seed should be born
Christ the Savior of the world. In the latter the Apostle speaks by
comparison; for that mystery was not known before the preaching of the Gospel,
Heb. 1.1.
for it was revealed to the Fathers in many parts and diverse manners, under
shadows and figures only; but to us, after the promises fulfilled in Christ,
plainly, clearly, and perspicuously.

* 86. Genesis 23.17, 18. Were made sure unto Abraham, etc. Acts 7.5. And, He gave
him none inheritance, etc.

The Land or Cave was made sure to Abraham, not for an heritage, so much as a
burying place; not for the living to enjoy, as for the dead to rest in: the
right of possession and heritage, was not bought by Abraham, but given by God
gratis to his posterity.

87. Genesis 23.37. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land.
Exodus 20.5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. Mat.
4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.

He gave civil adoration to the people, which was an ordinary thing amongst
those of the east, but religious adoration is only due to God, which he will
not have to be given to an other.

88. Genesis 25.23. The elder shall serve the younger. Chap. 33.3. Jacob bowed
himself seven times when he came to his brother.

Jacob gave civil honor to his brother Esau, who was in great power and
authority, yet that takes not off from the force of the promise, Psalm. 60.1.
which was fulfilled in its time; when David conquered the Idumaeans and made
them subject to the Israelites.

* 89. Genesis 25.23. with Genesis 33.3. and 33.14. The person of a man is one thing,
his posterity is another. The elder shall serve, etc. The preeminence of Jacob
the younger, above Esau the elder, consisted in the prerogative of the
birthright, (which gave him authority over his brethren, and the rest of the
household under his Father) devolved from Esau to Jacob. 2. In promise of the
land of Canaan. 3. in the holy Covenant of Religion with God, which was
propagated in Jacobs posterity. But in temporal pre-eminence, Jacob might be
said to serve Esau, and he might serve, and call him his servant, and do him
homage.

90. Genesis 26.34. Esau married two wives, Judith the daughter of Beeri the
Hittite, and Besamath the daughter of Elon the Hittite. Chap. 36.2. Esau took
his wives of the daughters of Canaan, Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite,
and Aholibama the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite.

Those wives were two, or each of them had two names, for the Hittites were in
the borders of the Hivites.

* Genesis 26.34. with Genesis 36.2. Either these former were different ways from
the latter, the two former dying without Children, else they were the same, and
had two names, the former place using one name, the latter another, so it was
usual in Scripture.

91. Genesis 27.23. Jacob deceived his father Isaac. Chap. 20.41. His father in
law, and his uncle Laban. Mark 10.29. Defraud not.

1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
We must live by Gods law, and not by examples; Jacob did that by inspiration
from God, without injuring his Father or his Uncle. Let us so live in mutual
conversation, that we circumvent not our brother in any thing, because God is
the revenger of all these things, for all deceit is openly condemned in the
word of God.

92. Genesis 27.28. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the
earth, and plenty of corn and wine. Chap. 42.2. Jacob for want of provision
sent his sons into Egypt to buy corn.

Deficiency and temporal want does not diminish the divine blessing and force
of the promise. As traveling did not hinder Abraham, so Jacob did not lose the
fruit of his Fathers blessing.

93. Genesis 27.38. Esau lift up his voice and wept. 12.17. Esau found no place of
repentance. Heb. 12.17.

Esaus repentance was not true but hypocritical, for he did not acknowledge his
sin, but was sorry for his loss, and would have killed his brother. Nor could
he by his tears move his Father to repent of the blessing given to Jacob.

* Genesis 27.38. with Heb. 12.17. Repentance and weeping are to be distinguished
according to their Objects, some repentance and weeping are carnal, because
they are set upon, and rests in (not looking further than) worldly losses and
affairs; the other repentance respects Gods displeasure; this of Esaus in
Genesis, was upon a worldly account, and that repentance spoken of in Hebrews,
was not spoken of Esau, but of Isaac his father. Esau found no repentance or
change for all his weeping in Isaac his father.

* Genesis 30.41. Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the sheep in the gutters
that they might conceive, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That no man go beyond, or defraud
his brothee, etc.

Warrantable policy carried by the instinct of the holy Ghost in cases
concerning the public good of the Church, against its adversary, is one
thing; private practices for base ends, defrauding others to enrich themselves,
in buying and selling that's another thing. Jacob did this by Gods direction,
Genesis 31.9, 10, 11, 12.

94. Genesis 32.3. and 33.14. Esau lived before Jacobs return in the Land of Seir.
Chap. 36.6. Esau took all that he had got in the Land of Canaan, and went unto
Seir from the face of his brother Jacob.

Esau, says August. after that his brother was departed to Mesopotamia, would
not live with his parents, whether by reason of that commotion, that he grieved
that he was deceived of the blessing of his Father, or whether it were by
reason of his wives, which he saw were hateful to his parents, or whatsoever
the cause was; and he began to live in the mountain of Seir, then after that
Jacob was returned, peace being made betwixt them, he went back to his Parents,
and when they both together had buried their Father, he went again to Seir, and
there be propagated the Nation of the Idumaeans.

95. Genesis 32.30. I have seen God face to face says Jacob. Exodus 33.20. No man
can see my face and live.

It was the common opinion of the Ancients, that if any man should see the face
of God, he must dye the death; so Gideon, Manoah, and the Israelites feared
their lives; but Jacob here, Abraham Chap. 18. Joh. 1.18.
Isaiah, Chap. 6. Daniel, Chap. 7. by their example confute that opinion, for
they saw God face to face, that is, the glory of God was manifest to them; but
the essence and nature of Gods face, no mortal man can see, nor ever did see.

* Genesis 32.30. with Jo. 1.18. No man has seen Gods face at any time. And Exodus
33.20.

The face of God in Scripture is not to be taken for his Essence and Nature in
the former place, but in the latter, No man has seen God thus.

Secondly, The face of God is Gods manifestation of himself externally some way
or other, thus the Patriarchs and other have seen him.

Thirdly, The knowledge of God by his Word, especially the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3 8.

Fourthly, The glory and ineffable clearness of his Majesty in eternal life,
1 Cor. 13.12.

The sight of God is twofold, either in respect of us under the New, or of
those under the Old Testament. Jacob and others saw God face to face, not in
respect of us, but in respect of others in the same time and dispensation, who
saw not God in so clear a dispensation as he did. No nor he himself formerly
did enjoy that clearness. This vision in humane form, in comparison of other
apparitions, was more plain and familiar with face to face, as those that
wrestle, or when a man talks with his friend in presence.

* 96. Genesis 32.3. and 33.14. and 36.6. The land of Seir, the country of Edom.

There were two Seirs, Seir in the land of Edom, so it may be taken for a part
of Edom or Esaus possession, which was called Seir a Chorite and not Esau, for
it had the name before his birth, Genesis 14.6.

97. Genesis 33.19. Jacob bought a parcel of a field at the hand of the children
of Hamor Sechems father. Chap. 23.16. Abraham bought the field with the cave of
Ephron the Hittite.

Abraham bought the possession of the Cave, with the ground about it for the
burial of the dead. Jacob bought the greater part of the field to dwell there,
Genesis 30.13. Chap. 48. Josh. 24.32.
where he pitched his tents. In the cave that Abraham bought was Sara buried,
and he himself; also Isaac, and Jacob. But in the field that Jacob bought, and
gave to his son Joseph, were Joseph's bones buried; brought thither out of Egypt.

* 98. Genesis 33.19. and 49.29. and 50.13. Josh. last 32. with Genesis 23.16. Acts
7.16.

To resolve these large difficulties, for brevities sake, which suits with the
design, know. Ephron from whom Abraham bought the sepulcher had two names,
Seir, so called by Moses, Hemor or Hamor by St Stephen; so as its the same
person that Moses and Stephen designs, when they put several names.

Secondly, There was two purchases, the one made by Abraham, Genesis 23.17, 18.
the field of Ephron in Machpelah; the other by Jacob, in Genesis 33.19. but the
one after the other a long while.

Thirdly, Some of the Patriarchs were buried in Sychem, which Jacob bought,
Genesis 33.19. as Joseph, and some as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Genesis 50.13. were
buried in Hebron, the field that Abraham bought for money of Ephron.

Fourthly, Those words in Acts 7.16. Of the sons of Emmor, may be rendered
besides, that ( i. e. sepulcher) of the sons of Emmor of Sychem.

99. Genesis 33.19. Jacob bought a parcel of a field where he had spread his
Tents. Chap. 23.16. Abraham paid the money for the Cave, and the borders round
about. Act. 7.5. And he gave him no inheritance in it, no not so much as to set
his foot on.

The Patriarchs would not possess themselves of the Land of promise before the
time, whose patrimony was not bought with money, but as we find it Acts 7. God
gave it freely to their posterity.

* Genesis 35.26. All the sons of Jacob were said to be born in Padan Aram, yet
Benjamin was not born there; but the Scripture is not sollicitous to reckon
many times the exceptions, but gives the denomination to the greater part, as
Genesis 46.15. all the souls which came from Jacob are reckoned to be 70, when
probably there wanted one.

* Genesis 37.10. with 35.19. And thy mother.

If Rachel was dead, how then does he say, I and thy mother shall worship thee?

He speaks not of dead Rachel, but of his living maid Bela, who being Joseph's
Nurse, was in place of his mother.

100. Genesis 42.15. By the life of Pharaoh. Matthew. 34. Swear not at all.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. 2 Cor. 1.23.
Joseph swears not, but he confirms his words by speaking after the usual
manner that the Egyptians did. So Moses calls the heaven and the earth; and
Paul calls God to witness upon his soul. Christ by the Evangelist forbids
all vain and unnecessary oaths, and forbids perjury.

101. Genesis 46.4. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely
bring thee up again. Chap. 49.33. Jacob died in Egypt. Genesis 50.13.


Jacob returned out of Egypt in his posterity, and his body also after his
death was brought into the land of Canaan, and buried there.

102. Genesis 46.21. The ten sons of Benjamin. Chap. 44.20. He was a child, a
little one.

Dom. Mart Luth.
Jacob gave a wife to his youngest son Benjamin, that Rachel might have seed
by him; and whilst God by a singular blessing gave him so many sons, by that
means he pacified Jacobs sorrow for Joseph.

* 103. Genesis 46.26. with 27. and Acts 7.14.

In the first computation Jacob and Joseph are not comprised, nor Ephraim and
Manasses his sons, which being added make up 70, in the Acts is added the
five Nephews of Joseph, which Numb. 26. and 1 Cro. 7. are reckoned, and they
are Machir the son of Manasses, and Galaad the son of Machir, Sutulaam and
Taam the sons of Ephraim; and Edom the son of Sutulaam, which were all born
in Egypt.

* Gen 46.26. All the souls were threescore and ten. Exodus 1.5. Deuteronomy. 10.22
with Acts 7.14. Threescore and fifteen souls.

Moses observed a threefold manner of numbering the people.

First, Those souls only which entered with him into Egypt of Jacobs family,
and came from his loins, except the wives of his sons, and so there was 66
souls.

The second numbering, by which is exposed the number of the whole Nation,
comprehending Jacob, Joseph and two sons of Joseph which came from the loins of
Jacob; which 4 added to 66 make 70.

The third numbering of all the heads belonging to the family of Jacob
contracted into one, viz. 4 Wives of Jacob, and the two sons of Judah though
being dead in Canaan, Or and Onam, comprehending Jacob, Joseph and his two
sons, and so they will all make 76; and so Jacob being subtracted, Acts 7.14.
as will appear by the words they make 75, so the number 75 is not to be
understood of those that went down, but of all which had relation to Jacob, who
Jacob excepted were so many.

Others resolve it thus, Jacob and Joseph, and Joseph's two sons born in
Egypt (coming from Jacobs loins are reckoned with them) which with 66
reckoned verse 6. make 70; and though Joseph came into Egypt before, and two
came not down at all, being born there: Yet they are said to be 70, the whole
taking denomination from the greater part, but without appearance of fraud;
because the story sets down, who came with Jacob, and who came not. As for the
number 75, the Septuagint use 75 in their Translation, Genesis 46.27. and Exodus
1.5. which 5 are Machir the son, and Gilead his son and nephew or
grandchild of Manasseh, and Sutulam, and Taham; two sons of Ephraim, and
Edom his grandchild by Sutulam, which they seem to take from 1 Cro. 7.14, 20.
but if they reckon right, they should reckon two more, verse 29.

But others say, that to make up the number 75, there is use made of such as
were born afterward in Egypt of one family, as Father, Son, Grandchild, and
Great-grandchild, which Jacob might see before he died: and of these the most
being such as he brought with him out of Canaan, they might all in reference to
Jacob, be sorted to his company.

104. Genesis 46.34. Every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. Chap.
47.6. If thou know any men of activity amongst them, then make them rulers
over my cattle.

The Egyptians hated the shepherds of the Hebrews, not for their cattle, but
for their circumcision and religion, because they sacrificed those things which
the Egyptians worshipped for Gods.

105. Genesis 47.31. And Israel bowed himself upon his beds head. Heb. 11.21.
Worshipped leaning upon the top of his st^ffe.

Jacob being lifted up at the head of his bed bowed himself upon the top of his
staff, and so worshipping God, left an example of piety behind him to his
children.

* Genesis 47.31. with Heb. 11.21. Some say the difference arises by the Apostles
following the 70, and the 70 followed a Copy which had no poin^s, for the same
Letters varied, in one vowell stand to both, for Mitteh is a bed, Matteh a
staff. But others easily reconcile it thus; Jacob was old and feeble, and
delighting in prayer, and bowing himself in holy adoration to his God, would
now in the last time succor up his feeble limbs by a staff, to wind about his
weak body into a more reverend prostration before the Lord, than that of lying
upon his back in his bed; and in this posture he kneeled up, with his face
toward the beds head, leaning on a staff.

* 106. Genesis 48.22. with Genesis 33.19. and Josh. ult. 33. The one place says, He
took it by force, the other, He bought it.

Jacob at the first truly bought it, but being stricken with fear, by reason
of the slaughter of the Sichimites by his two sons, he relinquished the
field, the Amorites invading it, Jacob returning upon them with force, took it
from them.

107. Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come. 1 Samuel 10.1. The Scepter was before David
in the tribe of Benjamin. Luke 2.1. And when Christ was born, it was an
Augustus Caesar.

The supreme power over the Jews, was in Moses and Joshua their leaders, then
in the Judges unto Saul, under the Kings to the captivity of Babylon, under the
Priests until Herod. Now the accomplishment of this Prophecy began not in the
time it was pronounced, but from the time the Kingly Government was confirmed
in the tribe of Judah, and the Princes of that tribe were in the Sanhedrim
until Christ came, it was at last abolished by Herod.

* Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver, etc.
Luke 2.1. In the days of Augustus Caesar there went forth a command, that all
the world, etc.

The Scepter was departed before Christ's time from Judah, and many times it was
not in Judah, but in Ephraim, etc.

Answ. The Exposition of the words will resolve the doubt, the meaning is not
that Judah should never cease from having a King, or being a Kingdom, but that
it should not cease from being a State, a body Politic, or Commonwealth,
having a power of Government and Jurisdiction within it self until Messiah
come, (...).

Lawgiver signifies, not only a maker of Laws, but qui jus dicit, he that
exercises Jurisdiction from between his feet, or of his posterity, Shiloh the
Peacemaker and Messiah.

The rule was said to be in Judah, because the longest time of continuance
(though in a diverse form of government) shall be in Judah; or if in any other
Tribe, yet so that Judah shall have the name and honor of the Kingdom,
Commonweal, and People, who are o^ the posterity of Jacob or Israel, which
shall not be styled the Kingdom or People of Ruben, etc. but of Judah, and it
shall not be confounded, as other Tribes after the captivity of Babylon. But it
shall more evidently appear, who rightly deriveth his pedigree from Judah, and
so it designs the ceasing to be a Commonwealth, or to have any government; but
that they shall be dispersed when the Shiloh comes, and gathers all Nations to
him, not when the Romans had at first the Jews in subjection, for then the
Shiloh was not come but coming, nor under Herod; or as some will seven years
after him, when his son Archelaus being banished, Iudaea was reduced into a
Province; for though Christ was then born, yet were not the Gentiles gathered
to him. But at the destruction of the Jewish state by Titus, when both these
things were come to pass: Christ being come, and the Gentiles converted unto
his obedience, then did the Scepter depart from Judah, and they cease from
being any more a Commonwealth.

* Genesis 49.7. I will divide them in Jacob, Josh. 19.1.

Simeon had his lot to be sharer of the land as others; How then was he divided?

The land at the first was accounted greater than upon a review it held forth,
Josh. 19.7. so as Simeon being scanted of the first possession, they being
received into the possessions of Judah, were afterward removed into the
confines of another Tribe; or it growing greater, was found to have an
enlargement: and further, the Scribes and Lawyers arise out of that Tribe,
which that they might the better instruct the people in the Law, and follow
their calling, they were dispersed through all the Tribes.

108. Genesis 49.28. Jacob blesed all his sons with their proper benedictions.
Verse. 7. Jacob cursed Simeon and Levi.

That is, he blessed them all in Christ; but he foreshewed to every one of
them, blessings or cursing, as the Holy Ghost inspired him.

EXODUS.
THis Book has its name from going out, for here is described the going forth
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt: the promulgation of the moral Law,
and the ceremonial, and judicial in the wilderness: the raising of the
Tabernacle, with all things belonging to it. It contains a History of 114 years.

109. Exodus 1.5. And all the sons that came out of the loins of Jacob were 70
souls. Genesis 46.26. All the souls which came into Egypt with Jacob were 66.
Acts 7.14. Joseph called his father Jacob and his kindred 75 souls that went
down into Egypt.

There descended with Jacob into Egypt the souls which came out of his thighs
66, if you add to these Jacob and Joseph and his two sons they make 70.
Stephen adds the four wives of Jacob, and the two sons of Judah which were
dead, excepting Jacob, his whole family make 75 souls in number.

110. Exodus 1.19. The Midwiues lied to Pharaoh, and God blessed them. Chap.
3.18. and 5.3. Moses said, We will go three days journey into the wilderness,
and sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Zach. 8.16. Speak every one truth to his
neighbor.

1 Pet. 2.1.
It is not certain whether the Midwives did lie or not; it might be the Hebrew
Women were delivered before they came at them: and God blessed the Midwives,
not for lying, but because they feared him. Moses spoke the words of God unto
Pharaoh, and God is the God of truth.

* Exodus 1.19. God blessed the Midwives not for their lie* but for their holy
affections and pity expressed toward the Hebrew children. In the same action
God may love the affection, and pass by the failings in the actions; not that
hereby he would have us to do evil that good may come upon it. For it is a
great Question, Whether these Jews did conceive that such an officious lie, by
which so many poor innocents might be preserved, was a sin or not.

111. Exodus 2.3. Moses was laid by the river in an arc of bulrushes. Heb.
11.23. Moses parents feared not the Kings commandment.

It is certain that the Hebrew parents feared God more than Pharaoh; not did
they doubt in exposing of Moses, but that God would deliver him.

* 112. Exodus 2.14. Moses feared and fled (saying) surely this thing is known
to the King. Heb. 11.27. He feared not the wrath of the King.

Some distinguish of a religious or civil fear, well becoming a wise man and a
Christian; and that fear of a Malefactor which follows the terrors of
conscience. In this latter sense Moses had no cause to fear, because he knew
God would deliver him and his brethren; the fear that he had upon him was, that
if he stayed in Egypt, he should be executed, and then how could the promise
be fulfilled by his hand? and the Israelites be better by him?

Others tell us, that the departures of Moses from Egypt were two:

The former mentioned, wherein his fear appeared to be more than his faith.

The latter was after his contestation, (by miracles) with Pharaoh, Exodus
10.28, 29. and in this, his departure was not by way of fearful flight, but of
faithful and courageous conquest.

113. Exodus 2.15. Moses feared and fled from the face of Pharaoh. Heb. 11.27.
He feared not the wrath of the King.

Moses feared for killing the Egyptian, whilst Pharaoh sought to slay him,
therefore he fled into the Land of Madian. But upon his return when God sent
him to Pharaoh, he despised his threatenings, being secure from all danger.

114. Exodus 4.21. and 7.3. and 10.27. and 11.10. But I will harden Pharoahs
heart. Chap. 8.15. and 8.32. Pharaoh hardened his heart, and was hardened, etc.

Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33.11. Cont. Faust.
God hardens permissively not effectively, by no antecedent will (for he will
not the death of a sinner) but by a consequent will, when he punishes by just
judgment, and uses evil to a good end. Satan, says Augustine, hardens by
persuading, Man by consenting, God by forsaking.

* Exodus 4.21. and 7.3. and 10.27. with Exodus 8.15. and 13.15.

Hardening in Scripture is given to Satan, to wicked Men, and to God.

First, To Satan, as the first author and mover to sin, and hardness of heart.

Secondly, To wicked Men, when man by his own proper will turns himself from
God, and consents to the council of Satan, rejoicing in evil, and detesting
that which is good.

Thirdly, to God, not as hardening is evil, and he the author of evil, but
that God uses it to a good end.

Satan hardens by persuasion, Man by assenting, God by forsaking.

God hardens sometimes.

First, Temporary, and that either for trial, or for correction, or for a
punishment.

Secondly, Eternally, which is a part of divine vengeance, God casting off
wicked men, not only taking away his graces, but delivering them to Satan, so
as they harden themselves more and more.

And of this sort God either hardens, as some think, because he by prescience,
foresees their hardening. Or,

2. By Permission.

Or by more efficatious ways.

As, 1. By his general providence whereby we live and move.

2. By withdrawing his Spirit.

3. By affording opportunities which wicked men lay hold on, and harden
themselves.

By hardening in the former place is meant, I will withdraw and withhold grace
from him (as by withholding or withdrawing light, he causes darkness) and
permitting Satan to work upon him, and to excite and spur on his corrupt
nature to all manner of contradiction and contumacy against God: and thus he
shall harden himself by taking those courses whereby he may be hardened.

115. Exodus 4.24. Moses had his wife with him in his journey. Chap. 8.5. And
Iethro Moses Father in law came with his wife and his sons unto Moses.

Moses sent his wife Zipporah back to Her Father, and then afterward received
Her with her Children brought unto him by his Father in law.

116. Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, etc. Romans 1.21. The Nations knew God and his power, so
that they are inexcusable.

Pharaoh was ignorant who Jehovah the God of Israel was, nor had he a true
knowledge of the true God that he might serve him only.

* 117. Exodus 7.1. I have made thee Pharaohs God. Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have
none other Gods before me.

Office is one thing, Essence is another: It is one thing to represent the
Person of God, another thing to be a God. Moses was to represent God, having
the office to be an extraordinary Messenger from God The word is Elohim, which
is ascribed to men in authority, and here it is given to Moses as an
Ambassador from God, for God, and in his stead to command Pharaoh, and to
punish him, if he will not obey the words of Moses speaking in Gods name, and
working miracles by his power, for the confirmation of what he said.

118. Exodus 7.20, 21. All the waters in Egypt were turned into blood. Verse.
22. And the Magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments, when they came
to the water.

That which the Magicians did with water dug cut of the earth, seemed to be
the like, for they are no true miracles of God, which are done by the help of
the Devil.

* 119. Exodus 9.6. All the Cattle of Egypt died, 9.20. They that feared the
Lord among the servants of Pharaoh, put their Cattle into their houses.

All the Cattle, i. e. the Cattle of all sorts, not every one of every sort of
Cattle, for there were some reserved till another time, as in the second place,
and so the word all, is used in other places of Scripture.

120. Exodus 9.16. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to
show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the
earth. Rom 3.8. We must not do evil that good may come of it.

The hardening of Pharaoh was a punishment of his former sins, and of his
tyranny showed over the Israelites, and this God directed for a good end, that
in Pharaoh his power, glory and justice might appear.

121. Exodus 9.29 Moses prayed for Pharaoh that the plagues may cease. 1 John
3.4. and 5.16. We must not pray for any that sin unto death.

Moses prayed not for Pharaoh, but for the taking away of the plagues; farther
to declare the power of God, and to overcome the wickedness and obstinacy of
Pharaohs tyrannical heart.

112. Exodus 11.5. And all the firstborn in the Land of Egypt shall dye. Chap.
12.30. There was not a house where there was not one dead.

We must understand here not only the first born by birth, but such as were so
by authority; for it was so ordered by divine providence, that there was a
first born found in every house.

* 123. Exodus 12.2. Nisan which answers to our March. Exodus 23.16. Thisrin
which answers to September.

How can the year begin at both times?

Answ. Nisan was the beginning of the religious year, accord to which was the
new Moons and Feasts, etc. September was the beginning of the Civil year,
before the Lords Command. And hence the account in Civil affairs took their
rise; yea Sabbaticall and Iubily an year, though they were sacred, yet in that
there were many contracts and bargains, etc. they begun from September, if
these years had begun from the Spring, then the Jews had forborne reaping and
sowing two years together, for they should have left their Husbandry in March,
and so have wanted it in Autumn following twice; but beginning at September,
they only absteined from one harvest and crop, unless the Sabbaticall year
immediately proceeded the year of Jubely, which God remedied by antidating a
double fertility.

* 124. Exodus 12.3. They shall take every one a Lamb. Jer. 7.22. I spoke not
unto your fathers, in the day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt.

It is one thing to enjoin sacrifice and offerings, as a duty representing
other things, another to enjoy a duty for its own cause and sake. God enjoined
not sacrifice or Lambs as things to be done for their own cause, but he
enjoined these things as representing Christ, which if he were not represented,
God esteemed the duty as undone, or not commanded so as they did them; and so
the Lord required not the bare sacrificing, without having an eye to the thing
signified.

* Exodus 12.24. Ye shall observe this thing for ever. Col. 2.14. The
handwriting of ordinances were blotted out.

For ever does not always signify eternity or everlasting; but that which is
of long durance, or to endure to the end of that generation, viz. till the
coming of Christ, which it did; and thus the word for ever is used many times.

125. Exodus 12.36. They had the express warrant of God for it, who could not
command unrighteousness. He that gave the Law may dispense with it. Genesis 15.14.
The Israelites spoiled the Egyptians by borrowing of them. Ps. 37.21. The
wicked borrows and pays not again.

The Israelites had Gods special command for it, to spoil the ungrateful
Egyptians whom they had served for many years for no wages. God foretold this
to Abraham, that his posterity should come out of slavery with great wealth.

* Exodus 12.40. Was 430 years. Acts 7.6. And entreated them evil 400 years.

From Gods promise of the Land of Canaan, made Genesis 12.7. and his first passage
into Egypt, Verse. 10. to this miraculous deliverance, were 430 years.

Some reckon the 30 thus, viz. 15 in Horan, 1 in Canaan when Ismael was born,
14 of Ismaels age when Isaac was born, Genesis 17.25. and 18.10. and 16.16. and
21.5. and then 400 years begin from Isaacs birth, viz. from Isaacs birth to
Jacobs 60, thence to Joseph's birth 90, which is thus collected: Jacob 130 when
Joseph was 40, viz. 30 when Pharaoh advanced him, after that 7 of plenty, 3 of
famine, when Jacob came down. Jacob was 14 when Laban before Joseph was born,
and 40 years of his age out of Jacobs 130, and so will remain 75 or 76 for the
age of Jacob, when he came to Laban, and so 90 years when he had Joseph. Joseph
lived after his Father came down 70. Betwixt Joseph's death and Moses birth 60,
thence to the Israelites going out of Egypt 80 years, which make up 400, and
so there is 430 years in all; thus, 5 60 400 11 90 30 14 110 430 30 60 80 400

126. Exodus 14.15. And the Egyptians which you have seen to day, you shall see
them again no more for ever, Verse. 30. And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon
the sea shore.

In the former place he means the Egyptians alive, following the Israelites,
which afterward the Israelites saw choked in the waters, and cast dead upon
the sea shore.

* 127. Ex. 15.3. The Lord is a man of war. Heb. 13.20. The God of peace.

God is called a man of war by resemblance, not that he is so of his own
essence, but that when his peoples necessiti^s require, he expresses the
actions of a man of war, in defense of his people and offense of his enemies.

He is the God of peace, because he commands peace, works it, loves it and
proclaims it.

* 128. Exodus 12.37. Succoh, with Joshua 13.27. 1 Kings 7.46.

Succoh was the name of three places, one in Egypt, so Exodus 12. The second in
the tribe of Gad, Josh. 13. The third in the tribe of Manasses, 1 Kings 7.

* Exodus 12.40. with Genesis 15.13. From the time the Lord spoke that Genesis 15.13.
to the time of Jacobs weaning was 30 years, and so to the going out of the
children of Israel from Egypt 400, which make 430 years; which agrees with Gal.
3.17. which said, that after the promise was made to Abraham, to the time of
the giving of the Law, which was but three mone^hs after their egresse, was 430
years.

* Exodus 12.42. with 51. and Deuteronomy. 16.6. We must consider, that in Scripture
words are often taken, not in actu perfecto, not in a perfect act, but in
fieri, as they were to be done, or actu continuato; vel solum in^hoato, in a
continued act, or as the act was only begun. When its said, the Israelites went
forth on the night, its intended of the b^ginning of their going forth, when
they are the paschall Lamb, they received the command for going forth probably
in the night, as soon as he knew of the slaughter of the first born; but it was
in the morn that they actually set forth.

* 129. Exodus 17.6. And thou shall smite the rock, and there shall come out
water of it, that the people may drink. 1 Cor. 10.4. And did all drink the same
spiritual drink; For they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them:
and that rock was Christ.

Moses speaks of the natural rock and drink, the Apostle of the spiritual
rock and drink.

Answ. Moses speaks of these historically, the Apostle as they were
institutions, types and mysteries. The rock and drink are said to be spiritual
and sacramental;

First, In respect of the spiritual fountain, of whose fullness we have all
received.

Secondly, In respect of sacramental institution, it was a type of the
spiritual drink in Christ.

Thirdly, In respect of exhibition, the signification was not naked, but a most
real performance of those things, exhibited by the water and rock.

Fourthly, In respect of the manner of receiving it by faith.

* 130. Exodus 17.5. Jehovah Nissi.

The Socinians would hence gather, that the name Jehovah is attributed to the
creature, and so elude those arguments, we draw of Christ's essential deity
from the word Jehovah, which we say is only given to God, and so Christ is
because its given to him.

But we answer, there is no place in the Old Testament, where the word Jehovah
is attribu^ed to created Angels, or any created substance definitive, or in the
nominative cases, or by a proper and improper figurative speech. As for this
place the Altar was not called singly Jehovah, but Jehovah Nessi, that is,
Jehovah is my Banner, so that its not a bare simple name, but a sentence
serving instead of a name.

* 131. Exodus 18.12. Iethro took burnt offerings, etc. 13, 16. verses with
Deuteronomy. 1.7, 8.

The story as it lies here is misplaced, the Statutes and Laws are not yet
given to Moses, and he himself knows them not. The Law for burnt offerings
and sacrifices was not yet given. The choosing of Elders and Judges, which was
upon Iethro's counsel, was not till their departing from Sinai, and now they
are not come to Sinai. The reason for the misplacing of the story was, Moses
(Chap. 17.14, 16.) had denounced the curse on the Amalikites, to show, that
Iethro who dwelt among the Aamalekites, 1 Samuel 15.16. did not fall under his
curse, he brings in the story of his coming into Israel in that very next place
after that the curse is related; not therefore to conclude, that his coming was
at the very time as soon as the curse was denounced, but to show that he once
came, and so accords, and escapes that curse.

* 132. Exodus 19.19. God answered him by a voice. Jo. 5.37. You have neither
heard his voice at any time.

The essential or natural voice of God is one thing, the assumed or
angelical another. No man ever heard Gods natural voice, the voice which was
now and afterward heard, was only angelical or assured.

133. Exodus 20.5. I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquities
of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. Deuteronomy.
24.16. Ezekiel. 18.20. The son shall not bear the Fathers iniquity.

God visits the fathers sins upon the children, if they walk in the way of
their fathers (that is, on them that hate him) but it is otherwise if the
children repent. Also God punishes the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children with temporal punishments, not with eternal, unless they follow the
footsteps of their wicked fathers.

* Exodus 20.5. Visiting the iniquities of the Fathers, etc. Exodus 18.20. The
son shall not bear, etc.

Moses is speaking of idolatry, which is such a sin as cuts in pieces the
Covenant of the Lord, which so far provokes the Lord, as he not only punishes
the father that committed it, but likewise by with drawing his word from them,
punishes it to the third and fourth generation.

Ezekiel speaks in answer to those who would justify themselves, and blame
God, as bringing judgments on them only for their fathers cause, not deserving
them.

* Exodus 20.5. with Ezekiel. 18.17. and Gal. 5 6.

The meaning is, no son shall be damned for the sin of his father; nor one
man for the sin of another, unless by commission or approbation, or some
other way he may make it his own. But for temporal punishments there is none
but (by occasion of others sins) may have their portion in them. But this is
spoken chiefly of those who continue in the sin of their parents: and though
diverse dye (in their minority) God foreseeth how bad they would have been if
they had lived, and sometimes the Parents derive vengeance on their heads, by
imprecations upon them; as the wicked Jews wished Christ's blood might be on
themselves and children; and sometimes the good children of wicked parents, are
temporally punished, because in them, and by such means are their parents
punished; for that in them they would live and flourish, when themselves are
dead.

* Exodus 20.6. And showing mercy unto thousands. Mal. 1.3. Romans 9.13. Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated.

The latter places speak of Gods electing and choosing before time, the former
place speaks of Gods conditionate showing mercy, for he shows mercy for from
Father to Son, and so to Grandchild, if they remain obedient, and be like
their Fathers; but if they swerve from their Fathers steps, and turn to their
broken cisterns, then he will turn away his loving kindness from them.

* Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the name of, etc. Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at
all.

The former place speaks of needless swearing without just and weighty
occasions, or rashly without heed and reverence, or falsely without truth; it
forbids not swearing before a Magistrate; the latter place forbids all vain,
false, and profane swearing, but not a solemn calling God to attest the
truth. This place forbids not all swearing, no more than the Commandment all
killing; but speaks in opposition to that doctrine and practice of the
Pharisees, who suffered common swearing, so it was not swearing falsely or
forswearing.

134. Exodus 20.8. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Deuteronomy. 5.12. Matthew.
12.5. On the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath day and
are blameless.

Legal Ceremonies, and their external observations give place to charity and
necessity, moral duties are preferred before ceremonials. God forbade those
works which hinder his worship; but Christ defends his Disciples, plucking ears
of corn on the Sabbath day, against the Pharisee by the example of David, and
of the Priests killing sacrifices on the Sabbath day, pulling off their hides
and washing of them.

* Exodus 20.8. Its one thing to break the Sabbath in contempt, another thing to
break it in necessity, or rather to do works of necessity upon it. The Priest
did kill sacrifice, and labor in the offering them up bodily, and that in the
Court of the Temple. Now to labor bodily on the Sabbath day, the Jews did
account profaneness; and yet these Priests for all their bodily labor, were
not accounted prophaners of the Sabbath. So as its not the bare action, but the
end and intent of that action which makes the profaneness.

135. Exodus 20.12. Honor thy father and mother. Luke 14.26. If any man come to
me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren
and sisters, yea and his own life also he cannot be my disciple.

Christ forbids not the honor due to parents, but he says, Matthew. 19.37.
He that loves them more than me, is not worthy of me: for all things must be
forsaken, and hated too, so far as they hinder our love of God and Christ, for
all things must give place to the love of God; and that takes not away our duty
or due honor to our parents.

* 136. Exodus 20.12. with Luke 14.26.

The first place commands honoring of parents, but it must not be equally with
God. Honor parents as parents, subordinate to God; Honor parents with honor
fit for creatures, not for the Creator. If parents will command things
dishonorable to Christ, we must be so far from honoring them, as to hate
them; but if their command be agreeing with Christ; Children must obey their
parents in the Lord.

137. Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father. Mat. 23.9. Call no man Father upon the
earth.

Christ's forbids not children to honor their parents, 2 Kings 2. 1 Chronicles. 4.
or the hearers to honor the Preachers, for Paul calls himself the father of
the Corinthians; but he forbids us to depend on humane authority in divine
matters; but we must depend on one God, and have a filial confidence in him.

138. Exodus 20.13. Thou shall not kill. Matthew. 5.21. and 18.9. If thy eye,
hand, foot offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee.

Christ would not that we should dismember our selves, but that we should
mortify the old Adam, and bridle the wicked motions and desires of our minds,
and take heed of them.

139. Exodus 20.18. The people saw thundrings and the lightnings, and the noise
of the trumpet. Deuteronomy. 5.23. You heard the voice out of the midst of the
darkness.

The frighted people standing afar off, stricken with fear, saw the thunder
joined with lightning, breaking forth of the dark clouds in the promulgation of
the Law.

140. Exodus 20.24. Thou shall make unto me an Altar of earth. Chap. 27.1. Of
Shittim wood.

The inward part of the Altar was earth, the outside of Shittim wood.

141. Exodus 21.24. Lev. 24.40. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Matthew.
5.38, 39. If any one strike thee on the right cheek, turn to him the left.

The first place is concerning the public judgment of the Magistrate, and the
judicial Law; now because the Pharisees interpreted their law falsely, Christ
confutes them and teaches, that private persons must not resist force with
force, and evil with evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21.
to part with their garment and turn the cheek.

142. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy
people. Luke 13.32. Go and tell that fox. (Christ speaks so of Herod.)

Private persons, of ill will or by contempt must not speak reproachfully of
the Magistrate. Christ was no private person, and by his words detecting the
fox-like craftiness of Herod (who endeavored by his craft to overthrow true
Religion and the Gospel) he shows plainly that he feared him not.

* 143. Exodus 23.7. Thou shall not slay the innocent and righteous, etc. Ezekiel.
21.3. I will draw my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off both the
righteous and the wicked.

The former place tells what the civil Magistrate should do in executing
Justice; the latter shows what the Lord would do in afflicting a people in
general when he destroys the Land. He would destroy good and bad, whether they
were really or only in appearing righteous; and this he might do, because even
in the best he finds matters of failing: And besides, though he take away the
good in a general judgment, it is from the evil to come, which they would
endure by living under so hard pressures as they were like, when a Land was
destroyed. Besides the godly are no losers in being translated to Heaven.

* 144. Exodus 25.8. Make me a Tabernacle, that I may dwell among them. Acts
7.48. The Lord dwells not in Temples made with hands.

God dwelt in the Tabernacle, not that Gods essence or presence can be confined
to any place, but that he there would give especial evidence of his grace and
glory, and of his near relation to his people, in intercourse with them by his
Word and Sacraments. In the time of the Law God did more evidence himself
there, than in the time of the Gospel.

145. Exodus 25.16. Thou shall put into the Arc the Testimony which I shall
give them, etc. Heb. 9.4. In the Arc was the golden pot with Manna, and Aarons
rod that budded, and the Tables of the Testament.

In the Arc under the covering were only the Tables of stone of the Covenant,
Exodus 16.33, 34. Numb. 17.7.
the pot with Manna, and Aarons rod stood before the Ark. The Apostle joins
them all together, because they were in the Tabernacle in the sight of God.

* Exodus 25.16. with Hebrews 9.4.

The Apostle says, not that the pot, and Aarons Rod were in the Arc. The
Relative (...) in the which, is not referred to the Testament, but to (...),
the Tabernacle before spoken of. Its not unusual for the Relative to be
referred to the former Antecedent. The Pot and the Rod were said to be in the
Arc, because we have no answerable Preposition in the English to signify the
latitude and extent of the Original. The Greek Preposition signifies not only
in or within, but also by, near unto, or before, Luke 9.31.

146. Exodus 29.32, 33. Aaron and his sons shall eat the holy bread, but a
stranger shall not eat thereof. 1 Samuel 21.6. David eat thereof and they that
were with him.

The Precept of the holy bread or proposition was ceremonial, and a temporal
pedagogy; the moral prohibition was not so: David therefore is here excused by
a case of necessity.

147. Exodus 30.6. Thou shall put the Altar before the vail that is by the Ark.
Heb. 9.3, 4. After the second vail in the Tabernacle was the golden censer.

There was a double vail, one by which the outside of the holy place was
distinguished from the inside; the other by which the holy place was
distinguished from the holiest of all: between those two vails the Altar of
Incense was placed.

* 148. Exodus 32.32. Race me out of the book of life. 2 Peter 1.10. Make your
calling and election sure.

Doubt. How did Moses endeavor to make Heaven sure to his soul, when he
desired to be rased out of the book of life.

Answ. Moses zeal to Gods glory and the peoples good, forgets himself and his
own estate, wishes rather that himself, than the people should perish: The
Book of life is twofold, the one of life natural, the other eternal. He
desires to be blotted out of this natural life, and were it to be understood
of eternal life, it would show no more then that Moses though careful enough
of his own salvation, yet such was his care over the people, that he prized
theirs rather than his own.

* 149. Exodus 32.13. Remember Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Romans 2.11. God is no
accepter of persons.

In temporal things (such as the first place speaks of) such as the forbearing
to punish the people of God, (some say) God may have respect to persons, but
not in eternal.

Secondly, God had not respect to the persons of these Patriarcks, but to his
gracious promise which he had made unto them, as there Moses says, Remember
Abraham, etc.

* 150. Exodus 33.11. with Exodus 17.9.

Joshuah though he were called a Boy or Child, yet he was fifty three years of
age, and a Commander in the Camp; it was usual to name them so in former
times, when men's lives were (as I take it) generally of a longer extent than
now; and when they were unmarried (as Joshuah was) Varro calls one juvenis at
five and forty, and serviu^ Tullius at the age of six and forty, there is
juventus.

* 151. Exodus 33.11. The Lord spoke to Moses face to face. John 1. No man saw
God at any time. John 6. No man has seen the Father at any time, unless he
that is of God, etc.

Moses could not see God and live, but the Lord spoke so clearly to him, as a
man speaks face to face with his friend, that is, distinctly clearly, not in an
obscure manner, by Dreams or the like. Great is the difference betwixt a
clear discourse, and the knowing or seeing of the substance or essence of God.
No man saw God, nor his secret will of producing salvation by Christ, and the
manner thereof before the Son revealed and discovered it; and John 6. No man
has seen the Son: This is opposed to the revelation which Moses laid forth
in his writings, and which did so elevate the Jews, Christ far excelled Moses
herein. Moses heard a distinct voice, but Christ saw the substance of the
Father, and the secrets of his designations for our salvation,

152. Exodus 33.20. No man shall see me and live. 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see
through a glass darkly.

1 John 3.2.
The essence of God is invisible and incomprehensible to us in this world, but
in the next world we shall see God face to face, the glory of God as he is.

153. Exodus 34.3. God does not justify the wicked. Romans 4.5. He justifies the
wicked.

He does not justify the impenitent and such as persevere in wickedness; but
he justifies the penitent, and such as are justified in Christ.

* 154. Exodus 34.7. He will by no means justify the ungodly. Romans 4.5. He
justifies the ungodly.

He will not justify an ungodly man, i. e. he will not esteem that man which
walks wickedly to be a godly man, but yet if a wicked man humble himself and
casts himself upon Christ, he will justify him in Christ, though not in
himself. He justifies him, who in his own person was and is ungodly, though in
Christ he be righteous now by believing.

* 155. Exodus 34.15, 16. with Deuteronomy. 21.11.

The prohibition is to be understood, as long as the woman remains in her
infidelity, seeing the danger was of turning the husband from his God to
strange Gods: but if she was converted to the Jewish Religion, he might marry
her. Thus Solomon married Rahab the whore, Boaz, Ruth the Moabitish, etc. but
Solomon is reprehended for marrying Infieels; nor yet can that hinder that
Sampson took the unbelieving Philistim to wife, etc. Esther was married to
unbelieving Ahasuerus, seeing that was either done by a special dispensation,
else it was the failing of Sampson, and the other was under the power of
Ahasuerus, and much good did accrue thereby.

156. Exodus 34.15. Thou shall make no league with the Cananites. Genesis 21.27.
Abraham made a Covenant with Abimelech.

Covenants in spiritual matters, and such as belong to Religion, must not be
made with Heathens and Idolators: but Abraham made a Covenant with Abimelech in
temporal matters, such as belonged to commerce and the common peace of the
Country.

147. Exodus 34.16. Thou shall not give thy daughter to his son. 1 Cor. 7.12.
If any brother have an unbelieving wife, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away, etc.

God expressly forbad the Israelites to marry with the Cananites, lest the
Israelites should be seduced to worship other Gods. The Apostle speaks of a
marriage confirmed already, before the conversion of one party to Christ,
otherwise it is a very unhappy thing to marry those that are of false
religions; 2 Cor. 6.14.
Nor must we draw in the same yoke with them.

LEVITICUS.
WAS so called from Levi one of the Tribes; It contains the Leviticall
sacrifices, the sanctifying of the Priests and people: the difference of meats,
vows, conversation, and other observations and rites. * The whole time of the
story of Liviticus is but one month: namely, the first month of the second
year of their deliverance; and not altogether so much neither, for the very
first beginning of the month was taken up in the erecting of the Tabernacle,
of which the story is, Exodus 40.

158. LEv. 1.6. The sons of Aaron shall pull of the skin of the burnt-offering,
and cut it into pieces. 2 Chronicles. 35.11. The Levites pulled off their skins.

It was the office of the Priests to pull off the skins of the burnt-offerings,
but because in the time of Hezekiah and Josias, the celebration of the
Passover was solemn, and many millions of sacrifices were offered, therefore
it was extraordinarily granted to the Levites to pull off the skins.

159. Lev. 1.13. The Priest shall burn all oblations upon the Altar, for a
burnt sacrifice, for a sweet savor unto the Lord. John 4.24. God is a Spirit
and smells not.

In the former words he speaks comparatively, that a man delights in sweet
odors, so God is delighted in their sacrifices, not by reason of the fat of
bullocks, but for the sacrifice of his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom he is well pleased.

Mat. 3.17.
160. Lev. 2.1. The oblation of a sacrifice to the Lord must be fine flower, and
he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon. Chap. 5.11. He shall
bring the tenth part of an Ephah of fine flower, he shall put no oil upon it,
neither shall he put any frankincense thereon.

Sacrifices of free will were made with oil and frankincense, but offerings
for sin were made without oil and frankincense.

161. Lev. 2.11. No meat offering shall be brought unto the Lord made with
leaven. Chap. 23.17. You shall bring two loaves of two tenth deals, they shall
be of fine flower, baken with leaven, they are the first fruits.

The oblation which was leavened, was eucharisticall, or for a thanksgiving,
but the free will offering was without leaven.

162. Lev. 3.16. All the fat shall be the Lords by a perpetual statute. Chap.
23.17. Two loaves of the first fruits of two tenth deals of fine flower with
leaven.

God separated the fat for himself, not to eat it, but to hinder the people
that they should not eat it, for Idolaters did eat the fat of their sacrifices.

163. Lev. 6.18. The Leviticall sacrifices should endure for ever. Heb. 10.14.
By one offering Christ perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

The sacrifices of the old Law are said to be for ever, by reason of the long
continuance of the Jewish polity, but they are all abolished by one complete
sacrifice of Christ.

164. Lev. 9.24. Fire went out from before the Lord and consumed the
burnt-offering, etc. Amos 5.22. Though you offer me burnt-offerings and gifts,
I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts.

Offerings to God of a pious and sincere heart were accepted by him, but the
offerings of Hypocrites proceeding from a corrupt heart were an abomination to
the Lord.

165. Lev. 11.1. Unclean beasts. Genesis 1.31. All things that God made were very
good.

Unclean creatures in the old Testament, were so in respect of the Jewish
pedagogie of the ceremonial Law, and not by nature; but because God was
pleased to have it so, whereas by goodness of the creation, all things were
good and clean to those that were clean.

Tit. 2.15.
166. Lev. 11.7. The Jews must eat no swines flesh. Matthew. 5.11. The Gadarens of
the tribe of Benjamin fed hogs.

Hogs flesh was not eaten by the Jews, but yet they were not forbid to apply
the paunch, the skin, and the fat to other uses.

* 167. Lev. 11.8. Of their flesh shall you eat, etc. They are unclean unto
you. Romans 14.14. There is nothing unclean in it self.

To be unclean by divine institution is one thing; to have a natural
uncleanness is another: all things in their first creation were good and
clean, though not as Moses says, to you who have a restriction by Gods
special command; and that upon the account of teaching them, or representing
something to their minds, by these outward things.

* Lev. 11.44. You shall therefore sanctify your selves, etc. Ezekiel. 37. ult. I
the Lord do sanctify Israel.

In the former place is meant ceremonial sanctifying, which is nothing else
but separating from such and such things, which the Leviticall Law prohibited
to be touched, so as it concerned external reverend addresses before the Lord.
And though it did purport a spiritual and inward sanctification, yet it
implies no more, than that we seeing the necessity of the duty of sanctifying
our selves, and not finding power in any other to sanctify us, besides God, we
should apply our selves to God as the fountain of our sanctification.

168. Lev. 13.46. The Leper and unclean lived alone without the Camp. Mat. 8.2.
In the City a Leper craved of Jesus.

The divine Law was that the Leper set apart should dwell alone, but this Leper
comes boldly to Christ not doubting to be free from his leprosy.

169. Lev. 16.3. The sacrifices were appointed by Gods commandment. Psalm
40.7. Sacrifices and burnt-offerings thou would not.

The sacrifices were appointed by God under the Old Testament, that they might
shadow forth the sacrifice of Christ, and foreshew his coming; but God would
none of them, as the Jews abused them for ostentation, and placed the worship
of God in the outward ceremony without the internal devotion.

170. Lev. 16.6. Aaron shall offer his bullock, and make an atonement for
himself. Heb. 10.4. It is impossible that the blood of Goats should take away
sins.

The legal sacrifices did not expiate sins of themselves, but as they were a
figure of Chrst, his own oblation surpasses them all, and is propitiatory for
our sins.

* 171. Lev. 17.3. with 1 Samuel 7.9. 1 Kings 18.33.

The cause ceasing, the effect cease, or the prohibition cease.

The causes of these prohibitions were two.

First, That no Layman should not arrogate the office of sacrificeing.

Secondly, That the Jews should not fall into the Gentiles mode of sacrificing
in the high places.

172. Lev. 18.6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him.
Verse 16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brothers wife. Deuteronomy.
25.5. The brother shall take his brothers wife.

The law of the nearness of blood, and not uncovering the brothers nakedness
is perpetual, and must be holily observed by us; but that of raising seed to
the brother, was partly ceremonial, figuring the primogeniture of Christ,
partly judicial, lest the inheritance should depart to another family; which
does not oblige us, but is abrogated.

The former was a general rule, and was to have no exception, but such as God
himself who made that rule did give, which he did Deuteronomy. 25 5.

* 173. Lev. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge nor bear any grudg, etc. Numb. 31.2.
Go and revenge Midian.

Private revenge of personal injuries is one thing; to be the instrument of
Gods vengeance is another: We must not revenge our selves as private persons:
But where God is wronged in his peoples wrong, there we being lawfully called
to it, having the Word of God for our rule, we may execute his wrath upon these
wicked ones.

174. Lev. 19.18 Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 1 John 2.15. If any
man love the world, the love of the father is not in him.

In the former p^ace he understands the love that is due to our neighbor
according to Law. In the latter, concerning unlawful love of worldly things;
as those that prefer the things of this world, as honors, riches and p^easu^es
before God himself.

* 175. Lev. 19.27. Ye shall not round the corners of your head. 1 Cor. 11.14.
Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man wear long hair, etc.

The word round signifies such a rounding, as may be without cutting. The word
corners is in the original in the singular number, and so may not some singular
cutting of one corner of the head round, in the manner of a circle, (as the
Egyptian Priests) or else in manner of an half Moon; or taking the singular
number for the plural, so it may be meant of crisping, or curling round the
hair in some corners of the head; or cutting off the longest of the hair to
offer tufts or locks, as a devoted oblation to Idols, as many Heathens did,
making the bare place round, with a superstitious conceit of a round figure,
as most pleasing to God. Or of cutting the hair, as the Egyptian Priests did,
who worshipped the Idols Anubis and Isis, shaving round their heads and their
eyebrows, or of cutting round the hair in mourning.

The second place speaks of wearing long hair, as Women do, or very long hair,
longer than is modest.

176. Lev. 22.25. From a strangers hand you shall not offer the bread of your
God. 1 Kings 5.10. Hiram gave to Solomon cedar-trees, and fir-trees.

All strangers were not abominable in the sight of God, but only the enemies
and persecutors of his Church: so Cyrus King of the Persians promoted the
building of the second Temple, and restored to the Jews the golden and silver
vessels.

177. Lev. 24.19. As he has done, so it shall be done to him. Romans 12.19. You
shall not revenge your selves.

In the former place private persons are forbidden to avenge themselves, but
the Magistrate is admonished of his office. In the latter, only private
revenge is forbidden.

Exodus 22.29. Deuteronomy. 1.18.
178. Lev. 27.30. And all the tithe of the Land, whether of the seed of the
Land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lords. Numb. 18.21. I have given the
children of Levi all the tithes in Israel for an inheritance for the service
which they serve me.

The tenths are called Gods, because they were commanded by him for a holy use,
and good of the Church; they were given to the sons of Levi, or to the
Ministers of the Church for their service, for an inheritance to support them,
because they being consecrated to Gods service, had no inheritance amongst
their brethren.

NUMBERS.
THIS Book is so called from the numbering of the people of God. Wherein
Mansions and Offices were ordained for all the Tribes; between the Mount of
Sinai and the promised Land, many transgressions and dangers of the people and
punishments, and benefits of God are numbered. The History contains 28 years.

179. NUmb. 1.19. Moses numbered the people in the wilderness of Sinai. 2 Samuel
24. David offended God by numbering the people.

Moses and Aaron did that for good order as God commanded them, but David
sinned out of arrogance by numbering the people without command.

180. Numb. 4.3. The Levites stood from 30 years old to 50 years old to
minister in the Tabernacle of the Covenant. 1 Chronicles. 23.3, 24. The Levites did
the work of the Ministry for the house of the Lord from 20 years old. Numb.
8.23. from 25 years.

The younger Levites were newly instructed to 20 years; then they were admitted
to the office of doing service at 25 years; from that time a kind of secondary
service was committed to them, till they came to be 30 years old, from 30 to 50
years they did fully execute the Leviticall office.

181. Numb. 7.89. Moses entered into the Tabernacle of the Covenant. Exodus
40.35. Moses could not enter into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, for a
cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.

First when the cloud covered the Tabernacle of the testimony, and the glory of
God filled that, Moses could not then enter, but when the cloud was removed,
then he went into it.

182. Numb. 8.7. The Levites shall shave off all the hair of their flesh. Lev.
19.27. You shall not round the corners of your heads, nor shave your beards.

In the time of the Leviticall pacification they did shave the hair of their
flesh, Ezekiel. 44.22.
but otherwise to cut the hair of their heads or shave their beards round, was
sorbade them by Moses.

183. Numb. 10.29. Hobab was Moses father in law. Exodus 2.18. Raguel. Chap.
3.1. and 4.18. and 18.5. Jethro.

Hobab because he was the son of Raguel, is thought by some to be Moses
kinsman; in the Scripture, oft-times persons have two or three names: so the
father in law of Moses had many names.

* 184. Numb. 12.1. His wife who was an Ethiopian. Exodus 2.10. She was a
Midianite of Arabia.

Answ. There was a double Aethiopia, one West, without Egypt in Africa, which
is called Abasa; the other East, which is called Arabia, which comprehends the
Midianites and other people, living toward the South.

185. Numb. 12.8. God spoke with Moses mouth to mouth. Exodus 33.20. Joh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time.

1 Timothy 6.16.
The divine essence is invisible, and dwells in an unaccessible light; that Moses
in his morality saw not perfectly: yet we piously believe that the Son of God
taking on him the shape of a man, as he was afterward to be incarnate, did
speak with Moses familiarly.

186. Numb. 14.1. All the people with a (...) voice, murmured against Moses.
Verse 23. They shall not see the Land of promise, except Caleb. Joshua 14.1.
The children of Israel possessed the land of Canaan: which Eleazar the Priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the Fathers distributed to them.
Chap. 24.7. Whose eyes saw what the Lord had done in Egypt.

1 Cor. 10.5.
Eleazar and Caleb and other faithful people came into the Land of promise:
but those that murmured were destroyed in the wilderness, for with many of
them God was not well pleased.

187. Numb 15.38. Speak to the children of Israel, that they make themselves
fringes in the borders of their garments. Mat. 23.5. Christ condemns the
Pharisees for enlarging their phylacteries and their borders.

The abuse of a thing does not take away the use of it. God commanded the
Israelites, that so often as they should look upon their garments they should
remember the Commandments of God and do them. But the Pharisees abused this
commandment of God, boasting hypocritically of their long garments and
fringes, as though there had been some holiness in them; therefore their
hypocrisice is deservedly reprehended.

* 188. Numb. 16.29. If these men die the common death of all men, etc. Eccles.
3.19. As one dies so dies the other, for they have all one breath.

Its one thing to speak of death, according to the course of nature; another
thing to write of strange judgments above the course of nature; according to
the course of nature, as the one dies, so dies the other. But this was a
particular case of Corah, Dathan, etc. which were to dye in a strange manner,
that the people might see the Lords sending of Moses.

189. Numb. 16.32. The earth opening her mouth devoured them all which belonged
to Corah, with their houses and substance. Deuteronomy. 11.6. (Psalm 106.17.) and
26.32. When Corah perished, all his sons perished not.

The sons of Corah which escaped alive, were in the Tabernacle of the Lord
when the sedition began, because they consented not to the Levites in the
sedition of their Father.

190. Numb. 18.16. The redemption of the firstborn, shall be from a month
old, for five shekels, after the shekell of the Sanctuary. Exodus 22.30. Thou
shall give me thy firstborn, and with Sheep and Oxen thou shall do the like,
seven days it shall be with the dam, on the eight thou shall give it me.

The firstborn of man and of clean beasts were consecrated unto God the eighth
day, but the unclean beasts were redeemed after one month. A woman after she
brought forth a male child must stay apart six weeks, after a female twelve
weeks, in that time they were purged from their issue of blood.

191. Numb. 18.20. God said unto Aaron, Thou shall have no inheritance in the
Land, neither shall thou have any part amongst the Israelites, I am thy part.
Joshua 21.41. The 48 Cities of the Levites were within the possessions of the
children of Israel.

The Levites had their habitation and food in those Cities with their families;
which Cities were as Schools, wherein they were instructed rightly in the Law,
and to perform their office in holy things as they should.

192. Numb. 20.11. At the stroke of Moses on the rock of flint, the waters came
out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also. Psalm 18.1.
1 Cor. 10.4. They all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that
spiritual Rock, which followed them, and that rock was Christ.

Moses relates historically the water that came out of the flint for the use of
the people and their Cattle. The Apostle speaks after a spiritual manner, and
says, that Christ's b^nefits to us were prefigured thereby.

193. Numb. 20.18, 21. Edom would not suffer the Israelites to pass through
the land. Deuteronomy. 9.29. Let me pass through thy land, as the children of Esau did
unto me.

Jude 11.18.
The children of Esau denied to let the children of Israel pass through the
public way through their Cities and Villages; the King of Edom suffered them
to pass about by his borders, and through by-ways.

194. Numb. 20.28. Elcazar the high Priest was present at his fathers death.
Lev. 21.11. The high Priest shall not go in to any dead body, nor defile
himself for his Father or his Mother.

Eleazar was not yet the high Priest actually; and this was a singular example.
Augustine, That time that the high Priest did his office of high Priest, it was
forbidden him, that he should not come to his Parents being dead.

* 195. Numb. 20.29. In the mount Hor, and yet Aaron is said to dye in Mosera,
and to be buried there.

Answ. Hor and Mosera are the same places, the Mountain was called Hor, but the
place adjoining in which the Tents were fixed, was called Mosera.

196. Numb. 21.9. Moses made a Serpent of brass, and put it up for a sign, and
when they that were bitten beheld it, they were healed. Exodus 20.4. Thou shall
not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing in heaven or
earth.

God gave an especial command of setting up the brazen serpent, like to the
fiery Serpents, whose wounds and bites the Israelites could not endure, that so
looking on this, they might be safe; it was a figure of Christ crucified.

197. Numb. 22.12. God said to Balaam, Thou shall not go with them. Verse 20.
Rise and go with them. Verse 35. Go with the men.

God would not that Balaam should go to curse the Israelites, at last he
suffered him to go, though he were displeased at it; yet on this condition,
that he should speak nothing, than what God commanded him.

* 198. Numb. 22.22. And the Lord was angry, Verse 32. with 20.

Answ. God gave Balaam leave to go, upon this condition, that he should do
nothing but what the Lord commanded. But Balaam being overcome with the desire
of money; resolved with himself, if he could by any means to curse the Hebrews,
which was altogether against Gods mind.

* 199. Numb. 23.12. Must I not speak that which the Lord has put into my
mouth. Josh. 13.22. Balaam the son of Peor the Southsayer.

A wicked man may speak the truth; the Lord makes use of such instruments for
his own glory. Balaam was probably a southsayer, yet he might have particular
ways of knowing the mind of God in this case, or his reason might dictate that
to him. However it was that he knew the mind of God, he did deliver it.

200 Numb. 23.10. Balaam prophesied to his own disgrace. 1 Cor. 12.7. To every
man the manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal.

The gift of Prophecy was not hurtful to Balaam, in respect of God that gave
it him, had he used it well; John 11.51.
but Balaam abused it. False Prophets also speak truth as Caiphas did, though
it be against their will.

201. Numb. 25.3. Israel joined himself to Baal-peor, and God was angry with
Israel. 1 Cor. 10.8. Neither let us commit fornication as some of them
committed.

Lyra.
Since Idolatry is spiritual fornication, Paul makes mention of it; for the
daughters of Moah would not admit the Israelites before they had eaten things
offered to Idols.

202. Numb. 25.9. There died of the plague 24000. 1 Cor. 10.8. They fell in one
day 23000.

Moses collects the number of those which fell by sword and strangling; but the
Apostle counts only those that fell by the sword.

* Numb. 25.9. with 1 Cor. 10.8.

There was a double execution of Gods anger upon this people, the one by the
hand of man, Verse 4. The heads of the people were to be hanged up. The number
of which probably was a 1000, and 23000 died by the immediate hand of God in
one day, and though it be said that 24000 died of the plague, by the best
interpreters of the Original, may be read stroke, there died of that stroke of
divine justice, (for all was either of Gods bidding or his doing) 24000, the
lesser number taken away by man's hand cast into the greater number, and so
making up the whole of 24000, there is rather a subordination, than a
contradiction, for the lesser number is contained in the greater.

* Numb. 25.12. with 1 Samuel 2. In the one place there is a promise made of the
Priesthood being kept in Phinehas line; In another Heli has it, who was (as
Josephus says lib. 5. Antiq. cap. ult. and lib. 8. cap. 1.) of Ithamars family.

Answ. This promise was conditionate, if the posterity of Phinehas continued in
faith, and the true worship of God. So that though that it was taken away from
them, afterward when they repented in the days of David and Solomon, the
Priesthood was restored again, and reserved in that family till the days of
Herod, or well nigh; and although there was an interception toward the end of
the synagogue-worship, yet they held Jus ad rem, not in re.

203. Numb. 27.12. Go up into mount Abarim and see the land. Deuteronomy. 34.1. Moses
went up to mount Nebo to the top of Pisgah, etc.

Abarim was the mountain, but Nebo and Pisgah were the tops of that mountain,
so they differ but as a part from the whole.

204. Numb. 27.21. The Priest shall ask counsel for him after the judgment of
Vrim. 1 Samuel 30.8. And Abiathar brought to David the Ephod, and he enquired at
the Lord.

The Ephod was properly belonging to the high Priest, common to all sacrificing
Priests, which David made use of extraordinarily, and was inspired by God with
a prophetical spirit.

205. Numb. 31.18. But all maids that have not known a man, keep alive for your
selves. 1 Samuel 15.3. Slay both man, woman and infant.

The sin of the Midianites was not so horrible as that of the Amalekites; and
we though we know not the cause of Gods commands, yet must we say, Righteous
art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

206. Numb. 32.16, 17. Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse went armed
to battle before the children of Israel. Joshua 22.8. Divide the spoil of the
enemies with your brethren, that is to those that staid at home.

The strong and fighting men went with the Israelites, but those that were weak
and unfit for war staid at home, who took the charge to look to the Cities
and manuring of the fields.

207. Numb. 32.21. with Josh. 4.13.

Every Warrior, not every man that could fight, for likely they were more than
40000, but every Warrior appointed by me or Joshua, for there were some that
staid behind to keep the Cities on the other side Jordan.

208. Numb. 33.54. Divide the land amongst you. Deuteronomy. 18.12. Lots are forbidden.

Lots were ordained of God, which are used according to Gods Commandment,
Josh. 14.2. Act. 1.26.
and the Land of Canaan was divided by the lawful use of them; Matthias was
chosen to be an Apostle; so every man must be contented with his own lot, they
are unlawful and prohibited, which are used in sports and plays.

209. Numb. 34.17. Eleazar the Priest and Joshua shall divide the Land unto
you. Luke 12.13. Christ would not divide the Inheritance.

An office which is Ecclesiastical is distinguished from a secular office; in
the dividing of the land Eleazar the Priest for his authority was joined to
Joshua the Prince, that all things might proceed in right order; and the Tribe
of Levi might be well provided for a place to dwell in, from every Tribe.

DEUTERONOMIE.
THat is the second Law, Moses repeats here the ceremonial and judicial Laws,
spoken before in Exodus and Leviticus Chap. 34. to the end, from Verse 5.
Joshua fulfilled them after the death of Moses. The time of this Book is but
two months, namely, the two last months of the 40 year, divided into the time
of Moses his repeating the Law and dying, and Isreal's mourning 30 days for him.

210. Deuteronomy. 1.16. Judge righteously. Matthew. 7.1. Judge not at all.

Judgments appointed by God in the Church or Commonwealth are lawful, but
Christ forbids disorderly and rash judgments, that man should suddenly or
falsely pass sentence on his neighbors words or deeds.

211. Deuteronomy. 2.5. I will not give you in the land of Esau so much as a foots
breadth. Psalm 60.8. Over Edom will I cast out my shoe.

2 Chronicles. 10.
The Israelites going into the Land of Canaan through the Land of the Edomites,
were not to offend them, because the time to bring them into subjection was not
yet full; but they were made tributaries under David; nor was the land of
Idumaea given to the Israelites as the land of Canaan was.

212. Deuteronomy. 2.19. I will not give to thee of the land of the children of Ammon.
Josh. 13.24. Moses gave to the tribe of Gad the one half of the land of Ammon.

The Ammonites held the land which they possessed in the days of Moses; the
other part of the Country formerly possessed by Sihon, was distributed to the
Israelites.

* 213. Deuteronomy. 4 6. Sure this great Nation is a wise and understanding Nation.
Romans 3.11. There is none that understands.

It was a wise Nation politically and in humane affairs, but yet might be
spiritually blind; naturally every man is blind, not understanding the mind of
God.

* 214. Deuteronomy. 4.48. To Mount Sion which is Hermon.

Now Hermon was beyond Jordan, Sion at Jerusalem.

Answ. Hermon in the Sidonian tongue is Sarion, as Numb. 9. which the Sidonians
and Amorites call Sanir, the whole tract of the Mountain was called Galaad,
whose utmost part beyond Jordan is called Hermon, or Sarion, or Sanir, or Sin,
but its writ with Shin, to difference it from the other Scin, which was the
Tower of David, which is writ with Tsade.

* Deuteronomy. 5.3. He made not a Covenant with our Fathers, etc. Genesis 15.18. He made
a Covenant with Abraham.

Answ. The Covenant he made with Abraham was not such a Covenant as this he
made with the Israelites. He promised the Land of the Cananites to Abraham, but
to these his posterity, that they should be his peculiar people, by peculiar
Laws and Ceremonies obliged to himself, and they on the contrary did oblige to
take him for their God.

215. Deuteronomy. 4.10, 11. The Israelites stood before the Lord God in Horeb. Exodus
29.11. The Tables of the Law were given in Mount Sinai.

Mount Horeb was called otherwise, Mount Sinai; or the top of the pinnacle of
the Mount.

216. Deuteronomy. 6.3. and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Col. 3.23. (Exodus 6.5.) Servants obey in all things your
Masters according to the flesh, with fear.

God must be feared above all things, and he must be first served; masters
according to the flesh must be obeyed, for his sake, and in respect to his
commandment.

* 217. Deuteronomy. 6 4. Hear o Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Matthew. 2.8.
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc.

Object. The latter place speaks distinctly of three, else why should they be
baptized in their names? the former place speaks of one God.

Answ. Unity is referred to the essence or (...) the Trinity of Persons to the
Hypostasis, which subsist in one simple and undivided essence, and
distinguished by incommunicable proprieties. When the Scripture speaks of the
Unity of the Godhead, it speaks in opposition to the Creature; but when it
speaks of the Trinity of Persons, it speaks with relation to the Divinity
considered in it self, or one Person with another.

218. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall swear by the name of the Lord. Mat. 5.34. Swear
not at all.

Aug. Epist. 154.
That oath is lawful, when we give testimony to the truth in the name of God,
the Magistrate, and necessity requiring that of us: such an oath Christ
condemns not, but vain and unnecessary oaths, and such as are made by the
creatures: and he says so, not because it is sin to swear the truth; but
perjury is a horrid sin.

219. Deuteronomy. 6.16. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. James 1.13. God cannot
be tempted with evil.

Divine temptations are for trial, but men do tempt God when they ask such
things of him, that are not according to his will. Exodus 17.8. Psalm 9.2.
Matthew. 12.39. Diabolical temptations are to seduce us, he tempts good men to
turn them from what is good, wicked men to keep them still in their wickedness.

* Deuteronomy. 6.16. with James 1.13.

Temptations wherewith men tempt God are twofold.

First, Such as men tempt God withal, as are good, if we regard the things
asked and sought of God, yet if we regard the circumstances of Persons asking,
time, place, etc. we cannot say they are good. Thus Exodus 17.8. Psalm 95. 1
Cor. 10. Meat was good, but not good to ask it so of God in the wilderness,
and tempt him in the desert.

Secondly, Evil temptations, or such temptations as are evil in themselves,
and tend to evil. God cannot be tempted this way, nor he ought not the other
way. Of the latter sort might those temptations of the Jews to Christ, and the
Devil to Christ, Cast thy self down. Thou shall not tempt, that is our duty.
God cannot be tempted, that is his nature: we may try that God cannot yield to
temptations; in respect of himself, who is infinitely good, he cannot be
tempted; but in respect of men he is often tempted, Ephesians. 17.2.

* 220. Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. Thou shall make no marriages with them, etc. for they
will turn away thy sons from following me, etc. 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving
wife is saved by the believing husband.

It is one thing to marry an Infidel while she is an Infidel; another thing
for Infidels, or one of them after marriage to be converted. The former place
is meant of a believers marrying an Infidel, the latter of Infidels converted
after marriage.

* 221. Deuteronomy. 7.2. Thou shall make no Covenant with them. 1 Kings 15.19. There
is a league between me and thee.

This was a particular case of the Israelites with the inhabitants of Canaan,
as to dwelling, etc. Nor did it hinder but they might make a Covenant with the
rest of the Nations which God sent them not to destroy.

* Deuteronomy. 7.2. Destroy the Cananites. Matthew. 5.44. Love your enemies.

We must love the Lord absolutely, and others in God and for God, that is, so
far forth as it stands with his pleasure: and therefore when he commands
to kill, we may lawfully kill. And this we may do by way of punishment
appointed by God, not only without hatred, but in love to Gods Command,
forgiving the wrong which concerns us, and also praying for grace and mercy for
the party, if he belong to God.

* 222. Deuteronomy. 10.6, 7, 8. with Numb. 33.31, 32.

From Moseroth to Bene-Jaakan, and here its said to be from Beeroth to
Bene-Jaakan, to Moseroth. Now there were seven several encampings between
Moseroth and Mount Hor, Numb. 33.31, etc.

Answ. In those stations mentioned, Numb. 33. they were marching toward Kadesh
before their 40 year, and so they went from Moseroth to Bene-Jaakan. But in
these stations, Deuteronomy. 10.6. they are marching from Kadesh in their 40 year by
some of that way that they came thither, and so they must go from Bene-Jaakan
to Moseroth. Moseroth, Mount Hor, Gudgadah, and Horhagidgad, were but the same
place and Country as Horeb and Sinai were, though they be counted two several
Encampings of Israel, Exodus 17.1, 6. and 19.1. compared.

223. Deuteronomy. 10.17. The Lord your God is God of Gods and Lord of Lords. Chap.
32.39. I am God alone, and there is no God besides me.

Many in the world are worshipped, which are false Gods, but there is but one
great and true God in essence, by whom only we can be saved.

224. Deuteronomy. 10.27. God regards not persons nor takes rewards. Genesis 4.4. God
had respect to Abel and to his offering.

Oblations and gifts are various, God accepts those things he commands to be
offered to him, for Christ's sake, to whom those that offer must have respect by
faith, as to the only offering, etc.

225. Deuteronomy. 11.25. No man shall stand against you. Jud. 1.34. The Amorites
forced the children of Dan into the Mountains.

That promise held only for that time till the Israelites had gotten the Land
of Cannan, and continued in piety and the true fear of God.

* 226. Deuteronomy. 12.17. with 15.19. The firstborn which were to be eaten before
the Lord and not in Cities, were not of the male, and without blot, but either
female or spotted.

* 227. Deuteronomy. 12.20. Because thy soul longs to eat flesh, thou may eat
flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusts after. Romans 14.22. It is not good to eat
flesh, or drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother is offended.

All things are lawful in themselves to be eaten, but yet relation must be had
to the circumstances of time, persons and quantity. That this and that meat may
lawfully be eaten is without dispute; and yet this or that may not lawfully be
eaten before weak brethren, or in an excessive quantity, etc.

228. Deuteronomy. 13.5. A Prophet of false dreams shall be put to death. Tit. 3.10.
An heretic after the first and second admonition reject.

In the old Testament God commanded to kill the false Prophets. Matthew. 13.30.
In the New, Christ says, Let the tares grow unto the harvest. The
Apostolical rejection of an Heretic, is part of excommunication, and
spiritual death; which hinders not the Magistrate, that he should take
cognizance of Heretics, to punish them.

* Deuteronomy. 13.5. That Prophet or dreamer of dreams shall be put to death. Titus
3.10, 11. Heretics avoid, etc.

The Old Testament gives the Magistrate power to condemn Idolatrous dreamers
and the like; and the place in the New Testament bids a Minister to avoid an
Heretic, which hinders not the Magistrates proceeding against him, but rather
it forwards it; it is one thing what a private man, as a private man, and that
is to avoid; another thing what a Magistrate must do.

229. Deuteronomy. 15 3. Of a forrainer thou may expect thy money again. (Psalm.
37.21. and 112.5. Prove. 11.14.) Luke 6.35. Lewd, looking for nothing again.

A modest demand of a debt may be lawful according to the contracts of buying
and selling; Christ speaks of the poor, and says that we must deal brotherly
with them, that if they have not wherewith to pay, we should forgive them their
debts out of Christian charity.

* 230. Deuteronomy. 15.4. with Verse. 11. and Matthew. 26.11.

This is a precept to show, not that there should be no poor, but that the
poor should be helped. He that says thou shall not suffer an Whore to be in
Israel, de jure, does not say, but that there would be such de facto. Vatables
says, There was private beggars amongst the Hebrews, though none publicly
suffered.

231. Deuteronomy. 16.8. Six days. Exodus 13.6. Seven days shall thou eat leavened
bread.

The seventh day of the feast was no less solemn than the first.

232. Deuteronomy. 17.17. The King shall not have many wives. 1 Kings 11.3. King
Solomon had 700 Wives, and 300 Concubines.

God forbad that the King should have many wives, lest his heart should forsake
the true God, and run after strange gods, as Solomon's did, loving many strange
women, and fell into so great lust by following them, that forsaking the true
God, he set up many Idols of the Gentiles.

233. Deuteronomy. 17.17. The King shall not greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold. 1 Kings 3.13. God gave to Solomon riches and honor.

Kings must not for their pride heap up great quantity of silver and gold to
the oppression of their subjects; otherwise they had need of great riches to
reserve their Countries and their Kingly Majesty.

234. Deuteronomy. 18.10. Lev. 19.13. Chap. 20.17.
There shall not be found amongst you an observer of time. (1 Samuel 28.7) Romans
14.6. He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord.

Moses condemns superstitious observation of days, as if one day were more
happy than another. The Heathens divided days into white and black, fortunate
and unfortunate. The Apostle shows the liberty of Christians against those who
by an opinion of sanctity would have the legal feast days observed.

235. Deuteronomy. 18.11. You shall not consult with Wisards, or seek truth from the
dead. Matthew. 17.3. Moses and Elias spoke with Christ in Mount Tabor.

It is an abomination in the sight of God, and a heathen superstition to
consult with Wisards, etc. The appearing of Moses and Elias was of another way,
and their speaking with Christ, was to confirm the Disciples in the doctrine
delivered by Moses and the Prophets.

236. Deuteronomy. 20.17. Thou shall destroy with the edge of the sword, the Hittites,
the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perisites, the Hivites and the Jebusites.
Josh. 9.15. Joshua made a league with the Hivites, and the Jebusites. Solomon
spared the Amorites. 1 Kings 9.20.

The Gibeonites craftily saved their lives, laying down their high spirits, and
Solomon made the Amorites tributaries, the other enemies of God and his people
who continued stubborn in their wickedness were destroyed.

237. Deuteronomy. 20.19. When you besiege a City, you shall not destroy the trees. 2
Kings 3.19. You shall fell every good tree.

Those trees that bear fruit the Israelites could feed on, were not to be cut
down in the promised land; but in the Country of the Moabites God would show a
peculiar example of his just anger for their sins.

238. Deuteronomy. 21.16. The sons of the hated being first born, must be acknowledged
for the first born. Genesis 48.5. Jacob assigned the right of primogeniture to
Joseph the son of his beloved Rachel, and gave two Tribes to his children.

Jacob lived before the promulgation of the Law; Joseph was his first born of
his beloved Rachel, to whose children he wisely assigned two Tribes, as he made
to Judah born from Leah the primogeniture, and gave him the dominion over his
brethren, Genesis 49.8.

239. Deuteronomy. 21.21. If any man beget a stubborn child, he shall bring him to
the Elders of the City, to the gate of judgment, and he shall be stoned with
stones till he dye. Prove. 19.18. Instruct thy son, and despair not of him.

Moses speaks of the incorrigible son; Solomon concerning fatherly
correction, whilst there is hope of the sons amendment, and warns him that he
shall not set his mind to destroy him.

240. Deuteronomy. 23.2. 2 Kings 14.6. 2 Chronicles. 25.4.
A bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord. Ezekiel. 18.20. The
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father.

God would not suffer bastards to be admitted to public offices for the
disgrace of their births, and the honor of Matrimony, lest the Commonwealth
should grow contemptible by such: but that exclusion is not to be taken for a
punishment but an affliction which God in the next life will reward with more
glory, if they be pious and penitent.

241. Deuteronomy. 23.6. Thou shall make no peace with the Ammonites and Moabites.
Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men.

Those Nations did not only lay snares for the Israelites temporal life, but
also for their eternal life; we, so far as we are able, and where piety is
not endangered, must hold and embrace peace with all men.

242. Deuteronomy. 23.15. Thou shall not deliver to his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee. Philemon verse 13. Paul sent Onesimus who
was fled from his Master, to his Master again.

The fugitive servant was not to be sent back to his angry master who was ready
to kill him. There was a difference amongst the servants of the Jews, for he
that was to serve seven years, if he ran away after he had served six years,
he was not to be sent back to his Master, but the Gentiles were bond-servants
all their lives.

243. Deuteronomy. 24.1. If a man have taken a wife and married her, and she find no
favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her, let him
write her a Bill of divorcement and give it in her hand, 1 Cor. 7.15.
and send her out of his house. Matthew. 5.32. Chap. 19.7. Whosoever shall put
away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit
adultery, and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery.

The Law of divorcement of wives, was nothing but a concession of Moses for the
hardness of the hearts of the Jews, and the danger of the lives of the women:
Christ abrogated that custom by the divine Law, and a precept from the
beginning, and corrected the false glosses upon the Divine Law.

Mal. 2.6.
* Deuteronomy. 24.1. with Mat. 19.8. The latter place says Moses suffered it, the
former does not say, Moses commanded it: If we read it (as some say it may be
read) thus, And, He has written her a Bill of divorcement, and given it, etc.
and sent, etc. and she has departed and gone and been another man's wife; so
that he bids them not to put her away, but forbids to take her again, after she
had been married to another; or if men will say, Moses commanded it, it was by
a political Law, not by a moral Law or the Law of nature.

244. Deuteronomy. 24.2. She that was sent away from her husband might marry another
husband. Romans 7.3. Whilst her husband lives she shall be called an adulteress,
if she be married to another man.

Divorce by a bill of divorcement does not dissolve matrimony; therefore they
that are unlawfully parted, must not attempt second marriages, because they
that are once married are made one body.

Genesis 5.1. 1 Cor. 15.35.
245. Deuteronomy. 24.16. The children shall not be put to death for the parents. Romans
5.12. By one man sin entered into the world.

The innocent children are not punished for the sins of their fathers, but in
Adam we all sinned, and we are daily polluted with many actual transgressions.

246. Deuteronomy. 25.3. Forty stripes he may have given him, and not exceed. 2 Cor.
11.24 I received of the Jews five times forty stripes save one.

The Jews to seem more merciful subducted one stripe.

247. Deuteronomy. 25.4. Jos. Ant. l. 4. c. 8.
Thou shall not musle the Ox which treads out the corn. 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God
take care for Oxen?

The former place does not properly appertain to Oxen, but it is a figurative
speech. In the latter the Apostle speaks tropologically of the Ministers of the
Church, as if he would say, if God take care for Oxen, then much more does he
care for men, and the Ministers of his Church.

* Deuteronomy. 25.4. with 1 Cor. 9.9. It is certain God takes care for Oxen by his
general providence, for by this he provides for all creatures. The second
place is therefore not simply, and so to be understood, as if God had no
provision for bruit beasts; but to be understood comparatively, he rather takes
care for men, and those men which labor in his word; and so he argues, a
minori ad majus, he that provideth for Oxen, will much more provide for
Ministers; but God provides for Oxen, therefore for Ministers.

* 248. Deuteronomy. 25.5. If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have
no child, etc. Lev. 18.16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy
brothers wife.

There are several ways of interpreting this former Scripture. By Brother, may
be understood, the next kinsman, for so the word may signify, and so it is not
a natural Brother, but some other in the kindred, who might marry: or yet it
may be meant of a natural Brother, for where there were many Erothers who all
died childlesse successively, the surviving Brethren were to marry the Widow;
if there were no son but a daughter there was a diff^rent course to be taken.

249. Deuteronomy. 27.15. Cursed be the man that makes a molten Image. Rom 12.14.
Bless and curse not.

The former place must be understood to proceed from duty and zeal to the glory
of God, not our of desire to revenge. So Moses and Paul did curse. 1 Cor. 4.12.
Let us follow the example of Christ, who being reviled, reviled not again;
when he suffered he threatened not, lest he should seem desirous of revenge.

* 250. Deuteronomy. 29.2. You have seen all that the Lord has done before your eyes.
Verse 4. Yet the Lord has not given you eyes to see unto this day.

To see as the Israelites did, that which the Lord did with their bodily eyes
is one thing, and to see the intent and purpose why the Lord did such things,
with the eyes of their understanding is another. They saw with their outward
eyes, but their hearts did not see and consider what the Lord had done.

* 251. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to God, etc. Psalm 25.14. The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him.

Things are secret, either as they have relation to the subsequent issue, which
is hidden from all, or else as they have relation to this or that person. There
are many things which the Lord keeps in his own bosom, as not necessary for
his children to know: and there are other things, which his wisdom thinks fit
only to reveal to persons fitly qualified for so great secrets, and they are
his own children. The former place speaks of the secrets of Gods providence,
which are not fit to be discovered, till they appear in their effects; And the
latter place speaks of such things as the Lord hides from the world, in
general, and thinks fit to discover only to his children.

252. Deuteronomy. 30.11. The commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden
from thee, neither is it far off. John 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

Moses understands not only legal precepts, but Evangelicall also, which God
writes in our mouth and our heart: Christ commands us to seach the Scriptures
to increase our knowledge by, because we know hereby in part, etc. 1 Cor. 13.9.

* Deuteronomy. 30.11. with Jo. 5.39. It is one thing, for to manifest and clear sua
natura, in it self* and another thing to be clear quoad nos.

First, The Word of God is clear in it self, it was spoken in a clear and known
language, even their own; and the Laws were not to be locked from them, but
read and explained to them by their Priests; and though some things in the Law
of lesser consequence were more obscure, yet the things of greater concernment
as to salvation are clearer, so that he which runs may read.

Secondly, Yet in regard of our dullness, many things are hidden and dark to us
in the Law, therefore we may, we must search the Scriptures.

253. Deuteronomy. 30.15. I have set before you this day, life and good, death and
evil. John 8.24. Ye shall die in your sins.

Moses foreshews favor to those that keep the Law, and wrath to the
transgressors: Christ threatens the Jews, the servants of sin, with death and
eternal destruction.

254. Deuteronomy. 30.19. I have set before you good and evil. Romans 6.16. Wicked men
are the servants of sin.

In the first place it is spoken of Gods people. In the latter of the wicked,
who are called the servants of sin, that run after it with greediness, it
reigns in them, and their will leans to evil.

255. Deuteronomy. 31.2. Moses was an hundred and twenty years old. Psalm 90.10. The
days of our years are seaventy or eighty.

Moses obtained long life by a singular privilege from God. The term of our
life is seaventy or eighty years; or at the most an hundred years, as Ecclus.
speaks, Chap. 18.9.

* Deuteronomy. 31.2. with Psalm 90.10. The former place speaks of what happened to
Moses Historically; the latter tells what happens to men many times, and this
Doctrinally. Not that men even in our age pass not seaventy or eighty, many
exceed that, but that this is generally the longest term which old men live to.

256. Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will provoke them by those that are not a people. Romans
10.19 Matthew. 10.5. Enter not into the way of the Gentiles, rather go to the
lost sheep of Israel.

In the former place is understood the calling of the Gentiles. In the latter a
temporary command of Christ, by which he would that the Gospel should first be
preached to the Jews, and then according to Moses Prophecy to all Nations and
people.

257. Deuteronomy. 32.39 I am alone, and there is no other God. 2 Cor. 4.4. The Devil
is called the God of this world.

Jehovah is the true God, the Devil is called the God of this world, because
he inclines the minds of wicked men to mischief, and they obey him rather than
God.

258. Deuteronomy. 32.35. Revenge is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Romans 13.4.
The Magistrate is the revenger of Gods wrath on them that do evil.

That is Gods revenge which is done by the Magistrate, therefore the Scripture
forbids not public revenge by Gods Ministers the Magistrates, but only
private revenge.

* 259. Deuteronomy. 33.12.

Object. This seems not to be fullfilled, for the Temple and Jerusalem were in
the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.18.

Answ. The South superior part of Jerusalem where Mount Sion was, belongs to
the Tribe of Judah: The inferior and Northern part with the intermediall Mount
Moriah, in which the Temple was built, belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin; so
Lyra in Genesis 28. And when God is said to dwell in Sion, its a Synecdochicall
figure, as Sion is put for the whole City of Jerusalem.

260. Deuteronomy. 34.10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel, like to Moses.
Matthew. 11.11. Amongst them that are borne of women there has not risen a
greater than John the Baptist.

In the Old Testament Moses was the greatest Prophet, in the New Testament John
Baptist, who pointed out our Savior with his finger.

JOSHUAH.
THis Book was written by Joshua the Son of Nun, who brought the people of
Israel over Jordan into the Land of Canaan, conquering the Cities and killing
their enemies, and divided the Land amongst the Tribes of Israel; he lived
eighteen years after Moses. This Book contains an History of the seaventeen
or as others eighteen years of the rule of Joshua, which though they be not
expressly named by this Sum in clear words, yet are they to be collected to be
so many, from the gross Sum of four hundred and eighty years; from the
delivery out of Egypt to the laying of the foundation of Solomon's Temple,
mentioned 1 Kings 6.1. For the Scripture has parcelled out that Sum into
these particulars; forty years of the people in the Wilderness, two hundred
ninety nine years of the Judges, forty years of Eli, forty of Samuel and
Saul, forty of David, and four of Solomon to the Temples founding, in all four
hundred sixty three; and therefore the seaventeen years that must make up the
Sum four hundred and eighty, must needs be concluded to have been the time of
the rule of Joshua.

261. JOsh. 1.5. None shall be able to stand against thee all the days of thy
life. Chap.7.4. Three thousand men fled before the the men of Ai.

The promise was conditional, that if they would be obedient unto God; but
because the Covenant was violated, and the condition not performed on the
peoples part, therefore the violaters of the divine Covenant were punished.

The condition is not expressed, but as in other Scriptures it is understood.
Besides, by the words A man not able to stand before thee, is meant, a man that
shall not be overcome in the conclusion: and so the men of Ai, though they did
at first stand before Joshua, yet not in the conclusion, being conquered.

262. Josh. 1.11. Prepare your victuals. Exodus 16.20. Manna remained till the
next day.

Joshua understood not Manna alone, but other provisions, which he would have
them buy of the children of Esau.

263. Josh. 1.11. Deuteronomy. 2.6.
After three days you shall pass over Jordan. Chap. 3.4. That was done many
days after.

Joshua speaks according to his humane intention, hoping that the spies would
return to him within three days; but because they were forced to lie hid in
the Mountains, until such time as those that sought after them were returned,
therefore that passage of Israel over Jordan was delayed.

* Josh. 1.11. After three days, etc. with the following Chap.

Object. Mentioning three men which went to search the Land, which lay three
days hid in the Mountains; and after their return the Jews stayed three days
on the other side Jordan, as Chap. 3.

Answ. These are related per hysteron proteron, Anticipative, the sending the
spies ought to have been placed before this command of Joshua, and these three
days are the same with those Chap. 3.

264. Josh. 2.14. The spies promised to Rahab life and safety. Deuteronomy. 20.13.
Thou shall destroy every Male thereof with the edge of the sword.

The enemies of the true God, and of the people of Israel were to be destroyed.
Rahab with her Father and brothers, was well minded toward the spies, and
joining her self to the people of God, forsook the mad Idolatry of the Heathens.

265 Josh. 4.5. Take you up every man a stone upon his shoulder according to
the number of the Tribes of the Children of Israel, that it may be a sign
among you. Exodus 14.22. Passing through the red sea they did not do so.

At the Commandment of God, in memory of the drying up of the water of Jordan
and their passing over, this was done, that it might be a monument of Gods
benefits: Moses did not the same in his passage over the red sea, because he
had no command of God for it.

266. Josh. 5.7. Circumcision was intermitted in the wilderness for forty
years. Genesis 17.14. The man child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from my people.

Circumcision was intermitted during the time of the exile and perigrination of
the children of Israel, because of their continual journeying which did hinder
it, for it did cause great pain and languishing to the body.

267. Josh. 6.4. On the seventh day the Soldiers and the seven Priests shall
compass the City seven times. Exodus 20.8. Remember to keep holy the seventh
day. Deuteronomy. 5.15. Ezekiel. 20.12.

That was a special and singular Law of God. There are many things of this
kind, says Justinus, in the sacred Bible, which God imputes not to men as
sin, because of the necessity that fell out; as circumcision the eight day,
the seven times compassing about Jericho, the offering of sacrifices on the
Sabbath, etc.

268. Josh. 7.15. He that shall be taken with the cursed thing, shall be burnt
with fire. Verse 16. Achan with his children was stoned by the Israelites.

The fault of Achans sacrifice and violation of the Majesty of God by him and
his children was mitigated, for he was first stoned, and then burned, he and
all that appertained to him.

269. Josh. 7.24. For Achans sin were his children killed also. Deuteronomy. 24.16.
The children shall not die for their fathers. 2 Kings 14.6. Ezekiel. 18.20.

Achan did not only commit sacrilege, but also high treason, and therefore
both he and his family were to dye for it; for if for rebellion against earthly
Majesty committed by Parents, the Children are justly punished in civil
Judicature; much more shall God justly revenge the Rebellion of Parents upon
the Children unto the third and fourth generation, Exodus 20.5.
unless their children repent for it.

270. Josh. 10.26. The King of H^bron was hanged. Verse 37. He was slain with
the sword.

The first King being taken was strangled, the second who succeeded him fell by
the sword.

* 271. Josh. 10.38. Joshua took Debir. Judges 1.11. Othniel Calebs younger
brother took it after Joshuas death.

There were two Debirs, one a City in the Confines of Judah, butting on the
Tribe of Simeon, before called Kiriath-Sepher, Jud. 1.12. Another of this name
in the Tribe beyond Jordan, Josh. 13.26. But

Secondly, The things related in Judges the first to the 17. Verse, were done
in Joshuas time, but here expressed more fully and particularly; and though the
taking of the City be attributed to Othniel as a sub-commander, yet its given
to Joshua as the General.

272. Josh. 11.19. There was not a City which yielded not it self up to the
children of Israel. Yet in the time of the Judges and the Kings, many Cities
were not in their possession.

Joshua took all the Cities he came at by force, and those that were to be
taken, and they were to be delivered to Israel for a possession.

273. Josh. 15.8. Jerusalem was in the Tribe of Judah. Chap. 18.28. Benjamin is
numbered.

In the borders of Judah and Benjamin at first they were two small Cities, at
last they were joined into one and fortified with a wall round about.

* 274 Josh. 15.17. with Numb. 32.12.

Object. Therefore Caleb was not the brother of Othniel but Kenor.

Answ. Othniel is not absolutely called the brother of Caleb, but with this
addition, the younger brother, to wit, Nephew by the brother; the Law
forbidding the Uncle to marry the Niece.

275. Josh. 15.63. The Children of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites unto
this day. 2 Samuel 24.18. The Jebusites were in their own possessions in the time
of David, who bought the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.

Because the Israelites spared the Jebusites, and the Benjamites took them into
their protection, so that the remainders of them were tolerated unto David's
time; that succeeded ill to the people of Israel, who by their society were
drawn to Idolatry. Exodus 1.21.


* 276. Josh. 19.6. Beth-leboath. 1 Cro. 4.31. Beth-bires.

Most of the Cities of Simeon are written with an Alias, as they are named,
Joshua 19. and as they are named 1 Chronicles. 2. none need to wonder at their
different denominations.

Here I interpose nothing of the several Writings of the same place.

First, According to exact Critics of the same places.

Secondly, According to the vulgar Tongue, in pronouncing them.

The Book of the Chronicles was written after the return from the Captivity,
and about eighteen gerations after the days of Joshua, and therefore some
difference of letters after so large a time, is no strange thing: For seeing
here we have no continuing City, it cannot be expected that any City should
have any continued name, and yet great places longest retain their names
unaltered. Whereas small Cities like these in Simeon are often alterable, as
passed into a possession of several owners. Yea seeing it was the custom of
the Jews to call their Lands after their own names, this happily might change
Beth-leboath into Beth-bires, when it came into the possession of a new
Landlord.

* 277. Josh. ult. 32. A field which Jacob bought of Hamor, the Father of
Sichem. Acts 7.16. The field which Abraham bought of Hamor.

The Person of Abraham is one thing, the Posterity of Abraham bearing his name,
as Israel did, called by the name Israel, as their Fathers was, is another.

The word Abraham used by Stephen, is to be taken Patronymically, calling the
house and family by the Fathers name, as Matthew. 1.1. David is called by the son
of Abraham, whereas Ishi was his Father, but in regard he was the great and
eminent Father of their Faith and Family, they were called sons of Abraham.
See Acts 7.

JUDGES.
THIS Book is so called from the Judges of the people of the Jews. It contains
the condition of the Children of Israel after the death of Joshua, under
sixteen Judges. The Idolatry of Micha. The wickedness of the Gibiathites. The
slaughter of the Benjamites. It was written by Samuel. It contains the History
of three hundred years.

* 278. Judge. 3.11. The Land had rest forty years.

Under this number are all the years comprehended, from the death of Joshua to
the death of Othniel; as also the eight years of the servitude under the
Syrians. The lesser number is to be counted under the greater and more complete.

* 279. Judge. 3.30. The Land had rest eighty years, etc.

Here from the death of Othniel are numbered also the years of Ehud and Samgar,
for Ehud could not be Judge eighty years; for when these years are expired, the
whole time of man is run out. The like we meet with Jud. 5.31. and 8.28. and
9.22. and 10.2, 3. and 11.26. where in the three hundred years are included
the forty years of their carrying in the desert.

280 Judge. 5.31. Let all the enemies of the Lord perish. Prove. 25.21. If thy
enemy hunger, feed him with bread, Mat. 5.44. Luke 6.35. Romans 12.20.
if he thirst, give him water to drink.

We must do good to our enemies, but not to Gods enemies, and for private
injuries we must not curse them; but as they are Gods enemies, of whom there is
no hope of their conversion, out of zeal of a S. Spirit, we may pray also for
their destruction.

281. Judge. 6.17, 36. Gideon asks a sign from God. Mat. 12.39. An evil
generation seek for a sign.

Gideon was confirmed in his office by a sign given from God, so Moses, and
Joshua. Christ calls the Pharisees an evil generation justly, because they out
of curiosity sought for a sign: Let us be content with the Word of God.

282. Judge. 6.21. Gideon sacrified on a rock. Lev. 1.5. The sons of Aaron shall
offer the sacrifices on the Altar.

Gideon offered the matter of the sacrifice to the Lord, and God himself was
the Priest in burning the offering, nor was there any Leviticall officer
present, and the event teaches us, that what Gideon did was from divine
instinct.

* 283. Judge. 9.18. with the whole Chapter, and Chap. 8.3.

Object. Its gathered that there were not seaventy but sixty eight for
Abimelech, one of the brethren was the slayer, and the youngest Jonathus fled.

Answ. The Scripture often puts a round and full number, neglecting the lesser
or more, which either come short or exceed it, as Numb. 11. There is said to be
seaventy Elders, when in truth there were seaventy two; so here on the
contrary, seaventy for sixty eight.

* 284. Judge. 10.1. with Judge. 6.15. Of the Tribe of Issachar, of the Tribe of
Manasse.

Answ. Gideon and Phua although brothers by the same venture, yet of several
Fathers of several Tribes. A woman might marry to a man of another Tribe, so
as the heritage was not transferred into another Tribe.

* 285. Judge. 10.4. with Numb. 23.41.

Object. This latter says they were called Jair from one of an Elder date,
from Jair the son of Manasses.

Answ. The elder Jair gave a name to the Villages. The latter to the Walls
which encompassed them, and so made them Towns or Cities, and further he
strengthened and confirmed their names.

* 286. Judge. 11.26. Israel dwelt in Heshbon and Aroer and their Towns three
hundred years.

These years are to be reckoned from the departure of all the Israelites out of
Egypt after this manner; the time of their abode in the wilderness forty
years, the Government of Joshua seaventeen, of Othniel forty, Judge. 3.11. of
Ehud and Samgar eighty, Judge. 3.30. Barak forty, Gideon forty, Judge. 8.28.
Abimelech three, Judge. 9.22. Tolah twenty three, Judge. 10.2. Iair twenty two,
Judge. 10.3. The whole in all is three hundred and five years. Here therefore
the five years odd are not named; it may be, because this even number three
hundred, is fitter both for the computation and the speech.

287. Judge. 11.39. Jephtha did according to his vow. Verse. 31. Whatsoever
comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, I will offer up for a
burnt-offering to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12.31. The Lord hates all the abominations
that the Gentiles used to their Gods, and those that offered up their sons
and daughters, and burned them in the fire.

Jephtha vowed disjunctively, that whatsoever should first meet him out of his
house, should be the Lords, that it should be either sacrificed or deputed for
Gods service; for he knew that all living creatures could not be offered in
sacrifice to the Lord, therefore he he consecrated his daughter for the work of
the Sanctuary, Verse 38. for she being sanctified to God knew no man, and she
bewailed her virginity.

288. Judge. 13.7. Samson was a Nazarite from his mothers womb, unto the day of
his death. Mat. 2.23. It was fulfilled in Christ, he shall be called a Nazarite.

The Nazarites in the Old Testament were votaries according to Law, Numb. 6.
who gave themselves wholly to meditate upon divine matters, and others which
were born so, as Samson here, on whose head never razor came, nor was his head
ever shorn; others were called so, both ways jointly. Christ was prefigured
by them, who was most free from all uncleanness, commonly called a Nazarite,
because he was brought up in the Town of Nazareth.

* 289. Judge. 18.1. with Josh. 19.47.

Its said, Dans Lot was the seventh Lot.

Answ. The Lot assigned them in regard the Amorites possessed a great part
thereof, was not great enough for them, nor was it large enough for them, in
regard of their numerous Tribe.

* 290. Judge. 20.46. with 35. There were slain of the Benjamites twenty five
thousand. Verse. 35. twenty five thousand one hundred men.

Answ. An hundred are not counted, it may be, because this even number of
twenty five thousand is fitter for computation and speech.

* 291. Judge. 21.4. with Exodus 38. There were no more Altars to be built, after
the erecting of that by Moses.

Answ. Not without the Tabernacle, but within the Tabernacle or Temple, they
might erect as many as was sufficient for the sacrifice, as Solomon did, 1
Kings 8. But without the Tabernacle none was to be erected without a special
dispensation from the Lord.

292. Judge. 16.31. Samson killed himself. Exodus 20.14. Thou shall not kill.

Samson killed not himself with the Philistines by any rashness of his own, but
he did that by the instinct and power of God, and was a figure of Christ's
overthrowing our enemines.

RUTH.
IT is so named from Ruth a woman. Samuel describes in this Book Ruths
dutifullnesse to her Mother in Law, and the integrity of Boas, who was David's
Grandfather.

293. RUth. 3.4. Naomi persuades Ruth to lie down at Boas feet. 1 Timothy 2.9.
Women adorning themselves with modesty and sobriety.

That was indeed a dangerous counsel, nor must it be drawn in for an example;
Naomi was brought on to do that by the Law of raising children to the brother
that was dead. Yet God hindered that no dishonesty happened thereby.

294. Ruth. 4.13. Boas took Ruth, and she was his wife, and he went in unto
her. Deuteronomy. 7.3. You shall make no marriages with them.

Moah (who was the son of Lot) of his posterity they were not forbid to marry
wives, but of the Hittites, Gergeshites, Amorites, Cananites, Perisites,
Hivites, Jebusites, etc. Ruth followed the true Religion and the Nation of the
Jews, and not the Moabites.

The two Books of SAMUEL. Heb. Schemuel.

IN the first Book is described the life and death of Samuel, with the
Government of Saul. In the second, the translation of the Kingdom to David,
and his administration of it. Samuel writ the first Book to the twenty fifth
Chapter. The rest with the second Book were writ by Nathan and Gad both
Prophets. In these two Books is contained the History of an Hundred and Twenty
years.

* 295. 1 SAMUEL 1.1. with 1 Cro. 6.33.

The one says, Elcanah was of the Tribe of Levi, the other says he was an
Ephramite.

Answ. He was truly of the Tribe of Levi, but born of the City Ramata a
Levites City, so that by dwelling he was an Ephramite yet Levitish Parents. So
some think those Cretes and Arabians in Acts, were Jews by birth, the other by
dwelling.

* 296. 1 Samuel 1.12. with Numb. 3.45.

Object. How was Samuel dedicated by his Mother to the Lord, since all Levites
were so by institution.

Answ. The Levites were so from thirty to fifty by the Lords Institution, Numb.
4.2. But Hanna devoted her son to be a Nazarite in perpetual obedience.

* 297. 1 Samuel 3.7. And Samuel yet knew not the Lord, with 1 Samuel 2. Samuel
grew and pleased the Lord and men.

Object. How could he please the Lord and not know the Lord?

Answ. This Text speaks of a peculiar knowledge and science, which the Lord
indewed Prophets withal, sensibly, and by revelation.

298. 1 Samuel 3.13. Eli knew his sons did wickedly, and he restained them not.
Chap. 2.24. He said to his sons, Wherefore do you all these things that I hear
of you from all the people? do not so my sons, it is no good report.

The correction of Eli in reproving his sons was too gentle, nor is it
accounted for a restraint. Chrysostom says, if Eli had been unreproveable
himself in his life, In Mat. hom. 17.
he should more sharply have corrected his sons treading under foot the Law
of God; therefore was he justly punished.

299. 1 Samuel 7.2. From the day that the Ark of God abode in Kiriath-jearim,
the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the house of Israel
lamented after the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 13.6. David in the fifth year brought it
from thence.

The Ark was in Kiriath-jearim unto the days of Saul, who first brought it
into the Army, and then sent it back to its place. David being made King, first
translated it to Obed-edoms house, and after that unto the Mountain of Sion.

* 300. 1 Samuel 8.6. with Deuteronomy. 17.

Object. How should it be so displeasing to the Lord to have the Israelietes
ask a King of God, and yet he sets a King over them, or suffer them to have one?

Ans. The people offended not in asking a King that would be guided by Gods
Laws; but their offense was in asking a King to be governed by strange and
barbarous Laws, such as the Nations had: and upon this account it was that the
Kings Laws are held to be unjust.

* 1 Samuel 8.18. with 1 Samuel 9.16.

The Lord refuses to answer the people, when they cry against the oppression
of their Kings which they so desired. He refused not to hear their prayers in
other afflictions.

* 1 Samuel 11.1. with 1 Samuel 12.12.

Naas is said to fight against Jabesh Galead, after Saul's election one month,
and yet its said it was before this.

Answ. Naas undertook this expedition against Israel before Saul's election, and
Israel hereupon made terms of agreement; but having this new and fresh
occasion, the Tyrant renews his Wars.

301. 1 Samuel 9 16. Thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people Israel,
for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me. Hos.
13.11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

God gave a lawful Magistrate of his mercy for the good of the godly, to defend
them against the Philistines, yet because by diffidence of God they sought for
a King after the example of the Nations, as if they could not be safe without a
King, therefore God gave them a King in his anger.

* 302. 1 Samuel 10.6. And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou
shall prophecy with them, and be turned into another man. Romans 8.14. For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

The true and sanctifying graces and gifts of the holy Spirit is one thing; the
common illuminations of the Spirit are another. The Spirit of the Lord came
upon Saul with gifts fitted for a King, to make him exercise that office better
than another man: but not the sanctifying graces, as faith, repentance, etc.
for these come only on the Elect which are the Sons of God.

* 303. 1 Samuel 13.1. And Saul reigned two years over Israel.

That is, he reigned according to Law and Equity, or de jure, rightly. God by
reason of the Princes wickedness, leaves out or omits his name, or the number
of his years.

* 1 Samuel 13.1. with Acts 13.20.

Answ. These forty years seem to take in the Regiment of Samuel and Saul. Paul
joins them both together. Saul begun to reign in the thirty eighth year of
Samuel, and so only two is for Saul. Or as others, Saul reigned more than two
years, but he reigned only two years unblameably, in which he represented his
child-like candor; and upon this account Saul begun his reign in the twenty
three of Samuel.

1 Samuel 13.14. David was a man after Gods own heart. Acts 3. 2 Samuel 11.4. An
adulterer. Verse 5. A Murderer.

David amended all by repentance, and the heart of God is, that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live. Just.
Mart quaest. 78.
David indeed erred in many things, yet was he constant in the Covenant with
God.

* 304. 1 Samuel 14.3. with 1 Samuel 22. Abimelech the Son of Achitob.

Answ. The Priests had two names, as many others in the Scripture.

305. 1 Samuel 15.24. Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, now therefore I pray
thee pardon my sin. Esaias 43.25. I am he, says the Lord, that blot out thy
transgressions for my Name sake.

God by his own authority, but men ministerially from God remit sins, and
declare to those that are penitent the pardon of their sins for Christ's sake.

306. 1 Samuel 15.35. After Agag was slain, Samuel saw Saul no more. Chap. 19.24.
Saul prophesied with the rest, before Samuel.

Samuel saw him no more, when he had withdrawn himself from Saul, till he had
joined himself to the company of Prophets: or he never saw him more in his
Kingly ornament, or to converse familiarly with him as before.

307. 1 Samuel 15.35. It repented the Lord that he had made Saul King. Romans
11.29. The gifts and graces of God are without repentance.

The Scripture speaking by anthropopathy, after the manner of men, affirms
that God repented, because he knew Saul to be impenitent, and that he should
lose his Kingdom and his life also by the just judgment of God.

* 1 Samuel 15.35. with 1 Samuel 19.24.

Answ. He went not to see or visit him by way of office or friendship, as
formerly. He prophesied before him, when he was by himself, which was not to
visit him.

308. 1 Samuel 16.1. Saul was rejected by God, that he should no longer reign
over Israel above ten years. Acts 13.21. He gave them Saul the son of C is a
King for forty years,

Saul after he was anointed reigned ten years. Paul joined the government of
Saul and Samuel together.

309. 1 Samuel 16.21. David stood before Saul and became his Armor-bearer. Chap.
17.55. Saul seeing David go forth against the Philistines, he said unto Abner,
Whose son is this young man?

Order is not always observed in History; before the duel with Goliath David
was no approved Soldier, but after that, therefore it is Hysterosis, that is
put before which should follow after.

* 310. 1 Samuel 16.21. And David came to Saul and stood before him, and he loved
him greatly, etc. 1 Samuel 17.55. He said unto Abner the Captain of the Host,
Abner whose son is this youth?

Answ. Some would have this Chapter dislocated, and by an Hyst^rosis to be put
after the sixteenth, which ought to have been put after this, if the other
story would have suffered it. This seventeenth Chapter speaks of David as a
youth, not exercised in arms, or fit for fighting. But the sixteenth Chapter
speaks him to be strong and warlike; and thus in other places of the Bible, as
Genesis 2. and 5. Jo. 21. and 15, etc. there are the like dislocations.

Others say, that David after his coming to Court, had been some good time
absent before this battle, and so was forgotten of Saul, a little time making a
great change in growing youth; and that Saul's memory was not altogether so
strong, as to remember those that were absent from him, though he might those
which were constantly with and before him.

Others say, that he might know him in his person, and yet more curiously
enquire after his condition and parentage, having promised to give him his
Daughter: and as for Abner, being Captain of the Host, he might be abroad in
some Warlike expeditions, when David was in Court, and therefore now knew him
not.

* 311. 1 Samuel 18.19. When Merab Saul's daughter, etc. with 2 Samuel 21.8. And the
King took the five sons of Michal, etc.

They are the natural sons of Merab, and the legal sons of Michal, and
therefore (to bear) does only signify to bring up, to feed, and to nourish.
For thus the sons of Machir are said to be born on Joseph's knees, that is,
brought up. Filiation is either natural or legal; natural is by generation,
legal is adoption, testified by education and bringing up, and by succession
in the Kingdom, and in Levitation (of which Deuteronomy. 25.5.) by the Law of
redemption.

312. 1 Samuel 21.1. David came to Nob to Abimelech the Priest. Mark 2.26. He
went into the House of God in the days of Abiathar the Priest.

Abimelechs Father was Abiathar, the Son doing the Priests office, was in
place of his Father, who followed David, and was in exile with him.

* 1 Samuel 21.1. with Mark 2.26. He is called Abiathar, and there Abimelech.

Answ. When these things came to pass, Abiathar the son of Abimelech was
present, who was made High Priest upon the murder of the Father, or else you
may conclude both Father and Son had two names, 1 Cro. 15. and 1 Cro. 18.
where when David reigned its said, Sadok and Abiathar were Priests, and that
Sadok and Abimelech were Priests.

313. 1 Samuel 21.13, David changed his behavior before Achish and feigned
himself mad. Eccl. 7.17. Be not foolish. 1 Pet. 2.1.

David fearing greatly counterfeited folly, and by that dishonest means
secured himself.

Joh. 14.5.
314. 1 Samuel 26.10. Or his day shall come to dye. Eccles. 7.17. Why will thou
die before thy time?

His days are determined, the number of his months are with God, thou have
appointed his bounds which he cannot pass. Ecclesiastes warns us that we should
not by intemperance and wickedness shorten our days; for they that are put to
death, by man's reason might live longer.

* 315. 1 Samuel 28.11. The Woman said, whom shall I bring up unto thee? He said,
Samuel, etc. Romans 4.17. God raised the dead.

To raise a vanishing specter or shadow is one thing, and a living body is
another. To act a dead carcass is one thing, and to call the soul back into
the body, and the body from the earth is another. The Devil might do the one,
but not the other.

* 316. 1 Samuel 28.13. I saw men as Gods. Verse 14. An old man comes up.

The Hebrews to show the dignity of the person, use the plural number for the
singular, Exodus 32. these are thy gods, speaking of the Calf. And this may be
seen in Saul's reply, of what form or shape is he? she then leaves the plural
for the singular, an old man, which shows he was but one.

317. 1 Samuel 28.14. Samuel appeared to Saul after his death. Rev. 14.13. For
the dead rest from their labors.

He saw a shadow of Samuel, but not true Samuel, whose soul is in Gods hands,
and his body rests in peace; had it been Samuel indeed, he would not suffer
Saul to worship him, but would have reproved him, for that he had fallen from
God to look after Witches; it was the Devil therefore in Samuels likeness.

* 1 Samuel 29.3. David did not remain years, only four months. Chap. 27.

Answ. 'Twas Achish lie; the better to set forth David's fidelity; or some say,
he did not lie, but he spoke by disjunction: or the words may be understood of
his first flight, when he did feign himself mad.

* 1 Samuel 31.6. with 2 Samuel 1.4. Not all but many were slain, diverse escaping.

Answ. When the Text speaks of all being slain, it speaks of all Saul's familiar
Friends, Courtiers, Followers, and Guards.

* 318. 2 Samuel 1.10. with 11. He reigned two years, he reigned seven years.

Two years before War, the War arose betwixt David and him, and afterward five
years in trouble.

* 319. 2 Samuel 6.10. Obed-edom was a Levite, How then was he of Gath, a City of
the Philistines?

He was said to be of Gath, because of his habitation, he and his Father were
banished thither with David and Abiathar the High Priest.

* 320. 2 Samuel 6.20. with Verse. 14. and 1 Cro. 15.

He was naked or deprived of his Majesticall Ornaments, and only clothed with
a Linen Ephod, as Priests use to be.

* 2 Samuel 6. ult. Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her
death. 2 Samuel 21.8, 9. The five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, etc.

To have children of her own body, is one thing; to bring up her Sisters
children, as her own is another. It is one thing to speak after the Court
phrase of the Hebrews; another thing to express particulars at large.

The latter place by Michal (as some think) intends Michals sister, Merab the
Wife of Adruel, who being educated and adopted by Michal, are called here her
sons. Some think that here is used the figure of Ecclipsis, cutting off the
name of the one Sister, and expresing it by the other. So Verse 19. Goliath for
the brother of Goliath, and Jer. 32.12. Uncle for Uncles son. Michals Sisters
five sons are called Michals sons.

* 321. 2 Samuel 7.1, 11, David sat down in his house, and God gave him rest,
etc. And again, I have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. 2 Samuel 8.1,
10. After this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, etc. and
fought against, etc.

Its one thing to be at rest, in regard of Wars past, another thing for the
future. He was at rest in regard of foreign Armies assaulting him, not in
regard of his own Armies afflicting him, or disturbance in his Family. David at
present had intermission to build the House of God, though afterward he was
troubled --. Some think that after this no foreign enemy made an assault on
him, or gave him provocation, he might take offense against them.

* 322. 2 Samuel 8.3, 9. Hadadezer, etc. 1 Cro. 18.3. Hadarezer.

The Hebrew Letters Daleth and Resh are like one another, and often put and
used for one another, see Esaias 46.15. Jer. 11.20 which show that the Hebrew
Letters had the same form and figure in those days, which they have at this
day. And the same observation may be made upon the like change of other
Letters, wittingly made in Scripture, and much used in proper Names; and much
more used in the many mistakes of Interpreters and Translators of Scriptures in
many other place, and all by reason of the similitude of their Hebrew
Characters; as namely of and, of and and, of and, of and, of and, of ^ and,so a
Learned man.

323. 2 Samuel 8.18. The Sons of David were Priests (Elders) Lev. 8. Aaron and
his sons were consecrated to be Priests.

Priests that were to officiate in sacred things, were chosen only out of the
Tribe of Levi, as Aaron and his sons: but in politic matters by Priests of
Justice, Presbyters of Counsels, are Presidents, Princes, and chief Rulers to
be understood.

* 2 Samuel 8.18. with 1 Cro. 18. They could not choose Priests of the Tribe of
Judah.

Answ. The name Priest is sometimes given to the Prince, who was familiar with
the King, as the Priest with God, and so the chief Courtiers, were called
Priests, per Catachresin.

324. 2 Samuel 10.2. David would make a league with Hanun King of the Ammonites.
Deuteronomy. 22.3. Ammonites and Moabites shall not enter into the Congregation of the
Lord.

The Jews might not make a public league with the Ammonites; yet they might
hold private friendship with them, and the Moabites.

* 325. 2 Samuel 10.18. David flew seven hundred Chariots, and forty thousand
horsemen, with 1 Cro. 19.18. Seven thousand in Chariots, and forty thousand
footmen.

Answ. The Text speaks Metonymically, when it numbers seven thousand Chariots
slain, it intends the things contained, though the thing containing be used of
those forty thousand Horse, which are here mentioned. Many faught in Chariots,
and in Chronicles the footmen are reckoned which are here wanting. In this
battle was slain eighty thousand armed men, besides those Nobles which fought
in the seven hundred Chariots, and from them both is to be reckoned the number
of the slain.

* 2 Samuel 10.18. with 2 Chronicles. 19.18.

Seven hundred Chariots which had in them ten fighting men in every Chariot,
which make up the number of seven thousand, or seven hundred Troops of
Horsemen in Chariots, consisting of ten in a Troop. There was forty thousand
Horsemen, besides the forty thousand Footmen mentioned in 1 Chronicles. 19. for with
such huge multitudes of men, the Syrians and others used in those days to go
out to battle.

* 326. 2 Samuel 11.3. Bathsheba the daughter of Eliam. 1 Chronicles. 3.5. Bathshua
the daughter of Ammiel.

These two are the same persons writ different ways, which is easily done in
the Hebrew. Eliam and Amiel are the same person, though thus varied, and so
there are other words in 1 Chronicles. 3.

327. 2 Samuel 12.15. David judged a man worthy of death for taking away a sheep.
Exodus 22.1. If any one steal a sheep, he shall restore four sheep for it.

David judged the punishment of this theft, ought to be increased for the
civil circumstances that went with it, so the Magistrate uses to lay on more
punishment where he finds the offender more bold.

328. 2 Samuel 12.30. David put the Crown of the King of the Ammonites on his own
head. Deuteronomy. 7.25. Thou shall take nothing to thy self of the prey taken from
the enemies of God.

That Law was concerning Idolatrous people that inhabited the Land of promise;
the Ammonites were out of those bounds; therefore David sinned not when he put
the Kings Crown on his own head, and divided the spoil to his followers.

* 329. 2 Samuel 13.13. with Levit. 18.

Forbids the Marriage of Brother and Sister, though of several venters.

Answ. Thamar was of a Gentile Mother, i. e. of the daughter of the King of
Gessur, where such a Wedlock was lawful; and she being ignorant of the Law of
God, did think it might have been. Besides such were practiced among the
Hebrews: Or

Secondly, She spoke this to elude him, and put off the fury of his lust for
the present.

330. 2 Samuel 14.27. Absalon had three sons, and one daughter whose name was
Tamar. Chap. 18.18. He said, I have no sons to keep my name in remembrance.

The sons of Absalon were dead before their father, and so he was without sons.

331. 2 Samuel 17.25. The Father of Amasa was Ithra an Israelite. 2 Chronicles. 2.17.
An Ismaelite.

He was an Israelite by birth, by education an Ismaelite, for he lived there a
long time.

* 332. 2 Samuel 18.6. with Verse. 24. and 19.15. The battle was beyond Jordan,
Why then in Ephraim which was on this side Jordan?

Answ. This was called the wood of Ephraim, because of the great destruction
and slaughter of the Ephramites there spoken of Jude 12.

* 2 Samuel 18.18. with 14.27. Three sons, and one daughter.

Answ. They were by this either all dead, or else he erected the Pillar before
their birth.

* 333. 2 Samuel 19.20. How was Shimei of Joseph, when he was Chap. 16. of the
kindred of Saul, and consequently of Benjamin.

Answ. The who^e house of Israel is fr^quently called the house of Joseph, as
Psalm. 79. Thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep. Psalm. 76.80. Zach. 10. and
the reason was, because the name of Joseph was so famous in Egypt, even more
than the name of Israel; and beside, Joseph had obtained the dignity of
primogeniture, 1 Chronicles. 5. it was given to Joseph.

334. 2 Samuel 19.23. The King said to Shimei, Thou shall not dye, and he swear
unto him. 1 King. 2.9. He said to Solomon, Bring down his hoary head to the
grave with blood.

David swore for himself, but not for his successor; Shimei need not fear
whilst David lived; and under Solomon he had been out of danger had he staid at
Jerusalem.

335. 2 Samuel 20.23. Joab was over the whole Army. Chap. 19.13. David said to
Amasa, Thou shall be Captain of the Host for ever before me in the room of
Joab.

David desired to remove Joab from being Captain because of his cruelty, yet he
did it not, because in great matters he stood in need of him. In the mean time
Joab deceitfully killed Amasa, lest he should be preferred before him; the
punishment for this David deferred, but he did not wholly remit.

* 336. 2 Samuel 21.2. with Josh. 11.18. Of the Hivites.

Answ. The Amorites as having the most powerful possession, communicated their
name to the rest of the people thereabouts, so Genesis 15. all the inhabitants of
Palestina are called Amorites; the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full,
and Amos 2. I have banished the Amorites.

* 2 Samuel 21.8. with 6.23. She was barren, How then had she children? 2.
Michael was never married to Hadriel, but her sister Merob.

Answ. Some say that Merob being dead, Michael did adopt and take those
children for her own, seeing she wanted children her self; and so were called
hers, because she showed the care of a Mother to them.

* 2 Samuel 21.19. with 1 Samuel 17. Goliath was slain by David.

Answ. This was the brother of Goliath, 1 Chronicles. 20.

* 337. 2 Samuel 23.8. The same was Adino the Eznite. 1 Chronicles. 27.2. Jashobeam.

Adino the Eznite by name, Jashobeam by office; that is, one that sat on the
seat among the people as Judge: the immediate son of Zabdiel, called an
Harhmonite, or the son of Harhmoni for his former ancestry.

* 2 Samuel 23.11. with 1 Chronicles. 11.13. Full of Barley.

The field was full of both, the one part of it being sown with Barley, the
other with Lentiles, or that both these were carried into the Barn.

* 338. 2 Samuel 24.1. The Anger of the Lord was stirred up against Israel, and
he moved David to say, go number Israel and Judah. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan
stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.

He moved, i. e. say some, Satan moved, or David was moved: or God himself
(that hereby he might take occasion to punish David's, and the peoples sins)
did give him over to be tempted by Satan, and withheld his grace, whereby he
might have been enabled to withstand the temptation; and so David committed
this sin of numbering the people, which did arise out of his pride, curiosity
and confidence in his own strength, which otherwise in a civil use might have
been lawful.

It is one thing to move as a cause, another thing as an instrument.

339. 2 Samuel 24.9. Joab gave up the number of the people to the King eight
hundred thousand. 2 Chronicles. 21.5. He gave David the number of them eleaven
hundred thousand.

In the former place only the valiant men are counted; in the latter the
ordinary Soldiers also.

2 Samuel 24.9. Of the Tribe of Judah five hundred thousand. 1 Chronicles. 21.5. They
are numbered forty seven thousand.

First the Soldiers are numbered with their Colonels, but next they are
reckoned without their Officers.

* 2 Samuel 24.9. with 1 Chronicles. 21.5. Eight hundred thousand. All Israel were
eleaven hundred thousand, etc.

There were twenty four thousand Soldiers and Officers that attended David
monthly, so many every month, these make in all two hundred eighty eight
thousand. 2 Chronicles. 27. These were as it were a standing Guard about the King
every month, and ready for any sudden expedition. There were besides these the
Rulers of the Tribes, and Officers under them, and the Overseers and Rulers of
the Kings employments, and Officers under them: but the number of these was not
put into the account of the Chronicles of David, Verse 24. so that here is the
resolution of that scruple, the whole number of men able to bear arms in
Israel, were eleaven hundred thousand, and eighty thousand in Judah; but of
these there were three hundred thousand of Israel, and thirty thousand of Judah
that were already listed, and in the constant service and employment of the
King; and these Joab gave not account of, because their number and list had
been known long; and because the King would not lay Taxes on his own Servants.
Amongst all this number, Levi and Benjamin were not reckoned.

Joab doing this unwillingly, was the more careless, and so numbered not Levi:
Benjamin being affrighted by the Hand of Heaven left off; and David did employ
others about it.

* 2 Samuel 24.9. with 1 Chronicles. 21.5.

David's ordinary Soldiers or Trained-bands are not here computed, because
their number was already known, and reckoned in that number, 1 Chronicles. 21.5. The
number of those came to be twenty eight hundred thousand, there being in every
of the twelve Tribes twenty four thousand. So 1 Chronicles. 27.1, to 15. Over which
were set so many Colonels or Tribunes, Centurions, Captains, Commanders, and
chief Officers, as made up twelve thousand, which also are mentioned 1 Chronicles.
27.1. which in the whole amount to eleaven hundred thousand.

As for the five hundred thousand, there are reckoned the ordinary Soldiers of
David's Army in Judah, which are computed to have been thirty thousand, every
thousand having one of those Colonels or Captains set over them, the which are
left out in the computation, 1 Cro. 21.5. and only forty seven hundred
thousand mentioned, to which these thirty thousand being added, make up the
number of five hundred thousand here expressed.

340. 2 Samuel 24.13. Shall seven years of Famine come unto thee. 1 Chronicles.
21.12. Choose three years Famine.

The Famine of seven years is joined with the three years famine sent for the
cruelty of the house of Saul; after that should follow the other, for the sins
of David.

* 2 Samuel 24.13. with 2 Chronicles. 21.12. Three years of famine, seven years of
famine.

There shall be three years of famine come to make up those that have been
already to be seven, there had been already three years of famine from the
Gibionites, and this year of numbering the people was almost out, and there
shall three years of famine more come to make up seven.

* 2 Samuel 24.13. with 1 Chronicles. 21.12.

Seven years, that is, reckoning in this number the three years of famine
already past for the Gibeonites, to which three so lately past, and David's
sin of numbering the people, being in the fourth year which was a Sabbaticall
year, a new addition of three other makes up seven years of famine.

* 341. 2 Samuel 24.14. with Heb. 10.31.

It is better to fall into the Hand of God immediately, for when men are
employed in these punishments of God, they mix their own passions, and often
exceed the measure of Gods manifest intent, though not of his secret Decree.

It is better to fall into the hands of God, which revives penitents, which
cruel men will not.

The other place tells us, its a fearful thing to displease God, and purchase
to themselves not only a temporal, but an eternal displeasure.

342. 2 Samuel 24.14. It is better to fall into the hands of the Lord. Heb.
10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

It is good to be in the hands of God, when he is pleased with us, because his
mercies are great. It is fearful to fall into the hands of God, when he is
angry, for the wicked cannot stand before him in judgment.

343. 2 Samuel 24.15. God sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning unto the
time appointed. Verse. 13. Shall there be three days Pestilence in thy Land.

The time appointed was from the morning until noon of one day, or of the
continual morning sacrifice, that is, four hours.

344. 2 Samuel 24.24. David bought of Araunah the floor and the Oxen for fifty
shekels of silver. 1 Chronicles. 21.25. David gave to Arunah for the threshing
floor, six hundred shekels of gold, of just weight.

The floor with all the ground about it, was bought for six hundred shekels of
gold, a greater price then what was given for the threshing flour, the Oxen and
the wood appointed for the sacrifice.

* 2 Samuel 24.24. with 1 Chronicles. 21.25.

Fifty shekels of silver was only the price of the Oxen and instruments, and
the price of the threshing floor is not mentioned at all. Others reconcile this
diversity thus, that in both places is to be understood the price of all
together, both of floor and Oxen, etc. But that by the fifty shekels of silver
are to be understood, not shekels of silver in kind, but simply so much money
as should amount to the Sum of fifty shekels of Gold; and that in the
Chronicles the six hundred shekels of Gold ought likewise to be understood for
shekels of Gold in kind, but for common shekels of silver, paid in fifty
shekels of Gold in specie, according to the proportion of the weight, one in
Gold, being in value as much as twelve of silver, unless the sale of the floor
were made at an old quit rent, the principle value of which is set down in the
Chronicles.

The two Books of KINGS. Heb. Malachim.

THe first Book contains the History of Solomon. The building of the Temple.
The division of the Kingdom to Judah and Israel. The life of five of the Kings
of Judah, and eight of Israel. Of Elias the Prophet. With the History of an
hundred and sixteen years. The Second Book contains the Deeds of sixteen Kings
of Judah, and twelve of Israel. Of Elisha; and the destruction of the Kingdom,
and carrying the people of Israel captive to Assyria. Of the children of Judah
to Babylon. With the History of three hundred forty five years. Jeremias writ
both of them.

* 345. 1 KIngs 1. with 1 Chronicles. 23.1. and 29.22.

The doubt lies in this, whether he were three times made a King indeed, and
so all the three Texts that speak of it to be taken severally; or whether only
twice, as 1 Cro. 29.22. seems to hold.

Answ. The anointing of Solomon in 1 Kings 1. upon the aspiring of Adonijah,
was the first time that ever David showed who should Reign after him: See Verse.
20, 27. and therefore it must needs be held concurrent with the same, 1 Chronicles.
23.1. only that scruple that lies in the way, (that being supposed) is this:
That David at this first unction of Solomon should be in his Chamber, and upon
his bed, and exceeding decrepit; and yet at his second anointing should be in
the midst of his Princes and Commanders, and standing upon his feet, 1 Chronicles.
28.2. but this also will be removed, if it be but considered that David's
present infirmity was not sickness, but coldness, and benummednesse, and old
age; he was heart-whole, and head-whole, but he was old and Palsiish, and
therefore though his common and most commodious posture and composure was to be
in his Chamber, and upon his Couch; yet upon such an occasion as to Crown
Solomon before all Israel, he came forth and stood upon his feet, and made
Orations, and gave advice for things to come.

346. 1 Kings 2.4. If thy children shall keep my ways and walk in them in
truth, there shall not fail thee a man to fit on the Throne of Israel. Genesis
49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come.

In the former place it is spoken conditionally of the Kingdom of Israel, If
the sons of David should keep the ways of the Lord; but because Solomon
failed, therefore the Kingdom of Israel departed from his son, and in the
seventh generation the Kingdom of Judah was translated upon Nathan, whose
posterity ruled over the Jews until the coming of Christ. In the latter place
any kind of dominion is foretold to remain in Judahs posterity, until the
Messiah should come.

347. 1 Kings 3.1. Solomon took Pharaoh his daughter, and brought her into the
City of David. Exodus 34.15. Enter not into Covenant with the Inhabitants of
that Land, nor marry a wife, etc.

Marriages in a different Religion are dangerous, 2 Cor. 6.14.
nor are they pleasing to God. We must not draw in the same yoke with
Infidels, for there can be no firm charity or unity where the foundation is
neglected, that is, true Godliness. That Queen forsaking her Religion, 1 Kings
11.4.
and her fathers house, and marrying with Solomon, was a type of the marriage
of Christ and his Church. But because Solomon loved also the women of other
Nations, and his heart was led away by them to follow other gods, he drew the
anger of God upon himself and his posterity, and caused a defection from them.

348. 1 Kings 3.13. I have also given thee riches and honor, that none of the
Kings shall be like unto thee. Matthew. 6.29. Solomon in all his glory was not
like the Lillies of the field.

Solomon exceeded all the Kings in wisdom, riches and honor; Christ compares
the Lillies with his vestments in his greatest splendor.

* 349. 1 Kings 3.13. with Mat. 6.29.

The former place compares Solomon with other Kings. The latter place compares
him with the Lillies of the field. He might be the most glorious of Kings, and
yet less glorious than Lillies.

* 350. 1 Kings 4.26. Solomon had forty thousand stals of Horse. 2 Chronicles. 9.25.
Solomon had four thousand stals of Horse and Chariots.

Some thus; he had forty thousand for his Chariots, the other four thousand
Horse and Chariots. The latter puts them together to be numbered according to
the number of his Chariots, ten Horses to a Chariot, and so but four thousand.

Others thus; we must imagine that in each stall there were ten several
distinct places, to place an Horse in each one.

* 351. 1 Kings 5.16. Three thousand and three hundred: with 2 Chronicles. 2.2.
Three thousand six hundred.

The three hundred over-reckoned were Overseers of the Officers, or else there
might be three thousand three hundred over hewers of stone, and three hundred
over hewers of Timber.

* 352. 1 Kings 6.1. And it came to pass, in the four hundred and eightieth
year after the children of Israel were come out of the Land of Egypt, etc. Acts
13.20. And after that he gave unto them Judges, about the space of four hundred
and fifty years, until Samuel the Prophet.

These places have tortured many heads, and the difficulty lies thus.

Moses ruled forty, Joshuah seaventeen, Othniel forty, Ehud and Samgar eighty,
Deborah forty, Gideon forty, Abimelech three, Tola twenty three, Jair twenty
two, Jepthtah six, Ibzan seven, Elon ten, Abdon eight, Samson twenty, Eli
forty, Samuel and Saul forty, David forty, Solomon four, in all four hundred
and eighty: out of which number if you deduct David's forty, and Solomon's four,
there remains only four hundred thirty six, which falls short of St Paul's
number, (four hundred and fifty) fourteen years. Although we take into the
account the time of Kings Saul, who was not properly to be reckoned among the
Judges, he being an anointed King; and if we consult the next Verse 21. Acts
13. we shall see the other part of the Discourse begins at Saul.

Some would salve this, and make Joshuah to rule twenty seven, so Gagnius (as
Lorinus quotes him) but if so, how will the four hundred and eighty years be
made good.

Others think that the Scripture speaks not expressly of Othniels forty years
ruling, or Deborah, etc. but that the Land had rest forty years in their time,
not but there were interregnums and times of affliction, which are not reckoned
in the four hundred and eighty, though Paul may reckon these odd years in,
and so make up his number. But others say, that Paul speaks not definitively,
but only about the space of four hundred and fifty years, using a round number
for a broken.

Others say, four hundred and fifty are to be referred to the time of Judges,
beginning immediately after the death of Joshuah, and the Elders, and ending
the first of Samuel whose time is expressly excluded. The manner of computation
thus, They served Chusan-risathaim eight, Othniel judged forty, they served
Eglon eighteen, Ehud eighty, Jabin twenty, Deborah forty, the Midianites
seven, Gideon forty, Abimelech three, Thola twenty three, Jair twenty two, the
Ammonites eighteen, Jephta six, Itzan seven, Elon ten, Abdon eight, the
Philistims forty, Samson twenty, Eli forty; of Joshuah there is no time
expressed, and if there were, he were not to be reckoned to the Judges, Quisque
abandet suo sensu.

353. 1 Kings 6.2. The house which Solomon built for the Lord, the length
thereof was sixty cubits, the breadth twenty cubits, and the height thereof
thirty cubits. 2 Chronicles. 3.4. It is said to be an hundred and twenty cubits.

In the first place common cubits, in the latter cubits of the Sanctuary must
be understood, for the sacred cubit did contain two common cubits.

* 354. 1 King. 7.13. with 2 Cro. 2. The son of a woman, a widow of the Tribe
of Napthali. And in the other place, Of the daughters of Dan.

And besides in Kings he is called the Father of the King of Tire, and Chap. 4.
he is called the Father of Solomon.

Answ. He was born of a Mother of the Tribe of Dan, but of a Father of the
Tribe of Napthali. He was called a Tyrian by reason of his diurnall habitation,
and exercise of that art in that City; and he was called the Father of Solomon
and King of Tire, because of his excellent Magistracy.

355. 1 Kings 7.15. He made two brazen pillars, of eighteen cubits high apiece.
2 Chronicles. 3.15. He made two pillars of thirty five cubits high apiece.

Both the pillars did appear but thirty five cubits high, the half of each
cubit was hid in the capital or crowning of the pillar.

* 1 Kings 7.15. with 2 Chronicles. 3.15.

Betwixt the foot whereon it stood, and the Chapter on the head of it, for
from the ground to the top of the Chapter, it was thirty five cubits high, 2 Chronicles. 3.15. Besides the eighteen cubits here mentioned were sacred, but the
thirty five were common, and shorter by a third part, as is noted Verse 2. or
else the height of one single pillar may be set down in the former place, but
of them both in the other. The whole length of the pillars not appearing,
either of them seeming only to have seaventeen cubits and an half, because
half a cubit of each pillar was taken up in the Chapter.

356. 1 Kings 7.19. The Chapiters were four cubits. 2 Kings 25.17. They were
three cubits.

The Crown with the Chapter was four cubits: without the Crown but three
cubits.

357. 1 Kings 7.26. The Sea contained two thousand baths. 2 Chronicles. 4.5. Three
thousand baths.

In the former place is expressed the number of baths which ordinarily were put
into the Vessel by the Kings Order. In the latter the capacity of the Vessel
is set down, unto the brim of it, so it would hold three thousand baths.

* 1 Kings 7.26. with 2 Chronicles. 4.5.

The former place speaks what was the usual quantity which was used to be put
in it, viz. two thousand baths, or five hundred barrels, reckoning eight
gallons to the bath, and four baths to the barrel.

The second place shows not what was put in it, but what might be put in it, if
the Sea were filled to the brim, viz. three thousand baths, or seven hundred
and fifty barrels.

* 1 Kings 7.26. Two thousand measures. With 2 Cro. 4. Three thousand measures.

Answ. The measure of the Temple was a third part greater than the other
measure; or else though it was able to hold three thousand, yet two thousand
was only powered in.

358. 1 Kings 8.4. The Priests brought up the Ark of the Lord and the
Tabernacle of the Congregation into the Temple. 2 Chronicles. 1.13. The Tabernacle
of the Congregatien of God was at Gibeon.

2 Samuel 6.17. 1 Chronicles. 16.1.
The Tabernacle of David was a new one, in which was the Arc of the Covenant.
The old one made by Moses, was in the desert, and remained at Gibeon.

1 Kings 8.9. There was nothing in the Arc save the two Tables of stone, etc.
2 Chronicles. 5.10. with Heb. 9.4. Wherein was the golden pot that had Manna and
Aarons Rod. viz. Exodus 25.16.

359. 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not. 1 John 3.9. Every man
that is born of God does not commit sin.

Naturally we are polluted with sin by the frailty of the flesh: they that
are born of God, are the sons of God, who being regenerate by the holy
Spirit, do not give way to sin, but carefully resist it, being guided by the
holy Ghost.

360. 1 Kings 8.27. The Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain God.
Col. 2.9. In Christ dwells all fulness of the Godhead bodily.

The divine nature cannot be apprehended by us, the divinity of Christ is
personally united to the flesh and dwells in it as in its proper Temple.

* 361. 1 Kings 9.11. with Lev. 25. The Land shall not be sold for ever, etc.

Answ. Solomon parted not with the dominiost, but the use of these Cities to
the King of Tire, that he might have the benefit of those Cities so long, till
he had reparation for his expenses.

1 Kings 9.23. Princes over-Solomons work five hundred and fifty. 2 Chronicles.
8.10. All the Princes over Solomon's work were two hundred and fifty.

In the former place mention is made of all who took charge of the work; in the
latter of those that took charge by course.

* 1 Kings 9.23. with 2 Chronicles. 8.10.

There were five hundred which served by turns, two hundred and fifty at a
time; these two hundred and fifty mentioned in the latter place; fifty more are
to be added, which were over those five hundred Rulers in their course, and
gave account of the five hundred, so that there were in all five hundred and
fifty. Now these fifty Commissioners were Israelites, the other inferior ones
which were more in number were strangers, and but only Solicitors or
Overseers, 1 Kings 5.16.

362. 1 Kings 9.28. Hiram sent to Solomon four hundred and twenty talents of
Gold. 2 Chronicles. 8.18. They brought from Ophir four hundred and fifty talents of
Gold.

The mariners and Solomon's servants spent thirty Talents by the way, and they
brought to Solomon to Jerusalem four hundred and twenty.

363. 1 Kings 11.35. God said to Jeroboam, I will give unto thee ten Tribes.
Verse 36. To Solomon's son one Tribe. Chap. 12.21. Rehoboam gathered together
all the house of Judah and the Tribe of Benjamin.

Rehoboam had but one whole Tribe, and Jeroboam ten Tribes, the Tribe of
Benjamin was divided between them both. Some others also of other Tribes that
were godly men, specially the Priests and Levites came to Jerusalem, and staid
in Judea.

2 Samuel 7.16. Psalm. 142.12.
364. 1 Kings 12.24. This thing is from me, says the Lord, that is, the
revolting of the Israelites. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. The Lord God gave the Kingdom of
David over Israel to him and his sons by a Covenant of salt.

The promise made to David does not much concern his temporal Kingdom, as the
eternal and incorruptible Kingdom of Christ; and the promise also was under a
condition, if his children should keep Gods Laws, and walk in his ways. 1
Kings 2.4.

* 365. 1 King. 15.5. Save only in the matter of Vriah.

Now he sinned frequently, he was resolved and had destined Nabals family to
death 2. He promiseuously slew the Ammonites. 3. He numbered the people, etc.

Answ. God speaks here aft^r the manner of men, as he not sinning in these
things, which had any ho^est or virtuous pret^xt. The anger conceived against
Nabal and the Ammonites was covered with the pretext of a just revenge. The
numbering the people with the pretense of a religious Tribute for the Temple.
God therefore was content not to divulge them, that they may be known ipsius
judicio privato; but adultery and murder, enormous crimes as all men
acknowledge. Therefore these were accounted by the people grievous crimes of
him, in the matter of Vriah.

366. 1 Kings 15.14. As a took not away the high places. 2 Chronicles. 14.5. Also he
took out of all the Cities of Judah the high places and the Images.

Those high places where God was worshipped, Asa took not away; but he
destroyed the Idols of the Gentiles, and the Images of the Sun.

* 367. 1 Kings 15.16. And there was War between Asa and Baasha all their
days. 2 Chronicles. 15. ult. There was none between them until the five and
thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.

Its one thing to reckon the Reign of Princes, as it respects the people over
whom they Reign: Another thing to set down the years of their personal Reign,
respecting themselves. The five and thirty years spoken of in the Chronicles,
in which the War brake forth between Asa and Baasha, was so acconuted in regard
of the people, who had now been so many years under these divided times, since
the revolting of the Tribes, to this day, which was not five and thirty years
of his personal Reign, being but the fifteenth of that Reign.

* 1 Kings 15.25. with 1 Kings 15.28. Nadab the son of Jeroboam, etc. Even in
the third year of Asa King of Judah did Baasha slay Nadab, and reigned in his
sted.

Nadab who began to Reign in the second year of Asa, might Reign two years,
although B^asha succeeded him in the third year of Asa: because the last years
of the Kings of Israel and Judah are not fully expired; but some of them (as in
this place) do scarcely contain months in them, the rest of the years being
put completely.

368. 1 Kings 16.8. In the twenty six year of Asa King of Judah, began Ela the
son of Basa to reign over Israel in Tersa two years. Verse 10. And Zimri went
and smote Ela in the twenty seventh year of Asa King of Judah.

In the twenty six year of Asah King of Judah Ela Reigned over Israel; in the
twenty seventh year of Asa, Zimri rebelled against Elah, and killing him, took
the Kingdom from him.

* 369. 1 King. 16.8. with Verse. 10. Ela is said to Reign two years, not that
he reigned two complete years; for Zimries conspiracy was when he had not
Reigned one, or but one year. But Ela began to Reign in the six and twentieth
of Asa, and so in the twenty seventh, was slain by Zimri; and so he is said to
Reign two years, not of his own Reign, but two years of Asa's, or part of
them, which are reckoned for the whole.

370. 1 Kings 17.4. God commands the Ravens to feed Elias. Lev. 11.15. Every
kind of Raven was abominable to God.

A Raven indeed is an unclean creature, not by creation, but by divine
ordination, and the forbidding men to eat his flesh; but to touch the Raven
alive, or to eat the meat he brought, was not unclean to Elias, nor an
abomination before God.

* 1 Kings 17.4. with Lev. 11.15. Some things were unclean, ab intrinseco, as
by leprosy, others ab extrinseco, as by eating or touching; of these there was
a spiritual and corporal uncleanness, the spiritual when any beast (though
clean was abused to spiritual fornication, as to be offered to Idols, etc.
Corporal uncleanness was effective of bad nourishment, or subjective as the
swine, etc. such as fed uncleanly, or lived in unclean places, or both. Some
creatures though clean for use, yet not for sacrifice, as the Buck. Some
unclean secundum speciem, as those in Lev. 11. others unclean, secundum
accidens, as being torn of wild beasts or found dead. The Raven was unclean as
the Gentiles used them in sacrifice (as some think) however it fed on Carrion.
But yet not so unclean, as to be touched, or to eat that it brought. However
this was an extraordinary case of necessity, which will grant a dispensation in
Ceremonial uncleanness.

371. 1 Kings 17.22. Elias raised the son of the Widow of Sarepta. 2 Kings
4.18. Elizaeus raises the Shunamites child. John 5.28. God quickneth the dead.

God raises the dead by his own power, the Prophets did it not by their own
power, but by power from him, and so confirmed the heavenly doctrine.

372. 1 Kings 19.11. The Lord was not in the wind, or the tempest. Ephesians. 4.6.
God is all in all.

Act. 12.21
God did not reveal his presence to Elias in the wind or tempest, though he be
otherwise in all his creatures.

* 1 Kings 19.11. with Ephesians. 4.6. Gods essence and presence is one thing; the
manifestation of that presence is another. God was and is in all things, but
does not visibly manifest himself in all things. The former place speaks not
simply, but by way of manifestation. The latter place speaks of God simply
considered, and as his power is in all things.

* 373. 1 Kings 22.42. And he reigned twenty five years in Jerusalem. 1 Kings
22.41. And he began to reign the fourth year of Ahab King of Israel. 2 Kings
8.16. And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab the King of Judah, etc.
began to reign.

Joram the son of Jehosaphat began to reign, when as yet Jehosaphat was King
of Judah, 1 Chronicles. 21.3. Jehosaphat gave him the Kingdom, and yet not so, but
that he was still King; his son reigning with him four years, as some, or
seven as others, which will solve the doubt. By the 2d Kings 3.1. it
appears, that in the eighteenth year of Jehosaphat, Joram King of Israel
began to reign, and by 2 Kings 1.17. that the eighteenth year of Jehosaphat,
was Jorams second year; and by 2 Kings 8.16. Joram the son of Jehosaphat did
not begin to reign, but in the fifth year of the other Joram King of Israel:
Whence we must conclude, that in these twenty five years of the reign of
Jehosaphat, is comprehended all the time from his succession to the Kingdom,
even to his death: whereof he reigned sixteen years alone, and then he joined
his son Joram with him for seven years space, and at last put the whole
Government into his hand, disburthening himself of it two years before his
death.

* 374. 1 Kings 22.15. This prophecy seems to be false, for the King was slain
in the battle.

Answ. The Prophet spoke ironically, which the King might easily perceive by
his gesture or manner of speaking; and hereupon it was, the King adjures him to
lay aside all fiction, and tell him the truth, which the Prophet did.

375. 1 Kings 22.49. Ahasias the son of Ahab said unto J^h^saphat, Let my
servants go with thy servants in the Ships; but Jehosaphat would not. 2 Chronicles.
20.35. Iehosaphat joined himself with Ahasias King of Israel to make Ships to
go to Tarsis.

Iehosaphat first refused the friendship of Ahazias, but at length he granted.

376. 2 Kings 1.10. Elias consumed two fifties with fire. Luke 9.54. Christ
forbade his Disciples to do so.

Elias was the executer of the wrath of God on the enemies of God. The
Disciples would rashly have done the like; their vocation was not to return
evil for evil, but to overcome evil with good, and to love their enemies.

* 377. 2 Kings 1.17. And Ahaziah died, etc. with 2 Kings 1.17. Iehoram the son
of Ahab reigned in the eight, etc.

Iehosaphat determined in the seventeenth year of his reign to help King Ahab
against the Syrians, appointed his son Ioram to be Viceroy in the eighteenth
year of his own reign, and in the second of his sons, Ioram the son of Ahab
reigned. Afterward in the fifth year of this Ioram the son of Ahab, Iehosaphat
being stricken in age, confirms his Kingdom to his son Ioram. Who is said to
have reigned eight years, some whilst his father was alive, and four alone by
himself, after the death of his father.

378. 2 Kings 4.29. Go, and if thou meet any man salute him not. Romans 16.10.
Salute one the other with an holy kiss; Salute the Churches.

Superstitious salutations must be rejected; profitable and honest salutations,
by which we wish good and profit to our neighbor, must be observed. The
command of Elisha to his servant obliged him, that without delay or lingering,
he should perform his errand, for what he was commanded was a singular charge.

* 379. 2 Kings 8.10. Go, tell him he shall be healed, and presently after the
Lord has showed me, he shall dye the death.

The Prophet either spoke ironically: or else he spoke according to the mind of
the party inquiring; for the Question was, Whether the disease was mortal; to
whom the Prophet answered as before, the King grew well of that infirmity, and
died not then, but by an external cause was suffocated, as Verse 15. and so
they are two answers to several causes or cases.

380. 2 Kings 8.25. Ahasiah reigned in the twelfth year of Ioram the son of
Ahab. Chap. 9.29. In the eleventh year of Ioram the son of Ahab, Ahasiah
reigned over Judah.

In the end of the eleventh year, and beginning of the twelfth of Ioram,
Ahasiah began to reign.

381. 2 Kings 8.26. Ahasiah was twenty two years old, when he began to reign. 2 Chronicles. 22.2. Ahasiah was forty two years old when he began to reign.

Ahasiah his age in the former place, and the time of the reign of all the
house of Omni is put in the latter place.

2 Kings 8.26. with 2 Kings 9.29. and 2 Chronicles. 22.2.

Here seems to be two plain differences, the one about the age of Ahaziah,
and the other about the time when he began to reign.

Answ. Ioram the son of Ahab reigned one whole year in the life time of his
father, and eleven years afterward; and so one Text calls his last year, his
twelfth, i. e. of his whole reign; and another Text calls it the eleventh, i.
e. his sole reign after his fathers death. As for the other difference which
seems the more difficult, Ahaziah was but two and twenty, etc. and Chronicles
says forty two years; and so this latter makes him two years elder than his
father, for his father began to reign when he was thirty two years old, and
reigned eight years, and so died being forty, 2 Kings 8.17. Now for the
reconciling of this scruple, the Original helps us, which in our Translation
is not visible. The Original means thus. Ahaziah was the son of the two and
forty years, namely, of the house of Omir, of whose s ed he was by the Mothers
side; and he walked in the ways of that house, and came to run at the same
time with it. This the Text directed us to look after, when it called his
mother, the daughter of Omri, which was indeed the daughter of Ahab* Now these
forty two years are easily reckoned by any that will count back in the
Chronicle to the second of Omri.

382. 2 Kings 9.26. I have seen the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons,
says the Lord. 1 King. 21.14. Then they sent to Iesabel, saying, Naboth is
dead.

Naboth and his sons were killed, lest they should by lawful inheritance
possess the Vineyard; what therefore the holy Ghost conceals in one place, he
explains in another.

* 2 Kings 9.27. with 2 Chronicles. 22.8, 9.

The current of the story at large was thus. Iehu slays Ioram in the field of
Iezreel, as Ahaziah and Ioram were together. Ahaziah seeing this flies and
gets into Samaria, and hides himself there. Iehu marches to Iezreel, and
makes Iezabel Dogsmeat; from whence he sends to Samaria, for the heads of
Ahabs children and posterity, which are brought him by night, and showed by him
to the people in the morning. Then he marches to Samaria, and by the way
slays Ahaziahs kinsmen two and forty men, finds ^ehonadab coming in to
Samaria, he makes search for Ahazia, they find him hid, they bring him to
Iehu, he commands them to carry him up to Gion by Ibleam, and there to slay
him. It may be his father Ioram had slain his brother there, as Ahab had done
Naboth in Iezreel, they do so, smite him there in his Chariot, and his Chariot
drives away to M^giddo, before he dies. The story in the Book of Kings is
taken up short, and laid with the story of the death of Iehoram, that the end
of both the Kings may be taken up together, but Chronicles show the order.

383. 2 Kings 12.21. Iosachar and Iosabad his servants smote I^as, and they
buried him with his Fathers in the City of David. 2 Chronicles. 24.26. Zabad and
Iosabad conspired against him, and killed him in his bed and buried him, but
not in the sepulcher of the Kings.

Iosachar otherwise is called Zobad; Ioas was unworthy of Kingly burial,
because he was perfidious to God, and ungrateful to men.

384. 2 Kings 13.1. In the three and twentieth year of Ioas the son of
Ahaziah King of Judah, reigned Iehoahaz the son of Iehu over Israel in
Samaria seventeen years. Verse. 10. In the thirty seventh year of Ioas King of
Judah began Iehoash the son of Iehoash to reign over Israel sixteen years in
Samaria.

Ioachas King of Israel reigned seventeen years, to the thirtieth year of Ioas
King of Judah, the son of Ioachas. Ioas was joined with his father in the
Government, in the thirty seventh year of Ioas King of Judah and so he reigned
two years with his father.

* 385. 2 Kings 13.1. with Verse 10.

If this be taken in the first place of the beginning of the year, and the
account made from the two and twentieth year; and the seventeen years be
accounted current, so as he reigned but sixteen years complete; and the thirty
seventh year mentioned, Verse 10. be taken complete, then the account of this
Verse will very well stand with the account of the other.

* 386. 2 Kings 13.21. with 1 Cor. 15.20.

Rising to a temporal life and dye again, is one thing; rising to an
everlasting life never to dye, another thing. The first sort were all they that
ever by divine Miracle rose from death before Christ's coming. The latter only
in Christ, and cannot befall the creature, until the last resurrection.

* 2 Kings 14.21. And all the people of Judah took Azariah (which was sixteen
years old) and made him King instead of his father Amaziah. 2 Chronicles. 26.1. Then
all the people of Judah took Vzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him
King.

Here is the same person designed under two Names, Azariah and Vzziah.

387. 2 Kings 15.30. Hoshea the son of Elah, after the death of Pekah reigned
in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Vzziah King of Judah about thirty
three, Jotham reigned sixteen years.

Hosheah reigned in the twentieth year of Jotham, not of his reign, but from
the beginning of his reign, who died in the sixteenth year, and Ahaz his son
succeeded him.

* 2 Kings. 15.30. with 33.

Jotham lived twenty years after he came to be King; but four years before he
died he resigned up the Kingdom to his son Ahaz, so he reigned twenty, and yet
but sixteen, or else the twentieth year, from the time that Jotham began to
reign: for he reigned but sixteen years, Verse. 33.

* 2 Kings 15.30. And Hoshea reigned in the twentieth year of Jotham. 2 Kings
16.2. Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen
years. With 2 Kings 17.1. In the twelfth year of Ahaz King of Judah, began
Hoshea the son of Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years. 2 Kings
18.1. In the third year of Hoshea son of Elah, King of Israel, Hezekiah began
to reign.

Here seems a double difficulty, in the twentieth year of Jotham, i. e. the
fourth of Ahaz. How can this agree with that which is said, Ahaz only reigned
twelve years.

2. When it is said Hoshea only reigned nine years, and began his reign in the
fourth of Ahaz. How could it come to pass, that Ezekias began his reign in the
third of Hoshea, i. e. the seventh or eighth of Ahaz? How can the third of
Hezekiahs be the seventh of Hoshea? By collation of places, and the diagrams of
the Kings of Judah and Israel, it appears there was seventeen years exclusive
from the twentieth year, from the beginning of Iothams Kingdom; or from the
fourth of Ahaz, to the sixth of Hezekias (in which year Samaria the Metropolis
of the Kingdom of Israel,) after three year siege. Hoshea the last King of
Israel, with the ten Tribes were led into Assyria by Salmanassar Captive; so as
by this account, Hoshea reigned seventeen years, or if the last of Ahaz and the
first of Hezekiah were the same year (as it sometimes happens in such accounts)
the sixth of Hezekiahs must be the seventeenth of Hoshea. How then did Hoshea
reign only nine? Ahaz about the beginni^g of his reign, being oppressed by the
Syrians and Israelites, called into his help Tiglath-Pelezer, and conquered
them in the fourth of Ahaz, and first of Hoshea. So as Hoshea was for eight
years Tributary to Tiglath-Pelezer, and those eight years he is said not to
reign. But rising up in the twelfth year of Ahaz, he reigned nine years, till
the transportation of the ten Tribes, which was in the ninth year, from the
Rebellion or rising, and this was the sixth of Ezekias; so as Ezekiah reigned in
the third of Hoshea, not from the beginning of his reign, but from shaking off
the Assyrian bonds, in the eighth of his reign. It was the third of the
Rebellion, and the eleventh of his reign. Hoshea began the fourth of Ahaz, from
thence to Hezekiah twelve, which was the eleventh of Hoshea, and the first of
Hezekiah.

388. 2 Kings 16.2. Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years. Chap. 18.2. Ezechias was twenty five years old when he
began to reign; so should he be born in the eleventh year of Ahaz.

Physicians do allow this; others do attribute to Iotham twenty years, and read
it thus; Ahaz was twenty years old when Iotham began to reign.

* 2 Kings 16.2. with 2 Kings 18.2.

If in the twenty fifth year, he must be born in the eleventh year of his father
Ahaz, because he was twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen years, 2 Kings 16.2. in all thirty six when he died; out of which take
the aforesaid twenty five, and so Hezekiah must be born in the eleventh
aforesaid. A thing not impossible, considering the singular blessing that
Nation had for generation. So Rehoboam was begotten by Solomon, about the same
age, 1 Kings 14.21. although Physicians are against it, for at eleven years old
they are not come to puberty.

389. 2 Kings 22.3. In the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the King sent
Shaphan the son of Azaliah. 2 Chronicles. 38.8. In the eighteenth year of his
reign, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah.

Josias began to reign in the eighth year of his age, and in the eighteenth
year of his reign, he sent Shaphan to Helkiah

* 390. 2 Kings 22.20. Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, 2 Chronicles.
34.28. with 2 Kings 23.29. And he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him. 2 Chronicles. 25.24.

There is peace external and internal, the former place is peace internal,
or peace with God; thou shall die with peace of conscience, or favor with God.

Secondly, External peace is either personal or national; the former place
is understood of national, and in regard its said, thou shall die, in dying,
the Governor may be said to be put for the people governed.

Thridly, Thou shall dye, thou shall receive thy mortal wound at Megiddo, but
die peaceably at Jerusalem; the troubles of Israel followed after his death,
and his sudden and violent death brake not off his peace with God, for thereby
he was taken from the evils to come.

* 391. 2 Kings 23.13. Which were on the right hand of the Mount of corruption.
2 Samuel 15.30. 1 Kings 11.7. Mount Olivet.

The same Mount (as some suppose) called by two names, the Mount of corruption,
from the persons meeting there, corrupting themselves with Idols. The Mount of
Olives because plenty grew there, or from the nearness of the Hebrew. Mischah
unction. Maschith corrupting. So Bethel the Lords house. Bethaven of iniquity.

392. 2 Kings 23.30. The people of the Land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,
and anointed hi^ King in his Fathers stead. Verse 34. And Pharaoh Necho made
Eliakim the son of Josiah King in the room of his Father. Mat. 1.11. Josias
begat Jechonias.

Jeconias Nephew to Josias, was the son of Ioakim, set by Pharaoh into the
place of Ioacas who was carried into Egypt. Matthew passes by the Father of
Ieconias.

393. 2 Kings 23.30. Josias was buried at Jerusalem before the Babylonish
captivity. Mat. 1.11. Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren in the captivity
of Babylon.

Josias in his posterity begat Iechonias and his Brothers kindred who lived
when that miserable carrying captive into Babylon began.

394. 2 Kings 25.29. Iechonias or Ioachin died in Babylon. Matthew. 1.12. After
the transmigration unto Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel.

That was done after the beginning of the captivity, but not after the
confirmation of it, when the time was that Evilmeredach lifted up the head of
Ioachim, in the seven and thirtieth year of his reign over Babylon, when the
time of deliverance drew on.

The two Books of CHRONICLES.
THey are called Paralipomena, from (...) and (...); that is, from being passed
by. Things that are passed by in the Books of the Kings, are contained here. In
Hebrew they are named Dibre Hajamin, that is, Words of days, of Chronicall
Annals, because they contain Annals and Histories. The first sets down the
Genealogy of Adam; of the Patriarchs and Tribes of Israel: with the reigns of
Saul and David. The latter has the History of Solomon and of all the Kings of
Judah and Israel, to the Babylonish captivity, and their enlargement by Cyrus:
which is done in the year of the world 3435. They were both writtten by Esdras.

395. 1 Chronicles. 2.9. The sons of Ezrom, Jeramuel and Ram. Matthew. 1.3. Ezrom
begat Aram.

Ram and Aram were but one, in Hebrew Ram, in Syriack Aram, signifies, Noble or
High.

* 396. 1 Chronicles. 2.15. David was the seventh. With 1 Samuel 16. Where Jesse
besides these seven sons is said to have another which made eight.

Besides the seven here mentioned, he had an adopted son. Jonathan the son of
Sammaa, that is, the Nephew from the third son; Some say, the Scripture does
not here give us a complete number, seeing it does not appertain to the
essence of the History.

* 397. 1 Chronicles 3.5. with Proverbs 4. where Solomon says, He was the only
begotten of his mother.

Answ. Solomon was the only begotten of his mother by David, for there was
three other begotten by Vriah her former husband, which David by adoption made
his own. But this will not hold, for Nathan who was one of these, is in Luke
mentioned, as one from whom Christ came, and so must be the son of David
naturally. Besides that son which David begot in adultery, hinders Solomon from
being the only son. Therefore I the rather answer, these mentioned here were
the natural sons of David by her, and Solomon was the only son of his
mother by love and motherly affection, and so the seventy unice dilectus.

398. 1 Chronicles 3.11. Ioram begat Ochozias, of whom came Joas. Matthew 1.8.
Ioram begat Ozias.

Ochozias, Ioas and Amasias are left out by the Evangelist, because they
reigned not well, and to observe the fourteen generations, that is the fourteen
persons of Kings in the gealogie of Christ.

* 399. 1 Chronicles. 3.11, 12. with Mat. 1.8.

It is one thing to be a son immediately, another thing mediately or remotely.
Joram was not Ozias son immediately, for three Kings came between, Ahaziah,
Ioash, and Amaziah. Some count it likely the omission of these, was with design
to keep within the number of three fourteens. Some think they are omitted
rather than others, because Gods curse lay on Ioram for marrying of Ahabs
daughter to the fourth generation, as his blessing was on Iehu for destroying
Ahabs posterity.

* 400. 1 Chronicles 3.17. The sons of Ieconiah, Asir, Salathiel. Jerem. 22.
ult. Write this man childlesse.

Salathiel, the Hebrew Shealtiel, is said to be the son of Ieconiah, Matthew.
1.12. and so here, son of Ieconiah, Assir, that is, strictly bound, prisoner in
Babylon, for we read not of any son called Assir, that Ieconiah had: yet this
Salathiel is named the son of Neri, Luke 3.27. who came by many descents, of
another line, that is, of Nathan the younger son of Solomon: from which line
came our Savior, and not of Solomon's line: and though Ieconiah may seem to
have seed and sons more, out of Ier. 22.28, 30. yet he is doomed childlesse,
because neither Salathiel, if he were his son, nor any of Ieconiahs race (
Zedekiah the last King being uncle to Ieconiah) did succeed him in the
legality, to sit on the Throne of David, though in a kind of Sovereignty; as
Zerubbabel the son, or grandchild rather of Salathiel by Pedaiah did succeed:
in regard of which successions, both Salathiel and after also Zerubbabel may be
called sons of Iehojakim the father of Ieconiah. It is likewise said, he
shall have none to sit upon the Throne of David, that is, for any time worth
speaking of, for his son Ieconiah reigned but three months and ten days.

401. 1 Chronicles 3.18. The son of Salathiel Pedaiah, of Pedaiah Zorobabel.
Ezd. 3.2. Mat. 1.12. Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

Zorobabel was the nephew to Salathiel, which he begat by his son Pedaiah.

* 402. 1 Chronicles. 3.18. with Matthew. 1.12. Sons of Pedaiah.

Pedaiah might dye while his sons were young, and Salathiel their grandfather
bring them up, and in this respect Zerubbabel is called the son of Salathiel,
or Shealtiel.

403. 1 Chronicles. 10.6. Saul died, and his three sons; and all his house died
together. 2 Samuel 2.8. Abner made Isbosheth the son of Saul, King over Israel.

Isbosheth after his fathers death, though he had for a time the name of a
King, at last he was miserably slain in his bed, and Mephibosheth was by favor
in the Court of David without any rule; so the family of Saul perished rightly
with him, nor ever could aspire any more to any eminent dignity.

404. 1 Chronicles. 18.12. Abishai smote of Aedom in the valley of salt eighteen
thousand. 2 Samuel 8.13. It was David. Psalm 60.2. That Victory is imputed to
Joab.

Abishai with Joab having the Army divided, conquered the enemy, at the first
assault he overcame six thousand of the Edomites; Joab killed twelve thousand
of those that fled away; but the Victory is imputed to David as their King.

* 405. 1 Chronicles. 21.5. The sum of the number, a thousand thousand, and a
hundred thousand. 2 Samuel 21.9. There were eight hundred thousand.

Upwards to the eight hundred thousand, in 2 Samuel 24. seem to be added here
those twenty eight hundred thousand of David's Trained-bands, 1 Chronicles. 27.1, 15.
already enrolled in public Records, and their Colonels, Captains, and
Commanders and Officers, to the number likely of twelve thousand, which make up
the said eleven hundred thousand, to the forty seven hundred thousand, of Judah
are thirty thousand added more, in 2 Samuel 24.9. which addition might either be
the number of the Regiments under those thirty worthies of David, having one
thousand in each: or rather an addition of so many out of Jerusalem only, or
out of Levi and Benjamin also, (which still joined themselves to Judah,) after
Joabs first return to Jerusalem, and giving up the number to the King: which he
finished not, he being weary of that service which was so abominable to him,
viz. 2 Samuel 24.9.

* 406. 1 Chronicles. 21.12. with 2 Samuel 24.13. Three years famine, or seven years
famine.

Answ. Some say, there is a failing in transcribing the Text, in the Hebrew
three and seven being so like, and the seventy in the 2d of Samuel read it
three year, and the Arabic M S. in the hands of the Congregation Orators; and
reason much asserts that it was three years, for other judgments go by three,
as three days, three months. Some say, the Prophet at the first spoke of
seven years, but his heart being troubled at David's horror mitigated it to
three.

407. 2 Chronicles. 2.14. Hiram was the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan,
whose Father was of Tire. 1 Kings 7.14. He was the son of a widow of the Tribe
of Nephtalim.

The Father of Hiram was of the Tribe of Nephtalim, who lived many years in
Tyria, and had a wife of the Tribe of Dan.

* 408. 2 Chronicles. 6.1. The Lord has said, that he will dwell in thick
darkness. 1 Timothy 6.16. Dwells in light which no man can approach.

He dwells in darkness, not so as to include him, nor so in light, as to
exclude him from dark places. He may be said to dwell in thick dark-darknesse,
in relation to us, who are ignorant of him, and yet dwell in light, in relation
to himself. The Lord probably was said to dwell in darkness in Solomon's time:
because the sanctum sanctorum, by reason of the burning of Incense, was through
the great smoke therein, as it were filled with a cloud or darkness, and in
this place did God manifest himself, and dwell therein.

* 409. 2 Chronicles. 6.6. I have chosen Jerusalem to put my name there. John 4.21.
Nor yet at Jerusalem, men ought to worship.

In the time of the Law God did put his name in Jerusalem, by setting his
Tabernacle there, and having his Temple built there, and thither the Tribes
went to worship.

In the time of the Gospel, God took away the privilege of that place, and
now he wills that men lift up pure hands every where.

410. 2 Chronicles. 8.1. Solomon built those Cities which Hiram restored to him. 1
Kings 9.11. Solomon gave to Hiram twenty Cities in the Land of Galile.

Solomon gave to Hiram those Cities for twenty years; that he might have a
yearly revenue from them, until the charges were paid to him; then Hiram
restored them to Solomon, and he built them, and made the children of Israel
dwell in them.

* 411. 2 Chronicles. 14.2. He overthrew the Altars. 1 Kings 15. He took not away
the high places.

There were two sorts of high places among the Jews, Altars and Temples in the
higher places, some whereof were erected to Idols, these Asa subverted. Others
were dedicated to the true God, which was likewise unlawful, for the Temple by
divine institution, was only to be at Jurusalem. And so although he purged the
profane Temples, yet he overthrew them not, which occasioned the restitution
of Idolatry afterward.

* 412. 2 Chronicles. 15.19. The War was not till the thirty fifth year. And Chap.
14. It was said Zura was slain by Asa, therefore there is war.

Answ. The computation of years is not taken from the beginning of the Kingdom
of Asa, but from the Kingdom of Judah, i. e. Solomon's death when the devision
began betwixt Rhehoboam and Jeroboam. And thus the Text of the next Chapter is
to be understood, where it is said Baasha the King of Israel ascended into
Judah, Anno 36, of the Kingdom of Asa, for then it was the sixteenth year of
his Kingdom.

* 2 Chronicles. 13.5. The Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom over Israel to David
for ever. 1 Kings 13 32, 35. But I will take the Kingdom out of his sons hand,
etc.

The promise was conditional, if his sons would walk in his ways, the
condition not performed, the Lord might give the Kingdom to whom he would.

* 2 Chronicles. 16.1. In the thirty six year of the reign of Asa, Baasha the King
came up. 2 Chronicles. 15.19. And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth
year of King Asa.

The former place thirty six year, must be understood of that Kingdom wherein
Asa was now King. For Baasha began to reign in the third year of Asa, 1 King.
15.28. and reigned twenty four years, Verse 33. He died in the twenty seventh
of Asa, or twenty six complete, 1 Kings 16.8. and therefore this thirty six
wherein Baasha waged War with Asa, must be meant of the Kingdom of Judah, that
is, since the division of the two Kingdoms at first; and so reckoning seventeen
years of Rehoboams reign, and three of Abijah, we found this thirty six to be
the sixteen of Asas, the next year after that full reformation, 2 Chronicles. 15.10.
and to be the thirteenth year of the reign of Baasha.

This difficulty is too hard for me to unloose, it requires another Aedipus.
However Schorpius thus, 2 Cro. 15.19. reckons the years of the Kingdom of
Judah, (over which Asa was King) from the division and separation of the ten
Tribes, from the two in Rehoboams time. Kingdoms sometime have their
denomination from the people, sometime from the Prince which rules. The time
when Baasha went up against Judah, was thirty six years of the Kingdom of
Judah, after the separation from the ten Tribes, and this war to happen about
the fiftenth year of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.10. after which, viz. the year
following, Baasha waged war against Asa, viz. sixteen years of Baasha, and for
ten years together till his death.

413. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Iosaphat because he lent help to the wicked, and made
friendship with those that hated God, deserved Gods wrath. Genesis 14.13. Abraham
and Isaac were in league with heathen Kings and Gentiles.

Leagues in civil affairs are granted, but otherwise there can be no firm
league made with them. So was David at peace with his Neighbors, and Abraham
with the Cananites.

* 414. 2 Chronicles. 34.28. Thou shall go to thy grave in peace, but he was slain
in the battle; therefore this prophecy was not fulfilled.

Answ. This Prophet speaks not of the private, but the public peace of this
Nation, and the prosperity which then flourished greatly, when Josias went out
of his Kingdom with his Army to meet the King of Egypt.

* 415. 2 Chronicles. 35.11. And they killed the Passover, and the Priests
sprinkled the blood from their hands, and the Levites stayed them. Lev. 1.6.
And he shall stay the burnt-offering, viz. Aarons sons.

The former Text tells us what was done by the Levites upon an extraordinary
occasion: the like 2 Chronicles. 29.34. the Priests being few, and their work too
great for their hands. The latter place tells us what should be done ordinarily
by the Priests.

416. 2 Chronicles. 35.18. There was not the like Passover in Israel from the days
of Samuel the Prophet. 2 Kings 23.22. There was not the like passover from the
days of the Judges which judged Israel, nor all the days of the Kings of Judah.

Samuel was the last of the Judges; the meaning therefore of the words is this,
there was no passover like that, from the time that Kings began in Israel.

417 2 Chronicles. 35.34. Josias was killed in battle, by the City of Megiddo, by
the Archers of the Egyptians. Chap. 34.38. I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace.

Josias his reign, death, and burial were peaceable; though he were wounded in
the war fighting against Pharaoh Necho contrary to Gods Word; yet there is no
doubt of his salvation.

* 418. 2 Chronicles. 36.9. He was eight year old when he began, etc. with 2 King.
24.8. And he was eighteen years old, etc.

He ruled eighteen year with his father, and his father being dead, he began to
rule when he was eighteen years old, and so according to this he ruled but
three months and ten days. So some. But others better say, that its meant of
Iehojakim the father, mentioned Verse 8, and not of the son Iehojakim.

EZRA.
THey were both written by Ezra, and contain the return of the Jews from
Babylon to Judea, and the building of the Temple, and of the City Jerusalem;
the correction of the people, and restitution of Religion, with the History of
two hundred years.

419. EZra 1.5. There rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin,
the Priests and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised. 1 Chronicles. 9.3. The Israelites, the Priests, Levites, the Nethinims, went up to
Jerusalem, the children of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasses.

There came to Jerusalem in their return, not only the children of Judah, but
of other Tribes, and they restored the worship of God amongst themselves, who
were before time transported out of Judea with them into Babylon.

420. Ezra. 2.5. The sons of Arah returned seven hundred seventy five. Neh.
7.10. They are recorded six hundred fifty two.

First are set down those that gave up their names to return; then those that
came into Judaea, the rest remaining in Babylon, or perishing in the journey:
so also is reconciled the unequal number of other families.

* 421. Ezra 2.5. with Nehem. 7.11.

There was a double numbering of the people. The former was taken at their
setting out from Babylon. The other upon their coming to Judea and Jerusalem,
and so some might not come to Jerusalem, which had not registered their names in
Babylon: and some might register their names in Babylon, which yet came not up
to Jerusalem, either changing their minds to stay in Babylon, or dying by the
way. Or else that in Nehemiah might be applied to the persons that were living,
and remaining in the Land of Judah in his time; or else it may be taken out of
some other Register besides this in Ezra. The numbers of them that returned
with Zerubbabel in this Catalogue, Ezra 2. and in that Nehem. 7.6, 62. fall far
short of that total sum, both in Ezra and Nehomiah, which is said to be
forty two thousand, three hundred and sixty, besides seven thousand three
hundred thirty seven, more of servants and Profelites, Ezra 2.64, 65. Nehem.
7.66, 67. The number wanting, seems to be supplied out of those, Ezra 2.62. and
out of the Relicts of the ten Tribes, which were both captivated, and returned
with them of Judah, and are not numerically set down; yet after the return
continued among them, and professed their Religion, even till the coming of our
Savior, and the small destruction of Jerusalem.

422. Ezra 2 6. The children of Pahath-moab eight hundred, and Joab of the
children of Joshua and Moab two thousand eight hundred and twelve. N^^. 7.11.
The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Joshua and Moab two thousand
eight hundred and eighteen.

There was a less number of some of those families, but at length it grew
greater by the dignity of those that went forth; and greatest of all when
others joined themselves to them that had not set down their names.

423. Ezra 3.8. The Jews built the walls of Jerusalem after their return. Zach.
3.4. Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls.

Zach. 2.5.
Under the name of Jerusalem, Zacharias prophesies or the Church of Christ, and
the heavenly Jerusalem, the majesty of it is larger than can be comprehended in
one City, of which God is the wall, a fire round above, and glory in the midst
of her.

424. 2 Ezra 5.9, 10, 12. Nehemias reprehends the richer Jews, because they
thought to live by usury. Genesis 47.23. Joseph bought the Land of Egypt, and the
people thereof he made subject to Pharaoh for cor^^.

The Egyptians were punished by God for their iniquities; the Jews after
their return into their Country were so proved, the richer Jews oppressing
their poor brethren, with biting usury did burden them, which Joseph did not.

425. Ezra 6.3. Cyrus the King decreed that the house of God should be built at
Jerusalem, and let them lay the foundations, the height thereof sixty cubits,
and the breadth thereof sixty cubits. 1 Kings 6.2. The house which King Solomon
built for the Lord, the length thereof was sixty cubit, the breadth twenty
cubits, the height thirty cubits.

The structure of Solomon's Temple was more beautiful than this, 2 Chronicles. 3.3.
Agg. 2.3. Ezra 3.12.
therefore the Elders that saw this wept, because the beginnings of this did
not seem to answer the Majesty of the former Temple.

* Ezra 6.3. with 1 Kings 6.2. Cubits are common or sacred, the common are half
the length of the sacred, which were unknown to the Heathen. In the former
place they are taken for common cubits, and so the former Temple e^ceeded the
latter. And the number of them may be reckoned from the bottom of the
foundation, to the top of the outside; and from the ou^^ides of the Temple,
including the thickness of the Walls, and of the Chambers adjoining. And so
this Temple will be less than Solomon's; besides Solomon's exceed the other in
proportion, ornaments outward and inward.

426. Ezra 7.7. And there went up some of the children of Israel, of the
Priests and the Levites unto Jerusalem in the seventh year of Artaxerxes. Chap.
1.1. Jerem. 25.12. and 34.10. 2 Chronicles. 3.22.
In the first year of Cyrus King of Persia the Jews had power given them to go
up to Jerusalem.

After that Cyrus had given license to them to return from Babylon to
Jerusalem, many with Ez^^ras and Nehemiah returned to Jerusalem under the reign
of Artaxerxes.

427. Ezra. 10.32. The houses were not build. Verse. 3. Let not your doors be
opend.

Their houses were not fully built, the Cities had gates.

428. Ezra 8.18. Ezra read in the book day by day. Eza. 3.4. They kept also the
feast of Tabernacles as it is written.

This was a singular example of piety, for they were not bound to do so by the
Law, yet they came willingly day by day, to hear the book of the Law.

429. Ezra 10.32. Also we made ordinances amongst our selves yearly to charge
our selves with a third part of a shekell for the work of the Lord. Exodus
30.13. They shall give every one that passes amongst them that he numbered half
a shekell.

Moses once by Gods command laid on them that tribute, and Ioas at the renewing
of the Temple ordered that every one should give what he pleased; so Nehemiah
ordained the third of two shekels by the year, to restore the Temple, not from
the Law, but from necessity.

430. Ezra 11.6. Of the children of Phares that dwelt at Jerusalem were four
hundred sixty eight. Benjamin nine hundred twenty eight. 2 Chronicles. 9.6. Iehuel
six hundred and ninety. Benjamin nine hundred fifty six.

First the chief are set down to whom a dwelling fell by lot; then other
voluntary inhabitants, who chose a habitation willingly.

NEHEMIAH.
* 431. NEhemiah 8.18. with Leviticus 23.36. and Ezekiel 3.4.

The former place speaks of what was done extraordinarily by the people. The
latter what was usual for the people to do as their duty.

* 432. Nehem. 11.5. My God put it into my heart, etc. to reckon by
genealogies, etc. 1 Timothy 1.4. Neither give heed to endless genealogies.

The Jews were to observe and keep their genealogies, because they were to
know of what Tribe Christ was.

Saint Paul forbids not making or reckoning up Genealogies simply. But he
forbids our spending our time and study in seeking out Genealogies, which were
endless. By endless may be understood those of the Jews, who were turned
Christians, which were so addicted to these Genealogies, that they might have a
pretense of claiming kindred of Christ, that they made no end of drawing down
their lines of descent from David, or from Abraham: or because the Questions
moved concerning Genealogies, by reason of the slender proof and ground they
had for them, could receive no determination or end.

* Nehem. 11.6. The sons of Perez were four hundred sixty eight. with 2 Chronicles.
9.6. Six hundred and ninety.

In the former place mention is made of those who came by lot to inhabit at
Jerusalem. In the latter, 2 Chronicles 9. not only of such, but of voluntary
inhabitants, as Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh.

ESTHER.
THe Book of Esther is so called from Esther, who was Ahasu^rus wife, here is
showed how Ahasuerus divorcing Vashti, chose Esther to be Queen. Haman the
enemy of the Jews, and of Mordecai, is hanged. Mordecai is made Provost of the
Kingdom. It contains the History of twenty years. Ezdras was the writer of
it, or else the men of the great Synagogue.

433. ESther 1.12. Ahasuerus divorced Vashti, because she refused to come at
his commandment. Matthew. 19.9. Whosoever shall put away his wife, except for
fornication, and shall marry an other commits adultery.

The pride of Vashti hurt not the King alone, but all the people and Princes of
the Kingdom, by showing a kind of dominion over the King before other women.
Now adays men do not divorce their wives but for the cause of Adultery only,
and they are bound by the Laws of God and man to obey their husbands.

434. Esther 9.21. Mordecai sent to the Jews in all the Provinces, that the
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month Adar, should be held for
festivals. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Chap. 12.32. What I command you this day you shall not
add to it.

The ordinance of Mordecai was not against the Law, nor was it a feast of Gods
worship, but only commemorative for the divine wonderful deliverance of the
people of the Jews.

JOB.
THis Book is so called from Job, who was also called Joab King of Edom. Genesis
36.
Moses is thought to have written that Book for an example of patience; therein
is contained the affliction of Job, and contention with his friends, and
disputing with them. God ends this controversy at last, and restores Job to
his former prosperity. The History appertains to the time of Jacob.

435. JOb 1.1. He lived in the Land of Vz, his name was Job; he was a perfect
and an upright man, and one that feared God and eschewed evil. Psalm. 147.20.
He has not done so with any Nation.

Under the old Testament the public worship of the true God was amongst the
Israelites, whither other Nations were admitted to come, which God called by
diverse ways to come unto him, and he had amongst them some that served him
sincerely, as Iethro Moses father in Law; the Gibeonites, and Job here, so
Rahab and Ruth.

* Job 1.1. with Psalm 147.20. In all probability Job was a son of Nahor,
Abraham's brother descended from him by his son Vz, Genesis 22.21. and though he
were not immediately descended from Isaac, yet in regard he was of the same
lineage, and held the same Religion, the latter place seems not to thwart.
Besides the latter place did not exclude, the coming in of particular persons
to the knowledge of the Lord, for there were many Proselytes among the Jews.

436. Job 1.6. Satan came amongst the sons of God. 2 Peter 2.4. God spared
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them unto
chains of darkness.

The coming of Satan amongst the sons of God, was only as an executioner of
the commands and judgments of God.

* 437. Job 1.7. The Lord said, Satan whence come thou? he answered, from
going to and from the earth. Jude 6. Reserved in chains of darkness unto the
great day.

Although the world be the prison which God does allow the Devil to walk up
and down in till the day of Judgment; yet he is reserved under chains in this
world, in a dark estate and condition. He may walk up and down in this prison,
and yet be a prisoner.

* 438. Job 1.19. And behold there came a great wind out of the wilderness.
John 3.8. Thou can not tell whence it comes.

When the Text tells you of the wind coming out of the wilderness, it intends
not, that the wilderness was the original place, but that was the coast from
which it blew at that time. The latter place may purport that thou know not
from what matter it comes, or the precise place of its generation; though they
might tell the place from whence this or that particular wind did blow, in
relation to the people of this or that place.

439. Job 5.1. Call if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? Isa. 63.16. Abraham knew us not, Israel was ignorant of
us.

Eliphaz teaches Job that there is flying to Saints in misery, and that no man
is unjustly punished by God, but there is always a just cause for it:
therefore says he, show any of the Saints who being in such a calamity as thou
art, that was so without a cause, as thou supposest thy self to be.

Isal. 51.7. Romans 7.20.
440. Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of unclean? Romans 11.16. For if
the first fruits he holy, the lump is also holy.

All of us by original sin are conceived and born in sin, and sin dwells in
us; yet by Gods grace we are reckoned for holy, which account passes over all
within the Covenant as we are.

441. Job 14.5. His days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass Pov. 18.21. Life and
death are in the power of the tongue.

Death and life of man are in the power of God, who has put bounds to his
days. Life and death is said, after a sort, to be in the power of the tongue,
because a wicked man may by slanders and detraction, and contention, hurt a man
even to death.

442. Job 14.6, 14. Shall a man if he die live again? 1 Cor. 15.22. In Christ
shall all be made alive.

Job denies not the resurrection, Dan. 12.2.
but he says rather that men shall rise, not with bodies subject to death, but
such as shall live for ever, but the wicked to eternal death.

* 443. Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time, etc. Eccles. 7.17. Be
not over wicked, why should thou dye before thy time.

The time which we may live by nature, or according to the composition of our
bodies is one thing, the time which God in his secret judgment sets down for
us is another. God appoints one man to live so long as his natural composition
can last, and to this end, he shall use these and these ways, and God appoints
that this or that man, if he take these or the other extravagant courses, shall
by a fall from his horse, or by the hand of the Magistrate, or the like, come
to a sudden and not natural death.

444. Job 19.25. In the last day I shall rise out of the earth. Verse. 26. And I
shall be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh shall I see God. 1 Cor.
15.44.
1 Cor. 15.44. It shall rise a spiritual body.

We shall rise with this nature and body that we now carry about us, Matthew. 22.
and shall enjoy eternal felicity; it is called a spiritual body by the
Apostle, not in respect of the substance, but the qualities, virtues and
proprieties: we shall have no need of meat, drink, or wedlock, we shall be like
the Angels. Or a spiritual body, a body free from carnal desires, being
wholely subject to, and ruled by the Spirit.

445. Job 19.17. Whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold and not
another. Rev. 1.7. Every eye shall see him.

Job speaks confidently, that in his flesh he should see God to his salvation,
2 Cor. 13. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
face to face, as he is, after this ordinary seeing by faith; so shall the
godly see God a gracious father, the wicked shall see him as a just and a
revenging judge.

* 446. Job 21.27. Behold I know your thoughts. Jer. 17.9, 10. Who can know it,
I the Lord know it?

One man is said to know another thoughts three ways:

First, By revelation from God.

Secondly, By words of the mouth.

Thirdly, By external symptoms or actions.

And one man is said to know another thoughts these two latter ways,
probably, not infallibly. Job knew by the drift of their discourse, what they
in ended to make him confess, and this probably. Its God only which can
infallibly tell: what a man thinks, without word or symptom.

447. Job 31.30. Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin, 1 John 1.10. If we
say we have no sin, we make God a liar.

Job was not without sin before God, but his conscience did not accuse him of
manifest sin and wickedness toward men.

448. Job 42.10. The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Verse. 13. He
had seven sons, and three daughters.

His faith of the resurrection is here commended, because his children were not
doubled, (...) only were as many as before, Ep. 120. cap. 10.
(...) Augustine: for these did signify that those children which Job had lost
should rise again, and so joined together they are doubled.

The PSALTER, From Singing.
HEb. Sepher Tehilin, the Book of Praises. 2 Samuel 23.2.
It is called the Book of Psalms; the small Bible. The Psalms are in number an
hundred and fifty. The most are David's, who was an excellent Psalmist, and is
called the sweet finger of Israel. All of them were written by the dictate of
the holy Ghost. The most before, and some in the time, and after the Babylonish
captivity, unto the times of the Maechabees. Some are Didacticall, some
Prophetical, some Eucharisticall; containing Instructions, Doctrines,
Exhortations, Consolations.

449. PSalm 1.2. In the Law of the Lord is his delight. Romans 6.14. Ye are not
under the Law.

Godly men have a singular delight in the Law, and in the holy Commandments of
God. Yet they are not under the yoke and curse of the Law, which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear, but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act.
15.10
we hope to be saved as well as they.

* 450. Psalm. 1.3, 4. He is like a Tree planted, etc. the ungodly are not so.
Eccles. 8.14. There be just men to whom it happens according to the work of
the wicked, and there are wicked to whom it happens according to the work of
the righteous, this is vanity.

The former place tells us, what a godly man's portion and a wicked man's portion
is in certainty and assurance. The latter place speaks either of what happens
from evil Princes, who do oppress the just, and encourage the wicked, which
can but last only for the present. Or else this happens by the providence of
God, that the wicked should live in pleasure, and the godly in trouble, as
flesh and blood judges; yet it may easily be seen, the rod of the wicked,
shall not rest on the lot of the righteous. The righteous flourish either
themselves as a Palm tree, that has been depressed, or in their posterity
after their departure, which falls not out with the wicked.

451. Psalm. 1.5. The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment. 2 Cor. 5.10. We
shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

The first place is to be understood of temporal judgments, which wicked men
cannot endure; when they are examined according to Gods judgments, because they
are convinced of their sins. The latter speaks of the last judgment, when all
good men shall rise to life eternal, and wicked men to eternal death.

* Psalm 1.5. with 2 Cor. 5.10. The wicked shall not be able to stand at the
last Judgment, though they shall appear, i. e. not stand to justify
themselves in their evil actions; nor shall they be absolved by the Judges
sentence, nor be raised from death to glory in the resurrection. But they shall
be beaten down with terror, being void and fallen from all manner of hope.

* 452. Psalm. 2.7 Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Prove. 8.22.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.

Christ as God was with God in the beginning of his way, Christ as man was
begotten in time. This day relates to his nativity and exhibition in the flesh,
not to his Divinity. And at his resurrection that begetting of Christ according
to his humane nature, was manifest and clear, which probably made St Peter use
it to that purpose in the Acts.

453. Psalm. 2.9. Thou shall break them with an iron rod, like a potters
vessel. Isa. 42.3. He shall not break a bruised reed.

The Son of God will break the wicked with an iron rod, and the blast of his
mouth, but he receives the weak in faith into favor, and he perfects his
strength in their weakness.

454. Psalm. 2.10 Serve God in fear. 1 Peter 2.10. Servants be subject to your
Masters with all fear, etc.

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and before all it is necessary to
have that; yet we must obey earthly Masters next under God.

* 455. Psalm. 5.4. Neither shall evil dwell with thee. Esaias 45.7. I make peace
and create evil.

Evil dwells not with God, as its a sin, but creates evil as its a
punishment. Evil is taken in the latter place; not for that which is a breach
of the Law. God is not the author of sin, but for that which is contrary to
our nature, good and happiness, thus sickness and trouble, etc. are evil. I
create afflictions, says God. Evil as its opposed to peace.

Evil is either that which is opposed to the increated good, God himself, and
so its sin; or as its opposed to created good, and so its affliction. God is
the author of evil, i. e. affliction not of sin, because its contrary to
himself.

456. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. Romans 9.18. Whom he will
he hardneth.

God, since he is just and mighty, will and can punish all iniquity; though he
suffer the deceit and violence of the wicked for a time. Aug. cont. Faust.
Exodus 4.21. and 7.3. and 10.27. and 11.10.
Hardening is imputed to God, not as if he were the author of it, as it is
evil, but as it is a punishment; and God uses evil to good ends, and governs
the wicked for good.

* 457. Psalm. 5.5. with Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward us, in
that whiles we were yet sinners, etc.

God hates all workers of iniquity, as workers of iniquity; God loves those
which have wrought iniquity, not as workers of iniquity; but as they are
considered in Christ: those for whom Christ died, and the creatures o^ ^he
Lord, and as those which are returning to God from iniquity.

458. Psalm. 5.6. Thou hate all the workers of iniquity. Luke 16.8. Christ
praised the unjust steward, because he dealt wisely.

God hates all iniquity, and deceitful persons are an abomination unto him.
God praised the unjust Steward, not for his wickedness, deceit, or wealth, but
he admired his subtilty and craft: so we use in criminal things to commend the
cunning of men, though we detest their wickedness.

459. Psalm. 7.8. Judge me O Lord according to my righteousness, and my
innocence. Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.

A righteousness of the cause or action, a righteousness of the person.
In the first place he speaks of the justice and the judgment of the good cause
of David, which he upheld against the enemies of God, who oppressed him with
their false calumnies and violence, and therefore he appeals to God the judge
of his just cause, that he would defend his innocence. In the latter he speaks
of the justice of man, and so no man is just in the sight of God, if God should
try him according to the rigor of his justice.

460. Psalm. 7.12. God threatens, and God is angry every day. Ephesians. 4.31. Let
all bitterness and wrath, and anger, be taken from you.

Anger is commendable, when we are angry for our sins, and detest evil
justly and as we should; so God is daily angry with us for our sins. But
damnable anger and unlawful is joined with the sin of those who for every
light offense do maintain their anger, reckoning more of what is committed
against them, than against God.

461. Psalm. 9.8. God shall judge the world in righteousness. 1 Cor. 6.2. Know
ye not that the Saints shall judge the world?

The manner of judging of the world is either by authority, so the whole
Trinity will judge; or of subordinate authourity, so Christ as Mediator and man
will judge; or of assertion, so the Apostles will judge the world; or of
approbation, so all the Saints and Angels shall allow of the sentence
pronounced by the supreme judge. Chrysostom; the Saints shall judge the world
by exemplary judgment; because by example of their faith, the infidelity of
the world shall be condemned.

462. Psalm. 14.1. The fool said in his heart, There is no God. Psalm. 19.1. The
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work.

Wicked men, if not in words, yet in their deed, and actions they deny God, and
as much as in them is, they wish there were no God, and no Hell.

463. Psalm. 18.42. They cried unto the Lord, and he heard them not. Jer. 29.12.
Ye shall call upon me, and I will hearken unto you.

God does not hear the prayers of hypocrites, but he hears the prayers of
penitents.

464. Psalm. 19.4. Their line went out into the ends of the earth. Romans 10.18.
Their sound went out into the whole world.

Paul interprets the Psalm concerning the Doctrine of the Gospel, and says,
that it is the Canon of the holy Ghost, and rule of faith and manners of
Christians, appointed by God, by the sound and voice of the prophets, of Christ
and his Apostles; in which the will of God is revealed, and therefore it is
called the Canonical Scripture.

* Psalm. 19.4. with Romans 10.18. To fetch an allusion from a place, is one
thing, to allude to a place only, is another.

He that alludes to a place only, is not bound to recite the words further than
that allusion requires. The Apostle was showing that the Gospel spread much in
the world, even as David said, the light of the Sun did!

* 465. Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Romans
6.23. The Law is the ministration of death.

The former place speaks of the Moral Law and also of the Gospell-Doctrine of
Christ, as it was held forth in the Scripture before David's time. The latter
place of the Moral Law alone; which though it be a perfect rule of
righteousness, yet in regard of us, so unable to perform it, and
transgressors of it; we can have nothing but death by the Law, for cursed is he
that does not continue in all that the Law requires. The Law is a killing
Letter, and a ministry of death not of it self, but to us so sinful and
wretched.

466. Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the heart. 2
Cor. 3.7. The Law is the ministration of death engraven in stones.

In this Psalm by the Law is understood all the will of God revealed from
above. The Apostle speaks only of the Moral Law, not as it is in it self, for
so it is the perfect Law of righteousness and brings life, but in respect of
us who are transgressors of the Law, and obtained nothing but death by it.

467. Psalm. 19.11. And in keeping of thy Commandments there is great reward.
Luke 17.10. When you have done all ye were commanded, ye shall say, We are
profitable servant; we have done nothing but what we are obliged to do.

David commends the Law of God, and that there is great reward in the keeping
of it. In which the goodness of God is commended, who may of right require
obedience from us, yet he freely gives a reward unto us, which he owes not.
Christ shows, that we, and all that we have are due unto God; therefore we
can ask nothing for a reward; and it is presumption to think that we can
deserve any thing at Gods hands.

* Psalm. 19.11. with Luke 17.10. There is great reward of mercy, not of merit,
neither of congruity nor condignity; for when we have done all we ought, we
cannot profi^ he Lord. Its one thing what God g^^es to us as sons: another
thing what we expect as wages for our work.

468. Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, wherefore have thou forsaken me. Joh. 14.10.
Chap. 16.32. I am not alone, for the Father is with me.

In the first place is signified the sense of Gods wrath, and the effect
thereof in Christ, who taking upon him our person, is made sin for us; though
he complained that he was forsaken as man, yet he was not forsaken as the Son
of God, nor was the divine nature separated from the humane nature, but
supported it. In the latter place, when Christ says, I am not alone, he has
respect to the flight of the Apostles, and fortifieth himself against it by the
presence of his Father.

469. Psalm. 22.3. My God, I cried by day and thou heardest not. John 11.42. I
knew, because thou hear me always.

Christ was not heard in his passion, because he was to dye. In the latter
place he speaks of his prayer for believers, he gives thanks to his Father that
he was always heard.

470. Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Luke 4.6. I
will give to thee (says Satan unto Christ) all this power and glory.

Satan being the spirit and father of lying, Joh. 8.4. Matthew. 28. Psalm. 22 8.
does falsely appropriate to himself the power of the world.

Christ being appointed by his father King of Kings, to whom was given all
power in Heaven and Earth, he rules in Heaven and Earth, from sea to sea, from
the Rivers unto the ends of the earth.

471. Psalm. 24.2. The Lord has founded the earth upon the seas. Exodus 20.4.
The waters are under the earth.

The earth has its stability from the first Creation, the foundation thereof
is the power of God, which is the center of the whole, and it does as it were
move upon the waters above and beneath, it has the waters on the sides, so
that the Sea is higher than the earth: it is therefore the wonderful work of
God, that he preserves mankind from drowning in the midst of the waters.

472. Psalm. 26.2. Prove me O Lord. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man prove himself.

God because he proves our thoughts, words and deeds; therefore we must prove
our selves, that we may make our selves approved to God.

* 473. Psalm. 2.9. Turn not thy face far from me. Psalm 51.9. Turn thy face from
my sins.

It is one thing to turn away his face from David's sin, another thing to turn
away his face from David's person. David prayed that God would not withdraw his
favor from him, but that he in favor would hide away his face from his sin,
because sin would displease him.

474. Psalm. 32.3. When I kept silence my bones waxed old. Verse. 3. Through my
roaring all the day long.

Silence respects the suppression of sins; Crying, the complaints and
lamentations for grief of mind.

475. Psalm. 32.10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked. 73.5. The righteous
are punished more than the wicked.

Punishments internal and sempiternall are for the wicked, but external and
temporary are understood by the last place.

476. Psalm. 34.5. They looked unto him and were lightened. 1 Timothy 6.16. He dwells
in a light that no man can approach unto.

God is said to dwell in light not properly, but metaphorically; for by this
his glory and manifest presence is understood.

477. Psalm. 34.10. There is no lack to them that fear God. 2. Tim. 3.12. All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

The Godly suffer no want in spiritual good, but in corporal and temporal
good; yet their persecutions are good for them, and are rewarded with eternal
life.

478 Psalm. 34.22. None that trust in the Lord shall be desolate. Romans 3.23. All
have sinned and come short of the glory of God.

In the first place is understood delinquency to death and eternal
destruction, but they that believe in Christ, their faults shall not be imputed
to them unto death.

479. Psalm. 35.6. Let their way be made slippery and dark, and let the Angel
of the Lord persecute them. Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies.

In the first place are meant the incorrigible and obdurate enemies of Christ
and his Gospel. In the latter place, those of whose conversion we have hope.

480. Psalm. 36.8. Thou shall preserve both man and beast O Lord. 1 Cor. 9.9.
Does God take care for Oxen?

Under the general care of God are comprehended all creatures, but under his
special care, Men, for whose sake God has made the beasts. Ambrose says, God
cares nor for beasts for themselves, but for our sake, for which he created all
things, and therefore his principal care is for us.

* 481. Psalm. 36.25. I never saw, etc.

But many good men have perished by hunger, Lazarus and Martyrs.

Res. When God laid on the temporal punishment, he supplied it with spiritual
comforts and food.

Secondly, David speaks of himself, I have not seen; if it happened, it
happened the seldomer.

482. Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrowes and pays not again. Luke 6.35. Lend,
looking for nothing again.

If the Debtor be fallen into extreme want that he cannot pay, we must not kill
him, or forsake him in his utmost necessity.

483. Psalm. 37.25. I have been young and now am old, yet saw I never the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. Luke 16.20. Lazarus a
beggar desired to be satisfied with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
Table.

Beggary is a punishment to the wicked, but to the godly a fatherly punishment;
and it is found in the unlawful begging of Monks, sturdy, obstinate and idle
people which refuse to work; but the lawful begging is for the Members of
Christ, which are brought to extreme poverty by banishment, war, fire, water,
sickness, etc.

* 484. Psalm. 37.25. with Luke 16.20.

The former Text says, I never saw the righteous forsaken, his seed begging.
It wants Nor in the Original. And it may as well be rendered, The righteous
forsaken and his seed, i. e. both the righteous and his seed. One may be
forsaken as Lazarus, but not both the righteous and the seed of that righteous
person forsaken.

485. Psalm. 40.7. Sacrifice and offering thou would not. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye as
living stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God by Jesus Christ.

God would none of the sacrifices of the Jews which were offered without faith.
The Apostle speaks of the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, as the oblation
of our body, a contrite heart, giving of thanks, works of charity, which are
acceptable sacrifices to God.

* 486. Psalm. 40.7. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire. Lev. 16. The
Lord commanded, etc.

God would not have sacrifice, (...), as they came from profane persons,
without faith and charity. Yet God desires sacrifice in respect of their end
and institution, as they prefigured Christ to come, not as the Jews gloried in
them, and abused them, to resist Christ; nor as they were to remain (in the
Jews opinion) after Christ; or as they might be conjoined with Christ, nor yet
as they might imagine that he was to be served with the outward act, and not
having the inward power joined with that outward act.

487. Psalm. 40.9. Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me,
that I might do thy will O God. Matthew. 26.39. Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but as thou will.

Christ that he might fulfill the will of his Father in redeeming mankind
offered himself freely; and though in the act he was sorrowful as men are, and
would, if it had been possible, have escaped death, without the detriment of
man's salvation, yet he submitted himself to his Fathers will.

* 488. Psalm. 43.1. Judge me O Lord. Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with
thy servant O Lord.

Juding of a man's persons is one thing, of a man's cause is another. David
desires God to manifest himself, whether the cause which he was disputing with
his enemies were just, and whether his heart was upright in that matter, in
relation to them. But when David comes to consider the difference betwixt God
and him, occasioned by his sins, then he finds himself so faulty, that he
prays God to pardon him and not judge him for his sins were many.

489. Psalm. 44.23. Awake, why sleep thou O Lord? rise. 121.4. The keeper of
Israel sleeps not.

So the godly being grievously afflicted, speak after the manner of men, not
as if God slept, or took no care of them; but they crave of God that he would
show himself by his works of justice and mercy, and would help them.

* Psalm. 44.23. with 121.4. In the former place he spoke out of a sense of
divine displeasure. In the latter he spoke out of a sense of Gods providence.
Affection makes Gods children think that to be which is not, think that God
sleeps when he does not; every moment in mesery, being apprehended as the
absence of a years mercy.

* Psalm. 44.23. with Psalm. 121.4. Sleeping is attributed to God by a Metaphor
from men; when they are on sleep, they help not, nor regard the danger of
other. And when God regarded not, or helped not David, (as he apprehended) he
seemed to be as on sleep to him and his affairs, though he did not apprehend
God to be on sleep in himself or to others; for if he had, he could not have
imagined so small a cry as his on earth could have raised him in Heaven.

491. Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the children of men. Isaiah 53.2. There
was no comeliness in him, he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

In the first place is spoken of Christ exaltation, and the glory of his
Kingdom, of which Solomon was a type, not outwardly in the sight of men, but
inwardly and spiritually before God and the faithful people. In the latter of
Christ's humiliation, and as carnal men judge of Christ.

* Psalm. 45.2. with Isaiah 53.2. The former speaks of Christ as he appears to
the soul broken and bruised and called home. The latter of Christ, as he
appeared to the men of the world, Jews and the wicked without any Majesty or
Kingship. The former as he shall appear in glory; the latter, as he appears in
outward dispensations here below. The comeliness is rather relating to his
Majesty than to his person; though questionless, which in it self was fair,
yet was through his troubles and sorrow beclouded, and he seemed a man of
sorrow.

492. Psalm. 49.8. The Brother shall not redeem his Brother. Heb. 2.12. Christ
our Brother offered himself for the price of our Redemption.

Because men could not satisfy the Divine Law, Christ God and Man, our Brother
and our Savior, by his obedience and suffering, fulfilled the whole Law for
us; his satisfaction is our Redemption for our sins, 1 John 2.2. Romans 20.
and the sins of the whole world, and he is the fulfilling of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

* 493. Psalm. 49.12. He is like the beasts that perish. Romans 8.21. The creature
it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

Beasts perish, because when they die there is an end, they have no
resurrection. The second place speaks of the renewing of the world, after
desolution thereof. And whether by the creature he means the Heaven and the
Earth, with the rest of inanimate things, or he intends the animate. Besides he
shows that they shall be no more subject to any such alteration and corruption,
as now when the beasts perish; much less to serve for the object and
instrument of sin; but every thing according as its capable, shall be
glorified and fully delivered from vanity and perishing.

* 494. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee.
Isa. 65.25. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer.

When God says he will answer before they call, it hinders not, but that when
at other times they do call he will answer. The latter promise in Isaiah does
not say, that he will always answer before they call; but that sometime he
will answer before they call, i. e. he will deliver his people before they
apprehend danger.

* 495. Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy presence, etc. Heb. 13.5. I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Doubt. If the Lord should take away his Spirit, and cast his people out of his
presence; Then how comes he not to leave us?

Answ. The words of David might be spoken by him in his desertion, in which
case a man may fear that which he is most sure to avoid. His praying that God
would not cast him off, does not necessarily imply a fear that God would do it,
but rather an hope and assurance that God would not do it. As elsewhere we find
him praying for that which God has promised unto him, and which he doubted not
but God would perform, 2 Samuel 26.27. The former place shows what David in
justice might fear for his sin. The latter what God in mercy would grant for
his Christ. The former what David in his prayers did seek. The latter what God
in his promise did answer.

496. Psalm. 95.11. Slay them not O Lord. Verse. 13. Consume them in thy wrath.

First he prays that the enemies of God may be tolerated a while for example
to others, and led captive in triumph: then when others are taught better by
their example, let them be destroyed. That destruction, if it may not be
understood of their lives, yet it may be of their power, dignities, and wealth,
that so being brought down, they may not be able to hurt the Church, or oppose
themselves against God.

* Psalm. 59.11. with 13. Slay them not at once, or suddenly, let them rather
have Cains punishment; but yet consume them surely, that so they may know
themselves to be men, and thou the God of Heaven.

* 497. Psalm. 60. title. When Joab returned, and smote of Aedem in the valley
of Salt twelve thousand. 1 Chronicles. 18.12. Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of
the Aedemites in the valley of Salt eighteen thousand. 2 Samuel 8.13. And David
gat him a name, when he returned from smiteing of the Syrians in the valley of
Salt eighteen thousand.

The victory is ascribed to David as Generalissimo, to Joab and Abishai, as two
chief Commanders, and so all three had their special Victories running into
one. They are called Aedomites in some places, Syrians in another, because both
Syrians and Aedomites joined together against David, Joab and Abishai. In one
place its said eighteen thousand, in another place twelve thousand, probably
either David or some of the three at first slew six thousand; and then Joab
returning with the rest, he either giving the first onset, or else doing some
remarkable service is said to slay twelve thousand more; and so in all eighteen
thousand.

498. Psalm. 60.3. O God thou have cast us off. Romans 11.1. Has God cast off his
people? God forbid.

David speaks of temporal casting off; Paul of eternal.

499. Psalm. 62.11. God spoke once. Heb. 1.1. God spoke by diverse manners to the
Fathers and Prophets.

God speaks once, not by number, but by counsel, nor does he deliberate the
second time; but he speaks diverse ways with a voice, or without a voice to men
waking or sleeping, by himself, or by his Angels. In the former place, the
certainty; in the latter, the manner of divine Revelation is understood.

* 500. Psalm. 68.18. Thou have led captivity captive, and thou have received
gifts for men. Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men.

Led captivity captive, which may be interpreted either passively or actively;
Passively, he took away from Satan, Death, and Hell, all their captives;
changing their miserable captivity into an holy and happy captivity, whereby
they are brought into the obedience of the Gospel. 2. Actively, Christ has
captivated the world flesh, and Devil, Death and Hell; which in several kinds
had before captivated mankind.

Received gifts, and gave gifts, i. e. receiving, gave as the phrase is, Exodus
25.2. and in diverse others places, taking is used for giving, 1 Kings 3.24. and
17.10. Judge. 14 2. and giving is used for taking, as Genesis 42.30.

So as Christ received gifts at Gods hands in the Psalms, and he did not keep
these gifts, or use them for himself: but Saint Paul would have us to know that
he gave us these spiritual gifts. Thus the one shows the giver, the other
interprets to what end they were given to be bestowed on us.

501. Psalm. 69.1. Save me O Lord. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves us.

God is the principal efficient necessary cause of our safety. Baptism is the
isntrumental cause, and not absolutely necessary; because many are saved
without Baptism, for it is not the want of it, but the contempt of that
condemns us.

502. Psalm. 69.23. Let their Table be made a snare unto them. Matthew. 5.44.
Romans 12.14. Bless and curse not.

We may curse the enemies of God out of pious zeal, not out of evil affection.
Christ bids us pray for our enemies rather than curse them.

503. Psalm. 69.25. Let their habitation be desolate. Act. 1.20. Peter applies
that to Judas.

That which David speaks in general of the enemies of Christ, that Peter
applies to the Captain of them; Judas his habitation was desolate, and his
place amongst the Apostles, until another took his Bishopric.

* 504. Psalm. 69.28. Let them be blotted out of thy Book of Life. Lev. 17.8.
Whose names are not written in the Book of Life.

The book of the living is one thing, the Book of Life another. The book of
the living in the Old Testament, is the book of such as live here; the Book of
Life in the New Testament is the Book of Eternal Life; David prays that they
may not be in the Land of the living, or their names found in the book of the
living, that is, they may die and go to their grave.

Or else,

By the Book of the living and Life is meant the Book of Eternal Life, and so
it signifies, That he desires that God would make it appear, that they are not
written in the Book of Life, though they seem by their profession to be of that
number. So that this does not speak that their names were ever in the Book of
Life (for those, whose names are once there, cannot be obliterated, the
Election of God standing firm) but in regard wicked men are subject to flatter
themselves out of an erroneous heart, with the love and favor of God, which
they never had. He desires that God would make a plain discovery of this their
damnable delusion; letting their consciences taste the terrors of God, that so
they may not deceive themselves.

505. Psalm. 74.12. God is my King of old working salvation in the midst of the
earth. Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.

God from eternity worked our salvation in respect of his decree, in the midst
of the earth, freeing his Church from the beginning, and defending it; in us he
works it when he draws us to him, and gives us power to will and to do that
being so justified, we may study for holiness, and walk in good works unto the
accomplishment of our salvation.

506. Psalm. 72.8. He shall reign from Sea to Sea. John 18.36. My Kingdom is not
of this world. Verse. 36. It is not from hence.

The first place is concerning the power of Christ's Kingdom, he reigns also
powerfully amongst his enemies; the latter is of the Kingdom of Grace, for
with his grace by faith he blesses godly hearts; therefore he says, My
Kingdom is not of this world; yet he denied not, but that it was in this world.

* 507. Psalm 72. ult. The Prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended. Psalm
86.1. A Prayer of David.

The first place tells us, this was his last Prayer that he made for Solomon a
little before his death. Or the last Psalm which David penned, leaving it as a
depositum, or testimentary Legacy to Solomon: Or the last of those Psalms, that
David set in order before his death, for the use of the Church. The rest were
gathered together by others, as some of Solomon's Proverbs were, Prove. 25.1.

* 508. Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to such as be of a clean heart. Prove.
20.9. Who can say his heart is clean?

To have an heart clean by endeavor is one thing, to boast of a clean heart is
another. David tells us that God is good to such as endeavor to have clean
hearts, (God accepts of the will for the deed) and by Christ have cleanness
imputed to them. But yet even these cannot but say they find a polluted
principle against which they strive.

* 509. Psalm. 78.24. And had rained down Manna upon them to eat, and had given
them the Corn of Heaven. Jo. 6.31. Our Fathers did eat Manna in the desert, as
it is written, He gave them bread from Heaven to eat. With Jo. 6.32. Moses gave
you not that bread from Heaven.

The Heavens are twofold, either visible or invisible, the two former Texts
speak of Manna coming from the visible Heaven; the latter Text says, the Manna
came not from the invisible or spiritual Heaven. Manna was a corporal food,
and so came from a corporal Heaven. Its said to be Angels food comparatively,
not positively or simply, as if the Angels had eaten thereof. But the Hebrews
use the food of Angels for the food of the Mighty, an epithet given to Angels,
i. e. a food that seemed rather Angelical and Celestial, than Earthly: as
well by reason of its origin purity and perfection, as for the efficacy of it,
to preserve the body, in perfect health, and equal strength, by Gods special
appointment, in those who did not by their distrust or rebellion, make it of no
efficacy. This Manna was not truly and properly Heavenly, but by signification
and Sacramentally, as given by Moses the Minister of the Lord.

* 510. Psalm. 78.59. When God heard this he was wroth. Isa. 27.4. Anger is not
in me.

The first place tells us that God was as an angry man, in the effects he
poured out upon his people. The second place, that an implacable anger toward
his people is not in God, or that Gods anger and displeasure toward his Church
was then over. Not that he never would express the effects of anger upon any
part of his Church for the future, but that he at present was appeased with
them.

511. Psalm. 79.4. We are made a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us. Matthew. 5.10. Happy are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake.

Good men are more affected with scorns and reproaches than with blows; for,
says Chrysostom, a blow on the body is divided betwixt the body and the soul,
but a reproach wounds the soul only. Yet the godly must valiantly endure
injuries for the glory of God, and safety of their neighbors, but if that
accrue not to Gods glory, and is hurtful, we are to remit it to God by our
just complaint, and prayer for revenge on him that does the injury.

* Psalm. 79.4. with Matthew. 5.10. The former is a complaint to God. The second
is declaration of Gods judgment, of such men as are a reproach for his
Gospell-cause. Men may be happy in Gods account, and yet such are they in the
latter place, and yet be miserable in their own; the apprehension of misery is
enough to make them cry out to God, as in the former place.

512. Psalm. 79.6. Pour forth thine anger upon the Nations. 1 Cor. 13.7. Love
endures all things.

The Psalmist asks this, not out of a vicious affection, and desire of revenge,
but from a just zeal kindled by the holy Ghost, whereby he was inflamed for
Gods glory, against Blasphemers, the incurable enemies of God.

* Psalm 79.6. with 1 Cor. 13.7. The former is a deprecation against the
enemies of the godly. The latter describes love, as that grace which makes a
charitable man apt to construe all things to the best, and hope for the best,
where there is no apparent reason to the contrary; enduring all things which
may be endured with a good conscience, which no way hinders the praying against
wicked men, as they are enemies to God or Religion. For though love may make us
endure personal wrongs, it cannot make us endure public wrongs to God and the
Gospel. Charity may make us bear with outward pressures inflicted by
persecutors, yet pray against the persecutors as persecutors.

513. Psalm. 81.13. He gave them over to their own hearts lusts. Act. 17.28. In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

The first place speaks of the ill affection proceeding from man's corrupt
nature; the latter of the work of God in men, and the conservation,
sustentation, and government of all his creatures.

514. Psalm. 82.6. I said, Ye are Gods. John 17.3. This is life eternal to know
thee the only true God. Jer. 9.23, 24.

The Magistrates are called gods, not by nature, but from the Majesty
communicated to them, and their judiciary power, that so men may be brought to
obedience by them. God is so by nature, the Magistrate by his office has a
grant of part of divine power, and being Gods Vicegerent, he must do all
according to Gods will, and not according to his own will.

515 Psalm. 89.7. O Lord God, who is like unto thee? 1 John 3.2. We know that
when he appears, we shall be like him.

The Psalmist speaks of the mighty men of the earth, who living wickedly and
ungodly, are not like to God: And John speaks of the faithful, who though they
are here strangers and pilgrims, seeing only in a glass by faith; yet when
the time of perfection shall come, we shall see him face to face as he is, and
reign for ever with him.

516. Psalm. 90.9. We pass away in thy wrath. John 3.36. He that believes not
the Son, the wrath of God abides on him.

God is angry for a time, not against the persons of the godly, but against
their sins, and he chasteneth them here, not for ever; for their good, and
not for their hurt; but unbelievers shall never see Gods gracious face unto
life.

517. Psalm. 92.16. There is no iniquity in God. Romans 11.32. God has concluded
all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

God being free from all iniquity has concluded, that it argues all men to be
guilty of sins, not as the cause thereof, but as a judge, whilst he declares
them guilty for sin, if he would deal according to rigor of divine justice.

518. Psalm. 102.26, 27. Heaven and earth shall pass away, as a garment shall
they wax old, and as a vesture shall thou change them. 104.5. Eccl. 1.4.
The earth shall not be removed for ever, etc.

The earth shall endure to the time appointed by God; and what is corruptible
of it, shall be burnt with fire in the end of the world. For ever, here
signifies not eternity but a long time.

* 519. Psalm 102.26, 27. with Eccles. 1.4. But the earth abides for ever.

The former shows that the earth is not permanent. The latter shows; that the
earth abides a long time more than men; of whom its there said, One generation
goes, and another comes. The earths duration is opposed (in the latter) to
the duration of man, here not being intended the duration of the motion or
standing of it.

This word For ever in Scripture signifies that which is of long continuance,
as Exodus 21.6. 1 Samuel 1.22. and 27.12. 2 Kings 5.27. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Though its
not to be denied, that sometime it signifies that which never is to have end,
Exodus 3.15. and 15.18. Deuteronomy. 33.40. Luke 1.33. In the former place the earth is
compared to Gods Eternity, and so its said to wax old, and to be changed. In
the latter place the earth is compared with that which is very short lived,
man: and so its said to abide for ever, i. e. comparatively to man.

520. Psalm. 103.10. Dealt not with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after
our iniquities. Deuteronomy. 7.10. I will repay to them in time.

God rewards believers not according to their iniquity, nor does he deal with
us after our sins; for when we were his enemies, he was reconciled to us by
Christ, and gave us life: but he rewards the unbelievers according to their
works, and condemns them by just judgment.

521. Psalm. 104.5. Thou laidst the foundations of the earth. 2 Peter 3.5. The
earth standing out of the waters, and in the waters by the word of God.

The basis of the earth is the power of God that supports all this Universe;
the earth is called the Center of the Universe, and is said to subsist in the
waters and out of the waters, because it is compassed by the waters like an
Island.

* 522. Psalm. 104.6. Thou coverest it with the deep, as with a garment, the
waters stand about the Mountains. Psalm. 136.6. He stretches out the earth
above the waters.

God covered the earth in the first Creation with water, or rather in the
general deluge. He founded it on the waters. Either waters being at the Center
of the earth, or else the hills are above, and so are the banks above the Seas.

523. Psalm 104.15. Oil that makes a cheerful countenance. Isa. 3.18. The
Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments, their caules, and
their round tires.

God will not have people to paint their faces, for that is reprehended in
Isaiah; but because God foreknew by the fall, that most grievous diseases would
afflict us, he gave power of healing to Plants, and art to Physicians and
Apothecaries to make Oils and Unguents Chymically, to cure and refresh men. Of
this the Psalmist speaks.

524. Psalm. 105.37. There was not one feeble person amongst them. Deuteronomy. 25.18.
Amalek slew all that were feeble behind thee.

The Israelites going out of Egypt were sick of no disease, but there were
women with child, and old people, who were weary in the way and sat down to
rest.

525. Psalm. 106.31. Phinehas slew two of them in their fornication, and that
was counted to him for righteousness. Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness.

This just heroical act of Phinehas pleased God. To Abraham believing in
Christ, grace and righteousness is imputed. Therefore to be imputed for
righteousness, signifies diversely, as it is applied to different persons.

* 526. Psalm. 107.40, 42. He pours contempt upon Princes, etc. The righteous
shall see it and rejoice. Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls.

The righteous rejoices not at the fall of the person, so much as at the fall
of the power of a wicked man. He pitties his person, but he is glad that the
Sword is taken out of the hand of the wicked, whereby the righteous might and
should have been made to weep.

The godly rejoice not out of spleen to the wicked, but because Gods enemies
are fallen: and Gods glory begins to shine, and that he has manifested his
wrath against impiety and oppression.

527. Psalm. 108.9. He curses his enemies. Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies, bl^sse
them that curse you, etc.

Christ in the person of David by a prophetical spirit wishes horrid
punishments to the enemies of God and his Church. In Matthew he exhorts to
sincere and ardent charity to our enemies.

528. Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Mat.
11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force.

We are willing to do good when the holy Ghost does his work in us, and renews
us. The Evangelist means a spiritual violence of men with a burning zeal
entering into the Kingdom of God, and taking of it as it were by force, obeying
the Gospel, forsaking legal ceremonies, and embracing salvation by Christ.

* 529. Psalm. 112 3. Wealth and riches shall be in his house. Act. 3.6. Silver
and gold have I none.

Supply is one thing, superfluity is another. God promises wealth and riches
to supply the godly man's needs. The Apostles had none, because none was then
requisite; they needed not at that time a supply of money; but had it when it
was necessary. Wealth and riches when its necessary for them, and as much as is
necessary.

530. Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall not be moved for ever. Prove. 24.16. The
righteous man shall fall seven times a day. Job 5.19. Psalm 34.10.

The righteous in Christ founded on him by a true faith shall not be
overthrown, though the World and the Devil rage against him; but if at any
time by infirmity of the flesh he do fall, yet he rises again by Gods grace;
nor does he despair, or cast away his trust in God, but by repentance he
returns into favor with God again.

531. Psalm. 115.4. The Idols of the heathens are silver and gold. Isa. 41.45,
46, 1 Cor. 8.4. An Idol is nothing in the world.

Idols for their matter are things created by God; but an Idol is nothing
privatively, not negatively, because it is not that which it is called, namely,
God; it has nothing of God, it can do neither good nor hurt.

532. Psalm. 116.11. Every man is a liar. Rev. 14.5. There was found no guile in
their mouth.

The first place shows what we are by nature of our selves; the latter of
what we are by grace, after we apprehend Christ by faith, and are led by the
Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of truth.

* 533. Psalm. 116.11. All men are liars. Isaiah 63.8. Surely they are my
people, Children that will not lie.

David said this in haste, that all men are liars, even Samuel, and all who
said David should be King, so pressing was his affliction. What he said when
the cloud of blackness was upon his understanding, is not to be taken, as his
clear judgment. All men its true naturally are liars, but yet grace alters
them. Isaiah tells us, what an opinion the Lord had of his people, that they
would not lie, that is, deal disloyally with God, in departing from him to
Idols. If they had done so, they had lied, in regard of the promise made to the
Lord to the contrary.

534. Psalm. 119.13. With my lips have I showed all the judgments of thy mouth.
Romans 11.33. The judgments of God are unsearchable.

The Psalmist speaks of the judgments of Gods mouth revealed in his Word; Paul
of the secret and unscrutable judgments, or the reason why God does this or
that, to make one man rich, another poor.

535. Psalm. 119.13. I have hated the wicked. Romans 12.14. Bless those that
persecute you, and curse them not.

Godly men must not hate men's persons, Mat. 5.2. Acts 7.
but rather their faults; not those that sin of weakness, but those that
sin of obstinacy; and rather to pray for them, both by the example of Christ
and Stephen, etc. than to curse either.

* 536. Psalm. 119.54. Thy statutes have been my Songs, in the house of my
Pilgrimage. Psalm. 137.3. How long shall I sing the Lords Song in a strange Land?

Gods statutes were David's joy or comfort, or Songs, (for that may be meant by
Songs,) or Gods Word was the subject of his Songs in the time of his trouble.

The latter place tells us, that Saints are unwilling to sing at the desire of
the wicked, which will make a mock of the Songs of God. Nor does it say, but
that Saints may sing the Lords Songs in the time of affliction, when the Lord
moves their spirits to that work. It is one thing for Saints to sing of their
own accord, another thing to sing by compulsion or invitation of the wicked.

537. Psalm. 119.155. Health is far from the ungodly. Mat. 9.13. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

The Psalmist speaks of wicked men obstinate, and such as are hardened in their
sins, rejecting the grace of God, and Christ the author of salvation; Christ
speaks of penitent sinners, who being convinced with the sense of their own
sins, fly to the mercy of God, and seek health in Gods grace only, through
Jesus Christ.

538. Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall not be moved. Romans 11.17.
Some of the boughs were broken off for their incredulity.

Christ makes fruitful and barren Vines, the Apostles boughs, by which he
represents the faithful and Infidels; those that were broken off, it was for
their unbelief.

539. Psalm. 128.1. Blessed are all they who fear the Lord. 1 John 4.18. There
is no fear in love, for love casts out fear.

Filial fear proceeds from faith, by which we apprehended God as present, all
the faithful have this, and consolation accompanies it. The Apostle speaks of
the servile fear of the Infidels, which proceeds from a sense of the presence
of God as a Judge, and there is no consolation in this, but confusion.

* Psalm. 128.1. with 1 John 4.18. There is a twofold fear, servile, filial;
servile is that fear which has punishment for its object and nothing else.

Now in punishment are two things observable;

First, The punishment of loss.

Secondly, The punishment of sense.

1. The punishment of loss, a total and final separation from the face,
presence, and favor of God, which in some measure may be the object of a
filial fear.

2. The punishment of sense, the dolours, pains, and torments of Hell; and of
these there is a twofold fear, moderate and immoderate. Now when the fear of
these are immoderate, they cannot stand with love. But when we are afraid out
of the love and respect we owe to God to displease him, or we moderately fear
the punishments of the Lord. These may stand with love. Perfect love, casts out
all tormenting fear, not all fear whatsoever, for Matthew. 10.28. Fear him which
is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

* 540. Psalm. 129.1. Many times have they afflicted me from my youth up. Nahum.
1.9. Affliction shall not rise the second time.

The first place tells us, that the godly are often afflicted. The second place
tells nothing to the contrary; but that the enterprises of the Assyrians
against Judah, and the Church, were against God; and therefore he would so
destroy them at once, that he should not need to return the second time to
destroy.

541. Psalm. 132.13. God has chosen Sion for his habitation, this is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell, because I have chosen it. Acts 6.14. We heard him
say, that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy this place, and change the
traditions of Moses.

In the first place is a promise of the conservation of the Temple, and of the
Jewish polity, upon condition of their obedience, if the Jews should do that
which God commanded them, and keep his holy Covenant. In the last, Stephen from
the predictions of Christ and the Prophets concerning the ruin of the City and
Temple at Jerusalem, invites them to repentance.

542. Psalm. 136.1, to 26. The goodness and mercy of the Lord is for ever and
ever. Tit. 3.4. When the gentleness and love of God our Savior appeared.

The Fathers under the old Covenant did no otherwise taste the goodness of God
than we do by looking unto Christ, to whom God commended his goodness, and him
that he promised to give our Fathers for their salvation, he has given unto us
revealed in the flesh.

543. Psalm. 139.1. O Lord thou have proved me. Gal. 6.4. Every man shall prove
his own work.

The Psalmist prays that God would prove him, not that he was free from
sin, but he desires by mercy to be cleansed. The Apostle shows what is our
duty, namely to make our works approved to God, which he will prove.

* 544. Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? etc. Matthew.
5.44. Love your enemies.

There is a difference betwixt our enemies cause and his person. Their sins
and evil causes must be hated, we must give no approbation thereto; but their
persons being Gods creatures, and was his Image, must beloved. Enemies are of
two sorts, private and public; a private enemy is he which hates a man for
some private cause, such a one we must love and not hate. A public enemy, is
he that hates an enemy for Gods cause, for the Gospels cause, and these be of
two sorts, curable, and incurable; if curable, pray for their conversion,
hating their conditions; incurable, 1 Cor. 16.22. and even to these we must
have their sin^, and for their sins hate their persons, and no otherwise
David in the former place speaks of public, not private, who hated not him but
God, and were incurable.

545. Psalm. 145 8. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion. Exodus 33.19. I
will have mercy on whom I will. Romans 9.15, 19.

God is gracious and merciful, so that he offers his goodness to wicked men
also, and declares in them the effects of his grace and clemency; he made them,
he given them temporal goods, he defers his temporal and eternal judgments,
though they are ungrateful to him; but he shows mercy to whom he will, not
looking on our worth, but he saves us freely, without being obliged, he does
all of his own goodness and mercy.

* Psalm. 145.8. with Exodus 33.9. The former place speaks of Gods mercy compared
with his other attributes, as they are communicated to men, and so
comparatively his mercy is above all his works, for even wicked men have many
mercies from the Lord. The second place shows Gods mercy from eternity on
particular persons, which no ways crosses the former.

546. Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the beasts his food, etc. 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God
take care for Oxen?

God takes care for Oxen, so as to give them their food in due season. Yet he
takes no care for Oxen in comparison as he cares for man. The Apostles meaning
is to show, that the end of the Law was not to show or prescribe how Cattle
should be sed, (though that may be occasionally delivered in it) but to command
equity to be used in the just rewarding of those who labor for us, and under
similitudes and shadows, these were prefigured in the Law.

The PROVERBS OF SOLOMON.
Without doubt it was taken out of his three thousand Parables, and his most
wise sentences, for the good of the Church, teaching good men patience and
wisdom, and the fruit of it is to be embraced, and sin to be fled from.
Relating the works of the wise and foolish, he commends the manners of an
honest woman.

547. Prove. 1.15. My son walk not with sinners, remove thy foot from their
paths. Luke 15.1. All the publicans and sinners came unto him to hear him, and
he received them.

Solomon forbids us to run to evil with wicked men, or to allow of their
wickedness. Christ receiving publicans and sinners, reproved their faults,
exhorted them to repentance by his great love toward them.

* 548. Prove. 1.20. Wisdom utters her voice in the streets. Esaias 42.2. He
shall not cause his voice to be heard in the streets.

Christ the eternal wisdom of his Father, utters his Gospel in the most
public places, so as none can plead ignorance. Nor does this hinder Christ in
his Incarnation, to come privately, and not with the external pomp and glory
of worldly Princes, which by reason of their followers and triumphs make a
noise in the streets.

549. Prove. 1.26. I will mock at your trouble; and laugh when your destruction
comes. Ezekiel. 18.32. I will not the death of a sinner, for I take no pleasure
in the destruction of a sinner.

God is delighted in his justice, when he punishes those which despise his
grace, and that will not hearken to his fatherly vocation; but of his mercy he
will not the death of sinners, as death is the destruction of nature. The
former place belongs to Gods consequent will; the latter to his antecedent
will; that is ruled by justice, this by mercy.

* 550. Prove. 1.28. They shall seek me early, but shall not find. Mat. 7.7.
Seek and ye shall find.

When Christ says seek and find, he bids seek in time, and not out of time;
not defer our repentance, and calling on God till Gods time be past: for
then, if they seek God, as many may do in distresses and calamities, they shall
not find a return of deliverance. But if any man in the day of grace will seek
God, he shall find him.

* 551. Prove. 2.19. They that go in to her return no more. 1 Cor. 6.10. Such
were some of you, but you are washed.

When Solomon speaks of none returning, he speaks comparatively; none in regard
of the multitudes that never return. There are so few return, that they may be
accounted none in comparison of the multitudes that perish by whoredom. And
though some of the Corinthians returned, yet they were but some few, and unus
vir, nullus vir.

552. Prove. 4.3. Solomon was the only son of his Mother. 2 Samuel 11.27.
Bathsheba bare sons to David, Siman, Sobab, Nathan.

Solomon was so beloved of his Mother for the singular gifts of nature, as
though he had been her only son.

553. Prove. 6.6. Go to the Airs thou sluggard, and consider her ways. Psalm.
55.22. Cast thy way upon the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass.

Solomon by the example of the Pismire, would bring idle slothful people to
honest labor. The Psalmist warns all to trust in God and his providence; yet
not so that we should omit any thing of our duty, for so God does govern all
things, that he will have us to use lawful means, and effect all our works by
them. So when Christ faith, Be not careful for the morrow; Luke 12.15. Theoph.
he does not forbid us to work, or to give our selves over to care, and to
neglect Gods providence, for we are commanded to till the ground and to take
care to live.

554. Prove. 6.39. It is no great fault for a man to steal to fill his hungry
soul. Exodus 20.15. Thou shall not steal.

Solomon compares Theft with Adultery, and he determines that the punishment
and the offense is less in Theft than Adultery.

555. Prove. 6.31. A Thief if he be found shall restore seven fold, he shall
give all the substance of his house. Exodus 22.1. If any man steal an ox or a
sheep, or have killed or sold it, he shall restore five oxen for one, and four
sheep for a sheep.

If a man stole money or clothes, he must restore seven fold; for the seventh
number being perfect, he must redeem his life by it: Thefts which could be hid,
were more heavily punished, than such as could not so well be hid, as Cattle.

* 556. Prove. 8.5. O ye simple understand wisdom. Prove. 24.7. Wisdom too high
for a fool.

Simplicity which is natural is one thing, simplicity which is heightened is
another. Oh ye poor souls which are naturally simple; though you cannot by your
selves understand wisdom which is spiritual, yet come hither, and by using of
the means, you may attain to a right understanding of wisdom or divine
knowledge.

There are men which are naturally ignorant and bemone their ignorance, being
willing to be instructed in the things of God, such simple ones are called.
Others are fools in spiritual things, and yet think themselves wise, these
cannot attain to wisdom.

* 557. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. 1 Jo. 4.19. He loved us first.

God first loves the creatures, and infuseth his graces into their hearts,
whereby they love him, and then he loves them for loving him; so that the last
Text shows, that Gods loving us, is the cause of our loving him. The second
Text tells us, he rewards our loving him, not as merita nostra, but as dona sua.

558. Prove. 8.23. I Wisdom was crea^^d from the beginning. 2 Peter 1.19, 21.
Holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, in time.

First is meant the essential wisdom of God, that is Christ the Lord; but the
Apostle means wisdom revealed by the Prophets.

559. Prove. 8.35. He that finds wisdom finds life. Eccles. 2.16. There
shall be no remembrance more of the wise than of the fool forever.

In the former place we must understand divine wisdom, which conferres
eternal life. In the latter, humane wisdom which profits nothing after death.

* 560. Prove. 13.15. The way of transgressors is hard. Mat. 7.13. Broad is the
way.

The way of transgressors is hard or harsh, displeasing to good men. Nor does
the breadth hinder the hardness of the way. For a way which is broad may be
hard. Broad in regard of the liberty they take to themselves; hard in regard of
the judgment of others, yea their way is hard in themselves.

* 561. Prove. 15.27. He that hateeth gifts shall live. Prove. 17.8. A gift is a
precious stone in the eyes of him that has it, whithersoever it turns it
prospers.

He that hates gifts shall live comfortably in respect of his own house, of
his own conscience, and of his own renown; he shall live in the desires and
memories of good men, and he shall live in the sight of God and with him.

When Solomon tells us of a gift being a precious stone, he intends in the eyes
of those which gives it, they thinking that they by their gifts shall prosper
and be glorious: Not that he does by these words approve either of giving or
taking gifts, but shows, what the givers commonly esteem them.

562. Prove. 15.27. He that hates gifts shall live. Chap. 17.8. A gift is as a
precious stone in the eyes of him, that has it. Chap. 18.16. A man's gift
makes room for him, and brings him before great men.

A gift to corrupt covetous Judges is accepted, and causes that he that
corrupts the Judges may attain his end that he desires; for he that bribes
oft-times, obtains what his mind wished for.

* Prove. 15.27. with 17.8. and 18.16.

The first place relates to Magistrates, and those who may have gifts offered
them to hinder justice. Such as refuse gifts, as bribes may live in the favor
of God.

The second place speaks of gifts, as they are commonly esteemed of men, by
reason of the corruption of their minds, even as precious pearls drawing men's
eyes.

The third place speaks what effects gifts have with many, if not with the most
men, it tells us not what they ought to have.

563. Prove. 16.4. God made all things for himself. Verse. 4. The wicked also for
the day of wrath.

Since God has ordained the wicked for the day of wrath, he has ordained him
for his own glory; for when he punishes wicked men with temporal or eternal
punishments, he justifies himself in his own glory. God created wicked men
also, but he created not their wickedness.

* Prove. 16.4. with 4. For the day of wrath.

The end of a thing is either ultimate or less principal. God made all things
ultimately for his own glory, but there are proximate or less principal ends;
and thus God made the wicked for the day of wrath, yet he so made them for the
day of wrath that in the ultimate end they might be to his glory.

564. Prove. 16.6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged. Heb. 9.22. And without
shedding blood there is no remission.

Mercy and Truth are understood of God himself, 1 John 1.7.
who is the primary cause of the remission of sins; nor does this contradict
the meritorious effusion of Christ's blood for us, whereby we are cleansed.

* Prove. 16.6. with Heb. 9.22. Mercy and truth are either understood of God, or
of man. Of God, so the words run to this sense, by his mercy in promising, and
his truth in performing iniquity is done away, Prove. 14.22. And thus Gods mercy
in sending Christ and his truth in performing it, Christ shedding his blood
iniquity is done away.

Secondly, Mercy and truth as they are graces in man, do sin away.

Sin is done away two ways.

1. Meritoriously in the Court of Heaven: Or

2. Declaratively in the Court of conscience.

The former way, Christ's blood only puts away sin. The latter way, mercy and
truth purge away sin, i. e. where the soul finds mercy and truth, as graces
of the Spirit, implanted within it; there it may conclude, that the sins
thereof are forgiven: these being a good Index to show that the father loves it.

565. Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abominable to the Lord. Romans 4.5. God justifies the
ungodly.

He that justifies the wicked against the Law of God or Man, without
satisfaction made by himself or one for him, is abominable unto God. But God
justifies the wicked, not that it is so now, but was so, freely, by faith, for
the merits of Christ and his full satisfaction.

* 566. Prove. 18.21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue. Job 14.6.
Till he shall accomplish, as an hireling his day. Verse. 5. His days are
determined.

Death and life are in the power of God original and primarily; in the power
of the tongue, instrumentally and secondarily. Evil and treasonable words may
cut off our lives, and hasten our deaths. Our days are said to be determined,
that is, in relation to Gods decree and foreknowledge, that we shall live so
long, and no longer. But our days may be cut off, as we consider them, having
relation to the crasis, constitution and habit of the body, which might have
naturally been enlarged, if we by our words had not cut them off. God might
determine to give us a body so well compact as would live long, and yet
determine to leave us to our selves, to speak this or that, which speeches
should occasion our cutting off much the sooner.

567. Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? Psalm. 24.3. He that has pure hands, and a clean heart, shall stand in the
holy place.

We are all unclean in the sight of God, and corrupt by nature; yet our hearts
are purified by his grace, through faith in the blood of Christ.

568. Prove. 21.20. There is desirable treasure in the dwelling of the wise.
Matthew. 6.19. Treasure not up for your selves treasures upon earth.

Pious wisdom in honest gain is not reproved by Christ; but covetousness and
confidence in worldly wealth is forbidden, since we lose thereby the heavenly
treasure.

569. Prove. 22.28. Remove not the ancient Landmark which thy Fathers have set.
Ezekiel. 20.18. Walk not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their
judgments.

Solomon speaks of the bounds of Land and Inheritance; Ezekiel concerning the
statutes of their Fathers about the worship of God and the profanation thereof.
Let us not imitate those who oppose themselves against Gods Law, but let us
walk in his laws and keep his statutes.

570. Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy. Psalm. 137.8. Happy
shall he be that rewards thee as thou have rewarded us.

The Godly do not rejoice for the destruction of their enemies, and for revenge
of wrongs, but for Gods glory and the edification and good of the Church. So
Moses after the drowning of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, by his great zeal for Gods
glory sang a song of praise.

* Prove. 24.17. with Psalm. 137.9. The former place tells us, that we ought
neither as men or as Gods children rejoice in destruction of our enemies, as
our enemies: but we may rejoice in the destruction of the enemies of Gods
Children, and that by the destruction of these men, Gods children may have more
liberty to serve him, more freedom from presures, and security in their lives.
The latter place shows that wicked men may be destroyed (if there be a lawful
call thereto) if so be they aim not at malice or revenge on the persons, but
to deliver Gods people from danger by the destruction of the wicked.

571. Prove. 26.4. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like
him. Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his folly.

The art of dealing with fools is necessary, that we speak not foolish things
with a fool foolishly; for if a fool, that is, an ungodly person, blinded,
profane, speaks with scorns and evil speeches and derisions, we must not
answer him likewise; but when Gods glory is questioned, if there be danger, we
must reprove his folly and his arrogance, lest he proceed to please himself and
corrupt others.

* Prove. 26.4. Answer not a fool. with Verse. 5.

Answ. Answer not a fool with words, for they are in vain, but with blows and
correction, restraining his sauciness: The spur for the Horse, the saddle
for the Ass, and the rod for the fools back.

Secondly, Answer not a fool, etc. lest thou answer foolishly as he does, and
so be made like him. The second Text, according to his folly, that is as his
folly deserves, the LXX has it, (...).

Answer not a fool foolishly, but wisely; not foolishly, as he speaks, or as
soothing, humouring or consenting to him therein, imitating his foolish
passions, and undecent carriage, and raling.

Answer him gravely, opportunely, observing time, place, person, and manner of
answering; or if necessity require, sting him and stop his mouth.

* 572. Prove. 27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth. 1
Cor. 15.10. I have labored more abundantly than they all.

When Solomon would not have us to praise our selves, he does not exclude our
just defense of our selves, but our vain boasting. David may speak of his
innocence, and Paul of his labor in opposition to those, which would make the
world believe he was inferior in labors, etc. to other Apostles. When men
speak of themselves to manifest the truth, it is one thing; when they do it
to their own glory, and not Gods is another, Paul did it for Gods glory.

* 573. Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent to know thy flocks, etc. Matthew. 6.19. Lay
up for your selves treasuers, etc.

These are congruous, being diligent in our calling, and laying up treasures in
Heaven; there is a diligence about the work it self, or flocks themselves, that
they may thrive or prosper; this may lawfully be done; there is a diligence
about the end of the work, or issue or event of it. And besides this, diligence
that the work may succeed well, and come to an happy issue; there is a carking
and distrustful care, used about the issue and events of things, we setting
our hearts wholly on them. This is not to be used, we may use diligence, but we
must not use our affections lower than God.

Heb. Coheleth.
ECCLESIASTES, THE PREACHER.
SOlomon in this Book convinces the vanity of the world, and the foolishness
of men. Shows that there is nothing better than to fear God and to keep his
Commandments. And he maintains that there shall be a future judgment. He
wrote this Book after his falling from God, in token of true repentance.

574. ECcl. 1.4. The earth abides for ever. (Isa. 40.8.) Luke 21.33. Heaven and
earth shall pass away.

Romans 8.22. 2 Pet. 3.
In the opinion of men, the earth abides for ever, but in respect of God and the
future change and purgation from corruption and vanity, it shall pass away.

575. Eccl. 1.9. That which was shall be, and there is no new thing under the
Sun. Genesis 1.1. The world was once created. Heb. 9.25. Christ once offered
himself.

Ecclesiastes speaks not of all things, none excepted, but of the vanity of
natural and artificial things, which is collected from the natural
corruption and change of things.

* Eccl. 1.9. with Heb. 9.25. The former place speaks in relation to
happiness, so there is nothing new to create our happiness. The second place
speaks of Christ being offered, which if we regard the substance was not new,
for he was designed from the beginning of the world to be offered, and his
offering is yet as fresh and powerful, as it was at first. Something as to
circumstance of time and place, etc. may be new, but not as to substance and
force. A thing may be new in the individuality thereof, but not in the species
and kind.

576. Eccl. 1.10. There is no new thing under the Sun. Revel. 21.5. Behold, I
make all things new.

Ecclesiastes purpose is not concerning a creation of new kinds of creatures,
but concerning their change and vicissitude in the world, and concerning the
malice of men and the Devil; that men by the instinct of the Devil, from the
beginning, after man had sinned, being defiled with much wickedness, proceed
to covet after evil; unless God renews their hearts, and they become a new
creature in Christ.

* Eccl. 1.10. with Rev. 21.5. No new natural species or kind of creature, so
the first place. But yet new qualifications, accidents, and circumstances of
creatures, so the latter place. Christ will make all new, not only raise men
from their old dust in a new manner, but endue them in soul with new graces,
and in bodies with new tempers; and so purge every thing from its drossie
quality and mortality, as it shall appear to be new.

* 577. Eccl. 1.15. That which is crooked can never be made straight. Isa.
40.4. And the crooked shall be made straight.

That men by all their diligence, nor Princes by their power, can make things
otherwise than they are; that which naturally is crooked will have an
inclination and bending thither: and yet this hinders not, that God can and
will, according to his promise, make our hearts, which naturally are crooked,
to become straight.

578. Eccl. 2.2. I said of laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What does it?
Prove. 17.22. A merry heart does good like a medicine.

In the first place is meant natural laughter, and rejoicing in prosperity,
and the goods of Nature and Fortune, as the Gentiles do; and this Ecclesiastes
condemns as folly. But in the Proverbs is commended that joy only which
proceeds from the holy Ghost.

* Eccl. 2.2. with Prove. 17.22. Laughter is either natural, the effect of
rationality. 2. Spiritual, the effect of spiritual ratiocination; the former
place speaks of laughter as natural, which yet cannot be said to be madness,
for it is the natural product of our reason: but as it exceeds either in the
bounds, or arises from unworthy considerations. The second place speaks of the
effect of a merry heart, which may be without outward laughter; the one being
solid, the other flashy and frothy, or it speaks of an heart merry with the
incomes of the spirit: Or, 3. Of an heart which is modestly merry and laugheth,
but not of an immoderate nonsensicall mirth and laughter.

579. Eccl. 2.15. What does it profit me that I labored to attain more
wisdom? Prove. 8.35. He that finds me finds life.

Politic wisdom is indeed a singular gift of God; but if any man abuses it,
and depends on his wisdom it profits not, but is all vanity. Divine wisdom
which teaches us to wait all events from God, and to pray to him for his
direction in all, confers eternal life.

* 580. Eccl. 2.16, 17. For there is no remembrance of the wise, more than of
the fool. Prove. 8.35. For who so finds me finds life.

The former place tells us, that wise men are forgotten as well as fools many
times, in the thoughts and remembrance of men in this world. The latter place
tells us of getting wisdom, which will make a man live with God after, and in
this life. The former place speaking of worldly wisdom; The latter place of
Christ the essential or divine wisdom.

* 581. Eccl. 2.22. For what has man of all his labor. Psalm. 128.2. Of the
labor of thy hands.

The former place speaks of a man at the day of his death. The latter of a man
in his life; the former says all the fruits of our labors cannot advantage us
at the day of our death; the latter says, yet they may advantage us in our
life time, if we be godly.

582. Eccl. 2.23. The days of man are full of labor and sorrow. Psalm. 128.2.
Of the labor of thy hands thou shall eat, and happy shall thou be.

Ecclesiastes condemns not labor which God has laid on men, for that is good
and necessary, having great promises; but because riches are purchased by much
travel, and no man knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool that he
must leave them to.

* 583. Eccles. 3.14. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever. 2
Cor. 4.18. For the things that are seen are temporal.

The former place speaks of thing being for ever, not as so in themselves, or
appointed to be so by God. But so in relation to men, men not being able to
alter or change the work of God. The latter place speaks of things as they are
in relation to God, and as they are in themselves temporal.

584. Eccl. 3.19. There is one event to man and beast, as the one dies, so
dies the other. Chap. 12.7. The spirit of man returns to God that gave it him.

In the former place is showed the opinion of carnal men, concerning man and
beasts, who compares them by the likeness of their deeds and events. In the
latter place is taught what is the exellency of man's soul above the beasts, and
the difference after death. But a natural man cannot perceive these things.

* Eccl. 3.19. with Eccl. 12.7. The former place speaks of man and beast, in
relation to outward accidents, as hunger, cold, thirst, death, they are alike
in these; and the other place speaks of the soul alone, in that it differs from
a beast.

585. Eccl. 4.1. I saw the oppressions done under the sin, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they, had no comforter. John 14 26. and
15.26. I will send unto you the Comforter from the Father, the Spirit of Truth.

Ecclesiastes compares the oppressed with the oppressors, in that which
happens in the world: for oppressors are rich, mighty men, they have their A
betters and their Clients. The oppressed are alone, and defend themselves with
tears Christ shows how true comfort comes to those that are oppressed,
namely, from the holy Ghost.

* Eccl. 4.1. with Jo. 14.26. The former place speaks of such as had no outward
or humane comforters; the latter place speaks of sending of inward comfort. The
former of such as were oppressed, were they good or had. The latter place of
such as were only Religious and Gods Children.

586. Eccl. 7.16. Be not over righteous. Rev. 22.11. Let him that is just, be
just still.

Ecclesiastes understands a man's judgment of himself, and forbids us, that we
should not have too great opinion of our own righteousness, when it is not so
with us. John speaks of the oath of Justice, and continuing the benefit of
justification.

* Eccl. 7.16. with Revel. 22.11. The former place speaks of righteousness in
a man's conceit of others: Or, 2. Of a man's self, of others. Censure not good
men, because God suffers them to be afflicted, or to severely reprove every
petty error, or urge not every thing which thou in thine own opinion think
just; without yielding any way, either in charity or wise integrity, to the
opinions of others, or to the necessity of times, common custom or humane
frailty. 2. Of our selves, we must moderate our zeal with prudence, Matthew.
10.16. not make our selves over-wise to do a thing conscientiously,
scrupulously, upon opinion of duty, when indeed there was no necessity so to
do, and so to make sin where God made none; and thus all superstitious
creatures are over-religious and over-righteous.

The second place speaks of inherent justice, and righteousness, or holiness,
and so it is meant of real right holiness; let him that is holy be more holy.
The other is only meant of a righteousness in conceit.

* 587. Eccl. 7.17. Why should thou dye before thy time? Job. 14.6. Till he
shall accomplish as an hireling his day.

The former place speaks of our time, as it is considered from the
constitutions of our body, and what we may live by nature. The latter is spoken
of our days, as they are precisely numbered and appointed by God. We by our
sins may hasten on our death, that is, we may occasion the cutting off those
days, which by our natural constitutions we might have lived unto, though we
cannot either procrastinate or shorten those of Gods appointment.

588. Eccl. 8.14. There are righteous men to whom evils happen, according to
the manner of the wicked. Psalm. 1.3. He shall be like a tree planted by the
river side. Verse. 4. So shall not the ungodly.

Ecclesiastes sets down the judgment of carnal men concerning the righteous
and the wicked, from their outward condition, and they judge of them both
alike; yet the condition of good and bad men is most different in this life,
and in the end of it. Here the state of the godly is more excellent, and after
this life they shall rejoice for ever. Wicked men are abominable here, and
hereafter they shall be punished eternally.

589. Eccl. 9.1. No man knows either love or hatred. Romans 8.35, 38. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ. 2 Timothy 1.12.

The first place teaches that it cannot be gathered by outward happiness or
unhappiness, It is one thing to know love or hatred in a man's self and own
heart, another thing to know it in other men's hearts.
who it is that God loves or whom he hates, because these fall out alike to
good and evil, righteous and unrighteous men. Therefore we must not judge
according to outward things and accidents; but according to the testimony of
our faith and the holy Ghost, concerning the love of God, being certain that no
things that befall us for adversity, can separate us from the love of God.

Eccl. 9.1. No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred. 2 Timothy 4.8.
There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord shall give me.

A man knows not from himself, or his own strength or humane wisdom, whether
he be worthy of love or hatred, because God bestows riches, honor, strength,
etc. without any difference. Ecclesiastes speaks of discerning good men from
bad by natural judgment; the Apostle of the certainty of his salvation.

* 590. Eccl. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with
a merry heart. Eccles. 7.2. Its better to go into the house of mourning, than
to the house of feasting.

The former place bids us not repine at Gods dealings, but what he in his
providence is pleased to do, let us with chearfullnesse submit to it, eating
and enjoying the creatures with a sober chearfullnesse; and yet this does not
encourage any to an excessive or sinful mirth and jollity, for it is better
to go into the house of mourning (as the second place says) than so to spend
our time in joviallnesse and feasting.

591. Eccl. 9.8. Let thy garments be always white. Isaiah 2.8. Luke 16.19.
Luxury in clothing is disallowed.

Ecclesiastes commends not Luxury, but decent and comely clothing, according
to our quality, which God does not detest, but approves, that being refreshed
in body and mind, we may the better undergo the labors of our vocation.

* 592. Eccl. 12.7. The spirit returns to God that gave it. Rev. 6.9. I saw
under the Altar the souls of them that were slain.

The one is a literal, the other is an allegorical place: and yet both agree
together, showing, that the souls of the godly return to God, but yet by the
mediation and intercession, and merit of Jesus Christ, who is the Altar: And
though many Christians which were slain upon the account of Religion, by the
material Sword, yet by the virtue of Christ, the Altar under whose shade they
lie, they are in happiness.

The SONG OF SOLOMON.
HHB. Sirhastrim, and Kodes Kodassin, that is, the Holy of Holies. Wherein
Solomon under the similitude of a Bridegroom and his Bride, describes Christ
and his Church, the heavenly and spituall treasure, and the mysteries of
salvation to the godly.

593. CAnt. 1.5. I am black. Verse. 6. Look not upon me, because I am black.
Verse. 8. O thou fairest amongst women. Chap. 4.1. Behold thou art fair.

First the Spouse of Christ purges her self amongst her friends, that is, her
members, that they should not be offended at her blackness, that is, with the
scorns and reproaches that her adversaries cast upon her, and so she speaks of
her self, as she is in her self. In the latter place, as she pleases the
Bridegroom; in which is considerable, how he purges her by beginnings of
holiness in this life, and will in the next life set her completely holy
before his Father without spot or rinckle.

* Cant. 1.5. with Cant. 4.1. Blackness in Scripture is put for tribulation or
for sin, or thirdly, for sorrow for both the former. The first place speak of
her blackness, as she was in her own eyes. Secondly, As she was in others
eyes, in all these three relations. I am black in yours and mine own
apprehensions with tribulation, sin and sorrow.

The second place speaks of beauty or fairness in Christ's account. It is one
thing what a woman accounts her self, another thing what her husband accounts
her; she was fair in the latter sense. It is one thing to be fair in it self,
another thing to be fair by reflection or imputation. The spouse was inherently
black, but by imputation and reflection, as she was to the glass to the Sun
Christ so fair.

594. Cant. 5.1. Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly beloved. Isaiah
5.11. Woe be to ye that rise early in the morning to drink strong drink.
Ephesians. 5.14. Luke 21.34. Amb. lib. 1. cap. 5. de Cain and Abel.


Drunkenness with grace, not with wine, which makes us rejoice not stumble,
must be here understood. To be drunk here, is to be filled with the grace of
the holy Ghost, and with spiritual joy concerning the Gospel, which thing
produces healthful and pleasant fruit. Isaiah cries out, woe to drunkards,
filling themselves with Wine, and luxuriating in over much drink.

595. Cant. 6.10. The Church is terrible as an Army with banners. Chap. 7.6.
How fair, how pleasant art thou O love for delights?

She is terrible to the Devil, the World, to Hell; but most dear and and
delightful to her Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ.

ISAIAH HIS PROPHECY.
He prophesied ninety years.
IT was written by Isaiah the son of Amos, the Brother of Amasiah King of
Judah, about the year of the World 3190. It contains legal Prophesies from
Chap. 1, to the 40th. with the History of Ezechias. And from Chap. 40, to the
end, it contains Evangelicall Prophesies.

596. ISai. 1.2. I have nourished children, and they have rebelled against me.
Verse. 4. Ephesians. 5.27. The Church is glorious without spot or wrinckle.

The Church of it self and from it self is full of sins and deformities; but
she is without spot or wrinkle in her Husband and head Christ, who loved her,
and gave himself for her, that he might sanctify her, cleansing her with the
laver of water in the word of life. Ephesians. 5.26.


597. Isa. 7.14. And they shall call his name Emanuel. Luke 2.21. His name was
called Jesus.

In the Scriptures sometime the name is given to the person, not according to
the word, but the thing signified. Emanuel in effect is the same with Jesus.
Emanuel is, God with us; by this word the Prophet would explain the person, the
office and the benefits of Christ, and the mystery of the personal Union, and
that that Son should be God and Man, and live amongst men in his humane
nature that he should assume, that he might redeem them and save them from
their sins.

598. Isai. 8.20. To the Law and the Testament. 1 Cor. 2.2. ^etermined to know
nothing amongst you, Matthew. 1.21.
but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

Since Christ is the end of the Law and the Prophets; it is most profitable for
us to believe in him, and to seek comfort in his Cross; for without he had
been crucified, he had not wrought salvation for mankind.

* 599. Isai. 8.20. with 1 Cor. 2.2.

He that sends us to the Law and testimonies, he sends us to Christ, for the
Law is a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, and the Prophets are they which
testify of Christ. To be sent to them, was in relation to him, so that the
precept of Isaiah, and the practice of Paul were the same.

600. Isai. 9.3. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and have not increased their
joy. Chap. 60.5. Then thou shall see, and shall flow together, and thine heart
shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be converted
unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

The joy of the Nation and the people under the yoke of Rome, though it be not
increased, yet it is enlarged, whilst the Heathen people being called into the
Church, forsaking their heathenish rites, do embrace the Christian Religion.

601. Isai. 9.6. Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given. Luke 2. After
seven hundred years Christ was born under Augustus Caesar.

It is usual in the Scripture to have the present tence and preter tence, put
for the future tence; and the future tence for the present and preter tence: So
Psalm. 22.8. All make a mock of me.

602. Isai. 9.6. His name shall be called the Prince of peace, of his peace
there shall be no end. Matthew. 10.34. Think not that I came to send peace on the
earth, I came not to send peace, but the sword.

In the former place is understood the true Christian peace of God and Christ,
which we have with God, our Ne^^^bour and our selves. In the latter is meant
worldly peace, that we have with men of this world, which is often bad. Yet
Christ does not of himself bring the sword, but by accident, in regard of the
malice of the World and the Devil, who are the authors of contentions.

603. Isai. 9.6. He shall be called the everlasting Father. 1 Cor. 15.24. He
shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, when he shall have put down all
principality.

Since eternal and Kingly power belongs unto Christ, it shall never be taken
from him; but the manner of his government shall be changed; for he shall no
longer govern his Church by the Ministry of his Word and Sacraments, but
shall represent it to his heavenly Father freed from all evil. Nor shall there
be any more worldly governements after the blessed resurrection.

* 604. Isai. 9.6. with 6. A son is given. -- The everlasting Father.

He is the son of the everlasting Father by nature. He is the everlasting
Father, in respect of us, whom he has bought by his Blood, begotten by his
Spirit, preserved by his Power, and created by his Divinity.

605. Isai. 9.7. Of the increase of his Government, and peace there shall be no
end. Luke 12.49. I came to send fire into the earth, and what will I, but that
it may be kindled?

It is not meant a fire of discord and malice amongst men, but a fire of pure
doctrine, consuming all filth and temptations betwixt the spirit and the flesh,
the true and false teachers, the godly and the wicked, the Devil and men. For
the Gospel is no cause of troubles, but as lime when it is mixed with water,
grows hot, so the wickedness of men stirred up by Gods Word, rages against
Christ and his Gospel.

* 606. Isai. 26.10. with Isa. 40.5.

The first place shows what wicked men will do, the second what the Lord will
do. The first, That wicked men will not take notice of the Lords glorious
works, though the works being considered in themselves are glorious. The second
place shows what a glorious work that of redemption should be, that even all
that would see and take notice of it, not shutting their eyes, and being
obstinate, as the wicked do, might see it.

* 607. Isai. 26.14. They are dead, they shall not live. Verse. 19. Thy dead men
shall live.

The condition of wicked men perishing, is one thing; the Saints rising is
another. There is a difference betwixt men that are dead to God, and men that
are Gods dead men, or that die for God, or are his. The former Texts speaks of
oppressors which are but dead though they live, they are many times cut off in
the midst of their days, they shall not live; but those that are dead or slain
upon Gods account, shall live again, live for ever.

608. Isai. 26.20. The wicked will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. Chap.
40.5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Prophet speaks concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and the state thereof;
and he teaches in the former place that the wicked shall be so blinded, that
they cannot perceive the mighty work of God, wherein he has showed his
greatness, his glory, his power, and his mercy; which blindness of theirs
does not take away the glory of God and of Christ's Kingdom, which all men may
see in the saving work of man's Redemption.

609. Isai. 28.16. Behold, I lay in Sion a stone, a sure foundation, faith the
Lord. 1 Cor. 3 10. I have laid the foundation, says Paul.

God laid the foundation of our salvation, in respect of his decree, the
sending of his Son, and the perfection of man's salvation. Paul laid the
foundation in respect of manifestation, and of his office, and of the Christian
Religion at Corinth.

* 610. Isai. 30.26. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun,
and the light of the Sun sevenfold. Matthew. 24.29. The Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light.

Spiritual shining is one thing, natural is another. The light and knowledge
of God should so far exceed that which it had been; that as much as the Moon
light was inferior to that of the Sun, so much the knowledge of that time
should be inferior to that which was to be in after ages. Nor yet does this
hinder, but that at the general desolution of the world, the natural lights
of the Sun and Moon should be obscured.

* 611. Isai. 30.20. Thy Teachers shall not be removed into a Corner any more.
Phil. 5.1. Paul a prisoner, etc.

The former place speaks comparatively, thy Teachers shall not as formerly be
removed into corners, but there shall be more plenty: Nor does this hinder, but
God may upon special occasions, remove this and that Teacher, and suffer them
to be imprisoned as Paul, though he never leaves his Church in general
without Teachers. Some distinguish betwixt teaching in Corners, and Teachers to
be driven to Corners by persecution.

* 612. Isai. 31.7. Idols of Silver and of Gold, which your own hands have
made. 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol is nothing.

Idols are something material, or in relation to the substance that they are
framed of; they are nothing in relation to their effects and energies: an Idol
is of no force or value.

* 613. Isai. 33.52. The Lord is our Lawgiver. Gal. 3.19. The Law was Ordained
by Angels.

The former place speaks of God as the Author; the latter place denies not God
to be the Author, but speaks of Angels as instruments or means by which the
Lord gave the Law.

* 614. Isai. 35.8. He was taken from prison, and from judgment, and who shall
declare his generation. Act. 8.33. In his humiliation his judgment was taken
away.

It is one thing to quote the word, another thing the sense. Luke quoted the
sense and substance of what the Prophet had said, and not the words. He was
taken away from the judgment of his adversaries, and delivered from prison.
What else was that, but the exalting of his own judgment, above them that past
upon him? The word that is rendered, is as well to lift up a thing, as to take
away.

615. Isa. 38.1. 2 Kings 20.1, 2 Chronicles. 32.24.
Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not live. Verse. 5. I will add
unto thy days fifteen years, says the Lord.

Augustine says, that Ezechias was in order to dye according to some causes of
future events, In Genesis tit. lib. 6. cap. 17.
yet God added fifteen years to his life, doing only that which he foreknew he
would do before the beginning of the world. Gods justice brought the command
for Ezechias death, but his mercy prolonged his life, and so Ezechias Piety and
Repentance is proved.

616. Isai. 41.7. Chap. 46.6. They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver
in the balance, and hire a Goldsmith and he wageth it a God. 1 Cor. 8.4. An
Idol is nothing.

Silver and Gold, and such materials as the Idols are made of, were created by
God; but relatively unto God they are said to be nothing, because they have
nothing of God in them; for God will not be worshipped by Idols.

617. Isai. 42.8. Chap. 48.11. I will not give my glory to another. Matthew.
11.29. Chap. 28.19. All power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth.

God will not give his praise and glory to an Image. Christ to whom all power
and glory is given, is not only man, but the true and eternal God also with
the Father and the holy Ghost, having co-equall glory with them, but by reason
of his office of Mediator, all things are given him of the Father.

618. Isai. 42.8. I will not give my glory to another. Romans 8.14. The glory of
God shall be revealed in us.

The first place is concerning those things wherein God will be glorified by us
in this life, that is, by worship, adoration, invocation. The letter concerning
the participation and place of glory in the life to come, which he will
communicate to us.

619. Isai. 42.10. Sing unto the Lord a new Song, (that is the Gospel.) Genesis
3.15. It was Sung in Paradise concerning the blessed seed of woman.

That Evangelicall Song is called new, not for time, but because it comprehends
new and wonderful things, a new light is kindled by it, it makes a new
Creature, and shows us the new way to heaven.

620. Isai. 45.6, 7. I am the Lord, and there is none else; I form the light,
and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these
things. Genesis 1.31. And all that God made was good.

God makes evil, not of sin but of punishment and calamity, by which he
justly afflicts sinners: Also the Prophet here opposes the evil of the misery
of war to the good of peace. Mad men here wrest the name of evil, as though
God were the author of evil, that is, sin; but it may easily appear how
absurdly they do it, abusing the testimony of the Prophet. The Antithesis
shows this sufficiently; the members whereof must be compared together, for
he opposes peace to evil, that is, to adversity.

* 621. Isai. 45.7. with Lam. 3.37, 38. and Amos 3.6.

Joseph was sold by his brethren, Job spoiled, David cursed by Shimei, Christ
crucified by the Jews, and all this by the determinate counsel of God.

Answ. Distinguish betwixt the act and pravity thereof; the act as proceeding
from God, and as issuing from the rational creature. God wills an act qua
act, and produces it by the creature, as the first cause by the second cause;
and although the second cause may contaminate the act by a moral pravity, yet
God wills or suffers the same act as coming from him by a moral rectitude;
for he produces it by his power, from an unblameable and unspotted holiness,
which can never deviate nor be contaminated by any secundary cause. God is
pleased to use that act, which in it self is essentially good, (though it be
contaminated by the creature,) holy and justly from his divine justice, either
as a punishment, or as an instrument of probation and exercise, and by an
orderly and convenient medium; he brings the act to a good end. Thus he creates
evil. Joseph was by him sold into Egypt, etc. God did predetermine to produce
those acts as acts, and to permit the creature to contaminate these acts; and
though those acts should be contaminated by the creatures, yet the Lord would
call them forth to good ends. God wills the act qua act, voluntate
decernente: God suffers the vitiosity of the act as contaminating the
creature, voluntate permittente, and he suffers the act as now contaminated
by the creature to some good and holy end. God can will the same act as an act,
and nill it by his commanding will, as an act so depraved. The act qua act is
essentially good, and indeed indifferently good or evil. For as the essential
goodness of an act receives moral tinctures of good and evil, so its
denominated.

622. Isa. 49.6. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. Matthew. 10.5. Christ sent the
twelve, saying unto them, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.

The first is concerning the general gracious Ministry of Christ to both Jews
and Gentiles. The latter concerning the especial sending forth of the Apostles
to the Jews alone, to whom the Gospel was first published, until such time as
the partition wall betwixt the Jews and Gentiles was broken down; Mat. 28.19.
Mark 16.15. Luke 2.
which was done in the resurrection of Christ: Afterward he sent the Apostles
to all Nations, for he was the light of the Gentiles.

* 623. Isai. 49.6. with Matthew. 10.5, 6.

The former place tells, that Christ would be a light to the Gentiles, and to
restore the preserved of the Jews. The latter shows, that Christ by his
Disciples strove to restore the Jews. Nor does this sending of Christ at that
time only to the Jews, conclude that Christ did not afterward make good this
promise, for he did make it good afterward, by sending of his Disciples unto
the Gentiles. When the Text says, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, its but
to be understood temporarily.

624. Isai. 52.31. The Lord has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
Nations. Matthew. 15.24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

Christ was sent for the salvation and redemption of all Nations. His office of
teaching, Isai. 52.13. Revel. 19.10.
and confirming his Doctrine by Miracles, he discharged only amongst the
Israelites, as Minister of the Circumcision.

625. Isa. 52.13. My servant shall be exalted and extolled, and shall be very
high. Rev. 19.10. Our fellow servant and brother must not be worshipped.

In the first place Christ God and Man is pointed at. In the latter they are
the words of a created Angel, not admitting of divine worship.

626. Isai. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness. Heb. 1.3. The brightness of
his fathers glory.

The Prophet speaks of the passion of Christ, wherein was scorn and great pain,
otherwise he is the splendour of his Father, which he presents in goodness and
majesty, the fairest, the most comely, also in his body white, ruddy, beloved,
chosen before thousands, Cant. 5.

627. Isai. 53.8. Who shall declare his generation? Mat. 1.1. The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ.

The first place is of Christ's divinity, Heb. 7.3.
whose generation no man can declare, as he is described in the figure of
Melchisedech. The latter concerning his humanity, for according to the flesh he
was born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 2.

628. Isai. 56.7. My house shall be called a house of prayer for all people.
Matthew. 6.6. When thou prayest, go into thy chamber, and shutting the door pray.

The Prophet by the name of the house of God, understands not only the Temple
built by Solomon where the Jews yearly came together to worship God, but the
Church of which that Temple was but a figure; wherein amongst all Nations God
is invoked every where. Christ against Hypocrites and boasters, teaches that
it is better to pray in our closet, than hypocritically to pray in public
places; yet he does not by this precept take away public prayers in the
Church, John 4.21, 23. Ezekiel. 3.17. Chapter 33.7.
but he will have us depend on God, and the internal testimony of our own
conscience, not on the opinion and applause of men.

629. Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet.
Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bitterness, clamours and indignation be taken from you.

In the first place God commands the Prophet to cry aloud against obstinate
sinners, and this cry proceeds from zeal to the glory of God, of which Paul
speaks, Convince, reprove. In the latter the Apostle forbids crying, which
proceeds from anger, troubles the unity of the spirit, and all carnal,
boasting, earthly, devilish cries, directed for revenge against our Neighbor.

630. Isai. 59.21. This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit
that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. Matthew. 23.38. Your house
shall be left unto you desolate.

First God promises that he will defend the Church collected together of Jews
and Gentiles against the gates of Hell. In the last Christ threatens ruin to
the ungrateful people of the Jews, and desolation to them that were blinded
by their malice.

* 631. Isai. 59. ult. My Covenant shall not depart from thee, nor from thy
seed for ever. Matthew. 21.43. The Kingdom shall be taken from you.

It is one thing what is done to Gods own peculiar children in a Nation.
Another thing what is done to a Nation in general. God promised his spiritual
seed, or the true Israel, that they should not be cast off, but have the
incomes of his Spirit, etc. When Christ says, the Jews Kingdom should be
taken from them, he means from the external Israelites, which were not of the
spiritual seed. Nor does he say, that he would take away the spiritual
Kingdom from his Children, but he would take away the external Kingdom.

632. Isai. 60.6. Ps. 42.10.
The multitude of Camels shall cover thee, the Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah,
all they from Sheba shall come, they shall bring gold and incense. Mat. 2.1.
The wisemen came from the East to Jerusalem, Sheba lay to the South.

First this is a general promise concerning the calling of the Gentiles, that
the greatest company of them should give up their names to Christ. The
Evangelist does historically relate the coming of the wisemen to Christ out of
Persia which in respect of Judea lies to the East.

633. Isai. 60.11. Thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut
day nor night. Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in by the straight gate.

The heavenly gate is most large, and it stands open to all believers in
Christ, who opened it to them, but that all go not in by that gate, it is
through their own fault. For Christ denies not pardon to such as repent, but
such as despise the treasures of Gods patience, who crying to God seek for
salvation and are grieved, not so much that they have offended God, but because
they see punishment provided for them; which they cannot avoid, and yet they
repent not.

* 634. Isai. 60.11. Thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be
shut day nor night. Rev. 21.25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by
day, for there shall be no night there.

The first place shows that the gates of the Church shall continually be open
to receive Converts: for by night and day is meant continually. The second
place tells us the same, for the gates shall be open all day, that is
continually: and whereas St John mentions only the day and not night. He
would have us to know, that the light of the Gospel shall be so great, as that
in regard of the dispensation under the Law, there should be no night, but all
should be day; so that its the same in substance, only a variation of phrases
to show the glory and light of the Gospel.

* 635. Isai. 63.11. Who is this that comes up from Aedom, etc. Glorious in
his apparel, etc. Matthew. 2.15. Out of Egypt have I called my Son.

The first place is a description of Christ returning from the conquest of the
enemies of his Church, among whom the Aedomites, none of the last or least
propounded as a Type of the spiritual enemies thereof. The second place speaks
of Christ, not as returning from the conquest of his enemies, but as returning
from the persecution of Herod.

636. Isai 65.1. I am found of them that sought me not. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If you
seek the Lord, you shall find him; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

The first place is of the calling of the Gentiles. In the latter, David
exhorts Solomon to serve God with a perfect heart and a willing mind, and to
seek him by holy prayer; so Christ teaches his Disciples, Mat. 7.7.
for he moves our hearts to seek him, and gives both the will and the deed,
says Paul.

* 637. Isa. 65.1. with 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and Matthew. 7.7. Seek and find.

Man is to be considered in a double capacity, as dead in sin, and not able
to seek God, and so were the Gentiles. 2. As converted and alive by the grace
of God. God finds those first who are in their natural estate before they find
him, of this the first place. But those that are converted and alive, must seek
the Lord before he will be found of them.

638. Isai. 65.24. And before they call I will answer, and before they speak I
will hear, says the Lord. 2 Cor. 12.8. Paul asked of God thrice, that the
messenger of Satan might depart from him, and yet was not heard.

God hears the prayers of the godly, though not according to their will, yet
according to their salvation and profit, either giving them what they ask, or
deferring them, that they may ask more earnestly, and be content with his grace.

639. Isai. 66.2. But to this man will I lock, even to him that is poor. (Chap.
57.15. Chap. 611.) Romans 2.6. There is no respect of persons with God.

God in the Prophet reproving Hypocrites sacrificing with an opinion of their
desert, prefers the poor in spirit before them, and him that is contrite and of
a sincere heart, professing to do nothing without Gods grace: but God respects
not men's persons, nor is he a respecter of them, for in gratitudes accepting of
persons can have no place. Acts 10.34.
And he is accepted with God amongst all Nations who fear God and work
righteousness.

* 640. Isa. 66.2. with Romans 2.1. Looking or approving and taking care of a
person, is one thing, accepting of the person, is another. God he looks and
approves of the person of the humble, more than the curious fabric of his
material Temple, so in the former place; in the latter, he is no accepter of
the persons of men, i. e. he chooses not this man and refuses that, upon the
account of Nation, stock, gifts, birth, breeding, lands, or the like, or
refuses poor men, because they are poor; but he accepts of this man, poor
or rich, that is contrite.

The PROPHECY OF JEREMIAH,
THe son of Hilkias the Priest, who prophesied at Jerusalem, about the year
of the world 3324, unto the captivity of Babylon, which he foretold, and the
desolation of the City and the Temple, and the time of the Jews captivity for
seventy years. After the captivity he went into Egypt, and there he showed to
Idolaters the anger of God, and punishments, with the destruction of Babylon by
the Medes and Persians: he prophesied thirty four years.

641. JEr. 3 5. Will he reserve his anger for ever, will he keep it to the end?
Matthew. 25.46. And those shall go into everlasting destruction.

The Prophet speaks in respect of those that are penitent, Matthew. 7.
with whom God is not angry for ever; he chastneth them indeed with temporal
punishments. Christ speaks of obstinately wicked men, of whom God is the severe
judge, and he calls them the workers of iniquity.

* 642. Jer. 3.14. And I will take you one of a City, and two of a Tribe. Rev.
7.4. There were sealed an hundred forty and four thousand of all Tribes.

The first place signifies, that there should but a few of that people be saved
from the Judgment which the Prophet there speaks of; and though it were meant
of eternal salvation, yet one of a City, and two of a Tribe being saved this
week, and as many another, in the conclusion, the whole sum being cast up
will be great, if we consider all times. The number of the godly is great in it
self, but its small, compared with the multitude of the wicked.

643. Jer. 6.10. Chap. 9.26. All the house of Israel are uncircumcised in
heart. Romans 11.16. If the root be holy, so are the branches.

All] is taken here for the greatest part. The root of the Jews was holy by
reason of the Covenant, because they were born from their Father who was in the
Covenant, and so were they confederate with God, and separated from the profane
Gentiles.

* 644. Jer. 9.17. Send for the mourning women. Ezekiel. 24.17. Make no mourning
for the dead.

The former place shows the Judgment of God to fall so heavily upon the people,
that they should make a solemn mourning for themselves. The latter place
intimates, that the affliction should be so great upon the people, that there
should be no mourning for them, because noe mourning could express it, pauca
cura loquunter ingentes stupent; or else this was a peculiar case which breaks
not a general rule.

645. Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is
not in man to direct his steps. Matthew. 23.37. I would have gathered thy
children together, and thou would not.

In spiritual matters that concern his salvation, a man can do nothing that is
good. In politic and civil affairs he can indeed do something, but more
inclining to evil, than to good.

* 646. Jer. 15.1. with Matthew. 18.19.

The former place speaks, that God may in some cases be so provoked by sin,
as he will not hear even two or three gathered together; though the most
renowned of Saints. The second place speaks, that God will grant all things
which are asked by faith, which must be according to the rule and Cannon of
faith, by two or three together.

647. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man. Romans 10.11. He that
believes in Christ shall not be confounded. Isa. 28.16.

The Prophet speaks of bare mortal deceitful man in himself. The Apostle
speaks of man subsisting in the person of the Son of God, in whom the
fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily.

648. Jer. 15.1. If Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be
toward this people. Matthew. 18.19. If two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in Heaven.

In the former place the speech is hypotheticall; as if he should say, though
they were amongst the living, and did stand before me, and would turn away my
wrath from this people, yet would I not spare them. Christ in the latter
promises temporal good things, upon condition of repentance.

649. Jer. 17.10. Chap. 20.12. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins. 1
Cor 2.11. Who knows what is in man, but the spirit of man which is in him?

God is not excluded from knowing what is in the heart; but Angels and men are,
be they good or bad.

650. Jer. 22.11. Thus says the Lord touching Sellum the son of Josiah. 2
Kings 23.30. 2 Chronicles. 3.6. The people of the Land took the son of Josiah,
Joachaz and anointed him to be King.

Joachaz is called Sellum ironically, because as King Sellum, Israel was led
captive into Egypt, so Joachaz shall not return from the Babylonish captivity.

651. Jer. 22.30. Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, 1 Chronicles.
3.19.
for no man of his seed shall prosper. Mat. 1.12. Salathiel his son.

Jekonias died without children, Salathiel the son of Neri was from Nathan, the
adopted son of Jekonias, and by succession, not his natural son.

652. Jer. 25.1. The fourth year of Jehojakim the son of Josiah King of Judah,
was the first year of Nabuchadonozer King of Babylon. Dan. 1.1. In the third
year of Jehojakim King of Judah came Nabuchadonozer King of Babylon to
Jerusalem.

That is in the end of the third year, and the beginning of the fourth year of
Jehojakims reign.

* 653. Jer. 25.1. with Dan. 1.1. That of Daniel which says, the third counts
from the time he reigned as a vassal to the King of Babylon, 2 Kings 24.1.
having before reigned seven years as a Vassal of Egypt, 2 Kings 23.34, 36.
Now these three years must be understood complete, because that which is there
spoken of happened the fourth of his reign as in Jeremy.

654. Jer. 25.11. And this whole Land shall be a desolation and an
astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of Babylon seventy years.
Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times.

God by a Prophetical spirit revealed this to Jeremiah, and so comforted his
people; but we must not curiously search to know the times contrary to Gods
will, that is the moment of the day of Judgment, the destruction of the world,
which the Father has reserved in his own power.

655. Jer. 29.11. I think toward you thoughts of peace and not of evil. Verse.
17. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I will send upon them the Famine.

God gives peace to penitent sinners; but punishes sinners for their sins.

656. Jer. 31.15. A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and Rachel weeping.
Matthew. 2.16. That was done at length in the killing the children at Bethlehem.

The Prophets speak often in the present tense, or time past, of things which
are to come, for the certainty of the Prophecy. So here he foreshews the
lamentation of the Mothers for the children that were slain at Bethlehem by
Herod's command.

657. Jer. 31.2. The Lord shall create a new thing on the earth. Eccl. 1.10.
There is no new thing under the Sun.

New things are made by creation, so God the Father created all things new, so
we are a new creature in Christ, by sanctification, when we are regenerated by
the holy Ghost; by change, so when Christ shall come all things shall be made
new.

658. Jer. 31.31. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, and I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. Matthew. 5.17. I came
not to destroy the Law.

God promised a new Covenant when Christ should come, yet such a one that
should not differ from the former Covenant in substance, but sanctified by the
Messiah. The Doctrine of the Prophets and the Apostles was not changed by the
coming of Christ, but remains an eternal Law of leading our life; the
ceremonies are abrogated according to their use, but their signification was
more declared by his coming, and illustrated, and the Prophesies had their
complement in him.

659. Jer. 36.30. Thus says the Lord of Jehojakim King of Judah, he shall have
none to sit upon the Throne of David. 2 Kings 24.6. And his son Joakim
reigned in his stead.

Joakim did not sit, that is, he had no fast seat in the Kingdom, for in the
third month of his Government, Sedechias was put by force, not by right, into
his place by Nebuchadonozer.

660. Jer. 37.14. Jeremy said, I fall not away to the Chaldeans. Chap. 21.9. He
that goes out and falls to the Chaldeans shall live.

Jeremy taken in the gate defends his innocence, that he fell not to the
Chaldeans, nor was a betrayer of his Country, but he said, that he would go
into the Land of Benjamin.

661. Jer. 52.31. In the thirty seventh year of the captivity of Jehojakim King
of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty fifth day of the month,
Evilmerodach lifted up the head of Jehojakim King of Judah. 2 Kings 25.27. In
the thirty seventh year of the captivity of Jehojakim he was lifted up in the
twelfth month, the seven and twentieth day.

On the twenty fifth day Evilmerodach took counsel, to deliver Joakim out of
prison, on the twenty seventh day it was concluded and effected, all things
being disposed well for his enlargement.

THE THRENES or LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.
THe Prophet bewails the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of Judah,
and the captivity of the people. He comfort himself and the people in the
promise of God, and commends the cause to God by his prayers.

* 662. LAm. 3.31. The Lord will not cast of for ever. Lam. ult. ult. Thou have
utterly rejected us.

The first place tells, that God may afflict his for a time, yet he will not
cast off for ever. The latter place are the words of those sadly afflicted,
which makes them think themselves so miserable, as that they were utterly
rejected. Or else it may be read by way of Interrogation, Have thou utterly
rejected us? not that it does say, that God would reject them, but that they
were so long in affliction, as they thought God had forgotten them.

* 663. Lam. 3.33. He afflicts none willingly. 1 Pet 4.19. They that suffer
according to the will of God.

It is true, they which suffer, suffer according to Gods will, and yet he
afflicts none with delight, or so as taking pleasure in it, or doing it upon
recreation, but he is forced thereto by their wickedness.

664. Lam. 3.37. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord
commands not. Verse 38. Out of the month of the most High proceeds not both
evil and good? Deuteronomy. 32.4. The works of the Lord are perfect.

The evil of punishment not of sin is meant in the first place, which is not
ill in it self, but in respect of men. For all punishment in respect of God
that inflicts it, has the nature of good.

665. Lam. 5.7. Our fathers have sinned and are not, and we have born their
iniquities. Ezekiel. 18.20. The Sons shall not bear the Fathers iniquities.

The children succeeding the Parents in their sins, succeed them also in
their punishments. Godly and penitent children shall not bear the iniquities of
their parents for ever, though they be afflicted with temporal punishments.

666. Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned. Psalm.
119. ult. Hosea 14.2. Turn O Israel to the Lord thy God.

Conversion and repentance is the work of God, Act. 11.8.
he gives it to the Gentiles; and none but those that are enlightened in their
hearts, can truly turn unto God.

EZEKIEL HIS PROPHECY.
THE Priest the son of Buzi, who was brought into Babylon under Jekonias, and
confirmed the Prophecy of Jeremiah, and comforted the captives, about the year
3350, by the River Chebar, he had the visions from God. He prophesied twenty
years.

667. Ezekiel. 8.12. The Lord sees us not. Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and
open before the eyes of God.

The Prophet makes mention of what foolish men say; who thought both by their
words and deeds, that God saw them not; whose perverse judgment does not hinder
the truth, which maintains, that all things, be they never so secret, yea the
thoughts of our hearts are open before God.

668. Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins, that shall dye. Romans 5.6. Christ died for
us.

The first sentence is legal, and teaches what must be done by the Law divine
or humane, legally. The last is Evangelicall, showing that God for Christ's sake
freely gives us his grace and salvation.

669. Ezekiel. 12.13. I will bring Zedekiah into Babylon, to the Land of the
Chaldees, yet shall he not see it though he shall dye there. Jer. 34.3. Thine
eyes shall behold the eyes of the King of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee
mouth to mouth.

Zedekias being taken saw the King of Babylon, afterward they put out his
eyes, that he could not see the Land of the Chaldees, nor Babylon in his
captivity.

* 670. Ezekiel. 16.3. Thy birth and thy nativity is from the Land of Canaan. Romans
11.1. The seed of Abraham.

Its true, the Israelites were of Abraham's race, yet so degenerate, that they
in manners seemed rather to be Ammonites and Hittites, two execrable Nations,
they were Canaanites in imitation, Israelites in generation.

671. Ezekiel. 18.19. Walk in my precepts, keep my judgments. 1 Timothy 19. The Law
was not made for the righteous, but for the wicked and disobedient.

The Prophet understands the Law that teaches and enlightens us. The Apostle,
the Law that condemns us; Romans 8.33.
For there is no condemnation to those that are justified in Christ Jesus.

672. Ezekiel. 18.21. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has
committed, he shall not dye. Heb. 6.4. It is impossible for those that were
once illuminated, if they shall fall away, to renew them again by repentance.

It is hard and impossible in respect of those who bar themselves out from
Gods mercy, and shut their hearts, that they may not be enlightened by the Sun
of righteousness, but it is not so in respect of God who would have all men to
repent and be saved; yet he justly punishes with final impenitency, all
obstinate and malicious Apostates, and such as sin against the holy Ghost.

673. Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33.11. God will not the death. He has no pleasure in
the death of the wicked. Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardens.

God will not the death of a sinner by his antecedent will, but by his
consequent will, or his justice; because he justly punishes him who rejects
the grace of God offered unto him. He hardens therefore permissively, not
affectively.

674. Ezekiel. 18.23. I will not the death of him that dies. Chap. 3. 18. Thou
shall die the death.

God as our Father will not by the Gospel, but as he is our judge and revenger,
he will by the Law, that a sinner shall die.

675. Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies. 1
John 5.16. A sin unto death.

God will not the death of him that repents, for his mercy is over all his
works. A sin unto death, is a sin against the holy Ghost, and so it is
called, because it is justly punished with final impenitency.

676. Ezekiel. 18.26. When A righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and
does iniquity, he shall dye in it. Romans 8.30. Whom he justified them he
glorified.

Righteous in the first place is not truly so, but only in opinion, so Christ
came not to call the just; Matthew. 9.13.
but the Apostle speaks of those that are truly just, who are j^stified in
Christ, and shall be surely glorified. Or if the place of the Prophet be to be
interpreted of him that is truly just, it is conditional, and so proves
nothing, and the contradiction is reconciled.

* Ezekiel. 18.26. with Heb. 6.4. The first place speaks Hypothetically, Qui
subponit nihil ponit, such suppositions say nothing positively, that the
supposition is true; the latter place speaks positively. The first place speaks
in vindication of Gods justice, that if it were so, that a righteous man could
fall, that God would do and so. The latter place speaks in confirmation of
those that are godly, that they cannot fall away. The first place speaks of
Hypocrites, the latter of real Saints, so as they cannot be in opposition to
one another. The former, of such a man as is righteous, by his own
righteousness. The latter, by such as is righteous, by the righteousness of
Christ.

677. Ezekiel. 20.25. I gave them also Statutes that were not good, and judgments
whereby they should not live. Psalm 19.9. The judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether.

Precepts that are not good are either legal threatenings, by which God menaces
curses to the wicked, or false doctrine, when God by his just judgment suffers
those that would not believe the truth, but go forward in iniquity, to believe
lies.

* 678. Ezekiel. 20.25. I gave them also Statutes which were not good. Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy, just and good.

God gave them Statutes, which as they relate to the Lawgiver were good, and
in themselves were good; but in respect of them that seek justification by
them, they will prove such judgments, whereby they shall not live.

679. Ezekiel. 44.9. No stranger uncircumcised in heart and flesh, shall enter
into my Sanctuary. Gal. 5.2. If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing.

The Prophet means spiritual circumcision by faith in Christ; but the Apostle
means nothing but corporal and legal circumcision, which was that the Jews
strove to be justified by. Col. 2.16.


* 680. Ezekiel. 48.35. Jehova Schamma.

The Socinians hence would gather, that the name Jehovah is not only
attributed to God. But this place proves no such thing, for it is a sentence
which is as a name to the City, and it is not in the nominative, but has a
transition into the genetive case, and the name of that City shall be the
habitation of Jehovah, the place of the habitation of Jehovah.

DANIEL HIS PROPHECY.
DAniel was carried young with Joakim to Babylon, there he lived seventy years
to the time of Cyrus, in the year 3370. He interprets Nebuchadnezzars Dream
of the Image; and writes what was done under Nebuchadnezzars Reign,
Belshazzars and Darius. And describes the four Monarchies, and the eternal
Kingdom of Christ, he numbered also the weeks of years of the coming of Christ.

681. DAn. 1.5. The King appointed for Daniel and his fellows a daily
provision, that at the end of three years they might stand before the King.
Chap. 2.1. In the second year of Nebuchadnezzar, the King dreamed a dream,
wherewith his spirit was troubled. Verse. 16. Daniel went in and desired of the
King that he would give him time.

That was done in the second year after these things were ended which were
appointed for the education of Daniel and his companions under the government
of Nebuchadnezzar.

* Dan. 1.5. with Dan. 2.1. And in the second year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar.

That is, two years after that these young Jews had been brought up in the
Court, the space of three years, Dan. 1.5. So that this second year is not to
be taken from the Kings Reign, (which fell out in the fifth) but from Daniels
Coronation, as it were with wisdom, this dream following was expounded.

682. Dan. 1.21. and 6.28. And Daniel continued unto the first year of King
Cyrus. Chap. 10.1. In the third year of Cyrus King of Persia, a thing was
revealed to Daniel.

In the former place the two following years are not excluded; but it is noted,
that God prolonged the life of Daniel, until the time of the return of the
people of the Jews from Babylon. Daniel was in his office at Court to the first
year of Cyrus, then being grown old, he led a quiet private life.

1 Samuel 7.3.
683. Dan. 2.46. Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel. Deuteronomy.
6.13. and 10.30. Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.

Revel. 19.10.
Nebuchadnezzar would have worshipped Daniel after the heathen manner, but
being better instructed by him, he changed his purpose, being admonished by
Daniel to worship and adore the true God of gods.

684. Dan. 3.12. Chap. 2.49. Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego despised
the Kings commandment. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers.

Act. 4.19. chapter 5.29.
God being the highest power we must principally obey him, and above all men, we
must obey the Magistrate in things which are not against Gods Word and his true
worship.

685. Dan. 4.27. O King break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Isai. 53.7. The Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all. 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse
us.

Our sins before men are redeemed by making satisfaction for injuries, and by
sorrow for them, to this Daniel exhorts Nebuchadnezzar; but before God only
the merits of Christ Jesus can take away sins.

686. Dan. 6.10. Daniel, his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, kneeled upon his knees three times a day and prayed. 2 King. 4.33.
Elisha shutting his doors prayed. Matthew. 6.6. Christ commands the same.

Daniels work of confession was necessary, lest he should seem to deny God and
his truth, by reason of the wicked command of the King. Christ forbids not
public prayers, but boasting hypocrisy.

687. Dan. 9.3, to the 20. The prayer of Daniel is contained in many words.
Matthew. 6.7. And when ye pray use not many words. Isai. 23.3.

Daniels prayer was no vain repetitions, but a testimony of his fervent desire
powered out in prayer from before the most holy God. So was the prayer of Moses,
David, Solomon and our Lord Jesus Christ. But in the latter place Christ
reprehends the foolishness of them who think, that by many words repeated they
can persuade God.

688. Dan. 9.17. Cause thy face to shine upon the Sanctuary for the Lords sake.
John 16.24. Ye have hitherto asked nothing in my name.

We do ask in the name of Christ with confidence of his merit; that did the
godly under the Old Testament comparatively, secretly, implicitly, under a
shadow, and a propitiatory; but under the New Testament, simply, nakedly and
openly, without any shadows or external propitiatory, which Christ has
abolished.

689. Dan. 9.25. Unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore
and two weeks. Acts. 2.7. It is not for you to know the times and seasons.

By divine revelation seaventy weeks, that is, four hundred and ninety years
were foreshewed to Daniel, that within so many years Christ should come, and
perform the office of a Messiah: such a knowing of times is not forbid, but
that which is rashly attempted by us without divine revelation.

TEREASAR, that is, as they are commonly called in Hebrew, The Prophesies of
the twelve minor Prophets, not for their authority, but the quantity of the
Book.

HOSEA HIS PROPHECY, THE SON of BEERI.
HE chides the Jews for their idolatry. He shows their casting off, and the
espousing of the Gentiles to God. He declares salvation to those that should
repent. He Prophesied fifty years, in the time of Osiah, Jotham, Achaz, Ezekias
Kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joas King of Israel,
about the year 3150.

690. HOS. 1.2. Go take thee a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms.
Lev. 21.14. A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take, but a virgin.

The command of God to the Prophet was not that he should marry a whore, but a
lawful wife, yet with such an infamy, as though she were a Harlot and her
children bastards. By this emblem the Israelites are admonished of their
spiritual fornication.

* Hos. 1.2. with Lev. 21.14. As for the first place, its probable that all
this was commanded, and seemed to the Prophet to be performed in vision, that
by this allegory they might perceive their duty toward God, and rebellion
against him.

691. Hos. 1.7. I will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle. Romans
13.4. The Magistrate bears not the sword in vain.

The first place is of the conservation of the Kingdom of Judah against the
Assyrian, not by corporal weapons but by miracles, which takes not away the
lawful power of the Magistrate against the enemies of the Church, external or
internal.

692. Hos. 1.9. Ye are not my people. Verse. 10. Ye are the sons of the living
God.

The Prophet divides the people of Israel into those which are, and those which
shall be. Those which are he divides into righteous and wicked, the righteous
that remain shall be few, but the wicked shall be more; he says, that even the
whole people of Israel should forsake God; yet some few should be saved to the
coming of the Messiah, Jer. 3.18. Ezekiel. 34.27.
whilst all Nations both Jews and Gentiles should be gathered into one people
and one sheepfold under one King and one shepherd.

693. Hos. 2.13. I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, when she burnt
incense to them. 1 King. 18.40. Elias the Prophet killed Baals Prophets at the
brook Kison.

The Baalites were destroyed in the time of Elias and of Jehu; yet their
superstition remained and stuck to the posterity of the people.

694. Hos. 4.23. Swear not, The Lord lives. Deuteronomy. 6.13. And thou shall swear
by the name of the Lord.

An oath is part of Gods worship, and therefore the Prophet warns Idolaters
not to abuse it as they did in Bethel, that they might seem to serve God, and
not the Calf^.

695. Hos. ^.4. They have set up Kings, but not by me. Romans 13.1. There is no
power but of God.

The Prophecy respects the breaking of the ten Tribes from the house of
Solomon, that was not from God, as the Israelites did it, who would not be
subject to the Judges of Judah, contrary to Gods revealed will; but yet it was
from God, because he would punish the sins of Solomon. So Tyrants are from
God, not only as a scourge, but by reason of their power, because the power
must be distinguished from the corruption of the person who uses it, etc.

* 696. Hos. 10.6. Ephraim shall be ashamed, and Israel shall be ashamed. Joel
2.26. My people shall never be ashamed.

Its one thing to be ashamed of sin and the baseness of men's ways, as Ephraim
and Israel were, when they saw themselves in their own colors. Its another
thing to be ashamed of the ways of God; the latter Text tells us, we should
never be ashamed of worshipping God, for he would so answer their expectations,
and assist them in their necessities, that they should have no cause of being
ashamed.

697. Hos. 11.1. When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my
son out of Egypt. Matthew. 2.15. This Prophecy was fulfilled in Christ being
brought back from Egypt.

These words were spoken of Israel Gods adopted Son, and of his only
begotten Son, according to the union of the body with the head, and
comparison of the Type with the truth. The deliverance of the children of
Israel out of Egypt was a figure of our Redemption and freedom by Christ.

698. Hos. 13.14. O death I will be thy plague, O grave I will be thy
destruction. 1 Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy victory?

The first place may be explained by the latter, for in both is showed that
death has lost its strength, and is swallowed, up in victory.

* Hos. 13.14. with 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.

That which in one place is called plague, in the other is called Victory: but
the difference of metaphors causes not a difference in sense, for as a plague
conquers where it comes, and eats up all, so does death conquer and eat up all,
and gets Victory.

JOEL HIS PROPHECY, THE SON of PETHVEL.
HE Prophesied in the year 3239. That the Israelites should be carried captives
into Assyria; he exhorts them to repentance, and promises mercy to them that
are penitent.

699. JOel 1.13. Chap. 2.12. Turn you unto me with fasting, with weeping and
with mourning. Matthew. 6.17. When thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy
face, that thou seem not to fast before men.

Christ discommends not private or public fastings, but he taxes the
hypocrisy of the Pharisees in their fasts: for godly people must not sound a
Trumpet, but be content to have God the witness of their works.

700. Joel 2.14. Who knows whether God will return and repent and pardon us.
James 1.6. He that doubts is like a wave of the Sea.

Who knoweth] Belongs not to remission of sins, but removing of punishment,
for that is to be prayed for upon condition of the will of God and our good.

701. Joel 2.28. Isai. 44.3. And it shall come to pass after this that I will
power out my spirit upon all flesh. 2 Samuel 32.2. 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God
spoke as they were inspired by the holy Ghost.

Joel speaks of the state of the Church after the coming of Mossias, and of the
comparing of the spiritual gifts of the Jewish and Christian members of the
Church. And he teaches that after the Messiah shall be come, the spiritual
gifts of God shall be greater amongst all men; but not that all under the New
Testament should have the gift of Prophecy. The latter places are of public
and ordinary Prophecy.

* Joel 2.28. with 1 Cor. 14.34. I suffer not a woman to speak in the Church.

If women were to have the spirit powered upon them in the times immediately
after Christ's Ascension, then why must they not speak in the Church? The former
place speaks of extraordinary gifts given to some women; the latter of a duty
lying upon all. The former ^s to be restrained to the times ^ext after Christ's
life, the latter is a duty lying upon all times. The former has reference to
extraordinary parts and gifts, the latter has reference only to ordinary
preaching and teaching by way of office.

702. Joel 2.32. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be delivered.
Heb. 6.4. Chap. 10.26. They that are once enlightened, if they fall they cannot
be restored.

The first place speaks of the faithful who call on the Lords name in faith.
The latter concerning Apostates that sin against the holy Ghost, who have
neither faith nor true prayer, though they pray with their lips; for they do it
not sincerely, and therefore their prayers are an abomination to God.

* Joel 2.32. with Heb. 6.4. The former place is a promise to those that can
pray. The latter to those who cannot pray, but actually fall away. The former
is spoken of Gods Children (for God hears not sinners) the latter speaks of
the wicked; for Gods Children never fall away finally from grace, enlightening
not being put here for saving knowledge, but a Theory of Christ.

703. Joel 3.20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation
to generation. Amos 9.11. The Tabernacle of David is fallen down, Matthew. 24.1.
Acts 15.16.

The promises of the perpetuity of the Temple and Kingdom of Judah, belong not
to the building and walls of the City, or the civil Kingdom, but to the
perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ and his Church; against which the gates of
hell shall never be able to prevail; and they ^re conditional upon their
faith, obedience and purity of Divine worship.

* Joel 3.20. with Matthew. 24.1. The former place is meant of the spiritual
Jerusalem and Judah, the Children of God. The latter of the material Temple
and Jerusalem. The former is a promise (if it be meant of the external Judah
and Jerusalem) which has a condition, if not expressed yet employed, viz. that
they should walk with the Lord. The latter by the threatening of such judgments
shows, and implies that they had broke their promise. The former place uses
the word for ever. But that in Scripture is many times used for a long season,
and so it was in the latter, before the judgment came on Jerusalem after Joels
time.

AMOS HIS PROPHECY.
WHO was of the common people amongst the Heardsmen of Tekoa. He prophesies
of the wrath of God, to the Kings and Kingdoms of Judah and Israel; and he
threatens Famine, Sword, Pestilence, devastation and ruin to the neighbors
who were enemies to Gods people. He prophesied in the year 3153, in the days
of Josiah King of Judah.

704. AMos 1.3, 6, 9, 11, 13. Chap. 2.1, 4, 6. For three transgressions and for
four I will not spare. And at length he reckons but one.

It is a periphrasis of the seventh number which three and four do make, which
is called a perfect number in the Scriptures, and a certain number is put for
anuncertain; as if he would have said, For many iniquities I will not spare
those Nations.

* 705. Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in a City that I have not done. Deuteronomy.
32.4. The Lord is a God of truth, void of iniquity.

The former place speaks of God as the Author of malum poenae, of affliction;
the latter of him not as Author malum culpa, of sin. In the former sense,
affliction is not simply and in it self evil, or as it is a punishment of God:
but in respect of men's understanding or apprehension, and if God should punish
sin with sin, we cannot say but the punishment is good, as from God, though
the sin be naught as practiced by man.

706. Amos 5.18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord, that day of the
Lord is darkness. Matthew. 6.10. Thy kingdom come. Chap. 24.30. Let it come with
glory.

The Prophet speaks of the day of Judgment, of this world which hypocrites
desire, who look to be justified in their works, and not of the last judgment,
which godly men ought to pray for, and to cry without ceasing, Rev. 22.
Come Lord Jesus.

* 707. Amos 5.18. with Matthew. 24.30. and Rev. 6.10.

The former place speaks of a profane or scoffing desire, either as daring and
provoking God to bring that once to pass, which he has so long threatened. Or
as believing that the day should never come to pass; or by an impudent
presumption, as if God coming to Judgment should find them innocent, or less
guilty than they were adjudged to be, and so they are the words of profane
persons. The latter place of the desire of the faithful in humility for the
coming of Gods grace. God comes sometimes as a Judge, with vengeance to the
wicked, so in the former; and he comes by his Spirit to the godly as a
sanctifier, so in the latter.

708. Amos 5.21. I hate, I despise your feast days. Exodus 20.8. Remember thou
keep holy the Sabbath day.

God hated the feasts and solemnities of the Israelites, because they were
defiled with humane traditions, and a Pharisaicall opinion of merit. But he
does not despise the Sabbaths appointed by himself, and feasts which are kept
at his command.

709. Amos 5.26. But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your
Images, the star of your God, which you made for your selves. I will cause you
to go into captivity beyond Damascus. Act. 7.43. You took up the Tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your God Rempham, figures which you made to worship
them, and I will carry you beyond Babylon.

Romans 16.19. 1 Esd. 8.17.
Stephen cites this Prophecy, though in diverse words, yet in the same sense;
so Christ and his Apostles cite other places of the Old Testament. Moloch and
Rempham were the Idols of the Ammonites. The Israelites of Damascus by
Cyromedia were carried further into Persia, and the Country of the Caspians
beyond Babylon.

* 710. Amos 5.26. with Acts 7.43.

The places have some seeming differences, but thus reconciled; The former
place uses the words: the latter place, the matter and sense of those words
which accorded to the institution, and transposed some words for perspicuity
and evidence. Rempham in the latter place is added or put for Chiun, if by
Chiun (as some will) the Planet Saturn is meant. Plautus in his Penulus calls
the Ciun, and the Egyptian Anubis calls Cyon in Greek. Plutarch conceives to
be the same with Saturn, then its the same with Rempham. Besides Rephan in the
Coptick language, a Tongue extant at this day, (partly consisting of Greek, and
partly of old Egyptian) is used for Saturn, as Kircherus says. We know the
Septuagint was writ in the Land of Egypt, at the instance of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, where the Translators using Rephan, the noted name for Saturn
instead of Chiun; altered the word and retained the sense a liberty lawfully
assumed by the most faithful Interpreters. And probably Saint Stephen spoke to
the Jews in their own language. But Saint Luke writing in Greek, alleges his
words according to the Septuagint Translation. And whereas Saint Stephen adds
to worship them, it is but an amplification of the meaning which changes not
the sense at all, only show the end of their making such a God. Lastly, One
place names beyond Damascus. The other beyond Babylon. Saint Stephen only
more clearly Interprets what the Prophet meant, for 2 Kings 16.9. Damascus was
not far from thence.

712. Amos 8.14. They shall fall and never rise up again. 1 Cor. 11.22. We
shall all rise.

The first place speaks of a resurrection from sin to grace, or from death to
life, which is denied to impenitent sinners. But the latter speaks of the
general resurrection of our bodies at the last day.

OBADIAH HIS PROPHECY.
HE Prophesies against the Idumeans. He comfort the Jews, and promises
grace and help to the people of God. He prophesied in the year 3337.

713. OBad. Verse. 15. As thou have done it shall be done unto thee. Rev. 18.6.
Double unto her double.

In both places is manifested the just revenge of God; he is commanded to mix
double for Babylon, according to her works; thereby to show that the Kingdom
of Antichrist shall be most miserably destroyed and trod down.

714. Obad. Verse. 21. And Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion. Matthew. 1.21.
Jesus shall save his people from their sins.

The Prophet means ministerial Saviors, that is, Jer. 3.18. 1 Timothy 4.16. Jam.
5.20. Isa. 53.11. Joh. 1.29. Ephesians. 1.7.
the Apostles and other Ministers of the Church, who do serve for the salvation
of those that believe in Christ, by the ministry of the word, and not by the
merit of their works; and these turning sinners from their evil ways, do save
their souls from death. Christ Jesus is the only Savior who takes away the
sins of the world, in whom we have redemption by his blood, and remission of
our sins, according to the riches of his grace, nor is there salvation in any
other. Act. 4.12.

JONAH HIS PROPHECY.
THe son of Amittai of the Tribe of Zebulon. He was sent to Nineveh; the
Metropolis of Assyria to Preach. First when he refused, he was cast into the
Sea, swallowed by a Fish, and the third day he was cast on the Shore; then
being sent again to Nineveh, he was angry because God spared them upon their
repentance, therefore he was reprehended by God. He prophesied in the year 3110.

715. JON. 1.3. Jonas rose up to flee unto Tharses from the presence of the
Lord. Verse. 9. I fear the Lord the God of Heaven, who has made the Sea and the
dry Land.

Jonas would not flee from God, so much, as to escape his office by flying.
Verse. 9. In the midst of the tempest he gives the Mariners an account of his
Religion, and of his flight, confessing that for his disobedience that great
tempest was sent.

716. Jon. 1.10. Jonas flees to Tharsis from the presence of the Lord. Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

Jonas was not ignorant that no man could so flee from the face of the Lord,
but he thought that if he forsook the holy Land, then all divine apparitions to
him would cease; and that God would then call some other man to the office he
had laid upon him.

717. Jon. 2.6. The earth with her bars was about me for ever. Verse. 10. The
Fish cast Jonas on the dry Land.

Jonas thought in the belly of the Whale that he should remain there, but God
brought him forth, and showed thereby that he had power over life and death.

718. Jon. 3.4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Verse. 10. God
spared them.

The divine commination was conditional, if they repented not; but because
they did embrace the Word of God, and detesting their wickedness, Jer. 10.7,
8, 9, 10.
they did turn to the Lord with all their hearts, God spared them. Of such God
means speaking thus, If I speak against a Kingdom or a Nation, that I will
root it out, and that Nation repents of their evil ways, I will repent that I
thought to do so to them.

719. Jon. 3.4. Jonas foretold the overthrow of Nineveh, and it was not
performed. Deuteronomy. 28.22. If a Prophet speak in the name of the Lord, and that
thing comes not to pass, the Lord has not spoken it, but the Prophet has
spoken it presumptuously.

That Sermon of Jonas was not so much a prophecy as a commination. Moses
speaks not of comminations and Prophesies which have a condition included, but
of such Prophesies as are absolute, as Samuel foresaid to Saul, that two men
should meet him.

720. Jon. 3.9. Who knows whether God will return and repent? Mal. 3.6. I the
Lord change not. Numb. 23.19. Jon. 1.7.

Repentance and passions of men are attributed to God, not properly but
figuratively, and by way of comparison, and by Anthropopathy, whilst God shows
himself as a man repenting; otherwise with God there is no change. Jam. 1.17.


721. Jon. 4.11. In Nineveh were more then sixscore thousand persons, which
partly by want of age, and partly by simplicity did not know their right hand
from their left. Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is prone to evil
from his youth.

Between the right and the left hand they did not know the difference, who were
yet so young as to be free from actual sins, and others in years that were
simple and sincere.

MICAH HIS PROPHECY.
THe Morasihite against the Kings, the Judges, the Priests and false Prophets
in Judah and Israel. He threatens perdition to impenitent sinners, and
promises salvation to the Saints which remained. He prophesied in the year
3197.

723. MIcah 5.2. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little amongst the
thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is, to be
Ruler in Israel. Matthew. 2.6. And thou Bethlehem in the Land of Judah, art not
the least amongst the Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a Governor
that shall rule my people Israel.

The Prophet calls it Bethlehem Ephrata, and Matthew, Bethlehem Judah, for a
difference from an other City so called in the Tribe of Zabulon. It was indeed
a little Town before Christ's coming, before Christ was born, but afterward it
became a most noble City, because the Messiah was born there. Matthew cites the
place of the Prophet faithfully, which the Pharisees had corrupted, and sets
down the words which the Pharisees speak unto Herod.

Micah 5.2. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, out of thee shall he come forth unto me
that shall be Ruler in Israel. Joh. 7.27. Whence Christ is, no man knows.

The Prophet expressly names the place of Christ's nativity; the Jews not
knowing Christ to be the true God, did mingle his temporal generation with his
eternal, contending amongst themselves: Does not the Scripture say, that being
of the seed of David, Christ should come from the City of David?

* Micah 5.2. with Matthew. 2.6. Bethlehems both Texts speak of that in Judah,
The thousands of Judah. The latter says, The Princes of Judah. The Tribes of
Israel being divided into thousands, every one had a head or Prince, whereupon
St Matthew instead of thousands says Princes. Aleph signifies both a thousand
and a Commander over a thousand. Thou art not the least, though thou be little.
The words in Matthew are either to be taken as spoken by the Jews or as the
Evangelists, as spoken by the chief Priest and Scribes to Herod, for the place
of Christ's birth, called not the least; either reading the words of Micah
interrogatively in a negative sense: or varying the Text out of ignorance, or
of set purpose before Herod. Or as they are spoken by the Evangelist, Bethlehem
was little when David was born there: not little but famous; for and after the
true son of David, and son of God, was born there.

724. Micah 7.5. Trust ye not in a friend. 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all
things.

The first place is a rule of Prudence needful for Charity. The Prophet bids
us not to suspect ill of all men, but he complains of the corrupt manners of
his times, when men could believe no man; therefore he says, we must deal
circumspectly, which is agreeing to Charity, lest we be defrauded by craft or
malice. Christ himself did not trust himself with the Jews, Joh. 2.25, 26.
because he knew all men, and knew what was in man.

725. Micah 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned. Verse. 9. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.

The people of Israel being miserably afflicted, could not boast in the sight
of God of their innocence, therefore they ought patiently to endure Gods
corrections; but before their enemies being innocent, they did rise up by
divine help. The Babylonians were formerly to the Israelites as the Turks and
Tartars are now adays to the Christians, afflicting us without cause, though
in the sight of God we are not without fault.

NAHUM HIS PROPHECY, THE ELKOSHITE.
HE Prophesies against the Assyrians. He denounces destruction to the
Ninivites an hundred years after Jonas, he comforts the Jews, preaching unto
them the message of peace.

725. NAhum 1.2. The Lord avengeth and is furious. Psalm 103.8. The Lord is
very pitiful, long suffering, and full of mercy.

God is jealous, a severe Judge and revenger, not pardoning the sins and
wickedness of impenitent sinners; but he is most merciful as a tender Father
to the godly, and such as be penitent.

726. Nahum 1.9. Affliction shall not rise up the second time. Romans 1.28. The
wicked shall be punished in this world, when they are delivered up to a
reprobate sense, to do those things which are not convenient, and in the world
to come with eternal destruction.

Justice does not punish twice sufficiently for the same fault; but it is not
disagreeing to justice to inflict diverse degrees of punishments for the same
fault: so temporal punishments to the wicked, are but the beginning of
eternal punishments. But the Prophet teaches here, that God will so deal with
the Assyrians in the Land of Judha, that there shall be no need of a second
judgment.

727. Nahum 1.15. For the wicked shall no more pass through thee. 2 Kings.
24.1. Chap. 25.1. Nebuchadnezzar invaded the Land of Judah and spoiled it.

The Prophet speaks of Senacherib, that he should come no more into the Land of
Judah, for he was killed by his own sons. Also the words of the Prophet may
be understood concerning the perfect blessedness of the next world.

HABAKKUK HIS PROPHECY.
HE foretells to the Jews when they sinned, their destruction by the Chaldeans.
He comforts the faithful with the coming of the Messiah, and the destruction
of the Babylonians. He prays for the ignorant. He prophesied in the year 3290.

728. HAb. 1.5. Behold you amongst the heathen and regard, for I will work a
work in your days, which you will not believe though it be told you. Act.
13.41. Paul refers these words to the resurrection of Christ.

The Apostle compares the resurrection of Christ with the wonderful
deliverance of the Jews from the bondage of Babylon, which though their
forefathers would not believe, yet they found it to be true; so their posterity
must needs acknowledge that Christ was raised from the dead.

729. Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his faith. Matthew. 9.2. Jesus seeing
their faith.

Every one shall live by his own faith to eternal life; but another man's faith
or prayers may obtain from God for us temporal benefits or deliverance. In the
latter place Christ speaks not only of their faith, who brought the man to him
that was sick of the Palsy, but of his faith also.

730. Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his faith. Luke 10.28. Do this and live.

We live and are justified by faith, not for our says, but because by faith we
lay hold on Christ. Do this, says Christ, to the Lawyer, that from the Law he
might learn to know his own weakness, and not that by observing the Law he
might deserve life, for by the Law, Romans 3.9. Gal. 3.24.
no man is justified in the sight of God.

* Hab. 2.4. with Luke 10.28. The former speaks of our living in difficulties
by faith alone; the latter speaks of Christ's answer to one that thought he
could live by the Law, which was to convince him by the Law, that he could not
expect life in his deeds, but by his faith in Christ: Besides no man can do
this without faith. So as though we live by faith alone, yet that faith which
makes us live, is not alone, but makes us do this.

731. Hab. 2.4. with 1 These. 3.8. Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord.

We live by our own faith, as to justification and salvation; we live
comfortably when we see the faith of others; and so the first place, the just
man lives to justification, etc. by his own faith. Paul and the rest of the
brethren were comforted exceedingly, when they knew the Thessalonians stood
fast in the Lord.

ZEPHANIAH HIS PROPHECY.
THe son of Cushi, he prophesies to the unbelieving Jews their destruction
by their Neighbor Nations, and to those Nations their extermination by other
Nations; But deliverance to believers. He prophesied about the year 3451.

732. ZEph. 1.5. He prophesied In the days of Josiah of the evils which should
come upon Judah. 2 King. 23.3. Josias and all the people made a covenant with
the Lord, that they should walk after God with all their heart.

The Prophecy by a legal commination moved both King and people to manifest
their zeal. But he frighted the wicked Hypocrites, and such as were averse from
God, by threatening them, that so they might forsake their sins.

733. Zeph. 1.7. The day of the Lord is at hand. 2 These. 2.3. Be not terrified
as though the day of the Lord were at hand.

In the former place by the day of the Lord is understood the neernesse of the
Babylonish captivity. In the latter the coming of the Lord to Judgment, the
time whereof is not for us to know.

734. Zeph. 3.7. I said, surely thou will fear me. Verse. 7. But they corrupted
their own doing.

I said] The Lord uses that word after the manner of men, not as though he had
failed of his hope, for all things are known to him before they be; but as if
he should say, Who would think you should be so hardened, that my very
threatenings should not move you?

HAGGAI HIS PROPHECY.
HE upbraids the Jews for that they did not rebuild the Temple, and exhorts
them to build it, and he describes the magnificence of the second Temple. He
prophesied after the captivity of Babylon under Darius Hystaspes, in the year
3444.

735. HAggai 1.8 Bring wood and build the house. Isai. 66.1. Thus says the
Lord, Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestole, what house is that you
will build unto me?

The rebuilding of the Temple was accepted with God, for the holy convocation,
and the worship in it to Gods glory; that was with the Priesthood and
Leviticall Rites a Type of Christ; unto whose coming only it was to endure.

736. Haggai 2.3. You that saw this house in its first glory, and how do you
see it now? Is it not in comparison of it as nothing? Verse 9. The glory of
this latter house shall be greater than that of the former house, says the
Lord of Hosts.

The structure indeed of this house, did not answer the Majesty of the first
house built by Solomon. Yet the spiritual glory of this latter house shall be
greater than the former house, because the Lord himself came into it, and
preached in it, disputed, and wrought great miracles there.

737. Haggai 2.4. Do so, for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts. Zach.
1.12. O Lord of Hosts, how long will it be ere thou have pity on Jerusalem?

In the first place the Prophet comforts the people by the hope of promises in
Christ, promising that God would be present there with his people after the
captivity of Babylon. In the latter Christ intercedes for his Church, which
has sinned against God, and was punished by a just judgment of God with a
Babylonian captivity for seventy years.

* 738. Haggai 2.4. with Zach. 1.12.

The former place is conditional. I am with you if you do so. The latter
shows, that they were in affliction, and so it implies they had broken their
condition.

739. Haggai 2.6. Yet a little while and I will shake the Heaven and the Earth,
and the desire of all Nations shall come. This Prophecy was fulfilled after
five hundred years under Augustus Caesar, Luke 2.11.

With God a thousand years are but as one day, or one watch in the night.

ZECHARIAH HIS PROPHECY.
THE son of Barachiah. He warns the Jews to repent, to build the Temple, he
makes mention of his Visions, and explains them by the effusion of the Spirit
of grace and prayer. He prophesied after the return from Babylon, in the year
of the world 3456.

740. Zech. 1.3. Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. Joh. 6.44. No man
comes unto me unless my Father draw him.

The first place is legal, requiring of us what we ought, and not what we can
do. The latter is Evangelicall, for no man comes unto God, unless God draw him
by his Spirit. Jer. 31.18.
Therefore we must pray diligently, Convert me o Lord that I may be converted,
because thou o Lord are my God.

741. Zech. 1.17. Chap. 2.10. The Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet
chose Jerusalem. Ephesians. 1.4. God the Father chose us in Christ before the
foundations of the world.

The election of a certain people to be a visible Church, in the first place is
taken metonymically, for by that deed God shows that he has confirmed the
election of Jerusalem. In the latter God speaks of our election unto eternal
life.

742. Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Isa.
3.1. Behold the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem the whole stay of
bread.

In the first place is contained the promise of God to the faithful that keep
his Covenant in the latter is the pronouncing of judgment against the
obstinate Jews. God is said to have kept his people as the apple of his eye so
long as they were obedient. Deuteronomy. 32.10. Psalm. 17.8.
But temporal punishments inflicted on the wicked do not infringe the truth of
his promise and of divine performance.

743. Zech. 3.9. I will remove the iniquity of his land in one day. Rev. 13.8.
Christ slain from the beginning of the world.

In one day is the performance of Christ's passion, who dying for our sins
restored us unto life. But he was slain from the beginning of the world in Gods
determinations by election, virtue, eficacy, and acceptance, and in respect of
the fruits of it, which redounded to the Church under the Old Testament.

744. Zech. 6.13. He shall sit and rul^ upon his throne. Isa. 9 7. He shall sit
upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, Luke 1.33.

Christ in respect of his divine nature has his throne from everlasting to
everlasting. But in respect of his humanity, being he is born of the seed of
David according to the flesh, the Lord God has given him a throne, that he may
reign over the house of Jacob for ever.

745. Zech. 11.12. They weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. Matthew.
27.9. Then was fulfilled what was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, they took
thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they did value.

Eusebius says, De Demonstrat. l. 10. c. 4.
that Jeremiahs name was put for Zechariahs name, by the error of the
Scrivener. Out of Jeremiah some make the computation, where he makes mention of
seventeen shekels, which make thirty pieces of silver, Jer. 32.9.

746. Zech. 13.7. Awake o sword against my shepherd, and against the man that
is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts; smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall
be scattered. Joh. 10.10. No man takes away my life from me.

The Prophet mentions God the Father commanding in the name of the whole
Trinity, whose words outwardly are common to the three Persons, and undivided,
that his shepherd, namely Christ, should be slain, that contradicts not Christ's
words, who willingly laid down his life for us.

747. Zech. 13.7. The sheep shall be scattered. Joh. 17.12. Those that thou
gav^st unto me I have kept them. Chap. 18.9, 10. I have not l^st one.

God the Father speaks of the scattering, Christ of the keeping. That
scattering takes not away Christ's keeping, because none of the Apostles which
his Father gave to him perished but the son of perdition.

MALACHIE HIS PROPHECY.
HE complains of the wickedness of the people of the Jews and the Priests. He
comforts the godly. Threatens the wicked. Exhorts all to repentance and faith
in Christ. He was the last that prophesied before Christ's incarnation. In the
year of the world 3513.

748. MAl. 1.2. Was not Esau Jacobs brother? says tht Lord, yet I loved Jacob
and hated Esau. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. There is no accepting of persons with God.

God is a most free agent, and does all things that he does according to his
own good pleasure, he respects not the external quality of the person; nor his
condition, nation, sex, riches, poverty, hatred, etc. so he loved Jacob,
revealed himself unto him, gave to his posterity the Land of Cannan. He
neglected Esau who was Isaacs eldest son, and most beloved of his Father, nor
was he bound by any Laws to do otherwise unto him.

749. Mal. 1.8. If you offer the blind, the lame, the sick for sacrifice, is it
not evil? Psalm. 50.8. I will not reprove thee for thy burnt sacrifices.

The Prophet speaks of sacrifices, the Psalmist of the sacrificers. Sacrifices
were to be offered unto God without spot or fault* not blind, or lame, but
without s^^rs, scabs or blisters, Lev. 22.22, 25.
for Christ of whom they were but but Types, was an obligation, most pure and
absolute and free from all spots, for our sins.

750. Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his mouth. Mat. 22.29. You err not knowing the Scriptures of God.

The first place is concerning the office of the Priests, who were bound to
keep knowledge that the people might seek for knowledge at their mouth, Levit.
10.11.
and they were to answer the people that inquired concerning the Law. The
latter is concerning the ignorance of the Priests, who sit upon Moses chair,
contrary to Gods commandment and their own duty, which was the cause that the
people together with the Priests and the Scribes ran to error.

Hitherto we have described the Reconciliations of appearing contrarieties in
the Canon of the Old Testament, for the space of four thousand years; from the
creation of the world, from Adam, Noah, Abraham and Solomon, until the time
that Christ came. Now follow those of the New Testament, from Christ's Nativity
to the end of the world.

The End of the Prophets.
RECONCILING Of Places of the Nevv-Testament.
THE Scripture of the New Testament is the Word of God written, after Christ
was revealed, by the Apostles and Evangelists, in the Greek Tongue, some few
things were written in Hebrew, namely St. Matthews Gospel, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews. Eusch. l. 3 c. 26. l. 6. c. 11. 19. Jeron. in Catal. Scriptorum,
It is divided into Evangelical and Epistolical Books.

Those are the Evangelical books, which contain a part of the glad tidings, or
the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; with the History from his Nativity to
his Ascension into Heaven, at the thirty fourth year of his Age.

The Gospel of St. Matthew.
IT contains the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, his Birth, Education, his
Prophetical Office in Preaching, Miracles; his Priestly Office in the Oblation
of himself for our sins; and his Kingly Office in his rising from the dead, and
the Government of his Church.

* 749. MAT. 1.1. The book of the Generation, etc. Isa. 53.8. Who shall declare
his Generation?

The former place speaks of his Generation as Man, as the Son of Mary, and
supposed Son of Joseph; The latter place, not according to his Humanity, but
Divinity, so who shall declare the Excellency and Manner of his Generation; or
if the Prophet must be interpreted to speak according to his Humanity, then we
must say, there is a very few only can declare his Generation; neither is it
possible to express his Humane Generation to the full, because that is so
wonderful.

750. Mat. 1.1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 1.4. Tit.
3.9. Avoid foolish and endless genealogies.

The knowledge of Christ's genealogy is more profitable, that we may know Jesus
to be the true Messiah promised, of the seed of Abraham, and David. Paul
condemns the madness of those who tell men's fortunes by their Nativities, and
such as move unprofitable questions concerning genealogies, which the Jews
addicted themselves much to, neglecting the study of godliness; those he bids
us to avoid as vain, and idle, and Heathenish fancies.

751. Mat. 1.1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,
the son of Abraham. Luke 3.23, 38. Who was the son of Heli, Nagge, Matthat,
etc. of Adam, of God.

Matthew and Luke differ not; Matthew describes the genealogy of Christ by the
Line of Solomon to Joseph. Luke by Nathan, another son of David, from Joseph's
Father in law, who was called Eli, to David, and so far as Adam the father of
mankind.

* Mat. 1.1. with 1 Timothy 1.4.

The first speaks of a certain Genealogy, and generation; the second speaks of
an uncertain and vexatious generation. There were some, who probably being Jews
naturally, and turned Christians, were addicted to these genealogies, that they
might have a pretense of claiming kindred of Christ; they made no end of
drawing down their lines of descent from David, or else they would make a
scrupulous search after genealogies about Christ, about which there were great
controversies in the Church, when as Herod had burnt all public Records that
were of that nature. Matthew and Mark had set down what was needful herein.

* 752. Mat. 1.5. Solomon begat Booz of Rahab.

Doubt. How could Salmon beget children of Rahab the Harlot, if he entered not
into the land of Canaan, for none which came out of Egypt was to enter in,
except Joshuah and Caleb?

Answ. Although Salmon came out of Egypt, yet not being twenty years old, he
was not under the Curse of the Lord, Number. 14.29.

753. Mat. 1.6. David the King began Solomon. Luke 3.31. Who was the son of
Nathan, who was the son of David.

Matthew observes the natural order descending from Fathers to the Sons. Luke
ascends from the Sons to the Fathers. Matthew by Solomon and his posterity
reckons the forefathers of Christ from David to Salathiel; Luke by Nathan and
his posterity; for Solomon's race being extinct, Christ was born of the
posterity of Nathan according to the flesh.

* Mat. 1.6. with Luke 3.31.

Matthew observes the order of nature descending from the Fathers to the Sons;
on the contrary, Luke inverts the Order ascending from the Sons to the Fathers.
2. Matthew reckons not all, he begins from Abraham only; Luke accounts all, and
ascends even to Adam, and God himself. Matthew begins at Abraham; for God chose
the seed of Abraham to beget Christ on, and therefore he only mentions Abraham's
posterity. Luke considering both Jews and Gentiles had need of Christ, and that
he was promised to all Adams posterity, he deduced his Original from him, and
so from God. 3. Matthew derives Christ from David, by Solomon and his posterity
to Salathiel: Luke by Nathan and his posterity. Matthew recites the legal
Genealogy, that line by which the kingdom was conveyed from Solomon to
Salathiel, which King ended in Jechoniah, and after when the kingdom was
translated to Nathans posterity. Luke derives it from Nathan by a natural
Genealogy. 4. Matthew and Mark differ in accounting the Genealogy from
Salathiel to Joseph the husband of Mary, and though some think these were the
same which had different names yet it is not to be imagined, in regard there are
so many together, and their numbers do not agree; some would have Matthew to
repeat the Genealogy by Mary, Luke, by Joseph.

* 754. Mat. 1.8. Joram begat Ozias, with 2 Chro. 22.1. And the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son King, 2 Kin. 12. 2 Chro. 24. 2 Chro.
25.1.25. 2 Chro. 26. 1 Chro. 3.10, 11.

Joram begat Ozias, but not immediately, for three Kings came between, Ahaziah,
Joash, and Amaziah, 1 Chro. 3.11, 12. It is likely those three Kings were
omitted, because Matthew intended to keep within the compass of fourteen
generations here as well as afterward; and some think these three Kings were
omitted, rather than others, because Gods curse lay on Joram for marrying of
Ahabs daughter, to the fourth generation, as his blessing was on Jehu for
destroying Ahabs posterity, 2 Kin. 10.30. I will visit the sins of the fathers
upon the children to the third and fourth generation. In sign of his Judgment
he blots out of this line to the fourth generation. It is the manner of
Scripture very often to leave men's names out of certain Stories and Records, to
show a distaste at some evil in them: So all Cains posterity is blotted out of
the book of the Chronicles, as it was out of the world by the flood.

* 755. Mat. 1.11. Josias begat Jechonias. 1 Chro. 3.15, 16. Josias begat
Joakim, and Joakim begat Jechoniah his son.

Joakim is left out to make up fourteen generations from David to the Captivity
into Babylon; it may be the reason why Joakim was not inserted, was, because he
that was neither fit to be lamented, nor to be buried like one of the Kings of
Judah, Jer. 22.18, 19. was more unfit to come into the line of the Kings of
Judah, that leads to Christ.

Some conceive, because mention is made of Jechonias, his brethren must be
meant Jehojakim, because Jechoniah had no brethren, and that his brethren are
here mentioned, because two of them were Kings, Jehoahaz and Zedekiah: Yet were
they all noted for calamity, to show, that it was no strange thing to see the
Royal Stock so low afterward: Yet Jechoniah is said to have a brother called
Zedekiah, 1 Chro. 3.16. which cannot be Zedekiah his Uncle, that was King after
him, for he was reckoned there, verse. 15. as the son of Josiah.

756. Mat. 1.12. Jeconias begat Salathiel. Luke 3.27. Salathiel was the son of
Neri, Melchi, Addi.

Jeconias died without children; Salathiel was the natural son of Neri, born
from David by Nathan; the legal son of Jeconias, because he succeeded him by
right in the Kingdom.

* Mat. 1.12. with Luke 3.27.

Jechonias was father to Salathiel, as Baasha was to Ahab, 1 Kin. 20.34. not by
generation, but by predecession, for Jechonias in very deed was childless, Jer.
22.30. and the natural father of Salathiel was Neri, Luke 3.27. yet he is said
to beget him, because he declared and owned him for his next heir and
successor. As God is said to beget Christ on the day of his resurrection, Psa.
2.7. Act. 13.^^ that is, declared him to be (...) son.

* Mat. 1.12. with Luke 3.27.

Salathiel was the son of Neri by nature, and the son of Jechonias legally in
regard of succession in the same kingdom. After this manner Zedekias is the
brother of Jechonias or Jehojakim, 2 Chro. 36.10. and uncle, 2 Kin. 14.17. and
son, 1 Chro. 3.16. His brother by generation, and his son by right of
succession; on this manner Matthew and Luke are reconciled in the Genealogy of
Christ, for the one follows the natural order, as Luke, and the other the legal.

Mat. 1.12. And Salathiel begat Zerobabel. 1 Chro. 3.19. And the sons of
Pedaiah were Zerobabel -- Selathiel begat Pedaiah, 1 Chro. 3.18. Jeconiah begat
Salathiel, 1 Chro. 3.17.

Zerobabel was either another than that which is meant in 1 Chr. 3. or else
Salathiel died without children, and Pedaiah took his wife, and raised up seed
to his brother according to the Law, and then he was the legal son of
Salathiel, and the natural son of Pedaiah, or else the masculine line of
Solomon's house failed in Jechonias, the dignity turned over to the line of
Nathan, first settled upon Salathiel, but first showed it self eminently in
Zerobabel, therefore when mention is made of Zerobabel, constantly he is called
the son of Pedaiah, a man of no action, but obscure; and he was called the son
of Salathiel, in whom the head of the Family began, for Jechoniah was as a
signet plucked off, Jer. 22.24. and Zerobabel was set on again in his stead,
Hag. 2.23.

* 757. Mat. 1.13. Zerobabel begat Abiud, with Luke 3.27. Which was the son of
Rhesa, which was the son of Zerobabel. 1 Chronicles. 3.1^), 20. there is no mention
of Abiud, or of Rhesa.

In Scripture its usual for one man to have several names, so its to be
understood of these; the eldest son of Zerobabel, to whom the head lately
fallen to that house was to descend, was called Mesullam, either in memorial of
Solomon, the glory of that House, or from the signification of the word, which
imports, Requited; or from the peaceable building and inhabiting Jerusalem
after their return from Babel; Mesullam was called also Abiud, in remembrance
of his fathers glory, and his second brother Hananiah was called also Rhesa,
that is the chief, because Christ descended from him. Or else we must say, that
here the Old Testament is silent, and neither Abiud, nor any of his posterity
mentioned 1 Chronicles. 31.9. It may be the Evangelist had the rest either by
tradition, or out of civil Records.

* 758. Mat. 1.22, 23. All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, etc. Isa. 7.14
Behold a Virgin, etc.

Not that the Prediction was the cause of the accomplishment, the
accomplishment rather the cause of the Prediction; but this is said to show,
that the accomplishment was necessarily fulfilled in due time, and both the one
and the other concurred. Doubt. That in Isaiah was meant, say the Jews, of the
Prophets wife, this of Matthew, of Mary. The Prophets wife did bring forth,
Chap. 8. Shearjashub; the sign was given to Asa, therefore not so long after to
be fulfilled. Answ. It is usual to give signs of things soon to come, which
happen long after, 1 Samuel 2.34. 1 Kin. 22.25. There were two signs set forth by
the Prophet in Isa. 7. The one of a temporal deliverance, in token whereof he
brings his son Shearjashub, ver. 14. The other of an eternal deliverance by
the Son of God. who was to come of a Virgin. He could not call his own son
Emmanuel, etc, Esa. 8.8, 10. and to ascribe such wisdom to him; the Jews say,
Almah does not strictly signify a Virgin. But there are three words which
signify and betoken Virginity in the Hebrew: The first, Naarah, any young
woman, whether a Virgin or not. Secondly, Bethulah, a Virgin, though she be not
young, and sometime it may be otherwise taken. Thirdly, Almah, properly a young
Virgin, and not at all touched, it imports youth and virginity, which is the
word here, and so not applicable to the Prophets Wife, or any save Mary. It had
been no wonder for any woman that had known a man to bear a son, the wonder
was, that a Virgin, or one that knew no man, should bear a son.

759. Mat. 2.1. Behold wise men came from the East to Jerusalem. Chap. 11.25. I
confess to thee Lord, because thou have hid these things from the wise, etc.

The Wise men were led to Christ, not by humane, Col. 2.3. Romans 1.25. Mat.
23.23. Luke 11.12. 1 Cor. 1.26.
but divine wisdom, acknowledging that in Christ were hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge; Christ rejects no such wise men, but such as are not wise
from Gods Spirit, and yet think themselves wise, following the wisdom of this
world; as the Heathen Philosophers, and the Pharisees amongst the Jews, and
those that are wise now adays with fleshly wisdom.

* Mat. 2.1. with Mat. 11.5.

The former place speaks of some Wise men, whether worldly wise, Astrologers,
Wizards, etc. The latter says, God revealed these things not to the wise, i,
e. worldly wise, or wise in their own opinions, but to the men, who became as
children in their opinion, and were as children ready to be instructed; if
worldly wise men would leave their high thoughts and opinions of themselves,
and become docible, and little children (as these wise men were) they might
understand the mind of God, and see Christ. The former place is understood of
such Wise men as were so in the opinion of the World, and by Profession, though
not so in the opinion of themselves. The latter place is understood of such, as
are wise in themselves, and that the world adjudges wise.

* 760. Mat. 2.23. He shall be called a Nazarene. Isa. 11.1. There shall come
forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse.

There is not any place which in direct words calls Christ a Nazarene; The
former place says, that it might be fulfilled which is written by the
Prophets. But this place is equivalent to it; some things are spoken
Aenigmatically by the Prophets, some things Allegorically: Every thing that is
spoken Aenigmatically is spoken Allegorically, but every thing which is spoken
Allegorically is not therefore spoken Aenigmatically. This was spoken
Aenigmatically and Allegorically of Christ, for, Isa. 11.1. Christ is said to
be a rod or branch Nezer, which indifferently signifies a branch, and the City
of Nazareth, one and the same word denoting Christ, and the place where Christ
should be born. There were three sorts of Nazarenes: First, Those who were so
by profession of Moses his Law, Number. 6. Secondly, Those who lived in Nazareth
the City. Thirdly, Those who were Votives and Natives; Christ was said to be a
Nezer, or Nazarene the second way.

761. Mat. 3.1. John the Baptist preached in the wilderness. Luke 3.3. He came
into all the Country about Jordan preaching by the Desert.

Matthew means not the inward remote parts separated from the company of men,
but the fore-parts, a Mountainous Country lying about Jordan.

* Mat. 3.1. with Luke 3.1.

The former place says no more than that he was preaching in the wilderness,
and the latter, that he was in the Country about Jordan preaching, which are
thus reconciled: The wilderness is meant either that which is called so, and
yet had in it Villages and Cities, as Jos. 15.61, 62. 1 Samuel 23.14, 24. some of
which probably were in the Territories, and under the command of Hebron, the
place where John was born: for there is mention of the Cities of Hebron, 2 Samuel
2.3. Or the Wilderness is taken for the inmost Wilderness and Desert, where was
no Habitations of men. John lived, and was brought up in the former wilderness,
and when he came to thirty years old he began to preach first to his neighbors
and friends, and then afterward came down into the Country about Jordan, and
preached there likewise.

762. Mat. 3.14. John knew Christ before he baptized him. Joh. 1.33. I knew him
not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, said unto me, Upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit descending and resting upon him, he it is that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost.

John had a knowledge of Christ before his baptism, by inchoation, but that
knowledge was confirmed and consummate, when in baptism he saw the Heavens
open, and the Spirit of God descending upon him like a Dove, and so by an
outward revelation joined with an inward illumination, he pronounced that Jesus
was the Messiah, and the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

763. Mat. 3.16. The Spirit of God descended and came upon Christ. Luke 1.35.
Christ had the holy Ghost before, Gal. 4.6.

At the baptism of Christ the Holy Ghost came upon him like a Dove, to declare
that Jesus Christ is the Mediator between God and man, according to the
prophecy. The spirit of the Lord was upon me, Isa. 61.1.
because he has anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek, to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord: Psa. 45.8.
who being to take upon him the Office of Mediator, is anointed with spiritual
oil.

764. Mat. 4.2. And when Jesus had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered, and the Tempter came and said unto him. Luke 4.1. He was
tempted forty days.

The internal temptation lasted forty days, then came the devil to Christ in
an external and corporal shape, and spoke unto him.

765. Mat. 4.8. The devil at the third temptation took him up to a mountain.
Luke 4.5. The devil at the second temptation took him into a high mountain.

In the holy Scriptures (says Augustine) there is no contradiction, where any
thing is related by diverse Authors, and not observed the same way. De Cons.
Eccles. Matthew places the temptations in order. But Luke by Hysterosis puts
the second temptation after the third.

766. Mat. 4.12, 17. Jesus began to preach from the imprisonment of John the
Baptist. Joh. 1.2, 3, 4. chap. He preached before John was in prison.

Matthew passes over that which John sets down in his four first chapters.

* Mat. 4.12. with Ioh. 1. to the 4th Chap.

Matthew omits what was done and delivered by Christ in the days of John;
because it would not have been so congruous to his design; John he relates it
as supplying that which might to some have seemed a defect. Matthew tells us,
that John was imprisoned, but sets not down particularly the time of his
imprisonment; for these words, When Jesus had heard that John was imprisoned,
does not imply, that immediately upon Christ's being tempted John was imprisoned
(for as John relates many things were done) and Christ went into Galilee: But
that Christ when he heard of John's imprisonment began to preach and go into
Galilee.

767. Mat. 4.18. Jesus, walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon
and Andrew, casting a net into the Sea, and he said, Follow me. Luke 5.1. He
stood by the Lake of Genesareth. v. 3. Ascending into Simons ship, he bade them
put off a little from the land, and he sat and taught the people out of the
ship; as he ended his speech, he said to Simon, Lanch into the deep. v. 10.
Fear not, henceforth thou shall catch men.

Here we have need of a threefold reconciliation; Matthew says, that Christ
walking toward Sea, called Peter; Luke in a little ship: But Matthew speaks of
his first call; and Luke of his confirmation in it. 2. Matthew makes no mention
of the Miracle, but what he let pass, Luke describes. 3. Matthew calls it, the
sea of Galilee, Luke, the Lake of Genesareth; because the Hebrews call all
waters Seas: Matthew respects the Province, Luke, the banks by the next City.

* Mat. 4.18. with Luke 5.1, 3, etc.

This is not contrariety, but illustration, one explains another; the story at
full in them all is thus: As Jesus walked by the sea of Genesareth, he saw two
ships standing there, the one whereof belonged to Peter and Andrew, and the
other to James and John. All these men being partners, had been fishing all
night, but had caught nothing, and were not stepped down out of their ships to
wash their nets, Christ passed with multitudes on the shore, enters into
Peter's ship, and thence teaches the people; and thence putting out a little
into the Main, he helped Peter to a miraculous draught of fishes, which was so
unweildy, that he was glad to beckon up James and John from the shore to come
and help them; the draught of fishes was got up and boated, and then James and
John return to the shore again, and fall to mending their net, which was rent
with helping at so great a draught. Peter seeing what was done, adoreth Christ,
and he and Andrew, being yet at sea, are called by him for fishers of men, and
bringing their ships to shore, they leave all and follow him. Christ and they
coasting a little further along the shore came to James and John, and he
calls them.

768. Mat. 5.1. Christ seeing the multitude went up into a mountain and taught
them. Luke 6.17. He came down with them and stood in the plain. Ver. 20.
Looking on his Disciples, he said, Blessed, etc.

Here is also a threefold difference; either Matthew says, that Christ
preached in the Mountain, Luke, in the field: Or Matthew says, he preached to
the people, Luke, to his Disciples: or Matthew says, before; Luke, after the
healing of the leper, Whence we conclude, that Christ repeated that Sermon a
second time.

* Mat. 5.1. with Luke 6.17.

Or it may be thus: That it was the same Sermon in both Matthew and Luke, both
reciting the doctrine of Christ. Luke making mention of a plain, Luke 6.17.
before Christ's Sermon, not passing thence to the Sermon, but from his miracles
to his Doctrine, having no intention to hint the time or place, though Matthew
would the place, not the time. Or it might be thus: Luke says not, that it was
made by Christ in a plain, or standing: Only this he says, that Christ coming
from the mountain stood in a plain place, and there wrought certain Miracles,
and then preached: Now all this might be done, and yet Christ might preach this
Sermon in the mount sitting, as St Matthew says; For the order of the story is
this: Christ being maligned of the Jews, went into the mount, and there prayed:
After a long prayer, he chose the twelve Apostles, and then came down into a
Plain and wrought miracles: but by reason of the throng, which pressed about
him to touch him, he went into the mountain again, and there preached this
Sermon to his Apostles and others that followed him.

769. Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Verse.
14. Rejoice, and be glad. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always.

Christ speaks not of all that mourn, but such as from the heart mourn for
their sins, and believe in him; Joh. 16.33. Luke 16.25. 2 Cor. 1.
whose condition in this life is sorrowful, and they suffer pressures in the
world, their mourning brings joy in this world and the world to come, and God
comforts them in all afflictions; Christ pronounces such mourners happy.

* Mat. 5.4. with Phil. 4.4.

In the former place he pronounces them blessed that seriously and truly mourn
for their own and others sins. In the latter he commands the same mourning
persons to take their portion, even to rejoice and be glad for ever.

770. Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth. Heb.
11.13. And they all confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims in the
earth.

Meek are gentle, such as with a quiet mind, endured injuries, do not resist
evil, but overcome evil with goodness, by the example of Christ; to these is
the possession of the earth promised, not simply, Romans 12.21. Mat. 11.28. 1
Cor. 3.22. Psa. 27.13, 14.16
but by right of inheritance; for the godly, though they possess nothing, are
said to possess the earth, because they have Christ who possesses all things;
and he is only rich, who ha h a quiet mind. The earth here is principally
taken, not for the element of earth, but the land of the living.

* Mat. 5.5. with Heb. ^1.13, 37, 38.

The former and the latter place both speak of meek men, such as with quiet and
patient hearts bear Gods judgments and men's injuries. The former place speaks
of their possession of the earth, because God gives a meet and convenient
portion of the earth either to them or their posterity, as he dealt with
Abraham, Isaac, etc. they had sufficient for themselves, and a promise of great
possessions, which their Posterity did enjoy. 2. If it fall out that meek
persons die in want, or banishment, yet God gives them contentation, which is
fully answerable to the inheritance of the earth, 2 Cor. 6.10. 3. The meek have
this of right (as some suppose) being the members of Christ, who is Lord of
all, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. 4. They are Kings by Christ, and after the last Judgment
they shall rule and reign with him for ever, Rev. 5.10. though for a time Gods
people may want the possession of the earth, yet in regard of their posterity,
or of having that which is equivalent to it for themselves, they do not want it.

771. Mat. 5.10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake. Ver. 12. Because great is their reward in heaven. 1 Pet. 2.10. c. 4.14.
Romans 8.18. The afflictions of this world, are not worthy of the glory
hereafter, which shall be revealed in us.

The reward here has no relation to any merit of ours, but to the free love of
God, who promises for Christ's sake a reward of his grace to them that ask him;
and crowns his gifts in us. Nor do the afflictions and sufferings of this life
merit the free rewards of eternal life.

* 772. Mat. 5.12. with Romans 8.18.

The Former place tells us, that those who are persecuted for the Gospels cause
may rejoice; because they have a great reward in heaven, not that this
persecution did merit Heaven, but because God would freely give it to such a
person as was so qualified; it is a reward, not a desert; it is of grace, not
of merit. The latter place shows, that all we can do cannot deserve heaven.

Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies, 1 John 5.16. There is a sin unto death, I do not
say, you shall pray for it.

The former place gives a general rule, the latter tells us of a particular
exception. Love your enemies so as to pray for them, unless they be such
enemies as sin a sin unto death. Love your private enemies, I do not say the
enemies of the Church, pray for them till you be clearly convinced that they
have sinned the sin unto death.

773. Mat. 5.12. Great is your reward in heaven. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace you are
saved through faith, it is the gift of God.

Our salvation properly is not a reward, but the gift of God, Romans 5.6. c.
3.28. Phil. 2.13 1 Timothy 4.8.
in respect of acquiring it, and application, conservation and perfection.

774. Mat. 5.14. You are the light of the world. Joh. 8.12. I, says Christ, am
the light of this world.

All Doctors of the Church, and all Christians enlightened by Christ are light,
not of themselves, but from Christ, of whom they receive their splendour and
divine light; or Christ is of himself the true original light, who enlightens
every man that comes into the world.

* Mat. 5.14. with Ioh. 8.12.

There be several kinds of Lights, Original, and derived, the first as the Sun,
the other as the Stars. Original is that which is the cause of all light, and
so in the latter Text, Christ is the Cause of all light and knowledge which is
saving, and in this sense John Baptist, Ioh. 1.8. is not the light, nor any
Disciple. But there is a derived light, which shines forth, but yet is
received from another; and so John was a burning and shining light or lamp,
Ioh. 5.35. and so were the Disciples, 2 Cor. 4.6. for they received their light
from Christ; and they testified of this light, and they walked as in the light.

775. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works. c. 6.1. Beware that you give not your alms before men.

All that are enlightened with the light of the Gospel must study to do good
works, Romans 13.12. That by the works themselves, the faith and godliness in our
hearts may be known to men. But in the latter place, all works of ambition and
boasting are forbidden by Christ, for hypocrites they do so, desiring to be
praised and seen of men.

* Mat. 5.16. with 6.1.

The former place speaks, that Ministers must preach so as men may have
occasion to glorify God both by their life and Doctrine. The latter place bids
both Minister and people to avoid doing any thing for vain glory, for that
hinders the glory of God. It is lawful to do good works before men to stir them
up to do the like, and to praise God: but it is not lawful to do any work to
have praise with men; it is one thing to do a good work to evidence to men our
faith, when it is doubted and accounted by men to be hypocritical: another
thing to do a good work before men to make our hearts, which are hypocritical,
to appear to be true.

* 776. Mat. 5.17. with Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law to every one
that believes.

The former place shows, Christ as God and man, came not to destroy that
mandatory part of the Law, viz. the moral part; the mandatory part is
Ceremonial, Judicial, and Moral. He has not destroyed this last, though he
has fulfilled (so much as concerned him) the first, second, yea, and the
third. He came not to destroy that part of Gods Word, concerning Righteousness
and Justice, which Moses penned by Gods Commandment, or the Prophets, i. e.
That part of Gods Word which is contained in the writings of all the Prophets
in the old Testament after Moses; He came not either by his Doctrine or
Practice to free men from the obedience thereof, or to put an end to them so as
they should be useless: But he came to fulfill them, First, By his Doctrine, 1.
Restoring the proper meaning and true use. 2. And by revealing the right way.
Secondly, By his Person he fulfilleth the Law, 1. By becoming accursed to the
Law. 2. And by perfect obedience unto the Law. Thirdly, He fulfilled the Law in
the Elect by creating faith in Christ, and by giving them the Spirit of God.
The second place tells us, Christ is the end of the Law; He ended the Ceremonial
Law, and legal Rites, the Law and Prophets being until John, Mat. 11. He was
the end of the Law, but not directly, for in general the Law was made to make
man righteous, but seeing that could not be done, the Law brings us to Christ
in whom we are righteous. 3. Christ is the end and scope aimed at, in the Old
Testament all the Prophets gave testimony of him. Christ he is the end, because
he perfectly fulfilled it: the Ceremonial Law being the substance of it, the
Moral Law by his active and passive obedience. Christ is the end of the Law, as
the Law is taken more largely for the whole Doctrine contained in Moses, Joh.
5.46. Or secondly, as the Law is taken more strictly for the Precepts of the
Moral Law in three respects: 1. Of his personal obedience which the Law
required. 2. In regard of satisfaction for the punishment due by the Law. 3. In
justifying us by Christ, to whom the Law, as a Schoolmaster, brings us.

777. Mat. 5.17. I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Gal. 3.13.
Christ came to redeem us from the curse of the law.

There is a difference between the Law and the Curse of it; as Christ has
fulfilled the Law, so must we walk in his Commandments, and by applying Christ's
satisfaction to our selves, we are said (spiritually) to fulfill the Law, from
the curse and condemnation whereof we are redeemed by Christ.

778. Mat. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother is in danger of judgment.
Ephesians. 4.6. Be angry, but sin not.

That anger is unlawful, when any one without just cause is angry, and more
with the person than the faults, for his own cause, and not for Gods cause;
Thou shall not kill. It is lawful, when for Gods glory, we are angry with their
sins, and not with the persons: Also the Apostle warns us to moderate this just
anger, that we offend not by anger against God or our Neighbor.

* Mat. 5.22. with Ephesians. 4.6.

Anger is twofold, either advised, or unadvised; the former place speaks of
unadvised anger, the latter place of advised anger. Anger is such as arises
from good principles, the love to God, guided thereby. Secondly, It has for
its end the Glory of God, of this anger the latter place. There is anger which
looks at private revenge, and springs from private injuries that is excessive
in its heat: of this in the former place.

779. Mat. 5.22. He that says to his brother Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire. Luke 24.25. O fools and slow of heart to believe. Gal. 3.1. O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?

Christ condemns a contumelious despising of our brother, and a reproachful
aspersion of foolishness: but he in his way to Emaus, calls Cleophas and his
fellows, fools, not out of a vicious desire, but for their dullness and folly,
because they believed not the Prophets, nor the Word of God, so the Apostle
called the Galatians foolish.

* 780. Mat. 5.29. If thy right eye offend thee, etc. Exodus 20. Thou shall not
kill.

The former place hints, that there is a twofold Body 1. of flesh, 2. Of sin;
now whether of these Members, whether outward, or sins, if they stand betwixt
us and Christ, we must cut them off and cast them from us. The second place
condems murder, it forbids not a man's parting with any thing, though a member
of our body, to serve Christ: It forbids us to kill our selves, but not to part
with our selves for Christ's sake or Cause.

781. Mat. 5.25. Agree with thine Adversary. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist strong in
the faith.

The first place is concerning all adversaries in general, with whom we must
agree, according to the rule of Charity. The latter is concerning the devil in
particular, whom we must always resist, being armed with heavenly weapons
against him.

782. Mat. 5.32. Whosoever puts away his wife, unless it be for fornication,
causes her to commit adultery. 1 Cor. 7.11. If she depart, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband.

Fornication or Adultery is the principal cause of divorce betwixt those that
are married; but other causes, as witchcraft, impotency, malicious forsaking,
do not so dissolve the bond of Matrimony. The Apostle speaks of desertion, and
in that case reconciliation must be first endeavored, before the party
forsaken, or forsaking should be left out of Matrimony.

* Mat. 5.32. with 1 Cor. 7.15.

Laws are Moral, Civil, or Politic; and among particular Laws are those of
permission and toleration, which were such as did not approve of evil, which
they conceived, but did only tolerate and permit that evil which could not be
avoided, for the preventing of a greater evil which otherwise would fall out,
such were those Laws, Deu. 23.10. -- 21.15. This Law of divorce was not an
approving of the giving a Bill of divorce for every light cause, but tolerating
of it, for the preventing of a greater mischief, even murder: For the nature
of the Jews was this; if a man once took dislike to his wife, he would never be
at rest till he had shed her blood if they might not be parted asunder; this
Law of divorce was only to restrain this evil. The Law did not allow a woman to
put away her husband, because there was no such fear of blood, but the man to
put away his wife. Besides, the Law does not bid a man put away his wife, but
only permits it. The second place speaks of a malicious and willing departing
of the Unbeleever, which dissolves the marriage, but this is no cause of giving
a Bill of divorce; only Adultery causes that. Here the believer is a mere
patient, and the divorce is made by the unbeleever, who unjustly forsakes, and
so puts away the other.

* 783. Mat. 5.32. with Mat. 19.29. Whosoever forsakes not wife, etc.

The former place speaks of a separation by divorce: The latter place of
forsaking a wife, not by giving a Bill of divorcement, but that which is caused
by imprisonment, banishment, or death.

* 784. Mat. 5.32. with Tit. 3.10. Avoid an Heretic after once or twice
admonition.

The former speaks of private persons, and of a divorce allowed by the Law
permissively. The latter place speaks of that Commandment which is not given to
every private person, but to the Ministers of the Church, who after one or two
admonitions are to excommunicate, and cut off all Heretics from the Church.
Secondly, It hinders not, but that the bond of marriage may remain sure and
firm, though one of the parties be cut off from the Church, 1 Cor. 7.12. It is
one thing to be cut off from the Church, another thing to be cut off from bed
and board.

785. Mat. 5.39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn the other to him also. Joh. 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; if well, why smitest thou me?

The manner of resisting evil, is either of retaliation with injury: And this
Christ forbids, or of just defense, by which, without injury we drive off
injuries by Reason or Law. So Christ said, Why do thou smite me? Not out of a
mind desirous of revenge, but from a well composed heart, he spoke that; and it
is lawful for godly men to complain to the Judge, of injuries done unto them.

* Mat. 5.39. with Joh. 18.23.

The former place bids us not resist, or arise against the evil one, to requite
like for like, according to the injury done unto us; It forbids not
resisting evil, for we may resist evil by a lawful defense, as Christ did by
lawful reasoning; but he forbids resisting evil by private revenge; for he
speaks to his Disciples as to private men, Luke 6.27. The latter place shows
an example of Christ's reasoning with them about evil offered to them, but not
of his resisting evil with evil, smiting with smiting, but readiness to suffer
more, or turn the other cheek.

* 786. Mat. 5.39. with Romans 13.4. Gods Ministers for executing wrath or
revenge.

Revenge is twofold, private, or public: Private, when those who are no
Magistrates will revenge themselves on such as do them wrong: Instead of
pardoning, they resist and revenge themselves. Public revenge, is when the
Magistrate, according to Justice, and the Law of God, punishes an evil person
that wrongeth his brother. The former place is of private, the latter of
public revenge. There are two kinds of injuries: First, for which restitution
may be made. Secondly, for which it may not be made, and of this kind is
striking; for what profits, if thou strike him that stri^eth thee? Is the
hurt of thy body salved by this? There is a revenge which belongs to mercy,
which is not to be understood in the former, in that which avails to
correction: This belongs to them which have Authority: for they ought to
revenge, but with such a mind as Parents bear toward their little Children,
whom they hate not. He speaks afterward of such injuries as restitution may
be made, as money, coat, etc.

* 787. Mat. 5.40. And if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy
coat, etc. Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God, Mat. 5.25. Luke 12.58. 1
Cor. 6.4.

The former forbids not the going to law, but the wronged to revenge himself:
to wit, being injured in his goods, either privately, or under color of Law.
The latter shows that Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, and it may be used
lawfully. The former place is not to be understood simply, but comparatively:
to wit, rather than a man should seek private revenge, he must not only suffer
the loss of one garment, but of more.

* 788. Mat. 5.42. And from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away.
Deuteronomy. 15.3. Of a forreigner thou may exact it again.

Our Savior in the former, not simply, as reaching to all persons whatsoever,
and to all things, but lend to the poor, and lend what thou can spare: He is
worse than an Infidel that provideth not for his Family. It was lawful to look
for money back, with Usury, of strangers, which was not a Moral Rule. Besides,
it is one thing to lend or give to the poor, another thing to them which are
not really poor, but only at present want such or such a quantity of money to
help him in his bargain, etc. we must not expect again where it is not to be
had, we may when it is to be had.

788. Mat. 5.43. Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Ver. 44.
Luke 6.35 Romans 12.20.
Love your enemies, do good to those that hate you.

The first place was corrupt, and came into use from the time of the Maccabees.
The latter was not delivered by Christ as a new law; but the true sense of the
divine Law concerning love to our neighbors is explained by him. For God in
the Old Testament expressly commands men to love their enemies, Deuteronomy. 22.2.

789. Mat. 5.40. If any any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat from thee, let him have thy cloak also. Romans 13.1. There is no power but
of God.

Christ does here prescribe the law of patience to his followers; that they
should not be troubled for the loss of their goods, but wait on the Lord
quietly, until he take revenge on wicked men: yet he forbids not the lawful
means of recovering goods, fraudulently or forcibly taken away, or appeal to
the Magistrate for power, much less does he condemn it.

790. Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shutting the door
pray. 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray in every place.

Christ against boasters, teaches us that our duty in prayer is, that we seek
to please God rather than men, because God considers our hearts, men look only
on the outside: and he that is alone prays better with a composed mind, than
he that prays amongst a multitude of People: whether therefore we pray
privately or publicly, let us always pray so as if we were hid in our
Closets. The Apostle witnesses that our prayer is accepted with God, be it in
private or public, when God is worshipped in spirit and truth.

* 791. Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy Chamber, etc. Mat. 18.19, 20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, etc.

In the former place Christ opposes private prayers to hypocrysie and
vainglory, praying in the Closet to praying in the streets. He opposes not
private and public prayer, for they may well suit together at different times,
and upon different accounts; private prayer, the more freely to give our selves
to God: The public prayer to demonstrate our faith in God, and to help forward
the Petitions of the Congregation, and to stir up zeal in them that are cold.

792. Mat. 6.7. When you pray, use not vain repetitions. Luke 18.1. Men ought
to pray always, and not to faint. Col. 4.2. 1 These. 5.17.

Christ taxes the vain babbling and foolish prating of those who suppose to
move God with words often repeated, Isa. 23.13.
though they be cold and distrustful in their prayers. But he forbids not
continuance in prayers, but will have us to pray always, if not in words, yet
in desires; for the prayers of godly men are arrows that are shot into heaven.

793. Mat. 6.7. They think they shall be heard for their much speaking. 2 Timothy
1.3. Pray without ceasing.

It is one thing to speak much, and put confidence in their much speaking in
prayer; another thing to pray frequently or long, and refer their hearing to
the force of Christ's Mediation. Christ condemns not long prayers if they be
strong prayers, but he forbids and condemns men's thinking, if they can but
babble any thing to make their prayers long, that the length of their prayers
the very opus operatum shall be effectual.

794. Mat. 6.13. Lead us not into temptation. Jam. 1.13. Let no man say, when
he is tempted, that he is tempted of God.

Temptation is either good, for a good end, as when God proves the faith, hope,
patience, obedience, constancy of his children; or evil, to an evil end, and we
pray in the Lords prayer, that God will not let us be tempted with evil; nor
give us over into the hand of Satan to tempt us.

795. Mat. 6.13. For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory. Luke 11.4.
That conclusion is not found in the Lords Prayer.

One Evangelist omitting what the other has set down, does no ways derogate
from the truth of Gods Word. David used the same thanksgiving, 1 Chronicles. 29.11.
2 Timothy 4.18.
Thine is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the Victory, and the
Majesty. And Paul uses the same words, And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. From whence is taken that of
the Church, Glory be, etc.

* Mat. 6.17. But when thou fastest anoint thy head, etc. Joel 1.13. Gird your
selves and lament, etc.

Fasts are either public, such as concern Families, Towns, or Countries; we
must put on sackcloath in these, and publicly declare our sorrow. Private
Fasts, or personal, such as are meant here in Matthew, must be con^eiled from
others, as much as may be. The words in the former place are either properly to
be taken, or improperly: Properly, so they cannot be taken, in regard this
would condemn all former Fasts of the godly; and likewise it would show Christ
commanding things contrary. They must be taken improperly, and the true meaning
must be gathered out of the circumstances of the place. Christ's intent here, as
in the words before, is to prescribe men the approving their hearts to God in
fasting, by avoiding ostentation, and praise of men.

796. Mat. 6.19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth. 1 Timothy 5.8.
But if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own house, he
has denied the faith.

Christ forbids no man to possess wealth that comes as a blessing from God;
Lev. 36.14. Psalm. 112.3.
but to lay up treasures to the wrong of other men, and to put our trust in
them as the Gentiles do: nor does he condemn the care for a man's own family.

* 797 Mat. 6.19. Lay not up for your selves treasure. Job 1.3. Job was the
greatest man of all the men of the East.

It is lawful to lay up Gold, but not our treasure or greatest riches, as that
which serves for our greatest happiness. It is one thing to lay up gold,
another thing to lay it up as our great treasure. Our Savior in the former
place he tells us, we must not lay up Gold, or earthly things, with delight and
pleasure, with content and satisfaction, lay not up superfluous or unnecessary
goods. The second place speaks of Job as a rich man, but not as one which made
riches his treasure, or laid up riches here with delight or confidence, etc.

* 798. Mat. 6.25. Take no care what you shall eat, etc. He that provides not
for his Family, 1 Timothy 5.8.

There is a studious care, and a carking care, a care de opere, and a care de
operis successu: A care for the work it self, that it be honestly done. 2. A
care for the issue and success of the work, an hanging in suspense and doubt of
the event. Christ would have us studiously careful, Prove. 27.23. but not
carkingly careful for our Families. Careful with a moderate honest care, not
with a distrustful care.

799. Mat. 6.31. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what
shall we drink? 1 Timothy 5.8. If any man provide not for his own, he has denied
the faith.

Christ condemns here carnal care joined with heathenish distrust: but not a
Christian care to provide for our Family, with confidence in God.

800. Mat. 7.1. Judge not. Joh. 7.24. Judge righteous judgment.

Mat. 18.15. Jud. v. 8.
Christ forbids rash judgment, and defamation; but not Politic or
Ecclesiastical Judicature, appointed by God under the Old Testament; not yet
domestic: because all men are bound to judge of doctrine and manners, and to
call those to the right way that are wandering from it.

* Mat. 7.1. with Joh. 7.24.

There are four sorts of Judgment, 1. Public. 2. Private. Of public, first,
Civil, belonging to the Magistrate, Deuteronomy. 1.16. Secondly, Ecclesiastical,
belonging to the Minister, 1 Cor. 4.24. Heb. 11.7. Of private lawful Judgment
first is admonition, whereby one Christian does lovingly reprehend another for
his sins, and thereby judges him. The second is just dispraise, when the gross
faults of notorious offenders are condemned, for this end alone, that others
may take warning thereby, Mat. 23.1. we may judge these ways. But judge not
rashly of an evil mind, judging amiss of others for some evil ends, and not
according to the Laws and Rules of charity. Judging that which is well done for
evil, or that which is indifferent take it in the worser part, or upon
uncertain reports and bare surmisings suspect evil.

* 801. Mat. 7.2. The same measure ye mete shall be measured to you again. Rev.
18.6. Double to her, double according to her works.

The former place shows, that God rewards us according to our works: And the
latter place speaks the same; for the words before are, reward her even as she
has rewarded you, etc. She has doubly rewarded you to what you deserved, and
therefore she shall be rewarded doubly to what she esteems to be just, though
no more than is just in it self.

* 802. Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy to dogs. Mar. 16.15. Preach the
Gospel to every Creature.

In the former Scripture by Holy is meant the holy Word and Sacraments, because
they are holy in themselves, and in their effects and operations. By dogs are
meant, the obstinate and wilful impugners of the Gospel, scorners of that which
is good; so as the words seem to import, do not administer the precious
Promises and high mysteries of the Gospel, and the Sacraments to those scorners
and resisters of the Gospel; when once you find that they are hardened in their
sins leave them. The second Scripture bids the Disciples preach the Gospel to
every creature, man and woman, such as are capable of instruction; preach to
them till they oppose you, and impugn your Doctrine, and despise and scorn you,
then withdraw, as the former place hints, and give them none of your pearls.

803. Mat. 7.8. Whosoever asks receives. Iam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not.

He that asks as he ought to do in faith, receives what is convenient for
him: they that ask not as they should, that is, in faith, nor for a good end,
receive not, because they ask amiss.

804. Mat. 7.12. All things that you would that men should do unto you, do you
even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. Cha. 22.4. On these two
Commandments, the love of God and our Neighbor, hang all the Law and the
Prophets.

The first place excludes not the love of God, for he that loves his neighbor
loves God: the latter comprehends a moral rule of all things which are
contained in the Books of Moses, the Law and the Prophets.

805. Mat. 7.22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils? Then will I
profess unto you, I never knew you, depart from me. Cha. 10.32. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is i^ heaven.

Christ in the former place speaks of hypocrites who prophesied in his Name,
and teaching so, did confess him with their tongue. In the latter place he
speaks of those who profess his Name by faith, openly and sincerely without
hypocrisy, they have both a promise and a large reward.

806. Mat. 8.4. Tell no man. Ver. 4. Go thy way, show thy self to the Priest.

Christ forbad the Leper for a time, but not for ever, that he should tell no
man, that he was healed, but that first he should make his comparition before
the Priest.

* Mat. 8.4. with Luke 8.59.

It is one thing which is commanded, Tell no man by the way, or stay not
talking by the way with any man till you come to the Priest, and tell him what
is done to you, and another thing for a man not to tell it at all. This former
Text is concerning his not talking till he spoke with the Priest: The latter
was upon another occasion and so the commands differ, as to the circumstance,
when as in substance they were the same, both being to be proclaimed, the one
by himself, the other by the Priest.

807. Mat. 8.5. A Centurion came to Jesus, beseeching him, and saying. Luke
7.3. The Elders of the Jews were sent unto him, beseeching him to come.

Theophylact reconciles these places thus: First the Centurion sent Messengers
to Christ, then he came himself and met the Lord, and beseeched him with his
own mouth relating the business.

808. Mat. 8.19. A certain scribe came unto him, and said, Master I will follow
thee whither soever thou go. And Jesus said unto him, The Foxes have holes.
Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me will I in no wise cast out.

That Scribe would follow Christ out of vain boasting, and promised to himself
great wealth, and dignities; Christ did not reject this man, but only
admonished him of the poverty and misery of those that follow him in this life,
which is rewarded with salvation and eternal life.

809. Mat. 8.26. The Disciples were fearful, and of little faith. Jam. 1.6. Ask
in faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea,
driven with the wind and tossed.

The infirmity of the Disciples is to be distinguished from Heathenish
distrust: they that doubt receive nothing; but believers receive what they ask
in faith.

810. Mat. 8.28. Jesus came to the other side into the Country of the
Gargasens. Mar. 5.1. They came over to the other side of the Sea into the
Country of the Gadarenes.

The City Gadara, and Gergaza were neighbor places in the Tribe of Manasses,
having their several circuit, in the borders whereof the possessed met our
Savior.

811. Mat. 8.28. There met him two possessed with devils. Mat. 5.2. There met
him out of the Tombs a man with an unclean spirit.

They were two in number, Mark mentions one, because the other was notably
known. August.

812. Mat. 8.29. The Devils cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee
Jesus thou Son of God? Joh. 8.44. The devil is a liar, and the Father thereof.

The devils did not that for the glory of God and Christ, but to cause distrust
in men's hearts: for the devil though he do speak truth, yet he do h it not
without fraud and a false end, that he may draw men into error.

* 813. Mat. 8.29. They cried out, saying, Jesus thou Son of God. 1 John 4.2.
Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God.

Every Spirit that confesses willingly and cheerfully that Jesus is the
Christ, is of God: But wicked Spirits do neither confess it willingly, nor
cheerfully, what they did, they did it out out of terror of conscience, and
crying out, as it were, upon the rack, not with cheerfulness.

814. Mat. 9.6. The Son of man has power to forgive sins. Cha. 23.34. Father
forgive them, they know not what they do.

The Father gives, the Son has merited, and the Holy Ghost confirms salvation
and remission of sins.

815. Mat. 9.1. Jesus sat at meat in Matthews house. Luke 5.28. Matthew left
all, rose up, and followed Christ.

Matthew left all things which might hinder him from following Christ, as the
receipt of custom, and his Office of a Publican; but he left not his house,
nor did he wholly cast away his household affairs.

816. Mat. 9.18. My daughter (says Jairus to Christ) is even now dead. Luke
8.42. The daughter of Jairus lay a dying being about twelve years old.

She lay a dying when her Father went forth of his house; she was dead before
Christ came to her.

* Mat. 9.30. See that no man know it. Mar. 5.19. Go and tell what great things
God has done for thee.

Several occasions occasioned several commands; there is a time to speak and to
hold ones tongue: The two blind men must not speak, because they should see
Christ affected not applause in the world: Nor were the people at that season
fit for hearing of such things; besides, the discovery of that might hinder
Christ's other designs: Christ would have men to look more after his Doctrine
than Miracles. The charge he gave the man possessed in Mark, was when God has
done any great work for or in us, we should tell it abroad and not conceal it,
if there be a convenience for it.

817. Mat. 10.2. The first Simon Peter, Andrew, James, John. Mar. 3.17. Peter,
James, John, Andrew. Gal. 2. James, Cephas.

The Apostles were equal in dignity and office, but unequal in order. The
Evangelists in naming the Apostles observed not the order of dignity: he that
Matthew makes the second, Mark places in the fourth place, and Paul puts Peter
after James the son of Alpheus.

* Mat. 10.2. First Peter, Andrew, James. Mar. 6.17. Peter, James, John.

The Evangelists had the substance of the History in regard, not the
circumstances of honor who should be first, who last; in the one Peter and
James are named (as some think) because first converted; in another Evangelist
others are named, and not in that order. Order makes no difference of persons.

818. Mat. 10.5. Jesus sent the twelve, saying, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles. Mar. 16.15. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature.

Distinguish the time, De verb. Domini.
says Augustine, and the Scriptures will be reconciled. The message of the
Apostles to the Jews was before Christ's Passion, the partition wall was not yet
broken down between the Jews and the Gentiles. The general message was to all
Nations, after Christ's Resurrection and Exaltation, and it contains a plenary
promulgation of the Gospel. So first the family, then strangers were called: So
God in these days calls at certain times whom he pleases.

819. Mat. 10.5. G^ not into the way of the Gentiles. Joh. 4.10. Christ
preached to the Samaritans.

That Interdiction was directed only to the Disciples, Christ of his free grace
dispenses the crumbs where and when he will; there is no law can forbid him.

* Mat. 10.5. with Joh. 4.10. Luke 1.77.

There were two missions of the Apostles, the first temporary and special, as
here; the other universal, after the Resurrection. The former, to the Jews,
only that they might be first exercised in Judea, as in a Palaestra, that they
might be afterward more fit to endure the lists of all Nations. And that the
Jews might have the pre-eminence, the Gospel being first preached to them, and
not to the Gentiles, till the Jews rejected it. This sending only to the Jews
was to make them the more readily hearken to Christ; and besides, they were yet
Gods own people, and the Gentiles without the Pale of the Church: Nor were they
called in till the Jews by their rejection of Christ did disinherit themselves
of those privileges. Christ, it is true, preached to the Samaritans, but they
were not Gentiles, they were of the Jews, though accounted profane upon
another account.

820. Mat. 10.8. Freely ye have received, freely give. Ver. 10. The workman is
worthy of his meat. Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, minister to
him that teaches in all good things.

The Apostles were sent to cure all manner of sick folk, and Christ foreseeing
the Jews to be greedy of money, bad them give every one for his health what he
pleased, lest they should make a gain of Miracles done in his Name. That
command contradicts not the saying of Christ and his Apostles, of public
maintenance due to the Ministers of the Church, which must be paid to them for
their pains in their Ministry; but the gift of Miracles was not to be sold.

* Mat. 10.8. with Gal. 6.6.

The first place was meant of working Miracles especially; The second place, of
preaching the Word. Christ knew that the Disciples by working Miracles might be
proffered too much gain, and compass great wealth to themselves; therefore, that
they and others might know, gathering wealth was not the design, he commands
them, that as ^hey had freely received, so they should freely give; they had
received immediately power from God without any humane adjuments, or
advantages, or ministrations, therefore they should as freely dispense the
power of Miracles. Secondly, If the former place be understood of preaching the
Word, it is not to be understood further than forbidding filthy Lucre, setting
the Word to sale, preaching upon the design to grow rich, to benefit themselves
in estate or name above measure, 1 Timothy 3.3. Thirdly, This was a temporary
command aimed at for the Journey which they were then at, not to be a standing
Law in the Church, for so Ministers should have nothing at all, not wages for
their work.

821. Mat. 10.9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses.
Joh. 13.29. Judas had the bag.

The possessing of gold, silver, or brass, is not condemned, but the abuse of
it. Christ in his first temporal mission to the Jews, because they were in a
few days to take a view of all Judea, forbad his Disciples to take money or
bags, that they might perform their Embassage with greater expedition; doubting
not that they should want any thing. In the mean while he gives charge to Judas
for a common bag

* Mat. 10.9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses. with
Luke 22.36. But now he that has a purse let him take it, etc.

The former place forbad thought and care for provisions in that Journey. The
latter place only shows, that for the future they would have occasions enough
for money and meat; The former is not so precisely taken in the Letter as to
make the Apostles* Practice and Christ's Precept to be at odds, or Christ
condemn himself, for he had his bag which Judas bare. Besides, he had his upper
garment, Joh. 13.4. And Coat without seam, Joh. 19.23. Luke 22.36. Peter had
his Sandals, Act. 12. Paul had a Cloak, 2 Timothy 4. Secondly, This was a
temporary Precept given them only in commission only for the present; and that
they were to go thus, signifies no more than that they were in haste to go and
dispatch. Christ himself intimates as much, as the Command was temporary, Luke
22.35. When I sent you without a purse, etc. But now he that has a purse.

* Mat. 10.10. Neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves. Mar. 6.8, 9.
Take nothing for your journey save a staff only -- but be shod with Sandals,
and not put on two coats.

Christ forbids to carry two changeable garments, the one to wear to day, the
other to morrow, but he did not forbid two necessary garments for keeping out
cold; and the carrying of two changeable garments, I conceive, was only for
that present time and service; they being to make great expedition were not to
burden themselves with many garments. -- Staff they might have, not staves, a
staff to support, not staves to offend. -- Sandals they might have, which were
open above, and ready upon all occasions, not shoes, of more cost and credit
in those days.

822. Mat. 10.10. Not a staff. Mar. 6.8. Save a staff only.

A staff or wand was twofold in use, either to defend or carry, or to journey
and to support a man; in the former place he speaks of a staff of defense,
which would be burdensome to carry, in the latter place of a staff to support
one; Genesis 32.10. Exo. 4.7.
which we call a walking staff, which is a help to a man in his journey.

823. Mat. 10.10. Nor shoes. Mar. 6.9. But be shod with Sandals.

He forbids them to take shoes with them, that is, two pair; as he forbad them
to take two coats: but he lets them be shod with Sandals, which were then in
use.

* 824. Mat. 10.12. Salute it. Luke 10.4. Salute no man by the way.

Salutations are lawful; Paul commands them, Romans 16.16. But Christ forbad them
only for that journey, which they were to dispatch in haste, salutations being
most commonly hindrances and spenders of time; and though in that journey they
might not salute any by the way, yet when they were at their journeys end, in
houses where they were to abide, they might then salute any man worthy of a
salutation. So that the salutations forbidden was only at that time, and in
relation to hinderance of business.

825. Mat. 10.16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Joh.
14.27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.

The godly are in danger in the world, as sheep amongst wolves, but they have
peace in Christ: who said unto them, In me you shall have peace, in the world
you shall have trouble.

826. Mat. 10.16. Be wise as serpents. Romans 6.8. To be carnally minded is death.

Spiritual and Christian wisdom is commended by Christ to his Disciples, and it
ought to be in all Christians, especially Pastors who are often amongst Wolves;
and are bound to take heed that they be not too slow and fearful in discharging
their office, and fly from Christ, 1 Pet. 4.7.
for fear of dangers. Carnal and worldly wisdom contrary to the will of God, is
death, of that Paul speaks.

* 827. Mat. 10.16. with 1 Cor. 3.18. If any among you be wise, let him become
a fool.

There is a natural or acquisite prudence, which is to be exercised in all
callings, as men have relation to men, or to External troubles and affairs of
this life; and there is this prudence as it has relation to God and the
mysteries of Religion; We and Apostles had need to exercise our wisdom and
prudence in the affairs with men, especially in dangers, where so many traps
are laid for their lives; to be wise as serpents in foreseeing dangers, and yet
fly innocently on as Doves, till we be stricken down; and yet this hinders not
but that the most worldly-wise men may be blind in the things that co^cern our
eternal salvation. The former place would have those that are wise in the
things of God, viz. the children of God to be wise in their carriage and
management of affairs here below. The latter place tells us, that those who are
worldly-wise cannot be able to understand the things of God.

828. Mat. 10.23. When they persecute you in one City, flee ye to another. Joh.
10.1. A good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, 1 Pet. 4.3.

The flight of Ministers is lawful, when they are conversant with those where
there is no hope of propagating the Gospel, and of winning others: or if the
peace and safety of the Church require that, and it may be done without the
scandal of those that are weak, otherwise it is unlawful. Ad Honorant.
Augustine prescribes this moderating of flight, lest any man rashly forsaking
his place, should either betray his flock, or become an example of Idleness:
and yet no man must inconsiderately endanger himself; for if the whole Church
hinder, or part is sought for unto death, he shall preposterously withdraw
himself afterward; whose part it is to lay down his life for every one.

* 829. Mat. 10.23. When you are persecuted in one City flee into another, Joh.
10.12, 13. He that is an hireling sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep
and flees, etc.

Christ in the former place shows it is lawful to flee upon some certain
occasions. In the latter place, shows those who flee merely for fear of danger
are but hirelings. In the former place, shows when it is for the profit of the
Church we may flee. The latter, when it is only for fear of danger we may not.
But in these five Cases we may: 1. When there is a dispersion of the whole
Flock, the shepherd may escape, Act. 8.1. 2. When the Ministers person is
aimed at, as Elias and Paul, 1 Kin. 19.3. Act. 9.23. 2. When the Ministers stay
is not for the good of the Church, as in Cyprians, Peter Martyrs, and Cameroes
Case. 4. When the Minister is endangered, and others are sufficiently left to
supply the care of the peoples souls. 5. When he has the consent of the
Church, Act. 9.23. -- 17.13, 14.

830. Mat. 10.27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in the light. Joh.
18.20. I speak openly, and in secret have I said nothing.

In the former place Christ opposes his Ministry to the Ministry of the
Apostles, for he taught publicly in the Temple and other places; but because
his doctrine was rejected almost by all, it was hid in corners, which he
foretold should be preached openly by his Apostles. In the latter, being asked
of the High Priest concerning his doctrine, he says he spoke nothing in
secret, in respect of the time and the persons, as for the substance of his
doctrine, which was always the same, whether taught publicly or privately by
the Apostles or others.

831. Mat. 10.34. Think not that I am come to send peace on the earth. Joh.
14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Phil. 4.7. The peace
of God keep your hearts.

Christ is our peace, and his Gospel is our reconciliation and peace with God.
In the first place he speaks of civil peace, Ephesians. 2.14
in the latter of peace of conscience.

* Mat. 10.34. Luke 12.51. with Joh. 14.27. -- 16.32.

In the former place, Christ strives to inform his Disciples that they must not
expect the days of the Gospel should be days of peace to the godly, for they
must even expect trouble from their nearest and dearest Relation, Sons from
Fathers. Not that the Gospel or Christ brings this in, and of himself: But that
this is by accident, and in respect of the malice of the world and devil, and
thorough the corruption of the heart. The latter place tells us, that Christ
leaves his peace; as his kingdom and rule is spiritual, so his peace is
spiritual and inward which he leaves: For though he sent outward wars and
troubles, yet he sends inward peace and quiet, which is much better.

* Mat. 10.35. I came to set a man at variance against his father. Romans 16.17.
Mark them that make divisions.

Christ set a man at variance, not by his command or operation, but by accident
and our corruption: He sets at variance, as he makes our eyes ache, not by
reason of his clear beams, but by reason of our weak and soar eyes.

832. Mat. 11.9. Christ speaks of the Baptist, that he was more than a Prophet.
Joh. 1.21. The Baptist being asked whether he were a Prophet, answered, no.

Christ said John was more than a Prophet, because the Prophets foretold only
that Christ should come; but John Baptist pointed with his finger at Christ
himself; for he was neither any of the old Prophets, nor that great Prophet.

833. Mat. 11.13. All the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John. Romans
10.4. Christ is the end of the Law.

Christ and John were both at one time; John was the conclusion of the old
Covenant; Christ the Author of the new, and the perfection of the Law, the
Messiah, to whom the Law directed.

834. Mat. 11.14. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was to come.
Joh. 1.21. They asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he said, I am not.

Christ calls John Baptist, Elias metaphorically, because he was like him in
spirit and virtue. The Baptist denies that he is Elias the Thishbite, who lived
in the days of Ahab, for the Jews were of that opinion, as some now adays
look for Enoch and Elias.

* Mat. 11.14. with Joh. 1.21.

Elias was either properly so called, that is, Personally Elias the Thishbite;
or else Metaphorically, one who for the similitude of his mind, manners,
graces, gifts, and office, might and was called Elias, and this was John
Baptist, Mat. 11.13, 14. and this is Elias which was for to come. In the former
place, Christ speaks of John Baptist the metaphorical Elias, he that came in
the power and spirit of Elias. In the latter place he speaks of Elias in his
own proper person, not in his power.

835. Mat. 11.18. John came neither eating nor drinking. Cha. 3.4. His meat was
Locusts and wild honey.

Christ commends John's austere life, sobriety and temperance, in the former
place; because he used not ordinary meat and drink. Yet he did not exceed
Christ in his austere life, For bodily exercise profits but little. 1 Timothy
4.8.


* Mat. 11.18. with 3.4.

John came not eating and drinking in such a familiar way, conversing and
sitting with any company, nor of any meat, but had his more recluse way and
particular meat; not that John did not eat at all or drink, but he eat not
after such a manner, though he might after such a measure, as the Son of God
did.

* 836. Mat. 11.23. Then began he to upbraid the Cities. Jam. 1.5. He
upbraideth none.

It is one thing to upbraid one which is penitent, another thing to upbraid an
unthankful receiver; Christ upbraids the latter, not the former. Christ
upbraids, or blames, or reproves boldly the wicked that have had so many
blessings, and were not worthy of them: But Christ never tells a poor penitent,
that comes weeping to him, that he must be gone, for he has been a Rebel, a
base man, or the like; he upbraids no man with his former life.

836. Mat. 11.25. O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Iam.
3.13. Who so is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst you; let him show
out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

Christ speaks of the wisdom of this world, and diabolical wisdom, which is
contrary to divine wisdom; James speaks of both divine and humane wisdom.

837. M^t. 11.28. Christ says, Come unto me all. 1 Cor. 1.26. You see your
calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many noble
are called.

The general vocation extends to all; there is one general call of all men to
the great Supper: and another special call of believers only, Luke 14.
who obey Christ and his Gospel.

* Mat. 11.28. with 1 Cor. 1.26.

Christ calls not every particular man in the world: he calls every particular
man that is weary in, and of the world, to come to him. The latter place shows
that not many wise are called; but hereupon it follows not that those wise ones
are not weary ones.

838. Mat. 11.30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Mar. 10.25. It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God.

The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light to the spirit, not to the
flesh, to those that are mild and humble by Christ's example: or the Gospel-yoak
is easy by the Holy Ghost, and in comparison of the unsupportable yoke of the
Law. It is a hard matter for a rich covetous man to enter into the Kingdom of
God, not for that riches are evil, but because he does wickedly abuse them.

* 839. Mat. 12.1. At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day. Luke 6.1. And it
came to pass on the second Sabbath after the first.

In Matthew it is Sabbaths in the Plural by an enallage Numeri, as Jephtha is
said to be buried in the Cities of Gilead, Jud. 12.7. That is, in one of the
Cities: or its Sabbaths, that is, the second Sabbath after the first; which if
so, it belongs to one of their Festivals, in their great festivals, as their
Paschal, Feast of Tabernacles and Dedication; the first day was most holy, the
rest to the last not so renowned, yet all were called Sabbath, although it was
lawful on such days to provide victuals; it was called the second Sabbath
after the first, because it was the second from that renowned and great
Sabbath, and that first great Sabbath of those which followed. So as he who
walked the second day from the Sabbath, according to Matthew and Mark, walked
on the Sabbath, and as Luke, the second Sabbath after the first. Or others are
of opinion, the second Sabbath after the first, the next Sabbath after the
Passover, Exodus 12.16. It was not lawful to do any work upon it. Others, by
the second Sabbath after the first, understand the next Festival to the
Passover, which is Pentecost.

* 840. Mat. 12.10. And they asked him, saying, is it lawful to heal on the
Sabath days? Luke 6.8. But he knew their thoughts.

It is probable that the Jews at first observed Christ whether he would heal or
no, and after he had healed the man, they ask him whether it were lawful to
heal on the Sabbath or not; and he by way of answer asks them, whether it were
lawful to do good on the Sabbath? And though Matthew do place the words before
the healing, yet there may be an anticipation. Or else thus, that while they
observed him, he deferring to do any thing, they broke out into this question,
Whether it were lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? Which might be taken as a
question simply moved to learn of him, but it is said, that he knew their
thoughts, and that they had a mind in them to cavil with him for his Question
to them, Whether it were lawful to do good, or to do evil upon the Sabbath day?
It agrees fitly to the occasion, for the not helping a man in misery, is to do
evil at any time in him that has power to help; not to save life, when a man
can, is to kill.

* 841. Mat. 12.5. Have you not read in the Law, that the Priests profane the
Temple on the Sabbath? Exodus 20. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath.

The Jews had an opinion, that rest on the Sabbath (as I conceive) must be so
large, as no work at all must be done on it. Christ he goes about to prove, if
this opinion were true, then David and the Priests break, and have broken the
Law; they have broken the Law, because the Priests did circumcise on that day,
did make fires, kill Oxen, offer burnt offerings, etc. which were but
Ceremonial works, whereas the work of his Disciples plucking corn was a work of
necessity, a Moral Command, it was to do good to all, and at all times; so that
Interpretation of the Jews about the Sabbaths observation, and their censuring
his Disciples were in vain.

And whereas there may seem a difference betwixt Matthew and Mark, saying, they
spoke against Christ, and Luke, that they spoke against the Disciples, they
peradventure began with the Disciples, and after came to him: Or they spoke
against Christ in speaking against the Disciples.

842. Mat. 12.10. The Pharisees ask Christ if it be lawful to heal on the
Sabbath days? Mar. 3.4. Christ asks the Pharisees, whether it were lawful to
do good on the Sabbath days?

To the question of the Pharisees Christ answers by inversion; intimating
that God was more pleased to help a miserable man then to forsake him. Mat.
12.8.


843. Mat. 12.32. Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him. Romans 5.20. Where sin has abounded, grace does much more abound.

The unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost is not so in it self, that it
cannot be forgiven, but for the malicious obstinacy of those that will not come
to Christ by repentance, and do proudly seduce others.

* 844. Mat. 12.48. Who is my mother? with Luke 2.

Christ had a mother, and was not born of a Fantasy, as Marcion the Heretic,
and the Manichees, nor denies duty to them; God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, Gal. 4.4. and he was the seed of Abraham, and his Genealogy was derived
from Adam according to the flesh. He had brethren, but brethren are taken
several ways in Scripture: 1. By nature, as Jacob and Esau. 2. By Nation, as
the Jews. 3. By affection, as Christians in general; or else in special, as
friends, David and Jonathan. 4. By Cognation, the Jews calling kindred
brethren; and so Christ had brethren.

Christ does not disown his mother or brethren, but intimates, that he ought to
have a greater regard to those hearers so employed than either to mother and
brethren, and that they were in place of mother or brethren, or more to be eyed
than either.

* 845. Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart. Mat.
19.17. None Good but God.

Original goodness is one thing, derived another; none good but God Originally.
Saints are good derivatively; A man may be good, as a glass may be light, by
the beams it receives from the Sun, but nothing is light originally but the
Sun: So nothing is good but God primarily, but secondarily or derivatively men
may be good, as receiving it from God.

* 846. Mat. 12.39. A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign.
Joh. 16.23. Whatsoever you ask the father in my name, etc.

Christ condemns not so much their seeking a sign, as their seeking
preposterously: They should first have sought the Scriptures, and then a sign,
and not first signs; they should first have eyed them, and then less esteemed
signs; but here they most seriously looked at signs, and less at the
Scriptures. What was asked of the Father which was just should be granted, but
it was not just to ask signs in the first place.

* 847. Mat. 12.39. There shall be given no other sign but the sign of Jonah.
Joh. 10. I have done many miraculous works which testify of me.

No other sign so clear and eminent as this sign; though others shall be done,
yet none more clear and convincing both of Christ's Resurrection, and the
peoples destruction; for as Jonah was three days -- so should Christ be --
which was clear enough as to the time -- and as afterward Nineveh was
destroyed, they not living up to what Jonah had preached, so should these
people be destroyed for not living answerable to Christ's Doctrine.

848. Mat. 12.49. He stretched forth his hand toward his Disciples, and said,
Behold my Mother and my Brethren, Mat. 1.10. Luke 2. The Virgin was Christ's
Mother.

Christ denies not his kindred according to the flesh, but prefers spiritual
kindred before them; and that speech depends on his Office, who receives the
faithful into the first degree of honor, as though they were his nearest
kindred.

* 849. Mat. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven: but to them it is not given. Psalm. 119. The Law is a light, etc. Isa.
16.49.

The former place intimates that God must give us the knowledge of the
Scriptures, else we cannot understand them. The latter place intimates, that
the Scriptures are perspicuous, and yet both agree. For a thing may be
conspicuous of it self, and yet not so to us: The Scriptures in those things
which concern our Salvation are conspicuous but by reason of the blindness
which is upon our minds we cannot understand them till God give understanding.

850. Mat. 13.12. He that has not. Ver. 12. From him shall be taken away, even
that he has.

He is said not to have, who is more careful to seek after novelties, than to
believe Gods Word, or look after his own salvation; such a one, because he
thinks he has the knowledge of God, Luke 8.18 Romans 2.17.
and disdains his Word, shall fall away at last by his boasting, and shall by
his own destruction understand how miserable, naked and poor he is.

851. Mat. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes that see. Joh. 20.29. Blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet believed.

In the first place is understood the temporal blessedness and felicity of
those who conversed with Christ. In the latter the heavenly and eternal
felicity of believers.

852. Mat. 13.33. The kingdom of heaven is like to leaven. 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge
out the old leaven.

The doctrine of the Apostles was like to leaven, because of its sudden
piercing into the whole world, as the Doctrine of the Pharisees was like to
leaven, which was to be avoided; Mat. 16.22.
or all iniquity and filthiness of nature, and carnal desires of wicked men,
may be so compared: therefore we may interpret this either for good or evil;
leaven in the first place is taken in a good sense; in the second, in an evil
sense.

853. Mat. 15.22. A woman of Canaan. Mar. 7.26. A Greek, a Syrophenissian.

She was of the posterity of the Canaanites, by kind a Syrophenissian, in the
borders of Tire and Sydon, she dwelt in the Country of Syria and Phenicia.

She was called a Grecian, for the Jews counted all Heathens Grecians, probably
because of the rule they had in Syria, in former times over these people of
Syria Phenicia, she was an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, of the
Posterity of the Canaanites, which was in the Land of Canaan, and a
Syrophenissian, so called from the Region wherein she lived. Phenicia was a
part of Syria, in which were Tire and Sydon, famous Cities.

854. Mat 15.24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one mediator between God and man, who gave himself a ransom
for all.

In the former place, Christ speaks of his Prophetical Office, that is, of
teaching and working Miracles; In his second, of his Mcdiatorship, of salvation
and redemption, that belongs and is extended to all believers.

855. Mat. 16.6. Take heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.
Cha. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, All therefore
whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do.

By the leaven of the Pharisees, is here understood their perverse Doctrine,
corrupting the purity of Gods Word, Christ commands them to beware of this, and
their hypocrisy, infecting the sincerity of manners; for like leaven it
penetrates, puffs up and corrupts; but the eyes of God respect sincerity only:
yet he bids them observe what they taught that sit in Moses chair, Jer. 5.5.
out of the Law of God. For truth, whosoever preaches it, must be received for
it self, but we must not depend on their false hypocritical glosses; for God is
worshipped in vain after the commandments of men.

* Mat. 16.6. with Mat. 23.1.

The former place bids us examine the Doctrine, it forbids us to entertain it
if we find it false. The latter bids us hear them, and all that they teach we
must entertain, so be they teach aright, but if wrong, as before, not. The
former seems a general rule; The latter, the limitation or exception.

* Mat. 16.6.12. with Mat. 23.2.

The latter place bids us observe to do all that we are commanded out of Moses
chair, or Moses Law which God gave him; so long as they teach Moses commands,
do all, though they themselves do them not. But they must beware that the
Pharisees intrude not on them their own Traditions for Doctrines out of Moses
his chair, their own Traditions being no better than Leaven.

* 856. Mat. 16.20. Then he charged his Disciples that they should tell no man
that he was the Christ. Mat. 28. ult. Go teach all Nations.

Christ would have every thing done in its own order: He now sent his Disciples
to prepare the people for an expectation of Christ's coming. Afterward he sends
them to say that Christ was come. Christ forbad them because place and persons
were not convenient; He commanded them to go and invite those that were bidden
when all things were ready.

* 857. Mat. 17.1. The sixth day after Jesus took Peter, etc. Luke 9.28. And it
came to pass about eight days after that having taken to him, etc.

Matthew puts exclusively only the days that were between, which were
altogether accomplished. Luke puts in the reckoning, the two outermost days:
The day wherein Christ spoke is reckoned one, and the day of his
Transfiguration another; but here in the former are numbered the days only
coming between.

* 858. Mat. 17.11. Elias shall come. 17.12. Elias is come.

Some reconcile these thus: The former place is meant of litteral Elias, the
other of mystical. But rather Christ in the former words answers to the
Disciples, which in regard that Elias went away and continued not with them,
they wondered how the Prophecy of Malachy, and the opinion of the Jews should
be true, that Elias was to come: Christ tells them, that it is true which was
said, he should come; yea, and to make it appear that it was true, he tells them
he was already come.

859. Mat. 17.15. Lord have mercy on my Son, for he is lunatic. Mar. 9.17. I
have brought unto thee my son, who has a dumb spirit.

He is lunatic, who upon the wane of the Moon is sick of the Falling Sickness,
or a Vertigo, which happens to many by imperfection of nature. This man was
said to be dumb and deaf, not by nature, but because Satan possessed his tongue
and ears; so that he added more diseases to his natural infirmity.

* 860. Mat. 17.23. The third day he shall rise. Mar. 8.31. After three days
he shall rise.

Several ways of resolving this latter: As Synechdochically, as when we say,
He hated me from that day, when even that very day he hated me. But how can
that be after, which was within three days? Others say, These words, after
three days, ought not to be referred to the next word, suffer, but to all that
went before in that discourse: So Christ rose the third day, not from his
Death, but Passion, which began chiefly the day before the preparation for the
Passover, which Mark there speaks of, which others reject, because the
Pharisees would have the stone rolled to the Sepulchers mouth but till the
third day, because he said, I will rise after three days; it seems they feared
no cheat afterward. Besides, Resurrection is opposed to Death, therefore the
time of the future Resurrection must begin from Death. Others say, (...) ought
not to be interpreted by after, because it appoints no certain time, and it
would have impeded the Pharisees reason for keeping the Sepulcher three days.
Some say, (...) signifies and is put for (...), not declaring any certain time.
Others say, seeing he rose within three days, his word is much more amply made
good: For in Promises a prefixed time is set, to the end that the thing
promised may not be delayed beyond the time, but restrains not the performance
of it before.

* 861. Mat. 18.1. At the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, who
is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Mar. 9.35. And he sat down and called
the twelve, and says unto them if any man desire to be first, etc.

We find the agreement thus: Christ knew (says Matthew) their disputing in
their thoughts. Mark says, they disputed this by the way. Mark says, Christ
called the Disciples: Matthew says, they came, implying, when they were
called; and Matthew says, they asked Christ Who is the greatest? Mark says he
told them, If any man desire to be first, etc.

862. Mat. 18.8. If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off, and cast it
from thee. Ephesians. 5.29. No man hates his own flesh.

Christ speaks figuratively, that we should crucify the old man with his evil
affections, that bear rule in the members of our bodies, that we must cast away
the most dear and profitable things from us, which set our sins on fire and
foster them, and offend us.

863. Mat. 18.15. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone. 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all.

Christ speaks of our private duty toward our brethren, that offend us
without public scandals, and wills that we shall not be too severe or soft
examiners of our brothers faults. The Apostle speaks of the public office of
the Presbytery against those who persevere in their sins, as Theophylact
expounds it.

864. Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am
I in the midst of them. Joh. 11.15. I was not there.

Christ in the former place speaks of his personal and gracious presence; in
the latter, of his common natural presence with other men in the earth: for
when he was in another place, he was not truly and locally in Bethany.

865. Mat. 19.17. There is no man good save one, who is God. Luke 6.35. A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good.

God is good of his own infinite perfection, by his Essence, Nature, and
Being, to whom evil is contrary. Men and Angels are called good, not from
themselves, but by communication, by the goodness of God in their creation and
restitution. Christ attributes goodness to God only, that he might draw him
that called him good to acknowledge his Doctrine to be divine.

* Mat. 19.17. God only is good. Luke 6.45. A good man out of the good treasury.

God only is good: 1. Originally. 2. Perfectionally. And 3. Causally. God is
only the increated good: Other Creatures are good by a created goodness, or a
created convenience in the Creatures with the mind of the Creator understanding
and ordaining all things.

Christ does not in this place deny himself to be God, but he applies himself
to the person to whom he spoke; he reprehends his hypocrisy, though he spoke
the truth, yet he was reproved for not speaking it with a true heart; for as
some gather by his sudden departure he came to catch rather than to obey, and
yet some of the ancient Fathers do think Christ reproved him of pride of his
own righteousness; However this is an Ironical, not a negative speech. There is
a great distance betwixt these -- Do not call me good, and Why call thou me
good? The former denies goodness to be in him; The latter only seems to
expostulate the matter thus, Why do thou call me good, seeing thou do not
believe me to be God, nor art resolved to follow my Doctrine?

866. Mat. 19.27. Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee, What shall we
have therefore? Luke 17.10. When you have done all those things that were
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done only that was
our duty to do.

Peter glories in the name of the Apostles, that they had forsaken all for
Christ, though it was not much that they had, so men are wont to reckon largely
of their services toward God. Christ opposes against this ambition, our duty
we owe unto God, all that we can, and all we possess is from God, we are his
servants; and they that serve him not for himself, deserve nothing in the sight
of God, doing our duty, we do not repay the thousandth part of what we owe unto
him.

867. Mat. 20.16. Many are called, and few chosen. Romans 8.38. Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also justified.

Vocation is either external by preaching of Gods Word; so God calls all men
indifferently to partake of his grace; or by the internal vocation joined with
the outward, whereby God by his holy Spirit manifests to us our election,
Romans 8.
and declares us to be his children.

868. Mat. 20.20. The mother of Zebedees children came to him and desired. Mar.
10.35. James and John the sons of Zebedee came to him.

The Mother spoken to by her children, asked in their name, for they supposed
they should the more easily obtain it by the mediation of their Mother, because
she was Christ's Cousin.

869. Mat. 20.23. To sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give.
Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to fit with me on my Throne.

In the first place Christ maintains, that at his first coming, God the Father
had given him no command to assign to any men any degrees of honor, but that
he should instruct the faithful concerning the Cross; and should promise unto
them eternal life, which is given to them who shall overcome by faith, which is
our victory.

* Mat. 20.23. with Rev. 3.23.

He says, It is not mine to give; not that he wants power as God; but it is
not mine to give at this time. I came not from the Father for that purpose to
reward men with degrees of Glory before mine Ascension, but my business was to
die for you, and to teach you how by enduring the Cross, and despising the
shame, and cleaving unto me you may have that glory which is requisite for you.
It is not want of power, but want of injustice that it is not mine to give; for
when the time of remuneration comes, (which is after this life) even then I
shall not have recourse, or an eye unto Relations, or Kindreds; but I shall
give it to whom it is due, and in what degree it is fit. As if two Princes were
set to behold Champions striving for victory, and one of them having some
familiarity with one of the Princes, should desire him to give him the prize,
and he should answer, it is not mine to give, but it shall be given to him that
wins it; no man will say that he wants power, but commend his justice: So
the Lord says it is not mine, not because he cannot, but because he will not
violate the laws of Justice, preferring them, and neglecting others, if any
should afterward be of more labors, or sufferings, or virtues. It is not
Christ's to give, as man, say others. The latter place speaks that Christ shall
judicially distribute rewards at the last day.

870. Mat. 20.29. And as they departed from Jericho, behold two blind men
fitting by the way side. Mar. 10.46. As he went out of Jericho, blind Bartimeus
sat by the high way side.

Matthew was an eye witness that they were two, but Mark mentions the most
noted of them.

871. Mat. 20.29. As they departed from Jericho, Behold two blind men. Luke
18.35. As he came nigh to Jericho a certain blind man sat by the way side.

When Christ entered the City, the blind man first cried out, and when he was
not heard for the noise, he sat in the way where Christ went out, and never
left crying till Christ called and healed him. Christ did defer his cure, but
did not wholly refuse it; so he made proof of his faith, and of many others.

* Mat. 20.29. Luke 18.35. Mar. 10.46.

Matthew and Mark are easily reconciled, it being usual when one speaks of
two, for the other to speak but of one of most note, as when the two possessed
with devils were delivered: Or it may be that one cried first unto him, and the
other followed his example. And as for Luke telling that it was done when they
were about to enter Jericho, I think they did cry unto him when he was to
enter, but being hindered by the concourse and noise of the people, could not
be heard, wherefore they stood in some more convenient place about the time of
his going out, and then crying unto him prevailed: But Luke, content only to
supply what is wanting in the other Evangelists, speaks of no more but the
crying to him when he entered, and so comes directly to the Miracle; And this
is the more probable, because Christ oftentimes was wont to delay men seeking
to him, for the trial of their faith.

872. Mat. 21.19. The fig tree was forthwith dried. Mar. 11.20. In the morning
as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the root.

The fig tree indeed withered forthwith, but on the morning the day following
the witheredness was made manifest.

* 873. Mat. 22.14. Many are called, few are chosen. 1 Timothy 2.4. God would have
all men to be saved.

Many called by Gods revealed Will, or that of his Precept, but not chosen by
his private, or the will of his purpose, for few are chosen by that. God would
have all men saved, all sorts of men, not every particular man, but of all
conditions of men, poor, and rich, etc.

* 874. Mat. 21.38. This is the heir, come let us kill him. 1 Cor. 2.8. Had
they known him, they would not have crucified, etc.

The former place is but Parabolical, and so not argumentative. However the
Text tells us only they knew him with an head knowledge, as the devils knew,
that is, were persuaded by his Works and Miracles, he must needs be the Christ,
but they knew not savingly or feelingly that he was the Christ.

The latter Text is a Text of charity, which St. Paul looking upon himself in
his former estate of persecution, pronounced, thinking that no man would be so
base as to persecute and kill the Son of God, if he knew that he was the Son of
God. But this Judgment of charity does not affirm, that there will be none who
will sin presumptuously, and against the Holy Ghost, as probably they did in
Matthew.

875. Mat. 22.32. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Romans 14.8.
Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords.

Christ denies not simply, but comparatively and relatively from the
hypothesis of the Sadduces, that God was the God of the dead, for they supposed
the dead should never rise again; Paul from another hypothesis affirms the
same, which depends on Christ's resurrection, on this wise, God is the God of
the dead, because the dead bodies shall rise again.

876. Mat. 23.9. Call no man your Father upon the earth. 1 Cor. 4.15. If you
had ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers, for in
Christ Jesus have I begotten you.

Christ will have us place our filial confidence in God only, not in men,
though they love us with fatherly affection, and teach us the true Religion,
and so are called Fathers, not by nature, but by participation, that they are
so. So Paul calls himself the Father of the Corinthians, and of Timothy, by
reason of the Gospel, not primarily, but secondarily, because he was an
Instrument which God used to call and regenerate them by the Gospel; that he
preached to them.

877. Mat. 23.10. Be not called Masters. 1 Cor. 4.15. You have many Masters.

^oh. 1.
Christ is our only spiritual Rabbi, Master and Doctor; others that have these
titles, are but servants to this great Master, because they must teach no other
but the Doctrine of Christ, For of his fullness we have all received, he is the
way, the truth, and the life, and it is enough to us that he said it.

878. Mat. 23.17. Ye fools and blind. Cha. 5.22. Whosoever shall say, Thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Christ by his Office and his Charity was angry with the Pharisees, and to make
them repent he called them fools and blind, but he forbids, that out of a
carnal reproachful desire, and greediness of revenge, or pride, or mad anger
any man should detract from his neighbor.

879. Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them. Cha. 27. Jerusalem is called the holy City.

Jerusalem the City of Martyrs is there called the City of many Saints. It is
called the holy City, for the most holy God by whom it was made choice of; or
for the Messiah who taught them the sanctity of faith and life, and offered
himself for us for a price of redemption; or for the Saints that were in it.

* 880. Mat. 24.25. Prepared from the beginning. Joh. 14.2. I go to prepare a
place for you.

Preparation by Predestination is one thing: Preparation by Possession is
another. Heaven was prepared by Council and Predestination for Gods Children:
But by possession actually by Christ, who took our humane nature, and carried
it into heaven, to take possession in the name of the Elect.

881. M^t. 25.3. And he shall separate the sheep from the goats. Joh. 10.16.
There shall be one sheepfold, and one shepherd.

There is a difference betwixt a sheepfold and a fold for Goats. There is a
difference betwixt true sheep, and sheep only in appearance; sheep in
appearance may have the same visible Church as the true sheep, but in the
future state of the Church the true sheep shall be separated from the
hypocrites. There is but one sheepfold of both Jew and Gentile -- nor of both,
but one shepherd.

882. Mat. 25.32. He shall separate the Sheep from the Goats. Joh. 10.16. And
there shall be one sheepfold.

The first place is concerning the future state of the Church after the day of
Judgment, that shall be otherwise then it is now, for then shall there be a
separation made. Hypocrites now pass for Sheep, then they shall be manifested
to be Goats. Ephesians. 2.14 Cap. 5.23 1 Cor. 3.11.
The latter place is of the faithful, who shall be gathered into one sheepfold,
that is, the Church, both Jews and Gentiles under one shepherd.

883. Mat. 25.34. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world. Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy.

Christ by the beginning and foundation of the world, understands eternity; the
Apostle looks to the first Creation; for before the foundations of this world
were laid, God chose us in Christ to salvation.

884. Mat. 25.34. There is a Kingdom prepared for us, before the foundation of
the world. Joh. 14.3. I go, says Christ, to prepare a place for you.

There is a place by Gods decree provided for us from eternity, according to
predestination, but not particular designation, which is done after Christ's
ascension; but the Devil, Death and Hell, and Malediction did not suffer us to
come thither, until Christ had destroyed those impediments, and by his death
vanquished the Devil, Death, and Hell, blotted out our sins, and by rising
again had restored life to us, by his Ascension had opened heaven to us, and
going thither before us confirmed it, that we should follow him thither.

* 885. Mat. 25.46. These shall go into eternal punishment. Jer. 3.12. For I am
merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep mine anger for ever.

The former place speaks of Gods expression of his wrath in the world which is
to come; This latter place speaks of the expression of his wrath in this life.
The former is pronounced against particular persons that were desperately
reprobate; the latter of such, as though they were desperately wicked, yet
would or might return (having still time) to the Lord.

886. Mat. 26.2. Ye know that after two days is the Feast of the Passover.
Ver. 6. Jesus was in Bethany six days before the Passover.

The Evangelist began to speak of what was done two days before the Passover,
but repeating the matter higher, he relates some things were done in Bethany
six days before the Passover, because the History of Judas the Traitor
required that. Therefore here is an Hysterosis.

* 887. Mat. 26.2. -- 17. Mar. 14.12. Joh. 13.1.

The Hebrews begin their day at Evening, Lev. 23.32. The day from the ingress
of Christ into Jerusalem to the Resurrection may be reckoned three ways: After
the Jews. After the Gentiles. After the Evangelists. The first of the Sabbaths
Sunday The day of entering into Jerusalem. The second of the Sabbaths Monday Of
cursing the Tree. The third of the Sabbaths Tuesday Of the Supper. The fourth
of the Sabbaths Wednesday Of selling. The fifth of the Sabbaths Thursday Of the
day before the preparat. 6. The preparation of the great Sabbaths Friday Of
Preparation and Supper, etc. 7. The Sabbath Saturday Of rest in the Sepulcher.
The eighth of the Sabbaths Sunday Of rising.

So that after two days ^ems the third day after his solemn entrance into
Jerusalem. But while I study brevity I dare not enter into the sea of that
variety which is here offered.

888. Mat. 26.7. A woman poured Ointment on our Saviors head. Joh. 12.3. Mary
took a pound of Ointment of Spikenard very costly, and anointed the feet of
Jesus.

Some hold that these are different Histories, yet it might be, that when a
greater quantity of ointment was poured forth, that his feet were anointed also
at the same time.

* Mat. 26.7. with Joh. 12.3.

John says, Judas spoke against this woman's act: Matthew, that the Disciples,
and that by a figure called Syllepsis, by which one is called more; They were
sawn, Heb. 11. when it was Isaiah. John says, she anointed his feet, and
Matthew says, his head; she did both anoint head and foot, the ointment
running out in great measure; or she did first anoint his feet, and then break
the box and diffuse the residue upon his head. Matthew says, the Passover was
to be kept two days after. John says, this anointing was six days before the
Passover. Matthew speaks by way of recapitulation, and having spoken of the
Passover within two days, he does not say after these things, Jesus being in
the house of Simon the Leper, but relates it as a thing done, not setting down
the time of doing it. Whereas Matthew, speaks of the Disciples; John, of
Judas murmuring against the fact, it is to be understood, that the other
Disciples either said so, or thought so, Judas persuading them; but they spoke
it of a true care for the poor; Judas, out of a theevish intention. Some think
that the women are not the same, Mary being one, and the other, which the
Disciples did murmr at, was another.

889. Mat. 26.8. The Disciples saw it, and had indignation. Joh. 12.4. Then
says one of his Disciples, Judas Iscariot.

The Evangelists usually ascribe to many the fact of one, if their consent went
along with him. So the murmuring which Judas began, is imputed to the rest who
held their peace.

890. Mat. 26.11. You have the poor always with you, but me you have not
always, Cha. 28.20. And lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world.

In the first place Christ speaks of his corporal presence and natural
conversation with his disciples in the state of humiliation, that he should not
be so always with them. In the latter of the assurance by his Person, and his
help that should be effectual in their Apostolical duty, though it be
difficult, yet Christ would be present with them by a singular virtue of his
Spirit dwelling in them. The accomplishment of this promise was manifest in the
Apostles, and in all the faithful by the operation of the Spirit in us, and
shall be so to the end of the world.

891. Mat. 26.26. This is my Body. Cha. 24.23. If any man shall say unto you,
Lo here is Christ, or there, believe him not.

In the first place Christ asserts his presence in the sacred Supper. In the
latter he foretells that false Prophets should come, and exhorts us that we
should beware of those false Impostors, and should not look for salvation in
places, times, or persons, contrary to Gods word, but only in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

892. Mat. 26.26. This is my body. Joh. 6.63. The flesh profits nothing.

Christ in the first place understands his body that was given to dye for us.
In the latter, flesh, but not his own in special, but in general, the natural
use of any meat whatsoever. Not as the Capernaites dream, that they should so
eat his flesh, who would eat him with their teeth, but not with their heart.

* Mat. 26.26. with Joh. 6.63.

This is my body, that signifies and sets forth, or is sacramentally my body,
which being spiritually eaten, or applied by faith is bread and meat indeed;
but the ordinary flesh which is spoken of profits nothing to the saving of
the soul.

Mat. 26.26. -- with -- He went up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God. -- Whom the heavens must retain, etc.

Christ is sacramentally on the Lords Table really, spiritually, not
corporally; Corporally in heaven, yet by faith and by his effects and benefits
on earth; this denotes his body, and as surely as the bread is taken, so surely
is the benefits of Christ's body taken.

893. Mat. 26.29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine. He puts
these words after the Institution. Luke 22.18. He puts those words before the
Institution.

Christ once delivered the Sacramental Cu^ to his Disciples, Cap. 3. de Conv.
Evang.
says Augustine; but Luke has not made his Narration in a continued History,
nor always observed the order of time, so that here is an Hysterosis again.

* Mat. 26.29. with Luke 22.18.

They both agree in the words; Luke only speaks frequently, not so exactly of
the time. I will no more drink of the fruit of the Vine, etc. is, that the
Kingdom of God was now so near that this was the last meat and drink, or the
last meal that he was to have before that came. By the Kingdom of God, meaning
his Resurrection and forward, when God by him had conquered Death, Satan, and
Hell. And whereas he says, Till I drink it new with you, etc. He did so,
eating and drinking with them after his Resurrection. This therefore being the
aim of his speech, it was seasonable to say so, any time of the meal, this is
the last meal I must eat with you, till I be risen again from the dead; and
hereupon the Evangelists have left the time of his uttering of it at that
indifferency that they have done.

894. Mat. 26.29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Act. 10.41. We eat
and drank with him after he rose from the dead.

Christ said, he would not drink with his Apostles in his mortal body; but
after the Resurrection, having put off the infirmity of his body, he after
conversed with his Disciples, and eat and drank with them; he calls it new,
because he is made immortal of mortal, and the Devil and Death being destroyed,
he had opened a spiritual Kingdom.

895. Mat. 26.34. This night before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice.
Mar. 14.30. Before the cock crow twice thou shall deny me thrice.

Matthew briefly and in general, without relating the circumstances, but Mark
relates the matter with more and more particular words.

* Mat. 26.34. with Mar. 14.30.

Crow thrice in all; for Peter denying him once before the first crowing, and
twice before the second. He that says, He shall deny me thrice before the Cock
crow twice, does not imply at all, but he shall or may deny him thrice before
the morning Cock crow to break of day, or before the Cock give over crowing.

* Mat. 26.36. Then came Jesus into the place that is called Gethsamine. Mar.
14.32. with Luke 22.39. He went forth, as he was went, into the Mount of Olives.

Gethsamine was at the foot of mount Olivet, into a Garden which was there. The
Talmudists speak of Gardens there, and tell how the Gardeners use to fatten
their grounds with the scouring of the sink that carried the blood and filth of
the Temple Court into that Valley.

896. Mat. 26.52. All they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.
Luke 22.36. He that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.

A sword is taken properly in the first place; for Christ will not that private
men should use the sword for revenge, and to resist evil, but should overcome
evil with goodness: Romans 12.
In the latter place, a sword is taken metaphorically for the Word of God, with
which we must fight against Satan and our spiritual enemies, and therefore we
must be armed with it.

* Mat. 26.52. with Luke 22.36.

The former place forbids taking of swords for private defense unlawfully. The
latter place tells us, that the Persecution would be so great, as it in all
probability would be the greatest wisdom to part with our estates and buy
swords; not that indeed he would have them to buy swords, but that by this
Prophecy he would show them they must provide for trouble; and that it is
rather meant of material swords, will appear by their showing of him two
material swords, which he seeing, and their willingness to defend his person,
said, It is enough.

897. Mat. 27.4. Judas says, I have sinned betraying the innocent blood. Act.
1.18. Falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed out.

The confession of Judas, and the testimony he gave of Christ's innocence, was
not with true repentance; but only sorrow by the sense of his sin, which led
him not to conversion, but to hang himself.

* Mat. 27.4. with Act. 1.18.

The one place speaks what Judas said before he went to hang himself, which the
other place says he afterward did.

* 898. Mat. 27.5. And went and hanged himself. Act. 1.18. And falling headlong
he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

Having hanged himself, to hasten his death the more, or to be the more
revenged of himself, he cast himself headlong with violence from the place,
where the halter was fastened, and so it being broken fell down, and with the
violence of the fall he burst asunder, and his bowels burst out in a pitiful
manner.

* 899. Mat. 27.7. And bought with them the Potters field. Act. 1.18. Now this
man purchased a field.

He purchased the field by their hands, and they purchased the field with his
money.

* 900. Mat. 27.9. That which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet -- Zach. 11.12.
So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

There are two things reconcilable, 1. Whether Matthew mean Jeremy or Zachary?
If Jeremy, then where is it in that Prophecy? If Zachary, why calls he him
Jeremy? 2. Why urges he the words so? Matthew speaks according to an ordinary
manner of speaking used among the Jews, and by them would easily be understood,
though he cited a Text of Zachary under the name of Jeremy: For the
illustration of which matter we must first produce their ordering of the books
of the old Testament, the Law, the Prophets, and Hagiographa. By the last,
meaning the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Job, Ruth, Ester, etc.
Then the five Books of Moses, Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, and then the
Prophets, among whom Jeremy was set first, and then Ezekiel, and after him
Isaiah, and then the twelve. And thus in the Bibles of old, Jeremy came next
after the book of the Kings, and stood first in the Volumn of the Prophets. So
that Matthew alleging of a Text of Zachary under the name of Jeremy, does but
allege a Text out of a Volumn of the Prophets, under his name that stood first
in that Volumn: And such a manner of speech is that of Christ, Luke 22.44. in
which he follows the general division that we have mentioned, only he calls
the whole third part or H^giographa by the title of the Psalms, because the
book of Psalms stood first of all the books of that part. In that saying, Mat.
16.14. Others say Jeremy, or one of the Prophets. There is the same reason why
Jeremy alone is named by name, viz. because his name stood first in the Volumn
of the Prophets, and so came first in their way when they were speaking of the
Prophets. Or 2. It may be it was at first delivered by Jeremy, and after
written by Zachary, who in many things imitates him. Hence the Hebrews say, the
spirit of Jeremy was in Zachary. Or 3. It might be taken partly out of Jeremy,
and partly out of Zachary; for Jeremy bought a field also, Ier. 32. Or Zachary
might have two names -- As for the second Question, some think the words are
partly taken out of Ier. 18.2. and 32.9. and Zach. 11.12. and here in Matthew
are conjoined; and although the name of Potter be in Ier. 18. yet as not
pertinent to the History of Christ's Passion it is omitted.

901. Mat. 27.32. They compelled Simon of Cyrenea to bear his Cross. Joh.
19.17. Christ bearing his Cross, went forth into a place, called the place of a
skull.

At first going forth Christ himself carried the Cross, and when he was grown
too feeble in body, the soldiers compelled Simon whom they met on the way, to
carry the Cross.

902. Mat. 27.44. The Thieves also who were crucified with him, cast the same
in his teeth. Luke 23.39. And one of the malefactors which were hanged, rayled
on him.

Matthew ascribes to both that which was proper to one, as the murmuring before
amongst the Apostles; or if both at first did rail on him, one of them at last
confessed his sin, and acknowledged Jesus to be the Messiah.

* 903. Mat. 28.1. In the end of the Sabbath as it began to dawn, Joh. 20. The
first day of the week comes Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark.

John says Mary Magdalene came while it was yet dark; Matthew, when it began
to dawn: Mark says, she and the other women came thither at Sunrising: All
which speak the story thus: That at the dawning, and while it was yet dark, the
women, as soon as they could see, (at the least Mary Magdalen) set out to go to
the Sepulcher, and that was at the very instant of Christ's rising, when there
was a great earthquake, and an Angel came and rolled away the stone. Mary
Magdalen came from Bethany, from her Brother Lazarus's house (if she came from
her own home) and the other women were at their several Lodgings, and to get
them altogether would spend some time, so as though Mary were early stirring,
yet it was Sunrising before they were altogether at the Sepulcher.

904. Mat. 28.2. The Angel of the Lord descended from heaven. Joh. 20.12. And
sees two Angels, with Mar. 15.5.

The women had two journeys to the Sepulcher, the first early in the Morning:
when they saw an Angel without, sitting upon the stone; and coming within the
Sepulcher, they saw a young man sitting on the right side of the Sepulcher; and
then after this they go to the Disciples, and came back again to the Sepulcher,
where Mary finds either the same Angels to have shifted their places, and to
sit at the head and feet, or two others to sit within the Sepulcher, which John
speaks of.

905. Mat. 28.8. The Mary's departed from the Sepulcher with fear and great
joy. Mar. 16.8. They fled from the Sepulcher, for they trembled and were amazed.

A joyful fear.
That fear and amazement was joined with joy, as it falls out in sudden accidents.

906. Mat. 28.9. The women came and held him by the feet. Joh. 20.17. He says
to Mary Magdalen, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.

Christ suffered the women to touch him, to confirm the certainty of his
Resurrection, that they might be more sure witnesses to his Disciples and
others: he forbad Mary Magdalen to touch him, because she rejoiced too much
with carnal affection, and therefore he would have her rather touch him by
faith, that is, believe in him, to be the Son of God, the Lord of glory,
salvation, life and death.

* Mat. 28.9. with Joh. 20.17.

Christ suffered the women to touch him, and to worship him: But when Mary
Magdalen would even out of her natural affection, or spiritual desire, so touch
Christ as to hinder him in his progress and business, he forbids her to touch
him lest she might stay him from doing that work he had to do before he went to
his Father.

907. Mat. 28.18. All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth. Mar.
13.32. But of that day knows no man, no not the Son, but the Father only.

All power is given unto Christ the Mediator, because he is made Lord in the
glory of God the Father. In the day of his humiliation he knew not as man the
day of Judgment, or not for himself that he knew not, but for us, says
Augustine, because it behoved not us to know.

908. Mat. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Romans 9.5.
Christ who is over all, God blessed for ever.

Power is given to Christ as man, for nothing can be given to him is God, for
as God he had all things before in his power, but the humani^y of Christ has
not that power of it self, but from the Divine Nature with which the humane
nature is personally united.

* Mat. 28.18. with Romans 9.5.

Power is either a Physical power of Efficacy, or a Moral power of Au hority.
The Physical power of Efficacy, which is (as some, the omnipotency of his
Godhead, or as others) a spiritual power of his Manhood, but these are not
meant here; In all probability, the power that is here given unto Christ is for
its general nature, the same, which in the following words he communicates unto
his Apostles, but that is a power of Office and Authority, a power to teach and
baptize. Now this power of Authority is either Essential or Official: Essential
or natural, which belongs to him as God, and is potestas innata, or data,
therefore not here meant. 2. The Official power is dispensative, or donative,
delegated unto him as Mediator and head of his Church, and therefore termed a
Mediatory power, and this is the power spoken of in this place; the divine
authority of Christ is Mediatory, not as it is common unto every Person in the
Trinity, but as it is appropriated unto him, the second Person. This Person ^s
God receiving by voluntary dispensation this honor from the Father, that he
should in an immediate and appropriate manner execute Government over all the
Creatures in heaven and earth; and though the Father and the Spirit have a
right and sovereignty over the Creatures, yet they do not immediately execute
this in such sort as the Son does.

909. Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations. Mar. 16.15. Psalm. 19.
Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy to
the Dogs, Romans 10.5.
nor Pearls to Swine.

In the first place, by the Nations, and the Creatures, are understood the Jews
and Gentiles, for the sweet voice of the Gospel was to sound to all through the
whole earth, and the seed of the Word to be sown, that Infidels might be left
unexcusable. In the latter, Holy, and Pearls signify the same; It must not be
given to Dogs and Swine, that is, to persecutors, scoffers, Prove. 9.7
despisers, profane; For he that reproves a scorner, gets himself shame,
and he that rebukes a wicked man, gets himself a blot.

* 910. Mat. 28.20. I am with you to the end. Mat. 26.11. The poor you have
always with you, but me you have not always.

Christ's presence is twofold, Substantial or Corporal, 2. spiritual or
gracious. Christ's corporal presence we have not always with us: but his
children have always his spiritual presence in their hearts.

The Gospel of St. MARK.
IT contains briefly the sayings and deeds of Christ in Galilee, Judea, and
Jerusalem, Niceph. l. 2. c. 48. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15.
which Matthew wrote more at large, some will have it dictated and approved by
Peter, whose Scholar Mark was. Irenaus says it was written after the death of
Peter and Paul.

911. MAR. 1.1. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Ver. 3. The voice
of one crying in the Wilderness. Mat. 1.1. Luke 1.2. In the beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, his Conception and Nativity are described.

Mark understands the beginning of the Gospel to be the time of the
promulgation. Matthew begins the Evangelical History about thirty years before
the Preaching of John Baptist; but Mark begins from his Preaching, because the
Law and the Prophets prophesied until John, Mat. 11.15.

* Mar. 1.1.3. with Mat. 1.1. Luke 1.2.

The Gospel of Jesus Christ -- And yet it speaks both of the Nativity and Birth
of Jesus Christ, and likewise of John Baptist, with much of the like nature.

It is called the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus, though it begin with John
Baptist, and his Doctrine; for the beginning of the Gospel imports no more than
the beginning of that Age of the World which the Prophets so unanimously
pointed out for the time of good things to come; and which they expressed by
these or the like terms: The last days; The acceptable year of the Lord; The
Kingdom of God, etc. The Gospel of Christ is said to begin, though it be John's
Preaching and Baptizing, because it did bring in the Doctrine of the Gospel
more clearly and fully than was brought forth before, and had reference to the
Doctrine of Christ. Whereas there is mentioned John's birth and death, etc. or
Christ's birth and death. The former is in relation to Christ, and the latter,
Christ's birth, etc. is related as part of the good news which ought to be
preached.

912. Mat. 1.2. As it is written in the Prophets. Luke 3.4. In the Book of the
words of Isaiah the Prophet.

Isa. 43. Mal. 3.1. Isa. 43.4.
Mark understands Malachi and Isaiah the Prophets, Luke means Isaiah only.

* Mar. 1.2. As it is written in the Prophets. Luke 3.4. As in the books of the
Prophet Isaiah.

The first place speaks of both the Prophets, Isaiah, and Malachy, from whence
the Sentence urged here is taken. But Luke urges only the name of the more
eminent Prophet, Isaiah. The one half of the words alleged in the Text are not
in Isaiah at all, but in Malachy. So Mark might say the Prophets; and yet
sometime in the New Testament, in Allegations from the Old, do closely couch
two several places together under one quotation, as if they were but one; yet
makes it sure, that the first always is the very place which it takes on it
to cite, though the second be another. As Act. 7.7. a speech is alleged which
was spoken at twice, so that here Luke might say Isaiah.

* 913. Mar. 1.35. And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he
went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. with Luke 4.42.
And when it was day he departed, and went into a desert place, and the people
sought him, etc. with Mat. 8.18.

Matthew observes not the time when Peter's wives mother was cured, he bringing
the History in when other circumstances of place or persons, etc. invited him
thereto. And whereas Mark says, it was before day, and Luke, when it was day,
both agree, for it was in the twilight, which is not yet clear day, and yet it
is so much light as to be called day. And whereas Matthew says, Christ
commanded the multitudes to depart to the other side, which questionless they
did, and Christ he went into the Wilderness, and the multitude came thither to
seek him. The meaning may be, Christ commanded that they should depart to the
other side, not that which is opposite directly, but to the other side, in
respect of the sinus of the sea of Galilee, which was toward Capernaum: So the
multitude sailed over part of the Lake, yet did not wholly leave Galilee;
Christ he came by Land to the place where the people sought him. The History
tells us what Christ commanded, not what the people did.

914. Mar. 2.7. Who can forgive sins, but God only? Joh. 20.23. Whose sins you
remit, they are remitted unto them.

God above remits sins by his own authority. The Apostles and Pastors of the
Churches only testify in the Name of Christ, that upon condition of faith,
they are remitted. But God speaks to us by his Ministers, that we should be
sure of his grace, and should have the Sacred Function in honor, since it is
confirmed in heaven what the Ministers declare on earth.

* Mar. 2.7. with Mat. 6. As we forgive our debts or trespasses.

In every trespass which any do to their Neighbors, there be two offenses, one
to God, another to Man. In the first respect, as it is against God, and his
Commandments it is called a sin: And that God only forgives. In the other
respect, it is called only an injury or damage, and so man may forgive it.
When a man is robbed, the Law is broken by stealing, and the injury that is
done, is against a man that has goods stolen, this injury, as it is an
injury, a man may forgive; but as it is a sin, he cannot, but God only.

* Mar. 2.7. with Joh. 20.23.

God forgives sin by authority, Man ministerially; God of himself alone, Man
only from God; God absolutely, Man with conditions and supposition; God really
and originally, Man only declaratively.

915. Mar. 5.20. The man that was possessed with the Devil published in
Decapolis, how great things Jesus had done for him. Luke 3.39. He went through
the City publishing.

He published it first in the City of the Gadarenes, and afterward in other
parts of Decapolis.

916. Mar. 5.30. Virtue went forth of Christ to cure the woman. Ver. 34. He
said unto her, Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole.

By virtue from Christ was the woman restored to her health, which she applied
to her self by faith, and so her issue of blood stayed.

917. Mar. 6.5. Christ could do no mighty works in his own Country. Mat. 28.18.
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.

Christ was not destitute of virtue, but for their incredulity; for faith is
the hand that receives Christ's benefits, and to those that believe all things
are possible: that he could not, is meant here, he would not, for that is Gods
will, to be able, says Tertullian.

918. Mar. 9.2. After six days Jesus takes with him Peter, James, and John.
Luke 9.28. And it came to pass about eight days.

The first place must be understood exclusively in respect of the day, in which
Christ speaks, and was transformed. The latter includes both those days, and
he numbreth not precisely, but about eight, there were not so many whole days.

919. Mar. 9.35. And he sat down and called the twelve. Mat. 18.1. The
Disciples came unto him, saying.

The Disciples on the way disputed who should be the greatest of them, Christ
therefore at home called the twelve, and they being called came unto him.

920. Mar. 10.19. Christ answers him that asked of him about eternal life,
Thou know the Commandments, Do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not
steal. Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in the
sight of God, Gal. 2.16. c. 3.10.

To him that asked, What shall I do? Christ answering this question, that he
might make him know his weakness, he sends him back to the rule of Works, or
the Law of God, and so would have him to seek salvation in Christ, and not in
his own works.

921. Mar. 11.7. They brought the Colt to Jesus. Mat. 21.7. They brought the
Ass and the Colt.

Matthew is an eye witness, that the Ass and the Colt were both brought,
according to the Prophecy, Zac. 9 9.
Fear not O Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes sitting upon an Ass, and
the Foal of an Ass. Some make this an emblem of the Jews and Gentiles, by the
Jew to be meant the Ass, which our Savior rid first on, but because she went
untowardly, he left her, and road on the Foal, which was an emblem of the
Gentiles, who received the Gospel willingly, which the Jews rejected.

* 922. Mar. 13.32. But of that day, and of that hour knows no man, no not
the Angels that are in heaven, no not the Son, but the Father. Col. 2.3. In
Whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

Christ knew not the hour, say some, that is, knew it not to teach us to know
it; but thus God himself he knows it not; nor could Christ have said, No, not
the Son, but the Father. Thus we may aequivoke in any thing: I know it not,
because I will not tell you it. Christ, as Man, knew not the time of Gods
judging the world, though as God he did; and as Mediator he had the fullness of
wisdom dwelling in him, that is, as the Divine Nature is there. It is likely as
Man he had not this Mystery discovevered to him till after his Ascension.

923. Mar. 14.12. And the first day of unleavened bread when they killed the
Passover. Joh. 13.1. Now before the Feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew
that his hour was come.

The Jews began their day from the Evening, and they were to celebrate the
Passover on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, according to the Law, Lev.
23.
as Christ did. But the Jews referred that solemnity to the Sabbath day, and
called it the great day of the Sabbath.

924. Mar. 14.32. They came to a place which was named Gethsemani. Luke 22.39.
And he went as he was wont to the Mount of Olives.

Gethsemani, that is, the Valley of fatness, it was so called from the
fruitfulness of the place, or otherwise the Garden in which the Mount of Olives
was. Therefore the Evangelists here set the same place by diverse names.

925. Mar. 15.25. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. Joh.
19.14. About the sixth hour Pilate said to the Jews, Behold your King.

In the former place, the hour of the day was reckoned according to the manner
of the Jews, from Sun rising to Sun setting, twelve hours to a day; in the
latter, from midnight after the custom of the Romans: Christ was condemned and
crucified the third hour after Sunrising; at the sixth hour he was exposed to
scorns, at the ninth hour (after three hours darkness) he was dead; and the
remainder of the day was spent in his burial. Joh. 20.12.


* Mar. 15.25. with Joh. 19.14.

The East Country men do diversely distinguish their artificial day both into
twelve equal hours (called Planetary hours) and into Quadrants, having the name
of the hour going next before. The Eastern men accounting 1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 3, 6, 9. The manner of our accounting 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The opposition is not in the same respect therefore in the
manner of accounting.

Mark in that Calculation of the time takes his date from the first time that
Pilate gave him up to their abusings, and his phrase may be taken of so
comprehensive an intimation, as to speak both the time of his first giving up
at the third hour of the day, and the time of his nayling to the Cross the
third hour from that; and much after the same manner of account that our
Saviors six hours sufferings from Pilates first giving him up, to his dying
are reckoned: So the 430 years of sojourning of the Children of Israel in
Egypt, Exodus 12. are computed, namely, the one half before they came in
Egypt, and the other half after. As to the latter place, John seems the
rather to have added this circumstance, not only to state the time, (which was
of weighty concernment) but to brand the Jews impiety, and neglect of their
Religion for the satisfying of their malice, who would on so high a day spend
it so far and do nothing. And though some scruple may be, how it could be that
it was about the sixth hour when Pilate delivered him up, seeing Christ was on
the Cross, and darkness about the sixth hour? Yet the words of John as they
raise the scruple, so they give the answer. For it might very properly be said,
and that according to the usual speech of the Nation, that it was about the
sixth hour, when the sixth hour was but now beginning, and by the time that it
was completed, all that might be dispatched, that passed betwixt his
sentencing and his raising upon the Cross.

926. Mar. 16.1. When the Sabbath day was past, the Mary's brought spices. Luke
23.56. The day of the Passover the women prepared Spices and ointments.

On the day of the Passover they bought spices, and began to make Ointments,
on the Sabbath day after Sunset they continued it, and when the Sabbath was
past, they came very early in the morning to Christ's Sepulcher.

927. Mar. 16.5. In the Sepulcher they saw a young man sitting on the right
side. Luke 24.4. Behold two men stood by them in shining garments.

Mark makes mention of one Angel, which spoke to the women. Luke speaks of two
that were witnesses of our Saviors Resurrection.

928. Mar. 16.6. He is risen, he is not here; Behold the place where they laid
him. Joh. 20.14. Mary turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing.

The Angel speaks concerning him dead, such a one as the women sought for,
that they might anoint his body, but Christ witnessed himself that he was
alive, not only by testimony of Angel, but by manifesting himself at the
monument, and speaking unto Mary.

* 929. Mar. 16.8. Neither said they any thing, etc. And yet they told it to
the Disciples.

They said nothing to any man while they were on the way running and trembling,
but as soon as they got within doors they told it to the Disciples; they stood
not talking by the way, but hasted to the Disciples.

930. Mar. 16.9. When Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen. Mat. 28.9. Jesus met the women, which were
Mary Magdalen, and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and the rest.

Mary Magdalen is first named, because she in a peculiar manner saw Christ,
then the other women after her saw him in their order.

* Mar. 16.9. with Mat. 28.9.

Mary had two journeys to the Sepulcher: In the one, she and other women; in
the other, she alone met him. Or else she spoke to him, and not to the rest,
therefore mention is made of her, and not the rest.

931. Mar. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every creature. Mat. 10.5. Go not into
the way of the Gentiles.

The first place is concerning the enlarging of Christ's Kingdom amongst all
Nations after Christ's Resurrection. The latter is concerning the first temporal
mission of the Disciples to the Jews only; for the mystery of our Redemption
before Christ's death, was not to be preached to the Gentiles; Romans 15.8.
therefore Christ was called the Minister of the Circumcision.

932. Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Romans
10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

Faith is the means of our salvation; confession is required, not that faith is
unsufficient, but because that faith is not in the heart, where confession is
not in the mouth, but where it is in the heart it ingenders all parts of
outward confession.

933. Mar. 16.16. He that believes not shall be damned. Romans 11.32. God has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

Christ speaks of some unbelievers, who were hardened that they should not
believe the Gospel, such shall be damned. So they that are not moved by
promises or threatenings, to believe the Gospel, to them is cursing, judgment
and death. Paul speaks of all them both Jews and Gentiles, and describes their
state before the preaching of the Gospel, for they are all by nature shut up in
unbelief, and those that are believers of the Gospel are freed from this state,
that by the Gospel they may be made partakers of Gods mercy in Christ.

934. Mar. 16.19. The Lord Jesus after he had spoken unto them was received up
into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. Chap. 14.22. This is my body.

Christ ascending and sitting at the right hand of God, does not take away the
presence of his body in the holy Supper, but confessing it, Phil. 2.9.
that he is exalted above all things into glory.

935. Mar. 16.19. Christ sits at the right hand of God. Ephesians. 1.20. Col. 3.1.
Heb. 1.3. c. 8.1. 1 Pet. 3.22. Act. 7.56. Steven saw Jesus standing at the
right hand of God.

To sit is the part of the Judge, to stand, the part of him that fights and
helps us, says Gregory; Homil. de Ascens. Domini. Steven therefore being at
the conflict with death, saw him standing whom he had for to help him; but Mark
describes Christ sitting after his Resurrection, for after the glory of his
Ascension, he shall come as Judge in the end of the World.

The Gospel of St. LUKE.
IT comprehends the Conception of John Baptist, and Jesus Christ, with their
Nativity, Life, Vocation, Sermons in special, the Miracles of Christ, his
Passion, Death, Resurrection, Apparition, and Ascension into Heaven.

936. LUKE 1.13. Zacharias prayer is heard. ver. 18. He believed not.

Although he had a conflict through the weakness of his faith, of the special
gift of so wonderful a Son, yet he had a general faith concerning a Messiah the
Deliverer of the people from their disgrace, and therefore his doubting did not
exclude his prayers from being heard.

937. Luke 1.32. The Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David. Joh. 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world.

To sit in the Throne of David here, is not to govern a temporal Kingdom, as
David did here on earth, but a spiritual, wherein Christ reigns by faith in the
hearts of his followers, and he rules over sin, death, and the devil.

938. Luke 1.33. And he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever. 1 Cor.
15.24. He shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father. ver. 28. He shall be
subject unto him.

Christ's Kingdom is eternal and without end, not as David's earthly Kingdom was
for a few days, but it must be continued for ever in the Person of Christ, and
the faithful, after a spiritual manner; he shall deliver the Kingdom to the
Father, not that he shall no longer rule with the Father, but because after
this world is ended, he will fully join us to his Father, and will govern his
Church otherwise than it is now governed.

* Luke 1.33. with 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.

There is a twofold Kingdom of Christ, 1. Essential, as God; 2. Oeconomical, as
Mediator, God and Man, betwixt God and Man. The first Kingdom is not here
spoken of in either place. And as for the second which he received from his
Father, he shall surrender it up again to his Father after he has subdued sin
and death, and put all his enemies under his feet. Christ governs his Kingdom,
his Church and people here by means and instruments, as the Word, Sacraments,
Ministers, etc. By Angels, Men, Ecclestastical, or Politic; opposing means,
for the suppressing his childrens adversaries. Now he shall deliver this
Mediatory rule (when he has fully reconciled all men to God, and perfected his
work) to God the Father, who will rule his Children in a new and hidden way
without men or means, nor mediatly, but immediately by himself Christ shall
still reign. He shall reign over Israel for ever, because he shall rule till
Eternity come, and after him there shall be no King; for when Eternity comes,
he shall rule though in a new way.

939. Luke 1.36. Elizabeth Mary's Cousin. ver. 5. She was of the daughters of
Aaron. Luke 2.5. Mary was of the Tribe of Judah, of the house of David.

In the Scripture they are called Cousins, though they are not at all of the
same family, so vulgarly Anna is affirmed to be the mother of Mary, and the
sister of Elizabeth.

940. Luke 1.44. The babe leaped in my womb for joy, that is, John Baptist in
the womb of his Mother, when Mary came to her. Joh. 1.31. I knew him not, says
John.

Christ was known to John before by internal and spiritual knowledge, but John
knew him externally and corporally in his baptism.

941. Luke 1.67. Zacharias prophesied being full of the Holy Ghost. Joh. 7.39.
The Holy Ghost was not yet, because Christ was not yet glorified.

The first place is meant of the gift and Spirit of Prophecy; the latter place
is concerning the visible and wonderful effusion of gifts of the Holy Ghost
upon the Apostles after Christ's glorification.

942. Luke 2.11. There is born to you a Savior in the City of David, which is
Christ the Lord. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism does save us.

Subalternates do not disagree, Christ makes his people safe from their sins
principally as the efficient meritorious cause, Baptism serves but
instrumentally, and not always; for it is not the want of Baptism, but the
contempt which conde^ns us.

943. Luke 2.33. His Father and mother marvelled at those things. Mat. 1.8.
Jesus according to his humanity, had no Father. Heb. 7.3. According to his
Divinity had no Mother.

The Father of Jesus Christ, Joseph was only so for his care, but not really
and naturally so, for he was appointed by God to be a keeper of the Virgin Mary
espoused to him, and her Son, and Christ being a little child, gave him honor
and reverence due to a Father. The Virgin Mary was his natural Mother according
to the flesh, for he received his humane nature of her substance.

944. Luke 2.34. Simeon blessed him. Heb. 7.7. The lesser is blessed of the
better.

Simeon prayed well for Mary, congratulating her concerning her happy and
blessed Offspring, and by a Prophetic Spirit foreshewing the hard success she
and her Son should have, but he did not prefer himself before them.

945. Luke 3.7. The Baptist calls the Pharisees a generation of Vipers. Mat.
5.22. He that says to his brother, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

John Baptist calls them not so reproachfully out of an ill affection, but from
his Office, because such were full of poison and malice, working the Viperous
works of the devil the old Serpent. So the Ministers of the Church must
publicly complain of the sins of the people.

946. Luke 5.10. Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men. Joh. 1.42.
Andrew brought Simon his brother to Christ.

Simon is brought by Andrew to follow Christ, and to profess the Gospel, by a
general call, but Christ calls him by a special call to the Sacred Function,
about the matter of Fishing.

947. Luke 6.1. And it came to pass on the second Sabbath after the first, that
he went through the Corn fields. Mat. 12.1. At that time Jesus went on the
Sabbath day through the corn.

The Jews cal^ed the eight day of the great solemnity, the second Sabbath after
the fir^^; for some of their Feasts lasted for eight days, and the first day
with the eighth day were the most solemn, and the intermediate days, not so
much regarded, moreover they were called Sabbaths.

948. Luke 6.25. Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep. Joh.
16.22. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

In the first place the pleasures and delights of the world are understood by
the name of laughter, the end whereof is always sorrow; in the latter place is
meant joy in Christ by the Holy Ghost, which is heavenly and eternal.

949. Luke 6.26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you. Mat. 5.16.
(1 Pet. 2.12.) Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Woe be to them, who do only so that they may please the World, and desire the
praise of men, flattering the wicked, and winking at their sins that they may
get favor. But not to them who like a light are an example of good works, and
a godly life to others.

950. Luke 6.30. Give to every man that asks. Eccl. 12.4. Give to the godly,
and help not a sinner, hold back thy bread and give it not unto him.

Christ will have that we shall do good to our friends, and to our enemies,
though they be wicked and ungrateful, by the example of our merciful heavenly
Father, and if we give not to the person, yet give to his Nature as he is a
man. A place of Ecclesiasticus may not be opposed to Canonical Scripture, who
will have him that craves an alms to be humble, shutting out the wicked and
obstinate in malice, who abuse the benificence of good men.

951. Luke 7.13. Weep not. Eccl. 38.16. Let tears fall down over the dead

Christ comforts the Widow, who wept for the death of her only son, because her
son should suddenly live again. But Christ disallows not moderate weeping for
the death of our neighbor, only we must not mourn as those that have no hope.

952. Luke 8.39. Return to thy house, and show how great things God has done
unto thee. Cha. 5.14. He commands the Leper that he should tell no man.

Christ commanded him that was possessed with the devil, to tell what benefits
God had done for him, because the time, the place and other circumstances
required that; but he sent the leprous party who was cleansed, to the Priest,
that he might approve of the cure.

953. Luke 10.4. Salute no man by the way. Romans 16.16. Salute one the other
with an holy kiss, The Churches of Christ salute you. Phil. 4.22. The Saints.

Christ will have his Disciples diligent in dispatch of their Office, that they
should not hinder the course of their Ministry with long discourses and
salutations, but should fulfill their journey in a short time: such a command
gave Elias to his servant: which denies not our Christian duty and humane good
manners to salute one the other.

954. Luke 10.18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Joh. 8.44. The
devil was a murderer from the beginning, and the father of lies.

Satan falls from heaven, when he is cast out of our hearts by sound doctrine,
and loses his light, that is, his authority, by the preaching of Gods Word
here, as it were by a thunderbolt from heaven, that is, from the Kingdom of God
in the heart of man is he cast down and trod under foot: but he was a murderer
and liar from the beginning that he fell; not from that he was created.

955. Luke 10.22. No man knows who the Son is, but the Father, and who the
Father is, but the Son. Joh. 15.26. The Spirit of Truth he shall testify of me.

Christ excludes not the Persons of the Deity, but the creatures and the false
gods, for the Father by the Son from Eternity infinitely communicating his
infinite wisdom, Joh. 16.13.
revealed it to the Holy Ghost, and therefore Christ says, the Spirit shall
not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak.

* 956. Luke 10.23. Blessed are the eyes which see those things which you see.
with Joh. 20.29. Blessed are those which have not seen, and yet believe.

Sight is twofold, bodily, and spiritual: Bodily sight is meant in the latter
place; spiritual sight or understanding is meant in the former. Although many
souls have not seen Christ in the flesh, yet in regard they have seen him with
the eyes of their soul, and believed on him, they are blessed.

957. Luke 10.24. Many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things that
you see. Joh. 8.56. Abraham saw my day.

There are different manners of the Visions of Christ and of God. 1 Cor. 13.12.
We see now in a glass darkly, but then, that is, in the next life we shall see
face to face. Abraham and the faithful in the Old Testament saw Christ promised
that he should come: The Apostles saw him manifested in the flesh. The Prophets
saw him of old in shadows and figures, the Apostles and the Christians now see
him clearly and manifestly.

958. Luke 10.28. Do this and live. Romans 4.5. But to ^im that works not, but
believes, his faith is counted for righteousness.

The parts of Gods Word are the Law and the Gospel; the Law promises life
eternal to them that do it, the Gospel to them that believe. Christ by the
words, Do this, does not show that the Lawyer was able to fulfill the Law, but
only admonishes him so, that he might grow sensible of his own weakness.

959. Luke 10.41. Martha, Martha, Thou art careful and troubled about many
things. 1 Timothy 5.14. I will that the younger women marry guide the house.

Christ reprehends not Martha's care of her house, but for presumption and
false opinion, because she preferred the care of her house before the Word of
God.

960. Luke 11.41. Give alms, and all things are clean unto you. 1 Cor. 13.3. If
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, it profits me nothing.

Christ speaks of alms proceeding from faith and charity; the Apostle speaks of
hypocritical alms without Christian Charity.

961. Luke 12.33. Sell what you have and give alms. 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any
provide not for his own, especially those of his own household, he has denied
the faith.

Christ would not have us forsake our neighbor in his wants and necessities,
but rather (to help him) we should sell our possessions, to declare our
compassion so far as we are able, without doing injury to our family.

* 962. Luke 13.32. Go tell that Fox. with Act. 23.5. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

Some are of opinion, that it was not meant of Herod, but he that was the
Author of their coming, and speaking so to him. For although Herod dealt like a
Fox in killing of John Baptist, pretending sorrow for his death, and yet glad
of the occasion: he was not the Fox now, but some subtle Pharisee, who would
have him thus spoken to, as though they were thus sollicitous for him, when as
indeed they hated him to the death, and intended nothing else, but because his
Doctrine was still against them, to drive him away, if by any means they could.
Or if it were spoken of Herod, Christ spoke not as a private person, nor did he
speak as a rayler on the Magistrate, but as one that by a tart word would show
him his sin and nature. The latter place speaks of private persons speaking
injuriously of their Prince, or in contempt of him.

963. Luke 14.23. Compel them to come in. 1 Pet. 5.3. Not as being Lords over
Gods heritage.

There is used an internal compulsion spiritually, when men are drawn to the
knowledge of their sins, by the Law of God explained to them, and are urged in
their consciences to fly to the mediation of Christ: so from the days of John
the Baptist, Mat. 11.12.
until now the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it
by force; an external compulsion is, when men not sufficiently instructed, and
forced by carnal weapons to Religion against their conscience, such are made
rather hypocrites than good Christians, therefore the Apostle warns us well,
that no man should affect to Lord it over Gods people, that is, the Church, and
to use a tyrannical power over their consciences.

964. Luke 14.24. None of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper.
2 Pet. 3.9. God is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish.

The Gospel, since it is the power of God to salvation to all that believe,
they that hear it, being invited by God and receive it not, dying in their sins
without repentance, they are the cause of their own ruin, and not God.

965. Luke 14.26. He that hates not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. Ephesians. 6.2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that it may be well
with thee. Cha. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives. 1 John 3.15. He that hates his
brother is a murderer.

Christ is to be beloved above all creatures, and rather our Parents, brothers,
and sisters, and our own life should be lost, then we should deny the Gospel.
He that loves his Father and Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, says
Christ; otherwise we must honor our Parents and love our children.

* Luke 14.26. with Ephesians. 6.2.

The latter place bids us honor our Parents in all things that are lawful, yet
not as Gods: The former place tells us, he that honors his parents so much,
when Christ and his Parents come in competition, as they choose their Parents,
and does not so far prefer Christ as in an holy Zeal, leave and even hate their
Parents is not worthy of Christ.

966. Luke 15.7. The righteous need no repentance. Cha. 3.8. Bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance.

Repentance of those that stand, which is spoken of in the first place, must be
distinguished from repentance of those that are fallen, which is meant by the
latter place, and we are admonished to it, and to bring forth the fruits of it.

967. Luke 16.9. Make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. 1 Timothy 4.4.
Every creature of God is good.

Riches are good in themselves, as they are a creature, but because they are
often got unjustly, and many abuse them to injustice, pride, tyranny, luxury,
gluttony, etc. therefore Christ calls them the Mammon of unrighteousness, Mat.
13.7. 1 Timothy 6.9.
thorns; the Apostle calls them the snare of the devil, and will have us so to
dispose of our wealth, that we may reap fruit of them in another world.

* 968. Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets were until John. with Luke 2.1.

Christ's intent is concerning the Policy of Moses and the Ceremonies which were
in force until John's coming, after whose days follows a spiritual
administration which John begun, plainly preaching repentance and remission of
sins by the blood of the Lamb. The Jews had a fancy that Moses his Law should
be dispensed amongst the Gentiles, and the whole World to be under their
Polity, which Christ reproved, and told them of another Kingdom and Policy to
come. Christ speaks nothing here of the Moral Law, which in propriety of speech
is no part of Moses Polity, as the Ceremonial and Judaical were; the Moral Law
was natural and eternal, and therefore belonged to all times and persons. The
Ceremonial Law had no force compulsory over the people; but yet after John it
showed us Christ held forth in the times under the Law.

969. Luke 17.10. When you have done all those things which you are commanded,
say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.
2 Cor. 11.12. Paul glories, and reckons up his good works and divine
Revelations.

In the former place Christ says, that no man can deserve any thing at the
hand of God; since we are all bound to obey God in all things unto the end, so
that we cannot boast before God. In the latter, Paul mentions his labors,
not of vainglory boasting, but being compelled to it for the defense of his
Ministry, against all back-biters and false Apostles that unjustly reproached
him.

* 970. Luke 17.10. with Psalm. 19.12. In keeping thy Commandment there is great
reward.

When we have done all there is no merit, it is but all duty; but when we have
done all, there is a reward, it is Gods Promise and Goodness, though we by our
best deeds meant nothing; yet God out of his goodness rewards us with some
thing plentifully.

971. Luke 18.1. We ought to pray always, and not to faint. -- Christ's
Disciples did not do so, nor were they blamed for it.

This word always signifies not a continuation of time, but a constancy and
perseverance in the duty. There were set hours for prayer: Christ would not
have us confine our selves to these hours, but rather to take any time we can,
being diligent in the duty. We say, This boy is always at his study, because
he is most an end there, or he makes it his greatest business: So a Christian
should always be at his prayers, make it his greatest business.

972. Luke 18.29. Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house,
or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the Kingdom of Gods sake,
who shall not receive manifold more. 1. Cor. 7.10. The wife must not depart
from her husband, and the man must not put away his wife.

For Christ his sake we may leave our Wives and all things, when necessity
constrains us, but we cannot leave our Matrimony: Paul admonishes the wife
that she should not by contumacy forsake her husband, nor the husband to
forsake his wife; but if she depart, let her live unmarried, or be reconciled
to her husband.

* 973. Luke 18.35. And when he drew nigh unto Jericho, a blind man sitting by
the way-side -- Mar. 10.46. As he went out of Jericho -- blind Bartimeus --
Mat. 20.30. And behold two blind men sitting by the way-side, as they departed
from Jericho.

Some say, these were different times and passages; others, that they were in
the same Journey, and that he healed one blind man at his coming in; and as he
went forth two more, whereof the more noted was Bartimeus, or in English, the
son of Timeus, and he being the more noted his name is only set down. But
others say, he cured one at his going in, another as he came forth, and then
further on his way, two more.

974. Luke 22.28. Ye are they who have continued with me in my temptations.
Mat. 26.56. All the Disciples forsook him and fled.

In the former place, the Disciples constancy is commended for the time past,
that they forsook not Christ in his temptations, when others were backward. In
the latter, is observed their scattering abroad, for that at the time of
Christ's passion their faith was much shaken.

975. Luke 22.29. I appoint to you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed me.
Mar. 10.40. For to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give.

He speaks at first, not of the Kingdom of heaven, whereof he has the sole
government, but of the administration of the Kingdom of Grace, in the
promulgation of the Gospel through all the world; and planting of Churches by
Apostolical Authority, which he going to his Father, left in charge with them,
as he had it committed to him by his Father.

976. Luke 22.31. Satan desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat. 1 John 5.18. And he that is born of God sins not, and that wicked one, that
is, the devil, touches him not.

Satan lays snares for godly men always, seeking whom he may devour, that
Christ confirms by example of the Disciples. John teaches that that evil one
shall not hurt us, though he set upon us. For God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it.

* Luke 22.31. Satan has desired to sift you. 1 John 5.18. That evil one shall
not touch you.

The former place shows Satan's intent and desire; The latter shows Gods
intent and resolution. Satan's desire is by tempting and sifting to overthrow,
but he shall only cleanse and refine you, and this by goodness of God, who may
suffer Satan to take of the chaff, but will not suffer him to touch or meddle
with the corn.

977. Luke 23.34. Father forgive them. Joh. 17.9. I pray not for the world.

Christ both by words and his own example taught us to pray for our enemies, he
prayed not for the world, that is, for wicked men hardened in their sins, of
whom there was no hopes of repentance: we must not imitate that, because he
only knew best who they were that were such.

* Luke 23.34. with Joh. 17.9.

In the former, Christ seeing the people zealous without knowledge, and that he
might teach us to pray for those which despitefully use us, prayed for the
Jews; not that he so prayed for them, as absolutely to pray and believe that
all and every particular soul of them should be saved, but that those who
belonged to the election of grace, among them should be forgiven, etc. The
latter place says, that Christ would not pray that all and every paticular
person in the world should be saved.

978. Luke 24.10. Mary Magdalen and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, which
told these things unto the Apostles. Mar. 16.10. Mary Magdalen told them that
had been with him.

Mark excludes not the other women, he names Mary Magdalen, either because she
spoke to the Apostles in the name of all the rest, or else with greater
affection, or because she spoke first.

The Gospel of St. JOHN.
IT Contains a relation of Christ's Person both according to his divine and
humane Nature, also his Office, Mat. 10.7
and pains he endured unto the death of the Cross, his Resurrection also, and
his appearings. It was written after the other Evangelists against the Heresies
of Ebion and Corinthus, being as it were a Complement of those things were let
pass by the other Evangelists.

* 979. IOH. 1.1. And the Word was God. Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and for
ever, etc.

Doubt. A word is vox evanescens, a vanishing voice; Christ is a Word, ergo,
vanishing, and not stable.

Answ. There is an equivocation in the word (...), or word; for (...), or a
word is sometime in the predicament of Quality when it signifies a sound or
transient voice, volat irrevocabile verbum; sometime it is in the predicament
of Relation, when it signifies a promise, by which you are obliged to another.

Verba ligat homines, taurorum Cornua funes.

As often in the predicament of Action when it signifies a thought, or
deliberation, or purpose of mind; but in this place it is taken essentially,
not vulgarly; as for (...), quoddam subsistens and intelligens; And Christ is
called the Word in respect of the Father, because he was begot by the mind of
his Father: and in respect of us, as the person producing the Gospel from the
bosom of the eternal Father, and keeping the Ministry thereof.

Joh. 1.1. And the Word was made flesh. Flesh is a Creature, therefore Christ
was a Creature.

Mutato genere predicationes non valet consequentia. In majore usitata
predicatio est generis de specie. Flesh is a created substance in the other
proposition; The Word was made flesh was an improper speech. The Word was made
flesh, i. e. The Word is Man, or the Word the Divine Nature assumed into
personal union with the Humane Nature.

Joh. 1. We saw his glory as of the only Son of God. Ioh. 1.12. To them gave he
power to become the Sons of God.

The word Son is sometime taken (...), sometimes (...). They are properly Sons
who are procreated of the Fathers substance, and keep the Fathers Nature in
themselves, so Isaac was the son of Abraham. Others are sons by Law or
adoption, when he who was not of the nature of the Father is taken and
acknowledged by the pleasure of the father to be his son, as Eleazer was to
Abraham when yet Isaac was not born; and sometimes Catechistically, Scholars
are called sons of Masters. Angels and Believers are the Sons of God by
Adoption and Grace, but Christ is the true and natural Son of God. He is the
only begotten and beloved Son, storge naturali, with a natural affection; and
thorough this Son it is that all other Sons of God are beloved and adopted.

980. Joh. 1.7. John came for a witness to bear witness of the light. c. 5. 34.
I (says Christ) receive not testimony from man.

Act. 1.8. c. 10.39.
John testified of Christ that he was the light of the world, not for Christ's
cause, but for man's cause, that they might believe in him. For seeing he is the
chief good, the testimony of men or Angels can add nothing unto him.

* Joh. 1.7. with Joh. 5.34.

The former place speaks of John's office and end in coming to preach, to bear
witness. The latter place speaks of John's Testimony as nothing in comparison of
God's. q. d. I have no need to ground my Doctrine of John's Testimony concerning
me; the Testimony that I ground on, is that of the Father, which is far greater
than that of John's. Though I deny not John's Testimony in its place, yet I will
not compare it with the Testimony of God.

981. Joh. 1.8. He, that is, (John) was not that light. c. 5. 35. He was a
burning light.

John was not the light of life which enlightens every man that comes into the
world, Joh. 8.12
but Christ who is the light of the world. Yet John was a burning light, which
not of himself, but before others carried the Torch-light of the Word, and
enlightened many by the Ministry, that so they might see that true Light and Sun
of Righteousness. So Ministers of the Church and all the godly shine before
others in holy doctrine and pious life.

* Joh. 1.8. with Joh. 5.35.

Light is either created, or increated. John the Baptist was a created light;
Christ was the increated light. John was not the increated, but a created
light. John was not the original light, but he was a derivative light, or a
reflection of that Sun. John was not the light, but he bore witness of the
light, and in this regard he was called a burning light.

982. Joh. 1.14, 18. We behold his glory as of the only begotten of the Father.
Gal. 3.26. For you are all the children of God by faith, which is in Christ
Jesus.

Christ is the only begotten Son of God, namely, Romans 8.15. 1 Cor. 1.22. c. 5.
15.
the natural Son begotten from everlasting, by the communication of the whole
divine Nature from the Father: the faithful are called the Sons of God by
Adoption, their faith in Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which is called the Spirit
of Adoption, because by his virtue and operation, he adopts us to be the sons
of God.

* 983. Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time. Isa. I saw the God of
Sabbath sitting, etc.

Seeing God, is either wholly or in part; no man has seen God, or comprehended
God with the eye of his body or of his mind, the fullness of God. It is one
thing to see another, to comprehend by seeing, when as nothing of the whole is
concealed, but it is seen round about in all the limits thereof. God may be
seen by certain similitudes, but by the species of his nature he cannot be
seen; when Jacob, Moses, and Isaiah saw God, it was by certain similitudes, but
not his uncircumscribed nature. Or else no man formerly in the dispensation of
the Law has so clearly and fully seen God as now he is revealed in the days
of the Gospel; though Isaiah and others have had some twilight, yet not so as
now in larger beams.

984. Joh. 1.27. He it is who came after me. Ver. 27. For he was before me.

Christ was born after John the Baptist, of the Virgin Mary, in the sixth month
according to his humane Nature; but he was before him, as he was God from
everlasting.

* 985. Joh. 1.31. I knew him not. The babe leaped in my womb.

I knew him not by sight, before God revealed him to me, when Christ came to my
Baptism, and did afterward confirm it by the sight of a Dove. There was no
juggling betwixt Christ and me, for I was not acquainted with him, or saw him
before. When John leaped in his mothers belly, it was by divine instinct, not
natural knowledge.

986. Joh. 2.4. Woman what have I to do with thee? Mat. 15.4. Honor thy Father
and Mother.

The words of Christ were of Information, not of Reprehension. For we must obey
God rather than men. By the word woman, he implies that the Virgin Mary must
not be the object of Invocation, but God only, says Epiphan. Haeres. 79.

* Joh. 2.4. with Mat. 15.4.

The former place shows nothing of irreverence to his mother. Christ is to be
considered as God, as Man, as the Son of God, as the Son of Man. As God he did
Miracles, and so he reproves or inhibits her doing Miracles, and so sets aside
her Motherhood; or if we consider him as Man, he does not show irreverence,
only would by that word chide her for intermedling in appointing times and
seasons for his doing Miracles, and showing the power and glory of God in him.

* 987. Joh. 2.20. --

Forty six years was this Temple in building, Solomon's was but seven and an
half, Zorobabel was not so many, it was about fifteen, it is meant of the last
restoration by Herod Ascalonita. He began it 27 of the Julian year, and
finished it 15 of Tiberius, and 73 Julian; so as they are 46 years in building,
it being finished about the first of Christ's Preaching.

988. Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came from
heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven. Chap. 17.24. Father, I will
that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory.

By ascending and descending here, we must understand the usurpation of
heavenly things, for the natural and carnal man perceives not those things
which are from the Spirit of God. And all those whom the Father gave to Christ,
that is, the faithful, shall be blessed with him for ever both in souls and
bodies, and so the first place is explained by the latter. Christ is head of
the faithful, and we are his Members; he is in the midst of us, and our
conversation is in heaven. He descended in weakness, that he might raise us to
his glory, for no man can come to the Father but by him.

* Ioh. 3.13. with 17.24.

Ascending into heaven is either Corporal or Mental; No man has corporally
ascended into heaven, but by the merits of the Son of Man. But 2. No man has
Spiritually or Mentally ascended into the Mysteries of God fully and
thoroughly, but the Son of Man has fully and thoroughly, for in him dwells the
whole treasure of wisdom; and if any man has ascended in part, or into any one
part thereof, it is by the help and spirit of this Son of Man, who is likewise
the Son of God; which as the Son of God came down from heaven, the property of
one nature being usually ascribed to the other.

989. Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world. Gal. 4.4. God sent his
Son.

God sent not his Son to judge the World in his state of humiliation; but he
sent him to redeem those that were under the law: now in his state of
exaltation he does and will judge the World. Joh. 5.19. Mat 28.
For all judgment and power is given to him from the Father both in Heaven and
in Earth.

* 990. Ioh. 3.21. with 1 Cor. 15.22.

The first Text tells us, Christ quickens whom he will, intimating, that none
but whom he will is quickened, the power being solely in his hand. The latter
place tells us, That all are made alive in Christ. Life is either temporal, the
effect or result of the conjunction of the soul and the body. Secondly,
Spiritual life, the conjunction of the Soul and God, and that is either
inchoate or perfect in this life, and perfect in the life to come, when God
does discover the conjunction more fully, beside uniting the soul and body. Now
upon this account the souls that are enlivened are enlivened by Christ, and
none other. Or if (as others will) it be meant of all, then Christ is the cause
of the rising of all at the last day.

And so Joe. 3.22. with Joh. 4.2.
991. Joh. 4.1. Jesus baptized. Ver. 2. Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples.

Christ did not outwardly baptize with his own hands, but by his Disciples; yet
it is called Christ's Baptism, because he appointed it, and consecrated it by
his Word, sanctified it by his own Baptism, adorned it, and confirmed it by
annexing a promise to it, and because with the outward Baptism by water, he
joyneth the baptism by fire, that is, he inwardly washes our hearts by the
baptism of his Spirit and his own blood, Mat. 3.11 Luke 3.17
pardoning our sins, and purging our corrupt affections.

992. Joh. 4.13. Whosoever drinks of the water, that I shall give him, shall
never thirst. Ecclesiasticus 24.21. They that eat me, shall yet hunger, and
they who drink me, shall thirst yet.

Christ speaks concerning thirst and desire of a thing, which a man that has
it not wishes for; Ecclesiasticus concerning a thing already acquired; and of
wisdom, whose memory is sweeter than honey, and the Inheritance thereof, better
than honey and the honey-combe, as Lyra speaks on Ecclesiasticus.

* Joh. 4.13. Shall not thirst for ever. with Ecclus. 24.29.

They shall not thirst from defect or mere privation of grace and comfort
wholly and finally, as if they had no water, which who drinks of worldly water
must do, but they shall thirst from desire of having more plenty of those
waters, as those who once taste of sweet things desire more to taste of them.

993. Joh. 4.38. You have entered into other men's labors. 1 Pet. 4.15. Let no
man be a busy body in other men's matters.

In the first place Christ speaks of Apostles lawfully called, who under the
New Testament not drawn by curiosity, but being divinely and immediately
called, entered on the labors of the Prophets; In the latter an ill desire is
forbidden.

* Joh. 4.38. with 1 Pet. 4.15.

The former place speaks of the Apostles entering upon the Ministry, and labor
of the Prophets, and John Babtist. The latter place forbids men's being Spies
and disturbers of the public peace.

994. Joh. 5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself. Chap. 10.18. No man takes
away my life from me, but I lay it down of my self.

Christ as man can do nothing of Gods works of himself, but from the Father,
giving all honor and glory to Father. Phil. 4.13.
So the Apostle could do all things through Christ: In the latter place he
treats of the divine power, that he had of laying down his life for his sheep,
and of taking it up again.

* Joh. 5.19. with Joh. 10.18.

The former place speaks in relation to God, and so he can do nothing distinct
from the Fathers work: seeing as they are one God, so have they one will, and
one working. The latter place speaks in relation to men, so no man takes it
from me, and this I have as conjunct with the Father, not of my self as Son of
Man.

995. Joh. 5.22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son. Chap. 8.15. I judge no man, says Christ to the Jews.

The Father judges by the Son, and works all things; for works external are
common to the three Persons: Christ judges no man with unrighteous Judgment,
as the Jews did rashly judge of him, according to their carnal affections,
being led with hatred and malice.

* Joh. 5.22. with 8.15.

The Father judges no man immediately, but the Father governs the World in the
Sons Person, and exercises his Empire with his hand that he may rule heaven
and earth according to his pleasure. The latter place speaks of Christ in the
office of his Mediatorship wherein he did not proceed against the Jews, or any
else as a rigorous and criminal Judge, as his authority might have extended,
and he have had good reason to do, his end being to save by instruction,
exhortation, conversion, and not to ruin by judgment and condemnation; he
judges not in his first coming, his second is to judge.

996. Joh. 5.27. The Father has given all power and judgment to the Son. Chap.
3.17. God sent not his Son into the world, that he might judge the world, but
that the world should be saved by him.

The first place speaks of the coming of Christ in glory, and of his Majesty;
or of the sending of the Son to judgment; the latter is concerning Christ's
coming in humility, when he came not to judge the world, but that the world
should be saved by him.

997. Ioh. 5.31. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. Chap.
8.14. Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true.

In the former place Christ speaks after the opinion of the Jews, who would say
to him, thou bear witness of thy self, and no man that bears witness of
himself is worthy to be believed; and he urges them with it, that if he
testified of himself, without the testimony of others, then they should not
believe him, but he had John for a witness. Chap. 5.33. The Father. ver. 32.37.
His works. Ver. 36. The Scripture. Ver. 39. By the latter he defends the
authority of his own testimony, because he knew for what he was sent; and to
whom he should return, that is, to the Father, and because he was not alone,
Ver. 16.
but the Father was with him.

* Ioh. 5.31. with -- 8.14.

The first place intimates thus much: You think I aim not at Gods glory, but
at my own, and more eye Fame than Truth, which occasions my speaking such great
things of my self, without any witnesses worthy belief. If the case were so, I
were not worthy your faith: But you are deceived, I neither seek my own glory,
nor am I without witness, for there is my Father in heaven, and John, and
others on earth.

998. Ioh. 5.34. I receive not testimony from men. Chap. 15.27. And ye also
shall bear witness, because you have been with me.

Christ in respect of himself wants no man's testimony, nor does receive the
testimony of men, or glory from them, Chap. 5.41. as the Jews did, Chap. 5.44.
But when Christ chooses witnesses of his Truth amongst men, Joh. 20.32. Act.
10.43. 2 John 1.3
he does it by reason of our infirmity, that believing we may have society with
him, and it may be for our salvation.

* Ioh. 5.34.

Christ receives not testimony from man originally, My testimony is from
heaven, as in my Baptism, This is my beloved Son; and from the Scriptures, They
testify of me. Christians and Disciples do not so much give testimony to
Christ that he is the Messiah, as they hold forth this testimony, being
formerly given by the Holy Ghost. John and the Apostles bore witness not so
much to, as of Christ to the people.

999. Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures. Chap. 6.45. They shall be all taught of
God.

Christ speaks first of the manner and outward means, but afterward of the
internal means, for God teaches us by the Scripture, as an ordinary means, for
he will have us to search his Will in and out of the Scriptures, because he
teaches us by the Scriptures, as he does bring to pass other things by
ordinary means.

* Ioh. 5.39. with 6.45.

In the former place Christ tells us what is our duty if we would be taught of
God. The latter place tells us who will teach us, the Spirit within by the Word
without; the one, as the Efficient; the other, as the Instrument. He that
says, they shall all be taught of the Master himself, says not, that they
shall leave off reading, but they shall read that the Master may teach them.

1000. Ioh. 5.44. How can you believe, who receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? Chap. 12.42. Among the Chief
Rulers also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue.

The faith of the Rulers, if it had been true and lively in Christ, it would
have showed it self by confession and good works, and would have brought forth
good fruit: It was therefore but an Historical or Temporary faith: for they
loved the glory of man, more than the glory of God.

* 1001. Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes. 2 These. 3.10. He
that will not labor must not eat.

Labor not so much for outward meat as for spiritual and eternal. Labor every
one must in his outward Calling, yet this outward laboring must not make us
labor so earnestly as we do in our effectual and spiritual Calling. He sets
not aside outward labor, but prefers spiritual.

1002. Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that you believe. Romans 3.28. We are
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law.

Faith is called the work of God, because it is the effect and gift of God, and
pleasing unto him. The work of faith, as it is a gift of God infused into us,
and is an inherent quality, so faith in this sense does not absolutely justify
us, but relatively as it apprehends Christ with his benefits, and applies them:
so we are justified by faith alone without works, not for the inexistence,
inherence, dignity, or merit of faith, but for the instrumental efficiency, and
application by it.

* Joh. 6.29. with Romans 3.28.

Though faith be considered as a work wrought in the soul, yet it would not
follow that we were justified by works, but by a work; which is a Sophism of
the Papists, or others, to put the singular for the plural: And yet Faith, not
as a work in or of the soul, not as an act, habit, or quality, justifies; but
faith is said to justify in opposition to the external and internal
performances of the Law. It justifies instrumentally, as the hand heals by
applying that which heals.

* 1003. Ioh. 6.32. Moses gave you not that bread to eat from heaven. with 1
Cor. 10.3, 4. Did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual
^ock Christ.

Moses did not give that bread or rock which was really Christ, but only
significantly Christ; They all eat that meat, and drank the same rock: not
literally, or substantially eat and drank the rock; for that could not be, it
being a rock, and so not potable, nor could there be a spiritual rock, (as
spiritual is put for a substance without flesh and bones,) but figuratively a
rock; Though Moses gave the sign, he could not give Christ himself, which came
after Moses time from heaven, and took our nature upon him.

1004. Joh. 6.37. And him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Romans
9.16. It is not of him that wills, nor that runs, but of God that shows
mercy.

To come to Christ, that is, to believe, is not in our power, but in the will
of God, because it is given from the Father, so that it is not in man's will,
but in Gods mercy, that we come to Christ, and believe in him.

* 1005. Joh. 6.44. No man comes to me but whom the Father draws. with Ezekiel.
-- Turn you, turn you, why will you die?

The former place shows no man has strength to turn: The latter place shows us
our duty, we ought to turn. The former place shows where strength is to be had,
that we may turn: The latter place shows, that in regard it is our duty to turn
our selves, and we cannot of our selves do this, we must seek for help from the
Lord that we may be turned. The Master says, Every Boy is bound to con his
Lesson perfectly; and he says moreover, No Boy can do this of himself, he must
ask me: He therefore fairly invites the Boys to ask him.

* Joh. 6.44. And him that comes, etc.

The former place tells us not who gives strength to come to Christ, but assures
us that who comes shall be entertained. The latter tells us, none can come, but
those to whom God gives mercy, and draws by his mercy: So as they seem both to
speak thus much, It is Gods mercy any comes, and likewise it is his mercy that
he will not refuse those which come.

1006. Joh. 6.53. Except you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood, you have not life in you. Heb. 10.1. The Fathers under the Law had
shadows of future good things.

Christ speaks of the spiritual receiving of his body and blood by faith, as
believers are made partakers of his benefits. In the Old Testament under
figures, in the New Testament without figures; yet so, that the Fathers and we
eat and drink the same spiritual meat and drink, and we as they receive Christ
by faith.

* Joh. 6.53. with Heb. 10.1.

It is one thing to eat the wheat pure and winnowed from the chaff, another
thing to eat wheat with the chaff, in or out of the Ear. The Jews eat Christ
spiritually, but in the chaff of Ceremonies and Types, not so purely and
spiritually as we who live in the days of the Gospel, and have the wheat
winnowed from the chaff, Christ from Ceremonies.

1007. Joh. 6.54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life. Ver. 63. The flesh profits nothing.

In the first place is understood the flesh of Christ which gives life; In the
latter, the flesh of men taken in a carnal sense: also the flesh profits
nothing in that manner, as the Capernaites dreamed concerning it.

* Joh. 6.54. with v. 63.

The first place imports, that he who eats Christ's flesh, i. e. believes in
and rests on that which he has done in his flesh or humane Nature shall have
nothing: And the latter place is an Exposition how flesh is to be taken; in the
former place not literally as flesh is external and visible, for that does not
profit, no not Christ's flesh as separate from the Spirit, but it is the
spiritual flesh that must be eaten: It is the spirit which is in me must
quicken you; and the spiritual meaning must be here used.

1008. Joh. 6.54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal
life. 1 Cor. 11.28. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation.

The flesh of Christ in it self gives life, because it is always so, also in
respect of men, because some are faithful, which it does actually give life to,
others Infidels who are not quickened in Christ; the cause whereof is not from
Christ, but from their own Infidelity and unworthiness, for not discerning the
body and blood of the Lord, they draw on the judgments of God upon themselves.

* Joh. 6.54. with 1 Cor. 11.28.

He that eats my flesh. Flesh is twofold, it is material substantial flesh,
or secondly that which was purchased by that flesh, spiritual flesh. Eating is
twofold, with material teeth, and with spiritual faith. He that spiritually
believes in and relieth on that which I did in my flesh, i. e. those spiritual
and eternal advantages I have obtained, he has a right to, and a pledge of
eternal life, he has those graces which will bring him thither, and he shall
assuredly have eternal life as if he had it.

2. The wicked eat neither Christ's spiritual or material Flesh, they only eat,
that which represents his flesh; and that flesh they do eat unworthily, by
eating it only with carnal apprehensions, or carnally he eats the sign, not the
substance.

1009. Joh. 7.5. Neither did his brethren believe in him. Chap. 16.27. Ye have
believed that I came out from God.

The former place must be understood of his brethren and corporal kindred; the
latter of the Apostles and his Disciples, which were not all kindred to Christ
according to the flesh

* Joh. 7.5. with 16.27.

We must distinguish of times, that we may reconcile the Scripture. At the
first preaching of Christ, or the beginning of his Ministry, his own kindred
(which were not disciples) did not think of Christ as his deserts expressed, but
afterward many of them did believe and were converts.

1010. Joh. 7.7. The world cannot hate you. Chap. 15.19. Ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

In the first place Crist speaks to his Brethren and Cousins according to the
flesh that did not believe in him, living carnally, and after the manner of the
world; in the latter place he speaks of the Apostles who believed in him, and
were purged from all dregs of Infidelity, and he assigns the causes wherefore
they and other believers were hated of the world.

* Joh. 7.7. with 15.19.

Christ in the former place looks on his kindred as then having not made any
profession of Christianity, but living according to the manner of the Jews; and
so long as they did so they would not be hated of the world, but if once they
came to believe as they did. Chap. 15.19. Then they must expect that the world
would hate them.

1011. Joh. 7.8. I go not up yet unto this Feast. Ver. 10. He went up to the
Feast.

He went not openly with his friends that he might be seen, but privately; by
this example of his, he has taught us not to venture our selves rashly amongst
our enemies.

* Joh. 7.8. with 10.

The former place tells us that Christ was resolved not to go immediately; but
yet when he had got quit of those carnal relations he went to the Feast,
whether it were that day or the next I know not.

1012. Joh. 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but my Fathers who sent me. Chap.
17.10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine.

The Doctrine of Christ is said to be his Fathers, and his in different
respects; the Father has it from himself, Christ from his Father; also it is
said to be the Fathers, because he sent his Son, for Christ was sent from the
Father to publish it.

* Joh. 7.16. with 17.10.

My Doctrine is not mine originally as I am the Son of Man, but it is that
Doctrine, which as I am the Redeemer of the world, or the Prophet which Moses
said should be raised from among the Brethren, the Father had determined I
should preach. The latter place speaks of Persons, not Doctrine, all my sheep
and people; or if of Doctrine, then so all things are Gods as they are Christ's,
and so Christ's that they are Gods.

* 1013. Joh. 7.24. with Mat. 7.1. Luke 6.37.

Judge righteous Judgment when you are called upon to judge matters or things
in controversy betwixt man and man, or betwixt a man's actions and the Law,
Judge without partiality -- But judge not private transactions, wherein you are
not called to judge, or do not pass your censure rashly on men's persons.

1014. Joh. 7.26. Do the Rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? 1
Cor. 2.8. Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

The knowledge of Christ is either carnal and historical, so the Rulers of the
Jews, and the devils knew Christ; but this is nothing to salvation, or a
spiritual knowledge by faith, which justifies believers, and which the Jews
that crucified Christ had not. Here the same thing is said in both places, and
what in the first place is explained by an Ironical Interrogation, in it self
negative, that in the latter place is done affirmatively.

1015. Joh. 7.34, 36. Where I am, thither ye cannot come. Chap. 17.24. Father,
I will that they also which thou have given me, be with me where I am.

Christ in the former place speaks to the Pharisees and carnal men, rejecting
his grace, and he says to them, Where I am ye cannot come, that is, into
heaven. In the latter place he speaks of all the faithful which his Father has
given him.

1016. Joh. 8.15. I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. Chap.
16.5. Now I go my way to him that sent me.

In the first place Christ speaks of the unity of the Divine Nature, and the
inseparable conjunction of the Person; In the latter concerning his Death and
Ascension into heaven, to intercede with God the Father for us.

* Joh. 8.16. with Joh. 16.5.

The first place shows Christ to be so conjoined to God by his Divine Nature,
that he was never alone; The second place tells us, that Christ according to
his Humane Nature was to go to such a place as the Father did more fully
evidence himself than here. Not as if Christ as God were not present on earth
as well as in heaven, but that he went from them in his Humane Nature into the
heavens, from whence he shall come to judge the world.

* 1017. Joh. 8.19. You neither know me, Joh. 7.28. And you know me.

You know me; not as to my Divinity, you know me, as to my Humanity.

1018. Joh. 8.23. Ye are of this world. Chap. 15.19. Ye are not of this world.

To be of the world is to be in darkness, and to lead a wicked life: Not to be
of the world, is to acknowledge Christ, and to live godly. The first place
therefore respects the unbelieving Jews and carnal men; the latter respects all
the faithful, the children of God, and elected to salvation.

1019. Joh. 8.26. I have many things to say, and to judge of you. Chap. 3.18.
He that believes not, is condemned already.

In the first place the present-tense is put for the future, For we must all of
us appear before Christ's Tribunal, Romans 14.10.
that every man may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.

* Joh. 8.26. with 3.18.

The first place tells us, that Christ had many things whereof he might judge
them, and accuse them, but that at present was not his work, he came to
convince them by his Preaching and Miracles, who he was, and afterward to die
for them; as for judging them it was at present his Fathers work, who was true.
The second place, that he that believes not is in a condemned estate, and his
conscience upon a serious inquest will condemn him, and the Law will judge him
as condemned, though the sentence of condemnation is not already solemnly
pronounced against him, as it will be at the last day.

1020. Joh. 8.28. I do nothing of my self. Chap. 10.18. I have power, etc.

Christ of himself, that is, without the Father, or against his Fathers
authority, did nothing.

1021. Joh. 8.33. We be Abraham's seed. Ver. 44. Ye are of your Father the devil.

There are sons carnal, and sons spiritual; the carnal Jews were the seed of
Abraham, in respect of corporal propagation. Spiritual are such as are guided
by a good or evil spirit, sons by a good Spirit are all the faithful, who are
of the seed of Abraham by faith in Christ, who gave to believing Abraham, that
he should be c^^led the Father of believers: Christ says the Jews were from an
evil spirit, who did not the works of Abraham, but of the devil, in respect of
their malice and imitation; and he that does the works of another may be called
his son.

1022. Joh. 8.35. The servant abides not in the house for ever. 1 These. 4.17.
We shall ever be with the Lord.

In the first place is spoken of a servant of sin; in the latter, of the
faithful; who shall be delivered from all bondage, being made free by the Son,
Joh. 8.36.

* Joh. 8.35. with 1 These. 4.17.

The former place speaks of the condition of a servant in general, whether it
be meant of a bodily service, or otherwise. He remains not always in the
Masters house; but as soon as the days of his servitude are past, he goes to
live of himself. And this place compares a son and a servant; the one stays a
time, the other for ever. They were not spiritually and really Sons, though
externally and carnally sons, but really and spiritually servants. The second
place speaks of those who were not servants to sin, or the Law, but sons. I
call you no more servants, but sons; and so they may, as the sons of God
spiritually in Christ, remain in the house for ever.

1023. Joh. 8.36. Ye shall be free indeed. Romans 7.23. Paul was a captive under
the law of sin.

The faithful are free from sin, in respect of condemnation, dominion, and
perfect liberty which they shall enjoy in the next life, they are said to be
captive under sin, by reason of inherent sin; which begets ill desires in them
against their wills.

* 1024. Joh. 8.36. You are free indeed. Romans 7.16. I am sold under sin.

A Christian is free from the Ceremonies of the Law, and from the damning power
of the Moral Law, (as he is in Christ) and he is free from the power of sin,
that is, free from sins damnation, and free from sins dominion, i. e. when he
begins to believe, the Lord enables him more freely to resist sin than
formerly, and so daily enlarges his heart, till in the conclusion this freedom
is perfected; and yet St. Paul might speak of his being in his own apprehension
so troubled with sin as if he were sold under it, though he were in part free,
and was going on to perfect freedom from sin. It is one thing what Christ spoke
as to the right and portion of a Christian, another thing what Paul speaks out
of his hatred and detestation of the weight and lusting of sin within him. A
child of God takes the longing of his spirit after sins grievously, and
complains he is sold under sin when he finds sin strongly tempt him.

* 1025. Joh. 8.44. He was a murderer from the beginning. Joh. 1.1. In the
beginning was the word.

This word beginning has several considerations: It is not to be taken from
the first absolute beginning, for then Satan had no being not from his own
beginning: For at his creation he was good, as all things else were, but so
soon as ever Man was, he resolved to destroy man, and with reference to that
intention he was a manslayer or murderer of Man from the beginning of Man. So
that this place is meant of Man's beginning, and the second place is meant
simply the beginning of the world.

1026. Joh. 8.46. Which of you convinvinceth me of sin? Chap. 9.24. We know
that this man is a sinner.

Christ speaks of firm proof, that no man could convince him of sin. The Jews
for despite and calumny said falsely, that he was a sinner.

* Joh. 8.46. with 9.24.

The former place, put by way of Question, implies a Negative, that none could
justly convince him. The latter place tells us not that they did convince him
of sin, but they behind his back would scandalize him to be a sinner in the
general, without implying any particular sin that he was guilty of: Only they
being ignorant of his birth, and thinking him to be begot after the ordinary
manner of men, and consequently guilty of original sin do call him a sinner;
but this does not in the least convince him of this or that sin.

1027. Joh. 8.50. I seek not mine own glory. Verse. 12. I am the light of the
world.

He means glory acquired from his Father, not affected glory: and he calls
himself, the Light of the world, truly confessing what he is, and not by
hunting after vainglory.

* Joh. 8.50. with 12.

A man may speak what he is, and what he has without affectation of glory: for
the manifestation of truth, and the good of others will require it. If Christ
should not have discovered what he was, they had not known what he had been;
therefore his saying he was the light of the world was no affecting or seeking
glory of himself, but a manifestation of truth for the good of others.

* 1028. Joh. 8.50. I seek not my own glory. Joh. 17.1. Father glorify thy Son.

Glory is either earthly and external, or spiritual and eternal. Christ sought
not, as those who affect external glory on earth, to do what he could to be
seen of men, and reputed potent; for he strove to hide his Miracles many times
from the Jews, but he notwithstanding might pray, and did, that God would be
pleased to deliver him from this prison of the world, and give him eternal
glory, and spiritual enjoyments in heaven.

1029. Joh. 8.51. If a man keep my saying he shall never see death. Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto all men once to dye.

Christ speaks of spiritual and eternal death, the Apostle speaks of corporal
and temporal death.

1030. Joh. 8.58. Before Abraham was I am. Heb. 2.17. He took upon him the seed
of Abraham.

There are three kinds of speeches concerning Christ, some things are spoken of
him according to his Divine Nature, so he was before Abraham, some things are
spoken according to his Humane Nature, when he is called Abraham's seed, or
David's, and some things are spoken of both Natures, that he is the Mediator
between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5.

1031. Joh. 9 3. Neither this man sinned, nor his Parents. Romans 3.10. There is
none righteous, no not one, none that understands.

The cause of his blindness was no notable and enormous wickedness of himself
or his Parents, though all men be sinners, and for their sins, infirmities and
defects of nature, are obnoxious to temporal and eternal punishments.

* Joh. 9.3. with Romans 3.10.

This man and his Father both sinned, and were sinners: yet neither the Fathers
particular sin, or the Sons was the cause why the Lord made this man blind; but
the reason why this man was blind was God, would have glory.

* 1032. Joh. 9.29. We know not whence thou art. Joh. 7.27. We know whence thou
art.

We know not from whom thou have thy authority or was sent, whether from God or
not: But we know thy Country, and Kindred, and Parents.

1033. Joh. 9.31. God hears not sinners. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins,
God is faithful and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all our sins.

God hears not impenitent sinners, obdurate in their wickedness, but to such as
repent, confess, and amend their lives, he pardons their sins.

1034. Joh. 9.39. For judgment I am come into this world. Chap. 3.17. Chap.
12.40.47. I came not to judge the world; but to save the world.

In the former place, by Judgment is meant a benefit given to men by the coming
of Christ, by which he brought those things to good order that were out of
order; In the latter, Christ speaks of his principal end of his coming into the
world.

* Joh. 9.39. with 12.40, 47.

The former place intimates, that he came to discern betwixt the cause of such
as believe and confess: and of the proud, who think that they see, being hereby
the more blinded. And as he discerned rightly the cause of the blind and
seeing, so he administered knowledge and light, as the Physician judges betwixt
him that is really crazy, thinking himself to be sound, and him that is really
sound, and thinks himself crazy. The latter place speaks of his authoritative
Judicature of men according to their works at the last day; For thus at his
first coming he came not to judge the world, though the other way he did come
to judge.

1035. Joh. 9.41. If you were blind, you should have no sin. Romans 11.25.
Blindness is happened unto Israel.

In the first place Christ speaks of the Jews, according to the opinion they
had of themselves, for they did not acknowledge any blindness of their minds or
their sins; In the latter, what was the truth of them indeed; blindness happened
to them, not that they should all perish, but that many multitudes of the
Gentiles might be converted and saved so well as the Jews.

* Joh. 9.41. with Romans 11.25.

Blindness is either praev^ dispositionis, or purae Negationis, if they were
blind purae Negationis, then they had not had sin, i. e. sin so aggravated so
as now; that they have the means and ways of knowledge and will not know.
Blindness is partial or Total. The Apostle tells us, they were blind in part;
if they had been totally ignorant and blind, and wanted the means of knowledge
they had not had sin. Blindness is either affected and joined with a contempt
of knowledge, Job 21.14. or blindness which arises from negligence, when men
use not their just endeavors to know that which they should and ought to
practice; ignorance is per accidens, as when it follows upon the doing of some
voluntary previous action, as drunkards sin of ignorance, or ignorance is
invincible, and that is to be understood both juris and facti; That is defined
to be invincible, which when the person who is ignorant uses all sufficient
means for knowledge, and yet does not attain knowledge: If the Jews had been
blind or ignorant this way they had had the less sin, but their blindness was
affected and negligent, and per accidens blindness. The Apostle speaks of this
blindness, not of that which is invincible.

* 1036. Joh. 10.8. All that came before me are thieves and robbers. Joh. 1.6.
There was a man sent from God whose name was John.

The former place means of false Prophets, which came not in by Christ or his
authority, but by Satan and their own ambition; who did not preach Christ as
Moses and John did in all their administrations, all these false Prophets are
thieves. The latter place speaks not of a false Prophet, but of a true Prophet
who declared Christ.

* 1037. Joh. 10.15. Christ laid down his life for his sheep. Heb. 10. Christ
poured forth his blood for the ungodly.

By blood in the second place (as in other Scriptures) no more is meant than
life, so that to pour forth his blood, and to lay down his life are all one.
For his sheep, i. e. for the Elect. For the ungodly, by ungodly is meant the
Elect before their Conversion or Justification, as Romans 4.5. -- 5.6. So that
Christ poured forth his blood for the Elect, even when they were not yet
converted or justified, but in their natural and sinful estate and condition,
to the greater glory of his grace.

* 1038. Joh. 10.22. The Feast of the Dedication, and it was Winter -- Solomon's
Feast was about the Autumnal Aequinoctial. 1 Kin. 8. Zerobabels was in the
Spring, a little before Easter.

This was neither, for it was instituted by Maccabeus, 1 Mac. 4.59. The design
was to praise God for the deliverance of the people, and to put them in mind of
the consecration of the Temple, which had been profaned by Antiochus, and was
of the Hebrews called chamucho, and by the Greeks Euraenia, which signifies
renewing, because the Temple had been new dedicated. That Feast was kept in the
Month Caslew, which the November Moon corresponds with.

1039. Joh. 10.28. My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my hand. Chap. 13.18. Judas was chosen to be of Christ's sheep, and
yet perished.

Election in the first place is meant to eternal life; In the latter to an
Office, Judas was Christ's sheep only by outward vocation and profession.

1040. Joh. 10.29. My Father is greater. Ver. 30. I and my Father are one.

Christ is equal to God the Father according to his Divine Nature, less than
the Father according to his Humane Nature, and his Office of Mediatorship
between God and Man.

* 1041. Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. Joh. 14.28. My father is greater
than I.

They are one as to the Divinity of Christ -- Christ and God are one God so; as
to the Humanity of Christ, and his Office of being an Advocate and Mediator, a
Servant and Messenger, so the Father is greater than I.

1042. Joh. 10.32. Many good works have I showed you from my Father. chap.
14.10. The Father that dwells in me, he does the works.

In the former place Christ speaks not exclusively, because the works of the
Trinity outwardly are common to the three Persons: There is no work of the Son
which the Father does not work in him. In the latter ascribing operation to the
Father, he asserts that it is done by the authority and counsel of his Father,
so speaking of the manner and order of working, he takes not away the unity of
Essence, Majesty and Power.

* 1043. Joh. 10.36. Whom the Father has sanctified, etc. with Joh. 1.1. And
the Word was God.

The Socinians would gather, that Christ is the only begotten Son of God,
either by reason of the conception by the Holy Ghost, or for the sanctification
and sending into the world, as the formal cause of his Deity and Filiation.
It Is true, by reason of his conception by the Holy Spirit, the Son of God who
in the beginning with God the Father was God, and after made man, but (...),
without any mutation of the Deity, or confusion of the same by his taking
flesh. Neither is his Mission the foundation of the Deity of the Son, or of his
Filiation, but is founded in that, and shows it a posteriori. He could not be
sanctified and sent into the world who was not coeternal with the Father which
sent him.

* 1044. Joh. 10.36. Whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world.
Joh. 17.19. I sanctify my self.

God the Father sanctified the Humane Nature of Christ even from his first
conception, and from all contagion of sin made him full of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and consecrated him to the Divine Office of being Savior of the
world. Yet Christ as God sanctified himself, for the Father works, and he
wrought the same work in the Humane Nature.

1045. Joh. 11.4. Lazarus sickness was not unto death. Verse. 14. Lazarus is
dead.

The sickness of Lazarus by reason of the event was not unto death, because
Christ raised him again; and says, that his death was but a sleep, for we are
not so early awaked from sleep, as Christ called Lazarus out of his grave, and
he shall raise us all at the last day.

* Joh. 11.4. with 14.

Lazarus sickness was not really in the event unto death, though in appearance
he was dead at the present. In respect of Christ it was not unto death, in
respect of his friends he was dead. Not unto death, as death is a perpetual
separation of the soul from the body, Christ purposing to reunite them shortly.
Lazarus was dead, as to the present separation of soul and body.

* 1046. Joh. 11.15. I was not there. mat. 18.20. Where two or three be
gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them.

Christ was not there by his Humane Presence, which can be only in one place at
once, though his Divine Nature is in all places. Christ may be present in a
place, and with a person, in his humane shape and body, (as he was many times
with the Jews) and yet not present by his gracious influences and help. Christ
was present neither bodily, nor by his help there. In the latter place, which
is not meant of ordinary matters, but of the Assembly and Meetings of Gods
People about his Worship, Christ is present there, not by his bodily presence,
but by his gracious influence^, and spiritual presence.

1047. Joh. 11.25. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. Ver. 26. He that believes in me shall never dye.

Death is temporal and eternal, temporal in this world is corporal and
spiritual; Christ speaks of both in the former place; Spiritual death is either
of them, who being dead, have not Christ's quickening Spirit, and of this he
speaks not here; but of them that being quickened by Christ's Spirit are dead to
sin and the flesh; in the latter is meant chiefly eternal death.

1048. Joh. 11.26. Whosoever believes in me shall never die. Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed for all men once to dye.

The faithful do not dye a spiritual and eternal death; but natural death is
common to all men.

1049. Joh. 11.34. Where have you laid him? Chap. 21.17. Thou know all
things.

Christ enquired of Lazarus his grave, not as if he were ignorant thereof, but
that he might stir up a desire in his sisters and those that were present to
consider, and to see the Miracle of the Resurrection. So God said to Adam, Genesis
3.9. Adam where art thou?

* Joh. 11.34. with Joh. 21.17.

He that knew Lazarus to be dead, knew where they had laid him; he either
speaks this as Man, and so he acted when he wept; or else he speaks it, not as
ignorant of it, but as one who would draw them to go with him, by asking that
question, he gave them an opportunity to follow him to see what he did, and how
he raised Lazarus.

* 1050. Joh. 11.42. And I knew that thou hear me always. Psalm. 22.2. O my
God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not.

There are several ways of hearing: The King hears his Subjects by way of
Regality; The Master, his Scholar by way of docibility; The Father hears his
child by way of natural affection. God hears Christ as a Father his Son
always that he asked any thing of God. The second place speaks of David in the
Letter, and Christ in the Mystery; he was heard always of God, though God did
not always seemingly attend to him, but sometime forbear to give a present
remedy according to his Petition, as in his Passion: Not that really and indeed
he did ever shut his ears against his Prayers; It is one thing to hear and
grant, though not just in the same mode and time; another thing to hear, and
presently give a supply in the same manner and method.

1051. Joh. 11.50. Caiphas a wicked man prophesied by the instinct of the
Spirit. Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God.

The gifts of Gods Spirit are of Sanctification and Salvation, and those are
proper to the elect children of God, or gifts of administration, which are
common to good and bad men; amongst which is the gift of Prophecy.

* Joh. 11.50. That one man should dye, etc. Romans 8.14.

The gifts of God are one thing, the graces of God are another. Caiphas, though
a wicked man, might have this gift given, or by a thorough consideration of the
Scriptures might know, that one man was to dye, and yet this hinders not but
that only the Sons of God should have the graces of the Spirit.

* 1052. Joh. 12.25. He that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto
eternal life. 1 John -- He that loves wickedness hates his own soul.

Hatred is not here taken properly, for so man never yet hated his own flesh,
but hating is taken for less loving; i. e. He that less loves his life, than
trouble for the Gospel, while he lives here, shall keep his soul to eternal
life, though he may suffer the loss of his external life. Hatred in the second
place is taken for the effects of hatred. He that loves wickedness effects
that to his soul which a man that hates him would do, that is, he punishes
his own soul.

1053. Joh. 12.27. Father, save me from this hour. Phil. 2.8. He became
obedient unto death.

Christ feeling the sins of the world lying upon him, feared death as he was
man; and desired rather to live than dye, if that might have been granted
without detriment to Gods glory and our salvation; but because it was not
possible that that Cup should pass from him, he submitted himself to his
Fathers will, and said, Therefore came I unto this hour.

1054. Joh. 12.30. Now shall the Prime of this world be cast out. Ephesians. 6.12. We
have yet war with the Prince of this world.

That casting out was out of the hearts of the faithful, whom, though the devil
do tempt and oppose many ways, yet he cannot vanquish them, but is cast out:
Also Christ respects the casting out of the devil, whilst both Jews and
Gentiles, amongst whom the devil reigned, were called to the grace of Christ by
his coming.

* Joh. 12.30. with Ephesians. 6.12.

Satan is cast out, while the darkness of Ceremonies, neglecting the Substance,
and the Idolatry that was amongst Jews and Gentiles was cast out, and Christ by
the preaching of the Gospel was exalted. 2. Satan is cast out of the hearts of
Gods people, when he has not his Regal and full sway in the heart, but by the
power of Gods grace he is mastered; though satan, as a tyrant, even in them may
strive and make onsets against the grace of God, so that he being cast out as
to his reigning, yet not as to his tempting and striving, warring against the
hearts of Gods children, which the latter place speaks of.

* 1055. Joh. 12.50. And I know that his Commandment is life. 2 Cor. 3.7. The
Law is the ministration of death.

The Commandment of God is that which either may be accounted Legal or
Evangelical. The former place intends Evangelical Commands, i. e. such commands
as were given by Christ, or concerning Christ. The latter is meant of Legal
Commands without reference to Christ, or else without the ministration of the
Spirit.

* 1056. Joh. 13.1. Loving his own in the world, he loved them to the end. Hos.
1.9. For you are not my people, and I will not be your God. Hos. 9.17. My God
will cast them away, etc.

Gods People are his own, first, in a general or National way, so are they
which make an external profession of the Lord, and are in outward covenant with
him, as the Jews, these may have the external signs and impresses of Gods love,
and these turning away from the Lord, the Lord will turn from them. Secondly,
Gods own Elect or chosen forth of others, which he once setting his love upon,
he loves to the end. The former place is meant of his Elect.

1057. Joh. 13.27. After the sop satan entered into him. Ver. 2. And supper
being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot.

The first place is of total possession, when after so many admonitions from
Christ, and so many humane favors received, Judas yet continued in his purpose
of betraying Christ, he is delivered to satan to be ruled, so that he could
think on nothing that was sound and good.

* 1058. Joh, 13.27. Do quickly. -- God commands no sin.

These are not the words of exhortation or command, but spoken Ironically, as
if he should say: Well, take thy course, and do what thou will, make haste man.

* 1059. Joh. 13.29. Judas had the bag. Mat. 10.9. Provide neither gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purse.

The latter place speaks of Christ's Command, upon a peculiar and particular
occasion not upon the account of all times; and that temporary command expired
with that expedition. But Christ having a purse-bearer constantly, as Judas
was, shows that it is lawful to have and use money for our necessaries.

1060. Joh. 13.34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one the
other. Mat. 22.27. This was the greatest Commandment in the Old Testament to
love God and our Neighbor.

It is called a new Commandment, not by reason of the substance, but because
Christ renewed it, and the singular affection of love which Christ requires in
his followers: As he loved them, and gave himself for them, so he would that
they should love one the other with singular affection.

* Joh. 13.34. with Mat. 22.37.

It was an old command, as to the substance of the command, but a new command,
as to the circumstances: Christ commanding it in a new manner; it is not now,
Love your Neighbor as your self, but, As I have loved you. The Gospel or
Testament, whereof this is a part, is new, the Spirit works it in out new
hearts.

1061. Ioh. 14.3. I go to prepare a place. Mat. 25.34. Inherit the Kingdom
prepared from the beginning of the world.

The place was predestined from the beginning of the world, but now by Christ
it was particularly designed, and fitted by the Ascension of Christ actually
for the Godly.

1062. Ioh. 14.4. Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. Ver. 5. We know
not.

They did know inchoatively, and imperfectly, but because they know not that
they did know, the cause was their rudeness and forgetfulness of Christ's words.

* Joh. 14.4. wi h 5.

The Disciples knew that Christ was to go to heaven, but they were not so
thoroughly instructed what heaven was, or that he would go then thither.
Possibly they might imagine him to speak of going to some other place, and so
say, We knew not, and yet Christ might justly say, You know; you know if you
will consider what you know, and apply it to this present purpose.

1063. Joh. 14.8. Show us the Father. Ver. 9. He that sees m^, sees the
Father.

The Apostles did not perfectly know Christ, therefore he taxed them of
ignorance, for they ought to have seen and known the Father in him.

* 1064. Joh. 14.10. I am in the Father, and the Father in me. Psalm. 22. Why
have thou forsaken me.

I am in the Father by an essential union, the Father in Christ, as God, being
one; and so in the first place. In the second, Christ was forsaken, not in
respect of Essential Union, nor in respect of the personal Union, the Godhead
with the Humane Nature in the Mediator; that which the Person of the Son took
once upon him he never laid down. But he was forsaken in respect of the sense
of Divine aid in the time of his passion in his Humane Nature.

1065. Joh. 14.12. He that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do
also, and greater. Chap. 3.2. No man can do these Miracles that thou do.

Christ means not works of divine Creation, Redemption, or Sanctification, but
of his mission, such Miracles as he wrought in the world, such and greater than
they were wrought by the Apostles, whose shadows cured sick men, as they passed
by after Christ's Ascension, and the wonderful conversion of the Gentiles
followed.

* Joh. 14.12. with 3.2.

The latter place says no more, than no man can do such Miracles as thou do,
except he have power from God; it says not, that no other man shall do such,
excluding all, but no man can do them, except he come from God. The former
place shows that power of him which gave, not of him who brought forth the
Miracles; he which did greater Miracles than Christ, did them not without, but
by Christ's power, whether by greater works, greater works of conversion, as
Peter's conversion of three thousand by one Sermon; and the conversion of
multitudes: Or by greater works be meant the working Miracles, as healing their
sick by his shadow, and handkerchiefs, which was not done by Christ, I shall
not determine. However, if we interpret it thus, we must restrain it to
believers in the Primitive times, not to all believers, and that in all Ages.

1066. Joh. 14.13. Chap. 16.24. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name,
that will I do. Ask and you shall receive. Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not.

We ought to ask in Christ's Name, in full confidence of his merits, with true
faith, and without doubting, spiritual or corporal blessings, with exception of
Gods Will, and our own salvation, in oll occasions, and in all our prayers,
they that ask so, receive, and they that receive not, ask amiss.

* 1067. Joh. 14.16. And he shall give you another Comforter. 1 Cor. 12. No man
can call Jesus Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

The latter place intends no man can do it truly and cordially, but only
fainedly, acknowledging him in words, but in deeds denying him. By this word
another, is not meant any other than that Holy Ghost which formerly had wrought
grace, which now was to work comfort in them in another manner, i. e. in a more
large, clear, and spiritual manner than formerly; and he is called another to
show the distinction of the Person of the Holy Ghost from the Son. He is called
another Comforter, not as if it were another spirit which was to work now in
them which did not before; but whereas before they were comforted immediately
and visibly by the presence and words of Christ, so now they should be
comforted immediately and invisibly by his influences within.

1068. Joh. 14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my words. Ver. 23. The Word
which ye hear is not mine.

The Word that Christ taught was his, but not any invention of his, but his
Fathers Word, which he was sent into the world to preach.

1069. Joh. 14.23. And we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Romans
7.20. Sin dwells in me. Ver. 14. I am sold under sin.

The first place is concerning the inhabitation of the Sacred Trinity in the
spiritual part of a regenerate man. The latter is of the dwelling of sin in our
carnal members.

* Joh. 14.23. with Romans 7.14, 20.

The former place speaks of the indwelling of the Trinity in the souls of
believers, not personally, but powerfully and effectually. The latter place
speaks of the dwelling of sin, but so as it is in all the faculties or parts of
the soul, Understanding, Will, Memory: Not that these, the Trinity and sin have
different parts of the soul, but that they both exercise their powers and
Energies in the same Faculties, as water which is lukewarm is both hot and
cold all over, so sin and grace is all over the soul; and as we say, fire is
still in the hand which is burned, when it is only the effect of fire: So it is
here, God is in the soul, when grace, which is the effect of his presence is
there, and not God personally dwelling there.

* 1070. Joh. 14.28. The Father is greater than I. Joh. 17.21. The Father and I
are one. Ephesians. 2.6.

The Father is greater than Christ as Mediator, and in respect of his humanity,
but the Father and I are one in respect of his Divinity.

* 1071. Joh. 15.13. Christ laid down his life for his friend. Romans 5.10. When
we were enemies, etc.

He laid down his life for us as we were enemies, that we might become his
friends; and he laid down his life for us as friends, that we should continue
so; as we were enemies, by the corruption of the flesh, as we are friends, as
reconciled by the blood of his Cross.

1072. Joh. 15.15. I call you not servants, but friends. Mat. 25.21. Well done
good servant.

The Disciples were Christ's servants by right of Creation, Redemption, and
Vocation, friends by right of Adoption, Communication, and Patefaction. Aug.
tr. 55. on John.

* Joh. 15.15. with. Mat. 25.21.

Christ calls us not servants in the former place, to show the great Union, and
happiness by that Union, which a Christian should have with and in Christ. He
would not use them as servants in his dispensations and favors, but rather as
children, with love and delight. In the second place, Christ calls them servants
when he was to give them the reward of heaven; which reward was so far beyond
their deserts that our thoughts cannot imagine, they being but servants, and so
owed all they did to God as duty, and they might say they were unprofitable
servants. The former place tells us, Christ calls us not servants, to show
that now we were free as friends. The latter place is but a Parable and
Parabolical speeches and words are not argumentative; A man may be a son by
Adoption, and yet the servant of God by duty.

1074. Joh. 15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. Chap. 16.12. I have yet many things to say unto you.

In the Scriptures some things are said to be full, which are to be fulfilled;
In the former place Christ speaks concerning the knowledge of God, and the
perfect worship of Christians in it self; in the latter, concerning the
understanding of this Word, which the Disciples by reason of their rudeness
could not bear before they had received the Holy Ghost; nor did they understand
it.

* Joh. 15.15. with 16.12.

All things I have heard, either he spoke this Prophetically, as if things to
come were past; or else I have declared the substance and maine, though not the
particulars which are to be revealed afterward. I have revealed what the
Father would have me to reveal, for that which is to come, when the Father
gives me license and authority to do it, I shall.

* 1074. Joh. 15.24. If I had not done such works as none other man. Joh.
14.12. The works that I do, ye shall do and greater.

The former place speaks of what had been done in the time past, Christ did
such Miracles, as none did the like. The latter place tells of what the godly
should do, and so they should do greater works.

1075. Joh. 16.13. The Spirit of Truth shall guide you into all Truth. Gal.
2.11. Peter erred after he had received the Holy Ghost.

The Apostles were led into all truth in part and degrees of it. After they had
received the Holy Ghost they erred not in doctrine, in writing, or teaching,
but in life and conversation, such was the error of Peter which was to be
reproved whilst he conversed amongst the Gentiles.

* Joh. 16.13. with Gal. 2.11.

The Spirit of Truth did lead them into all truth necessary for them to know;
they were led into all truth, but not into all truth at the same time, God
dispensed his truth to them sometime after a fall or doubt, sometime without a
fall, but we know that they were led into all truth in their writings.

1076. Joh. 16.24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name. Mat. 6.9. Luke
11.2. He had given them the Form of Prayer before.

The Disciples did indeed pray before, but not so plainly, with a clear
knowledge of Christ's Office, that their prayers should be heard for the Messiah
that was sent.

* Joh. 16.24. with Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.2.

We cannot imagine that the Patriachs and Prophets, with the Disciples, did
pray explicitly and distinctly in the name of Christ the Mediator, or for his
Cause; though probably the Apostles and others did it more implicitly. Before
Christ's rising from the dead they might pray for their Saviors cause and sake
in general terms, and yet not pray in this Christ's name, and for his sake as
the promised Savior to come: and though they might take him to be the Christ,
yet not so distinctly call upon God in his name.

1077. Joh. 16.26. I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you. Romans
8.26. He makes intercession for us.

Christ alone does not pray for us, but we also must come to the Father, and in
his name and at his command pray in full assurance, which is necessary for our
salvation.

* Joh. 16.26. with Romans 8.26.

Christ in the former place would have the Disciples to know that they have
favor with God, and not only by his means, but also of the natural propensity
and proclivity of the Fathers nature toward poor Creatures, who sent Christ
for sinners, and who is as ready to grant as they are to ask in Christ's name;
therefore I do not say, that the Father contemns you, and only when I pray, the
Father has a respect for you, for you are even dear to the Father as you are
to me. The second place shows that the Spirit intercedes for us, but it is by
the merit of Christ, and yet this hinders not, but God has a love toward us,
else he had not sent Christ to save us.

1078. Joh. 17.3. That they may know thee, Father, to be the only true God.
Act. 20.28. The Son is God. Chap. 5.4. The Holy Ghost is God.

Only] here does not exclude the Persons in the Divine Essence, but Creatures
and Idols which are no gods.

* Joh. 17.3. The only true God.

The Socinians would have the exclusive adjection he^e, (...), to know thee to
be solum verum Deum, the alone true God. Christ said not (...), that they may
know thee only to be the true God. It is not the Father alone: as the solitary
subject of the Enunciation of being the true God, but (...), solus ille verus
Deus is the predicate, and attributed to the Father, as he that sent Jesus
Christ. Here is excluded all that are called Gods, as the Objects of Religious
Worship, and only the true God introduced.

1079. Joh. 18.20. I speak openly to the world, and in secret have I said
nothing. Mar. 9.28. He taught his Disciples privately in the Desert.

In the first place he speaks of his Doctrine which he brought from Heaven,
that he might reveal it to all men, and teach it publicly and in the Temple,
not in private corners; In the latter place he taught privately, explaining
those things which he had taught publicly.

* Joh. 18.20. with Mar. 9.28.

Christ taught nothing in private, which he bid his hearers keep to themselves,
but what he taught in private he would have it revealed on the house top.

* 1080. Joh. 18.28. That they might eat the Passover. Exodus 12. The
fourteenth day.

Doubt. Our Savior had eaten the Passover over night, so that either Christ
or the Jews hit not on the right Fourteenth day, either he a day too soon, or
they a day too late.

Answer, Neither the one, nor the other; Christ and the Jews eat both on the
same night, Mat. 26.17. Mar. 14.12. Luke 22.7. The Passover which the Jews
reserved to themselves to be eaten now was not the Paschal Lamb that was eaten
the night before, but of the Passover Bullock mentioned, Deuteronomy. 16.2. 2 Chronicles.
35.7, 8, 9. Which Bullocks were slain at the Passover time, but not for the
Passover Beast properly taken, for that must be of a Lamb or Kid unalterably:
But those Bullocks were slain as attendants upon the Paschal, from the nature
of which Sacrifice they differed.

* 1081. Joh. 18 31. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. -- And
yet they killed Stephen and James.

The Romans had taken from the Jews the power of putting to death, leaving them
only power to take Cognizance of an offense, and judge it according to their
Law, not execute that Law. Stephen had no leg^l trial, but slain tumultuously,
and James was slain by Annas, who then was no more than a private person, being
deprived of his authority. Or else it is not lawful to kill any in the
Passover time.

* 1082. Joh. 18.31. with Joh. 19.7. We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to
die.

They had a Law in jure, not in facto; A Law, but it wanted the life,
Execution. They might judge among themselves whether such a one were worthy
death (as they wrongfully judged Christ here) but yet the Romans had given them
a Law, that they should not put their Laws in execution which concerned life:
And so by the Roman Law it was unlawful for them to put any man to death.

* 1083. Joh. 18.36. with Psa. 71.28.

Christ's Kingdom is not of this worlds fashion, nor of the fashion of the
world, nor of the Subjects of this world, but it consists of Gods Children, and
it is set up in their heart.

There is the Kingdom of Christ's power which he shows in the Protecting of
the godly from the wicked, in the destruction of his enemies, and in the
advancement of his name from one end of the earth to the other.

1084. Joh. 19.9. Jesus answered not Pilate. 1 Timothy 6.13. Christ Jesus before
Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.

To Pilates question first Christ did not answer, because he stood before him
to suffer, and not to plead or excuse; at length he gave testimony to the Truth
in words and deeds, for his Passion and Death were a sufficient testimony and
sealing of his Doctrine.

* 1085. Joh. 19.29. And they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon
Hysop. with Mar. 15. They put it on a reed. -- And so Mat. 27.

There was a vessel of Vinegar, which upon such occasions usually stood there,
either as some say to shorten life, or to ease the pain, but the soldiers did
wickedly mingle gall with some of it, and offered it him to drink, before he
was lifted up upon the Cross, which he refused, and then after when he was upon
the Cross, they offered him Vinegar, and he took it, so Matthew and John agree.
As for the Hyssope some suppose it put about the Sponge, so as the Sponge gave
him Vinegar to his mouth, and the Hyssope besprinkled his face with the Vinegar
wherein it was dipped.

1086. Joh. 20.1. Christ rose on the first day of the week. Mat. 12.40. The Son
of Man shall be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth (until
the third day.)

This is a Synecdochical computation of time; for the least part of the day of
the preparation is taken for a whole day, and the beginning of the day after
the Passover, or the Sabbath is taken also for a whole day; Christ was three
days in the grave, but it was incompleatly three days; so also he was two
nights in the grave, the night before being added to them.

1087. Joh. 20.1. Mary Magdalen came early when it was yet dark unto the
Sepulcher. Mar. 16.2. Very early they came to the Sepulcher at the rising of
the Sun.

When it was yet dark, very early in the morning she went out of her house, and
the City, waiting for the rest of the women, with which afterward she came to
the Sepulcher at the Sunrising.

1088. Joh. 20.17. Touch me not. Ver. 26. Reach hither thy finger.

Christ after the Resurrection would not be touched of Mary Magdalen, who only
sought him after a carnal way, and thought of enjoying him no otherwise than
she did formerly by his earthly presence amongst them. But he commanded Thomas
to touch him, that his faith being confirmed, he might be a more certain
witness of Christ's Resurrection.

Touch me not, so as loving mothers touch their Sons, that they have wanted,
that is, touch me not to stay me: For I am not yet ascended. I am in haste, and
have not dispatched all I must, I have now the business of being your Advocate
to do, and I must speedily about it. But yet Thomas thou art an unbelieving man
in this point, and have less faith than this woman, touch thou me, for
confirming of thy Faith, not to stay my Journey.

The ACTS of the APOSTLES.
LUKE the Evangelist describes either in general all the Acts of the Apostles;
or in special, Peter's Preachings, Acts, Visions, Miracles, Imprisonments, the
Conversion of Paul, his Travels, Disputations, Miracles, Bonds, Imprisonments;
and the History of the Primitive Church after Christ's Ascension, from 26 years,
unto the 60 year from Christ's Nativity.

1089. ACTS. 1.1. Of all things that Jesus began both to do and teach, Luke
wrote. Joh. 21.25. There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which
if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self
could not contain the books that should be written.

Luke in the first Book wrote of all things necessary for our salvation, though
not of all things; but summarily concerning the conception of Jesus Christ, his
Nativity, Life, Passion, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into heaven,
August. In John Tract. 49.
Christ did many things that are not written, as John the Evangelist
witnesses, but those things were chosen to be written, which might suffice for
the salvation of Believers.

* Act. 1.1. with Joh. 21.25.

Of all things, that is, something of every thing which Jesus did, the most
material and chief things, or all things which the Spirit of God suggested to
be writtten, or all things which were sufficient for the preaching of the
Gospel, and his he^rers. The latter place tells us, that there are many other
things, beside the principal matters, which were not written, though it denies
not but the principal are written.

1090. Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons. 1 These.
5.1. Of the times and seasons brethren you have no need I write to you.

Times and seasons, as they are in a general consideration is one thing, and as
they are taken for particular years, or days, or seasons, are another. The
Apostles must not be too curious to know the year or day when Christ will come,
or restore the Kingdom to Israel; but yet the Apostle would not have them
ignorant of this, that there is a time when Christ will come again, though he
may conceal the particulars of it.

1091. Acts 1.9. Whilst the Disciples beheld Christ was taken up, and a cloud
received him. Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up into heaven, but he that came
down from heaven.

The body of Christ was taken up visibly on high, where Christ was personally
before, according to his Divine Nature.

Acts 1.9. with Joh. 3.13.

The former place speaks of Christ's personal ascent into heaven, as Man, where
he is to be reserved till his sesecond coming: It speaks not of his ascent as
God, for there he was as God; yet the Person in which the Divine Nature was
ascended visibly. The latter place speaks of Christ's being in heaven as God.

1092. Acts 1.15. The number of names together, were about an hundred and
twenty. 1 Cor. 15.6. After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once.

The number of an hundred and twenty must be restrained to the faithful there
at Jerusalem, the rest were out of this gathering in other places. Luke by
calling the brethren that were present, shows that there were no women
present at the Election of Matthias.

* Acts 1.15. with 1 Cor. 15.6.

There is no difference betwixt these, for they are not meant of the same
apparition, nor of the same time; for the first apparition of our Savior,
being risen, was to Mary Magdalen alone, Jo. 20.11.19. The same day he appeared
to two men, Luke 24.13, 18. That night he appeared to the twelve, so called, 1
Cor. 15.5. Eight days after to the Disciples, and convinced Thomas, Joh.
20.26. At the sea of Tiberias he appeared to seven Disciples, Joh. 21.24. On
the Mountain in Gal lee to the Eleven, Mat. 28.16. And to five hundred brethren
at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. -- Another time to James, 1 Cor. 15.7. And lastly, to all
the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.7. Being gathered to Jerusalem by his appointment, Acts
1.4. And led them to Bethany, and was taken up, Luke 24.50.

1093. Acts. 1.18. Judas purchased a field with the reward of iniquity. Mat.
27.3. He repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief Priests and Elders.

Judas purchased a field, It is Metonymia Adjuncti.
not actually, but by purpose and event; for he hoped with those silver pieces
to buy a field, he acquired the money, and the price wherewith the Priests
bought the field.

* Acts 1.18. with Mat. 27.3.

The first place denotes not that he himself bought the field; the Chief
Priests bought it for this damned Bribe. Nor was any such thing in his
intention when he bargained for his Money, but Peter by a bitter irrision
shows the fruit and profit of this wretched covetousness; and how that he had
thought to enlarge his revenues and to settle his habitation by such horrid
means: Yet on the contrary, his revenues was to purchase lands for others, his
habitation to be desolate, and himself to come to so sad an end.

* 1094. Acts 1.20. For it is written in the Book of the Psalms, Let his
habitation be desolate, etc. Psalm. 69.26. For they persecute him whom thou have
smitten, and they talk to the grief of their heart. Psalm. 109.8. Let his days
be few, and let another take his Office.

The former place is taken out of two several Psalms, and though David seem to
apply the place to many, yet in regard Christ is the head of the Church, what
was said of the enemies of the Church may be said of his enemies, and in regard
Judas was the Antesignanus, or the chief enemy, it may particularly be
attributed to him; and though one of the Testimonies may seem rather a Curse
than a Prophecy or Prediction, yet such Curses have the force of a Prediction;
as for that difference of words, Let another take his Office, -- And his
Bishopprick let another take, (...), Episcopatum. David writ literally
concerning Doeg the chief of the Kings Shepherds, which he calls his Office,
and the word being thence translated to Ecclesiastical affairs and
administrations is called, his Bishopric or superintendency, which another
should take.

1095. Acts 2.23. Jesus being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, by wicked hands you have crucified and slain. Joh. 19.11.
He that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin.

The death of Christ is ascribed to God and men in diverse respects: God
delivered him by his determinate counsel that he might procure life for us: The
Jews out of their diabolical hate, that they might blot out the memory of him.

* Acts 2.23. By the determinate counsel, etc. with Joh. 19.11.

Gods foreknowledge was no force why the Jews should crucify him; nor his
determinate Council any necessity why they should commit this sin, but God did
foresee that the Jews by abuse of their will would fall into the greatest of
sins when any occasion was offered. He did determine that Christ should die and
be crucified, and that the Jews should do it, they falling from him by a
frequent sinning he would suffer them to be the Executioners of this decree
upon Christ, and that as a just punishment for their former transgressions. God
did determine Christ should be crucified out of love to man, and that the Jews
should do it out of judgment for their sins. As for that Scripture, Joh. 19.11.
it is not to be understood of Gods delivering up Christ, but as the Jews
delivering him up as Prosecutors to a Judge, not as a Creator delivering one
Creature to another.

1096. Acts 2.33. Christ is exalted by the right hand of God. Joh. 17.5. Christ
was glorified with the Father before the world was.

The state of Christ's humiliation and exaltation, is in respect of right and
profession; Christ was as Mediator at the right hand of God, also before his
corporal Ascension, but in respect of use after his Ascension.

1097. Acts 2.36. God has made that same Jesus whom you have crucified both
Lord and Christ. Luke 2.11. He is called Lord at his Nativity by the Angel.

Christ by right of his personal union was made Lord at his Nativity; by
possession and use in his Glorification, declared to be so by his sitting at
the right hand of God, according to the rule, Then a thing is said to be done,
when it is manifested to be done.

* 1098. Acts 2.36. Lord and Christ. Joh. 1.1. And the Word was God.

Christ was Lord and God from the beginning, but this place speaks of him as
Mediator, and so he is Lord and Christ; Lord over the Creatures, and Christ
Gods anointed; The words being made, is not to the definition of the Deity of
the Son of God, but to the demonstration of the Rule and Dominion that Person
had over all Creatures.

1099. Acts 2.38. And be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Mat. 28.19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

In the first place there is the command and fruit of Baptism, but not the
form: Some by the Name Christ understand the three Persons, the Father
anointing, the Son anointed, and the Holy Ghost the Unction. Also in the Name
of Christ, is, in the Doctrine, Faith, Knowledge, and Obligation of Christ.

* Acts 2.38. with Mat. 28.19.

Not that their Baptism was not administered in the name of the Father, and the
Holy Ghost also; but that he would especially work them up to the
acknowledgment of Christ; for the Father and the Holy Ghost they acknowledged,
without any scrupling, but to own Christ for God, whom they had crucified, and
to be initiated into Jesus of Nazareth, was the great work that the Apostles
went about: And therefore especially endeavor to enter them into Jesus, and to
have them baptized in his name.

* 1100. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized. Heb. 12.17. Esau found no place of
repentance.

Repentance is either a natural affection or acting of the soul, which some
call Civil or Politic grief, change of mind: or else it is a saving grace,
whereby a sinner turns from sin to God. As Repentance in the former place is
taken for a saving repentance: In the latter place, it is taken for a sorrow or
change in the mind, not of himself, but of his Father.

1101. Acts 3.2. And a man lame from his mothers womb they laid daily at the
gate of the Temple to ask alms. Cha. 4.34. Neither was there any among them
that lacked.

They that carried the lame man to the Beautiful Gate of the Temple were not of
the number of those who believed in Christ, nor the lame man himself before he
was healed.

1102. Acts 4.31. And when they had prayed, they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost. Chap. 2.4. In the Feast of Pentecost the Holy Ghost sat upon every one
of them before.

The first place is of the increase of gifts, and their boldness and confidence
to profess the Gospel; that casting away all sorrow they were full of
rejoicing, and preached the Word of God freely against the threatenings and
interdicts of the High Priests.

* 1103. Acts 4.31. with Acts 4.8.

Peter was filled with the gifts of the Holy Ghost to preach and answer
stoutly, according as Christ had promised. Nor does this hinder, but that he
might receive further Augmentations and repletions of the Spirit afterward;
for when it is said, He was filled with the Spirit, it implies no more than
that the Spirit did at present furnish the soul for that work it was about
fully and completely, which hinders not the Spirits furnishing the soul with
other gifts and graces for other works. There are several works of the Spirit,
and if so, these two places are reconciled, the one of fullness, for one office;
the other place of fullness, to a new matter and office.

1104. Acts, 7.2. Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hearken. Ver. 52. Betrayers and
murderers.

In the former place he does civilly use those compellations to the Jews, in
the latter he shows what the truth is; according to the Gospel they were
enemies, Romans 11.28.
but according to Election they are beloved for the Fathers sake.

* 1105. Acts 7.3. Get thee out of thy Country. Genesis 12.1.

Diverse Expositors think these words, and Genesis 12.1. to be the same, and to
speak of the same time and thing: whereas others suppose them different; and
they mean two several calls of God to Abraham, the one in Chaldea, the other in
Charran: In Chaldea God appears to him, and bids him, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy Kindred, but makes no mention of leaving his Fathers
house, for that he took along with him, Genesis 11.31. The Holy Ghost indeed has
ascribed the conduct of this Journey to Terah, as if he had received the Call,
and had been the chief Mover in the business, but it is only to show his
conversion and forsaking his native Country and Idolatry, and his readiness to
go with Abraham when God called Abram: but that the Call was to Abram, it is
not only asserted by Stephen here, and Joshuah 24.2. but also confessed by some
of the Jews themselves. But when God calls him away from Haran or Charran, he
then bids him depart from his fathers house, as well as he had done from his
Country and Kindred before, for now he left his brother Nahor, and all his
Fathers house behind him. The story in Genesis runs in a continuation, and
seems to say thus much: God in Ur of the Chaldees appeared to Abraham, and said
unto him, get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, but take thy
Fathers house with thee, and go to a Land which I shall show thee: And when
Abram told Terah of this command, Terah condescended and consented; and Terah
took Abram, and Lot, and Sarai: And they ( Terah and Abram) went with them from
Ur to Haran, and dwelt there: and Terah died in Haran; and then God said to
Abram, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers
house also now, and go into Canaan, etc. Ur and Haran are both called Abraham's
Country, Moses and Stephen lays them both in Mesopotamia.

* 1106. Acts 7.6. And entreat them evil four hundred years. with Genesis 15.13.
Exodus 12.40.

There is a double sum of years mentioned concerning the seed of Abraham,
namely, four hundred years, and four hundred and thirty. The four hundred and
thirty was from Abraham's receiving of the Promise, to the delivery out of
Egypt; and the four hundred was from the fifth year of Isaac to that delivery:
Then did Ishmael mock, and then began affliction to Abraham's seed; and from
thence they were in affliction and sojourning in a strange land, Canaan and
Egypt four hundred years.

* 1107. Acts 7.14. Threescore and fifteen souls. Genesis 46.27. Exodus 1.5. Deuteronomy.
10.22.

Whereas Moses says, that all the souls of the Family of Jacob that went down
into Egypt were but seventy, Steven enlarges the number, and says seventy
five, and herein he follows the Septuagint, who in the first cited places
have that sum, and they make up the account in Genesis 46. by fetching the names
of five children of Joseph out of the Book of Chronicles, which Moses
mentions not, and which indeed were not born at their going out into Egypt,
but after, and these were Machir, Gilead, Shulela, Taben, and Eden.

* 1108. Acts 7.16. And were carried into Shechem. Genesis 49.29, 30, 31.

The shortness of the language in this place has bred some difficulty, and as
Stephens speaking more than Moses in the Verse foregoing was the cause of some
obscurity there, so is it a cause of more in this verse for that he has not
spoken so much. Moses says, Jacob in Hebron. Stephen says, in Shechem. Moses
says, Jacob was the buyer of the land of Emoreh, Stephen seems to make
Abraham the buyer of it. And in conclusion to make Jacob and his twelve Sons to
lie in one Sepulcher, and Abraham's and Jacobs purchase to be but one and the
same. Stephen and Moses speak the same thing, only Stephen uses shortness of
speech in relating a story which was so well known, that a word was enough for
a sentence: And he spoke in a language which had its proprieties and Idioms
which those that heard him easily understood, in regard that the ordinariness
of the matter was such, as if Stephen had failed in the least it had been a
disgrace: Therefore it is past all doubting that Shechem was known and
generally reputed the place of the Patriarchs burial: Although there be only
mention of Moses bringing up the bones of Joseph, Exodus 13.19. yet we may learn
hence, that the bones of all the Patriarchs were brought up with him. Now why
Stephen speaking of the burials of Jacob and his Sons which were in distance
and different places, does yet couch their Story so close together as if they
were in the same place. 1. Because treating of two numbers so unequal as twelve
and one, he follows first the story of the greater number. 2. He uses the
singular number for the plural, Sepulcher for Sepulchers, a common thing in
Scripture. 3. He uses an Elepsis, a cutting off a Conjunction, And. So that
the sen^e seems to be, And Jacob and our Fathers died, and were removed to
Shichem, and were laid in Sepulchers, in that which Abraham bought for money,
and in that was bought from the Sons of Emmor, the father of Shichem.

1109. Acts 7.38. Moses received in mount Sinai the lively Oracles. 2 Cor. 3.7.
Paul calls the Law, the ministration of death.

The words of the Law were words of life, because the Law has life in it self,
and leads us to Christ; it is not the Ministration of death in it self, but in
respect of men's infirmities, and our corrupt nature.

Acts 7.38. with 2 Cor. 3.7.

That which Moses received was lively Oracles, for they were lively delivered
to him, and not only written (as some part was,) they were lively, because the
Moral and Ceremonial Laws together brings a man to life; for the Moral Law lets
us see our infirmities and necessity of a Savior to take us from our sins; and
the Ceremonial showed Christ the Messiah, which would take us from our sins.

Paul calls the Law, the ministration of death, not that of it self, and qua
Lex, brings death, but that it pronounces and works a sense of death to, and
in the disobedient and rebellious.

* 1110. Acts 7.43. Ye took up the Tabernacle of Molech, etc. Amos. 5.26.

The Tabernacle of Molech. In Amos it is Succuth, Malkekim, which is rendered by
some, Succuth the King, or the Tabernacle of the King, or the observance of
your King. Moloch was the Idol of the children of Ammon, 1 Kin. 11.17. And
singularly prohibited to Israel, Lev. 18.20. -- 20.2. This Image was without
Jerusalem, and set within seven Chapels; which seven Chapels help us to
understand what is meant by Molechs Tabernacle, he is called Succuth, or the
Covert God, because he was retired within so many Cancelli before one could
come at him.

You took up Succuth, or the Covert God your King, which is the Tabernacle of
Molech; that Idol you prize as highly as the chiefest King. Molech, Molech,
Milcham, or Malcham are the same Baal.

And the Star of your God Rempham; Amos says Chijim, your Images the star of
your God. Chijim is either taken as the proper name of an Idol, as Hercules,
which by the Egyptians was called Chon. Or Saturn, which by the Arabians was
called Chevan. Or else Chijim is an appellative word, and so it signifies the
whole host of heaven, which one Idol cannot do Malchom. Besides, Chijim,
Tsalmecon, the latter word in the Plural number, and as it seems by the very
posture of it, the latter of two Substantive, and not in apposition, for if
Chijim were but one Idol, it is somewhat improper to say Chijim, your Images,
as speaking of more: Chijim may be construed for the ordering or disposing of
their Images. Stephen says, they had their (...), or representations of the
whole heaven, and host of it in one Series, or in one body: beset with variety
of stars and figures representing this or that Planet, and this or that
Constellation. Amos says, You took up Succuth your King, and the frame or
disposal of your Images, in one compact piece the stars of your God which you
have made to your selves.

Remphan, upon this word are several conjectures: The seventy have rendered
Chijim, (...), mistaking one piece of a Letter, reading for, but to omit these,
it seems 1. That Stephen does something follow the seventy in this word as well
as he does in the rest of the Text: and for the New Testament to follow them
differently from the Hebrew Text is no wonder. 2. That Stephen does add a
letter to the word, or does a little change it from those very syllables that
the Septu^gint use, that he might give the sense of the Prophet the more
clearly and plainly. As the Prophet in the word Chijim expressed the Fabric of
the Host of heaven, which the Idolatrous people had wrought and represented in
one piece, so should Stephen speak to the very same sense, and therefore
forsakes the word (...), which he found in the seventy, and takes up or
forms it into (...), which signifies the high face, or high representation,
or that whole piece, that represented the whole heaven, which he calls their
God, because in that they adored all the Stars and Hosts of heaven at once, and
so (...) is but one number put for another, one Star for many.

And I will carry you beyond Babylon. in Amos it is beyond Damascus, and so in
the seventy, which Stephen seems purposely to have changed beyond Babylon:
because that as he had treated in the beginning of the Chapter of Abraham's
coming out of those parts into that Land, he would now show e contra how they
for their Idolatry should be carried out of that Land into those parts again.

1111. Acts 7.51. You do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did.
Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his will?

To resist the Holy Ghost, is not to hear him in the Word of God, so the Jews
rejected grace proffered unto them, and despised it revealed in the Word, and
so were the cause of their own damnation. The Apostle speaks of Gods absolute
will, according to that he does all things, to which we must be subject.

* 1112. Acts 7.56. Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Mar. 16.19. And
Jesus sat at the right hand of God.

Sitting and standing are not words properly used no more than the word at the
right hand of God. These Metaphorical Phrases must not be strained to signify
several things. He saw him standing, that is, he saw Christ as an Advocate
standing to plead his cause with God the Father. And Jesus sat, that is, He was
now sitting to judge and order the actions and sins of men.

1113. Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Luke 16.22. Lazarus was carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

All the godly and faithful children of Abraham, must commend their spirits
into the hands of the Son of God who enlivens us; there is that bosom, and the
soul of Abraham rests there.

1114. Acts 8.1. And they were all scattered abroad throughout the Region of
Judah and Samaria, except the Apostles. Mar. 16.15. Go into all the world and
preach the Gospel.

The beginning of the Apostles preaching was at Jerusalem, where they suffered
persecutions building a Church unto Christ, before they went to other Nations.

* Acts 8.1. with Mar. 16.15.

The former place shows de facto how they were dispersed; The latter shows how
de jure they ought to disperse themselves to preach the Gospel. The former
place shows how Providence offered an opportunity, and the latter, that they
ought to make use of all opportunities in any place to preach the Gospel.
Though the latter place did tie them to the performing of the duty, yet it did
not limit them to this or that day, they were to begin at the Center,
Jerusalem, and so run to the utmost point of the Circle of the Isles.

* 1115. Acts 8.33. with Isa. 53. 7, 8. Who shall declare his Generation?

Some Christians understand it concerning the ineffability of Christ's Eternal
Generation; others, of the ineffability of his Incarnation, or the Generation
of his Humane Nature united to the Godhead. Others concerning the wondrous
Generation of the Church. But that the word (...) is to be understood of the
Age and Generation in which Christ lived, rather than that of his own
Generation or Descent. And the meaning of the Verse is to this purpose: He was
taken away and hurried from prison, and from Judgment to execution, and as the
seventy had enlarged the sense by change of phrase in his poor and dejected
estate, his judgment was utterly taken away, and no right done him; And who can
sufficiently speak of the looseness and wickedness of that Generation of Vipers
who dealt so unjustly and wretchedly with him, as to take and cut him off from
the Land of the living.

1116. Acts 9.6. Go into the City, and there it shall be told thee what thou
must do. Gal. 1.15. Paul was not called by man neither from men to be an
Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Saul was taught by Ananias concerning the means of his conversion, but not
concerning the Articles of his faith, Ananias was sent to baptize him, and heal
him, but not to call him to be an Apostle.

* 1117. Acts 9.6. with -- 26.16, 17, 18.

In the one place more was related to be spoken from heaven than in the other,
and it is usual with the Holy Ghost to relate part of a story in one place,
part in another, challenging the Readers pains and study to find them out.

1118. Acts 9.7. And the men that journeyed with him stood speechless. Cha.
26.14. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice.

The companions of Saul were first cast down, then they stood speechless, nor
could they go forward, until Saul also rose from the earth.

* Acts 9.7. with 26.14.

Stood speechless; The word (...), they stood stands in opposition to their
going forward, and not to their falling to the earth, and means that their
amazedness fixed them that they could not flee nor stir.

Acts 9.7. They heard a voice, but they saw no man. Chap. 26.14. They that were
with me, says Paul, heard not the voice.

Hearing the sound of the voice they understand not the meaning of it; so a
voice coming to Christ from heaven, Joh. 12.29.
the company that heard it said it thundered.

* 1119. Acts 9.7. with -- 22.9.

They heard the voice of Paul speaking to Christ, but not Christ's voice to him:
Or if they heard the voice from heaven, yet they understood not what it said
distinctly.

1120. Acts 9.8. They led Saul into Damascus. Gal. 1.17. He went into Arabia.

Paul after his conversion was first at Damascus, then he went into Arabia, and
so returned again to Damascus.

1121. Acts 9.15. Paul bare the name of the Lord before the Gentiles, the
Kings, and the Children of Israel. G^l. 1.16. He was separated to preach to the
Gentiles the Gospel of Christ.

He was the ordinary Apostle to the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2.7.
but extraordinarily he might teach the Jews also.

1122. Acts 10.30. Four days after the vision of Cornelius Peter came to
Caesarea. Ver 19. The morrow after, they that were sent from Cornelius came to
Peter.

Cornelius the first day at three of the clock after noon sent his servants to
Peter, the second day they came to Peter, the third day they came with Peter
from Joppa, and lay by the way that night, the fourth day they returned to
Cornelius at Caesarea.

* 1123. Acts 12.17. Tell it to James and the Brethren. James was already dead,
Ver. 2.

Either the^e is anticipation of that Verse. 2. or else this James was James of
Alphaeus, James the less, Mar. 15.40. The Brother or Kinsman of our Lord yet
surviving, who was Bishop of Jerusalem, as Antiquity affirms.

* 1124. Acts 13.22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my own
heart which shall fulfill all my will. with Psalm. 32.5. Psalm. 51.4. Against
thee have I sinned.

David was after Gods mind in the main of his life, though not in every
particular action, the denomination being from the greater part. Besides, God
looked upon David as a man after his heart, as he was repenting, returning, and
washed from his sin, not as he committed his sin. He fulfilled all Gods will,
that is, all the Precepts of Gods will, though not all the particulars of those
general Precepts, he fulfilled singula generum, though not genera singulorum.
He fulfilled wi^h sincerity though not with perfection of degrees the whole
will of God.

1125. Acts 14.22. We must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of
God. Heb. 6.12. (c. 11.1.) The Saints by faith and patience inherit the
promises.

The condition of the faithful is common, through many tribulations to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, from which some are freed by special privilege,
for faith is the means of acquiring life eternal, but tribulation is the way
thither.

* Acts 14.22. with Heb. 6.12.

We pass thorough many afflictions as they are the paths which God in his
providence orders us to walk into heaven, but we walk in these paths by faith
and patience, as they are the feet of the soul, or Qualifications of those
persons which walk in tribulations heavenward.

* 1126. Acts 15.2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension.
Romans 14. Him that is weak in the faith. 1 Timothy 3.3. The servants of Christ
ought not to be contentious.

Paul and Barnabas were earnest in the contest, because it was in a matter
which so nearly concerned the main of Religion, as dispense with that, and with
all. It is one thing not to contend about things indifferent in their own
natures, another thing to contend about that which is of absolute necessity, as
this truth which they here so contended about. The servants of Christ must not
be contentious about trifles, but we must con^end for the faith once delivered
to the Saints.

1127. Acts 15.10. The Law is a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able
to bear.. 1 John 5.3. His Commandments are not grievous.

The Law is a yoke in respect of perfect obedience, for here that is impossible
for us: the Commandments are easy in respect of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, Rom 6.14.
who fulfilled the Law for us, in whom our sins are forgiven.

* Acts 15.10. with 1 John 5.3.

The former is meant of the Ceremonial Law, which both because of the extreme
painful bondage in the observation thereof, as also because that the observance
could never be so perfect, but that the conscience would be involved in many
scruples and anguishes: And besides, because that under them being understood
in the sense of these false Apostles, the necessity of observing the whole Law
was included, for to find out ones righteousness before God, Gal. 5.3. which
being impossible to do for man, the Law was a yoke which neither they nor their
Fathers could bear. The latter place shows that Christ's Commands are not
grievous, because the Holy Ghost gives believers the power, and a sincere will
to execute them, and to overcome all opposition of the flesh. The Law of Christ
is not grievous, compared with Moses dispensation of the Ceremonial Law.

1128. Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us that you abstain
from blood and things strangled. Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets were
until John.

That was a temporal command belonging to the Ceremonial Law, until the weak
in faith who were not fully instructed were better confirmed, least their
conscience should be troubled and offended.

* 1129. Acts 15.28. with Romans -- The kingdom of God consists not in meats.

The former place forbids bloud-eating, not as part of the Ceremonial Law, or
the like, but as a thing which would be offensive to the Brethren, and hinder
the Gospels progress, though in it self there was no sin.

1130. Acts 16.3. Paul circumcised Timothy because of the Jews. Gal. 2.3. Titus
being a Greek was not compelled to be circumcised.

Circumcision from the time of its institution until Christ's death was
necessary, because of Gods command, for it was a Sacrament, and a part of Gods
worship. After Christ's death the Ceremony and use of it remained for some time,
until the Jews were taught concerning the abrogation of the Law; for it was
needful that the Synagogue should by degrees be buried with honor, as the
Ceremonies were by degrees set up. Paul circumcised Timothy lest he should
offend the weak, but might win them to Christ; he would not circumcise Titus
after the Gospel was planted, lest he should do wrong to Christian Liberty.

* Acts 16.3. Paul did circumcise Timothy, which seems strange, in regard,
Gal. 5. he says, If you be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing.

Some say Timothy's Mother Eunice was a Jew, and his Grandmother Lois, but his
father an Heathen: Therefore that the Jews might less abhor Timothy, and in the
infancy of the Church, when these Ceremonies were not wholly abolished, the
readilier to gain them to hear him he was circumcised, without which it is
conceived they would not hear him. As to that of the Galathians, he reproves
their vain imagination that Circumcision should be a necessary Ordinance for
the Worship of God, and merit even under the Gospel of Christ for Jews and
Gentiles. Paul would root out that opinion of Merit and necessity, and make
Circumcission to be a thing indifferent; and as a thing indifferent he used it,
becoming a Jew to the Jews to gain them, nor could the Gentiles take offense
hereat since his mother was a Jew.

1131. Acts 16.6. They were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the Word in
Asia. Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations.

The time to preach the Word of God in Asia was not yet come, and Paul and
Silas were then sent to some other place to greater increase of the Gospel; 1
Pet. 1.21.
yet at last the Gospel was plentifully preached there also.

* 1132. Acts 16.6. with Gal. 2.3.

It is one thing to use Circumcision as a Sacrament, according to the first
institution; Another thing to use it as indifferent, till the light of the
Gospel should shine more brightly. In the one place he used it as a thing
indifferent, which being used might more prepare the Jews for receiving the
Gospel of Christ. When Paul would not suffer Titus to be circumcised, he did it
as in opposition to that opinion, that Circumcision was a sacrament, and
necessary to salvation.

1133. Acts 16.18. Paul would not suffer the spirit of divination. Phil. 1.18.
What then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ
is preached, and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice.

Paul had great causes to cast out the spirit of divination, because
translating himself into an Angel of light, he would have drawn the Apostolical
doctrine to be suspected, as if they had been both as one, and so they that
believed the Apostles should believe the spirit of Divination, that he might
overthrow the Gospel.

1134. Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have our being: this sentence
is from Aratus the Heathen, out of Menander. 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil communications
corrupt good manners. Tit. 1.12. That the Cretians are liars, evil beasts, slow
bellies, is taken out of Epimerides and Callimachus.

Jerome gives the reason of this thing, that they who were obstinate in their
heathenish malice might be condemned out of their own Writers.

* 1135. Acts 17.28. In him we live, move, and have our being. Psalm. 81.12. And
they walked in their own Councils.

The former place speaks of what we have Originally from God, life, motion, and
being. The latter place speaks of Gods suffering us to use our Lives, Motions,
and Beeings irregularly. Our Lives and Motions are one thing, the moving and
living this or that way is another; The one is from God, the other from our
selves.

* 1136. Acts 18.3. And because he was of the same Craft, and wrought. Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word Communicate, etc.

The former Example shows, that sometimes the extremity of professors of the
Gospel may be so great, as Musculus must turn Weaver, and Paul Tent-Maker: But
this shows not that it shall always be so, or that when the condition of the
Gospel is otherwise that they may, and must not eat the fruit of their labors;
this shows what Paul in extremity did, not what the Ministers of Christ must
constantly do. Paul himself received contribution of the Philipians when he was
absent from them, Phil. 4.16. If Paul received Contribution where he did not at
present labor, it is now lawful for Ministers to receive where they do labor.
It is one thing what was done in the first propagation of the Gospel, and none
yet had the knowledge of Christ; another thing when the Gospel is propagated
and settled.

1137. Acts 18.8. Paul baptized Crispus and Gaius, and the house of Stephanus.
1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Christ sent all the Apostles to preach and to baptize; yet because the
ordinary way of preaching was better, more hard and more necessary, therefore
he would have them apply themselves rather to this, leaving baptizing to those
that were inferior to them. Paul denies that he was sent to baptize, not
simply, but comparatively, so God commanded not sacrificing, but obedience,
because he will rather have this than that, Jer. 7.22.

1138. Acts 18.2, 18. Priscilla and Aquila were with Paul at Corinth. Romans
16.3. Writing from Corinth he salutes Priscilla and Aquila.

Paul when he was again at Corinth, writing to Rome, salutes amongst others
Priscilla and Aquila, who were then there.

* Acts 18.2, 18. with Romans 16.3.

I, and two others may have been at London, and they two coming to York, I
still remaining there, or else after we had all come from London, I return back
thither, and they go to York, I may write to them from London to York for all
the former being together at London: The same is here about Paul and their
being at Corinth, and yet his writing afterward to them, shows nothing to the
contrary but their being there.

1139. Acts 18.18. Paul shaved his head at Cenchrea, for he had a vow. Gal.
5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Some refer that vow and shaving to Aquila, if Paul did that, he did it
therefore that he might become all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9. Acts. 21.26.
that he might win some, that he might serve the time, and not offend the Jews,
but promote the cause of the Gospel.

* Acts 18.18. with Gal. 5.1.

While this was done it was but an using the liberty of shaving the head, a
thing indifferent to the advantage of the Gospel.

1140. Acts 19.2. The Disciples said to Paul, we have not heard whether there
be any Holy Ghost. Ver. 4. They were baptized, therefore they must know the
Holy Ghost.

In the first place he speaks of the extraordinary miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost, otherwise they were taught concerning the person of the Holy Ghost by
John, and they had received his common gifts conferred in Baptism.

* Acts 19.2. Whether there be an Holy Ghost.

Not that they doubted of such a Person in the Trinity, but that whereas they
had learned in the Schools, that the Holy Ghost departed away after the death
of Malachy they had never yet heard whether he was restored again in his gifts
of Prophecy and miracles till now or no. The Jews had an old Maxim, That
after the death of Zacharias, Malachy, and those last Prophets, the Spirit of
God departed from Israel, and went up; So that from thence forward Predictions
of future things, and working Miracles were rarities among them.

1141. Acts 19.3. Into John's. Verse. 5. They were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

Baptism in the first place is taken for the whole Ministry of John, Ver. 5.
there was no reiteration of Baptism; but an approbation of Baptism conferred in
the name of Jesus by John, which is understood to be done by laying on of hands.

* Acts 19.3. with 5.

The word Baptism is used in Scripture for 1. The Baptism of water, and outward
washing. 2. For the Baptism of blood or Martyrdom. 3. Metaphorically for the
effusion of gifts of the Holy Ghost. 4. Synecdochically, not only for external
Baptism, but also for the whole doctrine, and so they are said to be baptized
unto John's Baptism. Some understand the words, V. 5. not of Paul, but of John,
(...), those which heard John, were baptized by John in the name of Jesus, so
as these words seem not to be spoken by Saint Luke of Paul, but Paul's words
continued of John, as the Particle (...), to which (...) necessarily answers.
Others think, that though John's Baptism was for remission of sins, in the name
and blood of Christ, and so in substance was the same with Christ's Baptism; yet
that Form of words was not then used, neither was there any mention made of the
Holy Ghost, so that it was imperfect, and yet such, as in the Divine Providence
befitted that time, wherein the Mysteries of the Gospel were not so plainly
revealed, but some more direct and particular preparation unto Christ, and to
his Baptism, was made then before by the Prophets and legal Ceremonies.

1142. Acts 19.13. Certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to
call on the Name of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

The Lord Jesus is so called either by the mouth only, as by the exorcists, or
from the heart by the Holy Ghost: there are external gifts of the Holy Ghost,
and Confession is reckoned amongst the common gifts, so those that were
possessed with the devil could say that Jesus was the Son of God; but the gifts
of regeneration are proper to Believers only.

1143. Acts 20.9. Euticus fallen asleep fell from the third loft, and was taken
up dead. Ver. 10. His life is in him.

Paul speaks confidently, whether the soul were in the young man or not; so
Christ said before he raised the maid, she is not dead, but sleeps.

* Acts 20.9. with 10.

The former verse speaks of him as really dead; the latter verse speaks of him
as one that was as sure to live as if he were now alive.

* 1144. Acts 20.22. Behold I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem. Acts 21.4.
The Disciples told him by the Spirit he should not go.

The former place tells us, Paul knew he must go to Jerusalem, and held himself
bound in conscience or spirit to go thither. The second place tells us, that
the Disciples which were inspired did represent to Paul the danger of his
Journey by the Spirit, and (...), not to ascend to Jerusalem because of the
danger he would be in. So that the sum is. Paul was bound in his own spirit, or
resolved to go to Jerusalem, and these Disciples from the Spirit of God tell
him the danger of that resolution. Or else if Paul was thus bound by the Spirit
of God, or commanded by him to do it. The same Spirit of God did afterward
tell him of the dangers he should undergo, and they from their Christian
affection toward him, which is a true fruit of the Spirit, wished him not to
ascend up.

* Acts 20.22. with 21.4.

The former place says, he should not go, not as hereby forbidding him
absolutely to go, but forbidding him to go, unless upon the condition of his
suffering soar afflictions. Though the condition be not expressed, yet it is
necessarily implied, as in other Scriptures and the Context expresses.

1145. Acts 20.27. I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of
God. Romans 11.34. 1 Cor. 2.6. Who has known the mind of the Lord?

The counsel of God is either necessary for our salvation, which was hid
before, and now is revealed; or not necessary, secret, ascribing to the
revealed will of God.

* Acts 20.27. with Romans 11.34.

He declared all the Counsel of God which was necessary for them to know at
that time. The mind of God is either of precept or purpose, secret or revealed.
Who has known the secret will, the will of Gods purpose? And as for the
revealed will and mind of God it is either in things that more necessarily have
relation to our salvation or less concern it. He speaks in the former place of
those things which were more necessary for their salvation at that time. The
latter place speaks of the will of his secret purpose.

1146. Acts 20.35. It is more blessed to give than to receive. Paul says, that
these were the words of the Lord Jesus, which are not found in the Evangelists.

Though the words be not found there in the same letters, yet the sense of them
is found in the words of Christ? Lend, looking for nothing again; Give, and it
shall be given to you; for all Christ's words and deeds are not set down, but
only those which suffice for true faith and our salvation.

1147. Acts 21.4. The Disciples said to Paul that he should not go up to
Jerusalem. Chap. 20.22. Now behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, says
Paul.

The Disciples by suggestion of the Spirit warned him of bonds and afflictons,
using also some persuasions of their own, as they were moved with brotherly
affection, being ignorant that it was the will of God that Paul should go up
thither, which he had revealed to him after a singular manner.

1148. Acts 21.9. Philip had four daughters, Virgins which did prophecy. 1
Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches.

The first place is concerning private and extraordinary gifts; the latter, of
the public Ministry, and that which is ordinarily used, from which women are
excluded.

1149. Acts 23.3. Paul reviled Ananias the High Priest. 1 Cor. 6.10. Revilers
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Reviling is either lawful, which rises from zeal to Justice, and has the
observation of the Law for its object, that is just and honest; so Peter
reviled Ananias, Simon Magus; Paul, Bar Jesus or Elymas, and God all wicked
men: Or unlawful, which proceeds from a wicked desire and mind of revenge that
Paul had not. Acts 5.8. c. 13.10.


* Acts 23.3. with 1 Cor. 6.10.

The words in the former place are by some, not words of reviling, but a
Prediction of the destruction of the Legal Priesthood, being figurative: The
true High Priest being come, he was but a shadow and whited wall. Or else it
was a free and confident denouncing of Judgment by a kind of Apostolical
authority. Or else he did it in passion, and repented in the following words.
Revilers in the latter place is meant of such as practice it, not such as
repent of it, and seldom use it.

Acts 23.3. Sit thou to judge me after the Law, etc. 2 Cor. 11.10. For ye
suffer, etc.

It is one thing to plead the equity of their cause, another thing after the
pleading of their cause to bear their sufferings patiently. Paul's pleading here
against the High Priests unjust proceedings does not imply, that he was
impatient in his sufferings.

1150. Acts 23.6. Paul cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a
Pharisee. 1 Cor. 1.12. He reproves and condemns denominations from men.

Paul amongst those that disagreed admits the denomination only for distinction
sake, and so thinking with the Pharisees, he distinguishes himself from the
Sadduces: So the faithful Professors of the Gospel are called Christians, but
when the persons agree in Doctrine, he forbids to prefer one before the other.

* Acts 23.6. with 1 Cor. 1.12.

Paul calls not himself a Pharisee, as if by that name he would abet names to
make sects among Christians, or those of the same body, who agree in
substantials, but he uses a name which was generally known to hold forth such
and such an opinion, as that of the Resurrection from the dead. I am of Paul,
etc. That shows names to distinguish Christians from Christians, as it was
corruptly used. They all agreed in the main and substance, only one gloried he
was for Paul, another for Apollo, etc. as they were Teachers, one excelling
another in the manner of delivery, not in the matter delivered.

1151. Acts 25.10. Paul will be judged at Caesar's Judgment seat. 1 Cor. 6.1.
Dare any of you go to Law before the unjust?

Civil Judicatures are to be had in honor, the abuse of them is condemned, and
he admonishes Christians that they should avoid contentions before unjust
Judges, lest so contending concerning small matters they should prostitute
their sacred Religion.

* Acts 25.10. with 1 Cor. 6.1.

It is one thing for one Christian to implead another; another thing for an
Heathen to implead a Christian. It is lawful for a Christian, being impleaded
by an Heathen before Heathens, to appeal from one Heathen Judicature to
another, though it be unlawful for two Christians contending, which may have
the conclusion made by Christians, to fly and appeal to Heathens, which is the
thing the Apostle condemns in the Corinthians.

* 1152. Acts 25.15. Agrippa and Bernice came down to Caesarea. Chap. 12. He
was eaten with worms.

This Agryppa was the son of Herod. Agryppa who was eaten to death -- the
brother of Drusilla, nor was he King in Judea, but in Trachonitis.

* 1153. Acts 27.12. We came to Phaenice to winter in the Port of Crete.
Phaenicia is a Province of Syria.

Phaenice is either a Province which is not here meant, or a City and Port in
the Island of Crete, which Crete is at this day called Candy, and subject to
the Venetians.

* 1154. Acts 27.33. The fourteenth day -- fasting --

Which cannot naturally be, in regard no man in his health can live without
meat above seven daie^, taking nothing by way of set meal, or a full refection,
only now and then a little to keep them alive.

1155. Acts 28.28. Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is
sent unto the Gentiles. Mat. 15.24. I am not sent but to the l^st sheep of the
house of Israel.

The Gospel ought to be preached by the Apostles first to the Jews, they not
believing it came to the Gentiles: So Christ preached to the Israelites, before
he gave command to his Disciples, Go and teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19.

St. PAUL'S Epistle to the ROMANS.
IT may be said to be the Method of the holy Scripture: in this are contained
that which convinces all both Jews and Gentiles of their sins; it demonstrates
Justification from sin by the Grace of God, by Redemption of Jesus Christ,
which we apprehend by faith, and testify by good Works as the fruits of our
faith. It was written in the year of Christ 55. and sent from Corinth.

1156. ROMANS 1.1. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ. Joh. 15.15. I will not call
you servants.

There are servants of sin, and servants of Righteousness; Christ speaks of
servants of sin, the Apostle was an Apostle of Righteousness, either in respect
of the common condition that he was freed by Christ from the power of Satan, or
of his Apostolical office being placed in the sacred Ministry by a singular
manner.

1157. Romans 1.2. The Gospel of God, which he had promised before by his
Prophets in the holy Scriptures. Chap. 16.25. The Gospel was kept secret since
the world began, but is now manifested.

The Gospel is taken, either largely, as it signifies the doctrine of Glory
concerning Christ revealed in the Word, or strictly: properly for the Gospel
promised or fulfilled; Metonymically, when the name of the thing is given to
the instrument, or it is taken for the Ministry.

1158. Romans 1.13. I oftentimes purposed to come unto you. Ver. 13. But was let
hitherto.

Paul purposing to go to Rome did not resist the will of God, nor was it
contrary, but according to his will, not absolutely but conditionally, if God
pleased: the impediments he might have, were, Satan casting many hindrances in
his way, or sickness, the planting of Churches, or the like.

* 1159. Romans 1.17. The just shall live by faith. Hab. 2.4. The Just shall live
by his faith.

The latter place tells us, though wicked or carnal men may trust in external
security: yet good souls shall be maintained in their spiritual life by faith
in Christ. And the former place shows us, that man obtains life and salvation
by the Gospel, inasmuch as it offers Christ (the cause of life) and likewise
this Christ is to be embraced by a lively faith. The one or both places tells
of getting life, if not of keeping and getting; for in attributing the one to
faith, it does the other consequently.

1160. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness. Chap. 2.4. The goodness of God leads thee to repentance.

Justice does not oppose the goodness of God punishing wicked men as they are
wicked, but goodness invites men to repentance, deferring the punishments of
the wicked, not as they are wicked, but as they are Gods creatures, and he
delights not in their destruction.

1161. Romans 1.26. He reckons up heathenish beastliness and Sodomy. Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication and all uncleanness and filthiness, let it not be once named among
you.

The Apostle commemo^^tes the dissolute life of the Heathens, to make us avoid
it, not to imitate it; by disgracing it, that so being terrified with that
filthiness, we may escape the anger of God.

* 1162. Romans 1.26. God gave them up to vile affections, etc. 1. Joh. 2.16.
Lust of the flesh -- is not of the Father.

God gave them up by permission, or suffered them to give up themselves to vile
affections, or God gave them up out of Judgment by substracting his grace, and
this as his justice because of their former inordinate walking. The latter
place tells us, that lust, etc. come not from God as the Author; nor does it
deny, that God for his own glory is the permitter of sin, or that he may
withdraw his grace.

1163. Romans 2.1. Inexcusable thou art O man whosoever thou art that judge.
Chap. 13.1. There is no power but of God.

The power of the Office is distinguished from the faults of the Person: though
in the court of Conscience and before God we are sinners, yet we are not in the
Courts of Civil Justice, and before men.

1164. Romans 2.6. God will render to every man according to his deeds. Verse. 16.
God will judge the secrets according to my Gospel.

In the former place is treated of the effect of faith that goes before
retribution, in the latter, of a necessary instrument. God will condemn the
wicked and Infidels according to the Law, and acquit the believers according to
the Gospel, for he that believes shall be saved; and both ways God will reward
according to our works, Mar. 16.16.
as they were done well or ill from faith or infidelity.

1165. Romans 2.6. He shall render to every man according to his deeds. Chap.
3.28. Chap. 8.3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works
of the Law.

To render is not only meant just retribution, but free gift; Rev. 22.12.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man
according as his work shall be. This doctrine takes not away justice, but
confirms it, because it respects works for a man's faith, and judges by the
works as the effects of men's faith and life, and condemns bad works for
unbelief.

* 1166. Romans 2.11. For there is no respect of persons with God. Romans 9.13.
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

God does not accept this person, or refuse that, because the one is of this
Nation, the other of that, the one rich, the other poor, etc. But in love he
accepts whom he will from the ordinary or damnable condition of the wicked;
that he accepts any upon arguments taken from himself or his love, is not in in
justice to the rest, but mercy to the Elect. Debitum si non reddis, habes quod
gratuleris, si reddis, non habes quod queraris. If thou do not pay thy debt
which thou owe, thou have cause to be thankeful, if thou do, thou have no
cause to complain, Aug.

* 1167. Romans 2.12. He that sins without the Law, etc. Romans 4.15. Where no Law
is, there is no transgression, etc.

There are three kinds of Laws, the written Law, given to the Jews, not to the
Gentiles: and of this Law speaks the Apostle here, that they sinned without
the Law, and so shall perish without Law, that is, the written Law of Moses.
There is beside the Law of Nature, whereof the Apostle speaks afterward. Ver.
14. They having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves: Against this Law the
Gentiles sinned, and by this Law they shall be judged. The third Law is that
which was given unto Adam in Paradise, by which not only he, but all his
Posterity are found to be Transgressors: And in respect of this Law even
Infants are found trespassers, because of Original sin.

1168. Romans 2.13. The doers of the Law shall be justified. Gal. 2.16. For by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

Justification is attributed to the Law and to Works, not simply, but by
supposition, if any man can perfectly fulfill the Works of the Law; but no man
can in this weakness perfectly fulfill the Law.

* 1169. Romans 2.13. The doers of the Law are justified. Romans 3.28. We conclude
a man justified by Faith without the Works of the Law.

The Law is fulfilled two ways: One is in supposition, that if a man could by
his own strength keep the Law, he should thereby be justified: There is another
fulfilling, which is by the perfect obedience of Christ, imputed to us by
faith, whereof the Apostle speaks. Phil. 3.9. Of these the Apostle speaks here,
who endeavor themselves to live according to the Law, and show their faith by
their works, yet are saved by the obedience of Christ. There are two kinds of
Justification: One is verily and indeed before God, which is by faith in
Christ, Romans 3.26. The other is in opinion of men, Luke 16.15. Of the former
the Apostle speaks here.

1170. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law. Chap. 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity to the Law of God,
for it is not subject to the Law of God.

The natural Law convinces the Gentiles, the written Law, the Jews. The
Apostle does not in the former place affirm that all the Gentiles do fulfill the
Law, but indefinitely, the things contained in the Law: for he speaks of
outward works, and civil Discipline, which was honest amongst some Gentiles. In
the latter, by the name Carnal he understands the unregenerate part, and the
corruption of nature.

1171. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles have not the Law. 1 John 3.4. Sin is the
transgression of the Law.

The Gentiles indeed had not the Law published in writing by Moses: but the
natural Law in the first Creation was printed in every man, which we
transgressed in Adam, and so were made sinners: Adam was, says Ambrose on Luke
l. 7. and in him we were all; Adam fell, and in him all men fell.

* 1172. Romans 2.14. Do by nature the things contained in the Law. Ephesians. 2.3.
Were by nature children of wrath as well as others.

The Apostle in the former place describes the Gentiles in general even before
the times of the Gospel, and such as had no other direction than by the Law of
Nature which they had, as appears both by the external works of the Law, and by
the inward Testimony of their conscience. Yet the Apostle says not, they
followed the Law, they only did certain things prescribed in the Law, and he
speaks rather, De notitia naturali, quam de implendi legis facultate; of the
natural knowledge which he had, not of any power or faculty to fulfill the Law,
and he meane^h, not all the Gentiles in general, but the wiser sort among them,
as Solon, Socrates, Aristides, etc. who outwardly did some external works which
the Law commanded though they wanted the inward obedience. The sum is, this
place speaks of doing the same things in kind with Christians, but not out of a
Christian principle, much less with all Christian Qualifications, and so though
they did by the light of nature some things contained in the Law, (no man can
imagine they did all) yet could not be justified by the Law.

* 1173. Romans 2.23. Circumcision profits if thou keep the Law. Gal. 5.2, 5.
-- 6.1. If you be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing.

In the places last mentioned the Apostle speaks of Circumcision then
abrogated in the times of the Gospel, but in the former he has respect unto
the times of the Law, while Circumcision was an ordinary Sacrament of the old
Testamen^. The Apostle speaks here of the profit which Circumcision brought:
which was only during the continuance of such legal Sacraments, which were
profitable unto them then, as being seals unto them of the righteousness of
faith in Christ: so then Circumcision with other legal Rites was profitable
under the Law: But after the Ceremonies were abolished, they became
unprofitable in the mean time between both, as they profited not such as
believed of the Circumcision, so they hindered not, if they did not repose their
trust and confidence in them.

1174. Romans 2.25. Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law. Gal. 5.2.
c. 6.15. If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

External Circumcision in the Old Testament was a Sacrament, upon condition of
the Law fulfilled: Under the New Testament, as other Ceremonies, it is mortal;
in the place of this came Baptism: In former times it did profit the Fathers,
as a seal of the righteousness of faith: after Christ came, and the Gospel was
planted it was taken away, by the full plenty of spiritual Circumcision.

1175. Romans 3.2. The Jews exceed the Gentiles much every way, Ver. 9. What
then? Are we b^tter than they? No in no wise. Chap. 10.12.

The Apostle speaks in the former place in respect of the Jews excellency from
the Covenant of God, A temporary privilege is on thing, an everlasting is
another.
who was pleased to bestow on the Jews the grace of his Covenant and his Law,
before the Gentiles were called; In the latter place he speaks of the Jews
themselves who deserved no more favor at Gods hands than the Gentiles, nor
were they better than we, and continuing in their unbelief they have lost their
privileges, they were nothing to be preferred before the Gentiles, Gal. 3.28.
but now we are all one in Christ, and that prerogative is taken away.

1176. Romans 3.4. Every man is a liar. Chap. 9.1. I say the truth in Christ I
lie not.

Man as he is man corrupt, is subject to lie, but being regenerated and
enligh^ened with the Holy Ghost, he embraces truth, as is manifest in Paul.

1177. Romans 3.8. We must not do evil that good may come. Chap. 9.18. God
hardening the wicked produces that which is good.

In the former place is spoken of evil of sin, in the latter of evil of
punishment. It is the singular goodness of God that he so overrules sin, that
it may be converted to good, as we see in Joseph.

1178. Romans 3.12. There is no man that does good, no not one. Joh. 13.10. Chapter
15.3. You are clean through the word which I have spoken.

By nature, by reason of inherent sin, we are all unclean by the grace of God
in Christ we are cleansed, and our hearts are purged.

1179. Romans 3.20. For by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight. Chap. 2.7. To them who continue by patience in well-doing, shall
he render glory and honor and eternal Life.

The first place shuts out all works from man's Justification, not by fault of
the Law, but by accident, that is by the fault of men: In the latter the
Apostle urges works as necessary, not by necessity of the cause to justify,
Bern.
but to be present in him that is justified; for works are no cause of
reigning, but they are the way to the Kingdom.

* 1180. Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace. Romans 5.1. Being
justified by faith.

We are justified freely in respect of any merit of or in us; what God does, he
does it freely and by his grace. We are said to be justified by faith, not in
opposition, but subordination to grace, grace is the cause, faith is the
instrument. We are justified by faith as it brings home Christ the cause of our
salvation, but not as the cause it self.

1181. Romans 3.28. Faith is greater than charity. 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity then
faith.

Faith is greater, as it is the cause of charity, and our victory, by faith
Christ dwells in our hearts, Exodus 3.17.
we please God, but charity without faith is sin. Charity is said to be greater
than faith or hope, because it never fails, but shall endure in our future
state and perfection, faith and hope then ceasing as to their actions; but it
is not greater in respect of Justification, because charity does not justify
Legally, for in many things we offend all, and it is not perfect nor
Evangelically, because in the Gospel the act of Justification is ascribed to
Faith.

1182. Romans 3.25. God has sent forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation. Joh.
18.2. Judas delivered him to the Jews.

The Father delivered his Son out of love to us; but Judas delivered Christ out
of covetousness. The Father for us and for our salvation, Judas for thirty
pieces of silver to his own destruction.

1183. Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the Law, Jam. 2.24. You see that by works a man is justified, and not
by faith only.

Paul does not separate, as to existency, works from faith which works by love,
but the object of Justification before God. Gal. 5.6.
James rejects faith which wants good works, that is, a dead faith of the
devil, v. 17, 19. and attributes to works the declaration of Justification, v.
21. yet he confirms a lively faith, v. 22. by the example of Abraham. Augustine
says, that when the Apostle says, a man is justified by fa^^, he does it not
that works should be despised, because they follow the man justified, they do
not go before Justification.

* Romans 3.28. with Jam. 2.24.

St. Paul tells us, a man is justified by faith in opposition to that
justification, which the Jews expected by the deeds of the Law. St. James tells
us, a man is justified by works in opposition to a pretense of faith, or such a
faith as men say they have, while they pretend to believe in Christ, and yet do
nothing that Christ commands. St. Paul tells us, it is a faith alone that
justifies, but not such a faith as is alone; for that faith which justifies,
though it justify as alone, yet it always is accompanied with good works. St.
James says, a man is justified by works, or a faith which is working. St. Paul
speaks of faith as it justifies in foro divino before God. St. James of works
as they justify in foro conscientiae vel humano, as they justify us to our
selves, or to others. Faith justifies our Persons, Works justify our Faith.

1184. Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid, yea,
we establish the Law. Heb. 7.18. There is a disanulling of the Commandment
going before through the weakness thereof.

The first place is of the Moral Law, which faith confirms, because Christ
came to fulfill it, and not to destroy it; and the end of the Law is to bring us
to Christ. The latter place is concerning the Ceremonial Law, which is
abrogated, because the shadow was to give place to the substance.

* 1185. Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness. Psalm. 106.31. -- And Phinehas executed judgment, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness.

Abraham was not justified merito fidei, by the merit and worthiness of his
faith. Abraham was justified by faith, not materialiter, materially, as it was
an act, but relate and objective, as it has relation unto the Object, the
Justice of Christ, and Organice instrumentally, as it applies the
righteousness of Christ. Abraham believed the Promise of God to be his shield,
and to give him an heir of his own body, and to multiply his numerous
Posterity, of whom Christ was the chief, and by whom all Nations were to be
blessed. As for Phinehas, God accounted his Act as a righteous Act, though men
might count it an an Act of rash Zeal. So that the Act did not Justify the
Person, but the Person doing that Act sincerely was justified as to that Action.

* 1186. Romans 4.5. God justifies the ungodly. 1 Kin. 8.31. Condemning the
wicked to bring his way upon his head, and justifying the righteous.

God justifies the ungodly, not as he is ungodly, but as he is penitent and
turning from his ungodliness; He is said to justify the ungodly, as those who
were so in themselves and are clothed in Christ, and so are esteemed godly.

* 1187. Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes. Lu. 10.28. This
do and thou shall live.

The former place says, He who is not able to fulfill the condition of works,
not grounding himself thereon, taking the way to be saved by believing, to him
is the reward reckoned. The latter place shows us a man who sought Eternal life
by the works of the Law, which he could not fulfill, whom Christ referred to the
Law to show him his sin: knowing that would be a means to bring him to Christ,
or leave him inexcusable, and so they intend the same thing.

1188. Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered. Mat. 5.2. Blessed are the poor in spirit, the clean in heart, the
merciful.

In the first place is spoken of the cause of blessedness, namely, remission of
sins, and imputation of righteosness: In the latter place, of virtues which are
the way to blessedness.

1189. Romans 4.15. Chap. 5.20. Where there is no Law there is no transgression.
Chap. 2.12. As many as sin in the Law shall be judged by the Law.

In the former place the Law is taken generally, without which there can be no
transgression; In the latter place he speaks of the natural Law; for even the
Gentiles shall perish for violating of it.

* 1190. Romans 4.17. Even God who quickneth the dead. 2 Kings. 4.35. Elias
raised the dead, etc.

God only and of his own power raised the dead, the Prophets and Apostles
raised the dead by power of God, and not by their own power; They, as
Instruments; God, as the Cause.

1191. Romans 4.18. Abraham against hope. Ver. 18. Believed in hope.

He believed contrary to humane hope, by his hope in God, having confidence
contrary to the reason of the flesh, the force of nature, for all these would
have weakened hope, would make him doubt and despair also, yet he overcame all
those difficulties by firm hope, he hoped in things, desperate, distrusting
himself, but trusting in God.

* 1192. Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the Promise. Genesis 17.17. Abraham fell
upon his face and laughed.

This laughing is of admiration at Gods favor, nor at distrust of his power:
though he had hitherto found an indisposition in his body to beget a Child, and
having been so long without, he could not but entertain the Promise by way of
wonder and rejoicing; and in this rejoicing his faith might reach as far as the
joy of the Messiah, Luke 2.10: Joh. 8.56.

1193. Romans 4.25. God raised Jesus Christ our Lord from the dead. Joh. 10.18. I
have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up.

The Resurrection is ascribed to God the Father, because the works of the
Trinity, ad extra, are indivisible to the Son, because he has the same power
with the Father, who willingly underwent death, and therefore the Resurrection
is to be ascribed to his free will.

1194. Romans 5.2. By faith we stand and rejoice. 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that
thinks he stands take heed least he fall.

We stand founded on Gods grace, whilst we are kept by the power of God by
faith unto salvation: by sin we fall, when we think we stand.

1195. Romans 5.4. Patience works experience. Jam. 1.3. Experience works
patience.

Probation in the first place is taken passively for experience which rejoices
by patience, in the latter place it is taken actively for trial and the effect
of it, that is tribulation, for affliction tries faith, as fire does gold.

1196. Romans 5.6, 7. Christ died for us. 1 John 3.16. Because he that is Christ
laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

Col. 1.24.
Christ dying for us a sacrifice, and revenger, paid our ransom for us. John
comparing the death of Christ for us, and our death for the brethren, does it
secundum quid, for we dye not to redeem our brethren, but to edify them.

1197. Romans 5.8. God commends his love toward us in that when we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 8.32. The Father spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all.

The Father and the Son did always love us, and have done all things for us;
Christ delivered himself for our sins into the power of the devil; and because
we were not to be redeemed by power, but by righteousness, Christ the Righteous
died for us, and so by righteousness he overcame the devil; therefore because
the devil had slain Christ, it was necessary that he should release those that
were captives, Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c. 2.
and the devil by the price paid, was not made rich but ensnared.

1198. Romans 5.10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son. Joh. 15.13. No man has greater love than this, that a man lay down
his life for his friends.

By nature we are Gods enemies, by reason of sin, but by grace we are
reconciled to God by Christ, who died for us, and we are so made the dearest
friends unto God.

1199. Romans 5.12, 18. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, so death passed over all men. Ver. 19 As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by one man's obedience many shall be made righteous.

The guilt of Adam is here compared with the grace of Christ, because both have
that descends on their followers. Adam derives his guilt on all men by nature,
Christ derives his righteousness by grace on all that believe on him.

* Romans 5.12, 18. with 19.

This term of Universality All must be restrained according to the nature of
the subject, as Adam transfused his Sin unto all which were his offspring, so
Christ also justifies all his, that is, all his which believe in him. Besides,
the pre-eminence of the benefit consists not in the equality of the number,
that Christ should save as many as are lost in Adam, for then there should be
only an equality, not a superiority. Herein the Prerogative of grace is seen,
1. In the excellency of the effect, Life being more excellent than Death,
Righteousness than Sin. 2. In the powerfulness of the Work. it shows a greater
power to save than to destroy. 3. In the pre-eminence of the amplitude of
grace, we are justified not only from one, but all kind of sins.

1200. Romans 5.20. The Law entered that sin might abound. Chap. 7.12. The Law is
holy, and the Commandment holy, just, and good.

The Law increases sin, not of it self and its own nature, but by accident,
because it discovers sin, and the poison of it, that we may know it; for by the
corruption of nature we are stirred up to strive against the Commandment, yet
the Law remains still in it self just and good.

1201. Romans 6.3. So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death. Acts 8.13. Simon Magus and other hypocrites were
baptized, yet they put not on Christ.

To be baptized into Christ is to put on Christ, the Robes of his Righteousness
and Holiness, which Believers who are baptized do. Hieron. in Romans 6.
Simon Magus and hypocrites that are not faithful, receive not the Spirit, but
water only in Baptism, for there is a common Baptism to all that are baptized,
but not the virtue of Baptism, that is grace. Aug. in Psalm. 77.

1202. Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body. Chap. 3.12. There is
none that does good, no not one.

The first place is to exhort us to mortify sin in us, in the Regenerate sin
reigns not, they are wholly dead to sin in Christ, and partly in themselves;
they that are not Regenerate know indeed what they ought to do, and know that
of themselves they are unable to perform it.

1203. Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under grace. Gal. 3.22. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin.

The first place is concerning the Regenerate, who are not under the
malediction, dominion, and rigid exaction of the Law: The latter place is
concerning all that are subject to sin, for whom the Law is a Schoolmaster to
Christ by the knowledge of our sins.

1204. Romans 6.18. You are become the servants of righteousness. Ver. 20. You
were free from righteousness.

In the former place is spoken of those who were converted and freed from the
yoke of sin; in the latter, of those that are not yet converted, who are free
from righteousness, and are not under the government of righteousness, for
carnal wisdom cannot be subject to the Law of God.

1205. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Wisdom 2.24. By the envy of the
devil death entered into the world.

The wages of sin is death, because the Justice of God would have it so, to
punish mankind that was fallen, by death, the Author whereof was not God, but
it came into the world by the envy of the devil.

1206. Romans 7.6. Now we are delivered from the Law. Mat. 5.17. I came not to
destroy the Law.

We are delivered from the curse of the Law, the rigor and provocation of it
to sin; also from the Law or death in which we were held; but that takes not
away the right use of the Law in respect of us.

1207. Romans 7.7. I had not known lust, unless the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet. 1 Timothy 3.1. If a man desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good
work.

Concupiscence taken morally, is either absolutely indifferent, as to eat and
drink, or relatively to the Law, and so good or bad, as it is done contrary or
according to the Law, being ordinate or disordinate; The latter place the Law
condemns.

1208. Romans 7.8. Sin in me wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. Jam.
1.15. When lust has conceived it brings forth sin.

Paul means actual concupiscence of corrupt nature, James, original
concupiscence.

1209. Romans 7.9. I was alive without the Law once, says Paul. Phil. 3.6.
Touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless.

Before his conversion Paul lived a Pharisee, without any true knowledge of the
divine Law, ascribing to himself external righteousness, which was hypocrisy.

1210. Romans 7.12. The Law is holy, just and good. 2 Cor. 3.7. It is the
ministration of death.

The Law in it self in respect of the Author, is good, holy, and just, because
it declares the good and holy will of God: in respect of us it is called the
ministration of Death, because it reproves sin, and threatens us with death.

1211. Romans 7.14. I am carnal sold under sin. Chap. 6.22. We are made free from
the Law of sin wherein we were held.

The Apostle according to the unregenerated part was carnal, that is, indulgent
to his carnal lusts: but being Regenerate he did lament for those carnal
affections, and resisted them.

1212. Romans 7.18. In me dwells no good thing. Chap. 8.9. The Spirit of God
dwells in us.

The first place is of the old man, in me, that is my flesh, and that part
which is not regenerate: The second is concerning man that is regenerate, for
Christ lives in us, the Holy Ghost lives in us, and indeed the whole Trinity,
Joh. 14.23.

1213. Romans 7.18. To will is present with me. Phil. 2.13. God works in you to
will.

To be willing is that good which is wrought in us by the Holy Ghost; but after
the fall of man to be willing and be able to will what is good, was lost in us.

1214. Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. Ver. 23. I
see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind.

Paul delighted, according to his spirit and inward man, the regenerate part,
in the Law of God, but rebelled against it in his outward man, the flesh, and
the part unregenerate: for the whole man, is as it is commonly said, partly
flesh and partly spirit.

1215. Romans 7.23. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my
mind. Chap. 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and of death.

The faithful are either captivated by the Law of sin, that they cannot do that
good they would, but what sin will have done that dwells in them; or they are
freed from sin here inchoatively, because it does not condemn them, nor yet
reign in them, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 8.1. c. 6.12.
but in the next world it shall be accomplished, and they shall be perfectly
made free from it.

1216. Romans 8.2. The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and death. Joh. 5.28. The hour is coming in the which
all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice and come forth.

Resurrection from death to life is common to the good and bad, but in a diverse
manner, and for a diverse end, the good shall come forth gloriously to life, the
wicked ignominiously unto death.

1217. Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are you saved
through faith. Mar. 16.16.

Subalternates disagree not, the grace of God is the efficient cause, faith and
hope the instrumental causes of our salvation.

* 1218. Romans 8.26. The spirit it self makes intercession for the Saints,
according to the will of God. 1 Timothy 2.5. One Mediator between God and Man, the
Man Christ Jesus.

The Spirit provokes us to prayers, and tells us as it were within what we
should say, and how we should groan. The Son does properly make intercession
for us, who is our Advocate. Yet by a figure the Holy Ghost is said to make
intercession for us also: because he rowseth and stirs us up to prayer, and
prompteth, as it were, our Lesson unto us, and how we ought to pray in all our
necessities.

1219. Romans 8.30. God, whom he did predestimate, them he also called. Mat.
20.16. c. 22.14. Many are called, but few chosen.

The first place is concerning those who being called are obedient to the Holy
Ghost, and make their vocation firm unto the end of their lives: The latter is
of those who resist the vocation of God; in respect of the former there are as
many predestined as are called, but of the latter more called than are
predestined.

1220. Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us? 1 Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the devil.

When God is for us, though the devil be against us, he prevails not.

1221. Romans 8.38. Nothing, nor creature can separate us from the love of God.
Chap. 9.3. I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren.

The wish of Paul was conditional, if it were lawful and might be done; the
Apostle thereby shows the vehemence of his affection toward his kindred, and
submits himself to the Divine will. Chrysostom on this place says, that Paul
by a premeditated prayer desired to be separated from Christ by a temporal and
eternal abjection for the salvation of his brethren, and so would by his own
destruction redeem them to eternal salvation; neither did he therefore love his
brethren more than Christ, for he did not desire to be separated from the love
of Christ, but from the fruit of his love and friendship; he desires to
perish, not as an enemy of Christ, but a preserver of his brethren, as Christ
was made a curse for us, not as Gods enemy, but as our Redeemer.

* Romans 8.38. with 9.3.

In the latter place Paul had respect unto the glory of God alone, or unto the
salvation of his brethren alone, Sed charitatem hominum in studio gloriae Dei
conjungimus; but we join the love of Men with the glory of God, etc. He wishes
the salvation of his brethren with respect unto the glory of God, as Moses in
the like Case, in making request for his people, therein desired the promotion
of Gods glory.

This does not show that Paul could be separated from Gods love, but that his
zeal for Gods people was so great, that if it were possible he would be
separate. Qui subponit nihil ponit. Or secondly, (...) only imports
Excommunication, whereby one is held as accursed, and execrable, and deprived
of all communion with the Church, not as if the Apostle wished to be hardened in
heart against the Lord Christ, and severed from his love; for that can never
simply be wished of any pious man, but that he out of the overflowing of his
love wished that he himself might bear the punishment, which they might expect
from the righteous judgment of God for their hardness, so they might be freed
from this hardness and accursedness.

* 1222. Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

There are three things to be considered in the accepting of persons: 1. When
some external condition is respected beside the merit of the cause. 2. And this
is done contrary to the Law of Equity. 3. And not without injury done unto
another. But none of these are seen in Gods electing Jacob, and rejecting Esau.
1. He respects not any condition or quality in them which are elected: but he
makes of this or that man, of his own good pleasure. 2. He is not tied to any
Law, and so transgresses no Law. 3. He does no wrong unto any in exempting
some from destruction, which in the rigor of his justice is due unto all. If
the Creditor do forgive his debt unto one, and exact it of another, he does no
wrong: It is free for him to do what he will with his own, Mat. 20.15. The
re-acceptation of persons properly is where the Judge leaving the merit of the
cause does find somewhat in the person, for which he gives sentence with one
against another: But so does not God, he finds no difference in the persons,
but all being in the same cause of damnation he of his own free will forgiveth
his debt unto some, and requires it of others. Though God give unequally, yet
it is not accepting of persons, but when this is done with respect to some
quality in the person.

1223. Romans 9.16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. Mat. 19.17. If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments.

It is therefore said not to be of him that wills, because salvation is not
given for our merit, but of Gods mercy: but it is also of him that wills, not
because we will, though no man is saved against his will, but of unwilling to
receive Gods call, he is made willing.

1224. Romans 9.18. God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth. Chap. 11.32. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all.

The first place is concerning the most free will and power of God, who may
have mercy on whom he please; his Antecedent will reaches to all men, his
consequent will is restrained to the believers and unbelievers, and so he will
have mercy of the faithful, that they may be saved, but he justly punishes and
hardneth the unbelievers and wicked men who resist his grace freely offered
unto them.

* 1225. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law. Mat. 6. I came not to destroy
the Law.

The word (...), or end, signifies not the abolition or destruction, but the
scope or drift of the Law; him whom the Law would have us to believe, and to
whom by its strictness it sends us unto. Christ is the end which the Ceremonial
Law aims at, demonstrates, and declares; The Sacrifices were types of our
having reconciliation by Christ, and the Politic part of the Law was a shadow
of the Kingdom of heaven, or the Church of Christ. The moral Law (which the
Apostle principally intends in this Epistle) in that it cannot receive
satisfaction from our transactions, and holding forth the Messiah of which man
stood so much in need of is terminated in Christ; not that Christ is effective,
only the end of the Law, as if he giving us his Holy Spirit, whereby our souls
are regenerated and enabled to walk in obedience which the Law requires, but
that principally he is the end of the Law by imputation of his righteousness to
us, whereby we stand clear in the account of the Law.

1226. Romans 10.10. With the mouth is made confession unto salvation. 1 Cor.
4.20. The Kingdom of God is not in word.

In the first place is spoken of confession with faith; in the latter of humane
words, which the false teachers used in preaching, wherein the Kingdom of God
consists not, but in the virtue, that is, in a true performance of those things
they profess with their mouths.

* 1227. Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing. Romans 15.21. They that have not
heard shall understand.

Faith, though it be the gift of God, yet it is wrought by the preaching of the
Word. The latter place tells us, that they which had not the Law nor the
Prophets, they shall now hear the preaching of the Apostles, and understand or
believe; So that the latter place contradicts not the former, but tells us,
that they which yet heard not shall hear and so understand, and by
understanding believe. He which promises the end, implies the means conducing
to that end.

* 1228. Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not. Isa. 65.1. I am
sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not,
etc.

St. Paul neither exactly follows the Hebrew Text, nor yet the Septuagint, as
Erasmus observes, and as may appear unto him that will compare them together:
But he takes the sense, 1. The order is somewhat inverted, for Isa. 65.1. the
first part of the sentence, I was found of them that sought me not, is there
the latter: And the latter here, I was made manifest to them that asked not
after me, is there the first. 2. The word in the Hebrew which St. Paul
translateth, I was made, (...), manifest, is there Nidrashti, not I was sought
for of them that asked not after me; for how can that be? But I caused them to
seek me, as Beza and Pagaine observe.

1229. Romans 11.2. Who has known the mind of the Lord. 1 Cor. 2.16. We have
known the mind of Christ.

These words were spoken by Elias in Passion, however, not as if there were
none at all that knew the mind of the Lord, for he himself knew it; but that he
conceived there was very few, for they did visibly appear to him to be few. The
latter place shows, that some do know the mind of Christ, though it implies not
that all do it.

1230. Romans 11.7. Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for. Mat. 7.7.
Seek and you shall find.

In the first place he speaks of works, so they that seek God and righteousness
attain it not, but in the latter the promise is made to them that seek by faith.

* Romans 11.7. with Mat. 7.7.

There are two kinds of seeking God, a lawful, right and true seeking of God,
wherein there must be both observed the manner, which must be of faith, and the
end, which is of the glory of God: And the other is not right, which fails of
either of these, as the Jews failed in both: for they sought not righteousness
by faith, and therefore missed of that which they sought for; and beside, they
went about to establish their own righteousness, and would not submit
themselves to the righteousness of God, i. e. They sought their own praise and
glory, and not Gods, and therefore they failed of their desire.

* 1231. Romans 11.9. Let their table be made a snare. Mat. 5.46. Romans 12.14.
etc. Bless them which persecute you, bless, I say, and curse not.

We must distinguish first the cause, whether private, which concerns one person
only, in which cause it is unlawful to curse; or public, concerning the glory
of God, as Acts 5.

Secondly, We must consider the condition and calling of them which use
imprecations, whether they do it out of private affection, which is unlawful:
Or of a Prophetical spirit, as the Prophets and Apostles did, Acts 13.9.

Thirdly, The things themselves, whether temporal, which may tend unto their
amendment, Psalm. 89.16. Or eternal, but these cannot be denounced without Gods
special warrant.

Fourthly, The persons are to be distinguished which are cursed; some are such
as there is an hope of an amendment, or others of whom there is no hope of
amendment, professed enemies.

Fifthly, The manner and kind of imprecations must be looked into, some are
extraordinary or ordinary; of the former there is no question, coming from an
extraordinary spirit. The ordinary, in which must be considered, 1. The persons
that curse, which must be public. 2. The persons cursed, which must be
intractable. 3. The manner, they must curse conditionally, not absolutely. 4.
With such affections as the persons be not hated, but the vices detested.

In David's imprecation, there was Gods cause, a Prophetical spirit, they were
professed enemies of God. The second place is meant against private curses,
against persons not desperately evil, and without any special direction.

1232. Romans 11.11. The fall of the Jews is for the salvation of the Gentiles,
that they may provoke them to emulation. Chap. 3.8. We must not do evil that
good may come of it.

God rejected the Jews by his just judgment, not that they were guiltless, but
because they were rebellious and unbelieving, and so caused God to cast them
off, and to take the Gentiles in their room: The latter place is to be
understood of the evil of punishment.

1233. Romans 11.16. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy, and if
the root be holy, so are the branches. Mat. 12.39. An evil and adulterous
generation. Joh. 8.44. The Jews were of their father the devil.

The Jews are called holy by right of the Covenant, because they were separated
from the profane Gentiles, thence it is concluded that all hope of salvation
is not cut off from them; they are called a perverse generation for their
wicked works.

* 1234. Romans 11.16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy:
and if the root be holy, so are the branches.

Isaiah calls the Jews a rebellious people; the same Israel cannot be said
holy in all the parts, and in respect of the same time to be both holy and
unholy: but diverse parts and times considered, both may agree unto Israel; for
the faithful and elect considered in Israel they were holy: But the rest were
rebellious and unholy, the Proposition must be understood not of the whole
Nation, but of diverse parts.

* 1235. Romans 11.16. If the root be holy -- Job 14.5. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean.

We must distinguish between internal, inherent and personal qualities, such
are the habits of the mind, Wisdom, Piety, Faith, etc. these are not conveyed
by generation; and the external privileges which are given unto a stock and
kindred, which do descend by Generation, as Freemen beget Freemen, Slaves beget
Slaves, Jews beget Jews, and Christians are born of Christians: Because the
Promise is made to the faithful and their seed, the branches then are holy
because of the holy root, not by an actual and inherent holiness, but by an
outward Prerogative of grace, grounded on the Promise of God made unto
Believers and their seed.

No man can bring a clean thing by personal and inherent cleanness out of a
soil that is inherently unclean; Though a person under the external privileges
of holiness, called a branch, may yet be unclean in himself, and so bring forth
nothing but uncleanness.

* 1236. Romans 11.16. If the root be holy, so are the branches. Ephesians. 2.3. We
were by nature the children of wrath as well as others.

In respect of original corruption there is no difference betwixt Jews and
Gentiles, both were the children of wrath; but in respect of external
privileges and advantages the Jews were the right Olive, a holy root and
branches, they were descended of believing Parents, to whom the Promise was
made.

1237. Romans 11.17. The Gentiles were engrafted into the stock of the Jews, or
the Olive tree. Chap. 6.5. If we be planted into the likeness of his death, we
shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection.

Christ is the Vine, the Olive tree, the Fig tree, in respect of his efficacy,
which is imputed to the Church by participation; and they that are engrafted
into Christ the Head, are made members of the Church which is his Body.

1238. Romans 11.20. Be not high minded, but fear. Ver. 22. Otherwise thou also
shall be cut off. Ver. 29. For the gifts and callings of God are without
repentance.

The first place concerns hypocrites, who profess the Doctrine of the Church;
the faithful who are certain of their salvation by confidence from the heart,
fear with a filial, but not a servile fear, for they are taught by that fear to
be careful that they do not by carnal security cast themselves into Gods
displeasure.

1239. Romans 11.22. The Jews that were cut off shall be engrafted again, and the
Gentiles shall be cut off. Ch^p. 11.29, 15. The gifts and callings of God are
without repentance.

The unbelieving Jews are excluded, but they that believe shall be grafted in
again and be saved, therefore here follows no change of the counsel of God.

1240. Romans 11.25. Blindness is happened in part unto Israel, until the fullness
of the Gentiles be come in. 1 These. 2.16. The wrath of God is come upon them to
the uttermost.

The wrath of God remains upon the unbelieving, obstinate, malicious Jews, who
crucified Christ, persecuted the Apostles, and hindered the preaching of the
Gospel to the Gentiles.

1241. Romans 11.26. And all Israel shall be saved. Luke 18.8. When the Son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

Christ speaks comparatively, extenuating the number of the faithful in the
last times, either in respect of the multitude of the wicked, or seduction of
Antichrist; but Antichrist being discovered and consumed with the blast of Gods
mouth, there will be a great multitude of the faithful, so that all Israel
shall be saved; for as the fullness of the Gentiles is not taken generally for
the conversion of every individual amongst the Gentiles, but for a great part,
so it must be understood of the conversion of the Jews.

* 1242. Romans 11.29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
Genesis 6.6. God is said to repent, it repented God he made man.

This word Paenitere, to repent, is taken two ways, either properly, and so it
signifies a change of the mind and purpose, which wishes a thing undone, and
not to be, which is: and in this sense God cannot repent him of any thing which
he has done, nor of any gifts bestowed, no not upon the wicked: For howsoever
they abuse them ungratiously, yet the Lord had reason to do as he did: He that
repents, either fails in his counsel, not foreseeing all things, or in his
power, not being able to effect what he intended: but God has no defect either
in counsel or power, therefore properly he cannot repent. 2. To repent
signifies a change, not in him that wills and purposes, but in the thing
willed, and so God is said to repent, not that he changes, but they change and
alter upon whom the gifts are conferred, and show themselves unworthy of them,
so here is a Metonymy of the effect for the cause -- Neither are all Gods gifts
without repentance, but such gifts as depend upon Election: Neither is every
Vocation unchangeable, but only the internal and spiritual. God had chosen Saul
to be King, and furnished him with excellent gifts, but they were only
temporal: Though he had a temporal Election to the Kingdom, it follows not that
he was eternally elected; for God had decreed or foreseen that Saul should not
continue in the Kingdom appointed unto David.

1243. Romans 11.32. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all. Mat. 7.14. For straight is the way which leads unto life, and
few there are that find it.

The Apostle understands all, that is, Jews and Gentiles, who are not saved by
themselves, but of the mere mercy of God.

* 1244. Romans 11.32. God has shut them all in unbelief. Psalm. 92.16. And there
is no iniquity within him.

God does not commit iniquity by shutting all up in unbelief, for they are shut
up as in a prison in punishing them, as a just Judge, with the fetters, as it
were with Gives, of their own blindness and hardness of heart, Romans 1.26. Like
as a Judge, does inflict imprisonment upon offenders and restraint of liberty:
So men are kept in the prison of infidelity by the justice of God, their sins
so deserving; But here is the difference: Civil imprisonment is for sin, yet it
is not sin; but Spiritual imprisonment is blindness and unbelief is sin: And
God justly punishes sin with sin, Quis dicat Achabum non peccasse credendo
spiritui mendaci, etc. Who can say that Ahab sinned not in believing the false
Spirit? And who will say that sin was not the punishment of sin coming from the
judgment of God.

1245. Romans 11.34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? 1 Cor. 2.16. But we
have the mind of Christ.

The first place is concerning the inscrutable secrets of Gods wisdom, which
are not needful for us to know; the latter is concerning mysteries that belong
to our salvation, revealed in Gods Word, and such which no man by his natural
reason, were it never so acute, could ever come to know.

* 1246. Romans 12, 2. Fashion not your selves. with 15. Rejoice with them that
rejoice, weep with them that weep.

Fashion not, or be not conformed, or apply not your selves to the customs,
dispositions, and Practices of worldly and corrupt men. The latter place bids
us not rejoice with wicked men, but with the godly, and weep with them, which
contradicts not the former.

1247. Romans 12.20. Thou shall heap coals of fire upon the head of thine enemy.
Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you.

The Apostle understands here by coals the spiritual things of conscience, not
natural coals, for benefits done to an enemy are a cautery to his conscience,
which pricks and burns out adversary, does justly convince him, and stirs him
up to peace, concord, amendment of life; let us therefore overcome evil with
good, and so win the victory over our enemies.

* 1248. Romans 12.44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you. Psalm.
139.21, 22. Do not I have them, O Lord, that hate thee, etc.

We must put a difference betwixt our enemies cause and his person, betwixt sin
and a sinner: Their evil causes and their sins must be hated, and we must give
no approbation thereto; but yet their persons being Gods Creatures; and bearing
his Image, in some sort must be loved -- Enemies be of two sorts, Private and
Public: A private enemy is he that hates a man for some private cause in
himself, or concerning his affairs, and such a one we must love and not hate,
as Christ commands and the Apostle here. A public enemy is he that hates a
man for Gods cause, for Religion, and the Gospels sake; and these enemies be of
two sorts, curable- and incurable. We must pray for the public curable enemies
that they may be converted, and yet hate their conditions. If they be
incurable, and we have plain signs of their final impenitency, then we may hate
them, for so we hate the devil; and ye^ so hate, as to direct ou^ hatred to
their sins, and for their sins hate their persons, and no otherwise. The latter
place speaks of public enemies.

1249. Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God. 1 Pet. 2.13. Be subject to
every Ordinance of man.

The Magistracy is a Divine Institution: It is called the Ordinance of man,
because men undergo it, and it is employed for the government of men, and was
ordained for the good of man: though the Magistrate be ordained of men, yet
that is done by Divine authority, and subalternates disagree not.

* 1250. Romans 13.1. The powers that be are ordained of God. Hos. 8.4. They have
set up Princes, but not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it not.

We distinguish betwixt the power in it self considered, and the way of
attaining unto that power, and the use and manner of execution. The first is
alwais of God, but not the second, and the third; for when any by bribery,
cruelty, or any other corrupt mean^ attaineth unto any Magistracy, or abuses
his power tyrannically or wickedly, in neither of these respects is he said to
be of God.

As to that of Hosea, the renting of the Kingdom from Solomon and giving ten
Tribes to Jeroboam was the Lords own act, 1 Kin. 11.31. But in respect of the
circumstances, as the rebellion of the people against their lawful King, and
their falling away from his obedience without consulting with God, so was it
not the Lords act. Besides, He is said to have reigned, but not by God, in
respect of the manner of his government, Q^^^ se non accomodavit, ad scriptam
and patefactam Dei voluntatem; and so they reign, but not by God, both because
it is contrary to the order instituted of God, and they reign to themselves,
not to God.

1251. Romans 13.2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of
God. Mat. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God
the things that are Gods.

Preachers have authority to reprove the Magistrate Theologically for his sins,
but not politickly to resist him, when he applies himself to Gods Commandments.
But if he shall degenerate into a Tyrant and Idolater, and opposing himself to
God, 1 Timothy 5.20. 2 Timothy 4.2. Acts 5.29
shall set up what is contrary to God, then we must obey God rather than men:
For the second Table of the Law must give place to the first Table.

* 1252. Romans 13.2. Magistracy is the Ordinance of God. 1 Pet. 2.13. Magistracy
is intimated to be the Ordinance of man.

The Powers are not simply of God, as other things, but especially ordained,
that is, by special precept from God; there are other things of God, as Famine,
Sickness, War, but not ordained by Precept and Command. Three ways may these
Powers be said to be ordained or ordered, first in respect of God, because they
are by him instituted and appointed. Secondly, in regard of themselves, the
Lord has set them certain limits and bounds, whereby they should be ordered
Thirdly, in respect of those which are to be ordered: God would have order
among men; some to rule, and some to obey. Magistracy is said to be the
Ordinance of man, that is, the framing and ordering of Civil Government is of
man; or intended by, or has this or that mode from men, or is proper to men,
or is discharged by men.

1253. Romans 13.5. You must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free.

Submission is either active or Passive. If we cannot the active way, we must
the passive way.
The decrees of the Magistrate, if they agree with Gods Word, and are appointed
for good order, they bind the conscience: so also Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
for keeping the Moral Laws, are to be piously observed, so far as they hinder
not the use of our Christian Liberty.

* Romans 13.5. For conscience sake. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast, etc.

For conscience sake of the Divine Precepts, which being obeyed brings peace of
conscience, but to resist Gods Ordinance, i. e. the Magistrate in Licitis and
Honestis, or actively, is a deadly sin, sauciens conscientiam, wounding the
conscience. The second place forbids not obedience to the Magistrate, but bids
us stand fast in that liberty which Christ has given, but Christ never gave
liberty to resist the Magistrate, as before I said.

1254. Romans 13.8. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law. Mat. 22.40.
On these two Commandments, (the love of God, and our neighbor) hang all the
Law and the Prophets.

The love of our neighbor proceeding from the love of God, is the fulfilling
of the Law; since we have but the Image of God in our neighbor, therefore God
must be principally beloved.

* Romans 13.8. with Mat. 22.40.

Has fulfilled the Law. The Apostle rehearses not all the Commandments, but
only those of the second Table, because he treats of those Duties which are
to be performed unto men; and by the keeping of the second Table is better
observed and discerned the keeping of the Law than out of the first: We must
restrain the word Law to the second Table, but in the former place we must take
in both the Tables. Besides, the love of our Neighbor may be said to be the
fulfilling of the Law, because it proceeds from the love of God, and he that
loves his Neighbor, first loves God, and then his Neighbor in order to God.

1255. Romans 13.13. Let us not walk in strife and envying. 1 Cor. 14.39. Covet
spiritual gifts.

Emulation joined with envy by reason of another profit, is evil, and meant by
the first place; in the latter, sincerity of love proceeding from good zeal and
justice.

1256. Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. Gal. 2.11. Paul withstood Peter to the face, saying, if thou
being a Jew live after the manner of the Gentiles.

They are weak who know not the true use of indifferent things. Peter being
taught by the heavenly vision, that distinction of Meats was taken away,
deserved to be reprehended; because what he learned of God, and taught in the
public Council, he yet observed not, but was scandalous both to Jews and
Gentiles.

1257. Romans 14, 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Col.
2.21. Touch not, taste not, handle not.

In the former place, abstinence, and observation of meats proceeding from
faith without scandal, is left free; for the Ceremonial Law ended at Christ's
coming: In the latter he reproves the superstition of the Colossians, who being
taught the use of things indifferent, yet brought them in as a part of Gods
worship necessary to salvation. The Apostle does not so much condemn them for
observing Ceremonies, as that they did keep them opinione necessitatis, with an
opinion of necessity. In the latter place the Apostle speaks not so much of
abstinence from meat, and marriages, but of the Precept of abstinence, from
both which should be brought in by wicked Heretics, the Manichees, Talions,
and others which condemned them as evil.

1258. Romans 14.6. He that regards the day regards it unto the Lord, and he
that regards not the day to the Lord, he does not regard it. Gal. 4.10. He
reprehends them for observing days and months, and times, and years.

The first place leaves it free to the weak, who had tender consciences, either
to observe or not observe the legal festival days, so they did it without
opinion of merit, or necessity, or offending their neighbor: The latter
reprehends the Galathians, who with a kind of tie of conscience did observe the
Sabbaths and Festival times of the Jews according to the Law, as if they had
not been set free by Christ.

* 1259. Romans 14.9. That he might be the Lord both of the dead and of the
living. Mat. 22.32. He is not the God of the dead.

In the one place they are said to be dead according to the Sadduces sense,
that had no being at all, but were utterly perished and extinct both in body
and soul, of such the Lord is not God: For he is not a God of that which is
not; he is not their God as they are dead, but as he purposes to raise them
again. But hereby the dead the Apostle understands them that are alive in
soul though dead in body.

1260. Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. Joh.
10.28. My sheep shall no man pluck out of my hand.

The Elect may be destroyed by themselves as weak men, and by reason of Satan's
malice, that puts so many offenses in their way, but not in respect of God, for
no man can snatch them finally out of his hands.

* Romans 14.15. with Joh. 10.28.

He is said to destroy his brother, who though he really cannot, yet g^ves
occasion to such a ruin. The Apostle speaks not here exactly and precisely of
those whom indeed Christ died for, but of such as in our charitable opinion are
held to be of that number: Omnes fidem Christi profitentes pro redemptis habet
charitas Christiana; All that profess the faith of Christ, Christian charity
holds to be of the number of those which are redeemed.

1261. Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor. Gal. 1.10. Should I
yet please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

We must please men for their edification both by words and examples, but not
to seek for glory at the mouth of the people, for so the Apostle would not
please men.

* Romans 15.2. with Gal. 1.10.

We must consider three things, Who, wherein, to what end, men are to be
pleased.

1. Who, if I should please the incredulous Jews and Infidels I should not
please Christ. He must seek to please the brethren and believers.

2. Neither must we please men in things that are evil. Cum been agimus, and
been docemus, placemus, proximo; When we teach well, and do well, we please our
neighbor, etc.

3. The end men must propound in pleasing their neighbors is in seeking their
good, and furthering their salvation. Not to seek praise, but that men may
profit by their example: And that profiting is either in bringing them to
Christ, or if they be brought to Christ, to help them to increase and go
forward. The weak must not be supported so as to encourage him in his weakness,
but rather to strengthen him in the faith.

1262. Romans 15.14. And I my self also am persuaded of you my brethren, that you
also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge. Chap. 14.1. There were
many amongst them weak in faith.

The Apostle before by Synechdoche attributes to the whole Church that which
belongs but to one part, for there were many godly, learned, and weak also in
that Church.

* Romans 15.14. with Romans 14.

He had formerly spoken sharply unto them, he now uses this insinuation to
qualify his former asperity, lest they should think that he judged them all to
be very rude and simple; He speaks this persuasion by that of charity, and of
some eminent ones which give denomination to the whole, not to every particular
Member thereof.

1263. Romans 15.20. I would not build on another man's foundation. Joh. 4.38. I
sent you to reap that whereon you bestowed no labor.

Paul compares his Ministry with the other Apostles, and he denies that he
builded on another man's foundation; or to have preached where other Apostles
had planted a Church, but rather to have taught there where the name of Christ
was not so much as once heard of. The Prophets were the seeds men in Gods
field, the Apostles they reaped the harvest, because they saw the fulfilling of
the Prophesies, and they built on the foundation of the Prophets.

* 1264. Romans 16.3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila. Acts 18.2, 8, etc. They were at
Corinth with Paul, whence he wrote this Epistle.

Aquila and Priscilla were twice at Rome, once when by the Edict of Claudius
they were thence expelled, Acts 18.2. And afterward, when the cruel Edict
ceased they returned to Rome again, where they were at that time when St. Paul
wrote this Epistle. Or else,

Aquila and Priscilla from Rome came to Corinth, from thence with St. Paul
removed to Ephesus, then they returned to Ephesus. 2. St. Paul was twice at
Corinth, twice at Ephesus, twice at Jerusalem, after he had been the first time
at Corinth. 3. Between Paul's first and second going to Corinth, there may be
supposed some five years (some say six or seven) to have come between: He might
come thither first in the ninth year of Claudius Reign, not in the seventh or
eighth of Nero.

* 1265. Romans 16.5. Epinetus the first fruits of Acaiah. 1 Cor. 16.15. You know
the house of Stephanas that it is the first fruits of Achaia.

Epinetus was one of the first which believed, or because of his excellency of
spirit, making a way for others entrance into the faith, or for his good
example to others, or for his perseverance in his first Zeal -- So called the
first fruits. It may be he was one of Stephanas household, and so the first
fruit, and Stephanas likewise the first fruits this way.

1266. Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
Col. 2.15. Christ has spoiled principalities and powers.

Christ was already become Conqueror, bruising the head of the infernal
Serpent, and he daily conquers Satan in us, and he gives us force to overcome
that wicked spirit by the virtue of the Holy Ghost; and so to triumph over him.
Christ had himself overcome Satan, and purchased of God the Father that we
should overcome; now Christ shall shortly come and make us actually tread and
perfectly conquer Satan.

Two Epistles of St. PAUL to the CORINTHIANS.
THe first is Legal, reprehending them who were obnoxious to so many vices, it
is direct against Sectaries, Incestuous, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Contentious,
Despisers of the weak brethren, Proud, Arrogant, Covetous, such as denied the
Resurrection, Written from Philippi, in the Year of Christ 55.

The other Evangelical, to comfort the afflicted, commands them to receive him
that was excommunicated, commends the Ministry of the Gospel; exhorts to give
Alms, and do good works, reproves slanderers, and glories against them in the
Lord. It was written from Philippi in the Year of Christ 55.

1267. 1 COR. 1.7. You come behind in no gift. Ver. 11. It has been declared
unto me that there are contentions amongst you. Chap. 3.3. Chap. 11.15.

The first place is concerning those that were approved and commended amongst
the Corinthians: The latter is concerning those who did contentiously prefer
themselves before other Ministers of the Church.

* 1 Cor. 1.7. with 1 Cor. 1.11. -- 3.3. -- 11.15.

They abounded in gifts, but this hinders not their want of grace; their having
many gifts might make them contentious if they had not more graces. 2. They
were not behind in no gifts, i. e. in no kind of gifts, some could speak with
Tongues, some could Prophecy, etc. And so altogether they might seem to be
defective in no gift, and might excel others with whom they were compared, yet
they might contend among themselves. 3. They came behind none of that age, and
yet this says not but that they as well as others were imperfect in grace.

1268. 1 Cor. 1.7. You come behind in no gift. 1 Cor. 13.9. We know in part.

In the first place is meant necessary graces to salvation, the abundance
whereof was joined with imperfection of degrees, which shall be fulfilled in
the Revelation of Christ.

* 1269. 1 Cor. 1.14. I thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus, etc.
Ver. 17. Christ sent me not to preach. Mat. 28.19. Teach all Nations.

The Apostle says not, he thanked God he baptized none at all, but none except
Crispus, etc. for if he had thought baptizing unlawful he would not have
baptized them; but he thanks God he baptized no more, in regard they made the
being baptized by such and such persons to be an occasion of their Divisions,
one being of Paul, another of Apollo, and upon this account he blesses God.
When he says, Christ sent him not to baptize, he does not mean not to baptize
at all, (for he confesses he did baptize Crispus, etc.) but that baptizing was
not his principal work, though Christ sent all the Apostles to baptize as well
as to preach, yet not so the one as the other.

1270. 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.
Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them.

In the Apostolical Ministration the less principal was to baptize; the
principal was the preaching of the Gospel, and that was ordinary, or
extraordinary.

1271. 1 Cor. 1.21. The wisdom of God. V. 21. It is called the foolishness of
preaching.

The Gospel of it self is the wisdom of God; which in the opinion of carnal and
unbelieving men is called by accident foolishness.

1272. 1 Cor 1.21. It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them
that believe. Mat. 9.21. If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.

The first place is of the salvation of the soul, which is done by the Gospel:
The latter is of the cure of the body, which is wrought by diverse means,
ordinarily by the Word and Sacraments, extraordinarily by other means.

* 1273. 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the wisdom of God. God the Father is the God of
wisdom.

Christ is called the wisdom of God, not as if the Father had no wisdom of
himself, or had no personal abilities of knowledge; The Son is called Wisdom as
he is called the Word. To distinguish him from the person of the Father, the
Son is said to be the Wisdom of the Father by a begotten Wisdom. Sapientia
genita, and so the Word as light is begotten by light: The Son is said hereto
be the revealed Wisdom of God in gathering his Church. Christ is that person
that reveals the secret wisdom of God to us, by which he would have us brought
to salvation, and so he is called the power of God; not that the Father is
weak, and the Son only strong, but Christ is the person by whom the Father
powerfully and effectually gathers his Church, and raises the dead.

* 1274. 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise after the flesh, etc. Mat. 11.28. Come unto
me all ye that are weary, etc.

Calling is twofold, external and internal, ordinary or extraordinary, common
or spiritual and effectual; not many wise (as the world counts wise men) are
called effectually, internally, and savingly. Or Christ calls not all to him,
he calls all the weary: All wise men and mighty men are not weary men, there
are not many wise that are weary.

* 1275. 1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Isa. -- To the Law and to the Testimony.

When we are sent to the Law it is in reference to Christ, the Law and Prophets
testify of Christ, and are schoolmasters to bring us to Christ; Therefore the
Apostle might determine to know nothing but Christ, and yet know the Law and
Prophets in relation to Christ, and so he might know other things in that
respect.

1276. 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect. Chap. 13.12.
We know in part.

Perfection in the former place is not meant simply, but comparatively; the
Apostle calls them perfect here, not those who wanted no perfection, but such
as are so in respect of novices in the Church. Absolute perfection is proper to
the next life, and of that we know here but in part.

* 1277. 1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the things of man which is in man?
Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart.

Man knows not his own heart, nor one man cannot know the things of another
man's heart; yet the Lord knows all our hearts.

1278. 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man, Chap. 4.4. He that judges me is the Lord. Cha. 14.32. And
the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

In the first place God, Ecclesiastical and Political Judges are not excluded,
being they are ordained by God, but those that are carnal and sensual, the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets in the judgment of faith, concerning
things that are to be believed, for God gives us his Holy Spirit by measure:
neither do we all understand all things, but comparing our opinions we must
judge with Learned men.

1 Cor. 2.15. But he that is spiritual judges all things. 1 Cor. 4.4. He that
judges me is the Lord.

The former place tells us, he that is spiritual or enlightened and regenerated
by Gods Spirit understands and discerns all Gods truth, so much as concerns his
salvation, and yet this hinders not the Lords judging of our consciences
whether we have improved our understandings to the utmost in Gods service.

* 1279. 1 Cor. 3.1. with 2.1.

The word Carnal is not to be taken as in some places for that which is
opposite to spiritual, but to that which is less spiritual, and so the next
words, (...), as babes, are Exegetical, or explanatory. I speak to you that are
so far carnal as you seem but babes in Christ.

1280. 1 Cor. 3.1, 3. And I brethren could not speak to you as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal. Chap. 1.2. Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints.
Ver. 5. Enriched with all knowledge.

The Corinthians were more or less carnal; who walked according to men,
depending on men's authority, in doctrine given to contentions, and troubling
the Church of God with carnal desires.

* 1281. 1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollo watered. 1 Cor. 3.8. Now he that
planteth, and he that waters are one.

I first preached the Gospel among you, from which preaching sprung up your
faith. Apollos came after me, and he taught the same doctrine of Christ to you,
and watered you with seasonable instruction. Now both I and Apollos are one, i.
e. Have the same office from the same Lord, and we work in the same external
manner, and neither the one or the other can make any impression upon the soul,
nor infuse any virtue unto it without God. We are one as to the effects.

1282. 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither he that planteth, nor he that waters is any thing,
but God who gives the increase. Ver. 8. He that planteth and he that waters
are one.

Any thing, is not to be taken absolutely, or for being in nature, but
comparatively, and secundum quid, for all our labor without Gods operation
profits nothing.

1283. 1 Cor. 3.8. He that planteth and he that waters are one. Ver. 4. Paul
was not one with the Teachers at Corinth.

One is said to be either in number, degree, vocation, gifts, authority, time,
labor, or reward. Preachers are not one all those ways. Paul was not one with
those Teachers who preached up themselves more than Christ.

1284. 1 Cor. 3.10. Paul laid the foundation. Heb. 3.4. He that built all
things is God.

God is the chief Work-master and builder of all things, and who alone gives
faith to his Church; but to commend the Ministry he gives this honor unto
others, which he says do that, which he himself does: so in the Old Testament
he calls the Prophets, in the New the Apostles the Architects of the
Foundation, other Doctors that build the Walls, others who cover the House, and
Paul says by his Apostolical Office, that he laid the Foundation.

1285. 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay but that is laid, which is
Christ Jesus. Ep. 2.20. You are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets.

Christ is the Foundation of salvation by the eternal Decree, by his sending
and delivering himself to death, or by his being apprehended by faith in the
heart of believers: or of Doctrine, because the fundamental Doctrine necessary
to salvation respects Christ, which Doctrine is contained in the Law and the
Gospel; in the Law, because Christ is the end of the Law, and perfect charity;
this is the principal foundation; the second foundation is ministerial, and
that is of the Prophets and Apostles, because by their Ministry the fundamental
Doctrine is delivered.

1286. 1 Cor. 3.15. Heretics shall be saved by fire. Mat. 7.22. They shall be
condemned.

The first place is not concerning obstinate Heretics who overthrow the
foundation, but of such as hold the foundation; they that build upon this
foundation, wood, hay, stubble, that is, they that darken the Gospel of Christ
with improper, obscure, frivolous, foolish expositions, mingling with
questions, men's inventions, Philosophical traditions, such if they renounce
their opinions, and hold the true foundation they may be saved.

* 1 Cor. 3.15. with Mat. 7.22.

The first place shows, that if any man's Doctrine will not endure the trial of
the Word he shall lose the praise of his labor, which shall not be accepted
nor praised of God. Notwithstanding (if he have not so erred as to destroy the
foundation) he himself shall be saved by the fire of revealed brightness of
Christ or of the fire of the spirit, which will show the vanity of his work, or
by the fire of affliction, or so saved as one that escapes naked out of the
fire without carrying away or saving any of his goods. His person may be saved,
but he shall lose his reward of a well-qualified Minister. The latter place
tells us how Christ will do with such as preach, but live not as they preach,
or else that preach in Christ's name and destroy the foundation.

* 1287. 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seems to be wise in this world,
let him become a fool that he may be wise -- Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, etc.

If any man be worldly wise, let him lay aside that wisdom, and become such an
one as the World accounts a fool, a Believer in Christ, that so he may be truly
and spiritually wise. If any man want this spiritual wisdom (though he be
worldly wise) let him ask this wisdom which is spiritual of God.

1288. 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ.
Joh. 15.15. You are my friends.

We are servants in respect of Creation, Aug. in Joh. trac.
Redemption, Vocation: friends in respect of Adoption, and Revelation of things
necessary to Salvation.

1289. 1 Cor. 4.3. With me it is a small thing to be judged of you. Chap.
14.32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Paul despises not the judgment of the Church and godly men, but he denies
that he hunts after favor or applause from men, 2 Cor. 10.15.
or that he cares for the sinister judgment of those that contemned him,
therefore he appeals to the censure of the Church.

1290. 1 Cor. 4.3. I judge not my self. Verse. 4. 1 Cor. 10.15.
For I know nothing of my self.

I do not judge my self so as to prefer my self before others, nor do I commend
my self, lest I should seem to boast, nor do I dispraise my self, lest I do
wrong to my Office, says Chrysostom. The Apostle was so modest, who when he
might have commended himself, in respect of his vocation, doctrine, and
fidelity, lest he should seem to be a Judge in his own cause, he leaves the
judgment to God. Lastly, he knew nothing by himself, in respect of his Office
and a good conscience wherein he lived honestly; but he speaks not of his
fore-past life.

1291. 1 Cor. 4.3. I judge not my self. Chap. 11.31. If we would judge our
selves we should not be judged.

In the first place he avoids the judgment of dignity, of preferring himself
before others: In the latter he commends the judgment of correction and proving
of our selves, which belongs to all men.

1292. 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time. Chap. 10 15. Judge ye.

The Apostle in the former place appeals from the corrupt judgment of the
Corinthians unto Christ the supreme Judge; as if he should say, Do not pass
your censure before you know the matter perfectly, and the parties have been
heard, or before the last judgment day, when God shall judge us all; by which
words he casts a bridle on all perverse censurers, and condemns untimely
judgment before things be certainly known.

* 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time. 1 Cor. 10.5. Judge you what I say.

The former place forbids not all judging of things and persons, but a rash and
precipitate censuring of persons and actions, misconstruing doubtful things,
which might in the judgment of charity have admitted a better interpretation.
Judge not rigidly without mercy, exaggerating small faults; Judge not
partially, having an eye to the offenders rather than to the offenses. Things
and actions that are not clear and conspicuous judge not before the time of
Gods revealing, yet you may judge Doctrines, which are delivered unto you,
seeing you have the Word to judge by; nor is this judging before the time, for
the time is come to judge the Doctrines of men by the Word of God.

* 1293. 1 Cor. 4.14. I write not these things to shame you. 1 Cor. 6.5. I
speak to your shame.

It is one thing to write scoffingly at their vanity, by comparing his own
estate with theirs. Another thing to write to them, showing them their own
faults to themselves in such a convincing manner as may make them to avoid
those courses which may make them ashamed. Paul did not the former, but he did
the latter.

* 1294. 1 Cor. 4.15. You have not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel. Mat. 23.9. Call no man father on earth.

The first place speaks after this sense: You may have many Ministers to
instruct you, and to feed you, being already begotten, but yet you cannot say
you have many Fathers, or those which first preached the Gospel to you, and by
that preaching begot you to believe in Christ. I did that office for you. The
second place bids us call no man on earth primarily or originally father,
secondarily, and as instruments we may.

* 1295. 1 Cor. 4.20. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Romans
10.10. By the mouth confession is made to salvation.

The former place tells us the Apostle does not govern nor handle the hearts of
his by Rhetorical art and speeches, after the manner of worldly States, but by
the strength of his Spirit, which gives life to the plainness of men's
preaching. The second place tells us, that God requires of them whom he has
won by his Spirit that they should make confession of the name of Jesus Christ,
if they think to be saved. God does not only require that you should believe
with the heart that Jesus is the Christ, but he does expect if you would have
salvation by Christ, you should confess his name. So that the former place
tells us how, and by what we come unto the kingdom of grace by the Spirit; The
latter, how we should come unto the kingdom of glory, and that is by believing
and confessing.

1296. 1 Cor. 5.1. It is reported, that there is fornication amongst you, and
such as is not amongst the Gentiles. Romans 1.26. The Gentiles were given up to
all unclean affections.

The Apostle shows that this wickedness was detested by the more honest
heathens, that without detestation it could not be named before chaste ears,
also the offenders themselves did detest that wickedness.

* 1 Cor. 5.1. with Romans 1.26.

The former place shows, that Incest was practiced among these Corinthians; a
crime that the very Gentiles detested, and severely punished in their Laws, if
any among them (which seldom fell out) defiled themselves with any such
unnatural contract or abominable act. The latter place shows, that the Gentiles
were given to all unclean affections in the whole; yet that this sin of Incest
was generally practiced of them, or by any of them without punishment is not
said.

1297. 1 Cor. 5.12. What have I to do to judge them that are without? Cha. 6.2.
Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the World?

The first place is of his Apostolical function, whereby Paul was very careful
of those who were made members of the Church by the word he preached to them:
The latter is of the Saints in general, and their judgment of approbation. The
Saints, says Chrysostom, shall judge the world by their exemplary judgment,
because by their example the perfidiousness of the world shall be condemned.

1298. 1 Cor. 6.1. Dare any of you go to Law before the unjust? Romans 13.1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers.

In the first place the Apostle condemns their desire to contend before an
unbelieving Judge; yet he does not forbid them to appear before civil
Judicature.

* 1 Cor. 6.1. with Romans 13.1.

The Apostle condemns not their going to law, or their trying civil Causes at
the Tribunal of Infidels, if right could not be had else where; and if the
matter were of very great consequence, and not only concerning our selves. But
he condemns them for going to law before Infidels, whereas there were brethren
and Christians enough to compose differences; and not out of spleen, or other
sinister affection to implead one another before heathen Judges, which could
not be done without great scandal to the godly, and wrong to Christian
Religion; for this laid open to the Gentiles the Ambition, Envy, Covetousness,
etc. of the Christians, who at the best are but men, though the Heathens
considered it not, but were subject to throw the failings of Professors on
Profession it self.

* 1299. 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World?
Psalm. 9.8. And he shall judge the world in righteousness.

God judges the World authoritatively and Primarily: The Saints judge the
World derivatively and as Assessors and approvers of Gods Judgment to be just.

1300. 1 Cor. 6.5. Is there not a wise man among you? Chap. 1.20. There are not
many wise.

In the first place he makes the question, in the next he asserts that there
are not many wise men amongst the Corinthians; but he requires not carnal
wisdom, but Christian wisdom, the beginning whereof is the fear of the Lord.

* 1 Cor. 6.5. with 1 Cor. 1.26.

While he asks the question, Whether there be a wise man? He does not deny that
there is, but rather asserts it. And while he says, that not many wise men
after the flesh. He does not assert that there were many wise men among them,
but this, that in all the world we should find that not many carnally wise men
were converted to believe in Christ. The former place is spoken of discreet and
prudent Christians; The latter place of carnally wise men.

1301. 1 Cor. 6.13. God shall destroy the belly. Phil. 3.21. He shall change
our vile body.

The first place is of the abuse of the belly, of the flesh and worldly
pleasures; the belly, being it is a part of man's body, shall not be destroyed,
but glorified with the other members.

1302. 1 Cor. 7.1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman. Ver. 2. Let every
man have his own wife.

Good here is not opposed to evil, or to sin, as if it were sin to live in
Wedlock; but it signifies tranquillity of life, especially in time of
persecution: The wife before the fall was given to man by God, as a helper to
his devotion, society, generation, education, economy; and much more after the
fall is she a helper to him in his infirmity, and is the remedy of unlawful
love.

1303. 1 Cor. 7.6. I speak this by permission and not of commandment. Verse. 5.
Defraud you not one the other. Verse. 2. Let every man have his own wife.

The first place leaves it free to married people to live continently if they
can, and are willing so to do: Genesis 2.24 Mat. 19.^
In the latter places, the pious custom of married people by the Institution
of God and the approbation of Christ is commended.

1304. 1 Cor. 7.10. I command, Mat. 5.32 c. 19.3.
yet not I, but the Lord. Ver. 12. Speak I, not the Lord.

First he says, not I, but the Lord, because it was a Law to forbid
divorcements: Afterward, I, says he, not the Lord, because by him without a
commandment of God the Holy Ghost did then teach.

* 1 Cor. 7.10. with 12. I command you from the Lord, and not by any new
doctrine or Law, and yet not by mere counsel, and advice of wisdom, but by
Christ's express command.

He speaks not this by peculiar revelation, as some other things afterward,
but that he had an express command for it in Scripture. Yet I speak, not the
Lord, I guided, as I suppose, by the Holy Ghost, but I cannot be so confident
of this as of the rest, because I have not so clear a revelation from God, nor
have the express Word of God for it, so as for the other.

* 1305. 1 Cor. 7.10. Let not the wife depart from her husband. Luke 18.29. No
man has left House, or Parents, or Brethren, or Wife, etc.

There is a double departure from a Wife, the one in body, the other in spirit
and affection; let no man depart from his wife in the latter account; some may
be forced upon the account of the Gospel to depart from their Wives bodily, and
separate thus from them, though they that are thus separated are not separated
in spirit; and if it be put to the question, Whether we should obey God in
forsaking all, or else forsake God and keep us to our Wives? The answer will
be, that our obeying God, though in opposition to our Wives, does not argue our
hating our Wives, or departing from them in affection, but our loving God
better than our Wives.

* 1306. 1 Cor. 7.10. with Mat. 19.9. Except for the cause of fornication.

When he says the wife may not depart, he intends not, depart not upon any
occasion, but depart not upon any trifling or lesser occasion than the Word of
God has expressly laid forth, which is fornication -- And yet it is one thing
for the Wife to depart from the Husband, another thing for the Husband to put
away his Wife; Though the former is the safer opinion for reconciliation of
this place.

1307. 1 Cor. 7.14. Your children are holy. Ephesians. 2.3. We were the children of
wrath.

The first place shows the honest procreation of Christian children, who
though they are by nature the children of wrath, yet by reason of the Covenant
and faith they are called holy.

* 1308. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing. Genesis 17.16. And you shall
circumcise the flesh, etc.

To say Circumcision is nothing is one thing, and that it was commanded of God
is another. Though God commanded Circumcision, yet he commanded it so as not to
be an Ordinance further than to reach that Age which was till Christ came and
suffered. When the Apostle said it is nothing, he meant now in the days of the
Gospel it is nothing, or of no force to salvation.

* 1309. 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is
called. 1 Timothy 3.1. If a man desire the Office of a Bishop he desires a good
work.

Doubt. How can a man desire the Office of a Bishop, which is a ruling over
other Churches, and yet abide in his first calling of being a Deacon or
Presbyter?

Ans. A man may abide in his Calling and yet desire an higher degree in that
Calling; to be a Minister, and to be a Bishop are not different species; for a
Bishop when he does assume that Office leaves not his Ministry.

1310. 1 Cor. 7.21. Art thou called being a servant? Care not for it. Ver. 21.
But if thou may be made free use it rather.

The first place is to comfort servants against the troubles of servitude, and
he will not have them for that condition to forsake the faith of Christ
whereunto they were called, and lose their Christian liberty for their corporal
service: So that the instruction added to it makes no disagreement, because
servants ought with a willing mind to embrace lawful freedom, obtained by
reason and a safe conscience.

1311. 1 Cor. 7.23. Be not servants of men. Chap. 9.19. The Apostle makes
himself a servant to all men.

It is indeed a most ignominious slavery and sad service to depend on the
commands of other men, besides the commandments of God, but to be serviceable
for the sacred Ministry is not ignominious but honorable.

1312. 1 Cor. 7.23. Be not servants of men. Ephesians. 6.5. Servants obey your
Masters.

Service is spiritual or carnal, from that he disswades in the former place,
for we must not obey the wicked desires of men and dishonest commands, Gal 5.1.
Ephesians. 6 6.
but must so serve them, that we may not offend God, or wrong our consciences;
this he charge us to do, which though it may be thought hard, yet whilst we
do it in the sincerity of our hearts, for that God requires it, it will be
accepted.

* 1 Cor. 7.23. with Ephesians. 6.5.

The former place bids us, if we be free we must not wilfully or willingly
(especially when the times are as they were in Paul's time) betake our selves to
the services of men, but be as little entangled as may be, that both in body
and spirit we may be Christ's; Or however be not so the servants of men that you
may forbear the commands of Christ; or be not so men's servants as to give men
any command over you -- depend only on Christ and his Word. The second place
forbids nor our being servants, but when we are servants to behave our selves
as servants; yet if we can be lawfully made free to choose that rather.

1313. 1 Cor. 7.25. Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, yet I
give my judgment. Mat. 19.12. There are some Eunuchs which have made themselves
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heavens sake.

There is no command of Virginity in both the Covenants. Christ speaks of the
Essence of the time past; condemning them of rashness, because they sought for
the Kingdom of God in perpetual continency, which is a singular gift of God,
and given to very few. Paul speaks for necessity, setting down what is
expedient for all, by reason of time and place, because it was not safe for
Christians, because of persecutions, to stay always in one place, and because
of the cares which ordinarily follow married people.

1314. 1 Cor. 7.29. Let those that have wives be as though they had none. Ver.
3, 4, 5. He approves conjugal custom.

In the first place he forbids not the use of Marriage, but he would not have
the husband too uxorious, and he bids them to use the goods of this world
moderately, lest we should be overcome with evils, or suppose the good of this
life to be perpetual: Since if we lose not all here by some accidents, yet in
our doubts we must leave them all.

1315. 1 Cor. 7.32. I would have you to be without carefulness. 2 These. 3.10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat.

By carefulness here he means not, to call men from their vocations and
household cares, but the inconveniences of Matrimony, whereby we are often
called from the service of God.

1316. 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffs up. 1 Cor. 1.5. Enriched in Christ with
all knowledge.

The first place condemns vain knowledge adjoined with pride; Knowledge puffs
up, not of it self, but by accident, smatterers and boasters abusing it,
neglecting what is for their edification: The latter praises knowledge joined
with charity, as it was a gift of God in Christ amongst the Corinthians.

* 1317. 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol is nothing. Isa. 41.45, 46. Idols
are silver and gold, etc.

Materially they are something, so Silver and Gold, and the works of men's
hands, but effectually they are nothing, that is, not able to work any thing;
they are nothing in the value of God or of good men; they are nothing worth.

1318. 1 Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish, for
whom Christ died. Joh. 10.28. Those that are Christ's sheep shall never perish.

Infirm Christians may perish, by reason of first their infirmity; secondly
Satan's malice,; and thirdly the impudency of the wicked, who abusing their
Christian Liberty, are an offense to the faithful, they cannot perish 1. In
respect of the counsel of God; 2. And the merits of Christ; 3. And the efficacy
of his intercession, who by a mighty hand preserves them to salvation.

* 1319. 1 Cor. 9.6. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear
working? 2 These. 3.9. He that will not labor let him not eat.

The former place tells us, it was as lawful for Paul and Barnabas to live upon
the Churches allowance as for any other of the Apostles, nor does this say that
they were idle, or thwart the other place, for there is a labor with our head
and with our hands. He that will not labor with head or with hand, according
as his Calling is, is not worthy to eat; but the Apostle and Barnabas did
labor with their heads in their Callings.

* 1320. 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God take care for Oxen? God preserves both man and
Beast.

God does preserve and take care for Oxen to preserve them and feed them, but
yet God does not take care for Oxens preservation as he does for Man's. The
former place is spoken comparatively, and not Negatively.

1321. 1 Cor. 9.15. It were better for me to dye than that any man should make
my glorying void. Chap. 1.29. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

The first place is of true and honest glory, necessary for a good conscience
that has faithfully discharged it self in its office: The latter is concerning
vain, unjust boasting, and unnecessary, which must be avoided.

1322. 1 Cor. 9.20. To the Jews I became as a Jew. Acts 13.46. We turn to the
Gentiles.

The Apostle would have won both Jews and Gentiles unto Christ; for the Jews
cause he circumcised Timothy, shore his head, paid his vow in the Temple, and
observed other Ceremonies for a time: In the latter place he turns to the
Gentiles, from the Jews who were hardened, and thrust away from them the Word
of God. The former place tells us what he did in prudence; The latter, what he
did in justice. The former shows what the Apostle did to the Jews; The latter,
what the Jews made him do to the Gentiles.

1323. 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made all things to all men. Gal. 1.10. If I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

In the first place as a wise Teacher he accommodates himself to strong and
weak, to edify them in the Gospel, not as flatterers and hypocrites do.

* 1 Co^. 9.22. I am made all things to all men. Gal. 1.10. If I should please
men I were not the servant of Christ.

In matters that are indifferent, which may be done or not done with a good
conscience. I have changed my self into all fashions to comport withal, that I
might win at least some of all sorts. Non Mentientis astu, sed Compatientis
effectu; Nor by the deceit of Dissimulation, but by the effect of Compassion.
If I should please men by doing unlawful actions, and things that in their own
nature are not ind^fferent, then I could not please Christ.

1324. 1 Cor. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain. Romans 9.16. It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

The first place is of those that are justified, and heirs of eternal life,
that fight a good fight: The latter is concerning the efficient cause of our
salvation, which is the grace and mercy of God.

* 1325. 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my body -- lest that by any means, when
I have preached to others I my self should be a cast away. Romans 8.39. Who shall
separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.

Paul mortified his lusts, and subdued his flesh to the obedience and
discipline of the Spirit of God, lest he should be a Castaway, or reprovable,
or unapproued, (so the Greek may signify) the word signifies not a reprobate,
as if he were uncertain of his election, for so who can separate us from the
love of God -- (...), signifies not here to be cast away for ever out of Gods
favor, but to be rejected either as base and refuse Oar or dross: Or to be
cast out of their society and company who wrestled or ran for the prize. The
Apostle only shows that his care was that his life might be conformable to his
doctrine; His practice to his preaching, that so the one might not cross or
confound the other, and that he might not be taxed to preach that he practiced
not. So that this thing to be a castaway was in the sight of men, not of God,
which nothing impedes his salvation.

1326. 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all baptized unto Moses. Chap. 1.13. Were you
baptized in the name of Paul?

To be baptized in the name is taken improperly; unto Moses, that is in the
Doctrine and Law delivered by him, or by his Ministry, as Acts 19. into John's
Doctrine; but in the latter it is taken properly, so we are baptized in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for baptism cannot be performed in the
name of any creature, because to be baptized in the name of any one, that is by
his command and authority to be baptized for his worship, faith and obedience.

* 1327. 1 Cor. 10.2. The Fathers were baptized into Moses.

The Socinians would gather Christ not to be God by comparing this with Mat.
28.19. In the name of Christ, and here in Moses they would have to be in the
name of Moses, and so it is no more than to be baptized into the Legate of God.

But there is a difference betwixt to be baptized into Moses, and to be
baptized into his name; though to be baptized into Christ and into Christ's name
be the same. This of Moses is no otherwise to be understood than the Syriack
and Arabic render it, in manu, in the hand, i. e. by the Ministry of Moses to
baptize in any man's name, as 1 Cor. 1.13. In Paul's, or Moses, or the like, is
added in Scripture as they being instruments or means of the administration.

* 1328. 1 Cor. 10.3. And did all eat the same spiritual meat, scil. Manna.
Psalm. 78.24. And had rained down Manna upon them, and had given of the corn of
heaven.

Manna and the water out of the rock were in regard of their substance corporal
meat, and so Manna was the corn of heaven; yet in regard of their spiritual and
sacramental signification the Apostle calls them spiritual meat and drink,
for so they were to believers, who by faith in eating and drinking of them laid
hold upon Christ's body and blood, the true spiritual food of our souls.

* 1329. 1 Cor. 10.8. There fell 23000 in one day. Number. 26.9.24000.

Of these 24000. there was 23000 died by the immediate hand of God, and those
are here reckoned, but besides those there was execution done upon others,
which might make up another thousand. Or else the Apostle may well reckon
23000. as the lesser is included in the greater.

1330. 1 Cor. 10.13. No temptation has befallen you, but such as is common to
men. Mat. 4.3. The devil is a tempter.

Temptation is the divine probation of our faith and obedience, or a devilish
tempting of us to sin, or when men tempt us to persevere in sin, or when the
weakness of our nature draws us into faults and errors, such were the
temptations of the Saints, and of the Corinthians here.

* 1 Cor. 10.13. with Mat. 4.3.

No temptation or affliction but such as are incident to men, such as usually
befall men, even Gods own children. Though the devil do tempt, yet he brought
no unusual temptations upon the Corinthians; though they not formerly have been
acquainted with such temptations which might think them so strange, yet they
may assure themselves, that those temptations under which they lie are no other
than such as usually befalls men.

* 1331. 1 Cor. 10.13. Who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able. 2 Cor. 2.8. That we were pressed above measure, above strength.

What we are able to bear through Gods goodness and grace is one thing, and
above this we cannot be tempted. What we are able to bear by our own strength
is another, and thus Christians and men, thus Paul were pressed above measure.

1332. 1 Cor. 10.15. Judge ye your selves what I say. Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures.

The Apostle makes all men judges of his cause, if any could not judge, it was
not imbecility of the Law, but the deed, because all were bound to know things
that concerned their faith, for by the Word of God we may judge concerning
things that belong to faith, the knowledge whereof is necessary for all men,
and it is acquired by reading, meditation, invocation, and searching the holy
Scriptures.

1333. 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak as to wise men. Chap. 3.1. As to carnal and babes.

The Corinthians were wise in respect of their doctrine, but carnal in their
affections, by reason of their strife and contentions; for the most learned
have their carnal desires, nor were they all wise or carnal, for often what
belongs to some is imputed to all.

1334. 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils.
Chap. 11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation.

The first place is of right, and so they cannot not must not eat or drink,
though they do eat and drink; the latter is understood of the fact whereby they
take it.

1335. 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any man provide not for his own, especially for his own house,
he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

The first is to be understood with limitation, that no man out of overmuch
love of himself should do his own occasions boastingly, which is far from
Christian charity, which teaches that a man is not born for himself, but to
serve God, and to do good to his neighbor. Let no man seek his own principally
and solely, but thus let him seek Gods glory, and after this, and in reference
to Gods glory let him seek his own.

* 1336. 1 Cor. 10. ult. I please all men in all things. Gal. 1.10. If I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

Things are either indifferent in their own nature, and so may be used or not
used, according to opportunities and persons: Or else they are such as are
sinful in their own nature, being forbidden of God. S. Paul pleases all men in
things that he lawfully might, as in Ceremonies to observe or forbear them, but
in such things as were simply evil, if by doing them he should please men he
were not the servant of Christ, but of men whom he intends by such actions to
please, while on the other side, should he not, wherein he lawfully might,
please all men to gain them to Christ he was not the servant of Christ.

* 1337. 1 Cor. 11.16. If any seem to be contentious, we have no such custom.
Jude 3. Contend earnestly.

The Apostle would have no man contend against reason and authority
presumptuously, and yet we ought to contend earnestly where the authority of
Scripture and the truth of reason is evident, and makes it appear that the
thing contended for is matter of faith and salvation.

1338. 1 Cor. 11.24. Eat, this is my Body. Romans 6.9. The body dies no more.

In the Lords Supper, the Body of Christ is not broken by a natural or carnal
manner; the Body and the Blood, the Bread and the Wine are received
conjunctively in respect of the instrument, but they are received disjunctively
in respect of the manner, for the Bread and Wine is received after one manner,
the Body and Blood after another manner.

* 1 Cor. 11.24. This is my body. Romans 6.9. The body dies no more.

This is in signification, not in essence, my body; this is my body as the
seven wheat ears were the seven dear years; as Christ is a door, this signifies
my body. Christ's body died but once, but it may be signified a thousand times
to be dead.

1339. 1 Cor. 11.24. Which is broken for you. Luke 22.19. Which is given.

The Apostle received from the Lord what he delivered to the Corinthians
concerning the sacred Supper; without doubt in the first institution the Lord
used both the words, and because the Evangelists make mention of the name of
giving, the Apostle adds the other.

* 1 Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.19

So broken with cares within, and with nails and wounds without, as he might be
said a man of sorrows; so given as to be broken, and so broken as to be given;
a broken Christ for a broken soul. The Apostle had an eye to the substance and
matter, and may seem in this to interpret what is meant by giving, as to the
manner of the gift, a broken gift, or a bleeding Christ to make us have whole
souls.

* 1340. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself -- Psalm. 26.1. Examine me O
Lord.

Our examinatiod of our selves hinders not our praying that God may examine us;
for when we have examined the most strictly, yet we shall leave much
unexamined, but when God examines he examines every corner of our heart, and
sets our sins in order before us. He finds our sins as he found Saul, hid under
the stuff. The Psalmist would have God to examine him to see the justness of
his heart in that cause.

1341. 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy
Ghost. Isa. 29.13 Mat. 7.21
Mat. 7.21 Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven.

In the first place it is not only historically with outward lips to say that
Jesus Christ is the Lord, Tit. 1.16.
but with faith to believe that he is the Lord, which hypocrites and devils
cannot do, for though with their mouth they confess him, yet with works they
deny him; also no man can say for his own salvation that Jesus is the Lord,
unless he have the Holy Ghost.

1342. 1 Cor. 12.6. God works all in all. Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation.

God works all that we may work out our salvation
God as the first cause works all good in all men, we with God work out our
salvation subordinately, we are called by God moving and helping us freely, and
by his grace we cooperate.

* 1 Cor. 12.6. with Phil. 2.12.

God works as the Author, and we must work as the Instruments; we must work
because God works, we must work, but with Gods strength.

* 1343. 1 Cor. 12.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal. 2 Pet. 2.15. Balaam who loved the wages of unrighteousness.

The former place tells us, that God has given gifts unto men that his Church
may profit by those gifts; and the second place does not tell, that if God did
give Balaam those gifts, but he gave them for this purpose, that he should have
made Gods Church profit thereby; now that he did not use those gifts so was his
own failing. Besides, it is the opinion of most that Balaam was a Witch: And so
had not those gifts, as Gods Children have them from God.

1344. 1 Cor. 13.2. Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
I am nothing. Romans 3.28. We are justified by faith without the works of the Law.

In the first place, Mat. 17.20.
by all faith is meant faith of working all manner of miracles, so that it can
extend it self so far as to remove mountains, yet charity may be separated from
such a faith, 1 John 3.23.
but it can never be separated from a justifying faith, to subsist without it.

* 1345. 1 Cor. 13.3. Bestow all my goods -- it profits me nothing. Luke
11.41. Give alms and all things shall be clean to you.

The Apostle supposes that if a man which wants charity do such acts, yet he
would be no better by those acts as to obtaining of heaven. Our Savior speaks
of giving alms out of charity, and from a right principle.

1346. 1 Cor. 13.9. We know in part. 1 John 2.20. Ye know all things.

In this life our knowledge is in part and imperfect, but in the next life it
shall be perfected: the latter place is concerning necessary things to the
knowledge of Antichrist, that is done by the Holy Ghost leading us into all
truth by degrees and parts.

1347. 1 Cor. 13.12. We see now through a glass darkly, but then face to face.
2 Cor. 3.18. But we all as with open face beholding the glory of the Lord.

The face in Scripture is taken for Gods Essence, Exodus 33.23. for his general
presence, Deuteronomy. 31.17. for Gods grace, Number. 6.25. for his revenge, Rev. 6.16.
for knowledge and internal vision, Exodus 33.11. of this in the first place: but
in the latter is meant the sight of God in our Country, that is in heaven; as
it is said through a glass, and in riddle, in respect of the Law, for God is
seen by us in part, in the Word of God, as he is.

* 1 Cor. 13.12. with 2 Cor. 3.18.

There is as much difference betwixt the knowledge we have at present of God,
and that we shall have in heaven of him as betwixt seeing a man thorough the
window at distance, and seeing him face to face. As for the second place it
does not compare the knowledge we have with what we shall have in heaven as the
former did: but it compares the knowledge we have under the Gospel with that we
or our Fathers had under the law; for now we in comparison of them which were
under the Law seem to see face to face, and they as it were thorough a glass,
yet we in comparison of them that are in glory seem to see as thorough a glass
and they face to face.

1348. 1 Cor. 13.13. Now abides faith, hope and charity, but the greatest of
these is charity. Gal. 5.6. Faith works by love.

Charity being the effect of faith is the inferior, for by faith we are
justified, Romans 5.1.
and Christ dwells in us, and we please God, we are the sons of God and
obtain eternal life. Charity is not the greatest virtue, but because it shall
remain in the next life in its operations.

* 1 Cor. 13.13. with Gal. 5.6.

Charity. If the Apostle speaks here not of justifying faith, but of faith of
Miracles, of which Verse. 2. then there can be no question but charity far
exceeds that faith: But because he joins it with hope, and Divines generally
understand this of saving graces; let it be understood of justifying faith, and
yet charity has the greatest pre-eminence, as 1. In respect of the Object,
Faith respects God only, Charity God and our neighbor. 2. In respect of the
manner of working. Faith works by receiving Christ and all his benefits;
Charity by giving and bestowing both our affections and goods, it is better to
give than receive. 3. In respect of duration or continuance, Faith and Hope
shall cease in the life to come; Charity shall remain in the life to come. 4.
In respect of the end, Love is the end and scope of the other two graces, yet
upon another account Faith is the principal grace, viz. of our Justification.

1349. 1 Cor. 14.31. You may all prophecy one by one. Heb. 5.4. No man takes
this honor to himself, but he that is called of God.

The Apostle understands all that are lawfully called to the Office of
Prophesying. Jer. 28 2. 1 Pet. 4.11.
You all that are Prophets may prophecy one by one, but this invites not
others who are not to take this honor till they be called.

1350. 1 Cor. 15.9. I am the least of the Apostles. Ver. 10. I labored more
than they all.

He was the least in order, because he was the last called to be an Apostle;
but he was greater in laboring, Romans 15.16, 17.
because the charge of all the Churches was committed unto him. In the first
place he speaks lowly of himself, according to Christ's commandment, When you
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10. In the latter
place he speaks of those that strove with him by emulation, to whom he compares
himself, not derogating from others, but he magnifies his Apostleship from his
faith, and fruits of his works.

* 1351. 1 Cor. 15.22. In Christ shall be made alive. Job 14.14. If a man die
shall he live again?

All men shall rise to judgment. Job speaks of a man's dying in the world, and
implies that he shall not live again in the world, though he does not exclude
by this his belief that man shall live again in the next world, for he said he
knew his Redeemer lived, etc.

* 1352. 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Shall deliver up the kingdom to his Father.

Hence the Socinians argue against the Eternal Deity of Christ, to deliver up
the Kingdom was not regnantis potestatem, the power of the Ruler: As if Christ
should then cease to rule, for Luke 1.33. he was to rule to eternity. By the
Kingdom is to be understood the people or Church of Christ glorified, and this
place is to be interpreted by Ephesians. 4.27. To deliver the kingdom to the Father
is to set the Church before the Father gloriously, and therein is not the end
of Christ's ruling, but an end of the Economy of Christ's Mediation, and God
shall be all in all.

1353. 1 Cor. 15.27. He has put all things under his feet. Ver. 28. The Son
also shall be subject to the Father.

That subjection shall be effected in his members and Church which is his Body;
and by resignation of his Kingdom, that now he administers at present by his
Ministers in the midst of his enemies, but not without battle: also he shall
declare his subjection to the Father, answerable to that nature according to
which all power is given to him in heaven and in earth.

* 1354. 1 Cor. 15.44. It is raised a spiritual body. Job 19.21. I shall see
him in my flesh.

A spiritual body, not in respect of substance or being, but by reason of
those qualities which the glorified body shall partake of; Or a spiritual body,
a body free from carnal desires, being wholly subject to, and ruled by the
Spirit. Job speaks of rising with the same body for substance, but does neither
imply nor deny but the body may have more glorious qualities.

1355. 1 Cor. 15.50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Ver 53.
This corruptible must put on incorruption.

Flesh and blood here signifies the corrupt nature of man in the state of sin;
this as it is such, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; but our nature purged
from corruption, shall put on incorruption.

1356. 1 Cor. 16.15. The household of Stephanus addicted themselves to the
ministry of the Saints. Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he
that was called of God.

In the first place is meant the ministry of transparting the collections to
the brethren, and they did it by the sending of the Apostles by them in a most
dangerous time.

1357. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema. Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies.

The Apostle does not pronounce this Anathema out of his own private affection,
but being led by the Holy Ghost; it is not lawful rashly to use private
imprecations, unless the glory of God require it in an especial manner, and
there be no hope left of their salvation. Love our own enemies, but not love
Gods enemies; he pronounces a curse, not against his, but Christ's enemies, if
they love not Christ.

1358. 2 Cor. 1.1. Timothy with Paul wrote that Epistle. 1 Timothy 1.3. He was
left at Ephesus, when Paul went into Macedonia.

Paul sailing from Corinth into Asia, Acts 18.19.
left Timothy at Ephesus together with Aquila and Priscilla, but that they were
with the Apostle at Corinth at that time, the Inscription it self testifies.

1359. 2 Cor. 1.8. In Asia we were pressed out of measure, above strength. 1
Cor. 10.13. God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able.

The first place is concerning temptation exceeding bare humane strength, the
second concerning faith and strength given to us by God, which is our victory.

* 1360. 2 Cor. 2.5. But if any have caused grief, he has not grieved me but
in part -- with Ver. 4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote
unto you.

If the incestuous person or any other have been the cause of your and my grief
together, I make no reckoning of the grief which I have received thereby in
respect of that which my censures have brought upon you, whereof he has been
the cause. And yet my aim has not been to afflict you, as bearing you any ill
will, but rather to give you a certain proof of my charity, by gaining your
salvation through repentance.

1361. 2 Cor. 5.2. In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven. Ver. 4. We groan being burdened, not that
we would be uncloathed.

The first place is concerning the groaning by grace, the second by nature, for
the Holy Ghost stirs up a desire of life eternal in the mind of the godly, and
it is natural to fear death, because it destroys nature.

1362. 2 Cor. 5.16. We know no man after the flesh. Romans 1.3. Christ of the
seed of David according to the flesh. Phil. 2.8.

To know according to the flesh, is to praise that which corrupt flesh delights
in, and to despise what it despises, so we knew not Christ carnally, but out
of Gods Word we know him to be of the seed of David.

1363. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Ver.
20. We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.

Reconciliation is ascribed to God as the principal cause, to Christ as the
meritorious cause, or to the Ministry of the Word as to the Instrumental cause,
or to our selves apprehending it by faith, and applying it for our salvation.

1364. 2 Cor. 8.20. Avoiding this that no man should blame us in this abundance
which is administered by us. 1 Cor. 4.3. With me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged of you.

The first place is of just dispraise, wherein our hearts convince us; the
latter is concerning the unjust judgments of the world, which proceed from men's
depraved affections.

1365. 2 Cor. 11.4. If he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we have not
preached, or receive another Gospel which ye have not accepted, ye might well
bear with him. Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that we have preached, let him be accursed.

In the first place is meant by another Christ, and another Gospel, a better
Doctrine than the Apostle taught; but in the latter, by another Gospel is meant
false doctrine which overthrows Gods grace and Christ's merits.

1366. 2 Cor. 11.17. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but
foolishly. 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God.

Paul being forced to it by the calumnies of false Apostles, said somethings
concerning his own labors and dangers, which did not directly appertain to his
Ministry. Peter speaks of those things which directly appertain to the Ministry
of the Word; wherein the rule of our words must be the Oracles of God revealed
in the Scriptures.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to the GALATIANS.
HE defends the Justice of faith against false Apostles, that a man is
justified, not by the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ, and exhorts to
good works, that the fruits of faith must be sowed in Christian charity and
liberty: It was written from Rome in the Year of Christ 60.

1367. GAL. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ. Chap. 2.2. I communicated unto them the Gospel which I preach among the
Gentiles. Ver. 6. Who seemed to be somewhat.

Paul came to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, not that he might learn the
Gospel from them, but to have their testimony of his Doctrine, that he preached
nothing to the Gentiles but the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

1368. Gal. 1.17. I went not up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before
me, but I went into Arabia. Acts 9.26. Paul after his return to Damascus, came
to Jerusalem.

Paul after his conversion went into Arabia from Damascus, and coming back
thence to Damascus in the third year, persecution befell him, who being in
hazard of his life, was let down in a basket and escaped; and coming to
Jerusalem, when they were all afraid of him, he was brought to the Apostles by
Barnabas, ver. 27.

* 1369. Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galathians -- Mat. 5.22. Call no man fool.

Christ condemns not the word, so as the manner of speaking the word, when it
is spoken with virulency and railing, especially proceeding from causeless
anger. St. Paul did not call them foolish out of passion, but discretion, to
let them see their carriage and behavior in the affairs of the Gospel.

* 1370. Gal. 4.4. Christ was born of a woman. Mat. 11.11. John Baptist was the
greatest of those who were born of a woman.

John was preferred before any of the Prophets or others that went before him,
but not before any that succeeded him. However John was not to be compared with
him who was not begot by man, but by the Holy Ghost himself, as Christ was.

* 1371. Gal. 4.6. And because you are sons God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son. Jo. 11.50, 51. Caiphas prophesied.

It is one thing to have the Spirit of grace, another the gifts of the Spirit;
a wicked man may speak from the gifts of the Spirit, yet not have the graces of
the Spirit Caiphas beside he spoke this extraordinarily, not ordinarily.

1372. Gal. 4.11. I am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain. 1 Cor. 15.58. Be ye steadfast, knowing that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

In the first place the Apostle feared of the success of his labor by reason
of schism amongst the Galatians, Isa. 65.23
who sought their salvation more from the Law than from Christ: in the latter
he hopes well of the Corinthians, that his labor shall not be lost.

1373. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against powers.

Flesh is taken in the first place for our corrupt nature; in the latter for
men whose nature is frail and weak; nor is our chief conflict with those, but
with spiritual powers, which use many deceits, and make many incursions upon
the faithful.

1374. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections. Ephesians. 5.29. No man ever yet hated his own flesh.

The first place is not concerning the nature of the flesh, but the desire of
the regenerate man, who cares not for the affections of the flesh, will not
serve his belly, his pleasures, the world or worldly delights; The latter is
concerning self-love natural to us all; and the Apostle speaking of the wife,
uses the name of flesh, because they are both made one flesh.

1375. Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one another burdens. Ver. 5. Every man shall bear his
own burden.

In the first place is spoken of the faults and infirmities of our brethren
which are indeed a burden to us, yet we must bear them by sympathy, and the
rule of charity will have it so, that all of us help our brethren and tolerate
their infirmities, to lift up such as are down, to hide their faults, so much
as may be and is fitting. Theod.
Thou have this fault, and not that, another man has another fault, do thou
bear his fault, let him bear thine, and so fulfill the law of charity; be not
curious in other men's faults, for every man shall give account of his own.

1376. Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his works. 1 Cor. 3.13. The fire shall try
every man's work.

In the first place is intimated what is our duty, to make our works approved
to God; in the latter place, the fire signifies either the Holy Ghost, or
afflictions by which we are tried.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to the EPHESIANS.
HE commemorates the benefits of God which are part, and recites our Election,
Redemption, Sanctification, Vocation into the Church, Justification by faith,
our future inheritance of eternal life, and our duties; in general, of us all;
in special, of married people, and unmarried, of Parents, of Children, of
Masters, and of Servants. It was written from Rome in the Year of Christ 59.
and sent by Tychicus.

1377. EPHESIANS. 1.7. In whom we have redemption. Romans 8.18. We wait for future
glory, and the redemption of our bodies.

1. We have redemption in Christ from the guilt of sin by our justification, we
expect a full redemption from inherent sins in our glorification; 2. For Christ
shall transform our mortal bodies, that he may make them like to his glorious
body, that as we are one with him here in soul and body by grace, so we may be
also in glory.

* 1378. Ephesians. 2.19. You are no more strangers and foreigners. 1 Pet. 2.11. I
beseech you as strangers and pilgrims.

No more strangers to God and Christ, but friends and sons, no more strangers
to heaven, but fellow Citizens; but you are strangers and pilgrims in and to
the world and worldly courses.

1379. Ephesians. 3.5. The mystery of Christ's incarnation was in other ages unknown
to men. Col. 1.5. You have heard before in the Word of the truth of the Gospel.

It was unknown to the Fathers under the Law, in respect of fullness and
clearness of knowledge, revealed since Christ came, and it was made manifest to
the whole world by the Ministry of the Apostles.

* 1380. Ephesians. 3.5, 6. It was not made known in other ages -- That the Gentiles
should be fellow heirs of the same body. Genesis 12.5. In thy seed shall all
Nations be blessed.

He means not, that none knew the Calling of the Gentiles before, but because
very few in comparison knew of it; and they that did know of it had it revealed
to them darkly, and for the most part under Figures in general and confusedly.
It was revealed, but not so distinctly and particularly as now it is.

1381. Ephesians. 3.15. All paternity is named from God the Father. Joh. 8.44. The
devil is the father of lies.

God is the Father of heavenly and earthly paternity, the devil is excluded
from these, for he bath no such paternity, but as he is the Author, his called
the Father of a lie.

1382. Ephesians. 4.19. The Gentiles gave themselves over to lasciviousness to work
all uncleanness. Romans 1.28. God gave them over to a reprobate mind.

The Gentiles gave themselves over in regard of their sins, God gave them over
in regard of punishment.

* 1383. Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not. Mat. 5.22. But whosoever is angry
with his brother, etc.

The former place commands anger, but not as it is a sin; the latter forbids it
as it is a sin. The former would have us rather angry with the sin; the latter,
not with the person as a person. The former rather respects the wrong done to
God, for which we ought to be angry, and the latter, the wrong done to us, for
which we should not be angry. However the former and the latter both condemn
excess of anger, or such as may be sinful.

* 1384. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole steal no more. Rev. 22.11. Let him that
is unjust be unjust still.

The former place is a duty or command that thieves forbear their former
courses. The latter is the denunciation of a Judgment; they that in the days
when the Gospel is preached shall remain hardened in their sins shall by Gods
Judgment be delivered to the devil and their own wicked lusts, being deprived
of all safety of the spirit.

1385. Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me.

The Apostle warns the Ephesians to be followers of God, for by that they shall
fructify the more: He exhorts the Corinthians to follow him, that as he
followed Christ, so they would learn of him; as if he would have said, if you
cannot follow Christ, yet follow me at least that am his servent.

1386. Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives. Luke 14.26.

Wives are to be beloved as they are wives, but if they hinder us from
following Christ, they are to be hated with such a hatred as proceeds not from
anger, but zeal to Gods glory.

1387. Ephesians. 5.26. Christ has cleansed his Church by the washing of water by
the Word, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins.

Christ purges away our spots with his blood, as with water, by the Word and
Sacraments, as by instruments he communicates to us the power of his death.

1388. Ephesians. 5.33. Deu. 6.13
Let the Wife see that she reverence her husband. Mat. 10.28. Rather fear God.

Fear in respect of God must be guided the same way that love must. God must be
beloved above all, not excluding fear which is due to others.

1389. Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood. Gal. 5.17. The
spirit and the flesh are contrary.

In the former place mention is made of our principal and capital enemy, that
is, the devil; in the latter, of the concupiscence of our corrupt flesh, and
the strife of it against the Spirit.

1390. Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood. 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain
from fleshly lusts which war against the soul.

The Apostle in the former place says nor, that we do not wrestle against
flesh and blood, but against greater and stronger enemies against
principalities and powers; q.d. you must not think that your main work is to
contend against these petty enemies of flesh and blood, (though you must
contend against these) but your main work is against principallities and
powers. The latter place tells us, that lusts sight against us, and yet it
hinders not but we must wrestle against more.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to the PHILLIPPIANS.
HE exhorts them to patience, and not to be offended with his chains, but that
they should live patiently in mutual love, and take heed of false Teachers, and
study to lead a life unblameable. Written from Rome by Epaphroditus.

1391. PHIL. 2.7. He was made in the likeness of man, and was found in fashion
as a man. 2 Cor. 5.16. Henceforth know we Christ no more after the flesh.

The first place is concerning Christ's true humiliation, who after his humanity
was exalted of God above all creatures, and made to be Lord in the glory of the
Father.

* Phil. 2.7. with 2 Cor. 5.16.

He was in likeness, habit, shape, and nature of other men. Yet we know no man
after the flesh; neither Paul or any other Apostle had any worldly or carnal
affection, to take notice of outward, as Kindred, Qualities, Honors, etc. no
nor yet Christ, etc. they put off all carnal imaginations of Christ's Kingdom
which the Jews had; nor did they know him, i. e. seek or expect fleshly things
with him, or did they desire to please men but Christ and him only: To whom
also they stand no longer affected after any merely humane, civil or natural
manner of affections, such as those bare unto him who conversed with him upon
earth, but altogether in a divine and spiritual manner.

1392. Phil. 2.9. God has given him a Name which is above every name. Mat.
1.21. In his conception. Luke 2.21. In his Circumcision they called his name
Jesus.

By the Name above all names, is understood Majesty and Glory given from God
the Father unto Jesus Christ our Lord. Mat. 1.21
In his conception he was called Jesus, because he shall save his people from
their sins.

1393. Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. 2 Timothy
1.12. I am certain, because the Lord is able to keep that which I committed
unto him.

The Apostle means fear and trembling, not that which is servile but filial,
which is opposed to presumption and security, lest we should grow insolent upon
the confidence of our gifts, but that we should altogether depend on the mercy
and goodness of God.

1394. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I were already perfect. Ver. 15. So many as
are already perfect.

Man's perfection is in heaven to which we bend our course, that he means in the
first place, but our perfection on earth must be conformable to Christ our
head, in doing well and suffering: The Philippians are called perfect, not
simply so, but comparatively in respect of those that are weak, Col. 3 6. Heb.
5.13
who are to be born withal by those which are strong, in respect of whom also
they are termed children.

1395. Phil. 3.21. Christ shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like to his glorious body. Heb. 1.4, 5.13. The Angels shall not be
like him.

Our bodies shall be conformable to Christ's glorious body which he had in his
Resurrection; but not by reason of his Majesty and power he has by the
Hypostatical union.

* 1396. Phil. 4.3. Whose names are in the book of life. 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord
only knows who are his.

In the former place the Apostle speaks by a judgment of charity, or he judges
the tree by its fruit, or men by the outward appearance. He saw them walk so
orderly, and upon such true and real principles as he could conclude no other
but that they were the Elect of God; and yet this hinders not but that God only
can infallibly know who are his.

* 1397. Phil. 4.5. The Lord is at hand. 2 These. 2.2, 3. As the day of Christ
is at hand, let no man deceive you, etc.

The Lord is at hand in regard of his presence and providence, which may move
us to be moderate. Besides, Christ's second coming is at hand in regard of God,
who counts a thousand years as one day. It is at hand in regard of Christians
expectation, who when they see the day dawning, and hear the Cock crowing,
frequently do hence gather that the day light is at hand; so they when they see
the forerunners of Christ's second coming do conclude that he is not far off;
and yet not so at hand as to make us cast off all labor, plowing and sowing,
and to make us sit idely, every hour expecting his coming.

* 1398. Phil. 4.12. Salute all the Saints. Luke 10.4. Salute no man by the way.

When our Savior forbids his Disciples to salute, it was only by the way, and
upon that extraordinary occasion he then sent them, not that he did afterward
forbid salutations.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to the COLOSSIANS.
HE exhorts them to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to fly from the
teaching of false Apostles, and he warns them to live godly, putting off the
old, and putting on the new man, that in Oeconomical Government, the men, old
men and Masters, should observe humanity and equity; women, children and
servants should live in obedience, that all should be watchful in prayer. It
was sent from Rome by Tychicus and Onesimus.

* 1399. COL. 1.15. Christ is the Image of the invisible God. Joh. 1.1. And the
Word was God.

Now an Image is not of the same substance and excellency as the thing it self.
Christ is called the Image of God, i. e. substantial Image, not a vanishing or
vain one, as Images and forms and shapes are in our mind; but God the Eternal
Father knowing himself, and beholding himself begot this enduring Image in his
own Deity, which Image is (...).

1. Christ was the Image of God from Eternity, a Word increate, a perfect,
essential, and invisible Image of his Father, and thus in respect of his
eternal birth.

2. In respect of his being made man, God the Father did in him, and by him, as
a lively Image, set forth before our eyes his glorious attributes of Wisdom,
Goodness, Righteousness, and Almightiness, etc. Now, though Christ was God, yet
he might be in the Image of God; for the word God is taken personally, not
essentially, it designs the Father alone, not the Divine Nature in genere.
Christ is the Image of the Father, not of the Deity. The Person of the Son
bears the Image of the Person of the Father; but the Divine Essence or Nature
in the Son is the same with that in the Father; Christ therefore cannot be the
same in Person with him whose Image he bears, yet he may be the same in Essence.

* 1400. Col. 1.15. The first born of every creature.

Hence the Arians imply, that Christ is a Creature: But the first born of every
Creature is no more than that he was begotten before every Creature, even from
Eternity; this is not so to be interpreted, as if his ineffable generation as
God had a beginning from the beginning of time, so that first, or first born
implies when it is said of God not temporally, it excludes a priority of other
things.

1401. Col. 1.24. I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
in my flesh, for his body's sake which is the Church. Heb. 10.14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Zac. 2.8. Mat. 25. 2 Timothy 3.12.
The Passions of Christ, as to merit and satisfaction, are perfect for his
Church; the Apostles and Martyrs fill up in their flesh what is behind of the
afflictions of Christ, enduring miseries wherein Christ himself suffers, for
they are his Members, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.
What you do to any of these little ones, you do it unto me; It is added for the
Church, not to redeem the Chuch, but to edify and strenthen the Church by our
example of constancy and patience.

* Col. 1.24. with Heb. 10.14.

The afflictions or passions of Christ are twofold, those which he suffered in
his own body, and so nothing remains to be fulfilled or filled up; Or
secondly, for such afflictions which Christ suffers in his mystical body the
Church, and so there remains many things to be filled up personally, i. e. in
every man there must be an enduring and bearing of afflictions after the manner
of Christ.

1402. Col. 2.3. In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Mat. 24.36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in
heaven, but the Father only.

Christ in the state of exaltation has a perfect knowledge of all things,
because all power in heaven and earth is given to him, and he fits at the right
hand of God. In the state of humiliation he knew not when the last day should
be, not in respect of himself, says Augustine, but in respect of us. Christ
has in him the perfection of all wisdom and knowledge; or else secondly, all
saving knowledge and true wisdom consists in a right knowledge of him.

1403. Col. 2.9. In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Heb.
2.17. It behoved him to be like unto to us in all things, sin excepted.

He is like to us in all things in respect of the Essence of Humane Nature, not
in respect of his subsistence in the person of the Word, and of his
Hypostatical Union, Glory, and Majesty.

1404. Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the
earth. Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God.

To set our affections on things above, is to elevate our minds to heaven,
above all earthly things, unto our Country where we wait for our happiness, yet
so that we be not high-minded, and desire to know that which God will not have
us to know: for some things are to be believed, and soberly to be searched
into, but other things which exceed the measure of our faith, must not be
searched into; Pro. 25 2.
he is overwhelmed with Glory, that seeks into Gods Majesty.

1405. Col. 3.2. Set not your affections on earthly things. 1 Timothy 5.8. He that
provideth not for his own household is worse than an Infidel.

The first place forbids us to search after earthly things, neglecting
spiritual and heavenly things, for so far must we take care for earthly things,
as they may serve to Gods glory and our use for our salvation.

* 1406. Col. 3.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters. Deuteronomy. 10.12. To
serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.

Servants may and must obey in all things their Masters, so be those all things
exceed not the bounds of all things in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. in all things
warrantable for the Masters to command, and the Servants to perform.
Subordinate obedience of Servants to their Masters is not contrary to an
absolute obedience to God, but rather the obedience Servants show to their
Masters, being in reference to perform Gods command, fulfils that command of
serving God with all our heart.

Two Epistles of St. PAUL to the THESSALONIANS.
IN the first he commends their faith and constancy, and exhorts them to an
honest life, and a serious expectation of Christ's last coming; In the second he
comforts them against persecutions, and foretells the last day, the Kingdom of
Antichrist, defection from the Gospel: He exhorts them to good words and works.
These two Epistles were written from Athens.

1407. 1 THESE. 1.3. Remembering your work of faith and labor. Romans 3.28. Gal.
3.10. Faith is opposed to works.

Faith is a work, but not ours, or proceeding from our own strength, Joh. 6.29
for then it would not justify us, but it is the work of God, and a quality in
us respecting the merits of Christ, therefore the Apostle calls not Faith it
self so much a work, as he does that which proceeds from faith.

* 1 These. 1.3. with Gal. 3.10.

Faith is a work and brings forth works; is a work of the Spirit, and brings
forth works of righteousness in us; yet this hinders not, but that Faith may be
opposed to Works in the matter of Justification; Faith as it justifies is not
considered as it brings forth Works, but as it brings home Christ: Faith yet
which brings home Christ is not without Works, which Works do show themselves
immediately upon Justification, though I cannot say in (...) of Justification.

1408. 1 These. 2.20. For you are our glory. 1 Cor. 1.31. He that glories, let
him glory in the Lord.

Our glorying has its foundation in God, in the mean while if any thing be
done amongst the auditory by the work of the Ministry, we must say with the
Apostle, It is not I that labored, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God which was with me.

1409. 1 These. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord. 2 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.

In the first place is spoken of the company of the faithful, by reason of the
most near communion and uniting of the body of Christ: for we are all one
spiritual body, so many as believe in Christ, so that what happens to one
member may seem to happen to all the rest.

* 1410. 1 These. 4.17. And so we shall be ever with the Lord. Rev. 20.6. They
shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years.

We shall be ever (after our Translation) with the Lord. The latter place
speaks of a thousand years, but probably this may be in this world before our
translation, and so it nothing hinders but that after our translation we may be
with the Lord for ever. Whether these thousand years are to be meant literally
for so many years, or else figuratively (as the rest of the verse must be, viz.
Kings and Priests) interpreted, it is not to the purpose in hand.

1411. 1 These. 5.5. Ye are all children of the light, and of the day, not of
the night. Romans 8.19. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the manifestation of the Sons of God.

We are here with Paul children of light and the day, in grace, nor yet in
glory. The Apostle expected not to be made the Son of God, because he was so
already actually, but only to be revealed to be so, for it appears not so yet
what we shall be, for though we be heirs, we do not yet actually possess the
Kingdom; we must therefore distinguish Sonhood acquired here by grace, from
that which shall be in our Country by glory.

1412. 2 These. 1.5. The persecutions and tribulations which you endure, are a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy
of the Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer. Ephesians. 2.8. You are saved
through faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

The faithful are worthy, not by their own worthiness, but Christ's; also the
word worthy is the same here with convenient. Col. 1.13


1413. 2 These. 2.2. The day of Christ is at hand. 1 John 2.18. It is the last
time.

To be at hand, and to draw near do differ, the Apostle denies that the day is
at hand, but he denies not that it draws near, it is called the last time in
respect of former time, and because in the last time the day of judgment
draws nigh: it is called the last hour in respect of God, because our days
compared to Eternity, are but one moment, and a thousand years in Gods sight as
yesterday, when it is past, also all things are present with God.

1414. 2 These. 3.10. If any would not work, neither should he eat. 1 Cor. 9.6.
Have we not power to forbear working?

In the first place, Works are either of the head, or of the brain.
flesh and idleness are condemned; in the latter labor is commended, which is
wrought not with the hand alone, but with the head also; the Ministers of the
Church are not to get their living by the labor of their hands, being they are
not Mechanics: The Apostle had a singular gift from God to preach extemporary,
2 Cor. 1.11.
and yet had he means from the Churches.

Two Epistles of St. PAUL to TIMOTHY.
THE first is a pattern for Pastors, to show them what they ought to be in
Doctrine and Prayers, and in Life with their families; and lays down the way
how to instruct all men, of what state, age, or condition soever. It was
written from Laodicea, in the Year of Christ 52. The second confirms Timothy
that he should not be cast down in his mind by reason of the tempests of
persecutions, and warns him that in preaching the Gospel he should avoid false
doctrine, that he should be diligent and come unto him. It was written from
Rome, when he was in prison, in the year of Christ seventy.

* 1415. 1 TIMOTHY 1.19, 20. Some having put away, scil. a good conscience,
concerning faith have made shipwreck. Joh. 3.36. He that believes has life
eternal.

Doubt. He that believes in Christ is as sure of salvation as if he were
already in an actual and real possession of Christ, which cannot be, if a man
may fall from faith.

Answ. Hymeneus and Alexander made shipwreck, not so much of faith it self, as
of the object of faith; that they believed the doctrine of faith which they
once professed and afterward deserted, falling into heretical blasphemies, and
blasphemous heresies, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. which place clearly explicates the
other, it shows that they fell from some fundamental truth formerly professed,
as in the point of the Resurrection, or the like. The Apostle adds immediately,
Ver. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of the Lord abides sure, etc. q.d. though
some professors fall away, yet such as do indeed belong unto Christ, and are
his, are firm and stable. Or secondly, they gave reins to a licentious life,
against the dictates of their own conscience, which God punished by taking away
the light of the Spirit from them, that so in the midst of their course they
should lose their most spiritual Merchandise. Yet this shows not that ever
these fell from true saving faith, or ever had it; they that have it once
cannot finally lose it.

1416. 1 Timothy 2.4. God will have all men to be saved (every one.) Acts 13.48.
And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

All that believe in Christ, God does promote them to salvation, and they by
Gods Divine decree are pre-ordained to eternal life: For Christ is the Savior
of all, especially of those who believe.

* 1 Timothy 2.4. with Acts 13.48.

All men. Men of all sorts and Nations and conditions, genera singularum, not
singula generum. Secondly, God by his will of Precept, or signi would have all
men to be saved, not of purpose, or been placiti; God by his will medii would
have all men not by his will finis. Remota hac dipretione quam divina scientia
intra secretum justitia sua continet, syncerissime credendum est, etc. August.
Setting apart the secret Will or Counsel of God, it is sincerely to be
believed, that God would have all men to be saved: That is, offering to all the
outward means of salvation, as his Word and Sacraments.

1417. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. Romans 8.26. The spirit makes intercession for us, with groans which
cannot be uttered.

Christ is our only Mediator of Redemption and Intercession; the Holy Ghost is
said to pray for us, when he stirs up our hearts to prayer, and causes us
to groan when we call upon God.

1418. 1 Timothy 2.12. But I suffer not a woman to teach. Tit. 2.3. Let the aged
women be teachers of good things,

Women must not teach publicly in the Church, lest they should thereby take
occasion of usurping authority over the men; but let them be in subjection; let
the aged women teach the younger women modesty and prudence at home, for that
they are commanded to do.

1419. 1 Timothy 2.15. Women shall be saved in childbearing. Joh. 3.16. Whosoever
believes in Christ shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life.

The first place is concerning the state of women, and by, for, and in, are set
down for their consolation, lest being married they should fall from the hope
of salvation, but they must continue in faith, love, holiness, and sobriety.

* 1 Timothy 2.15. with Joh. 3.16.

Though painful childbearing were part of the punishment inflicted upon Eve
and her Sex for her first transgression; yet she and all faithful women shall
he saved by Mary's bearing the holy Child Jesus. 2. Notwithstanding by
childbearing and subjection to Man, God has imprinted on women the mark of
Eves punishment and all other women; whence might be conjectured, that in
regard of this Curse there was no hope of salvation for the married women: yet
the Apostle teaches that this shall not hinder their salvation if they abide
in the faith; now childbearing and breeding is an ordinary way by which, or
through which women may go to heaven.

1420. 1 Timothy 3.1. If a man desires the office of a Bishop he desires a good
work. 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was
called.

To desire a Bishops Office for that end that a man may serve God faithfully is
not disallowed, if a man have an honest vocation, and continue in it, he does
well.

1521. 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church of the living God is the pillar and ground of
Truth. 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid,
even Christ Jesus.

The pillar and ground he says that the Church is, but not the foundation, it
does not primarily support the spiritual building, but the Church it self is
supported by the foundation.

* 1 Timothy 3.15. with 1 Cor. 3.11.

It is called a pillar and ground of truth, not absolutely or substantially, as
though the truth should be measured by the Church, but the Church is a pillar
demonstratively because it professes the truth, and as a golden Candlestick
holds out the light in the world, which is not elsewhere to be found but in
the Church; and it is the pillar of truth as it is the house of God, suffering
it self to be ruled and guided by the Word of God.

1422. 1 Timothy 4.16. Thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee. Luke
2.11. Christ the Lord is our Savior.

The first place speaks of the instrument of our salvation in the Ministry of
the Word, whereby the faithful attain salvation; the latter speaks of the
meritorious cause, and that is Christ.

1423. 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all. Mat. 18.15. If thy brother
trespass against thee, tell him his fault between him and thee alone.

In the first place he says what the duty of Pastors is in rebuking sins which
are committed publicly to the common-scandal; in the second he speaks of the
sins of private men, committed privately against private persons.

1424. 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil. Eccles. 10.9.
Pride.

Pride and covetousness are almost always joined together. He is proud who
desires to exceed his condition; he is covetous that would have more than
enough; neither of them can be contented with God himself; these two were in
the sin of the first man the chief ingredients.

1425. 1 Timothy 6.16. God only has immortality. Mat. 10.28. The souls of men are
immortal.

God of himself and in himself is immortal only; but Angels and men by the
grace of God.

1426. 1 Timothy 6.16. No man has seen God. 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is.

God being by nature invisible, cannot be seen with bodily eyes: The faithful
either see God by faith in this life, or after a special manner; in the life to
come we shall see him as he is, by a more perfect way than we do here, by the
participation of his glory.

* 1427. 1 Timothy 6.19. with Eccles. 10.9.

Covetousness is said to be the root of all evil, not as if all evil proceeded
from it, as it is a distinct species of sin, (though as Covetousness signifies
any desire or longing after this or that, so it may signify the root.) But yet
the Apostle intended not (probably) further than to show, that as from the root
proceed infinite branches, so from Covetousness proceeds many branches of sin,
as Hatred, Fraud, etc.

1428. 2 Timothy 2.10. I endure all things for the Elect sake, that they may also
obtain salvation. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for our sins.

The Apostle sustained all things for the Elect sake, not by satisfying for
them, but by his example edifying and confirming them, that they might not
refuse to suffer something: When he says that they obtain salvation by Christ,
he shuts out his own sufferings, that they may not be reckoned for satisfactory.

1429. 2 Timothy 2.21. If any man purge himself from these he shall be a vessel
unto honor. 1 John, 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our
sins.

Paul means purging from the corruptions of doctrine and manners. Ver. 18. John
shows a plenary redemption from our sins by Christ Jesus.

* 2 Timothy 2.21. with 1 John 1.1.

Purge him, not efficiently, but instrumentally. Purge, endeavor to purge, i.
e. to apply that which may purge us, viz. the Blood of Christ, and to get the
Spirit of God; the one to take away the stain, the other the ruling of sin
within us. The one to take away sin, the other, evil doctrine and corrupt
opinions -- He that says, we may be cleansed from sin by Christ, and that we
must purge our selves, does but in the one tell, where we may have the remedy;
and in the other, who must use the remedy.

* 1430. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution. Psalm. 34.12. The godly man is said to see good.

Persecution is either of the tongue or hand, they that are godly shall be
persecuted with the one or the other.

The godly see Good in their persecutions in that they see the comforts of the
Spirit, and the graces of Gods Spirit works in them. Good is either Spiritual
and Perpetual, or Corporal and Temporary. Godly men have the former, not
always the latter, for by persecutions they lose the latter, yet obtain more
of the former.

* 1431. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.
Eccles. 9.1. No man knows either love or hatred.

The Apostle had an huge confidence or assurance of his salvation, and that
upon good grounds. The Wise man tells us, not that a man can by no ways or
means know at all whether he be in favor with God, but that it cannot be
discerned by the outward chances and accidents of this life; nor does he hereby
say, hatred and love are impossible to be known, but that the external passages
of this life do not infallibly show them.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to TITUS.
IT is the compendium of Christian Doctrine, informing Teachers, set in the
Ecclesiastical State Political or Oeconomical, what they ought to do; he
exhorts all and every one to good works, and to fly vain questions and
heresies. It was written from Nicopolis in the Year of Christ 54.

1432. TIT. 1.9. Able by sound Doctrine to convince gainsayers. Chap. 3.9.
Avoid foolish questions, contentions and strivings about the Law.

In the first place he requires that Teachers by their Office shall rebuke
those that are gainsayers, with all long suffering and sobriety: In the latter,
that they avoid janglings about words, that is contentious, clamorous,
unprofitable Disputations, and verbal Discourse, which tends not to
edification, either with Heretics or others in the Church, because they edify
none, but rather confirm them in their sins.

1433. Tit. 2.15. Rebuke with all authority. 1 Timothy 3.3. A Bishop must be no
striker.

Titus was gentle by nature, therefore he is warned to rebuke with authority,
He inculcates to Timothy modesty and mildness, that when he rebukes he should
not strike, but should rebuke diversely according to the diversity of men's
faults, offices, ages, degrees, otherwise old men, otherwise young men,
otherwise those that sin of malice, otherwise those that sin of infirmity,
otherwise those that were ready to obey, and otherwise those that were
obstinate, as there were in Cr^^e many despisers of the Ministry.

* 1434. Tit. 3.10. A man that is an heretic after the first and second
admonition reject. Deuteronomy. 13.5. And that Prophet or dreamer of dreams shall be
put to death.

He that commands a lesser, hinders not the inflicting the greater punishment.
While the Apostle bids reject, he does not disallow the putting to death of
Heretics. Moses Moral Law is perpetually obliging. The Apostle might have
said, kill, if that could in his time have been done without prejudice, (Civil
Magistrates being Heathens then) but when the Church may do it without
prejudice (the Magistrates being Christian) the former Law needs no suspension
at all. Omnes fere ex nostratibus hujus sunt sententiae quod Haeretici sint
gladii puniendi, Zanchy. Almost all Protestants are of opinion that Heretics
may be punished with the Sword.

The Epistle of St. PAUL to PHILEMON.
HE intercedes for Onesimus, who was run from his Master Philemon, and would
have his Master receive him again.

1435. PHILEM. v. 5. He had love and faith toward all the Saints. Mat. 16.16.
Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved.

Philemon did testify to all men by his works of love toward the Saints, that
he had a lively faith in Christ.

The Epistle to the HEBREVVS Is also thought to be St. PAUL'S, but his Name was
left out, lest the Jews should be deterred from the reading of it.
HE describes the person of Christ according to his Divine and Humane Nature:
And he confirms his Offices, Priestly, Kingly, and Prophetical, and exhorts the
Jews to Faith, Constancy, and good Works, by the Example of the Fathers.

1436. HEB. 1.3. Christ sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Acts. 7.55. Steven saw the Son of man standing at the right hand.

To sit at the right hand, is to have all Glory, Majesty, Kingdom, and Power
both in heaven and in earth: The Lamb standing at Gods right hand, which was
slain for us, and intercedes as a Priest on our behalf, stands as Aaron stood
with his Censer of old, betwixt the living and the dead, to turn away the wrath
of God.

* Heb. 1.3. with Acts 7.55.

Sitting and standing are not properly, but allegorically attributed to Christ
in this place; for God has not properly and substantially a right hand; but
here sitting down the Apostle alludeth to the custom of Kings, who place him
at the right hand whom they put next in authority and power under them: Hereby
is denoted the supreme and high dignity and power of Christ obtained by
ascending into heaven. He is said to stand to show his readiness to intercede
to God for us.

* 1437. Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, etc. Isa. 53.2. He
has no form nor comeliness.

The first is a Metaphorical speech: God the Father is compared unto the
lightsome body, God the Son unto the beam or splendour sent down. The second
place speaks of Christ as the Jews esteemed him in his Humiliation. It is one
thing, what Christ was in himself; another thing, what he appeared in our eyes.

* 1438. Heb. 1.11. The heavens and the earth shall perish. Eccles. 1.4. But
the earth abides for ever.

The Heavens and Earth perish according to their form and outward accidents;
some think that the substance shall remain; However when Solomon says, the
earth abides for ever; He speaks comparatively, in relation to men, One
Generation passes, and another comes, but the earth abides -- The earth is
the same, and shall be till the day of Judgment.

1439. Heb. 2.3. The Gospel was confirmed unto us by those that heard Christ,
Gal. 1.12. I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

In the first place it is spoken of the Apostles, who were with the Lord, into
which number Paul was taken after Christ's Resurrection; and he was more
confirmed after his admission, communicating with them those things that he had
learned by revelalation from Christ.

* 1440. Heb. 6.4. It is impossible to restore such -- Ezekiel. 18. But if the
wicked will turn, etc. he shall surely live.

It is impossible in regard of Gods Wisdom and Justice, giving them up to an
impenitent heart, to restore those which sin so sadly, as is mentioned before
in the Chapter. The second place tells us, if the wicked, but it does not tell
us that the wicked; that is, such wicked men as the other place mentions shall
turn; suppositions are not positions; He that says, If the wicked, does not
say, that the wicked shall -- This latter place speaks of wicked men which have
not sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; the former does (as I think) speak
of that sin, but I submit to better Judgments.

1441. Heb. 7.29. The Law made nothing perfect. Jam. 1.15. The perfect Law of
liberty.

The first place is concerning the Ceremonial Law, which the Jews abused,
separating the Law from Grace and the Spirit of Christ, and opposing the Law to
the Gospel: The latter place is concerning the whole Doctrine divinely revealed
acomprehended in Gods Word, which contains not only in writing Moral Precepts,
but also Promises concerning Christ, of all which Christ is the soul,
recreating out souls by his Spirit, and enlightening our eyes.

* 1442. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, etc. Heb. 11.5. Enoch
was translated, that he should not see death.

It was appointed by God that men should once, i. e. according to the common or
ordinary course of nature, though there be some extraordinary examples to die.
Though Enoch was not subject to a separation of soul and body, yet he had a
translation, which was equivalent to death. However this particular breaks not
a general rule. But probably by death is meant a change and translation out of
this life, as multitudes at the day of Christ's second coming to judgment must
be, we shall not all die, but all be changed.

* 1443. Heb. 10.14. By once offering, or by one offering he has for ever
perfected them which are sanctified. Lev. 16.34. And this shall be an
everlasting statute unto you to make an atonement.

Christ once offering has really and effectually purged us from our sins, and
reconciled us to God. The word Everlasting, or for ever, used in the latter
place is (though used for time without end) yet otherwhere for a long time, as
Prove. 29.14. Dan. 3.9. as till the year of Jubilee, etc. till the end of that
generation or world, and so Sacrifices reached till Christ, when there was an
end of that World or Generation, there being now all things new.

1444. Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe that he is. Romans 2.6. God
shall render to every man according to his deeds.

We must believe, because faith is the means and the instrument of our
Justification. God shall render to every one according to his works, because
works are the outward testimonial and mark of our Faith and Justification
before God.

1445. Heb. 11.13. The Patriarchs all died not having received the promises.
Ver. 33. Obtained promises. Acts 2.39. The promise is made unto you.

The Promise made to the Fathers was temporal, concerning the possession of the
Land of Canaan, Acts 7.5.
which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob obtained, not by themselves, but by their
successors; but the Promise was spiritual concerning Christ to be sent, Joh.
8.56
and that by faith in him they should obtain eternal life; so the Fathers
obtained the promises, because they saw Christ afar off, and rejoiced that
Christ should come; they did not obtain the promises, because he came not in
their days, yet they believed he should come.

* 1446. Heb. 11.23. By faith Moses when he was born was hid. Ver. 23. They hid
him because they saw he was a proper child.

Diverse causes of the same thing may agree together; Faith was the principle,
beauty or properness the less principle; and probably the outward features of
his body might be an inducement to the more confirming them of Gods goodness
toward that child.

* 1447. Heb. 11.23. Hid three months of his Parents. Exodus 2.3. His Mother
kept him.

The mother was the chief doer, and the Father, though not so active, yet gave
his consent at the least: Now Consent is a kind of action whether in good or
evil things, as Acts 7.58. with Acts 22.20.

* 1448. Heb. 11.23. They were not afraid of the Kings Commandment.

Why then did they hide him, and why did they expose him to the water?

These words they did not fear must not be understood absolutely and simply,
but with limitation; for many places of Scripture are spoken simply which must
be understood with respect, as Mat. 11.18. John came neither eating nor
drinking, that is, not eating nothing at all, but eating little, and so Mat.
10.34. He came not to bring peace, but the sword, that is, (as Luke expounds
it, Luke 12.51.) rather debate than peace; And so in this place Moses Parents
feared not the Kings Commandment; that is, they did not fear it overmuch, or
wholly, or only, or so much as others did in the like case.

* 1449. Heb. 11.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King. Exodus 2.14. Then Moses feared and said, etc.

Moses left Egypt twice: The first time he feared the King; but the second
time, when he brought the Israelites thence, he feared not Pharoahs anger at
all, as Exodus 10.29. Besides, if we understand it of his first departure, Moses
fled not for any fear, in respect of himself, but lest that his Calling by this
means should be hindered, and he withdraws himself not so much of fear, as to
reserve himself for a better opportunity. Nor does he fear as distrusting his
Calling, but because he lost this opportunity. The Reason of this fear is
expressed in the Text, Then Moses feared, and said, certainly this thing is
known, He feared lest he should be hindered in this business of the deliverance
of the people.

* 1450. Heb. 11.33. with 39.

They received the benefit and accomplishment of those particular Promises
which were made unto them. Yet they received not the Promise, Christ in the
flesh, and the happy and glorious estate of the Church under him.

1451. Heb. 12.17. Esau found no place for repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears. Acts 2.38. Repent for the remission of your sins.

Repentance, if it be taken passively, is referred to Esau's father, whose mind
could not be changed with his prayers, that so he might revoke the blessing
conferred upon Jacob: but take it actively, Genesis 27.33. Ver. 45.
concerning Esau's repentance, and that was not serious, but hypocritical, who
intended to kill his brother.

* 1452. Heb. 12.26. Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but heaven. Ver.
28. We receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved.

The former, place speaks of the Earthquake, which was at the giving of the
Law; and of Christ's second coming when the Heaven and Earth shall be shaken.
The latter place speaks of the kingdom of Christ's glory, which we receive by
Christ; though the material heaven may be shaken, yet the seeds beatorum, or
the place where the Saints glorified are, shall not be shaken; or the spiritual
administration of this Kingdom shall not be shaken.

The Canonical Epistle of St. JAMES.
HE warns them who boasted of their faith without works, that they should show
their faith by their works in the Divine Law, and flee from sins that are
forbidden, and embrace virtues that are commanded.

1453. JAM. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. 1 Cor. 3.18. If
any man amongst you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wise.

The first place is concerning spiritual and heavenly wisdom, the Author
whereof is God: The latter concerning vain, earthly, worldly wisdom, and
carnal, which is foolishness with God.

1454. Jam. 1.25. Chap. 2.12. The perfect Law of liberty. Gal. 4.24. Which
gendreth unto bondage.

In the former place, not only the Moral Law, according to which whosoever
lives is free, but also the Doctrine of the Gospel, whence true liberty
results, is to be understood: In the latter, in respect of us and by accident,
it is called the Law of bondage.

1455. Jam. 2.24. A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. Romans
3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the
Law.

The sayings of the Apostles Paul and James are not repugnant one to the other,
^ Aug. quest. 76.
the one says that a man is justified by faith without works; the other says,
that faith is dead without works those works that go before faith are vain, but
he speaks of those works that follow faith. Paul considers a man justified
before God, James a man justified before men. Paul speaks of true internal
faith which justifies in the sight of God, James of the outward profession of
faith, historical knowledge and the effects and testimonies of it.

Two Epistles of the Apostle St. PETER.
THe former commemorates Gods benefits, exhorts all men in general to the
duties of piety and honesty toward God, themselves, and their neighbors; but
in particular, in their Domestical, Politic, and Ecclesiastical condition,
etc. The latter warns the faithful, that they proceed in godliness, and fly
from false Teachers, Deriders, and such as deny the coming of Christ, and the
last Judgment.

1456. 1 PET. 1.12. The Angels desire to look into. Mat. 18.10. Their Angels
behold the face of my Father.

The first place is concerning the mystery of Redemption, which the Angels
desire to look into, because in that is the height, and the depth, and the
length, and the breadth of Gods mercy manifested so far, that the very Angels
cannot comprehend it all. Angels are said to behold Gods face, because as
Servants they are in the presence of the King to go at his command. These two
places together seem to reprove that of the Papists, that Saints and Angels can
know by looking into Gods face what is said or done by men in several places:
For here are Angels beholding Gods face, and yet ignorant of the mystery of our
Redemption.

1457. 1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims. Ephesians. 2.12, 19. You
are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints.

The faithful are strangers and pilgrims in respect of the Kingdom of Glory,
but not of the Kingdom of Grace, which St. Paul speaks of.

* 1458. 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear. Psalm.
2.11. Serve the Lord with fear.

Withal lawful fear, with all that fear that is due to Creatures or Masters.
But yet serve the Lord with all the fear that is due to the Creator; serve the
Lord with fear to displease him; and serve men with such fear as it may be
known you fear the Lord.

1459. 1 Pet. 2.23. Christ when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not. Joh. 8.44. He contended with the Jews.

Christ as a Priest in his sufferings threatened not, and being reviled, reviled
not again; but as a Prophet he threatened those that were refractory with hell
fire.

* 1460. 1 Pet. 2.23. When he suffered, he threatened not. Joh. 8. and other
places he threatened the Jews.

Christ threatened the Jews as a Prophet, but not as a Priest, for their
injuring of him; Their abusing him did not provoke him to threaten them, but
his love to save them made him threaten them, or rather foretell such judgments
as would destroy them and fall upon them.

1461. 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves us. Psalm. 69.10. The Lord saves us.

Baptism did not ex opere operato, save us, but signify to us that salvation
was to be had by Christ's dying and rising again, represented in their going
into and ascending out of the water; the Lord saves us as the efficient cause
principally necessary. Baptism instrumentally, nor yet so as if none could be
saved without it, or all that used it were saved.

* 1462. 1 Pet. 4.15. Or as a busy body in other men's matters. Joh. 4.38. You
have entered into other men's labors.

Let no man meddle with any other men's Calling or Affairs whether spiritual or
temporal, but where he is lawfully called to it. The Apostles were lawfully
called into the labor of the Prophets.

1463. 1 Pet. 5.8. The devil as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he
may devour. Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us?

The devils malice can do nothing against us, when God defends us.

1464. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist, i. e. your adversary the devil. Mat. 5.25.
Agree with thy adversary.

We must agree with men that are our adversaries, but not with the devil that
is our adversary. The latter place is meant, agree with such adversaries as are
not Gods adversaries, as we in and about temporal things have made them our
adversaries. The former place is meant of our spiritual adversary.

1465. 2 Pet. 1.19. The sacred Scripture is as a burning lamp in a dark place,
Chap. 3.16. In Paul's Epistles some things are hard to be understood.

In the Scriptures things are handled clearly and not obscurely, though they
may seem obscure to us; yet that obscurity is not in respect of faith, but of
humane reason whence it is that many ignorant and unlearned people do foolishly
wrest the Scriptures into a contrary sense.

* 2 Pet. 1.19. with 3.16.

The Scripture is perspicuous to us, not by our Nature, of Grace we are
illuminate. The Law may be known even to wicked men ratione Materialitatis non
finis, they may know the matter of the Precept, but not rightly the end of the
Law, that is, to acknowledge and hate sin, etc. and yet they do not know the
Scriptures perfectly ratione materialitatis; for they know no more than the
Pharisees, not all the Precepts perfectly. There is a disciplinary knowledge,
as when any thing is taught by Precepts; and an experimental knowledge, which
we from experience obtain, which is proper to the Elect and faithful.

1466. 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.
Joh. 7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified.

The Prophets in the Old Testament had the same Holy Ghost which the Apostles
had in the New Testament, but after another manner and degree, the least of the
Apostles after the visible miraculous sending of the Holy Ghost in the day of
Pentecost, knew the Prophesies more fully and clearly than the Prophets that
foretold them, because the Apostles had seen the fulfilling of the Prophesies,
and Christ opened their minds, Luke 24.41.
that they might understand the Scriptures.

Three Epistles of the Apostle St. JOHN.
THe first is Catholic, it breaths out the love of God to us in Christ out
Mediator, and our love toward God and our neighbor, commands us to beware of
the world, Antichrist, and Idols. The second admonishes the Elect Lady, and
her Children, that remaining in the doctrine and love of Christ, they take heed
of seducers, The third commends the bounty of Gaius, and commends to him those
that were banished for Christ, rebukes Diotrephes, and gives testimony to
Demetrius.

1467. 1 JOHN 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves. Joh. 9.3.
Neither has this man sinned nor his parents.

In the former place sin is taken generally, and so we are all sinners; In the
latter in special for some grievous sin, which uses to be the cause of some
grievous singular punishment from God.

1468. 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin the truth is not in us. Chap. 3.9.
He cannot sin because he is born of God.

To have sin and to commit sin differ; we all have sin, and we are conceived
and born in it; yet the faithful commit no sin, because they will not suffer
sin to reign in them, but the wicked and hypocritical have sins dwelling in
them.

1469. 1 John 2.2. Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of
the whole world. Ver. 15. Love not the world. Joh. 17.9 I pray not for the
world.

The word World is taken variously in the Scripture: In the first place are
meant the men that are in the world, son whose sins Christ is the propitiation,
as for the sufficiency of his merits, the price and virtue, but not for the
efficacy thereof, which is hindered by the infidelity and sins of the wicked,
concerning which the latter places must be understood.

1470. 1 John 2.18. Antichrist shall come, and even now are there many
Antichrists. 2 These. 2.3. Antichrist was not yet revealed.

All those are Antichrists in general, who deny Christ's Divine or Humane
Nature, or in his Person or Office, etc. In special, that great Antichrist is
the son of Perdition, who in the time of Paul was not yet revealed, though the
mystery of iniquity began to work.

* 1471. 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. Luke 14.26.
He that hates not his brother cannot be my disciple.

The former place speaks of an hatred toward our brother, which is either
because our brother is good, or upon the account of some temporary affairs, or
upon the account of true Doctrine, whosoever thus hates his brother is a
murderer. The latter place is spoken of such an hatred as comes by our
brothers being against Christ and hating of him, or striving to draw us from
him.

1472. 2 John v. 10. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God speed. Mat. 5.44. Love
your enemies.

The first place forbids not to show our duty of humanity to all men, or to
salute them civilly, but we are admonished not to use too great familiarity
with seducers.

* 1473. 2 John 10.11. with Romans 16.3, 3, 4. Salute Priscilla, etc.

John speaks of such persons as are enemies to God, and to his truth and
Church, such we must not embrace, 2 Kin. 3.14. These here in S. John were open
and desperate enemies, such as Marcion whom Polycarpe meeting would not salute;
the not saluting them is a chastisement to them, by it they may know whence
they are fallen. The other place is salutation of one Christian to another.

1474. 3 John v. 13. I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and
pen write unto thee. Joh. 20.31. These things are written that you might have
life through his Name.

In the former place it is not said, as though the Apostle would say something
else, then what is contained in the sacred Scriptures: In the latter, he
manifestly confirms, that all things are written which appertain and are
necessary to true faith in Christ, and to eternal life. So that we have no need
of Traditions by word of mouth.

The Canonical Epistle of St. JUDE, The son of Thaddaeus.
HE exhorts the Faithful to constancy, and threatens the adversaries of Christ
with extreme misery; and warns that the godly hold their faith in God, and
avoid false doctrine.

1475. JUDE v. 9. Michael disputed with Satan about the body of Moses. Ver. 14.
The Prophecy of Enoch is mentioned, whereof the Scripture before speaks not at
all.

The striving of the Archangel is not expressly set down in Scripture, yet
there appears some prints of it in the burial of Moses by God, for that the
Israelites knew not the place of his burial; and it is out of question that the
devil would willingly have made that known to the Israelites to set up Idolatry
there, but that he was hindered by Michael. The Prophecy of Enoch if it were
not set forth in writing, yet it went by tradition from hand to hand unto
posterity.

The REVELATION of St. JOHN The Apostle, the Divine.
IT is called Apocalypse, that is, the Revelation, because it contains the
visions which St. John saw in the Isle of Pathmos, about the year of Christ 96.
and the Prophecy concerning the state of the Church Militant on earth, and the
Church Triumphant in Heaven.

1476. REV. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him. Col.
2.3. In whom are (...) treasures of wisdom and know^^^^.

Christ as he is God, is the fountain (...) knowledge, born of the substance of
the Father: in respect of order he is ^^id to have received this Revelation
from the Father, because the Father by him does reveal his secrets unto us; as
man by his personal union he has a perfect knowledge of all things
communicated to him. They are hid in Christ as in a Treasury: yet not so hid,
but he that seeks may find. All Treasures are hid in him, though some of the
droppings are to be revealed to us.

1477. Rev. 1.1. The things which must shortly come to pass; they are not yet
fulfilled.

Shortly signifies the certainty of the things foretold; in respect of God,
though not in our opinion, he shuts out long delays; for the whole time of
this Prophecy unto the last day is in the sight of God, but as one day or one
hour, Psalm 94. 2 Pet. 3.8
which is a comfort to the godly, that they may not despair; and it exhorts the
wicked to repentance, by reason of the sudden destruction shall fall upon them.

* 1478. Rev. 1.7. And every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him. Job 19.27. Whom I shall see for my self -- and not another, or a not
stranger.

Every eye, godly, and wicked, shall behold Christ either to their comfort, or
sorrow. Job says, he shall see him, and not another shall see him for Job, or
in the place of Job; but Job shall see him for himself: Which denies not, but
Job, and another, yea, all shall see Christ, and yet every man for himself.

1479. Rev. 1.13. I saw one like to the Son of man. Mat. 9.6. Christ is the Son
of man really.

The first place is an Hebraism, by which is intimated the certainty of Christ's
humanity; also he may be said to be like man, because he appeared in a singular
form.

1480. Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death.
Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die.

The bodily death is one, because the soul is but once separated from the body:
The second death is taken Metaphorically, for the misery and torment of the
soul after the death of the body.

1481. Rev. 3.7. Christ opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens. Ver. 20. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
to him.

The Son of God is he that opens the internal door of the heart, Joh. 14.
we open only the external, for no man comes to the Father but by him.

1482. Rev. 3.10. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come
upon all the world. Ver. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten.

God kept the Angel of Philadelphia from evil temptation, because he was a
pious assertor of the truth; but the Angel of Laodicea, who was lukewarm, he
would mend by his reprehension.

1483. Rev. 4.8. They rest not night nor day. Chap. 14.13. They that dye in the
Lord rest from their labors.

The souls in the heavenly rest of the blessed are not idle, they have their
labors that weary them not, but most sweetly refresh them; in the latter place
is understood the end of the troubles of this world.

1484. Rev. 5.1. I saw a book written. Ver. 4. No man was worthy to look
thereon.

John saw the book in a bare Vision; but no man could see the mysteries
contained in it.

* 1485. Rev. 5.5. Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Juda. Rev. 5.6.
Christ is called the Lamb.

He is called a Lion to show his great strength, Majesty, and Dignity, and of
the Tribe of Judah, because he arose from thence, which Tribe boar the Arms a
Lion.

* 1486. Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb -- to receive honor, glory, and
blessing.

If Christ be God, how can he receive honor, for we cannot add to Divinity?

Ans. Christ as God cannot receive an addition of honor in himself, but we may
give him a relative honor, or Quo ad nos. He may seem to be more honorable to
us, that is, when we take all the honor that the Creature has or Idols has,
and place it upon the head of Christ; we esteem him most honorable and
glorious.

1487. Rev. 6.9. Under the Altar I saw the souls of them that were slain. Ver.
11. White robes were given to every one of them.

Souls are invisible spirits, which cannot be seen or clothed; it is therefore
the sight of the mind and not of the body which is here understood, for these
things were seen in the Spirit.

1488. Rev. 6.10. The souls of those that were slain cry out for revenge
against those that slew them. Mat. 5.44. Love your enemies and pray for them.

The cry of the souls proceeds not from a wicked desire of revenge, but an
earnest desire for Gods glory, because they would have no ungodliness or
wickedness remain unpunished, etc. in the day of revenge and judgment, we
suffering here according to Christ's command pray for our enemies.

1489. Rev. 7.9. I saw a great multitude which no man could number. Luke 12.32.
The flock of Christ is called a little flock.

The Church compared with the numerous multitude of the wicked, is a little
flock; but considered in it self, it comprehends an innumerable multitude of
all Ages, Sexes, Places, Tribes, and People.

* 1490. Rev. 7.12. Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, etc. Rev. 8.1. There was
silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.

In the former place it shows what is Angels work in heaven (as I take it.) The
latter is shown what for a little while may be done on Earth; whether as in
Constantines time, or it be an allusion to that silence that was used to be in
the Temple, while the Incense was offering, whereas they blew Trumpets and sung
while the sacrifice was offered.

1491. Rev. 11.19. The Temple of God was opened in heaven. Cha. 21. v. 22. And
I saw no Temple therein.

In the former place the Temple is taken figuratively, this the Holy Ghost
intimates, that God is worshipped most holily with Hymns and Psalms; In the
latter place, we must not think there shall be any material Temple in the life
to come, as we have here on earth.

1492. Rev. 13.8. The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Gal. 4.4.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman.

He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, not properly, but
figuratively, and in Gods Decree, by Types, Predictions, and Efficacy, by
Acceptance, not by Execution.

1493. Rev. 16.1. Go and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.
Ver. 4. to the 13. They poured out their vials of wrath upon the sea, the
rivers, the fountains, the sun, the seat of the beast, and Euphrates.

In the first place the earth is taken in a general signification, because the
effects of all the Vials redounds to the earth in a manner, and to earthly men
the followers of Antichrist, for whatsoever the wrath of God was which was cast
on the Seas, Rivers, or the Air, or Sun, was not for themselves, but to afflict
the earth and those that dwell thereon.

1494. Rev. 18.6. Double unto her, double according to her work. Mat. 7.2. And
what measure you mete shall be measured to you again.

The first place is a special command of God concerning retaliation: In the
latter Christ forbids rash judgment concerning others, adding the Law of
retaliation the more to convince the Jews.

* Rev. 18.6. with Mat. 7.2.

Double, not of her deserts, but of those miseries she has brought on you
before, and that is just, both because God bids them do it, and because she
did wrongfully torture Innocents.

1495. Rev. 20.4. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. 1
These. 4.17. So shall we always be with the Lord.

In the first place a certain number is put for an uncertain, and he speaks of
the state of the Church, which during the reign of Antichrist seemed to be
dead; but afterward at the preaching of the Gospel, she rose again, which is
the first Resurrection.

* 1496. Rev. 21.5. Behold, I make all things new. Eccles. 1.9. There is no new
thing.

There is nothing new in reallity: Seeing that all things in all ages, have
been of the same nature and kind, and the novelty or diversity is only in
certain outward appearances, in which true happiness cannot consist.

I make all things new; This may intend the glorious state of Gods Saints after
the Resurrection, or a more ample restoration of the true Doctrine, and
sincere Worship of God on earth, before the end.

1497. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still. Mat. 22.39. Thou
shall love thy neighbor.

The Moral Law forbids private men to do hurt with an evil affection, but to
hurt another man at Gods command, is not against the Law, because God will have
it so, and he commands us to punish malefactors; good men are proved by
injustice, and so are crowned with Martyrdom by it; In the former place is
spoken of punishment justly inflicted on the wicked, which is not against
charity, since God does most justly make use of all the creatures to punish
ungodly men.

1498. Rev. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still. Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our righteousness is more and more to be declared and proved before men, and
before God by effects of our faith; for we do not find it perfect in us, but in
part only, as our faith increases by degrees.

1499. Rev. 22.19. If any man shall take away from the words of the Book of
this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Mat.
7.23. False teachers and hypocrites have no part in the Book of life.

They are said to be blotted out of the Book of life, Metaphorically, and not
properly; also negatively, because they were not written in; also positively,
as their heresy is made manifest, that we may collect that they were not
written in the Catalogue of the Elect.

1500. Rev. 22.20. Even so come quickly: He is not yet come.

The coming of Christ is corporal and spiritual, visible, and invisible;
Invisibly he comes alwais to us, and is present with us by his grace and power:
Visibly he came by his lowly Incarnation to save his people. He will come
quickly, that is, he will be suddenly here in the end of the World, in glory at
the last day, and shall render to every one according to their Works.

Jude v. 25. To the only wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion
and Power, now and for ever, AMEN.
Jamque opus exegi I have contracted my sails, and now being in the Haven,
though I have been writing on the Canon, I should end with the Apocrypha, 2
Maccab. 15.38. And if I have done well, and as it is fitting the Story, it is
that which I desired: But if slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could
attain unto. The design of the Augmentor of the former Edition being not
Magisterially to dictate his Cogitations upon any man's faith, but humbly to
submit himself and Studies to the Judgment of the Church of England.

T. M.

Scioli tantum ad detrah^ndum, qui in eo se d^ctos estentari volunt, si omnia
dicta lacerent. Hieron. T. 2. Apol. pro. lib. Adver. Jovin. p. 109. Non eadem
est sententia tribunalis Dei and anguli susurronum. idem. Epist. ad Virg.
Hermon. L. 1. p. 212.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, are Printed for Simon Miller, and
Sold by him at the Star in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
THe Reconciler of the Bible Enlarged: wherein above Three Thousand seeming
Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament, are fully and plainly
Reconciled. A like Work never yet exstant, and may serve for the Explanation of
the most difficult places of the Bible: being useful for all such as desire to
understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto Salvation. Humbly presented to the
Censure of the Sons of the Prophets. By J. T. and T. M. Ministers of Gods
holy Word and Sacraments. Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament,
which will shortly be reprinted with large Additions. Astrology restored; or
an Introduction to the language of the Stars in four Books, by William Ramsey
Gent. The civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of
Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy Differences are
paralleled in many particulars. A general History of Scotland, from the year
767 to the death of King James, etc. By David Hume of Godscroft. The History of
this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as it was in the
year 1500. also the causes of all the Wars and Commotions that have happened
to this present time; with the memorable Sieges and Battles; together with the
lively Effigies of the most renowned persons. Master Paul Baine his Practical
Commentary on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians. The most
pleasant and profitable History of Francion, wherein all the vices that usually
attend youth are plainly laid open, that the misfortunes of some may teach
others to abandon vice: done into English by a person of honor. Eighteen Books
of the Secrets of Art and Nature, being the sum and substance of Natural
Philosophy, first designed by Doctor John Wecker, and now much enlarged by
Doctor R. Read. The Queen of Arragon, a Play in folio.
In Quarto large.
Jo. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command with Figures or without.
Quarto Small.
An Experimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz. Abraham's Faith, or the
good Old Religion, etc. By John Nicholson Minister of the Gospel. The Anatomy
of Mortality: By George Stroad. Three Teatises: 1. The Conversion of Nineveh,
touching Prayer and Fasting. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance. 3.
Sovereign preservatives against distrustful thoughts and cares: By Will.
Attersoll Minister of Gods Word at Iesield in Sussex. Aynsworth on the Cantic.
Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial. Gralle against Appolonius. A Treatise of Civil
policy, etc. By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in
Scotland. Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates. Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.
Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided. Wells his
Souls Progress. Christ tempted, the Devil Conquered; Being a plain Exposition
on the fourth Chapter of Saint Matthews Gospel: By John Gumbleden Minister of
the Gospel. The Saints Society. D. Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his
Body of Divini y The Reasons of the d^ssenting Brethren concerning the
Presbyterian Government, together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines.
The Doctrine of man's Redemption by Edward Holioke. Of the doctrine of the
Church of England, sweetly harmonizing with the Confessions of Faith of all the
Protestant Reformed Churches. The Philosophical Touchstone; or Observations
upon Sir Kenelme Digbye's Discourses of the nature of bodies, and of the
reasonable soul, by Alexander Ross. The Saints Triangles of dangers,
deliverances, and duties, by Nathaniel Whiting Minister of the Gospel. The
Confession of Faith, of all the congregationall Churches of England agreed upon
at the Savoy, 1659. An History of Angels, being a Treatise of our Communion and
War with them: By Henry Lawrance. The Description of the Universal Quadrant,
etc. By Tho. Stirrup Mathem. The whole Art of Drawing, Painting, Limning and
Etching: collected out of the choicest Italian and Germane Authors, by Alex.
Brown Practitioner.
Large Octavo.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises: By Edw. Leigh Esquire. The Rights of the
Crown of England, as it is established by Law: by Edward Bagshaw Esquire, of
the Inner Temple. Florus Anglicus, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings
and Queens since the Conquest, cut in brass. Evidences for Heaven, containing
infallible signs, and real demonstrations for Assurance of Salvation,
published by Edm. Calamy. The Life and Reign of King Charles, from his Birth to
his Death, by Lambert Wood. The Night-search, the second part: by H. Mill. A
view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies. Useful
instructions for these Evil times; held forth in Twenty Two Sermons, by
Nicholas Lockyer, Provost of Eaton College The Nullity of Church Censures, or
Excommunication, not of Divine Institution, but a mere humane Invention: Writby
the famous Tho. Erastus, and never before Englished. Merry Drollery in two
parts, being a Collection of Joviall Poems, merry Songs, and witty Drolleries,
intermixed with pleasant Catches.
Small Octavo.
Ed Waterhouse Esquire, His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the
Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admirable Nature and Virtues of
Tobacco: By Dr. Everard and Others. A view and Defense of the Reformation of
the Church of England, very useful in these times. Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his
Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the
Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy among us. Vinditiae Gratiae
Sacramentalis duobus Tractatulis comprehensae. 1. De efficacia Sacramentorum in
genere. 2. De efficacia Baptismi, quantum ad parvulos quibus praefigitur.
Epistola Reverendissimi Patris Johannis Daven^^^ (...) Episcopi Sari^buriensis.
Dr. R. Record his Urinall of Physic. Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a
Christian, containing Meditations and prayers useful upon all occasions. Rare
verities; or the Cabinet of Venus unlockt, and her secrets laid open. Extrancus
Vapulans, or the Observator rescued from the violent but vain assault of Haman
Lestrange Esquire, and the backblows of D. Bernard an Irish Dean: by P. Heyli^
D. D. Ovid de Ponto, in English. The Loves of Clerrio and Lozio a Romance. Mr.
Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue. A Book of Scheams or Figures of
Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of times, and very useful for all
Astrologers. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of
William the Conqueror to the death of the Late King. Lingua, or the Combat of
the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a serious Comedy; Acted by Oliver
Cromwell the late Usurper. The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how
a man may certainly know whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or
not. The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion. Physical Rarities, containing the
most choice Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases
Incident to man's body: By R W lliams. To which is added the physical
Mathematics: By Hermes Tris-Megistus. The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of
Wat Tiler's Rebellion. The Raconian Catechism in English. The life of that
incomparable man Faustus Socinus Senensis, described by a Polonian Knight. The
Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England. Dr. Sibbs his Divine
Meditations. Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes. Grotij Poemata. Three Books of M.
Matthews Minister at Swansey in South Wales. 1 The Messiah Magnified by the
mouths of Babes in America; or Gai^^ and Gamaliel, a helpful Father, and his
hopeful Son, discoursing of the three most considerable points. 1. The great
want of Christ. 2. The great worth that is in Christ. 3. The good way that is
chalkt out by Christ. 2. The New Congregationall Church, proved to be the old
Christian Church, by Scripture, Reason, and History. 3 The Rending
Churchmember Regularly called back to Christ and his Church. A physical
Dictionary. An exact History of the several changes of Government in England,
from the horrid Murder of King Charles the first, to the happy Restoration of
King Charles the second, with the Renowned Actions of General Monck, by J. D.
Duodecim.
Dr. Smith's practice of physic. Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Italian and
Spanish, all Englished, and Alphabettically digested. The London Distiller, or
the whole Art of Distillations laid open. Friar Bacon his discovery of the
miracles of Art, Nature and Magic. The Grammar War. Posselius Apothegmes.
Fasciculus Florum. Crashaw's Visions. The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies.
The torments of hell shaken; or a Discourse with many proofs, showing that
there is not a punishment after this life for any to endure that shall never
end, by Samuel Richardson The understanding Christians duty, often to
commemorate the death and passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus; with the
necessary preparatives thereunto. The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the
three arch-enemies of mankind, the world, the flesh, and the devil. Seasonable
advice to the Apprentices of the Honorable City of London, touching their duty
to God, and their Masters. Heinsius de Crepundiis. The History of Russia, or
the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the manner and fashions of the
people of that Country. Drexeliu's school of Patience. Drexelius his right
Intention of every ones action. A School or Nurture for Children, or the Duty
of Children to Parents, very useful for all that intend to bring up their
children in the fear of God.
Viginti Quarto.
The New Testament. The third part of the Bible. Sir Richard Bakers Meditations
and Prayers for every day of the Week. All the Works of that great and glorious
Monark and Martyr King Charles the first, Collected into one Volume.
A Play.
The London Chanticlers: a Comedy full of various and delightful Mirth, never
before published.
FINIS.

