A TRUE CHRISTIAN SVBIECT Under an Heathen PRJNCE:

OR TERTVLLIANS Plea for Allegiance, argued in time of the sixth Persecution,
under the Emperor SEVERUS. Ann. Dom. 204.

With a Brief Application, to the Citizens of LONDON,

Written by a MEMBER of the HOUSE of COMMONS.

Feb: 21 1642OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall An. Dom. 1643.

A TRVE CHRISTIAN Subject under a Heathen Prince; or TERTVLLIANS plea for
Allegiance, argued in time of the sixth Persecution under the Emperor SEVERUS.
Ann. Dom. 204.
PRecantes sumus semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, Apol. ca. 30.
vitam illis prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum
fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota
sunt. Cap. 33. Imperatorem Dominus noster elegit: ut merito dixerim, noster est
magis Caesar, ut a Deo nostro constitutus, itaque ut meo plus illi operor in
salutem. Cap. 36. Iidem sumus Imperatoribus, qui and vicinis nostris; male enim
velle, male facere, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur.
Quodcunque non licet in Imperatorem, id nec in quenquam: quod in neminem, eo
forsitan magis nec in ipsum qui per Deum tantus est. Hesterni sumus, and vestra
omnia implevimus, Vebes, Insulas, Castella, Municipia, Conciliabula, Castra
ipsa, Tribus, Decurias, paelatium, Senatum, Forum, sola vobis relinquimus
Templa. Cui bello non idonei, non promptifuissemus, etiam impares copijs,
quitam libenter trucidamur? Si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret,
quam occidere. Potui mus and inermes, nec Rebels, sed tantummodo discordes
solius divertii invidia adversus vos dimicasse. Si enim tanta vis hominum in
aliquem orhis remoti sinum abrupissemus a vobis, suffudisset utique
Dominationem vestram tot qualiumcun. que amissio civium, imo etiam and
destitutione punisset. Procul dubio expav^ssetis ad solitudinem vestram, ad
silen^ium rerum, and stuporem quemda^ quasi mortuae urbis quaesissetis quibus
in ea imperassetis. Plures hosts quam cives remansissent. Nunc enim pauciores
hospes habet is prae multitudine Christianorum pene omnium civium, pene omnes
cives Christianos habendo.

WE always pray for all Emperors that they may enjoy a long Life, secure
Empire, safe mansion, strong Armies, faithful Counsel, good Subjects, quiet
times, and whatsoever may be his wish as a man, and as a Caesar: it is our Lord
who has chosen the Emperor: and I may justly say, Caesar is more ours then
yours, as being constituted by our God: and therefore I do more labor for his
safety, he being my King. We are the same to the Emperors, as we are to our
own neighbors, for we are equally forbidden to wish ill, do ill, speak ill,
think ill of any man. Whatsoever is not lawful against the Emperor, is
unlawful toward any other: what may be done unto no man, so much the rather
may not be done unto him, who through God is so great a man, We are but of
yesterday, yet have we filled all places among you, Cities, Islands,
Cittadels, Boroughs, Assemblies, your very Camp, your Tribes of the common
people, Decuries of the Judges, the Palace, the Senate, the Iudicatories, we
only leave to you your Temples. For what War are not we fit and ready,
though we were fewer in number, who so willingly are put to death? But that
we are taught that it is more lawful to be slain, then to kill. We (even
without Arms, and without Rebelling) if we differed from you in the ill will
of a Division only, could fight enough against you. For if we (so great aforce)
should break from you into any remote corner of the world, so great a loss of
Citizens (such as we are, whatsoever you think of us) would undermine your
Empire: I, and punish you enough even with a mere desertion. Without all
doubt, you would have started at your own solitude, at the dumbness of
things, and in a certain amazement as of a dead City, you would have enquired
for people over whom to reign. You would have found more enemies, than
Citizens. For, even now you have the fewer enemies, by reason of the multitude
of Christian Citizens, having almost all Citizens Christian among you.

Application to the Citizens of famous LONDON.
Thus Tertullian, from the very Principles of our Christian Religion, does
plead the harmless jnnocency, the willing obedience, and due subjection of
primitive Christians, even to irreligious heathen, and to persecuting Kings.
Is Religion Changed? or have our Princes less duty owing unto them then the
Heathen had? Is Buchanan wise, and Tertullian a fool; Is Machiavell true, and
Tertullian false? Are Iunius Brutus, Burrowes, Parker, Pryn, -- good subjects.
and was Tertullian a Traitor? will you value seditious Pamphlets, and despise
the ancient when they speak Orthodoxe? Are we less bound to the sacred Text
then our Fathers were? Is our Charter of Liberties more then God gave to his
first Saints? Have we leave to be less Christian, then they were? Is Charles
a Persecuter, or was Severus a Pious Prince? It is a shame to plead so plain a
cause, Noe salve can cure a wilful distrust, Three things there are, which
once (deeply) infected, are never fully cured: Heresy, Lunacy, and Iealousy,
But God confound their Purposes, who not being doubtful in themselves, do yet
create and nurse up the Iealousies of others, wherewith to work their own
dark ends. Miserable are the people who Resolve to see only with their ears.
Demonstration will not convince them. Their ear is tickled that here is an
Army of Papists, when yet we go to the Protestant Church, and there perform
all the opposites to papal superstition. Awake, and see how your souls are
sotted, by giveing them up to these delusions. Ease your selves and us by
owning the goodness of our King, who gladly would own your love in adue
subjection. Spare your selves, your wives, your for unes, and your children.
All are now ready to be exposed for that which may be given you without a
stroke; Nay which is offered to you, and is only hindered by the wicked mis
interpretation of a few false men about you. Do not say you desire peace, but
give it to us and to your selves by leaving impeached Traitors to stand or fall
alone. What is Pym what are Hollis, Hampden, Haselrig, and Strode, what
Kimbol^on, and a few men more that they may not undergo the trial of our
Laws? Ask any one of them alone, and if he have not innocence enough to
offer himself to the trial, yet he will have shame enough to say, he is not
afraid to be tried: He has not brass enough to say, I will not be tried by
the Law of the Land. whether these men (and others) be guilty or innocent, will
you for ever undo this Kingdom, rather then let us know whether they be
innocent or no? what have they deserved that you and thousands more must feel
the sword, for t^^m that were the cause to un-sheath it? who ever did ^e^d
down all that is dear unto us so, as they have (...) w^o ever labored to
raise us up into our just li^, as the King has done? The King does plead (...)
^ves for us, and they pay him again with Votes. (...) King does own our true
Religion, whilst a faction ^ng you, does cherish and multiply Schisms with
good allowance. His Majesty does argue the Subjects Liberty, whilst we are by
fellow Subjects rifled and imprisoned. He thought to have enjoyed his own
Property in Hull, and was denied; but Prophesied then that these men next would
invade your property also, as now is done. Look to the twentieth part, which
is but a setting dog to show where the covey of nineteen are, what hopes have
you of prevailing in this war so full of doubts, changes, necessities,
fears, distrusts; and so many among you (even of your Leaders) truer to the
King, then you wish or are aware of? I speak the freedom of a friend, Do not
put us to win the King his right again with our swords: perhaps the
concequences may reach farther then we wish, or you yet do fear. And what
would you do, if you should once prevail? how often must you fight again and
and again: how many victories upon victories must you get, and yet fall short
again? for our Gracious King, and our dear black Princ^ shall still revive
with new strength to subdue you. God cannot leave the King in this the pr^se^t
war (on his side) that ever Christian drew a sword in. Give up those few
traitor citizens among you. Lay down your arms, and give the land no farther
cause to wish our best City a heap of stones.

Your friend, more then they who Vote for War, IRENaeVS PHIL^OPOLIS.

FINIS.

