THE Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, the sons of Jacob: translated out of
Greek into Latin by Robert Grosthead, sometime Bishop of Lincoln: and out of
his Copy into French and Dutch by others: and now Englished. To the credit
whereof, an ancient Greek Copy, written in parchment, is kept in the
University Library of Cambridge.



London, Printed by E C for the Company of Stationers. 1658.

To the Christian Reader.
ALbeit these our happy days, in some respect, good Christian, have and enjoy
diverse and sundry works tending ^o the subversion of Belial, and the erection
of godliness: yet considering, that as earthly, so we spiritual soldiers,
seldom run to the watch without alarm; I thought it convenient to call upon
you with this grave and godly book, of long time hid in Hebrew, now come to
light in English. The malice of the Jewish people in concealing it, by reason
of Christ the righteous, so often prefigured, was intolerable; but the singular
providence of God in preserving it, unspeakable; and now at last though
charg^able, yet fruitful is the expressing, and printing in our natural
language of this so worthy, so golden a writ: being of it self, without the
accessory painting of eloquent speech, a Mirror for Princes, a Preacher for
all Christians, a beautiful glass for women, for children, servants, and such
like; a wise, plausible, and most ready schoolmaster, for to apply to every
particular estate his peculiar property, Art thou a Prince, a Magistrate, a
Rule? let Judah rule thee: If thou think upon manly courage, he teaches
valiantness: if thou seek to govern a right, he wills thee to fly
tyranny: if thou thirst after manners of life, he foundeth it out, that
vainglory* fornication, and discord, blemish, weaken, and at length utterly
consume nobility. Let me proceed farther and ask a question: Art thou a
Bishop, a Minister, a preacher of Christ's birth, life, and death? behold Levi
as a Lantern. Levi
Thou can teach thy self, but he can teach thee better: thou speak to
others, hearken to him that talks to thee; of thy office, how holy it is, how
honorable, the contemners thereof how miserable; by whom begun, continued, and
confirmed: of thy state of life, what, and how it should be; Nunquam sine Sale,
sine Sole: to be short, of thy blessedness, if thou art godly, wise, and
learned: of thine and their plagues where thou live, if wicked and ignorant.
What should I say more? Look upon Jacob, Jacob.
O you Parents, peruse the 12 godly Fathers in time and order: learn of him
and his, to pray to God in Christ his name for your children, have regard to
their instruction: the want of the former, your children shall miss: the
neglect of the latter, you your selves shall bewail. For the hearty prayer of a
Father to the almighty for his children, is a right singular benefit: but he
that for foolish pity gives them the bridle, is before God accounted a guilty
partaker of their sinful race. View this book therefore, hearken how to teach
your selves and your children. You have already handled a Sick man's Salve,
enjoy now at length a Sick man's tongue, to instruct them when you leave them,
and what to leave them when you die: else their end will be lamentation, but
yours lamentable misery. And come you hither you children of the earth; read,
see and say, that old father Ruben, with his good brethren, readily and rightly
describe the blessed path of righteousness, and the forlorn way of Belial,
the one to fly, the other to follow. Will thou begin with the eldest, for that
old age seems wisest? stop not then the ears of thy heart and body to so
wise and sweet a charmer. O the number, O the uglisome portraiture of those
deadly spirits, that he has so orderly numbered, and cunningly colored*
Lechery, Envy. Gluttony, Bravery, Pride, Vainglory, Unrighteousness, Wilful
ignorance.


All these, as they seem, are indeed pernicious: but the former is most
detestable, the end whereof is consumption of this earthly body, and
destruction of the soul. Which welspring and puddle of evil, if thou will have
dried up, cease from drunkenness: if not see it, have not a narrow and greedy
eye upon a beautiful face: if not drink, yet stop thy mouth from busy
questions with women: to conclude, if not therein be ducked and drowned, use
labor, tame youthfulness. For in this I overshooting my self, (says Ruben
to his Children) defiled my Fathers bed. Therefore look not upon the beauty of
women, muse not upon their doings, but keep your selves occupied either in
learning, or some work; charge your wives and daughters that they trim not
their heads; will them to chasten their looks, for every woman that deals
deceitfully in those things, is reserved to the punishment of the world to
come. Which trade of life to eschew, seeing it is difficult, without the
fulfilling of the law, and the law partly consists in mutual love; strive,
with Simeon the second brother, Simeon.
to avoid strife, which blinds the mind, pineth the body, provokes murder.
The remedy whereof, is both forgiving and forgetting. Take to thee Joseph's
cheerful countenance, a perfect platform of a quiet mind: yet set before
thine eyes Simeons withered hand, a right plague for such a sin. All which
disquietness and mischief safely to set a side, let not Judah be set a part.
Gather by him experience, that for a man to glory in his own works is sinful,
and he which upbraideth another man's vice, stands slippery. Judah choked
Ruben his eldest brother with his fornication: mark, who sinned immediately but
envious and railing Judah? Judas.
Did he not offend after the flesh in the Canaanites house? did he not take a
wife without consent of his Parents? two great sins, and alas in these our
days too much used; yet punished, the one with want, or at least small joy of
children, says father Judah the Patriarch; but the other with intolerable
danger of body and soul, says S. Paul. Wherefore abstraine from wine, abhor
drunkenness: for such a one slandereth not, rehearses not another man's sins,
breeds no sedition, but embraces love and charity in a single heart: as good
Father Isachar, Isachar.
who never railed, nor was hurtful and spiteful to his neighbor, never ate
his meat alone, but gave part to the poor; never removed the bounds and marks
of other men's ground, but loved all men as his natural children. O that as we
read this, so we might express the same in life and conversation. Mercy and
Love is a precious Jewel, the maintainers whereof being jointly connexed
prosper; once dissevered, come to naught. For the waters (says Zabulon) wash
away the sand, Zabulon.
when the stones and timber are dissolved: whose mercy and singular compassion
was rewarded singularly. Sift his testament, resemble his rare charity, in
clothing the naked, and feeding the hungry, known and unknown, as well
strangers as his countrymen. Let not the spirit of Dan possess your mind. Dan.
Suffer not the wrath of Gad to settle in your heart, Gad.
for such work with 3 sore instruments, bitter speech, treachery, and violent
hands, yielding fruit not much unlike, as you may read, as you may see. Will thou be taught the ready path to that that thou do seek? Two ways there be
(says Aser) Vice the one, Aser.
the other, Virtue. Neptalims race. Neptalim.
Embrace the latter, eschew the former. But he that walks in them both,
blinds men, deceives himself, and mocketh GOD, whose double faced dealing
shall be double punished. Such are the covetous, such are they that are
merciful in evilnesse, such are they, says Aser, that fast from meats, but
not from fornication. Have therefore a simple heart, with righteous Joseph,
Joseph.
the blessed of the Lord, that right figure of Jesus Christ: for hatred he
showed love: being cursed he blessed: being shot through he did not so much as
bend his bow: albeit his brethren would have slain him, albeit they cast him
into a Well, though they sold him as a bondslave, and that to strangers, and
such as hated shepherds to the death, of whom he was whipped and tormented,
yet he, when they stood in fear, gave them comfort: when they were well-nigh
famished, gave them food: when by his authority he might destroy, he by his
authority did preserve: being their Lord, using them as his betters: being
their brother, accepting them as his children: their unkindnesse not spoken of,
their conspiracies forgotten, their cruel dealing most lovingly, most
mercifully forgiven. You have heard his love toward his neighbor, hearken his
obedience toward God: when he was miserably afflicted, did he rage and swell?
when he was made a bondslave of a free man's son, did he cry out on heaven?
being utterly forsaken, did he impatiently accuse Gods justice? no, Expectans
expectavit Dominum: And at the last, the Lord which hid his face did show his
countenance; of a caitife, in respect, making him free; of a freeman, wealthy;
of a wealthy subject, an honorable personage, Lord President of Pharo's land:
whom the Egyptians being alive loved: being dead, l^ved: being rotten, loved:
whom living, neither wealth nor woe could m^ke to swell: neither promise or
threats of the Egyptian strumpet could make slide: and therefore being dead,
neither world, devil, nor man's policy could make forgotten. O that our mortal
race might thus begin, thus persevere, might thus, thus O Lord, most happily
finish. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Learn therefore of
Benjamin to inflame thy heart, Benjamin.
that thou may be ready both in body and soul. Let us, says Ecclesiast.
Eccles 14^
commend (and so say I, let us behold) the noble famous men, and the generation
of our fore-elders. For many glorious acts has the Lord done in them, and
showed his great power ever since the beginning. Upon the consideration
whereof, and especially for that I would have nothing wanting in this book that
might serve thy contentation, I thought it as well pertinent to deal with the
righteous Father, as with the godly children. For to shadow a face only without
a body, has his deserved commendation: but who so painteth a leg without a
body, or a body without a head, it shall not be amiss, as I suppose, as well to
term him a foolish painter, as to judge the thing undiscreetly painted.
Wherefore as well to see the head as the leg, and to hear the Father as the
children, I have faithfully drawn out of Scripture (and not according to my
fancy fashioned) the death and testament of Jacob, that blessed and right happy
Father, added to this ancient monument of the Children. Therefore, to
recompense my pains, read them, but read them diligently; neither read only,
but be content to follow. For the imitation of good and godly men, is the
direct way and course to godliness: So may we account of Jacobs blessing: So
may we thoroughly challenge to be his children: Children I mean, not by flesh,
but spirit. The Lord which made heaven and earth, the Lord which gave his Son
to shed his heartblood for us, GOD which disposes all things to his pleasure,
preserve our King, increase our faith, and make us thankful for his benefits.
Amen.

Richard Day.

The Testament of Jacob, made at his death, to his twelve sons, the Patriarchs,
concerning what should betide them in the last days: gathered out of Genesis
48, 49. and added unto this book. Come hearken my Sons, two thnigs I give, my
blessing, and my ban:
The first, to them that godly live; the last, to wicked man.

The Testament of Jacob.
Jacob the son of Isaac, borne of Rebecca in the year of the world 2108. his
Father being threescore years of age, Genesis 23.
Simple for innocence.
was a perfect man and rig^^eous, dwelling in Lents; not given to pl^a^ure and
hunting, as his elder brother, elder by nature, not by grace. For the elder
shall serve the younger, says the Lord. Why? not for that Jacob had so
deserved, Jacob beloved, not of merit, Romans 9. but of grace.
but GOD had so appo^nted. Wherefore when he thus by the determinate will of
God, and heavenly disposition, which orders all things whatsoever, had got
his brothers birthright, Genesis 25.
and his Fathers blessing, Genesis 26.
his parents considering that the slippery days of carnal copulation did
approach, Genesis 27.
and warily fearing his Brother Esau, for that he conceived murder in his
heart, and instituted a birthday for his divelish purpose, sent him from
Bersaba to Mesopotamia to Laban his mothers brother, there honestly to take a
wife, and quietly to live. For matrimony, A caveat for marriage.
without consent of Parents, and due consideration of either party contracted,
as it breeds their disquietness, so it provokes Gods displeasure. Jacob
therefore, after long travel, being placed with his Uncle Laban, and serving
him fourteen years in labor and pain (albeit be was the Child of
promise, Trouble and pain are destined to the Elect.
the Blessed of the Lord, borne of a Free woman, and that which is more, his
Uncles bone and flesh, and Lord of Canaan: An example for children.
not arguing with himself as the worldly Children of this earth, saying, Shall
I which am a free and wealthy man's son be made a servant? Shall I be a
drudge in my kinsmans house, being sent to marry, and not to serve?) had given
him by Laban to Wife for his good service (by which GOD blessed that little
that Laban had before) his two daughters, A godly note for servants.
Lea first, then Rachel, with their handmaids, Bilha and Zilpha: of whom,
according to the promise made to him in Bethel, that his seed should be
multiplied, he begat twelve sons, twelve godly Fathers of the earth. Ruben.
Simeon. Levi. Juda. Dan. Neptalim Gad. Aser. Isachar. Zabulon. Joseph. Benjamin.
Thus he being blessed of the Lord, Man's life is but a pilgrimage.
as well in Children as in substance, returned again to his native Country,
he and his Children, there to live, and there to die. But behold the divine
providence of God! after three and thirty years expired, he was removed from
Canaan to Gosen in Egypt, by means of his son Joseph, chief Steward of
Pharaohs land, whom his brethren heretofore had sold. Where, when he had lived
17. years, and seen his family increased exceedingly, to his great joy and
comfort no doubt, especially all the other Countries about being plagued with a
great famine, and he by Gods mercy not greatly feeling the same, God always
provideth for the righteous.
perceiving also his troublesome pilgrimage drawing to an end, called his Son
Joseph unto him, and said, If I have found grace in thy sight, oh put thy hand
under my thigh (for in this order they took an oath in Jacobs time) deal
mercifully with me and truly, bury me not in Egypt, but let me sleep with my
Fathers: Where noting his sure faith in the promise of God made to his Fathers,
willed him to look for Canaan his hoped inheritance, and not to trust in
Pharaohs land. To which his request, when Joseph his loving son obediently did
condescend, Jacob taking a little more strength unto him, and sitting up,
Parents ought to tell their children Gods blessings.
desirous also to show forth the great goodness of the Lord in preserving him
and his, said: God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz, in the Land of Canaan, and
blessed me: saying, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and cause thee to
multiply, and will make a great number of people of thee, and will give this
Land unto thy seed for an everlasting possession. Thy sons, Manasses and
Ephraim, I take as mine own, their own brethren shall be called after their
name, As I came from Mesopotamia, That is, shall be under their tribes.
Rachel dyed in the Land of Canaan, and was buried by the way to Ephrata, the
same is Bethlehem.

Then Jacob, albeit somewhat dim for age, beholding Joseph's two sons, said:
What are these? To whom Joseph answered: They are my sons which God has
given me. O bring them to me, said Jacob, and let me bless them: I had not
thought to have seen thy face Joseph, yet lo God has showed me thy seed.

God, in whose sight my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk: GOD which has fed
me all my life long unto this day, Christ.
and the Angel which has delivered me from all evil, bless these lads,
Counted as one of his children, not that they should pray unto him being, dead
as Eckius gathered. God has mercy on whom he will. By says Jacob divides the
Land, a yet but hoped for
and let my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers, Abraham and
Isaac, and that they may grow into a multitude in the midst of the Earth.

Then as Joseph lifted his Fathers hand from Ephraim, to Manasses the elder,
Jacob said: Let it be, I know well my son, he shall also be a great people,
but his younger brother shall be greater: in thee let Israel bless and say, God
make thee as Ephraim and Manasses. After this he fainting said: Behold Joseph,
I die, God shall be with you, and bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover, I give unto thee a portion of land above thy brethren, which I
conquered by sword and bow of the Amorites. And come you hither also, O my
children, that I may tell you what shall come on you in the last days: Gather
ye together, and hear ye sons of Jacob, hearken unto Israel your Father.

Ruben my first borne, my might, my strength, Begotten in my youth.
excellent in dignity and power, unconstant as water, thou shall not excel,
because thou did defile my couch.

Simeon and Levi, Levi had no Tribe, and Simeon was under Juda. Jud. 1.
Brethren in evil, who in your wrath slew a man, and in your selfewill dug
down a Wall: Cursed be your wrath, for it was shameless, and your fierceness,
for it was cruel. I will divide you in Jacob, and scatter you in Israel.

Judah, Blessings of Juda a worthy captain.
thy hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies. Thy brethren shall stoop
unto thee: as a Lions whelpe shall thou come up from the spoil: thou shall
couch as a Lion, and as a Lioness; who shall stir thee up? A noble Prince,
Christ.
2. The Scepter shall not depart from thee, nor a lawgiver from between thy
feet, until Shiloh come: all Nations shall seek after him. 3. A fertile Land.
Thou shall bind thy Ass Fool to the Vine, and the Asses Colt to the best
Vine; thou shall wash thy garment in wine, and thy cloak in the blood of
grapes: thy eyes shall be red with Wine; and thy teeth white with Milk.

Zabulon, thou shall dwell by the sea side, and thou shall be an Haven for
ships: thy border shall be unto Zidon.

Isachar, thou shall be a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens: And
thou shall see that rest is good, and that the Land is pleasant, and shall bow
thy shoulder to bear, and shall be subject unto tribute.

Dan, thou shall judge the people, Judge 13.14.15.16.
as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan thou shall be a serpent by the way, an
Adder by the path, biting the horse heel, so that his Rider shall fall
backward. Then Jacob foreseeing in his mind the great calamity that should
betide his posterity, comforting himself, and resting in gods promise, cried
out with heart and mind: O Lord, I have waited for thy salvation.

Gad, an host of men shall overcome thee, but thou shall overcome at the last.
Josh. 1.21.


And what shall I say to Aser? his bread shall be fat, Number. 33.
and he shall have pleasures for a King.

Neptalim is a hind, sent for a present, Judge. 4.5.
giving goodly words.

The blessing of Joseph.

Increase of family


Joseph is a flourishing Bough by a Welside, the small boughs shall ru^ upon the
Wall. The Archers shot against him, and hated him: but his bough was made
strong and his Arms strengthened by the hands of the almighty God of Jacob. Out
of him shall come an Heardman, a stone in Israel. All these things shall come
from my Fathers God which has helped thee, All things come of God.
and blessed thee with blessings of the Heaven, with blessings of the deep
beneath, with blessings of the breast and womb. The blessings of (me) thy
father, that I give thee, are stronger than the blessings that I had of mine
elders. Until the end of the hills of the world they shall be on thy head.

Benjamin shall ravine as a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey,
and at night divide the spoil. And now when I shall be gathered to my people,
Not for the holiness of the place, but for memory of Gods promise.
bury me with my father, in the cave that is in the Field of Ephron the
Hethite, in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre,
in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the Field of Ephron the
Hethite, for a possession to bury in, where as were buried Abraham and Sara
his wife, and Isaac with Rebecca; and there I buried Lea. The Field, and the
Cave that is therein, was bought of the Children of Heth.

When Jacob had made an end of commanding all that he would unto his sons,
having lived one hundred forty and seven years, he plucked up his feet into the
bed, and quickly died. A token of a good conscience.
Then Joseph falling upon his Fathers face, and kissing him with tears, caused
him to be embalmed by Physicians, to the space of forty days, and mourned for
him threescore and ten days. Who departing from Egypt into Canaan, with
noble men of the Land in Chariots, and horsemen, buried him in the place which
Jacob had appointed.

The Testament of Ruben, made to his Children at his death, concerning the
things that he had in his mind, by the suggestion of the spirit of
foreknowledge. Behold, the pot, the bear, the bed, do note the strength, the
lust,
Of Ruben, and unconstant head, who therefore was accursed.

The Testament of Ruben.
THis is the copy of Rubens testament, concerning all the things which he gave
in charge to his children before he died, in the 125. year of his life. Two
years after the decease of Joseph, his children and childrens children came to
visit him in his sickness, and be said unto them.

My children, I die, and go the way of my Fathers. And seeing there his
brethren, Judah, Gad, and Aser, he said unto them; Lift me up, my brethren, that
I may tell you and my Children the things that I have hidden in my heart, for I
am henceforth drawing to my long home. Death is our long home.
Then standing up, he kissed them, and weeping said; Harken my brethren, and
you my children, give ear to the words of your father Ruben, mark what I give
in charge to you. Behold, I command you this day before the God of Heaven, that
ye walk not in the ignorance of youthfulness and fornication, wherein I
overshot my self, Fornication plagued. Genesis 15.
and defiled the bed of my Father Jacob. For I assure you that the Lord did
therefore strike me with a sore plague in my flanks the space of 7 months, and
Prayer and repen^^nce stays Go^^ wrath.
I had perished if my Father The blessing and prayer of a father to god for his
children of what benefit.
Jacob had not prayed to the Lord for me, because he was minded to have slain
me. I was thirty years old when I did this evil in the sight of the Lord,
and seven months was I sick to the death, In repentance the heart is to be
considered, not external action.
and with a free heart did I seven year penance before the Lord. I drank no
wine nor strong drink: no flesh came within my mouth, The eight Instruments
whereby man works and the effect of them.
I tasted not any fine bread: but I mourned for my sin, for it was great, and
there shall none such be done in Israel. And now my sons hear me, that I
may show you what I saw concerning the seven spirits of error in my repentance.
Belial gives seven spirits against a man, which are the welsprings of youthful
works: and seven spirits are given man in h^s creation, whereby all his works
are done. The first is the spirit of life, 1 Life.
wherewith is created his being. The second is the spirit of seeing, 2 Seeing.
wherewith comes lusting. The third, the spirit of hearing, 3. Hearing.
wherewith comes learning. The 4 th is the spirit of smelling, 4 Smelling.
wherewith comes delight, by drawing in of the air, and by breathing of it
out again. The fifth is the spirit of speech, 5. Speech.
wherewith knowledge is made. The sixth is the spirit of Tasting, 6 Tasting
whereof comes the feeding upon things that are to be eat^n and drunk, and
through them is engendered strength, because the substance of streng^h is in
meat. The seventh is the spirit of seed and generation, 7. Seed, and of what
property.
wherewith enters in the lust of pleasure.

For this cause it is the last of creation, and the first of youth, because it
is full of Ignorance, and Ignorance leads the younger sort as a blind body
into the ditch, and as an ore to the stall. Among all these is the eight
spirit, which is of sleep, 8 Sleep, and of what property. Eight spirits of
error, and of what property.
with whom is created the wasting away of Nature, and the Image of Death. With
these spirits, are mingled the spirits of error. Whereof the first is the
spirit of lechery, 1. Lechery.
who lies within the nature and senses of man. The second spirit of
unsatiablenes, 2. Gluttony.
lies in the belly. The third spirit of strife, 3. Envy.
lies in the Liver and in choler. The fourth spirit is of bravery and
gallantnes, 4. Bravery
that the party may seem comely by excess. The fifth is the spirit of Pride,
5. Pride of what property.
which moves a man to mind over great things, or to think well of himself.
The sixth is the spirit of lying or vain gloriousness, 6. Vaineglory, in what
it consists.
in boasting a man's self, and in desire to file his talk concerning his own
kindred and acquaintance. The seventh is the spirit of unrighteousness, 7.
Unrighteousness.
which stirs up the affections that a man should perform the lustful
pleasures of his heart. For unrighteousness works with all the other
spirits, by taking guile unto him. Unto all these spirits is matched the eight
spirit, 8. Wilful ignorance.
which is the spirit of sleep or sluggishnesse, in error and imagination, and
so the souls of young folks perish; because their minds are darkened and
hidden from the truth, Discommodities of ignorance.
and understand not the law of the Lord, neither obey the doctrine of their
Fathers, as befell to me in my youth. But now my children love the truth, and
that shall preserve you, Ringleaders to fornication
Harken to your Father Ruben, and let not your eyes 1. run a gazing after
women, 1. a greedy eye.
neither be ye 2. alone with a Woman that is married; 2. Close company with
women.
neither do ye seek about 3. what Women are doing For if I had not seen
Bilha bathing her self in a secret place, 3. B^sie questions.
I had not fallen into that great w^ckednes. But my mind ra^so so upon the
naked Woman, till it suffered me not to sleep till I had committed
abomination. For while my Father Jacob was away at his Father Isaacks, and I
in Gader hard by Euphrata, a house of Bethlehem, Bilha fell 4. drunken, 4.
Drunkenness.
and as she lay asleep uncovered in her chamber, I went in so, and seeing her
nakedness, wrought wickedness with her: and leaving her asleep went my way.
By and by an Angel of God bewrayed my wickedness to my father Jacob, Nothing so
secretly done, but it shall be open.
who coming home mourned for me, and touched not Bilha any more. Therefore
look not upon the beauty of women, A godly caveat.
neither muse you upon their doings, but walk ye with a single heart in the
fear of the Lord God, busying your selves about some work, and keeping your
selves occupied either in learning or about your flocks, Labor a preservative
from fornication.
until such time as God give you such wives as he lists, lest you do suffer
as I have done. I durst not look my Father in the face to his dying day, nor
speak to any of my brethren for shame. My conscience bi^eth me even yet still
for my sin. A guilty conscience is a great burden.
But my Father comforted me, and prayed for me unto the Lord, that his wrath
might pass away from me, as the Lord himself showed, unto me. Therefore from
that time forth, I was kept from sinning any more. And you my children
likewise, keep ye that I shall tell you, and you shall not sin. For
Fornication is the destruction of the Soul, The fruit of fornication.

1. Destruction of the soul.

2. Idolatry.

3. Shortness of life.

4 Ignominious shame.


separating it from God, and making it to draw unto Idols, because it leads
the mind and understanding into error, and brings men to their grave before
their time. For whoredom has undone many men: and although a man be ancient or
noble, yet does it shame him, and make him a laughing stock both before Belial,
and the sons of men. But Joseph, Joseph's chastity rewarded.
because he kept himself from all Women, and cleansed his thoughts from all
fornication, found favor both before the Lord and men. The Egyptian Woman did
much so him, by using the help of witches, and by offering him slaubar sauces:
but the purpose of his mind admitted no noisome desire. For this cause the God
of our fathers delivered him from all death, both seen and unseen. For if
fornication overruled not your mind, neither shall Belial prevail against
you. Women are hurtful things, my sons, Properties of unchaste women.
because that when they want power and strength against a man, they work
guilefully to draw him to them by trains: and whom they cannot overmatch in
strength, him they overcome by deceit. For the Angel of the Lord which taught
me, told me of them, that they be overmastered by the spirit of fornication
more than men be, and that they be ever practicing in their hearts against men,
first making their minds to err by decking of themselves; then shedding their
poison into them by sight, and finally catching them prisoners by their doings:
for a woman is notable to enforce a man. Therefore my sons fly fornication, A
note for garish attire, and wanton looks.
charge your wives and daughters that they trim not their heads, and will them
to chasten their looks: for every woman that deals deceitfully in these
things, is reserved to the punishment of the world to come. An example of this
mischief, Genesis 6.
For by such means were the watchers deceived before the flood: as soon as
they saw them, they fell in love one with another, and conceived a working in
their mind, and turned themselves into the shape of men, and appeared to them
in their companying with their husband: and the woman by conceiving the desire
of them in the imagination of their mind, brought forth Giants. For the
Watches appeared to them of height unto heaven. Teachers infectious company
corrupts the mind
Therefore keep your selves from fornication: and if ye intend to have a
clear mind, keep your selves from all Women, and forbid them likewise the
company of men, that they may have also clean minds. For although continual
companyings do not always work wickedness, yet breed they incurable stings
to them, and to us everlasting shame before Belial, because that fornication
has neither understanding nor godliness in it, Envy acco^panieth
fornication, shame follows.
and all enviousnes dwells in the desire thereof; and for that cause shall
ye envy the Children of Levi, and seek to be exalted above them, but ye
shall not be able to compass it: Gen 4.9.
for God will avenger them, and you shall die a dangerous death: for unto Levi
and Judah has the Lord given the sovereignty, and unto me, and Dan and Joseph,
has he granted to be Princes with them. Wherefore I charge you, hear Levi:
for he shall know the law of the Lord, and deal forth judgment, and offer
sacrifices, for all Israel, till the full time of Christ, He prophecieth of
Christ.
the chief^ priest because the Lord has spoken it. I charge you by the God of
heaven, that every of you do deal faithfully with his neighbor, Faithful
dealing with neighbors.
and flicke unto Levi in humbleness of heart, that ye may receive blessing at
his mouth: Genesis 5.49.
for he shall bless Israel and Juda. God has chosen Juda to be the King of
all people, wherefore worship you his seed, for he shall die for you in battles
both visible and invisible, and shall reign over you world without end.

Ruben having given his Children the foresaid charge, and blessed them, dyed:
Then they put him in a coffin, and carrying him out of Egypt, buried him at
Hebron, in the double Cave where his Fathers slept.

The Testament of SIMEON, made to his Children at his death, concerning Envy.
The heart in woman's mouth, the face,
the sword, the wolf, the cap:
All these paint out the envious race,
That run to their mishap.

The Testament of Simeon.
THe copy of Simeons words which he spoke unto his sons at his death in the
hundredth and twentieth year of his life, in the which Joseph died. For they
came to visit him upon his deathbed, and he sitting up, kissed them, saying.

Hearken my Children, hear me your father Simeon, whatsoever I have in my
heart. I am my father Jacobs second son, and my mother Lea named me Simeon,
because the Lord heard her prayer. Genesis 29.
I became very mighty. I went through with my doings, and was not afraid of
any thing. For my heart was stout, my mind unmovable, and my stomach
undiscourageable: for hardiness is given of the highest into men's souls and
bodies. Hardiness of whom it is.
In those days I envied Joseph, Genesis 37.
because my father loved him: I hardened my heart against him to kill him,
because the prince of error sending forth the spirit of envy, so blinded my
mind, that I could not take heed to spare my father Jacob. But his God, Man
purposes, God disposes.
and the God of his fathers sending his angel, did rid him out of my hands.
For while I went into Sichem to carry fare for our flocks, and Ruben into
Dotaim, where all our necessaries were laid up in store: our brother Juda sold
him unto the Ismaelites: and therefore when my brother was come again, he was
sorry, for he intended to have conveied him self again to our father. But I
was angry with Juda, for letting him go alive, and bare him grudge five
months after: howbeit God let me, and restrained the working of my hands;
for my right hand was half withered up for vii. days together. Then did I
perceive (my sons) that that befell me for Joseph's sake: whereupon I repented
soon after, and besought the Lord to restore my hand, and I would abstain from
all rancor, envy, and folly. For I knew I had conceived a wicked thought
against the Lord, and against my Father Jacob, Envy desc^ibed.
for my brother Joseph's sake whom I envied.

Now therefore my children keep your selves from the spirits of error and envy.
For envy overruleth the Blinds the mind.
mind of every Man, suffering hinders ^^stenance
him not to eat or drink in rest, or so do any good thing, and is always
egging him to Provokes murder.
slay the party whom he envieth, and Pineth a^ men's prosperity
pining away at his prosperity. Two years together I punished my soul with
fasting in the fear of the Lord. For I knew that the way to deliver me from
envy, A remedy against envy.
was the fear of the Lord. If a man fly unto the Lord, the wicked Spirit
flies from him, so as his mind becomes meek, and of spiteful he becomes
pitiful, bearing no grudge toward such as love him, and so his envy cease.
And because my father saw me sad, he asked me the cause of it. In whom I lied,
saying: I have a pain in my stomach for I was sor^iest of all my brothers, for
that I had been the cause of Joseph's selling into Egypt. And when I came into
Egypt, and was put inward by him as a s^te, then perceived I, Genesis 42.
that I was justly punished, and I was not sorry for it. But Joseph being a
good man, Joseph merciful to his brethren.
and having Gods spirit in him, and being full of pity and mercy, minded not
to do me any harm, but loved me as well as the residue of my brethren. Genesis
50.
Therefore my children keep your selves from all spite and envy, and walk in
singleness of mind, and good conscience, after the example of your fathers
brother, that God may give you grace, glory, and blessedness, upon your heads
as you see in him. Of all the days of his life, he did never cast us in the
teeth with it, but loved us as his own soul, and more than his own Children,
honoring us, and giving us riches, cattle and corn abundantly. You therefore
my children, love ye one another with a good heart, A sure token of good.

Properties of Envy.

1 Corruption of life.

2 Distemperature of body.

3 Small sleep.


and put from you the spirit of Envy; for it makes a Man's sou'e to grow
savage, marreth his body, breeds wrath and war in his thoughts, sets his
blood on fire, drives him out of his wits, and suffers no reason to bear
any sway or rule. Moreover, it takes away his sleep, disquieteth his mind,
and makes his body to tremble. For even in sleep some spice of imagined malice
gnaweth him, cumbring his soul with Spirits of mischief, making his body
ghastly, and his mind affrighted with trouble, and appearing unto men, as it
were with a pernicious Spirit, and pouring out of poison. Genesis 39.
Therefore was Joseph fair of face, A token of a quiet mind.
beautiful and comely to behold, because no wicked thing dwelt in him, for he
had a countenance clear from cumverance of mind. And now my children let your
hearts be meek before the Lord, and walk right before man: so shall ye find
favor both with God and man: and beware that ye fall not to whoredom. For
whoredom is the mother of all naughtines, Effects of whoredom.
separating a man from God, and sending him to Belial. For I have seen in
Enochs writings, Genesis 49.
that you and your children shall be corrupted with whoredom, and do Levi
wrong by the sword. But they shall not prevail against Levi, because he shall
fight the Lords battles, and take all your tents, and very few shall be divided
in Levi and Juda, Parents. teaching not their Children, are guilty. Commodities
of concord.
for he shall be your Captain, as my Father Jacob prophesied in his
blessings. Behold I tell you all these things aforehand, that I may be clear
from the sin of your souls. Now if you put from you all enviousnes, and all
stiffneckednes, all my bones shall flourish as a rose in Israel, and my flesh
as a Lil^ie in Jacob, and my savor shall be as the sent of Libanus, and my holy
ones shall be multiplied as the Cedars for ever, and their boughs shall spread
out in length for evermore. Then shall the seed of Canaan perish together with
all the remnant of Amalek. Exodus 17.
All the Cappadocians shall perish, and all the Sethians shall likewise be
destroyed. Then shall the land of Cham fail, and all the people go to wreck.
Then shall the Earth rest from trouble, and all men under Heaven from war. Then
shall Sem be glorified, when the great Lord God of Israel appears upon earth
as a man, to save Adam in him. Then shall the spirits of error he trodden under
foot, and men shall reign over hurtful fiends: Ioh. 1.
then shall I arise again in joy, and bless the highest in his wonderful
works: for God taking a body upon him, and eating with men, shall save men. And
now my children obey Levi, and you shall be delivered by Juda: The fruit of
obedience.
and advance not your selves above these two tribes, for of them two shall the
saving health of God spring unto us. Genesis 49.
For the Lord shall set up, of Levi the prince of priests, and of Juda the King
of Kings, God and man. So shall he save all the Gentiles, and the offspring of
Israel. For these things sake I charge you to command your children, A note for
Parents.
to keep these things thoroughout all their generations.

And Simeon making an end of these his sayings and commandments, to his
children, slept with his fathers, when as he was of the age of an hundred and
twenty years. And then they laid him in a coffin of wood that rotteth not,
that they might carry his bones again into Hebron: and they conveyed him
privily in the warte of the Egyptians. For the Egyptians kept the bones of
Joseph, in the Kings treasure. For their inchanters told them that whenever
Joseph's bones were carried away, there should be such a plague of miste and
darkness among the Egyptians, as one brother should not know another, no not
even by torchlight: and Symeons children bewailed there Father according to the
Law of mourning, and continued in Egypt till the day of their departing thence
under the hand of Moses.

The Testament of LEVI, made to his Childrena this death, concerning
Priesthood. Fly sin, be just, rage not, give light,
Ye Preachers of Gods Word:
For what else shows Sun and Moon,
Dame Venus, Wolf, and Sword?

(...)
THe Copy of Levies words, namely which he spoke to his children concerning
all the things which they should do; and which should happen unto them, until
the day of judgment. He was in health when he called them unto him, for he
knew before when he should die. So when they were come together he said unto
them.

I Levi was bred and borne in Charran, Levi h^s birth and count^ey, Genesis 34.
and afterward came with my father into Sichem. I was at that time but young,
about 20 years old, when I helped my brother Simeon to revenge our sister Dina
against Hemor. Now as we were ^eeding of our flocks in Abelmuel, the spirit of
the understanding of the Lord came upon me, and I saw all men undermining their
own ways, and how unrighteousnes had builded her self a fortress, and
wickedness sat upon the throne thereof. And I was sorry for mankind, and
besought the Lord to save them. Then there fell a sleep upon me, and I saw a
very high mountain: It was the mountain of Aspis in Abelmuel. And behold the
heavens opened, and the Angel of God said unto me, Levi, come hither; Christ
and went from the first heaven to the second, and there saw the water hanging
between the one and the other. And I saw the third heaven much brighter than
them both: for the height thereof was infinite. Christ.
And I said to the angel, what means this? And the Angel answered me,
Marvel not at these things, for thou shall see four heavens yet brighter, and
without comparison when thou come up to them. For thou shall stand by the
Lord, and be his Minister, and utter his secrets unto men, and preach of the
deliverer of Israel which is to come by thee and by Juda the Lord will appear
to m^n to save all mankind in them. Thy life shall depend upon the Lord, by him
shall thou have thy fields, vineyards, fruits, gold, and silver. Therefore
harken as touching the seven the day of judgment, to take vengeance upon the
spirits of error and Belial. In the fourth above these, are the up, the fire
quake, and all creatures be troubled at the fainting of the invisible Spirit,
and the spoiling of hell in the passion of the highest: therefore shall they be
condemned to punishment. The highest then has heard thy prayer to separate
thee from unrighteousness, A minister what he should be of himself not
righteous. Mat. 5. End of the priesthood prophesied. Christ his passion
prophesied.
and to make thee his son and servant, and a minister in his presence, a
lantern of knowledge to lighten Jacob thoroughly, and to be as a day sun
among the children of Israel, and unto thee and thy seed shall the power of
blessing be given, till God visit all nations in the bowels of the mercy of his
Son for ever. Nevertheless, thy sons shall lay their hands upon him to
crucify him, and for this cause is wisdom and understanding given unto thee,
to give thy children knowledge of him, because that if they bless him, they
shall be blessed, and they that curse him shall perish in his sight. And the
angel opened me the gates of heaven, and I saw the holy Temple, and the
highest sitting on the throne of glory, Christ.
and he said unto me: Levi I have given thee the blessings of the Priesthood,
till I come my self to dwell in the midst of Israel. Then the angel brought
me down to the earth, and gave me a shield and a sword, saying: Execute
vengeance in Sechem for Dina, and I will be with thee, for God has sent me.
Genesis 34.
And at that time I slew the sons of Hemor, as it is written in the tables of
Heaven. And I said unto him, Lord I pray thee tell me thy name, that I may call
upon thee in the time of my trouble. And he answered, Christ our redeemer.
I am an Angel which excuses Israel, that he might not be stricken for ever,
because all wicked spirits he in wait for him. Afterward being waked as it
were out of sleep, I blessed the most highest, and the angel that excuses the
offspring of Israel and all righteous men. And when I came to my Father, I found
an Aspe of b^^sse whereupon the hill took the name of (...) is, which is hard
by Gebat on the rig^^ side of Abila. And I laid up these sayings in my hear^
and I counseled my father an^ my brother Ruben to persuade the sons of Hem^r
to be circumcised, The zeal of a Minister.
because I was z^^lously grieved for the abomin^^ion which they had wrought in
Israel For first fall I killed Sichem, Genesis 34.
and then Simeon killed Hemor, and after this came our brethren, who smo^e the
City with the edge of the sword. Genesis 34.
When my father heard of it he was angry, because they had received
circumcision, Genesis 49.
and were killed afterward, and therefore he dealt otherwise with us in
blessing. The manner, not the doing rebuked.
For we sinned in doing it against his will, and he fell sick the same day.
But I knew then the Lord intended evil to the Sichemites, The sin of the
Sichemites.
because they had heretofore purposed to have done the like unto Sara, as they
did unto our sister Dina: Raped Dina.
but GOD let them. And they persecuted our father Abraham (as then a
stranger) and carried away his cattle, Persecuted strangers.
and furthermore did beat Jeblao very sore, who was born in his house. After
the same manner dealt they with all other strangers, Genesis 12.
taking away their wives from them by force, Ravished their wives.
and driving the men themselves out of their country. For which cause the wrath
of the Lord came upon them in the end. And I said to my father: Sir be not
offended, for God will bring the Canaanites to nothing before thee, and give
their land unto thee, and unto thy holy one after thee. For from henceforth
Sichem shall be called the city of fools, because that as men do scorn fools,
so have we scorned them for their working of folly in Israel in taking away our
sister for to defile her. Then came we into Bethel, Genesis 35.
and there when I had sacrificed threescore and ten days together, The
ministry described.
I saw the thing again as I had seen it before. And I saw seven men in white
raiment, saying unto me, Up, put on the Stole of Priesthood, the crown of
righteousness, Exodus 28. Levit. 8.
the Reasonal of understanding, the Robe of truth, the Brestplate of faith, the
Mitre of holiness, and the Ephod of Prophecy. And so every of them bringing
something with him, did put them upon me, saying, Be thou henceforth the Lords
Priest, thou and thy seed for evermore. The first of them anointed me with holy
Oil, and gave me the Scepter of judgment. The second washed me with clean
water, and fed me with Bread and Wine, that is to wit, with the most Holy of
Holies, and clothed me with a glorious Robe down to the ground. The third did
put upon me a Silken garment like to an Ephod. The fourth girded me with a
girdle like to Purple. The fifth gave unto me an Olive bough, very full of
fatness. The sixth did set the Mitre of Priesthood upon my head. The seventh
filled my hands with incense, to the intent I should execute the office of a
priest unto the Lord. And he said unto me, Levi, unto three principal things
is thy seed appointed of God: namely, to be a sign of the glorious Lord that
is to come, The three blessings of the family of Levi. Christ prophesied.
and he that believes shall be the first. The great lot shall not fall upon
him, the second shall be in Priesthood, and the third shall have a new name,
because a King shall rise up in Juda, and renew my priesthood, according unto
the figure of the Gentiles, among all nations. But the coming of him is
unutterable, as who shall be the Prophet of the highest, born of our Father
Abraham. All the pleasant things of Israel shall be given unto thee and to thy
seed, and you shall eat all that is fair to see to, A distributing excludes
the sole receiving of the Sacrament.
and thy seed shall distribute the Lords Table, and of them shall be high
Priests, Judges, and Scribes: for in their mouth shall the holy things be kept.
When I awoke, I perceived that this vision was like the other, and I laid it up
in mine heart, and showed it not unto any man living upon the earth. The first
two days I and Judah went to our grandfather Isaac, and he blessed me according
to all the sayings of the visions that I had seen, but he would not ^o with us
unto Bethel. But when we came to Bethel, my father Jacob saw in a vision
concerning me, that I should be their priest before the Lord. And he arose in
the morning, and tithed all things to the Lord by me. Then came we to Hebron to
dwell there, and by and by Isaac called me to expound the law of the Lord
acc^rding as Gods angel had showed it to me, Exodus 29 Levi. 1.2, 3.
and he taught me the law of Priesthood, Sacrifices, Burnt offerings,
^ir^^^ings, Free Will offerings, and offerings for health. Every day he taught
me understanding, and called upon me continu^lly before the Lord, saying, My
son, An exhortation for Ministers. A minister may be married. Levit. 21. He
must come with a pure mind to ex^cute his office. Levit. 1.2, 3, 4,
give no care to the spirit of fornication, for he will follow thee and defile
the holy things by thy seed. Therefore take thee a Wife in thy youth, such an
one that has not any blemish nor uncleanness, nor is of the kindred of the
Allophytes or of the Gentiles. And before thou enter into the Holies, wash and
likewise ere thou sacrificest, and also when thou have done, offer unto the
Lord the fruits of the twelve trees that are ever green, as my father Abraham
taught me to do: and the fruit of all clean beasts, and of clean souls offer
thou in sacrifice. Likewise offer up thy firstborn of all things, and the
first fruits of thy Vine, and sprinkle thy Sacrifices with Salt. Now therefore
my Sons, keep ye all the things that I command you: for whatsoever I have heard
of my Fathers, that have I told unto you. I am clear from all the wickedness
and sin which you shall commit to the end of the world. A comfort for godly
parents. Prophecy of the destruction of Israel.

The Realm plagued, whose Ministry is wicked.


Ye shall work wickedness against the Savior of the world, and ye shall seduce
Israel, stirring up much evil against him from the Lord, and dealing wickedly
with him, so that Jerusalem shall not continue, by reason of your naughtiness.
The Veil of the Temple shall be rent in sunder to discover your foulness, and
ye shall be scattered as prisoners amongst the Heathen, and be scorned, cursed,
and trodden under-foot. Nevertheless, the House which the Lord shall choose,
shall be called Jerusalem, as the Book of Enoch the righteous containneth.
Therefore when I was twenty and eight years old, Genesis 36. Levi his progeny.
I took a Wife, whose name was Melcha, and she conceived and bare me a son, and
called his name Gershon, because we were but strangers in our land: for Gershon
signifies vanishment. Now I knew of him that he should not be of the chief
degree. The second was Caath, who was born the five and thirtieth year. I saw a
vision Eastward, how all the congregation stood up aloft, and therefore I
called his name Caath, which signifies the beginning of greatness and
learning. The third was Merari, who was born in the five and fiftieth year of
my life: Exodus 6.
And because his mother was hardly delivered of him, she called him Merari,
which is as much to say, as my bitterness. And in the threescore and fourth
year of my life, was my daughter Jochebed born in E^^pt: and so was I honorable
among my ^rethren. Also my son Gershon took him a wife, which bare him Lybni,
and Schimi. The sons of Caath were Amram, Yshvar, Hebron and Uziel: and the
sons of Merari were Mahali and Mushi. An the fourscore and fourteenth year of
my life, Amram took unto wife my daughter Jochebed, because that be and she
were born both on one day. Levi made Priest at 18 years.
I was eight year old when I entered into the Land of Canaan, and eighteen year
old when I entered into the office of Priesthood. At eight and twenty years
(...) a Wife, Married at 28.
and at forty years ^ld I en^red into Egypt, and behold ye be ^ow my
childrens children in the third generation. Joseph died in the hundredth and
tenth year. And now my Children, I warn you fear the Lord your God with all
your heart, A note for Parents.
and walk plainly in all things, according to his Law. Moreover, bring up
your children in learning, that they may have understanding by reading the law
of God, without ceasing all their life long. For whosoever knows Gods law,
Blessings of the learned Minister.
shall be honored; and go wheresoever he will, be shall be no stranger* also
he shall have more friends than his forefathers had, (...) many shall be glad
to serve him, and (...) hear the law at his mouth. My sons, deal rightfully
upon earth, that you may find Heaven, and sow good things in your minds,
Wisdom a precious jewel.
that you may find them in your life. For if ye sow evil things, ye shall
find and reap all manner of combrance and trouble. Get ye wisdom i^ the
fear of God: for if captivity come and Cities and Countries be destroyed gold
and silver and all possessions perish but none can take away the wise man
wisdom, save only the blindness of ungodliness and sin. Sin blinds
wisdom.

Commodities of wisdom.


For his wisdom shall become a shield to him among his enemies, and make a
strange country to be as his own home, and cause him to find friendship in
the midst of his foes. If he teach and do such things, Christ his death, and
spitefulnes of the Jews, prophesied. Mat. 27.
he shall sit with Kings, as did our brother Joseph. And truly my Children, I
know by the writings of Enoch, that in the end ye shall do wickedly, laying
your hands most spitefully upon the Lord, and through you your brethren shall
be confounded, and made a scorning stock to all nations. Howbeit our Father
Israel is clear from the wickedness of the high Priests, which shall lay
hands upon the Savior of the World. The Heaven above the earth is clean, and
you be the lights of the heathen, as the Sun and the Moon. What shall all the
heathen do, if you be overdarkned with wickedness, Ministers what they are.
and bring cursednesse upon your country folk, for whose sakes the light of
the World is put into you, to inlighten all men withal? this light of the World
shall you most wilfully steal, and teach commandments contrary to the
righteousness of God. Ye shall purloin the Lords offering, The wicked Priesthood
and their misery described. 1 Samuel 2.
and filch away pieces of it. Before you do your sacrifices unto the Lord, ye
shall steal away the choicest things, and eat them disdainfully with Harlots,
teaching Commandments of covetousness. Ye shall defile married women, and
enforce maidens in Jerusalem, you shall match your selves with who^es, and
Harlots, you shall take the daughters of the Heathen unto wife, purifying them
with unrighteous purifying, and your mingling shall be like unto Sodom and
Gomorrha, and ye shall be swollen with wickedness in the Priesthood, insomuch
that you shall most disdainfully and spitefully laugh the holy things to scorn,
not only vaunting and boasting your selves against men, but also being puffed
and swollen up with pride against the Commandments of God. A Prophecy of their
destruction.
For this cause shall the Temple which the Lord shall have chosen, be
undoubtedly left desolate in uncleanness, and you your selves become captives
to all Nations, and be loathed and abhord among them, and receive endless
shame and confusion, through Gods righful judgment: and all that see you shall
shun you. And were it not for our Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, A prophecy
of Christ's persecution.

Mark the right portraiture of the Shaveling generation.


there shoulh not one of my seed be left upon earth. Furthermore I know by the
Book of Enoch, that ye shall go astray by the space of threescore and ten
wreks, and defile the Priesthood, stain the Sacrifices, destroy the Law,
despise the sayings of the Prophets, frowardly persecute righteous folk, hate
the godly, abhor the sayings of soothfast men, and call him Heretic that
goes about to renew the Law by the power of the Highest: Christ and his
members.
and in the end ye shall kill him out of hand, as you think; not knowing that
he shall rise again, and so shall ye receive his innocent blood wilfully upon
your own heads. For his sake shall your holy places be left desolate, which you
shall have defiled, even by utter forswearing, and your dwelling shall not be
clean, but you shall be accursed among the Heathen, and despair shall vex you,
till he visit you again, and mercifully receive you through faith and water.
Ergo faith and the holy Ghost justifies, and not merits.
And for so much as ye have heard of the threescore and ten weeks, hear ye also
of the Priesthood. For in every Jubilee shall be Priesthood. In the first
Jubilee the first anointed into the priesthood shall be great, and talk to
God, as to his father, and his priesthood shall be full of the fear of the
Lord, and in the day of his gladness he shall rise up unto the Israel every
man shall hate his neighbor. The beasts. After that the Lord has sent
vengeance upon them in the priesthood, Christ and his true mnistery described
then will God raise up a new Priest, unto whom all the Lords word shall be
opened: and he shall execute true judgment upon earth many days, and his
star shall arise in heaven. As a King shall he shed forth the light of
knowledge in the open sunshine of the day, and he shall be magnified over all
the World, and be received and shine as the Sun upon the earth, and drive away
all darkness, and there shall be peace upon all the earth. In his days the
heavens shall rejoice, Christ lighneth the world. Baptism of Christ prophesied.
the earth shall be glad, the clouds shall be merry, the knowledge of the Lord
shall be powered out upon the earth as the waters of the Seas, and the angels
of glory that are in the Lords presence shall rejoice in him. The heavens shall
be opened, and out of the temple of glory shall sanctification come upon him
with the Fathers voice, as from Abraham the Father of Isaac, and the glory of
the highest shall be spread out upon him, and the Spirit of understanding and
sanctification shall rest upon him, whereof he shall give abundantly and
mightily to his children in truth for evermore, and there shall none succeed
him from generation to generation, No Priesthood shall succeed Christ.

Priesthood of Christ how beneficial.


world without end. In his Priesthood all sin shall come to an end, and the
unrighteous shall cease from their naughtiness: but the righteous shall rest in
him, and he shall open the gates of Paradise, and stay the threatening sword
against Adam, and feed the Lambs with the fruit of life, and the spirit of
holiness shall be in them. He shall bind up Belial, and give his own children
power to tread down hurtful spirits, Christ our propitiator.

Christ gives power to his to tread down spirits.


and the Lord shall rejoice in his children, and accept them as his beloved for
evermore. Then shall Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob be glad, and then shall I and
all Saints rejoice. Now my children ye have heard all. Therefore choose un^o
you either light or darkness, either the Law of the Lord, or the works of
Belial; and we answered our Father, saying: We will walk before the Lord
according to his law. And our Father said, the Lord is witness, and his Angels
are witnesses, and I am a witness, and you your selves are witnesses of the
words of my mouth. And when we had answered, We will be witnesses, Levi rested
with this charge given unto his children.

And stretched out his feet, and was put to his fathers, when he had lived a
hundred and seven and thirty years, and they laid him in a coffin, and buried
him afterward in Hebron, besides Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

The Testament of JVDA made to his Children at his death, concerning
valiantness, covetousness and fornication. Lo here the blessed Princely state
Of Juda suffering not his mate.
The Scepter, Lion, Purse and Crown
Betoken glory and renown.

The Testament of Judah.
THe Copy of all the sayings of Juda, which he spoke unto his Children at the
time of his death: when they were come together before him, he said unto them.

I was my fathers fourth son, Juda his exhortation.

The duty of children.


and my mother called me Juda, saying, I thank the Lord for that he has given
me a fourth son. I was swift of foot and painful in my youth, and obeyed my
Father in all things, and blessed my mother and my mothers sisters. And when I
came unto man's estate, Valiantnes of Juda: the gift of God.
my father Jacob prayed over me, saying: Thou shall be a King and prosperous in
all things. Behold, God gave me grace in all my works both abroad, and at
home. Upon a time I saw a Hind, The manhood of Juda.
and taking him by the pawe overthrew him, and rent asunder all wild beasts
that turned upon me, as if I had Hebron a bastard Lion leapt upon a Dog, and I
catching him by the tail, flung him away by and by, and be Gare a wild Bull
was feeding in the fields, and I took him by the horns, and swinged Chananites
armed, upon our flock, and much people with them, and I alone running unto the
flock, stepped to King Sur, and striking up his legs, overthrew him, and so slew
him. Thaphes, sitting on his Horse, and so scatterd Achor a Giant on
Horseback, shooting forward and backward: and throwing a stone of threescore
pound weight upon his Horse I overthrew him and killed him, and fighting two
hours with Achor, at length I c^ave his shield, and maimed his feet, and
finally slew him. As I was pulling off his brestplate, behold eight of his
friends assailed me, whereupon I filled my hands with stones, and flinging them
at them with a sting, slew four of them, and put the other four to flight.
Also our Father Jacob slew the Giant Beelisa King of all the Kings, The
valiantnes of Jacob.
who was mighty and huge, of the stature of twelve cubits. By reason whereof
fear fell upon them, and they left their fighting against us. For this cause
my father was careful of me when I was in battle with my brethren. He saw
in a vision concerning me, that the Angel of strength followed me every
where, to the intent I should not be evercome. The second handsell was a
greater battle to us, then that which we had at Sichem: in so much that in
fighting valiantly with my Brethren, I chased a thousand men, and slew of them
two hundredth persons and four of their Kings, and following after them, skaled
the walls of their city, and there slew two Kings more, and so we delivered
Hebron, and led them all away as prisoners. Then the next day we went to a
strong walled, and unapprochable city, called Areca, which threatened to kill
us. Therefore I and Gad went to the east side of the city, and Ruben and Levi
unto the West and South side. They that stood upon the walls supposing there had
been no mo but Gad and I, did set fire upon us while in the mean time my
brother that lay in stale, brake out upon the other two sides, and skaling the
walls with ladders, entered the city ere our enemies wist it, and so we won it
by the Sword, and set fire upon the Lower, and burnt it up with Thaffie lay in
wait for our prey, and took it with our children. But we followed them to
Thaffie and slew them, and buried their City, spoiling all that Gureba, we fell
upon the men of Jobel, that came against us in battle, and slew and spoiled
both them, and also their accomplices, that came to their aid from Selon, so as
we gave them no respite to return again upon us. The fifth day after, there
came men from Machir to fetch away our prisoners, whom we met in battle
notwithstanding that they were a mighty boast, and slew them before they could
get up to the place that they came Simeon coasting to the back side of the
town, got unto the higher places, and destroyed the whole city. The next day
it was told us that the cities of two Kings came against us with a huge Host.
I therefore and Dan faining our selves to be Amorrheans and Fellows Thamua,
which Dan reskued me. Therefore we came running upon them in a rage, and put
them all to flight: and they passing by another way, went and sued humbly unto
my Father, who made a Covenant with them, so as we did them not any more harm,
but received them into league with us, and delivered them all their prisoners.
Then builded I Chamma, and my father builded Rambahel. Twenty years old was I
when this war was made, and the Chanaanites were afraid of me, and my
Brethren. I had much cattle, and my chief heardsman was Yran of Odellam, in
whose company I saw Bersa King of Odellam who made us a feast, and with much
intreatance gave me his daughter Bethsue to wife, which brought me forth Er,
Anan, and Sylon, of which three God slew two Childlesse. For Sylon lived, of
whom some of you be the Children. My Father and we made eighteen years peace,
with his brother Esau and his children. When the eighteen years were past
after our coming out of Mesopotamia, in the fortieth year of my life Esau our
Fathers brother came upon us with a great strong Host, and was slain by the
Bow of Jacob, and conveyed away dead unto Mount Seir. We also followed upon
the Children of Esau, but his city was very strong with high Walls, and gates
of iron and brass, so as we could not enter into it, howbeit we did shut them
up within it, and besieged it. Now when they showed not themselves abroad in
twenty days together, I put my Helmet upon my head, and in fight of them all
set up a ladder, and skaling the walls, slew four of their noble men with a
stone of the weight of three talents. The next day Ruben and Gad went and slew
threescore others. Then they offered peace, and we by our Fathers advise,
received them into tribute. And they gave us two hundred quarters of corn,
five hundredth bates of oil, and a thousand and five hundred measures of Wine,
until we went down into Egypt. After this my Son Er married Thamar, of
Mesopotamia, the Daughter of Aram. Er and Anan slain for not using the benefit
of lawful marriage.
Now Er was a very wicked Impe, and doubted much of Thamar, because she was
not of the land of Chanaan. Therefore the Angel of the Lord slew him the third
night after his marriage, when he had not yet accompanied with her, by reason of
his mothers subtletie, and so died in his naughtiness, for she was loath that
he should have had any children by her.

When Anan was marriageable, I gave Thamar unto him, and he likewise of a
spite accompanied not with her, notwithstanding that he lived a full year with
her, and when I threatened him, then he companied with her, but yet by his
mothers commandment he let his seed fall upon the ground, and so also he died
in his wickedness. I minded to have given her unto Sylon also, but my wife
Bethsue would not suffer me. For she spited Thamar because she was not of the
daughters of Chanaan as her self was. Now I knew, the offspring of Chanaan was
mischievous, but yet did youthful fancy blind my heart. Fornication a fruit
of drunkenness.
And as I beheld her pouring out wine, I was deceived with drunkenness, and
fell in love with her.

Upon a time while I was away, she married Sylon to a woman of Chanaan: Genesis 38.
which her deed when I understood, I cursed her in the bitterness of my soul,
and so she died in the wickedness of her sons. A two years after these things,
as I went to sheare my sheep, An intolerable custom of the Amorites.
Thamar decking herself live a Bride, sat her down at the gate of the City.
For it was the custom of the Amorites, that their brides do set them selves
forth at the gates of their cities, Apparel, Beauty, and wine provokes
whoredom.
by the space of 7 da^es together, to be abused by fornication. I therefore
being drunken with the waters of Horek, knew her not, by reason of wine,
insomuch that her beauty together with the attire in decking of her self
deceived me, and thereupon turning aside unto her, I said, shall I come in
unto thee? and she answered, what will thou give me? and I gave her my staff,
and my Gyrdle, Fornication is chargeable.
and the Crown of my kingdom. Upon my companying with her, she conceived:
afterward I not knowing my self to have been the doer thereof, would have put
her to death for it. But she having kept my pledges in store, shamed me with
them: and when I had heard my own words of her in secret, which I had spoken
to her when I lay with her in my drunkenness, Happy are they that can cease from
doing ill.
I could not put her to death because it was of the Lords doing, but I touched
her not any more to my dying day. For when I had done this abomination in
Israel, lest she might work wyles with me, I said I would fetch my pledges
again of her: but when I enquired for her, the townsmen said there was no bride
in the city, because she came from another place, and had sit there but a
little while, and she deemed that no man knew of my going in unto her.
Afterward we came into Egypt to Joseph, because of the dearth. Six and forty
years old was I when we came hither, and threescore and thirteen years have I
lived here. And now my Sons hear me your father in all things that I charge
you withal, and keep you all my sayings, in doing all manner of Righteousness
before the Lord, and in obeying the commandments of the Lord God, and walk
not after your own lusts, nor after conceits of your own minds, It is sinful
to any man to glory in his felicity
in the pride of your hearts, neither glory in the works of the strength of
your youth, because it is sinful in the sight of the Lord. For in as much as I
gloried in my battles, and upbraided my brother Ruben with Bilha my fathers
Wife, See what it is to upbraid men their vice.
because no face of any beautiful woman had yet deceived me, therefore the
spirit of fondness and fornication fell upon me, so that I was overtak^n both
in Bethuse the Chanaanite, and in Thamar the Wife of my own sons. And I said
unto my father in Law, I have made my father privy to the matter, and
therefore I will take thy daughter to my wife. Hereupon he showed me an
infinite mass of gold in his daughters be^alf (for he was ^ king) and decking
her with Gold and Pearl, willed her to pour out wine to us at the Supper. The
beauty of the woman, and the wine together dazzled mine eyes, and voluptuousnes
did so darken mine understanding, that I fell in love with her, Children that
marry without consent of parents plagued. Discommodities of wine.

1. Blinds understanding.

2. Servant of lechery.


and brake the commandment of God, and of my fathers, and took her to wife.
According to the intent of my heart, the Lord paid me home for it: for I had
no joy of the children that I had by her. Now therefore my Children be not
drunken with wine, for wine turns a Man's understanding away from the truth,
and kindles in him the fire of lust, lead^ng his eyes into error, insomuch as
wine is a servant to the spirit of lechery, to further the feeding of the mind
with voluptuousness, and so these twain bereave a man of all power. Fruit of
drunkenness. A drunken man is shameless
For if a man drink wine till he be drunken, he traineth his mind unto the
filthy thoughts of lechery, and kindles the body to carnal copulation. And if
desired occasion serve, sin is wrought without shame. Such a thing is wine my
sons, for a drunken man is ashamed of nothing. Behold, it made both me and
Thamar do amiss, so as I blushed not at the multitude in the city, Example
but went aside unto her in the sight of all men, and committed a great sin
in discovering the unclean privities of my own sons. Through drinking of wine
I was not ashamed to break Gods Commandment, in taking a woman of Chanaan to
Wife. Wherefore my sons, he that drinks wine had need of discretion, and
the discretion that every man ought to use in drinking of wine is, Who ought to
drink wine.
that he be ashamed to over-drink himself. For if he pass that bond, he
forgoeth his understanding, and cleaves to the spirit of error, which causes
the drunken man to talk filthily, Properties of a drunken man is filthy talk
and wicked deeds.

Discommoditie: of whoredom.


and to do wickedly, and not to be ashamed, but to boast of his lewdnes,
thinking it to be good. He that commits whoredom is bereft of his liberty
and becomes a bond-slave of lechery, and cannot get out of it again, after
the same manner that I was made naked. For I gave over my staff, that is to
say, the stay of my tribe; and my girdle, that is, my power: and my crown, that
is, the glory of my kingdom. H^wbeit repenting these things, I forbear all
wine and flesh unto mine old age, and was utterly unacquainted with all mirth
And the Angel of God showed me that women should from time to time over-master
all men, as well Kings as captives, and bereave great men of their glory. For
the poverty of a poor man is a greater fence to him than is the strength of a
mighty man. Four noisome Spirits follow drunke^nes

1. Concupiscence.

2. Heart burning.

3. Lechery

4. Covetousnes.


Therefore my children keep measure in drinking, for there are in it four
noisome spirits, that is to wit, of concupisence, of heart burning, of lechery,
and of filthy gain. If ye drink wine merrily in the fear of the Lord with
shamefastnes, ye shall live: But if ye drink without regard of shame and fear
of God, then turns it to drunkenness, and dishonesty steals in. Astibnenc
from wine what commodity it has.

2. It slandreth not.

2. It quarreleth not, nor raileth.

3 It breaks not the commandments.

4. It perishes not before the time.


And if ye drink none of all, then shall ye not sin, neither in slanderous
words, nor in quarrelling, nor in railing, nor in breach of Gods commandments,
neither shall ye perish before your time. For wine discloseth the secrets of
God and man unto Strangers, like as I bewrayed the secrets of God and of my
Father Jacob to Bethsue the Chanaanite, which God has forbidden to be
disclosed. Also wine is a cause of war and sedition. Moreover I charge you my
sons that you love not money, ne look upon the beauty of women, for money and
womanly beauty made me to overshoote shoot my self in Bethuse the Chanaanite.
And I am sure that these two things shall corrupt mine offspring, and mar the
wise men of my lineage, and hurt the kingdom of Juda, Obedience to parents how
profitable.
which God has given me for obeying my Father, for I never repined at my
father Jacobs commandments, but did whatsoever be willed me. And Abraham the
Father of my fathers blessed me to fight for Israel, and so did Isaac bless me
likewise: and I know that the kingdom shall stand by me, but I have read in
the boks of Enoch the righteous, that ye shall work wickedness in the latter
days. The discommodites of covetousness.
Therefore my Children keep your selves from lechery and covetousnes, and give
ear unto your father Juda: for those things withdraw men from Gods law, and
blind the understanding of their minds, and teach them Fill of Pride.
pride, neither suffer they any man to show mercy Merciles
to his neighbor; they bereave his soul Disquiets the soul.
of all good things, and hold it down in pains and sorrows, also they
disappoint him of his rest and sleep Consumes the body.
and consume his flesh. F^nally, Contemnes Gods holy word.
they hinder Gods sacrifices, neglect his blessings, disobey the speaking of
the Prophets, and are offended at the word of godliness: for these two
passions are contrary to the commandments of God. He that serves them cannot
obey God, because they dazell men's minds, The covetous and lecherous cannot
fear God. Idolatry the fruit of covetousness.
and walk abroad as well a nights as of days. My children, covetousness
leads men to Idolatry. For through doting upon money, he calls them gods
which are not, and compels the infected party to grow most vilely out of
kind. For moneys sake I lost my children, and had not the penance of the
flesh, and the humbling of my soul, and had not the prayers of my father Jacob
been, I had died as now without Children. But the God of my fathers being
merciful, and full of pity and compassion, knew that I sinned through
ignorance. For the prince of error had blinded me, and I overshot my self as
a fleshly man, and being corrupted with sin, knew not mine own infirmity,
but thought my self to be invincible. Know ye therefore my sons, that two
spirits do wait upon a man: Two Spirits wait upon a man.
that is to wit, the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error, and in the
midst between them is set the Spirit of understanding of the mind, whose
property is to incline which way it lists: the things that belong both to
truth and untruth, are written in the breast of man, and God knows every whit
of it, and none of all men's works can be hidden at any time from him, because
all the privities and secrets of men's hearts are written before the Lord, and
the spirit of truth bears witness of all things and accuses all, and he
that sins has a burning in his heart, and cannot lift up his face to his
Judge. And now my children love ye Levi, that ye may abide, and exalt not your
selve^ above him, lest ye perish. The Lord has given unto me the Kingdom,
and unto him the Priesthood, and has pu^ the Kingdom In respect that heavenly
things are better then earthly, not in external rule and government.
under the Priesthood Unto Levi is given the Priesthood, an^ unto Juda the
Kingdom, and God hat^ put the kingdom under the Priesthood Unto me he has
given the things tha^ are upon the Earth, and unto Ergo iure divino, the Pope
can challenge no earthly power.
him the things that are in heaven. As far as the Heaven surmounteth the
earth, so far^ does Not in power and rule, but in the excel^e^cy of the office
appertaining to God.
the priesthood surmount the kingdom that is upon the earth. For the Lo^^ has
chosen him above me to approach unto him, and to eat of his table, and to tak^
the firstlings of the children of Israel, and thou shall be as a Sea to him.
For like as in the Sea both the righteous and unrighteous are in danger, and
the one sort are caught Prisoners, and the other sort are enriched: even so
shall all kind of men be hazarded in thee, some sinking in misery, and other
some floting in prosperity. For in thee shall reign great whales, Tyrants and
wicked men described and prophesied.
which shall swallow up men as fishes, and bring free men's sons and daughters
into bondage. They shall take away Men's Houses, Lands, Cattle, and money by
force, and wrongfully they shall feed ravens and other greedy fowls with many
folks flesh, and they shall prosper and flourish in naughtiness, and be
exalted through covetousness, and there shall be false Prophets like storms,
which shall persecute all righteous men. Mutual discord is a plague for
tyrants.
But the Lord shall set them together by the ears among themselves, and there
shall be continual wars in Israel, and my kingdom shall be knit up in
strangers, till the savior of Israel come, Christ prophesied.
even till the coming of the God of righteousness, that Jacob and all nations
may rest in peace, and he shall maintain my kingdom in peace for ever. For the
Lord has sworn to me, that the kingdom of me and of my seed, shall never
fail world without end. But I am very sorry my Children, Note this ye that
seek after witches for lost goods.
for the filthiness, and treachery, and idolatry which ye shall work against
the Kingdom, by following Witches and Conjurers, by vowing your Daughters to
deceitful Devils, by making them inchanters, The misery of Jerusalem.
charmers, and Strumpets, and by intermedling your selves with the
abominations of the heathen, for the which things the Lord shall bring upon
you Famine
famine, and Pestilence.
pestilence, death and Death and Sword.
sword, wrathful Besiegement.
besiegement, and Devouring dogs.
devouring dogs, reproach Daily reproach.
of friends and foes, loss and Loss and pain of eyes.
pain of eyes, slaughter Slaughter of children.
of your children, ravishings Ravishing of Wives.
of Wives, spoil of your goods, the burning Burning of the Temple.
of your temple, the desolation Desolation of the country.
of your country, and the Captivity. A remedy for these. First, Repentance.
Obedience
captivity of your selves among all nations, which shall geld some of you, to
make Eunuchs for their wives, but if ye return to the Lord with hearty
repentance and humility, and walk in all the commandments of God, he will
visit you with mercy, and lovinglie deliver you from the bondage of your
enemies. After this shall rise among you a Star out of Jacob, and a man shall
spring out of my seed, which shall walk as the Day-sun of righteousness among
the children of men, in peace and meekness, and righteousness, and no sin
shall be found in him. The heavens shall open upon him, to pour out the spirit
of blessedness upon him from the Father, and he shall shed out the spirit of
grace upon you, and you shall be his children in truth, walking in his flest
and last Commandments. This is the offspring of the most high God, and the
wellspring of life to all flesh. Then shall the Scepter of my Kingdom shine
bright, and out of your root shall spring the vessel of planting, in whom shall
grow up the Rod of righteousness unto the Gentiles, The most heavenly benefit
of Christ his second coming.
to judge and save all such as call upon him. After this shall Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob rise up again to life, and I and the Princes my brethren, shall be
your Scepter in Israel: Levi first, I next, Joseph the third, Benjamin the
fourth, Simeon the fifth, Isachar the sixth, and so all the rest. And the Lord
has blessed us. Levi shall be the messenger of my presence, Simeon the power
of my glory, Reuben Heaven, Issachar the earth, Zabulon the Sea, Joseph the
Mountains, Benjamin the Tabernacle, Dan the lights, Neptalim the Dainties, Gad
the Day-sunne, and Aser an Olive Tree. A sweet comfort for the godly Christian.
Matthew. 5.
And there shall be one people of the Lord, and one tongue, and there shall be
no more the false spirit of Belial, because he shall be cast into endless
fire. They that are buried in sorrow, shall rise in joy: Note.
and they that were poor for the Lords sake, shall be made rich. They that
suffered penury, shall have plenty: and they that were weak, The blessed estate
of the elect after death.
shall be made strong, they that died for the Lords sake, shall wake up unto
life, and run in Jacob: yea they shall run skipping and leaping, and they shall
fly as Eagles for joy. But the ungodly shall be sorrowful, and the sinners
shall mourn, and all people shall glorify the Lord for ever. Therefore my
children, keep all the law of the Lord, for there is hope for all such as walk
aright. A hundred and nineteen years old do and die in your sight. Let none of
you bury me in costly Clothes, nor rip my belly, for so will Rulers do, but
carry me back into Hebron with you. With these words Juda dyed: and his
Children doing in all things as he commanded them, buried him with his Fathers
in Hebron.

The Testament of ISACHAR, made to his Children at his death, concerning a
single heart. Learn here a simple life,
Not void of pain, but strife:
The Sithe, the Spade, the Ass,
Set forth what man he was.

The Testament of Isachar.
THE Copy of Isachars words. He calling his children about him, said unto
them, The exhortation.
Ye children of Isachar hear your Father, and hearken to the words of the
beloved of the LORD. I am Jacobs fifth son in the reward of mandrake. For Ruben
brought Mandrakes out of the field, and Rachel meeting him, Genesis 30.
took them of him. Thereat Ruben wept, and at his noise my mother Lea came out.
Now the Mandrakes were sweet sented Apples, which the Land of Aram brings
forth in high countries, by the water valleys. And Rachel said, I will not give
thee these apples, because they shall help me to children. Now there were two
of these apples: and Lea said, does it not suffice thee, that thou have gotten
away the husband of my virginity, but that thou will have this al^o? She
answered, Let Jacob lie with thee to night, for thy sons Mandragoras. Lea said
unto her, Do not boast nor brag: for Jacob is mine, and I am the wife of his
youth. And Rachel answered, How so? was he not first handfasted unto me, and
served he not our Father fourteen years for me? What shall I do to thee? For
many are the wiles and policies of men, and guile goes forward upon earth. If
it had been otherwise, thou should not have seen Jacob in the face at this
day. For thou art not his wife, but were guilefully put to him in my stead. My
father deceived me, and conveying me away that night, suffered me not to see
him. For had I been there, this had not come to pass. Wherefore take the one
Mandrake, and in lieu of the other, I grant thee him for one night: and Jacob
knew Lea, who conceiving bare me, and called my name Issachar, because of the
hire. Then an Angel of the Lord appeared unto Jacob, and said that Rachel
should bear but two sons, because she had forsaken the company of her
husband, and chosen continency: and if my mother Lea had not given the two
Apples for his company, she should have born eight children, whereas by reason
of that she bare but six, Rachel two, and because God visited her in the
Mandrakes. For he knew that she greatly desired to company with Jacob for
Issues sake, and not for lust of pleasure: for she laid up the Mandrake, and
delivered it unto Jacob the next day, and therefore God heard Rachel in the
Mandrakes, because that although she had a mind^ unto them, yet she ate them
not, but offered them to the Priest of the most High, which was in those days,
and laid them up in the Lords House. Therefore my Children, The godly life of
Issachar, and his true dealing.
when I came unto man's state, I walked with an upright heart, and became
Bailiff of Husbandry unto my fathers, and brought them the fruits of their
Lands in their due seasons, An example for godly children.
and my father blessed me, when he saw how I walked plainly and simply. A
pattern of a virtuous life.
I was no busy body in my doings, I was not hurtful nor spiteful to my
neighbor, I rayled not upon any man, neither dispraysed I the life of any,
that walked in singleness of mind. By reason hereof, when I was thirty years
old I took a Wife, because labor had consumed my strength. I never knew the
pleasures of a woman through wantonness, but my labor made me to sleep
soundly, and my father did always rejoice of my simplicity. For whatsoever
pains I took, first of all I offered all the first fruits and the first
engendered cattle unto the Lord by the Priest, and then gave my Father the rest,
and the Lord doubled his benefits in my hands. Yea, and Jacob himself perceived
well that God wrought with my plain dealing. For unto every poor man, and to
every man in adversity, gave I of the fruits of the earth with a single heart.
And now my children hearken and walk in singleness of mind, for I know that
the Lord is very well pleased with it. With a plain dealing man the Lord is
pleased.
The single-hearted man coveteth not gold, undermineth not his neighbor,
lusts not after diversity of meats, desires not shift of apparel, nor
behighteth himself long time, but only has an eye to Gods will, and the
spirits of error can do nothing against him. A single-hearted man described,
who and what he is.
For he cannot skill to entertain a fair woman, lest he should defile his own
mind: wrath overmastereth not his wit, envy melts not his soul, neither
does his mind run covetously upon gain. For he leads an upright life, and
beholds all things with a single eye, excluding all hurtfulnesse of worldly
error, lest he should oversee any of the Commandments of God. Therefore, my
Children, keep Gods Law, and hold fast plainness: walk on in innocence, and be
not too inquisitive into Gods secrets, or of your neighbors doings, Learn you
children of the earth.
but love God and your neighbor: pity the poor and weak, bow down your back
to Husbandry, and labor in rilling of the Earth in all manner of Husbandry,
offering presents to the Lord with thanksgiving, who blessed the earth with
increase, and a new spring of fruits, as he blessed all holy men from Abel to
this day: for there is none other portion given thee, than of the fatness of
the Earth, whose fruits come by pains taking: for our Father Jacob blessed me
with the benefits of the Earth, and the firstlings of fruits. Levi and Juda are
glorified of the Lord among the Children of Jacob. For God has planted himself
in them, giving to the one the Priesthood, and to the other the Kingdom.
Obedience and plain dealing commended.
Therefore obey ye them, and walk plainly as our Father Jacob did. For unto Gad
it is given to destroy the temptations of Israel. My Children, I know that in
the last days, your Children shall forsake plainness, and cleave to
covetousness, let go innocence, and follow lewdness, leave Gods
Commandments, and stick unto Belial, give over husbandry, A Plague for
disobedience.
and gad after wicked devices, and therefore shall they be scattered amongst the
heathen, and become bondslaves to their enemies.

Wherefore warn your Children of it, that if they sin, they may return quickly
to the Lord, for he is merciful, and will deliver them and bring them home
again into their own Land. I am now an hundred and two and twenty years old,
and I know not any deadly sin upon me. I have not known any woman but my
Wife, The innocence of Issachar. A godly pattern to follow.
neither have I committed whoredom in the lust of mine eyes. I have not drunk
wine unto drunkenness, neither have I coveted any pleasant things of my
neighbors. There has been no guile in my heart, neither has there any lying
gone out of my lips. I have been sorry with every man that was in heaviness,
Hearken you Landlords.
and given my bread to the poor. Learn you wealthy of the earth.
I have not eaten my meat alone, nor removed the bounds and buttels of lands. I
have been pitiful all the days of my life, and dealt truly in all cases. I
have loved the Lord with all my strength, and all men as mine own children. My
sons, if you also do the like, all the spirits of Belial will fly from you,
and nothing that mischievous men can do against you, shall have power over
you. You shall bring all wild Beasts into subjection to you, because ye have
the Lord of Heaven with you, if ye walk with him in singleness of heart. And
he willed them to carry his body into Hebron, and to bury him there in the cave
with his fathers. Thus he stretched out his feet, and died in a good age,
having all his limbs strong and sound, and slept the sleep of all the world.

The Testament of ZABULON, made to his Children at his death, concerning
compassion and mercy. The poor man at home Z^bulon fed,
The stranger unknown also clothed:
When sh^p did sail but gave him wit to govern it.
God did not fail, but gave him wit to govern it.

The Testament of Zabulon.
THE charge that Zabulon gave to his Children, in the hundred and fourteenth
year of his life, His exhortation, when it was given. Genesis 30.
two and thirty years after the decease of Joseph. And he says unto them, Hear
ye me, ye sons of Zabulon, a good gift to my Father and Mother. For when I was
begotten, my Father was greatly increased in Sheep and Cattle, by reason of the
good luck that he had through the straked rods. I wist not, my Children, I wist
not that I sinned in those days. For I considered not that I dealt wickedly
through ignorance in Joseph's case: and moreover concealed it with my brothers
from our Father, howbeit that I wept much for it in secret: for I was sore
afraid of my Brothers, because they had all conspired together to kill him with
the sword that should bewray that secret. Nevertheless when they would have
killed him, The love of Zabulon towar^ Joseph.
I besought them most earnestly with tears, that they would not do such
wickedness. For Simeon and Gad came upon Joseph to have killed him, and Joseph
falling upon his knees, said unto them, Have pity upon me my Brethren, have
pity upon the bowels of our Father Jacob. A good conscience refuses no trial.
Love between brethren is as a precious ointment.
Lay not your hands upon me to shed innocent blood, for I have not sinned
against you. If I have done amiss, nurture me with chastisement, but lay not
your hands upon me, for our Father Jacobs sake. Upon his saying of these words,
I being moved with compassion came and wept, and my heart melted within me, and
all the substance of my bowels were loosned upon my soul. Mutual love is
mutual safety.
Also Joseph wept, and I with him, and my heart trembled and the joints of my
body quaked, and I was not able to stand. And when he saw me weeping with him,
and them coming toward him to kill him, he fled behind me, and besought them
to take pity of him. Then Ruben stepping in, said: My brethren, let us not kill
him, but let us cast him into the dry pit, that our Fathers dug and found
no water in it. GOD suffered not any water to spring up in it, because it
should-be a safeguard for Joseph. And so God did, till they sold him to the
Ismaelites. Thus gave I no consent to the sin against Joseph: but Simeon,
Gad, and the other of my brothers taking money for Joseph, A figure of the
treachery and covetousness of Judas, read Matthew. 27.
bought thooes with it, for themselves, their Wives, and their Children,
saying: Let us not eat it, because it is the price of our Brothers blood,; but
let us tread and trample it under our feet, because he said, he should reign
over us, and we shall see what his dreams will come unto. Therefore in the
Scepter of Enochs Law, it is written of him that would not raise up seed to his
brother, I have loosed Joseph's Shoe. For when we came out of Egypt the young
men unbuckled Joseph's shoes at the Gate, and so we worshipped Joseph, as if it
had been Pharaoh: and not only worshipped him, but also kneeled down before him
with blushing, and so were we put to shame before the Egyptians, for afterward
the Egyptians heard of all the ill that we had offered and done to Joseph.
After the laying of him in the pit, my brothers set meat upon the Table to eat.
But I mourning for Joseph did taste no meat by the space of two days and two
nights together, neither would Juda eat with them, Juda careful for his
Brother.
but had an eye unto the pit, because he feared lest Simeon and Gad should step
there and kill him: When they saw that I ate nothing, they set me to keep him
till he was sold. He was in the Pit three days and three nights, without
repast, yet he was sold. Reuben hearing that he was sold in his absence, Reuben
his love toward Joseph.
rent his garments, and wept, saying, How shall I look my Father Jacob in the
face? And therewithal taking money, he ran after the Merchantmen: but he could
not find them; for they had left the Kings highway, and were gone away apace
by by-lanes, and Ruben ate no meat that day. Dan therefore coming unto him,
said, Weep not, neither be sad for the Boy: for I wot what we may say unto our
Father Jacob. Mark the wicked policy of the ungodly.
We will kill a Kid, and stain Joseph's coat with the blood of it, and say unto
him, See if this be thy Sons coat or no. For when they intended to sell Joseph,
they stripped him out of our Fathers coat, and put upon him an old coat of a
bond-servant, Symeon had gotten his coat, and would not deliver it us, but was
minded to have cut it in pieces with his sword: and he was angry that he was
yet alive, and that he had not slain him. Then all my brethren rising up
together, said unto him: Why should thou not give it us, seeing that thou
only art the worker of this mischief in Israel? Hereupon he gave it them, and
they did as Dan had counseled. Zabulon his exhortation.
And now my children I warn you keep the Lords commandments, be merciful to
your neighbors, and have inward compassion toward all, not only men, but also
beasts. Compassion is to be showed as well to beasts as men.
For in that respect the Lord blessed me, insomuch that when all my brothers
were sick, I escaped without sickness. For God knows every man's intent.
Therefore my children, have compassion in your bowels, because that as any man
deals with his neighbor, so will God deal with him. For the children of my
brothers fell sick also and died for Joseph's sake because their fathers pitied
him not, The unmercifull punished* both they and their children.
but my children were preserved without sickness as you know. And while I was
upon the Seacoast of Canaan, I fell to fishing for my father Jacob: Fishers
Boats first invented by Zabulon, but God gave the wisdom. Genesis 49.
and whereas many others were drowned in the Sea, I abode unbu^t. I was the
first that made a Fisher-boat to float on the sea, for God gave me
understanding and wisdom therein, so that I did set up a mas^ in the boat, and
fastened a sail to the midst of the wood, and coasing along the shore in it, I
fished for my fathers household, till we came into Egypt: The singular
compassion of Zabulon.
and for pity sake I gave of my fishing to every stranger that I met with: if
there were any foreiner born, or any sick body, or any aged person, I boiled
my fish and dressed it well according to every man's need, and carried it to
them, comforting them, and having compassion with them. And therefore God made
me to catch much fish in the sea. Note.
For he that gives his neighbor, receives the things multiplied of the Lord.
Five years did I fish, giving to every man that I saw, and serving all my
Fathers house sufficiently: in harvest time I fished, and in winter time I fed
sheep with my brothers. Zabulon his mercy in giving food.
Now will I tell you what I did, I ^aw a miserable man in the deep of winter,
and having compassion upon him, I stole a garment privily out of my house, and
gave it the naked man. A merciful deed to clothe the naked.
You therefore, my Children, take pity indifferently of all men, and show mercy
with the things which the Lord gives you, and deal them abroad to all men
with a good heart. And if ye have not wherewith to succor the needy out of
hand: yet have compassion on him with inward mercy. Inward compassion wanting
ability serves.
I know that my hand forslowed not to give to him that wanted, and to spend the
time with him, insomuch that I have walked above vii. furlongs with such a one
weepi^g and my heart yerned upon him for compassion: A rare example of a
merciful heart.
You therefore my children have earnest and inward mercy toward all that are
in m^sery, that God having pity upon you may be merciful to you likewise. God
dwells ^n a mercifu^l heart.
For in the last days God will send his mercy upon the earth, and wheresoever
he finds inward and hearty mercy there will he dwell. For look how much mercy
m^n shows to his neighbor, so much w^ll God show to him again, Now when we
came down in^o Egypt. Joseph minded not our evil dealing with him, Joseph
rewarded good for evil.
but when he saw me, it made his heart yerne: whom look ye upon my children,
and learn to forget the harm that is done to you Love ye one another, and do
not one of you think upon another ill dealing: for that breaks unity, and
displeases all ki^dred, and troubles the mind. For he that is mindful of
harm past, has not the bowels of mercy. He that is mindful of injuries, is not
merc^full.
Mark the water, and see how it washes away the sand when the stones and
timber are removed asunder And if a brook be drawn into many streams, Apt
similitudes.
the earth sucketh it up, and it comes to nothing: and so shall you, if you be
divided among your selves. An exhortation to concord.
Therefore divide not your selves into 2. heads: for all things that God has
created have but one head apiece. He has given a man two shoulders, two hands,
and two feet: but yet do all the members obey one head. The end of discord is
misery.
I know by the writings of my fathers, that in the last days ye shall depart
from the Lord, and be divided in Israel, following two Kings, working all
abomination, and worshipping all manner of Idols, and your enemies shall take
you prisoners, and you shall sit among the heathen in all misery, tribulation
and sorrow of mind: and afterward you shall remember the Lord and repent, and
he shall turn you again: for he is merciful and full of compassion, and
thinks not upon the lewdness of the children of men, because they be flesh,
and the spirits of error beguile them in all their doings. After this shall
God himself raise up unto you the light of righteousness: and wholesomeness
and mercy are in his punishments. He shall redeem all men from the bondage of
Belial, and all the spirits of error shall be trodden down, and he shall turn
all nations to the following of him, and ye shall see God in the shape of man;
for God has chosen Jerusalem, and God is his Name: nevertheless, by the
wickedness of your words, you shall provoke him to wrath, and ye shall be cast
off, till the time of full finishing. And now my children be not sad for my
death, neither be ye out of heart because I leave you. For I shall rise up
again among you, as a Captain in the midst of my Tribe, among as many as have
kept the law of the Lord, and the commandments of their father Z^bulon. But as
for the wicked, The state of the wicked at the latter day.
God shall bring everlasting fire upon them and destroy them for ever. I return
to my rest, as my fathers have done: now fear you the Lord your God, with all
your strength all the days of your life. As he had spoken these words he fell
asleep, to his singular benefit: and his sons laid him in a Coffin, and
carrying him back again unto Hebron, buried him there with his fathers.

The Testament of Dan, made to His children at his death, concerning anger and
lying. The Serpent with weapon and Dan declare
The intent of those men that wrathful are.

The Testament of Dan.
THe copy of Dan his words which he spoke unto them in his last days: in the
hundred five and twentieth year of his life, he called his tribe unto him and
said:

Ye Children of Dan, hear my sayings, and give heed to the words of your
Fathers mouth. Heart and outward profession must be, consociate. Lies and anger
schoolmasters of evil life, Self-love thinks himself as good as other.
I l^ked in mine heart, and showed in my whole life the thing that is good: for
truth joined with right dealing pleases God well. I have hated hurtful
things, as lying and anger, because they te^c^ a man all manner of
naughtiness. I confess unto you my Children this day, that I was glad in my
heart at the death of Joseph, that true and good man; and rejoiced of the
selling of him, because our Father loved him more then us. For the spirit of
spitefullnes and pride said unto me: Desire of prerogative entiseth to murder.
Thou art his son ^eo, as well as he. And one of the spirits of Belial wrought
with me, saying: Take this sword and slay, Joseph with it, and when he is dead,
thy father shall love thee. This was that spirit of spitefulness which
counseled me to devour Joseph, as the Leopard devoured a Kid. Man purposes,
but God disposes.
But the God of our Father Jacob did not put him into my hands, nor suffer me
to find him alone, that I might dispatch two Scepters in Israel by committing
that wickedness. And now my children, I tall you of a truth, that unless you
keep your selves from this spirit of lying and wrath, and love truth and long
sufferance, ye shall perish. Wrath is blind, my children, and no wrathful man
looks truth in the face, A wrathful man lively described.
because that although they were He accounts his Parents as enemies.
his Father and mother, yet does he hold them all his enemies. Though he be his
brother, yet he He knows not his brother.
knows him not: though he be the Lords He obeys not the Minister.
prophet, yet obeys he him not: though he be a He regards not the righteous.
righteous man, yet he regards him not, and though he be his He considers
not his friend.
friend, yet he considers it not. For the Spirit of wrath besetteth him with
the snares of error, blinding his natural eyes, and dimming the eyes of his
mind by falsehood, and giving to him a sight of his own making. And wherein
bleareth he his eyes? In hatred of heart, for he gives him a self-willed heart
against his brother, to spite him, and envy him. My Sons, wrath is
mischievous, for it becomes a soul to the soul, The properties of wrath.
and subdueth the body to it self by overmastering the soul, and gives power
to the body to work all wickedness. And when the soul has wrought, it
justifies the thing done because it sees not.

Therefore he that is wrathful, A wrathful man works three ways,

1 By servants.

2 By riches

3 By himself.


if he be a man of might, has trebble power in his anger. One, through the
help and furtherance of his Servants: Another, of his riches wherethrough he
persuades and overcomes his unrighteousness: and a third of the nature of
his own body, which of it self works evil. And though he that is angry be a
poor man, yet has he his natural power doubled. For the said Spirit does
always further his wickedness, by causing his deeds to be matched with lying.
Wherefore consider the power of wrath how vain it is. For he is bitter in
speech, and walks at Satan's right hand, that his deeds may be wrought in
untrustiness and lying. Two instruments of wrath; bitter speech: violent hands.
For Satan does first of all sting him by speech, and when he has once pricked
him forward, be strengthens him by deeds, and troubles his understanding with
bitter nips and losses, and so provokes his mind to excessive wrath.
Therefore when any man speaks against you, Remedy against wrath is forbearing
of words.
be not moved to anger: and if he praise you as good men, be not puffed up, nor
changed into voluptuousness and sternesse of countenance. For when a man
hears a thing that misliketh him, first it tickleth him and stingeth his
mind, so that he thinks he has just cause to be angry. Now therefore my
children, if ye fall into any loss and hinderance, The effect of impatience.
be not out of patience, for the spirit of impatience makes men to lust for
the things that is forgone, and to be angry for the want of it. Bear your
losses willingly, and be not out of quiet for it: for unquietnes engendereth
anger and untruth: and it is evil to have a double face. Anger and untruth
talk one to another, to trouble the understanding. And when the mind is
cumbred with disdain, the Lord departs from it, and Belial gets the
domin^on of it. Therefore my children, keep the Lords commandments and laws,
eschew untruth and hate it, that the Lord may dwell in you, and Belial fl^e
from you. Speak every of you the truth to his neighbor, that ye fall not
willingly into incomberance, and so shall ye be in quiet, and ye shall have the
God of peace, war shall not prevail against you. Love the Lord all your life
long, and love ye one another with a soothfast heart. For I am sure that in the
latter days ye shall depar^ from the Lord, and walk in naughtines, He
prophesies their wickedness.
work^ng the abominations of the Gentiles, and haunting wicked women in all
lewdnes by the working of deceitful spirits in you. For I have read in Enoch
that Satan is your prince, and tha^ all the spirits of fornication and pride,
shall ply themselves in laying snares for the children of Dan, to make them
sin before the Lord. But my children, stick ye unto Levi, and look upon him
in all things. The children of Juda shall snatch away other men's good like
Lions through covetousness. A note for covetousnes.
For this cause shall ye be led away with them into captivity, and there
receive all the plagues of Egypt, Repentance obtains mercy.

A prophecy of Christ his humanity.


and all the malice of the heathen: whereupon ^e shall return to ^h^ Lord and
obtain mercy, and he shall bring you into ^is holy place, and proclaim peace
to you The Lor^s saving health shall spring up unto you out of the Tribes of
Juda and Levi He shall make war against Belial, and give our young men the
victory in revengement. He shall deliver the imprisoned souls of the Saints
from Belial, Christ lively described.
and turn your unbelieving hearts to the Lord, and give everlasting peace to
such as call upon him. The Saints shall rest in him, and the righteous shall
rejoice in the new Jerusalem, which shall glorify GOD for ever. Jerusalem
shall no more be wasted, nor Israel led into captivity, because the Lord shall
be conversant among men in the midst of it, and the holy one of Israel shall
reign over you in lowliness and poverty, and he that believes in him shall
certainly reign in Heaven. Now my Children fear the Lord, and beware of Satan
and his spirits. And draw near to God, and to the angel that excuses you: for
he is the Mediator between God and man to set peace in Israel. Christ our
mediator. Christ assisteth us in all temptations.
He shall stand against the Kingdom of the enemy, and therefore will the enemy
labor to overthrow all that call upon the Lord: for he knows, that
whenever Israel decays, then shall his enemies Kingdom come to an end. But
the said Angel shall strengthen Israel, that he come not to an evil end. At
that time shall Israel depart from iniquity, and the Lord shall visit such as
do his will in all places of Israel, and among the heathen his name shall be,
The Savior. Therefore my children, keep your selves from all noisome dealings,
and put from you wrath, and all untruth. Love truth and mildness, and look
what you have heard of your father, deliver it over to your children, that the
Father of Nations may receive you. For he was soothfast, long suffering, meek,
lowly, and a teacher of Gods law by his own works. Therefore depart from all
unrighteousness, that ye may stick to the righteousnes^ of the Lords Law, and
bury ye me by my Fathers. In saying these things he kissed them, and slept the
sleep of the world. And his sons buried him, laying his bones by Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. And like as Dan had prophes^ed to them, that they should one
day neglect Gods law, and estrange themselves from the offspring and native
Country of Israel, so came it to pass.

The Testament of Neptalim, made to his Children at his death concerning
goodness. Run Neptalims race, but run apace:
Embrace his goodness and trustiness.
If your state you see servants to be,
Then God will you bless, and give success.

The Testament of Neptalim.
THe copy of Neptalims Testament, concerning the things which he discoursed at
the end of his time, in the hundredth and two and thirtieth year of his life. At
the coming of his Children together in the seventh month, the fourth day of
the month, he being yet in good health, commanded a sumptuous feast, and great
cheer to be prepared. When he awoke in the morning from sleep, because he was
even at deaths door, he praised the Lord that had strengthened him, and began
to speak to his children, in this wise:

My Children, give ear to Neptalim, hearken to your fathers words I was borne
of Bilha, and because Rachel dealt craftily in putting Bilha to Jacob, His
birth.
in her own stead, and Bilha was delivered of me in Rachels lap, therefore
was I called Neptalim. Why he was called Neptalim.
And Rachel loved me because I was borne on her lap, and she kissed me when I
was a little one, saying: God let me see a brother of thine out of mine own
womb after thee. By reason whereof, Joseph was like to me in all things
according to Rachels request. Why Joseph was like Neptalim.
Now my mother Bilha was the daughter of Rotheus, the brother of Debora,
Rebecca's nurse, and was born the self-same day that Rachel was born: his
family.
for Rotheus was a Chaldean, of Abraham's kindred, a worshipper of GOD, freeborn
and a noble man. Howbeit for so much as he was taken prisoner, Laban bought him,
and married him so a bondwoman of his, called Eve, who brought him forth a
son, whom he named Zeliphas, after the name of the Castle wherein he was taken.
Afterward she bare Bilha, calling her, her new hasty daughter, because she was
fond of the Dug as soon as she was born. The swiftness of Neptalim. Genesis 49.
And because I was as swift of foot as a Stag, my father Jacob appointed me to
run of all messages and errands, and blessed me by the name of Stag. For as the
Potter knows what his vessel shall contain, and tempereth his quantity of
clay thereafter: God his wisdom in creating us, lively set forth.
so the Lord makes a man's body proportionable to the spirit that he will put
unto it, and fliteth the spirit to the ability of the body, so as there is no
inequality or odds betwixt them: for all the Lords creatures are made by
weight, measure and rule. And as the Potter knows the use of every of them to
what things they be meetest, so the Lord knows the body, how far forth it
is fit for goodness, and when it begins in evil. For there is not any
Creature reasonable, nor unreasonable, which the Lord knows not, for he has
created all men after his own image: and as man's strength is, so is his work:
as is his will, so is his work: as is his forecast, so is his doing: as is his
heart, so is his mouth: as is his eye, so is his sleep: and as is his mind, so
is his talk, either of the Law of the Lord, or of the Law of Belial. And look
what diversity is between light and darkness, or between sight and hearing,
the same diversity is there in man and woman. Neither is it to be said, that
there is any bitterness in any thing either of the face, or of other like
things, For God has made all things good in their order or degres: he has set
the five wits in the head, and knit the head to the neck, and covered it with
hair for his glory. Moreover, he has assigned the heart to wisdom, the bell^
to the avoidance of the stomach, (...) health, the Liver to anger, the gall to
bitterness, the spleen to laughter, the kidneys to craftiness, the loins to
strength, the ribs to comeliness, the seed to lustiness, and so forth. So
my children do all things in order, All things must be done in time and order.
and in the fear of God, neither do ye any thing disorderly in scorn, or out
of due season. For thou can not command the eye to bear, The reason.
neither can thou do the works of light in darkness. Therefore haste you
not to mar^ your doings through covetousness, or to beguile your own souls
with fond talk. For by holding your peace with a clean heart, ye shall be
able to keep the will of God, and to cast away the will of the devil: the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, break not their order, neither break you Gods law in
the order of your doings. The Gentiles by going astray and by forsaking the
Lord, have changed their order, and followed stocks and stones, and spirits of
error. But do you not so (my children:) know ye that your only one God is the
Lord in the skies, on the earth, in the Sea, and of all creatures, for he is
the m^ker of them. And be not like Sodom, which alters the order of her
Nature: likewise the waters altered the order of their nature, and they whom
God cursed in the flood, making the earth desolate and fruitless for their
sakes. My children, Neptalim prophesies the misery of his children.
I say these things, because I have read in the holy writings of Enoch, that
you also shall depart from the Lord, and walk in all the wickedness of Sodom,
and the Lord shall bring thraldom upon you, so as you shall serve your enemies,
and be pinched with all manner of tribulation and pain, till God consume you
every one: and when ye be made few and small, ye shall turn again, and know the
Lord your God, and he shall bring you again into your own land, according to his
manifold mercy. And it shall come to pass, that when they shall be come into
the country of their fathers, they shall forget the Lord again, and deal
wickedly, so as the Lord shall scatter them all over the face of the whole
earth, till in the mercy of the Lord come a man that pours out mercy and
righteousness upon all m^n both far and near. A Vision.
For in the xl. year of my life, upon mount Olivet toward the east side of
Jerusalem, I saw, the Sun and Moon stand still, and behold. Isaac my fathers
father said to us, Come hither apace, and every one of you take hold, according
to his strength, for the Sun and Moon may be caught. And we came running all
togeth^r, and Levi caught hold of the Sun, and Juda jumping up caught told of
the Moon, and were both of them lifted up with them. And when as Levi became as
the Sun, a certain young m^n delivered him twelve boughs of Palm tree, and
Juda shined as the Moon, and twelve beams or rays were under his feet, and
Levi and Juda running together, beheld one another. And behold there was a Bull
upon earth that had great horns, and Eagles wings upon his back, and we would
have caught him, but we could not: for Joseph stepping before us, caught him,
and mounted aloft upon him. And behold, there appeared unto us an holy writing,
saying: the Assyrians, Medes, Elamites, Galathites, Caldees, and Syrians, shall
hold the Scepter of Israel in thraldom. And again, a seven months after, I
saw our father Jacob standing in the sea of Jamma, and us his Sons with him.
And behold, there came a ship sailing by full of (...) flesh, without Mariner
or Pilate. Upon the ship was written Jacob, and our Father said to us, Let us
go to our ship: When we were within it, there rose a sore tempest, and a mighty
gale of wind, and our father who held the stern, flew away from us, and then
we being tossed with the storm, were carried into the sea, and our ship was
filled with water, and weather-^eat^n, and torn on all sides. Then Joseph fled
out in the boat, and we all were divided upon twelve boards, and Levi, and Juda
was among us, so were we scattered on all coasts, and Levi being clad in
sackc^oth, prayed unto the Lord for us all. As soon as the tempest was allayed,
the ship came quickly to land, and behold our Father Jacob came, and we
rejoiced all together with one mind. I told my father these two dreams, and he
said to me, these things must be fulfilled in their time, and Israel must
endure many things. Then said he further to me, I believe that Joseph is alive,
for I see that the Lord does always number him with us. And he said, thou
live my son Joseph, Remorse of conscience moves open confession.
but yet I see thee not, neither see thou Jacob that begat thee: truly he
made us to weep at these words of his, and my vowels glowed within me, to
bewray unto him that Joseph was sold, but I was afraid of my brothers. Behold,
my sons, I have showed you the last times, and all things that shall be done in
Israel. You therefore command your children to be helpful unto Levi and Juda.
For by Juda shall health and welfare spring up unto Israel, and in him shall
Jacob be blessed. For by his Scepter shall God appear, and dwell among men
upon earth, to save the flock of Israel, and to gather the righteous from
amongst the Heathen. My children if you do well, both men and angels shall
praise and bless you, and God shall be glorified by you among the Gentiles,
the Devil shall fl^e from you, By doing well, God is glorified, men blessed,
and the devil v^nquished.
the beasts shall stand in awe of you, and the Angels shall receive you. For
like as if a man bring up his children well, the child gives and endeavors
always to be mindful and thankful: So of good works there is a good
remembrance with God. But as for him that does not good, him shall men and
Angels curse, and God shall be dishonored through him among the Gentiles, and
the Devil shall possess him, as a peculiar vessel and instrument, and all
beasts shall overmas^er him, and the Lord shall hate him. For the commandments
of the law are of two sorts, and are fulfilled in work. For there is a time for
a man to company with his wife, and a time to forbear her, that he may give
himself to prayer. There are two commandments which breed sin, except they
be done in their due order, and so it is in the rest of the commandments.
Therefore be you wise and skillful in the Lord, knowing the order of his
commandments, and the laws of all things, that God may love ye. Having
commanded them many other such things, he prayed them to conveigh his bones to
Hebron, and to bury him by his Fathers. And so eating and drinking with a merry
heart, he covered his face and died. And Neptalims children did all things
according as their Father had commanded them.

The Testament of GAD, made to his Children at his death, concerning Hatred.
You that excel in Martial feats,
Lo Gad, but GOD obey:
Lest in Gads wrath you GOD offend,
And lose your hoped prey.

The Testament of Gad.
THe Copy of Gads Testament, and of the things that he spoke to his Children,
in the hundred and seventh year of his life, saying: I was Jacobs seventh son,
and skillful and strong in keeping of sheep. I kept the flocks by night, and
when there came any Lion, Gad a good and valiant shepherd.
Leopard, Wolf, Bear, or other wild Beast upon our Ca^tel, I ran to it and
killed it. Joseph also did feed sheep with us about a thirty days, who being
tender, fell sick by reason of overmuch heat, and went home to Hebron to his
father, whom he lodged by himself, because he loved him* And Joseph told our
father, that the sons of Bilha wasted his goods at Z^lpha, and made havoc of
them, without the knowledge of Juda and Ruben. For he knew that I had rescued a
lamb out of a Bears mouth, and killed the Bear, and that because the lamb could
not live (which thing grieved me) we killed it also and ate it. He told our
father of it, and our brothers were greatly discontent^d with his doing, even
to the day that he was sold into Egypt, and the spirit of hatred was in me,
insomuch as I could not find in my heart to hear Joseph speak, or to see him,
because he had rebuked us openly, Gad hated Joseph for his complaining to his
father.
for eating the lamb without Juda. To be shor^, he made our father believe
whatsoever he told him. But now I acknowledge my sin, my children, that I was
often in mind to have killed him, for I hated him from my heart, and I was
utterly without compassion toward him, and the cause of this my great hatred
toward him, was his dreams: 2. For his dreams.
Therefore I would have devoured him, as an Ox eats up grass from the
earth. And for that cause I and Juda sold him to the Ismaelites for 30
gildernes, of the which we kept away ten privily, and showed the other xx to
our brethren. And so covetousness persuaded me to wish his death. But the God
of our Fathers delivered him out of my hands, to the intent I should not do
such wickedness in Israel: and now my children give ear to the words of truth,
that ye may live righteously, and keep the law of the highest, and not go
astray through the Spirit of hatred, for that is evil in all men's doings.
Whatsoever another man do h^ that does the hater mislike and abhor. If one
keep the law of the Lord, he praises it not: if one fear the Lord, and deal
righteously, him he loves not, but dispraiseth the truth, he envieth him that
orders his ways aright, he embraces backbiting, he loves scornfulnesse:
and because that hatred has blinded his mind, he does to his neighbors as we
did to Joseph: therefore my Children keep your selves from hatred, because it
commits wickedness even against the Lord; for it will not hear the words of
Gods commandment, concerning the loving of a man's neighbor, but sins
spitefully against God. If a brother offend, by and by it blazeth him abroad,
and is hasty to have him condemned and killed, or punished for his offense.
And if the offender be a servant or bondsman, it accuses him to his master, and
devises all means that may be to persecute him, and to put him to death if it
be possible: for hatred works with spitefulness, and is always sorry to hear
or see men go forward, or prosper in well-doing. A comparison.
For like as love bears good will then to the dead, and wishes them alive,
and would (if it were possible) stay them from death, which are condemned to
die: So hatred seeks to stay the living, and deemeth them unworthy of life
which have offended never so lightly. For the spirit of hatred does through
cankred frowardness of heart, work jointly with Satan in all things, even to
the death and destruction of men. But the spirit of love does through long
sufferance work with Gods Law to the welfare of men. Hatred is evil, The
property of hatred.
because it abides with lying, speaking continually against the truth, making
a great ado of small matters, overshadowing the l^ght with darkness, counting
sweet to be sour, teaching slanderousnesse, war, wrong, and abundance of all
mischief, and finally filling the heart with divellish poison. My children I
speak these t^ings upon experience, to the intent you should eschew hatred, and
stick to godly love. Righteousness drives out hatred, A righteous man
described.
and lowliness kills it, for a righteous and lowly person is ashamed to do
wrong, not for fear of rebuke, but for conscience sake, because God sees his
intent. He backbiteth no man, because the fear of the highest overcommeth
hatred: for the fear of the Lord offends not; neither will do any man wrong,
no not even in thought. At length I came to the knowledge of these things, when
I had repented the of my dealings toward Joseph* For the true Repentance that
is according to Gods will, mortifieth a man to obedience, chaseth away
darkness, inlightneth the eyes, gives knowledge to the mind, and leads the
soul to salvation. And whatsoever men know not of themselves, that does
repentance teach them. For it brought upon me the pain of the heart, and if my
father Jacobs prayers had not been, surely I had died out of hand. For lo^k
wherein a man sins, by the same he is punished. Forasmuch therefore as my
heart was merciless toward Joseph, I suffered Gods rigorous justice in my
heart by the space of xi months, that the time of my punishment might fall out
even, with the time that I urged the selling of Joseph. Now therefore my
children, each of you love his brothers, and put away hatred from your hearts,
loving one another in deed, word, and t^ought of mind. Love consists in
deed, in word, and mind.
For before my fathers face I spoke mildly of Joseph, but behind his back,
the spirit of hatred darkened my understanding, and tempted my mind to kill
him. Wherefore love ye one another heartily: and if any of you offend other,
tell him of it gently, driving out the poison of hatred, and fostering no
deceit in heart. And if the offender confess it, and be sorry for it, give it
him: and if he deny it, strive not with him, lest he fall to swearing, and so
sin double. Let no stranger hear you uttering one another secrets in
variance, lest he turn to be your ill-willer, and work some great mischief
against you. For he will talk guilefully with thee, and undermine thee to do
thee a shrewd turn, taking his poison at thine own hand. Therefore if he deny
it, and he ashamed of it, and hold his peace when he is rebuked, draw him not
out, for in denying he repents him, so as he will no more offend thee, but
honor thee, and fear thee, and be in quiet. But if he be unshamefac't and
abide by his naughtiness, then refer the revengement of it to God with all thy
heart. Envy no man's prosperity. It may be perchance your profit.
If another man prosper more then thou, be not grieved at it, but pray for him,
that he may have perfect prosperity. For peradventure, it may be to your own
benefit. And if he be exalted more and more, envy him not, but remember that
all flesh shall die: and praise God for it, who gives good and profitable
things to all men. Seek the Lords judgments, and so thy mind shall let him
alone and be in quiet. Now, if a man be enriched by evil means, as Esau my
Fathers brother was, envy him not: for in so doing ye control the Lord, who
either takes away his benefits from the wicked, or leaves them still to the
repentant, or else reserveth them in the unrepentant to their endless
punishment. For the poor man having sufficient of all things, A poor man how
he is rich.
gives thanks unto the Lord, and is enriched of all men, because men wish him
no harm. Therefore (my children) away with hatred out of your hearts, and love
one another with a right meaning mind. Also will you your children to honor
Levi and Juda: for out of them shall the Lord make the Saviors of Israel to
come. A prophecy of Christ.
I know that in the end your children shall depart from them, and walk in all
manner of mischief, naughtiness and corruption before the Lord. And after a
little pausing, he said again: My sons hear me your Father, bury me by my
fathers: And so plucking up his feet, he slept in peace: and after five years,
they carried him thence, and laid him with his Fathers in Hebron.

The Testament of ASER made to his Children at his death, concerning two Faces,
of Vice and Virtue. Two ways, says Aser, are prepared for men: the one for
joy;
The last for death* (...),

The Testament of ASER.
THe Copy of Aser his Testament, and of the things that he spoke to his
Children in the 120. year of his life. Being still in health, he said unto
them: Ye children of Aser, hearken unto your father, and I will show you all
things that are right before the Lord. The Lord has given two ways unto the
Sons of men, Two ways for a man to walk in.
two minds, two doings, two places, and two ends: and therefore all ways may
be one; yea though they be contraries, as are the ways of good and evil. Also
there are two minds in our breasts, Two minds in a man. of good and of evil.
which do move us either to honesty or dishonesty. Therefore if a man be led
to goodness, all his doings are occupied about righteousness: and if that be
do any thing amiss, by and by he repents him: for in as much as his mind
is bent unto righteousness, he puts away naughtiness, and out of hand
amendeth his misdeeds, and corrects the corruptions of his mind. But if his
mind incline unto evil, all his doings tend unto naughtiness, in so much
that he thrusts away the good, and takes unto him the bad, because he is
under the dominion of Belial: and if he do any good thing, he turns the same
unto evil. For if he begin to do any good, he brings the end of his doings
to an evil work, because the treasure of his heart is infected with the venom
of a divel^sh and mischievous Spirit, and therefore the evil overmastereth the
good in his mind, and brings the end of the thing to naughtiness. Some man
shows compassion upon him that serves his turn in naughtiness, that man
has two faces, Diverse sorts of double faces.
and that deed of his is stark lewdness. Another man loves ungraciousnesse,
and he is lewd likewise: and although he could find in his heart to die for
the compassing of his evil, yet it is manifest that he is double faced, and
his doing is altogether stark naught. For his love being but lewdness, does
as it were cloak his evil with a good Name, whereas the drift of his doings
tends unto a wicked end. The covetous man's wickedness described.
Another heals, does open wrong, pilleth and polleth, is covetous, and
pitieth not the poor. He also has a double face, and all this is stark naught:
for in being niggardly toward his neighbor, he provokes Gods wrath, and
denies the highest, in not pitying the poor. He despises and spiteth the
Lord, which is the commander of the law, he suffers not the poor to rest, he
defiles his own sent to make his body gay, he kills many, and p^^ieth few:
this is the part of a double faced person. Another commits whoredom and
fornication, or vexes many men piteously with his power and riches, and yet
abstaineth from meats: his fast is naught, for he does the commandments with
an evil conscience, and that is a double faced dealing, which is altogether
naught. Such manner of folk are right Swine and Hares, for they seem to be
half clean: but in very deed they be utterly unclean. You therefore my children
become not like them, neither bear you in one hood two faces, the one of
goodness, and the other of naughtiness, but stick all only unto goodness: for
in goodness does God rest, God abides with the plain dealer.
and men like well of it. Shun naughtiness, and kill the Devil in your good
works: for they that are double faced, serve not God, but their own lusts,
because they seek to please Belial, and such as are like themselves. Now,
though plain dealing men and such as pretend but one face are taken for
offenders, The preposterous judgment of the world makes not good or bad.
at the hands of such as bear two faces, yet are they righteous before GOD.
F^r many in killing wicked persons, do two works at once, namely, good by
evil: but indeed, the whole work is good, because that he which has rooted
out the evil, has destroyed it. Some man hating his neighbor, Other kinds of
double faced men.
mercifully blames him for his advoutry, or theft, such a one is double faced:
but yet is the whole work good, because he follows the Lords example, not
respecting what seems good, when it is evil in deed. Another will not make
merry with Rioters, lest he should be stained by them, and defile his own soul.
This man also is double faced, but yet is all his doings good: and he is like a
Roe or a Stagge, which in a common wild berd seem to be unclean, and yet are
altogether clean, because he walked in the zeal of the Lord, shunning and
hating those whom God wills to be shunned, in his Commandments, and so
kills be evil with weldoing. See therefore my Sons, how there are two in
all things one against the other, and the one hidden under the other. Death
succeeds to life, shame to glory, night to day, and darkness unto light.
All righteous things are under light and life, therefore does eternal life
overmaster death. It is not to be said that truth is untruth, righteousness
unrighteousness, or right wrong, because that as all things are under God, so
all truth is under light. I have practiced all these things in my life, Aser
his righteous living.
and not strayed from the truth of the Lord, but sought out the Commandments
of the Highest, to the uttermost of my power, and walked with one face in
goodness. Take heed therefore my Children to the Lords Commandments, and
fo^low the truth wi^h one single face. For they that are double faced shall be
double punished. Double faced, double punished.
The spirit of error hates the man that fights against it. Keep the law of
the Lord, and regard not evil that seems good, but have an eye to the thing
that is good indeed, and keep the same, returning to the Lord in all his
Commandments, and resting upon him: for the ends whereat men do aim, do show
their righte^usnesse. And know the Angels of the Lord from the Angels of
Satan. For if ye cleave to wicked spirits, your souls shall be tormented of
the wicked Spirit whom ye serve, in wicked lusts and work. But if ye quietly
and cheerfully acquaint your selves with the Angel of Peace, he shall comfort
you in your life time. My children, become not like the Sodomites which knew
not the Angel, and perished for ever. For I am sure that you shall sin, and
be delivered into the hands of your enemies, your land shall be laid waste, and
your selves shall be scattered into the four corners of the earth, and be
despised as unprofitable water in your dispersing abroad, A prophecy of Christ
his humanity.
until the Highest do visit the earth, eat^ng and drinking as a man with men,
and breaking the Serpents head in pieces without noise. He shall save Israel,
and all the Heathen by water, being GOD hidden in man. Therefore tell your
children these things, that they neglect not Gods Law written in the Tables of
heaven. For the time will come, that they shall give no credit to the Law of
the Lord. And you falling unto naughtiness, shall deal wickedly against God,
giving no heed to his Law, but unto men's commandments. For this cause shall ye
be scattered abroad, as my Brothers Gad and Dan, which were not acquainted with
their own country, tribe and tongue. Nevertheless the Lord shall gather you
together again in faith, for the hope of his mercy, for Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacobs sake. When he had so said, he commanded them to bury him in Hebron. And
he died, sleeping a good sleep, and afterward his sons doing as he had willed
them, carried him back, and buried him with his Fathers.

The Testament of JOSEPH, made to his Children at his death, concerning
Chastity and Patience. Let Joseph teach thee
Love and Chastity,
So shall thou have
A long blessed life,
Void of all strife,
Even to thy grave.

The Testament of Joseph.
MY sons and my brethren, hear ye Joseph the well-beloved of Israel. My
children hear your Father. I h^ve known in my life Envy and Death, with the
which my brethren would have destroyed me. For they hated me, Joseph's
afflictions.
and God loved me: they would have killed me, and the God of my Fathers kept
me: they put me into a pit, and the most high brought me out again: I was sold
as a bondsman, and the Lord made me free, and his strong hand helped me. I was
kept in hunger, God helps in distress.
and the Lord himself nourished me: I was left alone, and the Lord comforted
me: I was sick, and the Lord visited me: I was in prison, and the Savior made
me glad: I was fastened in Chains, and the Lord unbound me: He pleaded my cause
in the accusations of the Egyptians; and not only delivered me from Envy and
Deceit, but also exalted me, insomuch that Putiphar, chief Steward of Pharaohs
house, did lend me ladging, where I was in jeopardy of my life, by reason of a
shameless woman, which entised me to do naughtiness with her, through the
flam^ of voluptuousness burning about her breast. I was cast in prison for
her: I was beaten and mocked for her, yet the Lord caused the Keeper of the
Prison to be moved with mercy toward me. He forsakes not them that fear him,
God never forsakes his.
neither in darkness, neither in bonds, neither in tribulations, or
necessities. God is not ashamed as man, neither dreadeth he as men, neither
shakes or shrinketh he for fear as earthly men. He is present in all places,
and in their most grievous sorrows he comfort his. He goes away for a
season, to try the thoughts of their mind. He found me trusty in ten
Temptations: Joseph constant in temptations.
and in every one I was constant and preserved. For sufferance is a great
medicine, and causes much goodness. Sufferance what it is.
How often did the Egyptian threaten my death? How often was I punished, and
yet the woman called me again? How often did she threaten me to die, because I
would not have to do with her? She said unto me, thou shall have governance of
me, and all that be mine, if thou will give thy self unto me, and obey my
desire, A present medicine in temptation.
and thou shall be Lord over us. But I remembered the words of my father Jacob,
and entering into my chamber, made my prayer to the Lord, and fasted seven
days: Not from meat, but from wanton fare.
yet I appeared unto the Egyptian, in the self same estate of body, as if I had
lived in pleasures and delights. For they that fast for GOD, receive beauty of
face. When I had wine given unto me, I drunk none: and fasting three days, I
took my meat daily, and gave it to the sick and needy, and early I awaked unto
the Lord, and wept for Metemphetica the Egyptian, because she was evermore
troubling of me. A crafty practice of a woman.
She came unto me in the night, as though she would have visited me. And first
truly because she had never a son, she fained to take me as her son. And I
prayed to God to send her a son: until which time she embraced me, as though
I had been her son, and perceived not the cause. And for a conclusion, she
drew me to have done fornication with her, and I remembering my self, was
sorrowful to the death. And when she was gone out, I came to my self, and
sorrowed many days: for I perceived her deceit and error. And I spoke unto
her the words of the most high God, if peradventure she might be turned away
from her pernicious concupiscence. Flattery the Devils sweet bait.
Many times as to a holy man she spoke flattering words to me, not without
deceit, lauding my chastity before her Husband, which would utterly have
destroyed me: both manifestly and secretly she said unto me, Fear not my
Husband, for he is persuaded of thy chastity. For if so be that any man showed
him of thee and me, he would not believe it. A token of a zealous heart.
For because of this thing, I covered me with sackcloth, and laid me flat upon
the Earth, and prayed unto Almighty God, that he would deliver me from this
woman of Egypt. When she could do nothing this way, Hypocrites are of all
religions for luere.
she came unto me again armed with other reasons: that is to say, that she
would fain learn the word of God of me, and began to speak after this manner.
If thou will have me to forsake mine Idols, follow my desire, and I will
persuade my husband the Egyptian to go from his Idolatry, and we shall walk in
the law of thy God. Double faced men GOD abhors.
I made answer to these things: GOD will have none to worship him with
uncleanness, neither has he any pleasure in adulterers: and she held her
peace, desiring to fulfill her concupiscence. And I fasted and prayed, that God
might deliver me from her. Again at another time, Note the fruit of lust.
she said unto me: If thou will not do adultery with me, I will kill my Prince,
and so by the law I shall take thee to my Husband. When I heard that, I rent my
garment, and said: Woman, I pray thee be ashamed of these things before GOD,
and fear God, and do thou not such an abominable thing: Neither despair
utterly, that thou drown not thy self in thine own evil: for if thou go about,
I shall utter and declare the thoughts of thine iniquity. She fearing these
things, prayed me that I would not bewray her naughtiness, and so departed.
Yet again, she went about to beguile me with gifts, sending unto me all things
that men have need of, and she sent me meat strewed about with Enchantment. And
as the Eunuch brought it in, I beheld and saw a terrible fellow giving me a
sword with the dish, and I perceived that she went about to deceive me. And
when he was gone, I wept, and touched not that meat, nor any other of her
sending, for a good while after. A day after that, she came to me and said,
What is the matter that thou have not eaten of the meat? And I said unto her,
because thou have poisoned it. Therefore thou shall know that I will not come
unto Idols, Joseph did first admonish and not proclaim.
but only unto God. Now understand therefore, that the God of my Father by his
Angel, has showed thy mischief unto me, and I have kept the meat to thy shame,
if perchance thou might repent, or learn that the malice of wicked doers
prevails not against them that worship the Lord in chastity. And I took and
did eat before her, saying: The God of my fathers, and the Angel of Abraham
shall be with me, and then she fell down at my feet and wept. Then lifting her
up, The Name of God, and fear of infamy, pricketh the conscieece: Note this.
I exhorted her many ways, and she promised unto me, that she would never do
such iniquity after that day. Yet because her heart was mourning, and did burn
toward me in adultery with sighs coming from the depth of her stomach, she
cast down her countenance. The Egyptian her husband perceiving her, said,
Wherefore hold thou down the face? She answered, I am even sorrowful at the
heart: and he comforted her that was not sick: yet again she entered in to me
(her Husband being without) and said: I am strangled or choked: either I will
break thy neck, or else drown my self, without thou will obey me. And I
perceiving that the Spirit of Belial troubled and vexed her prayed unto the
Lord my God, and said thus: wherefore art thou vexed and troubled, all blind
in sin? Remember thy self, for if thou do kill thy self, the concubine of
thy husband called Secon, envying thee, shall beat thy children, and destroy
the memory of thee from the earth. And she said unto me: Have done, have done,
I perceive that yet thou have some care for me: I have even enough that thou
defendest my life and my childrens. I have good hope in time to come, that I
shall obtain my wished desire. And she perceived not that for the love of my
Lord God I said so, and not for her sake. Whatsoever he be, that follows the
concupiscence of his most filthy and pernicious desire, is made servant unto
the same, as this woman was. And if he hear any good thing in the passion
wherein he is overcome, he draws the same to his pernicious or filthy desire.
I say unto you my Sons, that it was about six of the clock when she went
from me, and I fell upon my knees, praying to God all that day, with the night
following. A remedy against temptation.
And about the break of the day I arose weeping, that I might once be de^ivered
from this Egyptian woman. Finally, she caught me fast by the garment, drawing
me to have gone to bed with her. Then perceiving that she waxed mad, and that
violently and with strength she held my clothes, I let my clothes slip from me,
and fled away.

Then she complained to her husband of me, which put me in prison in the Kings
house. The day following after, I was sore beaten and cast in prison. And when
I lay bound in fetters, this Egyptian Woman waxed sick for sorrow, and harkened
how I lauded GOD, being in a House of Darkness. For I rejoicing, with a glad
voice, glorified my God, only that by such occasion I was delivered from the
Egyptian woman. Note a subtle woman.
Yet she left not to stand hearkening, and said, Have done, and take the offer
which I put unto thee, and fulfill my desire, and I will deliver thee from thy
Bond, Joseph's singular chastity.
and bring thee out from the darkness: but all that could persuade me nothing,
insomuch that in thought I was not inclined to any desire of her. For God
loves him better which fasteth in chastit^, being in a prison of darkness,
then him which takes his pleasure with voluptuousness in a chamber of honor
and riches. For if a man live in chastity and desire glory (if God perceive it
to be expedient for him) he gives it unto him, as he has done unto me. Many
times as though she had been sick, she descended unto me unlooked for, and
heard the voice of my praying, and stood the more still. But when I heard her
sigh I held my peace, A property of a Harlot.
for in her house she stripped her self naked, breasts, legs, and arms,
whereby she might have kindled me into the love of her. For she was very fair,
and gloriously adorned to have deceived me, but God kept me from her works.
Therefore my Sons, behold what sufferance with prayer and fasting does. The
commodity of prayer and sufferance.
And therefore if you love Soberness and Chastity in Sufferance and Humility of
the heart, the Lord shall dwell in you, for he loves sobriety: and when the
most High does dwell in a man, although he chance to fall into envy, or into
bondage, or slander, the Lord which dwells in him will for his chastity not
only deliver him, but also exalt him, and glorify him, as he has done me, for
he is always with him in word, in deed, and thought.

Joseph's lowliness in prosperity.
My Children, ye know well how my Father did love me, and yet I was never the
prouder thereof in my heart. For though I was a child, I had ever the fear of
God in my mind. When I grew unto age, I moderated my self, and honored my
brethren whom I feared. I held my peace when I was sold, because I would not
have the Ismaelites to know my flock and kindred, how I was the son of Jacob, a
man of great strength and power. Therefore have you in your deeds the fear of
God, and honor your Brethren, for all men that observe the Law of God, are
loved of him. Then I came with the Ismaelites to a certain place called
Indoclep, and they demanded of me what I was: and I said (because I would not
reprove my brethren) that I was one of their household Slaves. Then said the
chief of them, thou art no slave: for thy countenance does show thee what thou
art. And he threatened me unto the death, An amiable countenance a token of a
liberal mind.
yet for all that I said again I was their slave. But when we came into Egypt,
they began to strive who should have me for the money that was paid: and they
agreed that I should abide in Egypt with a Merchant of their faculty until
such time as they had made their Merchandise and returned again: and God gave
me in the fight of the Merchant, that he gave me the charge of his house, and
the Lord blessed him by my hand, for the Lord gave him plenty of Gold and
Silver, and I was with him three months and five days. In this time, passed
by Memphitica the wife of Putiphar in great glory, and she cast her eyes upon
me (for the Eunuchs had showed her of (...) and she showed her husband of the
Merchant which was made rich in the hand of a young man being an Hebrew, A
covetous heart like Acha^.
and she said they had (...) ^im out of the land of Chanaan, therefore do now
judgment upon him, and that the young man to be your steward, and the God of
the Hebrews shall bless you, for grace from heaven is in him. Putiphar her
husband persuaded with these words caused the Merchant to be sent for, and said
unto him: what do I bear of thee, that stealest souls out of the Land of the
Hebrews, in selling of Children? The Merchant fell down upon his knees, and
prayed him, saying: I beseech thee Lord, show me, for I know not what thou
say. He answered again. Where gates^ thou this Hebrew child? and he said,
the Ismaelites left him with me, until they came this way again. When he had
said so, Putiphar said, bring the young man hither: and I being brought in, did
reverence to the Prince of the Eunuchs, for he was the third man in dignity
with Pharaoh, and Prince of all the Eunuchs, and he had wife, children, and
concubines. And when he had taken me apart, he said, Art thou ^ond, or art thou
free? I answered, bond. And he said unto me, whose bondsman art thou? I answered
him, the Ismaelites. And he said again unto me: how came it to pass that thou
^ast made their bondsman? And I said: for they bought me in the land of Chanaan:
yet he did not believe me, saying: truly thou ^iest, and commanded me to be
beaten. Memphitica his Wife spied me ^eaten, at a window, and sent unto her
Husband, A token of mercy, if it were not for an ill end.
saying, Thy judgment is unjust, for thou do punish wrongfully the young
man that is stolen. But because I changed not my word, yet again was I beaten,
and commanded to be kept at his commandment, till such time as my masters came.

And his wife said unto him, Wherefore do ye keep in captivity the noble
Child? Note a flattering woman.
it were more alms to let him go, and to beat you. She would fain have spied
me in desire of sin, and I knew nothing of this. He said again to Memphitica,
it is not honest among the Egyptians, to take away another man's goods before he
show him of it. He said that of the Merchant and of me, when I should be
imprisoned. After that, xxiiii. days, the Ismaelites came, and they hearing
that Jacob my father was heavy for me, fa^^ unto me, wherefore is it that thou
said thou wast a bondsman, and now we ^now that thou art the son of a
great-man in the land of Canaan, and thy father sorroweth for thee in
sackcloth. A good nature.
Then I could fain have wept, yet I refrained my self for shaming of my
brethren, and said, I know if not, for I am a bondsman. Then they took counsel
amongst themselves, whither or to whom they might sell me, lest I should be
found in their hands, for they feared Jacob lest he should be revenged of them:
for they had heard that he was mighty both to God and man. Then said the
Merchant to them, Redeem him now from the judgment of Putiphar: they hearing
this, went and asked for me, saying: that they had bought me for money, and he
delivered me. Memphitica spoke unto her husband to buy me, for she said, I hear
say they would sell him. Thus the Righteous be bought and sold.
And they sent an Eunuch to the Ismaelites, and desired to buy me, and when he
could not bargain with them, his returned and showed his Lady that they asked a
great price for the child: she sent again another Eunuch, saying; Although
they ask two besaunces of gold, see that thou spare not for money, but buy the
child and bring him to me. He paid 80 golden Crowns for me, and said to his
Lady that he paid 100 and I perceiving this, held my peace, lest the Eunuch
should have been searched: Behold my sons what I have sustained: love one of
you another, and with continuance cast out from among you deceitful minds, for
God delights in the concord of brethren, Concord between brethren pleases
God.
and has pleasure also in the love and choice of a proved heart. For when my
brothers came out of Egypt and knew me, I gave them their money, and never gave
reproach unto them, but comforted them, Joseph's merciful heart declared.
and after the death of Jacob I loved them more abundantly, and all that ever
he commanded me I did very gladly, and they marvelled because I suffered not
them to be troubled for a small cause, for all that was in my power I gave
them. Their children were reputed to me as mine own, and mine own children as
their servants. Their life was my life, and their sorrow was my sorrow, and all
their infirmity or disease was mine, my Land was their land, my counsel was the
counsel of them and I never exalled my self above them in pride for mine own
worldly glory, but was amongst them as one of the least. T^erefore my sons if
ye walk in the Commandments of the Lord, the Lord shall exalt you and bless
you in ric^^s p^rpetual. A promise for them that pray for their enemies.
And if any man will do ev^ll to you, with meekness look that ye pray for him,
and God shall deliver you from all evil. For behold and see, that for my long
sufferance the Daughter of my Lord was given me to wife, God provideth for his
Elect.
and there was given to me with her an hundred talents of Gold, for God made
them to serve me, and gave me beauty that I should be as a flower above them
that were fair in Israel, and he kept me unto mine age both in strength and
beauty, because I was like to Jacob in all things. Joseph's dreams.
And what dreams I have seen, my children now hear. There were xii. Hearts
feeding, and nine were divided abroad in the earth, also I saw how that of Juda
was a Virgin born having a white silken robe, and of her came forth an
immaculate Lamb: And on the left hand of the said Lamb, was as it were a Lion,
and all Beasts made against him, Christ prophesied.
and the Lamb overcame them, and trod them under his feet, and in him joyed the
Angels, the men, and all the earth. These things shall come to pass in their
time, that is to say, in the latter days. Therefore my Sons keep the
commandment of the Lord, and honor Juda and Levi. For of them, to you shall
spring the Lamb of God, which by his grace shall preserve all Gentiles and
Israel. The Kingdom of him is a Kingdom eternal, which shall never pass. For
my Kingdom shall be ended in you, a^ the keeping of an Orchard, for after the
harvest it shall appear no more. I know right well that after my death the
Egyptians shall trouble you: but God shall revenge you, and bring you to the
promised land which he share to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But carry my bones
with you: for in so doing, the Lord shall be in the light with you against the
Egyptians, and Belial shall be in darkness with the Egyptians. Also carry wi^h
you your Mother Zilph^, and ^igh unto the valley, near unto Rachel bury her.
When he had said these words, he stretched forth his feet, and slept the sleep
of all the World. Then they imbalmed him with spices, putting him in a Chest in
Egypt, after he had lived 110. years, who saw Ephraims Children unto the third
generation. For unto Machir the son of Manasse^, were children born on
Joseph's knees. After this all (...) of Israel bewailed him, and all the
Egyptians with a great mourning. For he had compassion of Egypt as of his own
proper members, and assisted them both with his labor and counsel, and did
them good at all times and seasons.

The Testament of BENJAMIN, made to his Children at his death, concerning a
clean mind. Lo what true faithful love does mean,
All you that Lovers be.
It is in heart and not in lust,
As here you plainly se^.

The Testament of Benjamin.
THe Copy of Benjamin^ words, which he uttered to his Children, being of the
age of an hundred, and twenty years. He kissed them and said: As Isaac was born
in the hundredth year of Abraham, so was I in the hundredth year of Jacob: and
because Rachel dyed at my birth, I sucked her Bondwoman Bilha. For after that
Rachel had born Joseph, she was barren twelve years. And when she had prayed to
the Lord in those twelve years, she conceived and bare me: for my father loved
Rachel exceedingly, and wished to see two Sons by her, and therefore I was
called Benjamin, Benjamin what it signifies.
that is to say, the son of my days, or the son of my sorrow, because my
Mother dyed in the birth of me. When I came first into Egypt, and that my
brother Joseph knew me, he said to me: What said they to me Father, when they
had sold me? I answered: They stained thy Coat with blood, and bringing it to
him said: See if this be thy Sons coat or no. And my Brother also said unto me:
Truly when the Ismaelites took me, one of them stripping me out of my coat,
gave me a thin shirt to put on, and lashing me with a w^ip, bade ^he run.
Joseph's distress revenged by God.
And as he went aside to hide my garment, a Lion met him, and flew him, and his
partners being afraid, sold me is their fellows. You therefore my Children
love the God of Heaven, and obey his commandments, following that good and
holy man Joseph, and let your mind be set upon goodness, as ye know that mine
has been. He that has a good mind looks rightly upon all things. Fear
God, Temptation sha^ not overcome them that fear the Lord.
and love your neighbors, and then although the spirit of Belial tempt you to
all naughtiness to trouble you, yet shall it not get the uppermost hand of
you, no more then it did of my brother Joseph. How many folk would have killed
him, and yet God still defended him? For he that fears God, and loves his
neighbor, cannot be wounded of the aerie Spirit Belial: and he that is
shielded with the fear of the Lord, is safe from harm both of man and beast,
and cannot be overcome because he is helped by the love of God, which he has
toward his neighbor: for Joseph be^ought our father Jacob to pray for my
brethren to the Lord, that he would not lay unto their charges, the mischief
that they had devised against him. Whereat Jacob cried out, O son Joseph,
Joseph aright figure of Jesus Christ.
thou have overcome my heart. And therewithal embracing him, he kissed him two
hours together, and said: In thee shall the prophecy of Heaven be resembled to
the full, concerning the Lamb of God, and Savior of the world, that the
unspotted s^all be delivered for the wicked d^^ers, and he that is without
sin, shall die for the sinners in the blood of his testament, to the
salvation both of the Gentiles and of Israel, and he shall dash Belial and all
his servants. My Children (...) upon the end of that good man, and follow his
mercifulness with a good mind, that you also may have a Crown of glory upon
your heads. A good man has not a dark eye, A good man,
for he is merciful and pitiful to all men, yea though they be sinners, and
have devised mischief against him: and he that does good, overcommeth evil 1
by the defense of goodness, 1 Overco^meth evil.
and loves 2 the righteous as his own soul. 2 Loves the righteous.
If another 3 man be honored, he envieth it not: 3 Envieth not.
if a man be enriched, it grieveth him not: If a man be strong 4 or valiant, 4
Praises the valiant.
he praises him, and believing him also to be chaste, he defends 5 him that
has the fear of God. 5 Defends him that fears God.
He works together with him that loves God, and if a man forsake the 6
Almighty, 6 Admonishes the Sinner.
he warns him to return again. Whosoever has the grace of the good spirit,
him does he love as his own life. He 7 pitieth the poor, 7 Pitieth the poor.
The example of a godly man converteth Sinners.
succoureth the weak, and praises and honors God. My children if ye have a
good mind, evil men shall stand in awe of you, and unthrifts shall for very
shame be converted to goodness. So that covetous men shall not only depart
from their niggardliness, but also give of their abundance too the needy. If
ye be good doers, both unclean spirits shall flee from you, and shrewd beasts
shall shun for fear of you. For where the regard of good works is in the
mind, there darkness flies away. For if he do wrong to any holy man, he is
sorry for it: And if a holy man receive wrong, he p^tieth the doer, and puts
it up with silence. And if any man betray a righteous soul, and the righteous
pray for his betrayer, the betrayed is not a little disgraced, and the
Righteous becomes much more notable afterward, as did my Brother Joseph. The
guilefull spirit of Belial has no power over a good man's mind: The properties
of a righteous man.
for the Angel of peace guides his soul. He looks not affectionately upon
corruptible things, ^e ^aketh together riches in the desire of voluptuousness.
He is not delighted with pleasures. He grieveth not his neighbor, he stuffeth
not himself with meat, neither wandreth he in the pride of his eyes: For the
Lord is his portion. He takes no glory for giving good counsel: he passes
not how men dishonor him, neither can he skill in any fraud or guile, untruth,
strife, or slanderousnesse: for the Lord dwells in him, and inlightneth his
mind, and he rejoices before all men in a good time. A good mind has not two
tongues; one to bless with, and another to curse with: one to slander with,
and another to honor with: one of sorrow, and another of joy: one of
quietness, and another of trouble: one of dissimulation, and another of truth:
one of poverty and another of riches: but it has one only disposition, pure
and incorrupt toward all. It has no double sight nor double hearing. For in
all things that he does, speaks, or sees, he knows that the Lord beholds
his heart, and therefore he cleanses his mind, that he may not be found
faulty, before God and man. But all the works of Belial are double, and utterly
void of simplicity. Wherefore my children shun the naughtiness of Belial: for
at the first he delights those that obey him, but in the end he is a sword,
and the father of seven mischiefs. For when the mind has once conceived by
Belial, it brings forth first envy, secondly desperateness, thirdly sorrow,
fourthly bondage, fifthly needinesse, sixthly trouble somness, and seaventhly
desolation: and for that cause was Cain tormented with seven punishments by
God, Disobedience the father of seven mischiefs.

1 Envy.

1 Desperation.

3 Sorrow.

4 Bondage.

5 Needinesse.

6 Trouble.

7 Desolation.

An example of Cain.


for in 7. years together God brought every year a new plague upon Cain. Two
hundred years he suffered, and in the nine hundredth year, the earth was made
desolate with the Flood, for his righteous brother Abels sake. In seven hundred
years is Cain judged, and Lamech in seventy times seven: for they that are like
Cain in spightfulnesse, and hatred toward their brethren, shall be punished
with the same punishment for ever, as he was. You therefore my children eschew
malice, envy and hatred toward your brethren, and cleave to goodness and
lovingnesse. He that has a m^nd clean in love, looket^ not upon a woman in way
of lechery. For he has no defi^ing in his heart because the spirit of the Lord
rests in him. An apt similitude to a mind resisting sins.
For as the Sun is not defiled by shining upon a puddle or dunghill, but does
rather dry up and drive away the stink: even so a pure mind striveth against
the uncleanness of the earth, and overcommenth it, but is not defiled it
self. And I perceive by the sayings of the righteous Enoch, that there shall
be evil deeds among you. For you shall defile your selves with the fo^nication
of S^dom, and perish all save a few, and multiply inordinate lusts in Women,
and the reign of the Lord shall not be among you, for he shall take it away
suddenly. Nevertheless the Lords Temple shall be made in our portion, A
prophecy of the nativity of Christ.
and it shall be glorious among you. For the Lord himself shall take the
Kingdom upon him, and the twelve Tribes shall be gathered together there, and
all Nations shall resort thither, until the most High send his salvation in
the visitation of his only begotten. And he shall enter into the first Temple,
Of his passion.
and there the Lord shall suffer wrong, and be despised, and be lifted up unto
a piece of timber. And the veil of the Temple shall be rent asunder, Matthew. 27.
Of the coming of the holy Spirit.
and the Spirit of the Lord shall come down upon the Gentiles, poured out as
fire: and rising up from the grave, he shall ascend from earth to Heaven. Of
his ascension.
He shall remember how base he has been upon earth, and how glorious he is in
heaven. When Joseph was in Egypt, I longed to see his person, and the form of
his countenance. And through the prayers of my Father Jacob, I saw him awake in
the day of his full and perfect shape. Now therefore my Children, know you that
I shall die. Wherefore deal every of you truly and rightfully with his
neighbor, work ye justly and faithfully, and keep ye the law and commandment
of the Lord: for that do I teach you instead of all Inheritance: And give you
the same to your Children for an everlasting possession. For so did Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, they gave us all these things for an Inheritance, saying:
Keep the Lords commandments till he reveal his saving health unto all
Nations. Then shall ye see Enoch, Noe, A prophecy of the last coming of Christ.
Sem, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, rising at his right hand with joyfulnesse. Then
shall we rise also every of us to his own Scepter, worshipping the King of
heaven, The resurrection and judgment described.
which appeared on earth in the base shape of man. As many as believe in him,
shall rejoice with him at that time. And all these shall rise again to glory,
and the residue unto shame. And the Lord shall first of all judge Israel for
the unrighteousness committed against him, because they believed not in God
that came in the flesh to deliver. Then shall he judge all Nations, as many as
believed not in him when he appeared upon earth, and he shall reprove Israel
among the chosen of the Gentiles, as he reproved Esau in the Midianites, that
seduced his brethren by fornication and Idolatry, who were estranged from God,
and fell away from the Inheritance of the Children, because they feared not
God. But if you walk in holiness before the Lord, ye shall dwell in Hope
again in me. And all Israel shall be gathered to the Lord, and I shall no more
be called a ravening Wolf, for your Robberies sakes, but I shall be called the
Lords Workm^n, which g^veth food unto such as do good. A prophecy of the
nativity of Christ.
And in my seed shall be raised up the Beloved of the Lord, whose voice shall
be heard upon the earth, and he shall give new knowledge, and enlighten all
Nations with the light of understanding, and shall come up to save Israel. He
shall take from them as a Wolf, Christ described.
and give to the Synagogue of the Gentiles, and continue in the S^nagogue of
the Gentiles to the worlds end. H^ shall be among their Princes as musical
melody in the mouths of all men, and his doings and sayings shall be written in
^oly books. He shall be the Lords Dearling for evermore. Christ wipeth away our
sins.
And as concerning him my Father Jacob taught me, saying: He shall amend the
defaults of thy Tribe. And when he had ended t^ese sayings; he commanded his
Children to carry his bones out of Egypt, and to bury them in Hebron, by his
Fathers. So Benjamin dyed in hundred and five and twenty years old, in a good
age, and they put him in a Coffin, and in the fourscore and eleventh year
before the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, they and their brethren
conveyed their Fathers bones privily again into the Land of Chanaan, and
buried him in Hebron, at the feet of his Fathers, and returned again out of the
Land of Chanaan, and dwell in Egypt, till the day of their departure thence all
together.

FINIS.
How these Testaments of the twelve Patriarchs were first found, and by whose
means they were translated out of Greek into Latin.
THese Testaments were hidden and concealed a long time, so as the Teachers and
the ancient Interpreters could not find them. Which thing happened through the
spitefulness of the Jews, who by reason of the most evident, manifest and
often Prophecies of Christ, that are written in them, did hide them a long
while. At length the Greeks being very narrow searchers out of ancient
writings, tought these Testaments warily, and got them more warily, and
translated them faithfully out of Hebrew into Greek. Nevertheless this writing
continued yet still unknown, because there was not any man to be found that was
skillfull both in the Greek and Latin, nor any Interpreter that might procure
the translation of this noble work, until the time of Robert the second,
surnamed Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, who sent diligent searchers as far as
Greece, to fetch him a Copy of the said writing, without respect of their
charges, which he bare most liberally. Therefore, to continue the memories of
those most lightsome Prophecies, to the strengthening of the Christian faith,
that reverend Bishop did in the year of our Lord, 1242. translate them
painfully and faithfully, word for word out of Greek into Latin (in which two
tongues he was counted very skillful) by the help of M. Nicholas Greek, Parson
of the Church of Datchot, and Chaplain to the Abbot of St. Albons, to the
intent that by that means the evident Prophecies which shine more bright than
the day light, might the more gloriously come abroad, to the greater confusion
of the Jews, and of all Heretics, and enemies of the Church of Christ, to
whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen.

1658.



At LONDON Printed for the Company o^ the STATIONERS.


