THESE For his old Friend Doctor WILD AUTHOR Of the Humble THANKS, etc.
SIR.
HAd I believed report, that said,
These Rhymes by Doctor Wyld were made,
I long before this time had sent
Some symptoms of our discontent.
For since y' have left off being witty,
Your humble thanks deserves our pity.
I cannot imagine what you will do,
Your Muse turned Nonconformist to?
And will not easily dispense
With the old way of writing sense!
She has received, if that be true,
As much Indulgence then as you.
Surely ( Dear Sir) you did not pray
Since you conversed with Tychobrah.
Jove played the wag, and Luna pist,
Do these things with Free Grace consist?
Celestial signs serve to express
The good man's heavenly mindedness;
There are but twelve of them in Heaven,
Yet he will name one by one eleven;
And if you are not in too much have,
It Is ten to one, he names the last.
You had been horribly put to it,
If Sagittarius could not shoot:
Aquarius and the Smyrna Fleet,
I Will swear, a very good conceit.
But, Doctor, let us know, why will ye
Thus vex your self at William Lilly:
It Is true, he could not find it out,
That March would bring all this about;
But on that day you well might gather
That there would be some change of weather:
And change of weather in a Nation
Portends a kind of alteration.
This favor, you do say, did come
Fragrant and full of all perfume,
Like Eastern Spices (it should seem)
This had done rarely in a Theme.
To the next Column -- let us see
How you discourse His MAJESTY.
Where every solemn Epithet
Does look like Grace before you eat,
Which being said, as rudely you
Do take the Boldness to fall to,
With Rhymes most reverently sent
About Pope Clements Fundament,
And Puns that would provoke the hate
Of any under Graduate.
Peter Non-con (it seems) must pray,
And Judas Church must take the Pay.
Some angry men would call him rude Ass,
That calls the Church of ENGLAND Judas.
You Will be no Bishop, nor no Curate,
It Is only Minister that you're at.
Minister! It sounds methinks,
Like Pastor Clark of Bennet Fynkes.
These Favors which the King does heap
Upon your head, has made you leap.
And since y' have found your feet again,
The Gout's got up into your Brain:
If cap'ring be so fine a thing,
Pr'ythee come over for the King.
Your humble Servant, OBEDIAH.
Ill Painters when they make a Sign
Either of Talbot or of Swine,
To satisfy all Persons rogant,
That they might make a Hog, or Dog on it;
Do never think it any shame
To underwrite the Creatures Name.
WILD made some Verses you must know
ITER BOREALE is below.


LONDON, Printed for T. D. 1672.


