TERTVLLIANS APOLOGY, OR DEFENSE OF THE CHRISTIANS, AGAINST THE ACCUSATIONS OF
THE GENTILES.

Now made English by H. B. Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper, and are to be sold by Thomas Butler at his
shop in Lincoln's Inn field, near the New Market, 1655.

To my honored Father in Law, ABRAHAM HAYNES, Esquire.
SIR,
THis Excellent Piece of Tertullian (who lived about 1400. years since) falling
into my hands, and perusing it, for an Essay, translated into English part
thereof. Some of my friends (who gave me a visit) read this beginning, and
liking it (although they have the same in Latin) importuned me to finish what
begun. Esteeming, it might bring some profit to the Christian Religion; because
therein Tertullian has made such a solid confutation of the errors of
Paganism, and so perfectly represented the innocence of Christians, against
the false accusations of the Gentiles; that in truth Religion could not be
better defended, nor better persuaded, then it is in this Divine Piece. That
which makes me appropriate it to you, for my particular, you are he, to whom I
profess my self,

SIR, Your humble and affectionate Son in Law, HENRY BROWN.

TO HIS HONORED Friend, Henry Brown Esquire, Translator of the ensuing
Discourse into the English tongue.
SIR,
ITs very commendable, when Gentlemen, to avoid the irksome sin of Idleness,
apply their minds unto studies beneficial to themselves and others, in making
Exo^ick tongues hold forth the truth of things in our Native Language. This (it
cannot be gainsayd) in your late translation of this rare Piece into English,
you have done. It was written at first by Tertullian, the Author thereof, in
Latin. Into how many several tongues it has been translated since, I cannot
say; this I can, its worthy for the excellency thereof, to be translated into
all tongues, the Contents being convincing Arguments for the proof of One God,
against the Heathen Romans, who were then Worshippers of Many. It were heartily
to be wished, we of this Nation, could all of us be as unanimous in the
Profession of One true Religion, as the Author of this Treatise earnestly
labored to make those unto whom he wrote, in the Confession of One true God.
This, however, at present, we may sooner wish, then hope for, in these
suffering and distracting times, you have seasonably done, Chirst being the
Center, from whence all lines of truth tend to the Universality of Religion, as
to their Circumference, in laying to your helping hand for supporting the
sinking pillars of Christianity, by translating, out of a foreign tongue, what
the Primitive Christians did, and suffered for the Name of Christ. Its high
time to put pen to paper, and publish in our Mother tongue, An Apology, or
Defense for Christians, when men and women, nowadays, who would be thought
true children of our Mother the Church, secretly blaspheme, and openly call in
question the Godhead of Christ. But as I and my Father am one (says our
Savior in the Gospel) and thereby declares himself consequently to be true
God, so this Apology sufficiently sets forth the truth of our Christian Faith.
Which that it so does in the English tongue, we are all beholding to you, for
your pains alone, in this translation. The happy success whereof, together with
a further blessing upon it, and your self from the Author of what ever
blessings, God blessed for evermore, is heartily prayed for by him, who is,

Sir, Yours, much devoted to serve you, THOMAS WESTLEY.

THE PREFACE.
THis Apology or Defense is the Work of an excellent Orator, displaying all
the forces of his wit, to uphold a most deplored cause in the opinion of the
Gentiles, and yet the justest that ever was exposed to the judgment of men.
Its Reader will easily comprehend the merit of this piece, so soon as know
Tertullian the Author thereof, and its subject the defense of truth. 'Twas
treated as criminal, with them who shut their eyes to the lights therein, and
would not thereby be informed; Error seemed venerable to them for its
antiquity: they preferred the darkness which blinded them for so many Ages,
before the most excellent Sunshine of divine light: although the accused made
mention of in this Treatise were without spots, yet their accusers endeavored
to find some, and obscured their luster, whom they falsely accused with such
impurity, that it was necessary men illuminated with the beams of divine
splendour, should employ the graces they received from heaven, to dissipate the
darkness of error, and discover to the world a truth which till then they were
utterly ignorant of.

Tertullian was one of those, God made use of to lay open or unfold so glorious
a ministry; and certainly it was a labor worthy of him; He had enriched his
mind with all the choice ornaments of humane Learning; was ignorant of nothing
that was taught by any kind of Philosophers, complete he was in the knowledge
of the Civil Laws, had read the histories of all Ages, made to himself a
treasure of what every science had most precious in it, knew all the mysteries
of idolatry, and was fully informed of the beginning and progress of
Superstition, having an understanding which made him capable of very great
things: His Discourse was so powerful, that one could not hear him without
being persuaded by him; every of his Arguments rendering him victorious, at
least over some of his Auditors. He was equally subtle and solid in his
reasonings; he had united to those his sublime qualifications, a perfect
understanding of the holy Scriptures: great piety and a mavelous zeal in the
Religion of the true God. It appertained to a man such as he was, to defend
the Christians aginst the calumntes of the Goutiles, to overthrow the Altars of
the false Gods which Philosophy (as he says himself) had set up to justify
the worship given by us to the Creator of the Universal.

He was an Affrican, drawing his original from a Noble Family of the City of
Carthage: his Father was an Heathen, and commanded a Company of Soldiers,
under the charge of the Governor of the Province. As himself took birth from
an idolatrous house, so brought up he was in Error, but God giving him an
inquisitive soul, he contented not himself with the knowledge of this world
only, but also soared, and even penetrated into heaven, to get knowledge of
divine truth. This saving well spring carefully laid up in the bosom of the
Church, was the water of life he chiefly thirsted after, which having once
tasted of, he happily plunged himself therein, and took aful draught of the
graces of God, swallowed up at the same time this precious liquor. Since when
he ever after abhorred the fond blindness of foolish men, who attribute to
miserable creatures the glory due to God.

Charity, the most excellent of Christian virtues, so lively inflamed his
heart, that it made him undertake to instruct Infidels, to communicate his
lights unto them, to confirm them therein by the Authority of holy Scriptures,
and by the strength of reason to rank themselves with him, in the faith of
Jesus Christ.

Heerupon it was he so powerfully resisted the vanity of Philosophy, which he
formerly so delighted in, and knew to be the principal ground of Superstition,
So that the same things he heertofore studied to adorn his mind withal, and
bring it to the knowledge of false Gods, whilst he lived under the servitude
of Idolatry, by an admirable working of divine providence, served him since his
conversion as strong instruments to destroy the worship of Idols.

Now it is very reasonable that he, who so earnestly desired the salvation of
his enemies, should have a particular care of his brethren, groaning under the
weight of persecutions, which Pagans made them suffer: As therefore he piously
labored to open the eyes of the Gentiles, and make them worship his Master, so
he happily employed himself likewise to represent to him the holiness of those
who most unjustly were charged with such strange crimes.

Two principal things he equally endeavored to set forth, namely the
falsenesse of the Gods of the Gentiles, and the truth of one only God, and
joining together the defense of doctrine and manners, proved by one same work,
the faith and innocence of Christians.

He came into the Church near the end of the second Age, about the time when
Severus came to the Empire. The faithful then enjoyed a profound peace after a
furious war. The Hmp rour Marcus Aurelius, a wise Prince for the world, but too
much addicted to the opinions of Philosophers, suffered the fourth Persecution
to be kindled, which being stirred up in the year of our Lord 164. by the fury
of the people, and injustice of the Magistrates, who governed the Provinces,
swept away an infinite number of the servants of GOD: Nevertheless, although
some rest they had, in the year of our salvation 176. by the authority of that
Prince his forbidding upon pain of death, to accuse the Christians, for their
Religion by a^ust acknowledgement of the service he had of their affection,
When by the prayers of Christian soldiers, which were in his troops, heaven
poured down a favorable shower, that refresht in extreme necessity, the Army
be commanded in Germany. Yet this calm lasted not long, the quiet of this
unconstant sea brought in with it an horrible tempest, especially on this side
the Alps, where the City of Vienna and Lions saw the Rhos^ dyed with the first
blood the members of Jesus Christ spilt in Gaul.

The people that durst not directly resist the will of the Emperor,
transported with extreme rage against so many good people, began again to
trouble their rest, in the year 179, on othre pretenses than that of Religion:
They accused them of supposed crimes, the borror whereof, made their names
odious, and by this detestable subtiloy dragd them unjustly before the Courts
of Justice; whereby they cluded the punishment established by the Emperor,
against those who accused the Christians, and boldly glutted their cruelty on
these innocents, whom they exposed to all kind of tortures, and in the end, in
humanely put them to death, for confessing the name of God only. This
Persecution ended with the life of Marcus Aurelius.

The faithful after so many suffering, had rest under the Emperor Commodus,
who transported with a bloody outrage against all Orders of his State, by a
secret judgment of God spared none but Christians.

And certainly it was by a visible miracle that this Prince an enemy of all
honesty was not also an enemy of those in like manner that made profession of
godliness, that this Prince who shed with so much tyranny, the blood of his
people, should close the wounds by which came out that of the Christians, and
that these Idolaters who before had no spectacle so agreeable to their madness
as the punishments of the Faithful, should cease to afflict them, in a time
when heir hands were so accustomed to slaughter.

We must acknowledge God, who inspires such motions as please him in the
hearts of men, the author of this so strange wonder. He procured this peace to
the Church, to the end he might fortify it against the assaults it was to
endure soon after. Its certain, during this tranquillity it was much increased:
the Gentiles moved to see such excellency in the Christians, the innocent
carriage of their lives, could not consider thereof without astonishment. They
admired the purity they saw shine in their actions. From thence sprang desire
in them of discovering the cause of such perfection, and employed were they in
the search of its original, which is truth. And after they had broken down
the vail, which hindered them from knowing the same, they embraced it with as
much affection, as ever they strove against it.

So not only the people, but those also, whose birth and merit raised them to
great dignities, followed the Cross of Jesus Christ. They renounced their
Idols, to consecraete themselves to the service of the true God, and abandoned
the Temples of the false Gods, that they might serve no other but that one God
that created them. By this means Towns wrer peopled with Christians, Armies
made up of them, and the Senate of Rome, from whence flowed the Governors of
all the World, filled with them every day. These are the fruits which peace had
produced, which the Church injoied since the Empire of Commodus.

Severus having found the Empire in this happy condition, left it not so. The
Sovereigne power fell in his hands in the year of our Lord 195. At the
beginning he showed no sign of any aversion against the Christians, but
contrarily made great esteem of them; witnessed their probity, and openly
opposed the violence of the people when he saw them most incensed to the
Christians destruction. He had still before his eyes the benefit wherewith he
was obliged to a Christian named Proculus Torpacion, who heertofore restored
him to his health, and by the remembrance of such a recovery, was so dear to
him, that he always kept this man near him, so long as he lived; he durst not
use violence to the Religion of him to whom he owed his life, so long as he was
in the world, and his presence ready to reproove him of such ingratitude. The
death of this Christian, time, and the revolution of affairs changed his mind
unhappily to indignation.

He had two Competitors in the Empire, Piscenius Niger (who held Syria, and
declared himself Emperor in the City of Antioch) and Claudius Albinius (who
was Master of Gaul and Britain,) Severus accommodated himself to this man,
and associated him with himself in the Empire, to defeat the other, and after
overcomming Niger (who died of akurt he received in fighting) turned his
thoughts unto procuring the ruin of Albinius, whom he had honored for no other
purpose then to destroy him. Albinius being dead, he came back from Gaul
victorious, and entering Rome, he was there received with public acclamations,
rejoycings, and such solemnities as Superstition had brought in, and which
thwarted the holiness of the Christians, thought they should offend God, if in
showing their affection to the Emperor, they mingled themselves in these
dissolutions; but their piety passing with the Infidels for a crime, their
enemies took occasion thereby to exclame against them, as against the enemies
of the Emperor. Some think that Severus after he had caused many Noble
persons to be put to death, of Niger or Albinius party, went to make War
against the Parthians, and leaving the Government of the City of Rome to
Plautianus, this man naturally cruel, and continuing the search after all
those who had favored the one or the other of these two parties, filling Rome
with Funerals and mourning, began also the fifth Persecution against the
Christians, not as accomplices of the factions which now began to be
extinguished, but as guilty of high Treason, in neglecting to render to the
Emperor at his return from Gaul, their duties in like manner as his other
people did.

They that writ this fifth Persecution were stirred up at Rome on this subject,
on the only authority of Plautianus, have also writ it was in this time that
Tertullian made this Apology or Defense, to make known to the Gentiles the
injustice of the usage the Christians had; And upon their account this Piece
was published the seventh year of the Empire of Severus, which fell in the
year of our Lord 201. But others more probably say, it was in the year of our
Salvation 204. the tenth year of the Empire of Severus, when this Prince after
he had overcome the Parthians, and established peace in the Empire, willing to
smother the seed of troubles, where with it had been so violently agitated, for
bad unlawful assemblies, and factious meetings; upon this occasion, pretense
is taken to persecute the Christians with authority as if in meeting to praise
GOD, they had violated the prohibition of the Emperor.

Tertullian in his Apology or Defense, affirms, this last opinion to be the
truest, showing Christian meetings not to be factious meetings: Concluding it
was not for this cause, that the before mentioned Inhibition was put forth.
Neither is it unlikely, but this Apology or Defense, that justifies Christian
Religion from the guilt of faction, practice and conspiracy against the State,
was after the Edict of Severus, who commanding the Judges to punish all
seditious confederacies, had kindled again the fire of Persecution against the
guiltless.

Howsoever it was, certain it is; Tertullian composed this Apology or Defense
in the reign of Severus, during the greatest heat of punishing the Christians:
he was then at Rome, and published this Book, without putting his name to it,
that be might not expose himself to inevitable danger.

Sparing the name of Severus for the respect born to his dignity, he addressed
this Book to the Magistrates, who sat every day in judgment upon the
faithful, and condemned the true Religion without knowing it.

Its impossible seriously to consider this Piece without being ravished
therewith. Riches it has that puts it into the rank of great Works, and of
force to make us consesse, that if it be to be esteemed for the reputation of
its Author, it is also of more esteem for its own merit. We may see therein rare
vivacity of wit, incredible store of high thoughts and a mervaillous power of
persuading. We may receive there the light of an eminent Doctrine. We meet
there with an infinite number of choice things. The conduct of it is admirable:
Art has nothing excellent, which is not judicially there observed. All the
parts thereof are agreeable with the whole. In fine, its a perfect body to which
the Learned have given this commendation, that of all the Works of Tertullian,
there is none to be compared to this. All the following Ages have
acknowledged, that the Church has nothing more accomplished; and that Religion
could not be better defended, nor better persuaded then it is in this Divine
Piece.

The truth is, the style is not so glorious, the phrase rude and obscure, and
it seems as if every one of its periods contained a mystery, the sense thereof
is so hid, But we must pardon an Affrican, if it be not expressed with all the
grace of the Latin Tongue: the fault is not so much in him, as in his
Country. If his speech has not much Eloquence, it has much vigor; His
discourse flatters not the ears, but works with vehemence, and impresseth
powerfully on the mind of the Readers that which will persuade him

Now although Terrullian has not loftiness of speech, yet we may say, he
has written purely and not used terms, which were not fit to declare
vigorously what he conceived, and which are not found in the Authors of Humane
Learning, and of civil right; all his words are Latin, but his phrase strange,
and rellisheth of the style of the Greeks, to which he was accustomed by his
ordinary reading of their Books. Its this mixture that makes it obscure, that
the most able men meet with difficulties in his Works; and the reason his
Apology or Defense shows not its beauty, to all those that makes use of it.

There have crept in some opinions not now received, and which in that time
were not condemned. He writes, Devils were engendered by the conjunction of
revolted Angels, with the daughters of men: he speaks of the birth of the
soul, as well as of that of the body, believing the child takes both his soul
and his body from the substance of his father: he says the soul cannot suffer
alone (but he is not constant in his opinion) and teaches, that the souls of
the wicked suffer in hell, although separated from the matter, and their bodies
rest in the grave, which is the doctrine of the Catholic Church. He mentions
Paradise, as a place of delights, different from that in heaven, and separated
from the world, by the interposition of a Zone of fire, where he believes the
just go after death, to remain till the day of the Lord. And in conclusion,
lets slip something from his pen of the age of a thousand years interposed
between the end of this world, and eternity: He is of opinion also, that during
the course of these thousand years, Jesus Christ shall reign on the earth with
his elect, that in the mean time, the just being raised out of their graves,
shall live with abundance of spiritual felicity, and that this age being come
to its period, the Son of God shall then make his universal judgment. It is
enough we have taken notice of these opinions, which were not yet errors in
the time of Tertullian; the Church then not having pronounced any thing to the
contrary, they con^^ated themselves then to preach the truth of one God in
three Persons, the mystery of the Birth, Life, and Death of Jesus Christ, the
institution of the Sacraments, the judgment of the Lord, the glory of the
blessed in heaven, and eternal punishments prepared for the wicked in hell.

Our Tertullian has so well1 established this doctrine, so perfectly represented
the innocence of Christians, by this Apology or Defense, that all the Church
had this Book in singular reversace: they esteemedit as a pretions Cabinet,
where the evidences of its faith are kept the proofs of its ancient discipline,
and marks of the holiness of its first children

It seems to me that England deserves to have this Piece in its Language, that
Learned men owe to this Nation so rich a Present; for although Translations are
not much esteemed in this Age, where every one adores his own inventions, yet
this, (how meanly soever translated) may be well received, because of the
dignity of the matter. I have undertaken it for those, who not knowing the
language of the Mistress of the World, cannot know the perfection of so
excellent a production of wit, if it appear not to their eyes with its graces
in the Mother tongue of their native Country. This Work might have met with a
better Pen then mine, but not a faithfuller; I aspire not to the glory of
writing well, but only, of being an Interpreter of an Author, who, in the
judgment of the Learned, has no fewer thorns, then flowers.

Tertullians Apology, or Defense of the Christians, against the accusations of
the Gentiles.
CHAPTER I.
SIRS:
IF the Authority of Justice be subject to so intolerable a necessity, as you
that hold the first places of the Roman Empire, (who in the dignity of your
Magistracy, being exposed to the eyes of all the world, judge men in the most
eminent place of this Capitol City of the Universe) have not the liberty to
examine publicly and in the view of the people under your conduct, wherein the
things consist whereof the Christians are accused, and which they propose for
the proof of their innocence: If upon this occasion only you fear, or are
ashamed to labor openly to find out the truth, and to instruct your selves by
the order the Laws have established; or if the severity you have exercised
against the Christians subject to your domesticke power, incensing your minds
with too much sury against our Religion, makes you bring from your home a
resolution to condemn us, and not so much as hear the reasons serving for our
defense: Be pleased we present you this truth in secret, and permit us to
discover the same to you in paper, seeing we cannot make you understand it by
word of mouth. She demands no favor of you; because her condition permits her
not to hope for a usage easier then that she has formerly received; she knows
her self a stranger on earth, and doubts not to meet with enemies in a
Country that's not her own; as she derives her original from Heaven, so
there makes she her principal residence, where she has most hope, where her
best credit is, and where her dignity Chines in its greatest luster. That which
she desires of you whilst she remains here below, is only you would not
condemn her unknown. The Laws of the State will lose nothing of their
Authority, if you Permit her but to defend her self; their power on the
contrary will be seen with more luster if you condemn her after you have heard
her: but if you judge her without knowing her cause, you will not only stand
charged with reproach of manifest injustice; but be justly suspected your
consciences check you with some secret motions, that make you refuse to hear
the thing you could not condemn if you heard it. We say then ignorance is the
first cause that makes the hatred unjust you have conceived against the name of
Christians; indeed we are unholy in your opinion, because you are not informed
of the holiness of our doctrine. But take heed what seems to serve you for an
excuse, be not that which renders your judgment of us faulty. For is there any
thing more unjust then to hate that you know not, although it were otherwise
even a thing to be hated? As bad as any thing is it begins not to deserve
hatred, till it be known to deserve it; while you know not what it is, how is
it possible you should rightly hate it? To make the hatred of any thing just,
it suffices not the thing it self be evil, but that the party who hates the
same knows it to be evil in like manner; seeing therefore you hate us without
knowing wherefore, how appears it you hate us not without a cause, and
consequently most unjustly? in regard whereof we have good reason to reprehend
you, because you know us not (to wit) in our condition when you hate us, and
therefore hate us most unjustly. Certainly you pursue us with so much
animosity, that it well appears you know not in what manner we live; and
affect an ignorance that condemns rather then excuses you of injustice. For
we see a great many whose hatred is grounded on the want of knowledge only,
who so soon as they cease from being ignorant of our discipline, cease at the
same time to bear hatred against us. It is of these fort of men that Christians
are made; they embrace our religion after informed in the Piety thereof, when
hating what they sometimes were, they make public profession of that they
hated before; the number of these men is so great, that it will astonish you
when but hear them reckoned up. And from thence it comes the people complain
highly that the City of Rome is environed on all sides with the enemies of the
worship of the Gods, that Christians are spread over all the Empire, that the
provinces are full of them; they be wail it as a signal mischief and as a
considerable loss, because persons of all qualities and ages, men of all
conditions, even those who have attained to great dignities, run promiscuously
on this side. The progress Christianity has made cannot make them judge well
of us, and the examples before their eyes puts not this thought in their
minds, that a religion that draws all the world after it must have something
excellent and divine that they know not of. The constancy wherewith we suffer
their persecutions is not able to move them, to better opinions of us then
those they have formerly conceived: they will not perticularly be informed of
our Doctrine, wherein only they care not for, being over curious, and take as
much delight to be ignorant of this, as others to know all things. O how would
Anacharsis have judged these rather imprudent for giving their judgment upon
men wiser then themselves, then formerly he taxed those of folly, who
themselves being altogether immusicall, gave their judgment touching Music.
Seemed it not the policy of the Athenians ridiculous to him, when he saw among
them the learned exposed to the judgment of ignorant men? Truly the
blindness of our enemies far surpasses this, in regard they are so hardened
in the hatred they bear toward us, that because not being obliged to
relinquish it, they care not for being made acquainted with our condition: much
doubting what they are ignorant of, is of such quality, that it will not be in
tneir power to hate it, if once acquainted but with the merit thereof. Now if
hatred have not a lawful cause, we cannot too soon extinguish it, and it
justly kindled, it imports that the subject which has given it a being be
examined; because if it be found it has justice on its side? not only this
restimony takes nothing away from its force, but seems to take new forces,
authorizing it the more. You say, to prove the holiness of our doctrine, we
should not boast in that which she insinuates into the mind, and that she
gains so much people; for we see very many change their good customs into
bad, that it is not a new thing soldiers revolting from their own party quit
their Ensigns, to cast themselves into the troops of their enemies. We agree
with you in this; but experience also teaches us, that even they that suffer
themselves to be surprised with unruly affections, are not assured of defending
the disorders of their life, and dare not undertake to make them pass for good
actions; Nature has tied to evil, fear or shame, the wicked seek for
darkness, tremble when they are surprised, and deny ail when accused: One can
hardly draw the truth from their mouths no not in the midst of tortures, and
when their sentence is pronounced, they have recourse to tears and sighs. They
examine their consciences, and remembering the number of their crimes, they
impute it to destiny and the stars, and will not acknowledge they have been
carried to it by their consent, because they know they are wicked and
punishable things. Do the Christians any such thing? They are not ashamed when
discovered what they are, they repent not, unless it be that they had not
sooner followed the Law of Jesus Christ, they esteem it a glory to be put
into the hands of Justice, if accused they defend not themselves, when
interrogated they confess willingly, and when condemned they declare
themselves thankful to their Judges. What is that evil that has not the
quality of evil? which is neither accompanied with fear nor shame? who know
not the artifices the accused make use of to gain time, and deferr judgment?
Who are not affected with repentings, or complaints wherewith Criminalls use
ordinarily to deplore the sadness of their conditio? was there ever an evil of
this nature? Did any ever see Criminalls rejoice in the torments they endure?
Who desire to be accused? Who make much of punishment? and of their pain make
their felicity? Do not say the constancy we show is rather a mark of despair
then of virtue, for you cannot judge safeiy of our actions, seeing you cannot
know the motions they produce.

CHAP. II.
IF notwithstanding you cannot part with the opinion you have conceived, but
believe us indeed guilty, why are we handled otherwise then they who, being
like us, are in like manner guilty? Seeing by the rules of justice the same
fault ought to have the same manner of punishment. When men, not of our Religion
are accused of the same crimes they impute to us, it is permitted them to have
their innocence made known, to defend themselves by word of mouth, to take
counsel of an Advocate; they are suffered to give an answer unto what objected
against them, and to make good their justification; for the Laws do not allow
those to be condemned whose offenses have not been heard. It is only from the
Christians they take the liberty to speak in their justification, to uphold the
truth, and to declare to the Judges the things they ought necessarily to know,
that their judgments might not be suspected of injustice. They require for
the condemning of us, but only the confession of the name Christian, they stay
not till the crimes wherewith they charge us be examined, and it is the
confession only that exposes us to public hatred. When you put up a process
against a Criminal, you do not pronounce his condemnation so soon as confessed
he is a murderer, sacrilegious, incestuous, an enemy of the State, which are
the titles they give us: But you examine the circumstances, you consider the
qualities of the fact, in what place, in what manner, and at what time the crime
was committed, then you inform your selves against the accomplices; you do not
keep these forms when you proceed against us, and yet you will condemn us
without show of justice; you must make us appear guilty of the things which are
falsely imputed to us; for example, how many children a Christian denounced
after inhumanely cut their throats, how many times darkness give him the
assurance of satiating his incontineney with incestuous embraces, who the Cooks
dressed the flesh of these bodies so cruelly murdered, and of what sort the
dogs (as you suppose) brought into our assemblies, to serve to put out the
lights. Oh what great glory to a Judge to have convinced by due proof a
Christian to have caten the fieash of an hundred children? seeing we read it
has otherwise been hecretofore forbid even so much as to make any manner of
inquiry after us. Pliny the second, whilst Governor of Asia, after sentencing
to death many Christians, and depriving others of their dignities, wondered his
severity did not diminish their number, and consutred with the Emperor Trajan
to know in what manner he should govern for the time to come, in the behalf of
Christians that should be presented to him. He wrote to him that besides their
firm resolution of not sacrificing to the Gods, he could learn no other thing
touching their Religion, but of their assembling together before day to sing
praises to Jesus Christ, and to God, and to unite their wills to the
conservation of the discipline established amongst them: forbidding expressly
murder, adultery, fraud, persidiousnesse, and other crimes. Trajan by way of
answer, returns him a command not to make inquiry after them, but being
brought before him to punish them. O judgment wrapped up in a necessary and
inexplicable ambiguity.! How is it possible to accord things so opposite? Hec
forbids to seek after Christians, as being innocent, and commands to punush
them as criminalls. He is merciful and cruel, pardons, and punishes at the
same time. How comes it you are contrary to your selves, that your own
judgment bears witness of your own Injustice? If you think we deserve
punishment, why forbid to enquire after us? If thought fitting not to enquire
after us, why then not acquit us? Provosts are established in all Provinces, to
discover and take thieves. Arms are lawful in the hands of all men to be
employed against traitors, and against the enemies of the State. When once made
acquainted with a villainy committed, we apprehend in the pursuit all we
suspect to be Pertakers with them that commit it. They are only Christians are
forbid to be sought after, and yet permitted at the same time to be dragd
before the Tribunals of Justice, as if the enquiry made to no other end then to
present men before the Judges. So you condemn a Christian when once found out,
although according to the design of your Laws, he should be assured against
all searches; and when you condemn them, I do not believe you judge them
worthy of the punishment you ordain them, because guilty, but only because
discovered; and that there are people found bold enough to enquire of their
life against the public ordinances. But when a Christian is in your hands, you
do not act against him as you are used to act when you would pursue the
vengeance of a crime, for when the other accused boldly maintain they are not
guilty, you ordayn they should be put to the rack, to the end that torture may
force them to confess, and contrarily you apply it to the Christians only to
force them to deny. If our Religion were evil, without doubt we should fly
to denyings in the same manner as criminalls do, and you would be forced to
draw confessions from us by the force of torments; you say you do not think
your selves obliged to seek by tortures the proof of the evil we do, because
you certainly believe the confession of the name Christian carries enough with
it of all crimes. But this pretense is not lawful: for if a man be accused of
murder, although you know well enough of what nature his crime is, yet you do
not content your selves with the confission, but you force him to declare the
order he took to commit it; you do not deal so with us, and the strangeness
of your proceeding discovers visibly your injustice. You hold that to confess
the name Christian makes us guilty, and you make use of violence to force us to
retract it, in disavowing the name of Christian, we discharge our selves, at
the same time of the crimes you impute to us because of this confession. But I
think you do so, because you will not have us destroy our selves, we whom you
take for execrable persons: It may be you are wont to bid a murderer deny the
murder he is accused of, and injoyne a sacrilegious person to suffer more
torments if he persevers inconfessing his impiety. Now seeing you proceed not
against us as against Criminals, its a figne you think us very innocent; Then
therefore it is without doubt you will not have us persist in this confeission,
whereas you know very well that condemnation is grounded on the necessity
imposed on you to obey the laws of the state, and not on the rules of justice.
A man cries out in the midst of his torments, and says, I am a Christian, he
declares openly what he is; you would hear from his mouth what he is not. You
are resolved, purposed, determined to draw the proof of the truth by the
confession of the accused, and of all other men, but there are none but we of
whom you strive to hear lies. You ask me (says one of us) if I be a
Christian, and I answer, I am. Why endeavor you to corrupt me by force of
tortures? I confess and you torment me. What would you do if I should deny?
when those that are guilty protest they are innocent, you believe not the truth
from their words; and you believe us so soon as we say we are not
Christians. Certainly this unjust affection which so unhapplly troubles your
reason, is to be suspected, and ought to make you think there is some secret
violence that works in your minds, and makes you proceed in our cause against
the order and nature of judgment, and also against the Laws. If I be not
deceived the laws command us to discover, and not conceal ofoffenders in
withdrawing them from punishment, it or daines that those who confess
themselves guilty should be condemned, and not absolved.

These are the rules established by the authority of your Senate, and custom
of your Princes: these are the maxims which are in use in the exercise of the
power whereof you are ministers; for the authority of your magistracy is
lawful, and not Tyranicall. Tyrants are accustomed to add tortures to ordinary
punishments to render them more cruel: but as your policy is full of
humanity, you make no use of it, but force the accused 10 confess. Keep this
Law in its vigor, and stretch it not further then its bounds; its necessary to
draw confession from the mouth of criminalls, but if they prevent its rigor
men must not use it, there remains nothing in this case but to judge and
punish it. Punishment established by the laws is a debt which they are bound to
acquit, and whereof its unjust to discharge it after it is confessed. Indeed we
see nojudge that strives openly to save a wicked person. Neither is he
permitted to have a will to it; and from thence it comes in order of judgment
we do not force men to deny. You believe a man cannot make profession of
Christianity without being tainted with all sorts of crimes; without being an
enemy to the Gods, to Princes, to the laws, to good manners, and to nature,
and that a Christian cannot be acquitted unless he denies himself to be a
Christian; you force him to deny that you may acquit him, which is apparently
tobetraye the justice of the laws. What would you have him deny he is guilty
that you may make him innocent, even against his will, and that a man cannnot
after impute to him what is past to render him criminal? tell us what motion
inspires you with an affection so, unreasonable? and from whence comes it you
resolve not to believe him that voluntarily confesses rather then the party
that denies what he is accused of by constraint: This last being forced in his
judgment mayspeake against his conscience, and keeping in his heart the
Christian Religion, after he is absolved, deride you at the same time you come
to judge him, because of the partiality you show in maintaining your opinions
at the charge of justice. Now seeing you treat us in every thing otherwise then
criminalls, and your only end is to make us foregoe the name we bear,(and
we undoubtedly relinquish the same if we do what they do who are not
Christians) you may easily apprehend we are not guilty of any wickedness:
that our being named Christians is our only crime, that his appellation is
unjustly prosecuted by the motions of a rash and blind hatred, whereof the
first effect is to take from men the desire of knowing certainly the things
which they know they have no assured knowledge of at all. So they believe all
that is published against us, although they see no proofs, and they will not
let our lives be enquired after, for fear a lawful proceeding discover only
the things they will not have to be believed to be true, and they take
occasion to condemn this name, which is the object of their hatred, on the
only confession we make as if the confession of the name were sufficient for
the conviction of those crimes, they attribute to it without any other ground
then their own opinion. Then as our contention is but a contention about a
name, they torment us when we confess it, they punish our constancy, and
acquit us when we deny it. But after all, when you pronounce sentence against
a Christian, why do you not declare another cause of his condemnation then
that he is a Christian? Why say you not he is guilty of murder, and of
incest? that he has committed all other crimes imputed to us by your selves.
It seems there are none but we against whom you are ashamed to pronounce
judgment under the notion of these execrable actions. If the name of Christian
be not a name of naughtiness, then what you attribute to it is nothing
pertinent, it being the name only, and not any wickedness that name imports,
Which you find fault with.

CHAP. III.
BUt is it not a strange thing, that the hatred, wherewith this name is
pursued, in such manner blinds the minds of most men, that when witness the
probity of a Christian, they mix in their discourse as a reproach that he has
embraced this Religion? One says, truly he of whom you speak is an honest
man, if he were not a Christian, and his life would be free from blame.
Another, do you know such a one who had the reputation of a wise and discreet
man, he is lately turned Christian? and there is no body reproves and shows
them it is more to the purpose to reason thus: Therefore such a one is an
honest man, or this who is so wise and modest has got these rare qualities
since making profession of Christianity: or else, such like men make it appear
visibly they are Christians, because they are wise and virtuous, they praise
the thing they know, and blame what they know not, and corrupt the purity of
handsome actions, whereof eyewitnesses, by the opposition of a quality whose
merit is unknown to them, although it is more just to judge of things that
appear not, by those that appear; then to ground on hidden things the
condemnation of those which are apparent. There are others found that keeping
company with those they knew before they were Christians to be vagabonds,
infamous, and wicked, now praise them, who observed the irregularity of their
life past. These people by an extreme blindness of hatred, speak to the
advantage of the name Christian when they strive to render it odious. For say
they, how pleasant and of what a good humor was that woman? How sociable and
joviall was that man? Its pity they should be Christians. So they impute the
amendment of their lives to the profession of Christianity. Some of them also
purchase the aversion they carry against the name Christian which we bear,
with the price of what is most precious to them, rather desiring to lose the
sweetness of life, tranquillity of mind, and all sorts of Commodities, then to
see in their houses that which they hate.

A man who heretofore had his mind full of jealousy, can no longer endure the
company of his Wife, what assurance soever he has of her Chastity, after once
he perceives her to be turned Christian, and parts from her now when her
actions (full of modesty) have extinguished all suspicions wherewith he was
heretofore moved.

A Father, who of a long time endured the disobedience of his heathenish Son,
resolves to take from him the hope of succeeding him in his inheritance, for
turning Christian, when at the same time executing his commandments without
murmuring.

A Master that used his Slave gently, when his carriage gave him some cause of
distrust, now puts him far from him, for that a Christian, when he has most
assurance of his fidelity. It Is committing of a crime to correct the disorders
of a man's life, by the motions of a holy conversion to the Christian faith; and
the good which is produced by so happy a change, works not so powerfully on
the minds of men, as the hatred they have conceived against us. Indeed this
hatred is strange; and when I consider that the name of Christian only makes
it to be so, I would willingly know how a name can be criminal, and how a
simple word can be accused? Me thinks a word cannot be condemned, unless it be
barbarous, or expresses some evil speaking, or represents some unchaste thing,
and of ill report. The word Christian draws its, original from that of
Unction; it is the name that the son of God our master took, to show he was
the King of the faithful, and the high Priest of the new law. And when by an
ill pronuntiation you change the signification of this name, (for one need but
hear you speak it, to discover you know it not) it is a name composed of
sweetness and goodness; so you hate men whose actions are full of integrity,
and a name that has nothing of evil in it, did one ever see an opinion
condemned because of the name of its author? What wonder were it if they that
give themselves to a discipline take the name of him that taught it? Are not
Philosophers by the reason of the name of their Sects called Platonicks,
Epicurians, and Pithagorians? and in consideration of the places of their
assemblies Stoics and Academicks? and do we not see Physicians borrow that
of Erasistratus? the Gramarians that qf Aristarchus? and the Cooks also that
of famous Apicius? Let none think it strange that both the one and the other
bear the name of their Author, seeing they glory in following their Doctrine,
and in embracing their discipline which was left them. Indeed the name of a
Sect cannot be condemned, if it be not vicious, and it must be made known
that a Doctrine is evil, and also that the Author is wicked, to make the name
of them odious which make profession of it: for it cannot be, unless it be
because of the vices of the Sect, and of him that made it. Therefore before you
hate our name, you must know the worthiness of our Religion by the knowledge
of our Author, which is Jesus Christ: or else inquire of the conditions of our
master, by a holy search of the things he taught us. But you will know neither
the Religion which you persecute, nor the excellent quality of its Author: You
are content to inveigh against the name, and to contend with it: a simple word
is all the ground of the injustice you do to a Religion, and the Author Of a
Doctrine you know not; and there is so much prejudice in your minds, that you
condemn this law and its Author, only because of the name, without being
convinced by the force of a lawful conviction.

CHAP. IV.
I Have hitherto insisted in opposing the injustice of the public hatred
wherewith we are persecuted: I am now to treat of the point of our innocence;
and therefore will not only refute the things they object against us; but
return the same upon themselves who cast them upon us, that thereby they may
know Chiristians defile not themselves with crimes so impudently laid to their
charge, by those who cannot be ignorant that Christians are guiltless thereof.
In regard whereof, I wonder they blush not (wicked people as they are) at the
rash accusations they charge us withal; I will not speak against: good men,
but only such as themselves, who asperse us for criminals.

I will touch in particular all they say we do in private, and from whence
they take occasion to reproach us as wicked, superstitious persons, worthy the
infamy of punishment, and in conclusion objects of laughter and contempt, and
make it appear our Enemies commit the same publicly every day. But because
your last refuge, when you see truth on our side discovers all these
impostures, is to make use of the authority of the Laws against us; and have
ordinarily in your mouths, either that it is not permitted you to examine anew
what they have condemned, or your oath injoynes the necessity of obeying the
same; that is, whether you will or no, and by constraint you prefer what they
will have you, before the knowledge of the truth; I am first obliged seeing the
Laws are under your protection, to speak to you of the obedience due unto
them. I say then, when you pronounce these words with too much rigor unto us,
your Religion is forbid by the Laws, and by an inclination contrary to humanity
condemn us with an unlimitted power, without suffering us to justify
ourselves: you act with violence, and exercise a power full of tyranny.
Certainly you abuse your authority, when you determine the Christian Religion
ought not to be suffered, not indeed because it ought not to be suffered, but
because you will not suffer it.

If Justice be the Rule of your Judgments, and if reason makes you condemn a
thing which ought not to be condemned; without doubt that only should be
forbid which is wicked, from whence it follows, what is good should be left to
the free liberty of all men. If I find that to be just your Laws forbid, is it
not true, this forbidding of yours obliges me not at all, and contrarily, that
I am bound to obey it, if condemning that which is evil? And wonder not if I
accuse your Laws of error: it is man has conceived them, they that made them
failed not a little: your Laws have not been established by the infinite
Wisdom of God.

It is no wonder to take notice that men may be deceived in making a Law, and
therefore upon better consideration with themselves, they have confessed their
error, in condemning that they formerly approved? Know we not that the
Lacedemoniaus sweetened the severity of Lycurgus Laws, to accommodate them to
civil society: at which the great Lawgiver was so displeased, that he
voluntarily quitted his Country, condemned himself to dye, and to advance his
death, deprived himself of nourishment for life? and falls it not out every
day, that the experience you have got in doing justice, serves you for a
Candle, and glittering light to dissipate the darkness of antiquity, to beat
down before you this thorny Wood of the ancient Laws? I might say, you clear
the confusion that would ensue thereupon, by the authority of the new
constitutions of the Emperors?

A little while since have we not seen Severus, a Prince endued with comely
gravity and rare wisdom to have changed certain things of the Papic Laws,
although their old age was never so venerable? Laws that forced the People to
put their children into the world, before the Age ordained by the Julian Laws
to contract marriage, and which showed them ridiculous, in taking thought with
solitary care for the birth of men.

There were also Laws that permitted Creditors to cut in pieces the bodies of
their Debtors, when destitute of means to pay what was due to them. But these
Laws are abolished, and the following Ages by a more feeling humanity, have
universally condemned this cruelty as too barbarous. They exempted the poor
from capital punishment, but not to leave them without chastisement imprinted
shame in their foreheads, by ordaining their goods to be publikly sold, that
their infamy might be public in like manner, choosing thereby rather to make
blood ascend into their faces, then to let it out of the bodies of such poor
men.

How many other crimes do you think there are in your State, whereof you know
not the injustice, and which deserve to be corrected? Surely, seeing equity is
the only object all Laws ought to propose; Laws themselves are neither for the
number of years or dignity of their Author, but for the only consideration of
the equity and justice that is in them for to be commended. So that when once
we know they are destitute of this so necessary a condition, we have reason to
neglect them though they have such authority, and condemn those which accuse
them of injustice. But it is not enough to say your Laws are unjust, we must
add they are impertinent, and rash when they punish men for their Names sake
only, as those are that are published against Christians; if it be true,
Laws ought to punish actions, if in respect of all other persons they will
have the condemnation to be grounded on the proof of the fact, and not on the
name of the accused: Is it not a strange thing that in our Cause they take
only the name we bear to punish us for the crimes they impute unto us? I have
committed incest, why require they not my life for the same? I have killed a
Child, how comes it to pass, they extort not from me the confession of these
crimes by racks, and tortures? I have offended the Majesty of the gods, and
the Prince (say they) why is not my, defense heard to know if I have where with
all to justify my self with respect to those crimes they accuse me of? There
is no law forbids me to examine that which is liable to condemnation, neither
does a judge justly inflict punishment, unless he finds the accused to have
offended against the public ordinances. Neither can a Citizen give the
obedience that he ought to the law, unless he know of what nature the action
is which, it punishes. It suffices not the law be good in it self: but so
it must be known also from those from whom it expects obedience. For that is
to be suspected which will not let us try whether or no it be just: but
without all apparent proof of its equity will absolutely have what it
condemns to be executed. Such a Law cannot but be wicked.

CHAP. V.
But (to say something of the original of the Laws you oppose against us)
there was an ancient Law that forbad introducing new ceremonies into Religion,
as worshipping strange Deities, unless approved by the Senate: this was an
inviolable and unalterable Law to which the Prince or Emperor himself was
subject. Marcus AEmilius knew what his power was, when he would have had divine
honors rendered to his Idol called the god Alburnus, but he could not obtain
the same. A strange thing, and advantageous for our part against you I that the
gods with you must depend upon the approbation of men: if men like not God, he
shall no longer be a God; and man must now be propitious to God. It was by
virtue of this Law the Emperor Tiberius (under whom the name Christian began
to be made famous) propounded to the Senate to receive among the number of
their gods, Jesus Christ, of whom he heard great miracles had been done, from
the intelligence given him by those Commanders under him Palestine, the place
where Christ our Master first Preached the mystery of his Divinity.

This Prince witnessed at first, that he inclined to ordain for him the honor
he rendered to his other gods: the Senate rejected the proposition, and would
not approve of a God they did not know. Tiberius remained firm in his
resolution, and threatened disgrace to those that went about to accuse the
Christians.

Read your ancient Records: you shall find there Nero the first of all the
Emperors that persecuted our Religion, when it was in its birth: which much
redounded to our glory, that this Monster should be the first of all others
that condemned us; for whosoever knew his life, must needs judge it could not
otherwise be, but what he condemned was most highly to be esteemed.

Domitian (whose cruelty made up that of Nero's) did sometimes resolve also to
molest us: but as his thoughts and resolutions were contrary to humane
condition, his mind of it self turned to render, us the peace he had taken
from us, and to recall those Christians he had banished. In brief, we were
never persecuted, but by Prince, whose actions were full of injustice, whose
minds of impiety, and whose manners of shame and infamy, never persecuted of
any but of those whose lives your own selves are wont to condemn, and whose
odious governments oblige you to revoke their judgments, in re-establishing
innocents which have been so miserable as to be the unhappy objects of their
fury. Princes who by their virtue got the love of the people, have not been our
enemies; and of all the Emperors commanding this State till now, and that had
any sense of Piety and Religion toward your gods, or whose conduct was
animated by the spirit of humane wisdom, you cannot name one that persecuted
the Christians. On the contrary, it will be found, the Emperor Mark
Aurelius, a very wise Prince, was our Protector; if you see the Letters he
writ touching the extreme incommodity his Army suffered whilst he made war in
Germany, you shall find he there witnesses, that the prayers of the
Christian Soldiers in his Troops, obtained from Heaven that favorable rain
which quenched the thirst wherewith they were oppressed.

This Prince resolving to make acknowledgement of their affection, and the good
will they bore him; and yet not purposing to infringe the authority of his
Predecessors, did not publicly discharge the Christians from the punishments
enacted against them, but rendered their power useless in the sight of all the
world, another way, by ordaining their Accusers to be inflicted also with the
extremest punishment. Consider then a little what force these Laws ought to
have, where none made use of them against us, but these Emperors that are
defamed with all manner of impiety, injustice, villainy, cruelty, lightness,
and folly: which Trajan frustrated in part, in forbidding to inquire after
Christians which were never confirmed by an Adrian, a Prince curious of all
rare and excellent things, by a Vespasian who conquered Judea, by an Antoninus
Pius, nor by a Marcus Aurelius: If our lives were wicked, as is supposed, we
should not fear affliction from wicked Princes, because Companions of their
Vices, but rather punnishment to be inflicted upon us from them who make
profession of honesty, whom being virtuous we might sooner fear to become our
enemies and ready upon all occasions to seek means to disturb us.

CHAP. VI.
BUT I could wish these men that appear so religiously, and so zealously
observant of their own Laws, and so severe defenders of things instituted by
their Ancestors, would answer to the demands I shall make them; namely, whether
they have kept their Faith inviolable? whether rendered the honor and obedience
they ought to the good Rules left them by their Forefathers? whether there are
not some Laws that have lost their power and authority among them? whether they
have not passed beyond the bounds prescribed by ancient simplicity? or rather
not banished from their policy all that their Fathers judged necessary and
convenient to establish a good government? what are become of the Laws which
cut off Luxury, superfluous and ambitious expenses? which commanded what we
spent at a Feast should not exceed five shillings? that would have us serve up
but one Hen at a meal, and that not a fat one neither? which forbad a Senator
entrance into the Senate, who had in his house twenty marks of silver; (as if
in that alone one might justly suspect he would seem too magnificent) that
would over throw the Theaters after newly set up, supposing the use of shows
would not serve but to corrupt manners? which would not suffer any man rashly
and without punishment to usurp the emblems of great dignities, belonging to
persons of noble birth?

But now I see superfluity gives names to Feasts, they call them Hundreds,
because of s;o many hundred Crownesspent at such Feasts. They also draw out of
the Mines silver to make Basins, not only for Senators but Freemen, and those
that not yet come to obtain their freedom, yea that scarce exempt from the
miseries of servitude: I see it is not enough in open Theaters to content the
eyes of the People, but by drawing vast Covertures over, they arm themselves
against the injuries of the Air, to fulfill their pleasures by the objects of
those infamous representations. For they imitate the Lacedaemonians, who were
the first that took care to see public Plays at their ease, and covered
themselves with large and heavy Gowns for fear lest during the winter, they
should catch cold, in enjoying their dishonest and unchaste pleasures. I see no
difference between the women of honor, and those that are infamous and lewd;
they observe not any longer those holy institutions of former times, that
enjoined women to have special care of modesty and temperance. When a woman
wore no more gold then that on the finger she put the Ring her Husband gave her
the day she was married, to be the gage of her conjugall Faith. When it was
so absolutely forbidden women to drink Wine, that there was one that her near
Kinsman caused to be starved, because she had broke the seals wherewith his
Cellars were shut up; and under the reign of Romulus one Mecenius killed his
Wife for the same cause, and was absolved for it.

Therefore it was established that they should kiss their Parents, that they
might judge by their breath, if they had offended against this Law. Where are
now those happy Marriages, and good manners, maintained in such a perfect
harmony, that we have seen near six hundred years since the foundation of this
City pass, without hearing so much as a divorce once spoke of in any one family
only?

Women now a days have never a part of their bodies which bows not under the
weight of the gold they wear: a man cannot kiss them without smelling the Wine
they drink; and we are fallen into those times, it seems, that people marry
only to be repudiated, and divorce is the fruit of marriage: But this is not
all, for as religious as you will appear in the observation of the ancient
institutions of your Fathers, you have revoked what they ordained with serious
deliberation concerning the worship of your gods. The Consuls with the
Authority of the Senate, banished, not only from the City, but also from all
Italy; Father Bacchus, with all ceremonies done in his honor; Piso and
Gabinius were not Christians, and yet during their Consulship, they forbad to
place in the Capitol, Serapis, Isis, Harpoerates, and that Image which had the
head of a dog, that is to say, they put them away from the Palace of the gods.
They took from them their divine honors, and caused their Altars to be beat
down, that the disorder of vain and dishonest superstitions might be
restrained.

You have re-established all these gods in the dignity they had taken from
them, and make them partake of honors due to the highest Majesty known by
mortals. Tell me where is your Religion? where the reverence you owe to your
Forefathers? you render your selves unlike them, in your habits, custom of
living, manners, opinions, and lastly in your very words and language? you
always praise antiquity, and every day, receive new things: so that you remove
from you as much as is possible, the laudable institutions of your Ancestors,
and as for the things that are established, you keep none of them, but what
deserve not to be kept. There is moreover, this in it, for I will show
presently that by a negligence, that injureth the authority of your
Forefathers, although you have set up again the Altars of Serapis, that by
your means this god might be no more a stranger at Rome, and have presented
your sacrifices to Bacchus, whom you cause to be worshipped in Italy, you have
no more this great affection to the worship of the gods, which antiquity held
so unfortunate an error, and so strange a blindness; you your selves destroy
the Religion your Fathers taught you, whilst pass for its faithful
protectors, and accuse Christians principally of being guilty of impiety
toward them; yet notwithstanding I must justify our profession from the
infamy of the hidden crimes which they object against it, that I may prepare a
way, to arrive at the point which concerns the actions we do in the sight of
all the world.

CHAP. VII.
I Say then, the crimes pretended against us, the horror whereof makes us pass
for wicked in the opinion of the people, are, that we meet together to
sacrifice a child; after we have taken away his life by a barbarous
superstition, we devour his body, and when devoured the flesh of this
Innocent, we commit incests. They add, we have Dogs who serve to overthrow the
Candles, and doing the Office of these infamous Merchants of modesty, make us
lose all shame in taking the lights from us, and covering our actions under the
veil of darkness, emboldens us to seek the use of ungodly and sacrilegious
pleasures.

But so it is, we are not guilty, save in the discourse you make concerning us.
It Is a long time since you imputed to us all these things, and though you
accuse us of them everyday, yet you make not much inquiry to know the truth
thereof. If you take us to be faulty, why make you not process against us as
criminals? but seeing you have not as yer convicted us by a lawful proceeding,
you should not have such an evil opinion of us; and certainly that which
moves you to use dissimulation in what concerns us, tells you we are unjustly
accused. Therefore is it you dare not undertake to inform against us, and when
you give the Executioners the order they are to observe in tormenting
Christians; you command them to draw from their mouths; not the confession of
what they are, but the disavowing the Religion they profess.

Now (as we have already said) the doctrine which we follow, began from the
time of the Emperor Tiberius; from its beginning it has drawn on it the
hatreds of men: it has met with as many enemies, as it has found people in
the darkness of Idolatry; even those who ought to have received it: The Jews,
to whom it was revealed, are set against it, by a spirit of jealousy, because
it would destroy their Law. Soldiers in their usual persecuting us are
accustomed to be against it, and our domestics becoming our adversaries by an
evil inclination of nature, have been the first that made war against it.
From thece it coms, that every day we see our selves besieged, we are betrayed
at every instant, and very often they take us in our Assemblies. This being so,
I ask when did it fall out, that ever any one surprised us at the same time,
when a Child having the knife set to his throat, gave forth his last cry
before we cut his winde-pipe asunder? was there any that finding a Christians
mouth bleeding, as of the Cyclops, and the Cyrenes after such a deed done by
us, presented it to the Judges? Who among you ever discerned in his Wite any
symptom or token of unchastity, after our Religion at any time sincerely
embraced by her? Is it possible our Enemies should hide such strange crimes as
laid to our charge, after once discovering us to be faulty therein? or that
they that take such a pride in persecuting and dragging us before the Tribunal
of justice, should be corrupted in our behalf? you say we do nothing but in
obscurity: if it be as you say, tell us, when knew you we did what you accuse
us of, and in whose power it was to give you the certain knowledge of it? it is
not likely you had it from the mouths of them you judge guilty: for all
Mysteries are to be kept secret; and to partake of them as we ought, the Law of
silence is faithfully to be observed by us. Men usually say nothing of the
mysteries of Samothracia or Eleusina: How much rather ought they to be
careful, not to reveal those which would excite against them, were they
known the rigor both of humane and divine justice.

They are not Christians it seems then, that discover themselves unto you; and
if not Christians, then must they be people of different profession, that
discourse of their actions. But how should such a peoples knowledge be
informed in those mysteries to be laid open by them, seeing even the ceremonies
where piety presides puts away the profane, and suffers no strange witnesses,
unless they will have it said, Christians are impious, and the wicked fear
less to be seen then the good. So you must confess you know nothing of our
doings, but by common bruit, uncertain proof, of the weakeness whereof there
is no man ignorant? Is there any who knows not the nature of it? One of your
Authors said, same is the swiftest of all evils? why think you call they it
an evil? is it because of its swiftness? or because its principal office is
to discover hidden things? or that it often declares lies; indeed it has this
evil quality, even when reporting something of truth it cannot forbear to
mingle the same with leasing or falsehood. Truth never passes purely through
fames mouth, either she adds something to, or takes something from, or makes
some notable change in it: besides, she has also this fault, her credit lasts
no longer then she lies: she has no life, but so long as she certainly proves
nothing: so soon as make evident her proof, she cease to be any longer Fame,
whose property is to make relation of nothing but what is not certainly known:
so soon ^s delivered for certain, the assurance of the thing delivered
succeeds immediately into its place, as being no longer a bruit, but a known
and professed truth. At what time and when such a thing is known, we say not
it is so reported, or so the bruit goes, but so or so it is without doubt.

For example, we use to say, such a man has got such a government, in such a
Province, when we know certainly he has got the same: and when not, it is so
famed, or so reported. After we are assured of a thing, we make no more
reekoning of Fame, which is an expression of doubt and uncertainty. So there
are none but fools ground themselves upon reports; wise men believe nothing but
what is certain, and what time also has verified on her behalf. And
certainly, as general and diffused as same may be, what belief soever she
has got with men, and with what assurance soever they esteem her, we must
always consider she had a beginning since she has passed through diverse
tongues and ears, which have given her the vogue she has in the world. Her
original is ordinarily weak and vicious: but together with all her faults she
authoriseth and covers all that is added to her from her birth, because no body
mounts up to the sourse, and troubles himself to know whether or no the first
Author of the relation thereof began with a lie: which falls out often, either
through hatred to them same tears in pieces, or liberty usurped to make evil
judgments upon simple suspicions, or the pleasure some take in lying, a
pleasure not new among men, and to which many are so naturally inclined. But
God be thanked, time reveals the truth of all things; it is a sentence we have
from you, and whereof we make use against you, the established order of nature
cannot suffer any thing long to remain hid: but in the end makes that appear
which fame had not discovered. Judge then if it be as reasonable you should
still persecute us seeing after so long time there is nothing but bare report to
inform you in the knowledge of the crimes we are supposed to commit, nothing
proved against us by you, but her restimony which is so much the more evil,
because she cannot yet prove what she bath heretofore invented to make us
appear odious, and which for so many years she has affirmed upon the
opinion only of certain men.

CHAP. VIII.
IT is not enough to show you the weakness of the proofs you employ against
us, I will make known our innocence by your own judgment, to overthrow the
opinion you have conceived against our life: I demand but the testimony of
nature, who is your mother as well as ours. Suppose Christians promise Eternal
life, as a recompense for all these crimes so full of horror: You may believe
it if you list, but I would also know, if after persuaded by such black
actions a man might merit Heaven, you would be so barbarous as to desire it at
such a rate. Can it be imagined one should say these words or the like unto
you? come on hither, die your sword in the blood of a Child, I say in a Child's
blood whose tender age ought to have no enemy, who cannot be guilty of injuring
any body, and whom every one with a fatherly Love ought to cherish.

Or if the charge of shedding a Child's blood be committed to another, can it
be supposed we should use this discourse unto you? Be present at the bloody
death of an infant who meets with the end of his life in the beginning of his
days, see a soul depart out of a body so soon as it came in, take this blood
newly animated, dip your bread in it, and fill your self with the substance
thereof. Again, while at Table, mark well where your Mother, and Sister, are
seated, that you may not fail to find them out, after they are left in the
dark, by dogs overthrowing the Candles, consequently extinguishing the lignt.
For you must know, you cannot but be faulty if you commit not incest. If
profiting by these our instructions, you square your Faith by the practice of
such actions, assure your self you shall receive everlasting life. Answer me
now, would you to get this never fading selicity do things so contrary to all
humanity? If nature it self be of force sufficient to divert your own minds
from acting such irregular courses, you cannot I persuade my self, be induced
to believe that other men would be faulty therein: Yea though ye certainly
believe this the only way to eternal happiness. I dare say you would not by
such means so barberously difile your selves; no neither if you had any such
desire, have the courage to perform the same. Judge then of us by your selves,
and know we can no more commit these crimes then you, or if we can, your
selves as liable thereunto as we.

But what do you think our judgments different form yours? that Christians of
another race of mankind then you are? do you take us for the Cynocephales, and
Sciapodes, Monsters of India and Lybia? do you believe we are made otherwise
then other men, that the faculties of our bodies otherwise disposed and by a
savagenesse more then the most brutish of all people, us only to feed on
blood, and violate the Laws of nature, in the use embracements which it
forbids? Certainly if believe these things of Christians there is some what in it
that you should do so, we are men as well as you: And therefore if your souls
abhor such like actions, you ought not imagine us in regard men as well as
Christians, to commit them. You acknowledge these crimes contrary to nature:
but you say we deceive them who know us not; as if the calumnies you invented
against the Christians were not public or any could be ignorant thereof. That
which all the world knows cannot be dissembled, and those who have embraced
the Law of Jesus Christ, take not this resolution, without well considering it:
but after all things exactly pondered they find we are innocent of the crimes
wherewith they accuse us. Besides, its a common use, that those who will be
instructed in a Religion, adresse themselves to the cheise Priests, to learn
of them what they ought to prepare that partake of his mysteries. Then if it be
true, Christians are guilty of these impieties, there is no doubt but the
Priest, whose charge is to receive him who would be instructed, speaks to him
in this manner: Friend, you must be careful to provide a child that is yet in
the innocence of his first age, who knows not what death means, and rejoiceth
at the sight of the knife that must cut his throat.

You must have a loaf to put under the wound to receive the blood which runs
from it. You must make provision of Candlesticks and Lamps: You must bring
Dogs; which when you throw meat to them to eat out of the reach of the string
wherewith tied, the desire of filling themselves therewith may excite them to
make such a leap, that they overthrow the Candlesticks to which they are tied,
and by this means put out the lights: but first it is necessary you cause your
Mother and Sister to be present. Yea, but how if they will not consent to it? If
he has neither Mother nor Sister? If no kindred that would be a Christian, can
he not be received? and these relations of Brother or Son, are they essential
to the quality of Christians? I say more, suppose they have all these things
ready, without advertising those who have no knowledge thereof: one cannot
deny but they learn presently what is done in their Assemblies; and yet they
remain firm, after turning unto Christianity they complain not of being
deceived: but you say they fear to be punished, if they discover the evil
they have done. Contrarily, if any be found that call for the public Authority
against Christians as against impostors, there would be none but would speak
in their behalf. Moreover, if the actions of Christians were so detestable as
you make the, those whom they should so abuse, would rather expose themselves
to death then live with the remorse of so criminal a conscience. But after
all, suppose they fear to accuse themselves, how comes it they perservere so
constantly, and keep their religion in the midst of persecutions? for men are
not wont to tie themselves with such constancy to a profession, which they had
not embraced, if not been well informed of it form the beginnig.

CHAP. IX.
BUT, to make it known we are not guilty of these crimes, I will show, that
you your selves in public and private commit the same; for it may be for this
reason it is you lay them to our charge. Men heretofore publicly sacrificed
Children in Africa to Saturn, until the time of Tiberius, by whose
Commandment, he that governed this Province under him, abolished so strange a
barbarism, causing the Priests, the authors of these impieties, to be put to
death in their room, on the trees which were near the Temple of this god; trees
whereon they were wont to hang the offerings they presented to him, and where
the leaves seemed to comply with the crimes committed under their shades.

A just punishment, and which these miserable creatures suffered in the view of
the Soldiers, in the Country of my Nativity, who served the Lieutenant of the
Emperor in the execution of this commission. They still continue these bloody
and detestable sacrifices: but they do them privately, and hide themselves
when they shed the blood of innocents.

So you see they are not Christians only that contemn your Laws: your own
people slight your injunctions: whatsoever severity used by you, you cannot
thoroughly pluck out of men's hearts the roots of this criminal devotion, and
your gods change not their manners, in having changed their condition.

Saturn that pardoned not his own children, much less would spare children not
his own. Since he ceased to live upon the earth, he lost not the desire of
blood he had before. Ever since men made him a god, he continually receives
the offering up of innocents unto him from the hands of their own Fathers, who
by an unlucky superstition, making sacrifices to their gods, take away the
lives of them to whom they had given the same; who voluntarily obliged
themselves to this impiety; and who in this action where their own Children
were the victims sacrificed by them, entertained them with flatteries, not
without any feeling of compassion, fearing the mystery might be interrupted, it
they suffer not their throats to be cut without shedding tears. Tell us a
little, whether the crime of murder you impute to us, be not far beneath
that of Paricide, which your People are guilty of? The Gauls offered on the
Altars of Mercury, men which had attained to their full strength or age of
perfection.

I Pass by the fables of the horrible sacrifices that were offered up in the
Temple of Diana Taurica, as matter fitter to be represented on Theaters. There
is also in this so religious a City, and Temples of the Pious offspring of
AEneas, a Jupiter in honor of whom they make plays, where they shed humane
blood, by Combats with men and wild Beasts. You tell me, you expose none but
those that are already condemned to dye. Alas, what then? Is it not the
shedding of humane blood, to shed the blood of these miserable creatures? But
this sacrifice, is it not much more detestable, then the blood of the wicked
which is presented to a God? whatsoever excuse you may seek for, this truth
remains always certain, that this blood which you offer, is the blood of a
man, whom you have caused to be cut in pieces, and you cannot accomplish your
vows without committing murder.

Certainly, your Jupiter much resembles Jesus Christ: for he thirsts as much
for blood, as you suppose our Master loves to see it shed, and as he is the
only Son of his Father; which you must acknowledge could never be, had not
Saturn a cruel heart.

Let us pass now form murdering children in scrifices, to other kind of
wilful murdering by their Parents; (for in what manner soever they take away
their childrens lives, it is always murdering them, although not always
alike heinous:) I will then address my speech to all Idolaters: how many are
there among you, O ye people, that are this way greedy of the blood of
Christians? and also among you, O ye Magistrates, that after you appear such
great Justiciers by the severity you treat us with, whose consciences I would
strike with true reproaches of having procured the death of your own children?
yet if you did but simply put them to death, it were somewhat; but by a strange
excess of cruelty, you throw them into the water, you expose them to the rigor
of cold and hunger, and the rage of dogs: you will not take their lives away
with the sword, because too gentle a death, and which men of the age of
discretion had rather suffer, then any other that has violence in it.

As for us that are Christians, homicide is particularly forbidden us, by
virtue whereof, it is likewise inhibited us to destroy that which the Mother
has conceived in her womb, though yet but blood, and deliberating (as I may so
speak) in the presence of nature, whether or no it take the form of man: It Is
a committing murder before hand, to destroy that which is to be born; and as
much evil in hindering the birth of a soul, as in plucking it out of the body
when it is borne: that which should come into the world being a man, and the
fruit already in the seed which produces it.

As for that custom, so full of inhumanity, to drink blood, and to feed on
such tragic meats, you may read further in Herodotus, it being he, as I think,
who reports, that certain Nations assembling to swear Treaties, were
accustomed to draw blood from their Arms, which presenting one to the other,
they drank solemnly.

There passed some such thing in the conjuration of Cateline. They say also
among the Scythians, in certain Families they that are near allied use to
devour the bodies of their dead kindred: but we need not go so far; we have
among us the use of these barbarous ceremonies. The Priests of Bellona,
shedding their own blood, and consecrating it to their Goddess, after putting
it in the palm of their hand, give it to those who participate with them in
their mysteries. In the public spectacles of the combats of the Gladiators,
they that are subject to the falling sickness, seek their cure by the practice
of a Remedy worse then the Disease, viz. seeing the blood of these wretched
creatures newly slain; they receive the same while running from their wounds,
and to obtain their healths, fill themselves in such a brutish greediness,
with the substance of these poor people, who are men as well themselves.

What shall we say of these that make whole meals meats of these poor
creatures (before key-cold) killed upon the place of combat, and ask at the
same time for a piece of the wild Boar, and of the Stag lying dead also upon
the place? a piece of that wild Boar, which having torn in pieces his
assailant, whilst they were yet in the encounter, licked up the blood flowing
from his wounds; again a piece of that Stag, even yet sweltring in the gore of
the Gladiator whom he pierced with his horn: The people also ask for the
intrails of Bears, which are full of the bodies of men they have devoured; so
men fill themselves with flesh nourished by that of men. As for you that cat
these meats, how much are your meals different from the meals of Christians?
But what judgment shall all one give of these who by a brutish concupiscense
make impure meat for themselves of that which contributeth to the birth of men?
are they less guilty then others, because they devour the substance of the
living? can one say in the filth to which they abandon themsolves, there is no
humane blood, because the matter they suck in is that wherewith blood is made?
These people eat not only children, but men, old enough to put other men into
the world.

Certainly it must needs be, these disorders with you, should make you blush
before Christians, who as you know, eat not the blood of any creature, and for
that reason feed not on the meat of any creatures stifled, and abstain from
that of beasts which have not been slain, for fear they should have the least
blood that is, even that dried up or yet remaining in the flesh of the
strangled beast to defile themselves with.

This is the reason also, you offer them puddings made with the blood of beasts
when you try them, being well informed, that what you suppose they sin most
in, if they accepted thereof, is most straightly interdicted them. Is it
possible, think you, we thirst after the blood of men, when you know by
experience, we abhor the blood even of beasts? This opinion cannot enter into
your minds, unless having tasted of the one and the other both, humane blood
seems to you the most pleasing.

But if persuaded Christians inhumanly devour this blood, how comes it to pass
you make not use thereof to try them? you should offer them man's blood, as
usually you offer them incense-fire: They Will soon discover themselves in not
taking this drink from your hands, as when refuse to sacrifice Incense; and
thereby you may have this advantage of two several proofs to condemn them
with; namely, their refusing to taste man's blood, and their not offering up
Incense to your gods.

The criminal justice you execute upon supposed offenders will furnish you
this way with blood enough to convince all manner of Christians brought before
you. But to speak of the crime of Incest, who should a man sooner suspect to be
guilty of this wickedness, then those to whom the greatest of their gods (to
wit, Jupiter) has given an example? The Persians (as Cresias reports) mingle
themselves incestuously with their own Mothers. The Macedonians it seems are
not exempt from this sin, in regard the mocking complaints Oedipus makes in the
Tragedy of Sophocles, because of the Incest he had committed with Jocaste, in
laughing to see him so afflicted, they said, go fight generously, and overcome
your Mother. As for you, if open but your own eyes, you cannot but take
notice, that Incontinence, whose slaves you are, nourishes you with disorders,
inconsiderately precipitating you into this soul crime: for you expose your
children to the open air by putting them from you, that passengers having more
compassion of their hard destiny then your selves, might bring them up, or else
make them over to be adopted by other Fathers of a better disposition then your
selves: Now it cannot be, but in time you lose the knowledge of your blood,
which you abandon to strangers, and when once for want of this knowledge, begin
to offend the error in which you so imprudently engage your selves, increasing
by course of years, your care will perpetuate it self with the vice of its
incestuous beginning. And truly your lust accompanies you in all places where
you go: it remains with you in your houses: it leaves you not when you
travel; it passes Sea with you, from whence it falls out you lose no
opportunity fulfilling your concupiscence, it is very difficult not to meet in
some places of the World with persons that know not your birth, and theirs have
the same beginning, and that descended of the same kindred and lineage that you
are. It Is also very hard, leaving your seed all the world over, it produces
not children unto you which by the commerce men have one with another, are
joined to you, or yours, by an incestuous conjunction, and thereby mingling
your blood with that of your near kindred, without knowing the same.

As for us, the chastity whereof we make exact profession, and which we keep
with greatest assurance, will warrant us from these accidents, and as enable us
against incontinency, by living purely in the estate of marriage, preserve us
from falling into the sin of Incest.

Yea, there are many among us, who to avoid these disorders, with greater
prevention, vow to God their virginity, which they happily keep till the
extremity of old age, that (as it were) renders and renewes unto them the
innocence of their first years. Certainly, if consider you your selves guilty
of these crimes imputed by you to Christians, you would presently confess that
they are innocent. The light of your own understanding could not butcondemn
your selves and acquit them at one and the same instant. But it falls out
ordinarily, by the rencounter of a double blindness, that they who see not that
which is, imagine they see that which is nor. I will show you by and by the
truth of this proposition in all things, but speak first of those which are
more manifest.

CHAP. X.
YOU say we do not worship the gods, nor for the welfare of the Emperors
offer Sacrifices unto them. The one of these two crimes whereof you accuse us,
must necessarily follow upon the neck, or in consequence of the other: for
being resolved to render no manner of worship to your deities, we must
necessarily be resolved in like manner, not to sacrifice to their Altars,
whether for our selves, or for what person soever it be. Hereupon you conclude
us guilty of sacrilege and high treason, which is the upshot of what you
charge us withal: and the argument most convincing of all other, whereof you
accuse us. And truly it well deserves to be examined, because the judgment of
our innocence wholly depends, thereon: the judgment I say of our guilt or
innocence in this matter, that neither prejudice nor injustice pronounce the
sentence: not prejudice which upon all occasions refuses to hear, nor
injustice which by all means refuses to allow of truth when ready to be
alleged in our defense: We say then, we have desisted from honoring your
gods, since the first time we knew them to be no gods. That which to be
expected by you from us, is, we prove those you adore as gods, to be no gods,
and therefore unworthy the worship you render them: for it is true, honor
should be due unto them, if they were true deities; and Christians were
punishable, if this title of a god appertained unto tnose whom they refuse to
adore, for the opinion only they conceive they are no gods. But you add, they
are your gods: in answer thereunto, we appeal from your words to your
Consciences: We are willing they both judge and condemn us, if it can be
maintained your gods have not been men as well as your selves; if it be denied,
we will convince it of falsehood, by the testimony of antiquity, which shows
us the Cities where they were born, the Countries where they left Monuments of
their actions, and places where they were buried.

I will not stay to speak to you of all particularly: there is too great a
number of them, new, old, Barbarians, Greeks, Romans, Strangers, Captives, gods
that are particularly adored in each Province, those that are known in Greece
and at Rome males, and females, gods of Countries, and gods of Cities,
Seafaring and Warfaring gods. It were to lose time to repeat what may be said
of every one of them, I will only speak of them in gross, not to make you
know them, but to recall your knowledge by remembering their beginning, which it
seems you have forgot.

You have never a god ancienter then Saturn: from him begins all that Deity to
which you address your Vows, at least the principal and the most known: That
which you say touching his original, may fitly enough be applied to those
descended from him. If believe written Books, we shall find that neither
Diodorus Siculus nor Tallus, nor Crassus Severus, nor Cornelius Nepos, nor any
other ancient Historian, have spoke of Saturn otherwise then of a man. If
seek for proofs drawn out of public Records or monuments, we cannot meet
with faithfuller, or more certain then those we have in Italy it self, where
we learn, that Saturn after many Voya ges landed in this Province, while
coming from greece, and was received there by Janus or Janes (as the Saliens
will have it.) The Mountain where he dwelt was called Saturnien: the City he
founded carries even until now, the same appellation, and in conclusion all
Italy after that of Oenotirian was called by his name. It was he who first
found out the invention of Tables and signing or marking money with the Image
of Princes, from whence it comes, that the public Treasure is placed by you
in his Temple: Now if Saturn were a man, he was the Son of another man; and
being his Father was a man, you cannot say he was the Son of Heaven, and Earth.

It is an error proceeding from hence when Saurn, so called, that his original
was not known, and because they knew not of what race he was, they easily fell
to this belief, that he had for his Parents Heaven and Earth, the which a man
justly may style the parents of all Mankind: for who is he that for reverence
or honors sake, calls not Heaven and Earth the Father and Mother of us all? or
else they had this thought of Saturn, namely, that as men are used to say of
those they never saw; till coming upon them on a sudden, they are come from
Heaven.

So Saturn in person thus surprising the Inhabitants of the places where he
first landed, passed after for a Divine person, the vulgar calling them
Children of the Earth, also whose original is altogether uncertain to them. I
could tell you people in these times were so gross, that if a man not wont
formerly to be among them, showed himself to them, they were moved with it in
the same manner, as if they had seen a god. Which ought not seem strange,
leeing now adays, the wits of men are so refined, that at present put them in
the number of the living gods, who a little before by the Ceremony of a
funeral pomp, you knew to be only dead men. Enough of Saturn, although but a
little spoken of him. We will show now that as Jupiter the Son of a Man, he
was Man also, as well as his Father, and all the descent of your gods mortal,
and of the same condition with those, of whom taking their Birth they are
descended.

CHAP. XI.
BUT because you dare not deny your gods have lived as men, to the end you may
justify the worship given by you unto them; you say, their deities were
established unto them after death: let us then examine the causes that should
raise men up into this glory.

First, you must grant a greater God then them, a power upon which the power of
your gods depends, as of their Sovereign, a god who made those your gods of me,
by endowing them with a divine nature; for of themselves they could never
attain this quality which was not in them, neither is there any but he who
had it of his own nature, that could give a part thereof to them to whom it
did not appertain originally: That if there were not a God, who gave this
divinity to men: if not, acknowledge this principle Author; it would be but in
vain to think they were made gods after they ceased to live here on the Earth
as men. Briefly, had they had the power of making themselves gods, they would
never have been born men, and subjected themselves to mortality, while enjoy
they might the possession of a far more excellent condition.

Then if there be a chief God that makes gods, I return to the search of the
causes which should oblige him, being the chiefest, to communicate to men this
high Majesty: and I find none unless we say this chief God had need of
their ministry wherewith to exercise his functions more perfectly: But it is an
injuring the Author of all things, to think he needed the help of any one
living, much less should employ to so excellent an end the ministry of dead
men. This wise providence could not but well foresee such an assistance would
be necessary to him for the time to come, and in this foreknowledge it had been
more convenient for him to make gods assistant to himself from the very
beginning, then stay the end of these men's lives subjected to mortality, whom
he purposed to make his fellow gods.

But I see no need God Almighty had to make other gods; for what manner of
thought soever we have of this world, whether it bad no beginning and was
never made, (according to the opinion of Pythagoras) or that there was a time
when it had a beginning, and was made, (according to the opinion of plato) the
eternal Wisdom at the same instant doubtless when he formed it, foresaw by an
absolute and admirable exquisiteness all that was necessary for the government
thereof; he who gives perfection to all other things, could not be imperfect to
himself, as expecting help from Saturn, or any other of Saturns race to add
to his perfection.

Men would be thought to be very simple if from the beginning of time they
believed not both rain to have fallen from the Clouds, stars to have darted
out their beams from Heaven, light to have shone, Thunder to have made a
noise, and Jupiter himself to have trembled (as it were) at the terrible
roaring of Thunderbolts put by God into his hands. Also the Earth produced all
sorts of fruits before Bacchus, Ceres and Minerva lived, yea before those whom
you make your greatest Gods reigned upon the Earth. That which serves to
entertain the life of man is as ancient as himself, providence giving him a
being, I gave him at the same time all things whereof he stood in need; and
men could not have invented any thing more for their preservation, then what
was before: let them not say therefore they are the Authors; but only after
finding out the same, when created before by God that taught others how they
should make use thereof, which presupposes such things were before such, as
they showed their use. And from thence follows the glory or honor thereof is
not to be attributed to men, but to him to whom they themselves owe their
original. If Bacchus were put in the number of the Gods, because he first
taught men to plant the Vine, certainly they have ill treated Lucullus in not
making him a god also, he being the first who planted Cherry-trees in Italy,
brought by him from the Kingdom of Pontus; for they ought also to have made him
a god, as Author of a new fruit, because he first gave them knowledge of it.
Wherefore seeing from the beginning all we see dono in the Universe, has
been done before, as likewise all things ordained to certain functions of
their nature, this first reason, for which suppose God communicated his deity
to men is rendered of no force because the same faculties you give to each of
your Gods inventing, were from the beginning of the world created by God, and
should never have seized to be, or to produce their excellent effects, though
you had never established those your gods. Seek ye therefore another reason
for mons being sacrificed unto, as unto gods, by saying that deifying them is
the reward of their eminent virtues. From whence I suppose you must grant that
this God that makes other Gods, governs by the rules of exact justice, and
distributes not so noble a recompense rashly, without measuring his
liberallity, and considering the merit of those whom he calls to his glory. I
will therefore examine these men's actions whom you now adore as gods, to see if
they be of a condition that render them worthy to be listed up to Heaven, or
not rather (which as a man would think) should have cast them headlong into
the bottom of Hell, a Prison (as you say sometimes) wherein the wicked are shut
up, to receive the punishment of their crimes. A place where (according to your
opinion) those are imprisoned who have banished from their hearts the natural
Piety that Children ought to show toward their Parents; a place whither those
are confined who commit incests with their sisters, who corrupt married women,
ravish Mayds, defile themselves with boys, use all manner of violence or
outrage, kill, steal, and deceive their neighbors, and who (to shut up all
in a word) by their vices, are like some of your gods; for you cannot make
appear one of them was ever exempted from all manner of faults, unless deny
him to be at any time man. But you must acknowledge, your gods have been of
the condition of men, because the actions you attribute to them witnesses they
were subject to such disorders, as are tokens of the weakness of our nature,
and tokens I say which permit not, we can be persuaded that after death they
should be styled gods.

In a word, if wont to punish those who suffer themselves to be carried away
with these disorders; if as many of you as are people any good manners, avoid
the commerce, conversation, and society of vicious and infamous persons,
think you, God has called you to possession of his Deity those whom they
resemble? or if any such matter believed by you, how comes it to pass you
condemn criminals? you that adore the companions of their crimes? the justice
you seem to exereise in this world, serves not in heaven but for a subject of
mockery, and derision. If render your selves conformable to your gods, you must
ascribe divine honors to the wickedst of all men, it being an honor to those
gods you adore, to make gods of men most like unto them in all manner of
abominable filthiness.

But to omit speaking any further of things so unworthy of divine worship, I
could wish so long as they lived here below, they had been of better report,
had passed their days here in perfect integrity. How many nevertheless of
better reputation then these whom you worship for gods, have you left in Hell?
have you not there put Socrates so renowned for his wisdom? Also Aristides, no
less famous to all posterity for his justice? Themistocles, who was so
excellent a Soldier? Alexander, who by his high, enterprises made himself so
great and terrible? Policrates, who was so happy? Craesus who possessed so much
riches? and Demosthenes whose eloquence was so admirable? Were there any of
your gods wiser then Cato? juster, or more warlike then Scipio? greater then
Pompey? happier then Sylla? richer then Crassus? and eloquenter then Cicero?
Certainly, God who knows perfectly the merit of men, being to have his divine
nature, communicated to mortal men, would have thought his graces with more
equity distributed if he had stayed for the death of these persons to make
gods of them.

But it may be he made too much haste, and thereupon after he had taken the men
whom you adore, to be partakers with him of his divine Majesty, shuting up
Heavens doors, could not call thither any other, these fair souls in the mean
while going down to Hell; where murmuring against his injustice, by their
complaint, from thence they make him still blush with shame enough unto this
day.

CHAP. XII.
NOT insisting on these things any longer, I will show you the true condition
of your gods, and thereby demonstratively make it appear that indeed they were
never gods. Touching whom to say what I have heard and read, I find nothing at
all but the names of certain men long since dead, fabulous reports of what
they did in their life time, and thereof composed mysteries made sacred to mock
the common people withal. As for the Images you adore, that which seems to me
most ridiculous, is, they are made of the same matter that other Vessels,
wherewith you are ordinarily served: or rather of your moveable goods you make
gods, by your consecrating them, and thereby changing the uses whereunto at
first ordained by the help of Art; also you give them another form, then what
they had, and of the matter thereof compose figures which you call gods: which
works cannot without much abuse and wronging the Divine Nature be done by you.

From whence nevertheless we that are Christians may take occasion of
comforting our selves with respect to those evils your gods cause us to
suffer, seeing the same you make them endure before obtain from you the titles
of gods. So whereas you tie Christians to Crosses and pieces of wood; have you
any image that in making thereof has not been first fixed to such like stakes
before completed into such a shape, as thought fit by you to be worshipped in?
you hang us up as public spectacles unto all men upon Gibbets. Is it not on a
Gibbet that the Mass or body of those things you call gods is set up before
worshipped by you? You pearce our bodies with irons, and when forming your gods
of wood, use you not the like violence with Sawes, Chissels, and such like iron
instruments upon each member of them also? You cut off our heads, and your gods
have no heads till after fastened by you to their bodies, with Soder, Ciment,
and Iron Cramps.

You expose us to the rage of wild beasts, and are they not such beasts you
make to keep company with, Bacchus, Cybele and Ceres, men carving or painting
them therewith? You throw us into the flames, and have not your gods been
tried therewith when of a shapelesse matter, the Smiths hand formed them into a
Comelier figure out of the fire? you condemn us to work in mines, and is it
not from thence your Gods made of silver and gold fetch their original? you
confine us to Islands, and have not some of your gods taken their birth, and
others their death there? If any divinity in these things, it will follow, men
consecrate these they punish, and that punishments are embraced instead of
gods. But in truth your gods neither know the outrages men do unto them, when
they work upon their Statues, nor the honors they render them when adore and
present sacrifices to them.

Most vile and profane Wretches, that speak after this sort, that dare utter
such blasphemous words (say you of us) in reproach of our gods, be as angry
and fume with rage as long as you list, whatever say, you are they that have
approved the works of Seneca, though inveighing more eagerly though penned
with much more vehemence against this your superstition. Then if we do not
adore Statues and Figures, which are as cold as the dead bodies they represent,
and whereof the beasts know their insensibility; our resolution that proceeds
but from the light of truth, which coming to inlighten our minds, makes us
renounce your error. Is it not worthy rather of praises, then of the torments
we suffer? Is it possible we can offend them whom we know very well that they
are not? That which is not, suffers no manner of injury from any body,
because it is not.

CHAP. XII.
BUT you say the gods we offend are your gods; if it be so, from whence comes
it, that by your actions you show your selves impious and sacrilegious toward
them. I will maintain it you undervalue those whom you take to be your gods,
you overthrow their Altars at the same time you are thought to reverence them,
and detract from the glory thereof when you would appear to be so zealous.
Examine what follows, and see whether I say the truth.

Is it not so that some among you adore certain gods which others adore not?
you cannot deny but you wrong those gods whom you render no honor to: the
preferring of some gods necessarily implies the neglect of others, because
when of two things we choose one, it is certain we reject that we choose not and
consequently neglect the same. So you despise the gods you know not, and
testify you fear not to offend them, in denying them the worship wherewith
you honor other Deities.

But (as we have touched upon before) the condition of each of your gods,
depends upon the appro bation of men. He is not a god whom your Senate, while
not approving of, refuses to own as God.

As for your domestic gods (styled of you by the names of Lares) you dispose
of them even as of your other household or domestic goods, pawning, selling,
and changing them upon all occasions, as your selves list: of a Saturn and
Minerva you make goods for your Kitchen, when these Images are spoiled and
broke with old age, in having too long time received divine honors: or else if
you find your selves incommodated in your affairs, you make money of them to
help the necessity wherewith you are pressed, in which you find more holiness,
then in your gods, seeing you prefer it before the worship you render them.

You use the gods of the public no better, then those private Lares made use
of. You employ the authority of justice to prostitute them; you put them into
the Book of the public revenew, and let them out to those that offer most for
them, even as you are wont to farm those incomes that are raised in the
Capitol and Market. A Crier publishes the prices of a Deity, and in
pronouncing what you judge it to be worth does it solemnly, and in the same
form as all other things prized by you; a Treasurer keeps Registers of the
price of the Farm of a god, as of the price of all other farms. It seems Land
charged with tribute is of less value, then Land not subject to any duty; a
man that is imposed to a personal tax, is not noble, as a man that is exempted
from it; for these charges are marks of servitude.

Contrarily, among the gods those which pay a greater tribute are not most to
be adored, but rather those to whom men have the most devotion, render a
greater tribute then others. They make a shameful commerce of the Majesty of
the gods: they carry their Images even into Alehouses, that Religion may began
Alms there: they take money for their entrance into the Temple, and for the
place they occupy there: one cannot make use of the gods freely, and their
mysteries are not exempted from sale also. But what do you in honoring them,
you do not also practice in celebrating the memory of dead men? you erect
Temples and Altars both to the one, and the other, their Statues have the same
Ornaments; You dress up those for men according to the diversity of their age
and condition: you observe the same thing of the gods.

What difference is there between the Feast made in honor of Jupiter, and
Feasts of the Funerals of the dead? between the Vessels out of which they power
Wine in sacrifices, and those they usually offer to the shades of the dead?
between the Augure, and he that has the charge of the Graves? For he does the
Office of an Augure, in Funeral Ceremonies, yet we must acknowledge you justly
place your Emperors after dead in the number of the gods, seeing whilst they
lived you conferred this honor upon them. Your gods are obliged to you, and
they ought to thank you, because of their Masters you make them their equals:
But whereas you attribute divine honor unto Larentina a Common Whore, I Would
rather advise you to worship among your Juno's, Ceres, and Diana's: Lais or
phryne after the same manner. You erect a Statue to Simon Magus, with this
Inscription, This is the Statue of a Deity. You make a Deity of I know not
whom, of one that has been bred with infamous education, and prostrated to the
lewdest pleasures, even those which Nature her self abhorres; albeit your gods
of old (being of the same stamp) were no better then such, yet they take
themselves nevertheless to be foully reproached by you when using liberty to
worship the aforesaid men and women with what ever divine rites your selves
list, you give the same honor to others of later edition, which was wont
anciently to be ascribed only unto themselves.

CHAP. XIV.
I Will now say something of the rites and ceremonies of your Religion; not
insisting much on the condition of your sacrifices, where the beasts you offer
are the oldest and worst you can find: when your sacrifices are fat and well
fed you keep the best of them; and offer to your gods, only unprofitable
pieces cut off from several parts, and accustomed to be given by you in your
houses, to servants or dogs. Even as of the tenth part of your goods vowed by
you to Hercules, you present him but with a third on his Alters.

Imagine not that I blame you at all for this, contrarily its an action of
wisdom me thinks to keep part of what would be entirely lost. But that which
I think strange is this, the Books wherein instructed in worldly prudence,
and from whence you draw the knowledge of all duties touching a civil life,
are they not filled with impertinent and ridiculous tales concerning your Gods.
In those books its reported that the gods have sought one with another, as the
Gladiators in favor of the Trojans or Greeks: that Venus was hurt with the
shaft of an Arrow, drawn by the hand of a man, when she would have pulled her
son AEneas from Diomedes who had almost killed her. That Mars remained thirty
months in irons wherewith chained. That Jupiter by the help of a certain
monster was saved from the same violence the other gods would have made him
suffer.

Sometimes they present him shedding tears for the death of sarpedon,
sometimes they figure him in the infamous embraces ot his sister, telling him
of his adventures and assuring him that the love he bore toward his
mistresses was not comparable to that of theirs to him. After all, who is he
among your Poets, to flatter some Prince, invents not some unworthy thing of
your gods? One will have Apollo employed in feeding the cattle of King Admetus?
Another speaks of Neptune as of a Mercenary, recommended to Laomedon to build
the City of Troy. There is a Lyrike Poet ( pindarus by name) who writes that
AEsculapius was struck with thunder, for abusing his knowledge of Physic, by
covetously making use thereof, to hurt rather then restore men unto their
healths; wherein Jupiter was too blame, if Jupiter it be that has command of
the Thunderbolts, for showing such cruelty toward his granchild, such envy
toward the Author of so excellent and useful a science But truly these things
are of such a condition that men who would be thought Religious should neither
relate them if they were not true, nor invent them if they were false. Tragic
and Comicke Poets are not more respectfull of your gods: in regard that
usually, when making mention of them in their interludes they spare not to
speak of their disorders. I will say nothing of your Philosophers. Socrates
may suffice for all, who in derision to your false Gods, calls an Oak, a Buck,
and a Dog, for witnesses of the oaths he made. But Socrates say you was
condemned, because he undervallued, and consequently put a blurre upon the
worship of your gods. I answer, truth has been in all times the object of the
hatred of men. Yet the Athenians repented of the judgment they gave against
him: they punished those that accused him, and placed in their Temples his
Statues made of the most precious of all their metals. Now seeing they revoked
his condemnation, without doubt they gave Testimonies of his innocence, and
approved the opinion he had of the gods. But your Diogenes has he not scoffed
sufficiently at Hercules? and Varro the Cynique of the Romans, brings he not
in three hundred gods without a head under the name of Jupiter?

CHAP. XV.
ALL these Libertines who labor so much to delight you, draw their subject
from dishonest action attributed to your gods. When you see them play the
Baffoones with ridiculous conceits out of Lentulus, and Hostilius, tell me
whether they be your jesters, or your gods that stir up laughter: there you
hear an immodest Anubis spoken of, a masculine Moon, and a Diana that was
whipped, there the will of a dead Jupiter, is recited there jests made of three
hundred starved Hercules's. Besides all this, Comedies Tragedies express all
that is shameful in the History of your gods.

There With delight you may hear the Sum complain of the misfortun of his off
spring thrown down from Heaven. You may see there without blushing Cybele
sighing for a Shepherd that undervalued her: there you suffer to be repeated
in songs before you, all the Encomions wherewith Jupiter is extolled for his
jewd pranks, and how Paris decided the difference between Juno, Minerva, and
Venus. But are they not certain infamous persons that are disguised With the
visages of your gods? Is it not some vicious fellow that appears on the Stage
with a forced posture, and an effeminate voice to represent a Minerva, or
Hercules unto you?

Tell me, if in approving these sacrilegious persons by the commendations and
applaudings you give them, you violate not the Majesty of your gods, and
profane their Deities? But it may be what is repeated on the Amphitheatre has
more modesty and piety in it. It is there where your gods play their parts in
the blood of men, and horror of punishments. Their Histories serve for an
argument to the subjects which the guilty present there; and very often also
these poor people do truly represent the personages of your gods, by the
pains they endure. We have sometimes seen the secret parts of a miscrable
creature cut off for your god. Athis of the City of Possena; and sometimes he
that wore the habit of Hercules lost his life for him in the flames. We have
taken occasion to laugh, to see Mercury in the midst of the bloody Spectacles,
of the combats of the Gladiators, which are acted at Noone, proving the dead
bodies with his hot iron rod, to try if they be still living. And Pluto
conducts them with a hammer in his hand, to dispatch them, if not already dead.

If all these actions and many such like, which one might find out, be
injurious to the honor of your gods, and throws all their Majesty to the
ground, they must take it from the neglect which they have of their Deities,
and of those that commit it, and are the cause thereof.

But suppose all this is but jesting: There are other things which your
consciences cannot disavow, no more then that I have already said; you make
bargains for Adulteries in the Temples: you corrupt the chastity of women
before the Altars: you fulfill your concupisceces for the most part even in
those houses which ordained for the Priests, and for the laying up of other
holy things therein, having before your eyes the Pontifical habits, and the
Incense still fuming with the fire of the Sacrifices. This being so, I know not
why your gods do not more complain of you, then of Christians: Indeed, all
that are found guilty of sacrilege are of your Religion: for (as you know)
Christians never enter, in the day time, into your Temples; it may be they
would ransack them as well as you, if they offered sacrifices, as you do.

But if you ask what Deity the Christians adore? I answer, it is not hard to
conceive, that they who render no worship to false gods, honor the true, they
will not fall any more into the errors from whence they are delivered, when as
they have received the light of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and known the
wickedness of Idolatry. Now I will begin to discover the mysteries of our
Religion, yet it shall be after I have refuted the false opinions you have
conceived of it.

CHAP. XVI.
SOme among you have fancied the god we worship has the shape of an Ass. It
imports that I discover the original source of this fable: The reason that
raised this suspicion of us, is in the fifth Book of the History of Cornelius
Tacitus, where making mention of the war that Titus had with the Jews under
the Empire of Vespatian, he takes occasion to relate the History of this
Nation, speaking as he thinks good, of its original, name, and Religion; and
reports that the Jews coming out of Egypt, where they were banished, as he
believes, received great incommodities in passing the vast Deserts of Arabia,
because they found no water, and as they were extremely pressed with thirst,
they were delivered by the rencounter which they had with a company of wild
Asses, who showed them the Fountains where they went to drink, lying not far
from their Pastures. And in acknowledgement of this benefit, they are reported
to consecrate the image of one of these Asses that then succored them in that
extremity.

I think this, tale makes it presumed that the Christians whose Religion is
drawn from that of the Jews, and has succeeded it, worship the effigies of an
ass. Yet the same Author, who faith he lies not, writes nevertheless that
Pompey having taken the City of Jerusalem, and entering into the Temple to see
the mysteries of the Jewish Religion, saw there no image at all. It is likely,
had they formed any image to the Deity adored by them, they had reposed it in
the Sanctuary, where if suspected to be thought Idolaters, they could not be
discovered by strangers, because none but their own high Priest permitted to
enter in, a veil also being drawn before it, to hinder all others from prying
thereinto.

As for your selves its a thing you cannot deny you worship with ridiculous
ceremony, all beasts of burden with their goddess Hyppone. But peradventure
it may not be so well taken, that among so many worshippers of all forts of
creatures, we only should be thought to adore nothing else but asses. I come
therefore to those who are of opinion we worship a cross also, and do not
they the same thing they believe of us when they consecrate their wooden
images. It imports not though it be another figure, so it be of the same
matter: though the form be not the same, so it be the body of a God.

What difference is there between the wood of the cross, and an Athenian
Palace, or a pharien Ceres, which are nothing but rough pieces of wood
unshapt, whereof the hand of the workman has not formed an image? All images
set upon their feet by you represent a part of the cross; and do not we better
then you when we worship the whole Godhead in Christ without a Cross?
Moreover, those taken by you for go^s have been in the beginning cast, as we
said before in moulds made after the form in some part or similitude of a
cross: besides you consecrate spoils taken by you from your enemies: you
raise up Trophies in honor of victory: and those Trophies what are they within
but only trees made by you into crosses? The Roman soldiers in their Religion
which is all martial, adore the ensigns of their Emperor, they swear by
their standard, and make Deities of them, which they prefer before the majesty
of their other gods. Which Ensigns and standards of theirs, however richly set
forth, however covered over with cloth of gold, perhaps, or tissue, and the
like, are all for the most part represented to the eyes under the form or
figure of a Cross. So that all the difference I find between the Cross we
honor, and you, consists, it should seem, in the pompousness wherewith yours
beyond ours is adorned. Wherein I applaud you for it, that you consecrate not
bare crosses without all other manner of adorning them.

There are, that with more apparent reason believe, the Sun to be our god,
these send us to the Religion of the Persians: But we worship not the Image of
the Sun, as these people do, who in a foolish superstition carry it ordinarily
painted on their Bucklers. Yet herein they suspect us for so doing, because
hearing when we pray, we turn our selves to the East: Is it not true, there
are many among you that do the same, when making Orisons to some other gods
then those Images of yours represent, prostrate themselves to the Sunrising,
and in that posture offer up their vows to Heaven? If celebrate the Sunday,
which is the day of the Sun, as a Holyday, to rejoice in it, so doing we
worship not that great light of the world, but thereby rather solemnize this
day which comes next after that of Saturn, to be distinguished from the Jews,
who own Saturday for their Sabbath, and with respect thereunto spend the same
in all manner of case and idleness, swerving in so doing from the laudable
custom of their Ancestors, long since extinguished with them.

The calumnies invented to cry down our Religion, arise to such excess of
impiety, that not long ago in this City, a Picture of our God was showed by a
certain infamous person that got his living by exposing to the sight of the
people, wild beasts: who, by a strange faculty gotten by him to avoid their
bitings, making use of his craft, showed also the aforesaid Picture openly to
all comers, with this inscription thereon, This is Onochoetes the god of the
christians.

This supposed god of the christians pretended by him, had the ears of an ass,
a hoof on one of his feet, carried a book, and was clothed with a gown. We
laugh at the barbarousness of this name, and the extravagancy of this figure.
But they me thinks, should rather worship such a Monster as this for a god, who
for the present adore with divine honor such like things: for example, an
Image composed of two different forms at the same time, having the head of a
Dog, and Lion, joined together; horns resembling those of an Ox and Ram,
like a goat from the loins, a serpent from the thighs, with wings on his feet
and back. Of these things more then enough, that nothing remains to be
confuted on our part, of what ever falsely alleged by the Heathen against us,
as also that you might not say or impute to me I have used artifice in
dissembling the things whereof I could not justify the Christians. I come now
to the expounding the mysteries of our Religion.

CHAP. XVII.
THe God whom we worship, is one only God, who created of nothing this great
mass of the world, together with every thing whereof the Elements, bodies, and
spirits therein are composed, and by the authority of his word, by the
admirable order which his wisdom has established, and the virtue of his
infinite power, has produced this excellent work to be a worthy image of his
greatness: from whence it comes the Greeks have given him a name which
signifies ornament. This God though daily to be seen, is nevertheless
invisible; though graciously represented every where, incomprehensible; enough
exposed to humane sense, yet indiscernable. Because such a God, therefore is
he the true God. Ordinarily that which falls under the object of the sight,
which may be handled, which the mind can understand, is less then the eyes
that see it, the hands that touch it, the mind which maks it be known. Which
things cannot be said of God whose infiniteness is only indiscoverable save
to himself. In regard whereof though not so well apprehended of men, yet is he
nevertheless not altogethe unknown to them. Something of him men conceave,
when conceave him to be beyond the farthest reach of all human reasonings; his
immensity at the same time discovering, when concealing. But herein you
mistake principally in that you will not know him at all, because you cannot
know him perfectly, or you will not worship him because you will not know him,
when at the instant you seem to a vow as much, you cannot be wholly ignorant of
him.

Well then, will you have us prove him by the infiniteness of his mavelous
works wherewith we are encompassed, wherewith we are preserved, wherewith we
are delighted, wherewith we are terrified? Will you have us convince you of your
infidelity by the witness of your own soul? you know in despite of the
constraint she suffers in the Prison of her body, in the midst of evil habits
wherewith besieged, with respect to the disorders of vicious inclinations, and
unchaste desires impairing her vigor, in this misfortune of her condition, where
she sees her self enslaved to false deities, when retire into her self, and
takes up her spirits, as it falls out after she comes from being cropsick (as
it were) out of sleep, or what ever distempers if retaining still the use of
reason, she thanks God. This inward motion that maks you call on God, does it
not show you that there is but one God to whom truly this high title belongs?
Is it not true that you all say God is great, God is good? and when you speak
of the good you receive from Heaven that God has given, do you not also make
this, God your judge, when you say God sees all things, recommending your
selves to God, and desiring that he will help you? in effect, these words
which you have ordinarily in your mouth show, that your souls are naturally
carried to acknowledge a God, and consequently that you are Christians.
Finally, he that speaks thus of God, looks up to Heaven, and not to the
Capitol; for he knows Heaven is the residence of the living God, as he knows
him to be the Author of his life, and from thence to have descended.

CHAP. XVIII.
NOw as God is full of goodness, he would leave a means, whereby men might
acquire a full and entire knowledge of the truth of his being, his laws, and
his commandments. He has given the Holy Scriptures to instruct those who will
be enlightened with the light of the true Religion, who desire to find it
when they seek it, who have intentions to believe in the word of one God,
after they have found him; and to serve him faithfully after they have received
the same. Therefore he caused men to be sent upon the earth from the beginning
of times, who by holiness of manners, and innocence of their lives, have
rendered themselves capable of knowing and showing his greatness to others. He
has abundantly shed upon them the graces of his divine spirit, that they might
preach, there is but one God who created this Universe; who is the true
Prometheus that took man from the earth, who has ordained in the world the
change of seasons, by which it subsists; who has given tokens of the dreadful
rigor of his judgments by water, and fire, who has published his Laws
wherein all he would have men do to please him are set down, Laws that you
are ignorant of, or neglect; who has ordained great recompenses to those that
keep them, who, at the end of the world, will raise all the dead, that ever
lived from the Creation of the World, commanding them to reassume their bodies,
to examine their good or evil actions, that thereupon gives to the faithful a
felicity that has no end, and condemn Idolaters and such like, to eternal
flames. We have heertofore been of your opinion, and then mocked at this
doctrine, for men are not borne Christians; they embrace this Religion after
they know it. We say then, those to whom God has given this charge to preach,
are called Prophets, because they publish the things which should come to
pass: the oracles which they have declared, concerning the mysteries of that
God which we worship, have been laid up in books, as in the public treasury,
where they have been kept till now.

The most learned of the Ptolomies, who was surnamed Philadelphus, a most
accomplished Prince in the knowledge of learning, would after the example of
Pisistratus make a rich Library; among the excellent pieces which he sought
after, and had reputation, either because of their antiquity, or because they
were rare and curious, by the advice of Demetrius phalerius, (who was then the
learned of all the Gramarians, and to whom he had given the keeping of all
that great number of volumes he had gathered together,) ask^ of the Jews the
holy books which were written in their mother tongue, and which were not found
any where else but in their hands: For the Prophets were always of their
nation, and they always addressed their Prophesies to them; as to a people,
who by the merit of their ancient Patrianks, had the happiness to be the
beloved of God. We called them heretofore Hebrews, whom you now call Jews,
and therefore their language was called the Hebrew tongue. The Jews to make
known to strangers the law of the true God, granted Ptolemy that which he
desired of them, and sent him seventy two learned men to interpret those holy
books. Will you have witnesses? the Philosopher Menedemus who was a powerful
Protector of the opinion of divine providence, admired at what recorded in
them, and in that point was of the same opinion with them. Aristaeus has left
a public monument of this history, in a book he composed in Greek: These
Hebrew volumes are found at this day in the liberary of Ptolemy, and the Jews
read them openly, you may go and hear them every Saturday in their
Synagogues; they buy this liberty with a great tribute which they annually pay.

He that hears the truths they declare, shall meet with the truth of one only
God; and whosoever will study to comhrehend the mysteries contained in the Holy
Scriptures, will be presently forced, to believe them.

CHAP. XIX.
THese holy Writings take their principal authority from their antiquity. You
are wont to make use of this proof, and will have it to be lawful in
upholding your Idolatry, you ground the reverence you carry to your gods, on
long continuance of years, but we have more reason to make use of it then you;
for the books of one of our Prophets only, to wit, Moses, (wherein, it seems,
God has enclosed, as in a treasure, all the Religion of the Jews, and
consequently all the Christian Religion, preceding for many ages together)
reaches beyond the ancientest you have, even all your public Monuments, the
antiquity of your originals, the establishment of your estate, the birth of
most part of the people, the foundation of many great Cities, all that most
advanced by you in all ages of History, and memory of times, the invention of
Characters, which are interpreters of Sciences, and the Guardians of all
excellent things: I think we may say more, even your gods, Temples, Oracles,
and Sacrifices.

Have you heard mention made of that great Prophet Moses? He was contemporary
with Inachus, he preceded Danaus three hundred fourscore and thirteen years,
the ancientest of all that have a name in your Histories: He lived about a
thousand years before the ruin of the City of Troy; I could also say, fifteen
hundred and more before Homer: for it is not without ground, neither will I
relate it, but as others have reported it before me. Every of the other
Prophets succeeded Moses, and yet the last of them all, is of the same age as
your first Wisemen, Lawgivers, and Historians were.

The proof of these things are not so difficult, as it would be troublesome, so
hard as long to make apparent: we must examine a great number of Volumes, and
Papers, put our selves to calculate the sequel of times; open the Records of
the ancientest of all people, namely, of Egyptians, Caldeans, and phaenitians:
make use of the testimonies of their Writets, who have left to posterity the
knowledge of things past; of Manethon an Egyptian, Berosus a Chaldean, Hierome
a Phaenician King of Tire, and of them that followed after, Menedesius a
Ptolomean, Menander an Ephesian, Demetrius a Phalerian, King Juba, Appion,
Thallus, and Josephus, the genuine and true Author of the antiquity of the
Jews, whose Writings either approve that which others have said, or make known
their errors.

We must examine the public Registers of the Greeks, see what actions they
report, consider when such actions done, that the order of times may appear,
and clear the Histories of the past ages, in reducing them according to the
sequel of years; in conclusion, we must turn over the leaves and Notes of all
the earth.

But me thinks I have already made half the proof, in showing from whence it
ought to be taken. Certainly it is better to defer the spinning out this point
any further; for fear that touching it in half, I say not all that importance
thereof requires, or that in resting here, I stay too long from the principle
means of our Defense.

CHAP. XX.
IF defer to show the antiquity of holy Scriptures, I will show you at persent
something more important in lieu thereof: for I discover to you their Majesty,
I tell you, they are divine, if you doubt still they are ancient. There Is no
need of any long discussion to let you know it, neither will we go to seek the
proof without us. The World History of all ages, and the event of things do
furnish us; all don in our days was foretold here to fore, what our. Fathers
heard spoken of arrived not till after them; the Prophets whom the providence
of God instructed touching the time to come, have foreseen and left in writing
that which passed every moment to the view of mor; they have known what we
see, that Earthquakes swallow up great Cities; that the Sea covers Islands, and
takes them from our sight; that the people are afflicted with strange, and
intestine wars; that one kingdom destroys another; that famine and the
Plague, cause mortallities; that every country has its particular calamities;
that wild beasts inhabiting the mountains, do hurt in the plains; that the
little become great, and contrarily, that the lofty by a miserable change fall
into a low fortune; that there is little justice among men, and very much
iniquity; that the thought of all good things is lost; that the functions of
the seasons and elements are in disorder; that the order of nature is troubled
by Monsters, and prodigies, all these misfortunes are found in our books,
whilst we endure, and try them, our judgment obliegeth us to believe those
who have foretold them: I think the accomplishment of a prophecy is a good
testimony of its holiness, and one may conclude it is divine, when find it
true.

Now as we believe things that have been prophesied, and are come to pass, so
we belive things that have been told us, and not as yet come to pass; because
they have been al foretold us by the same Scriptures, as well those that are
verified every day as those whose success us still expected; they are the same
words which we hear; the same letters that instruct us, it is the same spirit
which has inspired the Prophets both the one, and the other. He that by the
grace of God, has the gift of penetrating into the time to come, discovers in
an instant all future things: men which have not this light, distinguish the
times by the events, and separate the time to come, from the present, and the
present from the past. Tell me I pray, if we commit any fault, when we believe
that which should come, seeing the present and the past are two degrees; by
which we learn, that we ought to believe that which is foretold, although we
do not as yet see the success?

CHAP. XXI.
I Have told you our Religion is grounded on very ancient monuments; that is to
say, on the Books of the Religion of the Jews: yet because there are many among
you know it to be much newer then this, and that it began under the Empire of
Tiberius, and we acknowledge it ourselves. It imports that I explain my self
more particularly on this subject, that we may not be accused of covering our
own opinions under the veil of a most famous Religion, and whereof the
public exercise is permitted. We must take away the scruple that may arise,
not only in that we are distinguished from the Jews by the times, and novelty
of our institution, but also for that there is a difference between their
ceremonies and ours, that we forbid not as they do the use of certain meats,
nor solemnize their tea feasts, nor use circumcision, and in the end, carry not
the same name: which are arguments you hold infallible, to prove you do not
serve one God.

But that which helps to confirm you in the opinions you have of us, is, that
you all know, even unto the meanest of the people, that Jesus Christ was Man,
that as so he was condemned by the Jews, which carries you easily to this
persuasion, that we worship a Man, and not the God of the Jews. But the
behavior this ungrateful people have used to our Master, does not make us
ashamed; contrarily it is a glory to us to pass for his children, and to be
persecuted for his name, and the honor we bear to him derogateth not from
that we owe to God, neither have we any other opinion of the Godhead then the
Jews.

I am therefore obliged to speak a few things of Jesus Christ, and to show he
is the true God. The Jewish Nation of all others had the happiness to be the
only beloved people of God. They received this favor because of the
wonderful piety, and inviolable faith of their ancient Patriarks, and
therefore was their race still raised to that admirable greatness, their
condition came to a power that made it so flourishing, and their felicity so
perfect, that God communicated himself to them, and with his own mouth taught
them to honor him always, and not to offend him. But they had too much
confidence in the merit of their Ancestors; that which should have tied them
straightly to the service of the Divine Majesty, made them forget their duty:
they finned against God, and by a strange blindness, neglected his
Commandments, and changed his Laws into a profane worship. If the Jews will
not confess their crimes, the condition they are now in, will be a sufficient
proof thereof. They are spread over all the Universe, they wander from all
parts, are banished from their Country, cannot enjoy the air they breathed at
their birth; and run over all the world, without having either man, or God for
their King; in conclusion, their condition is so miserable, that it is not
permitted them to set so much as their foot, or cast their eyes on their
natural Country, or to pass thither as strangers. The holy Scriptures that
threatened them with these evils, are full of Prophesies, that foretold them
that in the last times God would choose servants faithfuller then they, whom he
would take to himself in all Nations, and Countries of the World; and on whom
he would power graces much perfecter, then those they had received,
proportioned to the merit of the Messiah, which should come to publish the Law
which he would give them.

Therefore the Mespsiah which God had ordained to send on the earth, to change
the Law of the Jews, to discover the truth of these figures, and to accomplish
the Prophecies; this just Dispensator of Divine graces, this excellent Master
of this heavenly Doctrine, the true light that inlightens, and Doctor that
teaches men, and to say all, this Son of God was promised us. But do not think
this Son is ashamed of his birth; he has been begotton, but know, that
neither the seed of his Father, not the name of Son, which he bears makes him
ashamed: His generation is not defiled with the incest of Brother, or Sister,
neither of a gods unchaste embraces with a Maid or married woman: His Father not
a god disguised under the form of a Serpent, Bull, Bird, or golden shower, as
of your feigned god Jupiter it is reported.

Besides, the Son of God whom we worship, it is true has a Mother; but not a
Mother defiled with the least impurity, she to whom the birth of this Son has
given the name of Mother, being still a Virgin without carnal knowledge of any
man. But to make you comprehend how the Son of God is born, I must discover to
you what his substance is. I have already declared, that God created the
Universe by the power of his word, the operation of his wisdom, and the
virtue of his power.

The ancient Wisemen also were of this opinion, that the word and wisdom,
which they named of one only word (...), that is to say, the word, did make
the World. Zenon says, this word is the Author of that order, and admirable
disposition we see in nature; also that the same that is called Destiny is God,
the mind of Jupiter, and necessity of all things. Cleanthes makes a spirit that
goes into all the parts of this Universe. As for us, as we say God has made
all things by his word, wisdom, and virtue, we attribute to the word,
wisdom, and virtue of God, a Spirit that is their proper substance, and which
is the word to command, the wisdom to dispose, and the virtue to give
perfection to his works. We have learnt that God has produced this spirit
which we call the word, that God in producing it has begot it, and therefore
it is the Son of God, and also God in regard the substance of God and his
own Son, are but one self same substance, because God is also a Spirit; it is
even as of a beam coming from the body of the Sun; this Planet in producing
the same, gives it a portion of its light, which notwithstanding it cannot
lose; for it is always in its beam, because the beam is always a beam of
the Sun; the substance of the light is not separated, but spreads forth. So in
the internal generation of the word, the spirit derives from the spirit, and
God derives from God, as the light of a Candle is taken from another Candle
which has comunicated to it its light: the light remains all entire in the
Candle from whence it is taken, and suffers not any diminution, although men
borrow the quality to distribute it to many Candles.

It is even so of God, that which comes from him is God, the Son of God, and
both together, God, and his Son, are one and the self same God. From whence
it follows that this distinction of spirit to spirit, of God to God, is not in
the substance, but person, makes not a division in God, but only a distribution
of the qualities of Father and Son; not a diversity of conditions between
Father and Son, but only an order of God the Father to God the Son: and
finally that God the Son springs, and is not separated from the substance of
God: wherefore the beam of God being come down into the body of a Virgin, and
incarnate in her womb; is come likewise into the world Man and God together.
This mavelous composure of mortal flesh, and the spirit of God, has been
nourished, brought up, grown in years, spoken, taught, and wrought, and is this
Man Jesus Christ. Take if you will, this truth for a fable, you may receive it
in the mean time, till we bring further proofs of our Master, as we receive
many tales made touching those, gods you confess. This wonder was known to
them of whom you hold all the follies you believe of a Deity.

They have invented them by a sacrilegious emulation, to destroy the eternal
truth of a God-man, in exposing to them the lies which have some relation with
them. If then you will have witnesses of the incarnation of the Son of God, we
tell you the Jews knew it from the mouths of the Prophets, that he was to be
borne among men, and they expect him still, and the greatest difference between
them and us, is, that they do not believe he is already come. The holy
Scriptures make mention of two commings of the Son of God: the first, when he
appeared in the weakness of humane nature, and condition of a very low
humility. The second, which to bring with it the end of all times, and wherein
he will show himself with all the splendour of his Godhead. The Jews have not
heard of the first, and they, hope for the second, which has been so clearly
declared, persuading themselves that the Son of God should come this only time
on the earth: Their sins are the just cause of their blindness, they have
deserved by their crimes committed against God, not to understand this first
coming; yet without doubt, they would have believed this glorious Mystery, if
they had uhderstood it, and if they Would have believed it, he had acquired for
them eternal salvation.

This punishment was foretold them, and they may read in the holy Scripture,
that God has threatened, they should not know his secrets, that their
understanding should not comprehend them; that they should have eyes, and not
see his light, ears, and not hear his word. Now, as they could not imagine
him whom they saw in this low humility, to be a God, so they took him only for
a man; whom when reflecting upon them the effects of his power, they gave out,
that he used Magic, and by the help thereof cast Devils out the bodies of
men, restored sight to the blind; cleansed the Lepers; healed them that were
sick of the Palsy; raised the dead; made the Elements obey him; appeased
Tempests; went upon the waters; all actions by which he showed himself to be
the ancient Word, the first born, accomplished with virtue and wisdom, as also
informed with the spirit of God himself.

The Doctors, of the Law, and the greatest among the Jews, who saw when he
preached, that he confounded their errors, and that an infinite multitude of
people followed him, were so incensed against him, that, in conclusion, they
accused him before Pontius Pilat, the then Governor of Judea, under the
authority of the Emperor Tiberius; and by violating justice, forced him to
deliver them Jesus to be nailed on the Cross. He foretold they should thus
unworthily use him; but, it may be, 'twould not be enough if the Prophets had
not declared it a long time before: yet Jesus being on the cross gave many
signs, by which he showed he was truly the Son of God; for after making that
great exclamation, when a dying, he rendered, of his own accord, his spirit to
God his Father preventing thereby the Executioners, accustomed to break the
thighs of those that were crucified, to hasten the end of their lives, and
deliver them from the pains of a longer punishment.

Moreover, in that very moment wherein Jesus expired, which was at noone, the
Sun lost his light, and the Earth was covered with darkness even they who knew
not this prodigy should happen at his death, and that revealed before to the
Prophets did take it for a miracle, and because unwilling to discover the
reason thereof, they denied it that came to pass: But you cannot make this
wonder suspected, seeing your own Calenders have remarked it, and your selves
retain the testimonies thereof in your own registers.

The Jews having took Jesus from the Cross, and put him into the sepulcher,
encompassed it with a great number of Soldiers, to whom they gave charge to
keep him carefully: This suspicious people, feared his Disciples should come
and take away his body, and having committed this theft, persuade them he was
risen, because he had said, that in three days he would rise from the grave,
and triumph over death.

But the third day being come, the earth shook on a sudden, the stone that
shut the mouth of the Sepulcher was overturned, the Soldiers astonished, and
troubled with fear, and not one of his Disciples durst appear, that they might
be accused of taking away his body, which not being found, there remained
nothing in the grave, but the linen wherewith he was wrapped. Yet
notwithstanding the High Priests divulged this bruit, that the body of Jesus
was taken away by his Disoiples. They had reason to publish this false theft,
that they might turn away the people from embracing this Doctrine, otherwise
themselves should lose the authority they had over the People, and the profits
they drew from them, if they had known that he whom they had crucified was
truly the son of God.

Their minds being thus abused by the ambition and avarice of the Priests,
they remained in the darkness of error; for Jesus Christ showed himself, not
to the People, because he would not do this favor to the wicked, to make
them become faithful, in presenting before their eyes his glorious body, and
it must be that the faith that promised such great recompenses, should be
wrapped up with some difficulties.

After his resurrection he stays with some of his Disciples sorty days in
Galile, one of the Provinces in Judea, where he taught them what they should
preach to men; and having given them to declare his Doctrine throughout all the
Earth, a cloud environed him, where with received up to Heaven, a truth far
more certain then any humane testimonies, given of your Proculus touching his
seeing a Romulus, or other of your Princes mounting up into the same place.

Pilate, who in his heart believed in Jesus Christ, at the same time wrote all
this History to the Emperor Tiberius, whereupon the Cesars themselves had
worshipped our Master, if their government in so doing had been consistent with
the men of this world, and Christians permitted to have been saluted Caesar's.
The Disciples of Jesus, following the order he had given them, went over all
parts of the known world to publish the Law of the Gospel: But the Jews,
their declared Enemies, made them endure many punishments, which they suffered
generously, because they knew they were hated only for preaching the truth. In
the end, these Insidels taking advantage of the cruelty of Nero, caused the
blood of the Christians inhumanly to be shed.

But remember when we told you of the gods you worship, we said we would
produce them as sit witnesses of the Godhead of Jesus Christ. Is it not strange
we should employ them whom you withold from being Christians, to make you
believe the Doctrine of Christians? yet you shall see by and by, that your gods
bear witness, in favor of our Religion, against your Idolatry. This we shall
tell you, when come to declare to you, wherein consists all the mystery of our
instirution; then you shall know both the original of out Religion, the name,
and the Author thereof. Let none therefore object to us any more these crimes
so full of infamy; let none any more conceive these strange opinions of our
lives, you must needs belleve what we declare to you touching the worship we
render to God.

Religion is a sacred thing, where it is not permitted to seigne, and where
lies are counted sacrilegious. Every man that says he worships other God then
whom he pretends truly to worship, is an Insidell to his God, and takes from
him the honor he should render him to transfer the same to another; and in
transferring it, acknowledges not his Godhead any longer, because he violates
it in denying him. We say openly we are Christians, we avow it publicly, yea
even in the midst of tortures, the which you make use of to make us deny it.
When we are torn in pieces and covered with our blood, we cry out, as far as
our voices will extend, we worship God in Jesus Christ, believe if you will
Jesus Christ to be man only. It is by him, and in him nevertheless that God
will be known and honored. So to the end we may answer the Jews, Have not
they learned to worship God on earth by Moses, a man whom God sent to teach
them to serve him, and that he made use of Moses as a man, to publish his Law?
as for the Greeks, were not they men that instructed them in their
superstitions? to wit, Orpheus on the mountain of Pierius, Museus at Atbens,
Melampus at Argos, and Trophonius in Beotia. Then if I should cast mine eyes
upon you, who are the Masters of all the world, do I not find it was a man, a
Numa Pompilius, that put upon you a Religion so full of ridiculous mysteries,
and troublesome ceremonies? Why should it not be permitted Jesus Christ also to
declare his Divinity, he to whom only the Divinity appertained, and to make
himself acknowledged for the God of Heaven and Earth? He ought not to be
suspected for an Impostor as others, for he was not like to a Numa, who would
not soften the wild spirits of these savage people, and barbarous, in filling
them with astonishment by the infinite number of gods which made them afraid.
He addressed himself to men pollishe and perfectly knowing in the prudence of
the world, and yet withal their wisdom, were blind as concerning Heaven. He
came to enlighten, and discover to them the truth they knew not. Inform your
selves whether the Godhead of Jesus Christ be the true Godhead we ought to
worship. Whether it change their manners that believe it, and makes them become
better then they were, all the other Deities must be condemned as false, and
principally that which is under the names and Images of dead men, by the
artisice of certain supposed signs, of the miracles they counterfeit, and the
deceitful Oracles they render, pass for a true Divinity, although it is
known that all it does is but the work of Devils.

CHAP. XXII.
WE say then, that there is in Nature certain spiritual substances, to whom
the name of Devils is given. This name is not new, the Philosopher had the
knowledge of it, and Socrates did nothing Without the permission of his Devil.
So they say, that from his infancy this Devil was always by him, and
abandoned him not so long as the lived. Certes: this spirit was not proper but
to turn him away from the love of good things The Poets also knew what the
Devils were; and the ignorant common people, have them in their mouths when
they would pronounce a malediction. It is by an inward motion of the soul,
that in those imprecations in calling the evil spirits, in effect they call
Satan, who is the Prince of this cursed Company. Blato did also aoknowledge the
nature of the Angels; and the Magidians who in their enchantments make use of
the names of Angels, and Devils, to be testimonies of their being. One may
learn from the holy Scriptures how by the sin of certain Angels, who from the
irregularity of their own will suffered their innocence to be corrupted, came
the race of the Devils, a race much more corrupted then these evil Angels from
whence they draw their original, and that God has condemned with them, and
their Prince, those of whom we come from speaking of, Wherefore suffices that
we now treat of the point that concerns the operations of these spirits.

They work on men but to destroy them; the malice of the Devils from the
beginning of times was employed in doing evil. Thus they afflict bodies with
diseases, and make them fall into troublesome accidents; they stir up in men's
minds violent troubles, and sudden motions, which move them extraordinarily.
Their simple and subtle nature gives them the faculty of laying bold of the
two substances that compose man.

The power with which these spirits operate is admirable, one may very well
know their action, but the manner of their operation falls not under the object
of the sight, neither can be perceived by the organ of the senses. As when
there happens any secret irregularity in the aite, the distemper thereof makes
the fruit to be lost in the blossom, takes away its life when it begins to put
forth, and nips them at the very time of their maturity: even as when the air
is infected by some sudden cause, it spreads the plague upon the earth among
the vapors that the Sun had drawn up; in the same manner, and with a contagion
as unperceiveable, the Devils and evil Angels by their blast cast disorders
into minds, agitate them with diverse furies, give them thoughts of folly and
filthiness, make them capable more violent passions, and slide therein an
infinite number of errors. Of these errors this is the principal, that,
after they have abused, and wrapped them up into a thousand illusions, they
recommend them to the worshipping of these false gods, and oblige them to offer
sacrifices to their Idols, that they may be fed with the odor of the
sacrifices, and the blood of these beasts which is their most agreeable
nourishment. For what nourishment do they raste with more pleasure then, the
Idolatry of man, when by the wiles of their false juglings, they seduce them,
and turn aside their thoughts from the object of the true God? I will now
discover by what way they deceive them.

Every Spirit has the same nimbleness as a bird, and because the Angels and
Devils are spirits, they are every where in a moment. All the world is but one
place to them, it is all one with them to know what is done in every coast of
the world, as to say it. This promptitude with which they know all things,
makes them pass for gods, because their substance is not known.

So they will often appear to be Authors of that which they declare; and in
effect they are sometimes of evil, but never of good. Besides, they learnt
heretofore from the mouths of the Prophets the things which eternal
providence has determined; and now they take them from the holy Scriptures: it
is from thence they draw the conjectures by which they judge of the times to
come.

They observe the changes that have happened in the fequell of times, and they
strive to appear like to a Deity, by the thefts they make of these
predictions wherewith they abuse the world. They work upon all with a
wonderful cunning to express the Oracles they render, by terms full of
ambiguity, that they may accommodate themselves to the events. Craesus and
Pyrrhus could tell much news. It was by the means we before spoke of, Apollo
declared, that Craesus had boiled his Tortoise With the flesh of a Lamb; he
had learnt it in Lydia, where he was in an instant. Moreover the Devils who
have their residence in the air, by their neighborhood with the stars, and
the nearenesse of the clouds may know the disposition of the Heavens.

They promise men rain which is ready to fall, and which they feel when they
promise it. Truly we must avow they are very helpful in the cure of diseases;
for they are they that do the evil, and afterward ordain the remedies, but
they are remedies wonderful new, and contrary to the evil: after one has
made use of their receipts, they cease to afflict the body, and then we think
they have cured it.

What shall I say more concerning the tricks of these deceitful spirits, and
their admirable effects? of the spirits of Castor and Pollux, who brought to
Rome the news of the victory obtained on King Perseus of Macedonia, presently
after it was won? of that Vestall that received water in a sieve? of another
that made a great ship sail which she drew only with her girdle? of that
Domitius to whom the spirits of Castor and Pollux, by their only touch,
changed the color of his beard, and of black made it become red, that he might
have some mark to make him elieveb it? when declaring to him this victory
already obtained by the Romans all these things which are the workers of the
Devil have authorized Idolatry, persuaded men that stones were true deities,
and hindered them to seek the true God; this high and incomprehensible majesty
to whom only worship is due.

CHAP. XXIII.
BUt seeing Magicians have power to make spirits appear to men; seeing they
recall the souls of the dead, whom they cover with infamy by their witchcrafts;
that by the force of their enchantments, Children are made use of in their
charms to throw themselves on the ground, and afterward rise up again to
declare Oracles; that by the delusions, wherewith they deceive the eyes and
ears, they represent a great number of miracles; that they infuse dreams into
us when asleep, and work all these things, when once by the virtue of their
invocations they have obtained the help of evil Angels and Devils, who make
their goats, and tables prophesic: When this power works of one accord, and
for it only; with how much more affection does it employ all its forces to
effect what it produces, when there is no question of any interest but of that
which is a stranger to it? If the Angels and Devils do the same things as your
gods, where is the excellency of the deity, we must imagine to be above all
other powers? is it not more seemly to presume that they are they that make
themselves to be acknowledged for gods, seeing their actions are like to them
they take for actions of the gods, then to believe the power of the gods is not
greater then that of Angels and Devils? but it may be your gods are gods but
in the temples, it is the place that gives them the title, and that out of
temples, you do not acknowledge them for gods; that in your opinion, it is
another kind of fury to leap over consecrated towers to a deity, then to
precipitate ones slle from a profane house, that it is another sort of rage to
cut off ones privy parts, and arms, then to cut ones throat; in truth the
despair both of the one and the other meet both in one, as it is but one cause
that transports them. But hitherto we have made use of nothihg but words; now
we must make use of the things themselves, and demonstrations, to show you
that your gods and devils are but one substance, and that they differ but in
name.

If a man should bring before your Tribunalls, one that were truly possessed
of a Devil, if a Christian should command him to speak, this wicked spirit will
confess then that he is a Devil, with as much truth as he says falsely at
another time he is a God. Let them present, any one of these they believe to be
wrought upon within by a deity; that in the ceremony of the sacrifices they
offer on the Altars, have the virtue of a God in senting the smell which goes
out of the sacrifices; who with force belch out words out of their stomachs;
within breathing declare oracles; if this heavenly virgin who promises rain;
if this AEsculapius that teaches the secrets of Physic, that preserves the
lives of them who must lose the same soon after, confess not by the mouths of
these impostors, Whose fained inspirations deceive the world, that they are but
devils, if the presence of a Christian takes not from them the boldness of
lying, we are willing that in the same place, you shed the blood of this
Christian, and punish him as a wicked person. What demonstration is clearer
then this? what proof more infallible? truth shines there in its purity, it is
afficted with this force, that is not proper but for her self; there is
nothing here to be evil thought on. Say then it is done by the power of
Magic; or by some such like trick, if your eyes or ears will let you. But I
pray what can you say against a thing that shows it self so clear and without
artifice? if these spirits are gods indeed, why do they falsely say they are
devils? is it to obey us they do so? on this accout the deity receives law
from the Christians, but they should not honor with this title, a nature that
is under the government of man: I might add, that is subect to the power of his
enemies, if it causes shame.

If on the other side these spirits are Devils, or Angels, how comes it when
they speak to others then to us, they would pass for gods? for as those to
whom divine honor is rendered would not be avowed Devils, if in truth they were
gods, because gods cannot take the quality of Devils without putting off their
majesty; so yet the names they give themselves whom you acknowledge to be
Devils, were the names, of true gods, they could not be so rash as to take,
and to put them in the rank of a Deity; because these gods would without doubt
be their Sovereigns, and they would fear to offend the majesty of them
whose power they should dread.

Acknowledge then that the Deity you honor is not a Deity, because, if it
were, the Devils would not attribute it to themselves, and the gods would not
disavow it. So seeing both the one and the other concur in acknowledging this
truth, that those the world acknowledge for gods are none, you must confess
then they are Devils; and therefore you must resolve to seek Deities somewhere
else, seeing you now see what is the condition of them you take for gods.

Now seeing by our means your gods discover to you they are no gods, and that
all the other to whom men erect Altars, are none in like manner; but this at
the same time they make you know who the true God is, if it be this only God
that we that are Christians worship, if we must believe of him what the
Christians believe, if he must be served as their Laws ordain. When you
conjure your gods in the name of Jesus Christ, do they ask who is that Jesus
Christ? do they call the History of his life a Fable? do they say he is a
man of the same condition as other men? that he was a Magician? that, after
dead, his Disciples took away his body privately from the Sepulcher? and that
he is now in Hell? say they not rather he is in Heaven? that he must descend
to the terror of all the world? with horror to the Universe? with the
lamentation of all men but Christians? and that he shall come down on the
earth full of Majesty, as the virtue of God, the spirit of God, the Word,
Wisdom, Reason, and Son of God? your gods must do as you do, deride all
these things, deny all the souls that lived since the Creation of the world
should take their bodies again; that Jesus Christ must judge them, they should
say it belongs to Radamanthus and Minos, according to the opinion of Plato, and
the Poets; at least they should discharge themselves of the shame of this sin,
and infamy of their condemnation, not avowing they are spirits of corruption,
although it sufficiently enough appears by the condition of their meats they
seed on, the blood, smoke, stinking sacrifices of beasts, and impure tongues
of their Divines that they are so; and in the end not confess they are already
condemned to the pains of Hell, expecting the universal judgment, where they
shall receive the just recompense of their wickedness, with all them that have
sinned as they, and worshipped them. Now all the power we have of them, is the
name of Jesus Christ who gives it us, it is the threatening we give them of the
evils God is ready to power on their heads, and which one day Jesus Christ
must declare to them. As they fear Jesus Christ in God, and God in Jesus
Christ, they are under the government of the servants of God, and of Jesus
Christ: so by the only touch of our hands, and breath of our mouths; the Devil
seized with fear at the sight of the flames that environ them are forced to
obey us, to come our of the bodies they possess, in dispite of them, and with
murmuring, to suffer this shame in our presence. You that are wont to believe
them when they lie, believe them when they speak of thenselves. No body will
tell a lie to get shame by it, but rather to gain honor; one will sooner
beleve them that confess against their own interest, then those that deny to
their advantage. These Testimonies which we have of your Gods make men to be
Christians; for we cannot give a full beleese to what they say, without
believing in Jesus Christ our master. Your gods kindle in our hearts the faith
which the Holy Scripture teaches us; they strengthen our hope, and confirm us
in the assurance we have of our salvation. As for you, to honor them, you
offer them also the blood of Christians; and if it were permitted then to lie
when Christians interrogate them, and labor to make you know the truth by
their confession, they would take good heed of discovering your errors to you,
as well for keeping the profit they have of them, and the honors you render
them, as for the fear they might have that in becoming your selves
Christians, you drive them away as we do from the bodies they torment with so
much rage.

CHAP. XXIV.
WE need nothing but the acknowledgment we have from your gods, when we
make them confess they are no gods, and when they answer us there is no other
God, then the only God we serve, to purge us from the crime of high treason,
and impiety to the Roman Religion. For if in truth the Gods they worship are no
gods, in truth their Religion is no Religion; if their Religion be no
Religion, then those they acknowledge for gods, are none, it follows we are
not guilty of the crime of impiety. On the contrary we can maintain, that
this reproach reflects on you, that, because so long as you honor a lie, you
neglect not only the true Religion of the true God, but moreover oppose God;
and by this means truly fall into the crime of true impiety.

If we should agree your gods are true gods, would you not confess, according
to common opinion, that there is a God greater and stronger then they, who is
as the principal and author of the Universe, and accomplished with power, and
an infinite majesty? for many have this opinion of the Deity; that to one only
God belongs Sovereign power, and that he commits the exercise of his
functions to all the other Gods: what is that Plato would have prepresented,
when he writ, that great Jupiter is in Heaven accompanied with an army of Gods
and Devils. You may say, we must honor the officres and Livetenants of a
Prince, even as the Prince whose majesty they represent. But I demand of you,
what crime commits he who regards none but the prince, hopes not but in his
favor, and will please none but him? what outrage commits he against the
Godhead that gives not the name of God but to the Prince of Heaven? seeing in
the world they give the name of Emperor but to the Sovereign, and that it is
a Capital crime, by humane laws, to call, or suffer to be called with this
title any other, then the master of the State? But let one worship God,
another, Jupiter, let one in saying his prayers lift up his hands to Heaven,
another put them on the Altar of faith; let one, if you will, number the
clouds, another the seelings; one vow his soul to his God, another offer him
that of a goat. But you ought to: take heed that this be not a kind of
impiety, to take from men the liberty of serving God after their own manner,
to hinder them from making choice of a deity, and force them so in that which
should depend upon the will, that it should not be permitted them to worship
the God they would, and be forced to worship him they would not.

Know we not very well that neither the gods, nor men, demand any thing but
voluntary services: and this is the reason they suffer the vain superstitions
of the Egyptians, who by a strange blindness consecrate Birds and Beasts, and
condemn to death them that have killed one of these gods. Moreover every
province, and city has his particular God, Syria the God Astartes; Arabia the
God Disares; Bavaria, Belenus; Africa the goddess Celestis; Mauritania their
Kings.

The provinces I have named, me thinks, are subject to the Roman Empire, and
yet I have not named among the Gods that are there worshipped any of the gods
of the Romans; in effect the gods that are honored in these countries, are as
little known at Rome, as those that are worshipped in the Cities of Italy, as the
God Belventinus of Monte-rotondo, Visidianus of Narni, the Goddess Ancaria of
Ascoli, Nursia of Vulsina, Valentia of Ocricoly, Nortia of Sutry, and June of
Monte-siasooni, who is called upon there, because there she was born, and to whom
the inhabitants of the place gave it the name of her father. There are none but
we to whom it is forbid to have a Religion a part.

We offend the Romans, because not serve the God of the Romans, and are
unworthy the names of Romans. But we have this advantage, that God is the God
of all men, and that we are all his, whether we will or no. As for you, it is
permitted you to worship all forts of gods, excepting the true God; as if the
same were not by way of eminence, the God of us all, seeing we all are his.

CHAP. XXV.
IN my opinion I have sufficiently proved, what the false, and what the true
Divinity is, seeing I have drawn my proofs, not only from Arguments which
reasoning produces, but also from the sole testimony of those you acknowledge
to be gods; so that I have largely given satisfaction (as I think) in this
point. But because in this place, an occasion is presented to speak of the
name Romans, I will not avoid the combat that some oblige me to undertake,
against the opinion that has seized on their minds, and makes them say, the
Romans obtained the Empire of all the world, and this greatness where to we
see them arrived, by their piety, and deserved to be Masters of all the
Nations of the Earth, by the reverence carried by them to the mysteries of the
religion of the gods, the gods having rendered them flourishing beyond all other
honors, because the Romans surpass all other in devotion.

There is some likelihood the Romans received this Recompense from the
original gods of Rome, in acknowledgement of the honors the Romans rendered
unto those gods; for example, the gods sterculus, Mutunus, and Larentina, who
enlarged the bounds of their domination. For I do not think the other gods
had more inclination to a strange Nation, then to their own Country, or that
they would have subjected to a people so far remote from their Country, the
Land where they were borne, where their youth brought up, where they acquired
so much honor in their life time, or where finally after their death they had
burial given to their bodies. Cybele will not disavow the affection she bore
to the City of Rome to be produced from that she carried to AEneas, because he
was of her Country; she defended him against the Armies of the Greeks, and
loves the City where she still sees the blood of Trojans, and progeny of that
Prince. Without doubt, when resolved to favor the Romans, she foresaw they
would revenge it, and put Greece in servitude, which had ruined the Empire of
Troy.

Certainly, she has caused it to be seen in our time, that it was with a
great deal of reason the City of Rome delayed to give unto him Divine honors;
for Marcus Aurelius having ended his days at Sirmion, the seventeenth of
March, the chiefest Priest of that goddess, this venerable chief of the
Evnuches, the sour and twentieth of the same Month of March, with the horror
and impurity of the blood he spilt, and which came from the wounds he made in
his body, rendered his vows, as he was wont, for the preservation of this
Prince after he was dead. O sleepie Courtiers! O tedious dispatchers, whose
tarrying the cause that Cybele was not acquainted sooner with the Emperors
death! truly Christians could not choose but make derision at such a goddess.
But had it been in the power of Jupiter to dispose (as he thought good) of the
Empire of the world, would he have suffered the power of the Romans to put his
Isle of Creet insubjection? Would you think, the remembrance of the cave of
Mount Ida, with the noise the Corybantes made, in beating on their head
attires, and playing on their cymballs to hinder those childish cries from
discovering him: again, the acceptable smell of the breath of his nurse, should
not obliege him rather to oppose himself against this conquest? would he not
have preferred the place of his burial before all the greatness of the
Capitol? would he not rather have inclined to have raised up above all the
countries of the earth, that which enclosed his ashes? would juno have taken it
well that Carthage, which she preferred before samos, should be overcome and
destroyed, even by the race of AEneas, if I be not deceived

-- Hic illius Arma,
Hic currus fuit; hoc regnum dea gentibus esse,
si qua fata sinant, jam tum tendetque fovetque.
Englished thus by John Ogleby out of Virgill.

-- Here her Arms, and here
Her Chariot was: that this Earth sway should bear
(If Fates permit) she fosters and intends.
This unfortunate sister and wife of Jupiter had not the credit of changing the
decrees of destiny, -- Fato stat Jupiter esse.
-- To Fate, was Jupiter himself conform.


And yet the Romans have not done them so much honor, although they put
Carthage under their power, against the design and desires of Juno, as to an
unchaste whore, and a villainous and an infamous Larentine, now of all the gods
you honor, its certain there are many of them that have reigned in the would;
if they had now the power to give Empires and kingdoms, whilst they were
kings, and commanded maen, of whom recived they their authority? what gods have
been worshipped by Saturn and by Jupiter? it may be it was some Sterculus, to
whom they gave immortallity because the first found out the invention of
dunging the earth, but he lived since their death with the people that
inhabited the territory of Rome. If any of your gods have not had the
Soveraigue power here below, in their time, there were Kings that rendered them
not as yet, Divine honors, because they were not as yet acknowledged for gods;
from whence it follows that it belongs to others then to them to give
kingdoms, because there were kings established a long time before they
consecrated these deities.

But see how ridiculous a thing it is to attribute the greatness of the
Romans, to the merit of their piety and care had or Religion, seeing their
Religion became much more pompous and costly since their estate grew powerful,
and their dominion enlarged. For although Numa was author of all your
superstitious mysteries, yet in his time the Romans served their gods without
Images and Temples, their Reliligion being then void of all costlinesse and
ostentation; their ceremonies then neither rich, nor magnificent, we saw not
as then Capitolls raised up to Heaven, but only altars of turfe made in have,
as served occasion and upon necessity: te vessels for their sacrifices were as
then but of earth, from whence only issued the odor of all the blood of the
beasts which were sacrificed. Engraven representations of the gods then no
where appeared. For the Greeks and Tuscans who first invented the art of making
carved images to the gods were n ot as then spread in the City of Rome. Its true
therefore the Romans were powerful before they were Religious, neither was it
their piety that was the cause of their greatness

For, how should the care of Religion become great to them, who owe their
greatness to impiety and sacrilege? for it I be not deceived, Kingdoms and
Empires are established by disorders of war, and increase by victories. Wars
and victories ordinarily produce the taking and ruin of Cities. Which things
cannot be done without offending the gods. Fury at the same time indifferently
assaulting the walls of Temples and Cities, slaughters involving Priests and
Citizens without distinction, and the Soldier eager for his prey, sparing no
more sacred things, then profane. In which regard the Romans committed as many
sacrilodges, as they obtained conquests; triumphed as often over their gods as
Over men; all Images of strange and captive gods, yet in your Temples, remain
as so many booties taken form people overcome by you, and these gods suffer
their enemies to worship them, giving an endless Empire to them, whose outrages
they should rather have punished, then recompensed after that sort their
sacrilegious flatteries.

But as it is unprofitable to honor these gods that have neither sense, nor
knowledge, so it is as little dangerous to offend them. Certes true piety
permits not to believe, that this people who (as aforesaid) increased Religion
by scandalizing it, again scandalized Religion in laboring for its judgment,
should get this great power to which arrived, by any reverence borne by them to
divine things; neither is it otherwise in like manner, to be believed, that
those Nations, whose Countries conduced in their being conquered by them, unto
the Roman greatness, before losing their Countries, should be destitute of all
manner of Religion.

CHAP. XXVI.
Return then into your selves, and examine if it be not more likely that it is
he distril utes Kingdoms, he to whom the World belongs which kings govern,
and whom Kings depend upon, who command on the Earth; that it is he that has
ordained the change of Emperors in the sequel of times, and course of ages,
who was before all times, and who from times has composed the ages, that
raises up estates, and makes them fall from their greatness, whom men have
acknowledged for their Author before they had established among them any
society: confess your error. Rome, this City heretofore a field, in
ancienter then any of your gods; she had her Laws reverenced before she built
this vast and magnificent work of the Capitol. The Babylonians reigned before
the creation of your high Priests. The Medes before that of the fifteen men,
whom, you propounded to consult on the Sybils Books. The Egyptians,
Assyrians, and Amazones possessed great Empires before we heard speak of the
Saliens, Lupercals, and Vestall Virgins.

After all, if the gods of the Romans disposed of Kingdoms, the Jewish Nation
who always neglected these kinds of Deities, had never formed an Estate
powerful as it has done: they abhorred your Idolatry, and on the contrary,
you have sacrificed oblations to their god, you have presented gifts to his
Temple, you have lived in alliance with them along time, and they had never
fallen under your power, if they had not offended their God by the unworthy
treating they used to Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XXVII.
ME thinks we have purged our selves very well of the crime of high treason,
when we say we offend not your deities, because we show they are no deities.
Therefore when we are exhorted to present them sacrifices, we oppose for our
defense, the trust we put or owe to the light God has given us; we call our
consciences to our aid, which shows us certainly, to whom the worship you
render to these images should be adressed, which are exposed to a sacrilegious
adoration, and to the names of men you have consecrated: but some say there is
folly in our resistance, we may sacrifice when pressed to it, and conserve our
lives without injuring our consciences, in keeping a secret resolution to
remain firm in our Religion, and that in neglecting our security, we prefer
a vain selfewill before our welfare. So you give us an advise that teaches us
how to deceave you, but we know the author of this counsel, and who inspires
it into you: we know the crafts of that wicked one, who sometimes by the wiles
of his persuasions, sometimes, by the force of torments makes us suffer,
strives to overthrow our constancy. It is that malicious spirit whose substance
is that of Angels, and Devils, who by his sin finally falling from grace
becomes our enemy, and envies at that state of happiness wherein by Gods
gracious assistance we yet remain, and who puts projects in your minds to
assault us, who secretly excites these furious motions that corrupts all
functions of reason in you, and dispose you to do us the injustice we spoke of
in the beginning of this discourse; of condemning us against the rules of
justice, and in tormenting us, altough guilty of no fault: for although all
power of Devils, and this wicked spirit, is subject to us, yet is falls out
sometimes, that like unto wicked and faithless slaves, in the midst of the
fear they have of the authority God has given us over them, they give
themselves over to actions of disobedience and revolt: and as te ordinary
effect of fear, is to produce hatred, they strive to wrong them, whose power
they fear.

Besides in the estate of rage, and despair to which they are reduced, because
their condemnation is already pronounced, they find content in their
wickedness, they solace themselves in their evils, by those they make against
the servants of God, against the day of the last judgment when they shall be
shut up in hell to suffer there eternally.

Nevertheless, they combat not with us after this sort but at a distance, for
when we come near them, they must yield, being under out power, and are
forced to acknowledge the misery of their condition, so the Devils that
assault us when far from us, have recourse to entreaties when we affront them
near hand. Therefore when we must undergo such punishmets as you ordain for
your wretched slaves, when they shut us up in prisos, when tey cause us to be
condemned to work in the mines, or to some other servile work of the same
condition; in the end when they exercise all their rage against us, by te
impetuous motions of fury that transports them because they see they are
subjected to our authority, knowing their forces are inferior to ours, and
therefore our victory is assured, and their destruction is inevitable, then we
defend our selves against these troublesome and importunate spirits, as if they
were our equals, we resist them by a holy perseverance in the faith which
they strive to destroy; and the most glorious triumph we can gain over them,
is, when our constancy and firm resolution in the Religion of the true God
condemns us to death.

CHAP. XXVIII.
BUT seeing Religion cannot be forced, and the service of God is a pure act of
the will, it seems, it were injustice to force free men to offer them
sacrifices, and would be ridiculous to obliege them to honor the gods in
despite of them, seeing they ought to be carried by their own motion and
interest to seek their favor; if they be true gods, we should not snatch
away the advantage that gives them the liberty of their nature: It should be
permitted them to say, I will not have Jupiter favorable to me: who are you
that will force my will? I fear not Janus, I laugh at his anger, of which side
soever of his two faces he looks upon me, what power have you to meddle with
what concerns me? but the same spirit that inspires you to press us to
sacrifice to the gods, excites you to ordain us to sacrifice for the health of
the Emperors, and by this means the interest of Caesar being mingled with
that of the gods, you cannot avoid the necessity of constrayning us, and we
cannot hinder our lives form being in peril, if we will be faithful to God.
So we are come to the second head of high treason, but against a majesty more
august then that of the gods: for you render your duties to the Emporour with
more fear, and an apprehension more industrious, then to your Jupiter you
place in Heaven; and I find you do wisely if you knew the true condition of
this King of gods: for, tell me, whatsoever he be of the living, is he not to
be preserd before the dead? but that which you do is not so much because
reason obliegeth you to it, as for the consideration of the power present with
you, and which before your eyes exercises a sovereign authority on the earth:
therefore you show your selves impious toward your gods, in being more afraid
of the Princes of the world, then of those gods you prosesse to worship.
Finally there is less danger with you to call all the gods together to be
witnesses of a false oath, then to swear falsely by the genius of Caesar only.

CHAP. XXIX.
BEfore then you can force us to sacrifice to the gods, it must appear they
can preserve the lives of the Emperors, and the rest of men: when you can show
us they have this power we are willing to be declared criminalls, if we
address not our prayers to them for the welfare of our Princes: If the gods
you serve; who are no other then the miserable spirits of evil Angels and
Devils, work any good: if they that destroy themselves preserve others: if
the condemned deliver those that exclaim against them: and lastly if the dead,
as you know in your consciences your gods are, protect the living.

Why defend they not rather their statues, images, and temples, who in my
opinion owe their conservation to the soldiers that guard them? But tell me if
the matter, whereof these statues are formed, be not taken out of the mines of
the Emperors inheritance? and if all these temples depend not absolutely on
his will? There are many gods have had experience of Caesa^s anger; and this is
an advantage to us that the Prince being favorable to them, has used his
liberality and accorded some privileges to them.

Now how is it possible that they that are subjects to the Emperor, to whom
all the world is subject, should have the welfare of their Emperor in their
power? there is more likelihood they have their welfare from Caesar, then
Caesar from them.

What? offend we the majesty of the Prince, because we cast him not under the
things appertaining to him? because we turn not into derision the prayers
which should be raised up to Heaven for his preservation? and believe not that
it is in the hands of the leaden statues of your gods? Truly you appear very
pious to your Prince, being you seek his welfare where it is not, and demand
it of them who can do nothing, forgetting him that has the power, to give it;
and seeing you persecute men who can demand it, and knowing how to ask it,
know also how to obtain it.

CHAP. XXX.
As for us, in the prayers we make for the Emperous, we call upon the
eternal God, the true God, the living God, this God to whom the Emperors
prefer their assistance before that of other gods; they know very well who gave
them the empire they possess; and men as they are, know who gave them the
spirit wherewith they are animated. They acknowledge there is no other, then
this only God, through whose power alone they subsist, to whom they are
inferior one degree only, after whom they are next in place; before and above
all other that are called gods. Why should they not be greater then these gods,
seeing they are masters of all the living, which are more worth then the dead?
they consider how far their authority goes, and apprehend the essence of God
in proving they can do nothing against him; also seeing God greater and of more
power then themselves, they are forced to acknowledge they can do nothing but
by him.

Let the Princes of the earth makes as many designs as they please to subdue
Heaven, undertake to carry Heaven in triumph as a captive, command courts of
guard to be kept in Heaven, strive to make Heaven tributary, they labor in
vain, he is great, because not altogether so great as heaven. To him heaven
and all creatures appertain, the Emperor draws his original from the same
place whence man drew before he was Emperor: the author of his soul, is the
author of his power. It is to him to whom we Christians, address our prayers,
make them with hands opened, and lifted up, because innocent; the head bare,
because no cause to be ashamed when we pray to God. There are none declares
to us the words we are to say, because it is our heart that acts rather then
our tongue: We pray for all the Emperors, and ask of God that he would give
them along life; that their Empire enjoy a profound peace; their house a happy
concord; their armies be invincible; themselves assisted with good counsels;
the people remain in their duties, no trouble arise in the world against their
authority. In the end, we forget nothing the Prince can wish for, either as a
man, or as an Emperor.

Nevertheless, we cannot ask these things but of him of whom we know we
shall obtain them: as he is the only one that must grant them, we are they
alone that must pray for them, because we and none but we are his true
subjects, for of all men he is worshipped of none but us, let them put us to
death because we follow his doctrine, and offer this rich and fat sacrifice,
which he will have us consecrate unto him, to wit a prayer conceaved and
produced from a chaste body, an innocent soul, a spirit filled with holiness,
and not with the grains of incense of little value, the tears of that tree of
Arabia, two drops of wine, the blood of an Ox ready to die of old age, and for
that reason even to be rejected in true sacrifices; finally after all sort of
uncleanesse, with a contaminated conscience. In effect there is where withal
to wonder that among you, the Priests (vicious as they are) exactly consider it
the sacrifices are pure and entire, they examine rather the inwards of the
sacrifices, then the insides of them that offer them, then whilst we implore
the grace of God for the Emperors, with our hands lifted up, and stretched
toward heaven, let irons pierce us, gibbets put us on crosses, fires consume
us, knives cut our throats, beasts devour us: A Christian while in prayer
lifting up his hands to God is in a condition fit to receave all sorts of
punishments; and therefore continue, O magistrates, so affected to justice;
ravish our souls, whilst they are in prayers for the welfare of the Emperors,
and make a crime of truth and the service of God.

CHAP. XXXI.
BUT it may be you imagine our hearts belie our words, that what we come from
saying, of the vows we make for the welfare of our Emperors, is but
flattery, by which we think to shelter our selves from the torments prepared
for us: But if we use faigning, this faigning is not unprofitable, seeing you
admit us to prove what we alleadg for our justification: we entreat them who
believe our Religion takes no care of the preservation of the Emperors, to
examine the laws of our God, to read our books which we hide not, and which
by diverse accidents fall into other hands then ours. They will learn there
that it is commanded us by a superabundant charity to pray to God for our
enemies, and to wish good to them that persecute us.

Now have we greater enemies, and ruder persecuters, then those who make
offended majesty the ground of the crime they impute unto us? Holy Scriptures
content not themselves with this commandment; they have another more precise
and clearer, pray, say they, for Kings, Princes, and powers, that you may live
in peace in the midst of public tranquillity; for, if the Empire be shaken,
all its members suffer a general shaking, it is impossible we should not feel
it, because although people take us for strangers, yet seeing we occupy
certain places, as well as they, we make a part of the state as well as they,
and together with them participate of its good and evil fortune.

CHAP. XXXII.
WE have yet an obligation greater then that, of praying to God for the
Emperors, all estates of the Empire and prosperity of the Roman affairs. We
are assured that the general dissolution that threatens the Universe, and this
consummation of ages which must bring such fearful confusions in the world,
is retarded so long as the glorious majesty, and triumphant Roman Empire shall
last.

We desire not to be present at the subversion of all nature, and when we
pray to God to deferr it we pray to him that the power of the Romans may long
subsist. If we swear not by the Genius of the Caesar's we swear by their
welfare, which is more precious then all manner of spirits together. Know you
not that they call Genies Devils? we reverence the providence of God in the
persons of the Emperors, that raised them above all nations. We know they
govern the world with this supreme authority, because God would have it so;
and we desire their conservation, because God would have us desire it. And the
prayers we make for the welfare of Emperors, are in the same esteem with us,
as most solemn oaths.

As for Devils, or Genies, we are wot to conjure them to drive them away from
the bodies of men, whereof they are seized, and render them not the honors due
to God only, by swearing by them.

CHAP. XXXIII.
BUt why should I stay longer in making known with what sense of Religion and
piety Christians honor Emperors? It suffices to say we are obliged to
render them our duties, as to whom our master has commanded us so to do: I
can easily add, the Emperor is more Emperor of the Christians, then of his
other subjects, because the God of the Christians has established him, in
regard whereof we labor more to purpose for his welfare, then other men,
because we ask it not only of the only God who alone can grant it us, not
only we that demand it who are fitly quallified for obtaining the same, but
the prayers moreover which we make for him have so much the more efficacy, as
we abase the Emperors Majesty under that of gods, we submit it to his only
power; to the greatness of God, because we equal it not to him; for I give
not the name of God to the Emperor, either because I cannot lie, or have not
the forhead to mock him withal, or that himself will not have me call him
God.

If he be man, he has reason to acknowledge that God is more then he, it
being sufficient for him to be called Emperor: this name which God has given
him is full of dignity, he that calls him God, denies that he is Emperor,
because if he be not man he cannot be Emperor. Even when he is set on his
triumphant chariot, and sees himself raised up to the highest degree ot humane
felicities in this world, he should be advertised then, that he is man. There
is a voice that says, look behind you, remember what pomp soever environs
you, you are still but man: we should diminish without doubt very much of his
greatness, if in this estate we should call him God, because its a title that
belongs not unto him, and contrarily we honor him agreeably to the majesty of
his estate, when we call back his spirit to the consideration of what he is,
that he may not believe he is a God.

CHAP. XXXIV.
AUgustus to whom the Empire owes its establishment because Lord is the firname
which we give unto God, would not suffer his subjects to call him their Lord;
yet I will make no difficulty to acknowledge the Emperor is my Lord, but it
shall be, when not forced to call him my Lord, in the same sense that
appertains to my God.

When I say the Emperor is my Lord, I will not forbear in so saying to
preserve my liberty. This kind of reverence makes me not his slave. For I
have but one only true Lord, to wit the powerful and Eternal God, who is his
God also as well as mine.

But how can it be that the father of a country is the Lord of the same?
cerres, a name of piety is much more agreeable to such a man, then a name of
power and authority. Secondly, therefore it is that we call the chief of
particular houses, fathers, rather then Lords of families: If Augustus would
never take upon him the name of Lord, the^ less appearanc of reason to
attribute that of God unto Emperors. Its a flattery that's not only infamous,
but also of a pernicious consequence: as if forgetting the respect due to the
Prince, (to whom this great Empire renders obedience) you should thereby
transfer the title of Emperor to another; is it not true you do an extreme
injury to the Emperor, whom you acknowledged before for your master? by this
caution you render him irreconcilable to you, and his hatred kindled by you, is
dreadful to him as well as unto you whom you have honored with the name of
Emperor; You your selves must be pious to God, if you desire to have God
propitious to your Emperor. You must cease to believe there is any other God, by
forbearing to call your Emperor so who has need of the assistance of God.

But if the pleasure of the world so governes your spirits that you blush not
when you call man God against your own knowledge, you ought, at least, to
fear this title you attribute to him, be not an ilOmen; for its the making of
an imprecation against the life of the Emperor, to call him God before his
apotheosis.

CHAP. XXXV.
SO then Christians are public enemies, because the honors they render to the
Emperors, are neither vain, flattering, nor rash; because that in the sense
of the true Religion, they profess, they celebrate their solemn days, rather
by the motions of a pure conscience, then the disorders of a filthy
deboystnesse, Think you these are such great testimonies of affection, to
kindle fires in the midst of the streets, to set up tables there, to make
feasts in the public places; to change the face of the City into that of a
great Tavern, to spill so much wine upon the pavement, that dirt is made
therewith, and afterward to run in troops, for quarrels, for committing
insolences, for seeking of meats answerable to unruly appetites? Must a
public shame be the mark of a public joy? must these things be counted
seemly on the solemn days of Princes, which at no other time, on no other
days are either fitting or decent.

What? they who live according to the rules of exact discipline, that their
prayers may obtain from God the welfare of the Emperor, shall they I say,
change the manner of living, thus to houour the Emperor? shall liberty, and
corruption pass for piety? What serves to inflame concupiscence shall it be
imputed an act of Religion? I confess it is just to condemn us; for why while
observers of chastity, temperance, and all other Christian and morrall virtues,
deny we them the licentiousness of making such like brutish rejoycings and
bedlam sports for the welfare of the Emperors? why when all the world besides
in joy, shade we not our doors at the same time with laurells? why set we not
up candles and burn (as we use to say) in the proverb dayelight with
torches? for it is counted a meritoriour thing with you, in celebrating
public solemnities to adorn your dwellings with all manner of vicious
ornaments agreeable to licentious youth in harlots houses.

But let us see if they that envy us the name of Romans, and suppose us
enemies, to the Roman Empire, fall not into the selfsame crimes they reproach
us with that are Christians, let us look into your lives, examine your
histories that therein discover whether or no you (the people I mean) who
accuse us after this manner, offend not more then we this second Majesty,
whether you commit not more then we, this second sacrilege, a crime laid to
our charge, because we solemnise not with you the days you feast on in honor
to the Emperors, with all kind of beastly ceremonies repugnant to our modesty,
chastity and purity. I address my self to this common people of Rome, to this
popularity who occupy the seven hills of this great City, and ask them if their
language, as Roman ask is, has spared any of their Caesar's. The placcards fixed
to the Statues of Tiber, and the Cirques where they bring the wild beasts, that
are taught to tear men in pieces, and whether they hear the people in the
midst of these public spectacles speak ill of the Prince, can render
sufficient testimonies heerof. If nature had given to man a body of as
transparent a matter as a looking glass, is there any in this great multitude,
that appears not with the image of some new Emperor engraven on his heart,
set on a throne lifted up, giving order for the distributing of the presents
the Princes are wont to make to the public at his coming to the Empire, at
which instant he hears these confused voices which cry, De nostris annis
tibi Jupiter augeat annos? From our own years, should Jupiter add more to thine.

A Christian can neither pronounce these words, nor make wishes for the change
of Emperors. You say these are actions of the vulgar, but they are the actions
of the Romans, and of those that are the greatest enemies we can have, for its
this popularity that cry the lowdest against the Christians. But it may be
other Orders have been faithful to their Princes to the proportion of the
authority they have in the State; that there is come out no conjuration from
the body of the Senate, and of the Knights, that the Soldiers have not
attempted the Emperors lives, they are safe in theit own palaces: from
whence then an Avidius Cassius, a Piscenius Niger, and a Claudius Albinius?
from whence those that assieged the Emperor Comodus between the two laurel
woods? from whence those in the exercise of the At hletes got the force they
imployd to strangle that Prince? From whence those that forced the palace with
their arms in their hands, with more impudence then the Sigeres had, and the
Parthenians? If I be not deceived they are all Romans, all these Parricides
are of the Religion of them that profess not Christianity. So that these
people, at the same moment they went to commit these attempts so full of
impiety, did sacrifice for the welfare of the Emperor, swore by his Genius,
showing themselves outwardly much different from that they were within, and
gave to the Christians the names of public enemies. But so many persons as
are daily discovered to be confederates, or approvers of this detestable party
made against Severus, these rests of so great a harvest of parricides; what
lawrells newly gathered, and covered with branches, did they not put up before
their doors? with what elevated and lighted torches did they not black the
entry of their houses withal? what rich and magnificent tables did they not
set up in the chief places of Rome? not to take part in the public joys,
but that by the occasion of a solemnity ordained for another, they made the
Deities they called on understand, that the prayers they had conceived, and
changing in their minds the name of Prince, by the image of this pomp, they
consecrated that of their hopes.

They that consult with Astrologers, Devines, Augures, and Magitians concerning
the welfare of their Emperors, render them all theseduties; these curious
sciences were taught men by the revolted Angels. God has forbid the use
thereof, and therefore Christians male no use of them no not to my what should
be the success of their own affairs; but it is true, one cannot without crime
enquire of these impostors of the welfare of the Prince. For who can have an
interest in it, but he that has a design up on his death, who wishes it,
hopes it, and expects something should happen against it? We do not inform
our selves of the fortune of our neighbors, with the same intention we
inform our selves of that of our masters. The curiosity that produces the
affection of blood has other motions then that which enters in the mind of a
subject by the hatred it carries to servitude.

CHAP. XXXVI.
NOw seeing they who had the names of Romans, were enemies of the State, why
do they deny us the title of Romans, we whom they call enemies? but cannot we
be Romans without being enemies, because it is found they were enemies who
passed for Romans? Certes the piety we should, have to the Emperors, the
judgment of Religion, with which we are obliged to pray for their welfare,
and the testimonies of the fidelity due to them, consist not in these exterior
duties whereof we have spoken; contrarily under the veil of these ceremonies
men may hide their ill will; but it consists in the ceremonies of the actions
of virtue that commands the law of God, and that Christians are bound to
practice, as much for the Emperor in particular, as for all the world in
general; for the good we do, is not a tribute we owe but to our Prince. Our
good works distinguish not the qualities of persons, because we labor not
for our selves, and look not for the praise, or recompense of men, but of God,
who has a faithful register of our good actions, and gives us a rich
recompense when they are indifferent, and have not for an object any other
consideration in the world. We live with our Emperors even as with our
neighbors.

It is equally forbidden us to wish evil, to do evil, and to speak evil of
our neighbors, yea to think evil of whosoever it be: that which is not
lawful for us to undertake against the person of the Emperor, is not
permitted us against any other person whatsoever: that which is not lawful for
us to undertake against a particular, is perhaps less lawful against him God
has raised up to so great dignity.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IN effect, if (as we have said here before), it be commanded us to love our
enemies; remains there any we must hate? if revenging injury received, be
forbid us, as also to commit the same faults they fall into that have offended
us; remains there any one, to whom it is lawful for us to do a displeasure
unto? judge of it by your own knowledge? How often by a blind obedience,
render you as match to your passions, as to your laws; you employ the sword and
fire aginst Christians? How, often do these people, being our enemies, of
their own accord, without your authority, assault us with stones, or burn us?
Certes, they are so enraged against us, that during the furies of the
Bacchinales, they spare not, even Christians that are dead, but trouble the
rest of their graves, they violate their Sepulchers, which are as sanctuaries
of the dead, they draw forth their bodies, not to be known whose bodies they
are, after mangled by them, which with extreme inhumanity they tear and drag
in the streets. In the midst of all these outrages, have you observed that
these people, Who (as you think) have formed so strange a conspiracy, and on
the other side might be animated enough for revenge by the punishments,
wherewith you make them lose their lives, endeavored any thing against you to
ressent the evil treating they have received? Think you that they want an
occasion? When in one night only a small number of torches would be enough to
satisfy their revenge, if with us it were permitted to render evil for evil;
but God forbid we should do so.

A Religion that is all Divine ought not to revenge by the instigation of men;
and must not think it strange to suffer that which is made use of to prove
them. If we would declare against you, as open, rather then pursue you as
secret enemies, might we not have forces and troops enough? It may be the
Moors and Marcomanes, the Parthians, or whatsoever people they are, shut up in
the bounds of the Country they inhabit, make a greater number of men, then
they that are spread throughout all the Universe and have no other limits then
that of the world. Our original is but of late, and we fill already all that
your power acknowledges, Cities, Fortresses, Isles, provinces, the assemblies
of the people the armies also, the wards, and tenths of Rome, the, Palace, the
Senate, and the public places; Finally we leave you but the Temples. What
wars were we not able to undertake? With what promptitude might we not arm
our selves, although we should be the weaker; we that suffer our selves so
willingly to be killed, if in our Religion it were, not rather lawful to let
our selves be killed, then to kill others? We would also make war against
you without taking up arms, and casting our selves into a revolt; It were
enough not to live with you, and to separate our selves, our divorce would
print shame in your foreheads. For if the Christians who make so great a
multitude of all sorts of persons, should abandon you, to retire into some
Country of the world dispersed from all society; truly the loss of so many
Citizens, of what condition soever they are, would disparage your government
and also our retreat would be a rude punishment to you; without doubt the
solitude that would remain with you; this silence of all things, this general
astonishment of nature, even as if all the world were dead, would frighten you,
you might go seek subjects to command, there would remain to you more
enemies then Citizens: now you have more Citizens then enemies, because there
are greater number of Christians among you. But if we were not near you, who
would snatch you a way from these secret enemies, whose malignant operations
make so strange a confusion in your minds, and so horrible an alteration of
your healths? I have heard speak of the possession of Devils, where with you
are tormented from whence we deliver you freely and Without reward; if we had
the spirit of revenge, it were enough to satisfy us, that these corrupted
spirits might at all times sease on your bodies, and that entrance therein were
always open to them. But as you do not think of that you ought, to wit, so
dear a protection, you cease not to declare a people, to be your enemies, who
do you no hurt, whose assistance is so absolutely necessary to you. It is true
we are enemies, yet not of men, but of their errors.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THen being you see no evil can be imputed to our Religion, and on the
contrary, the piety it teaches, is saving to men, you should let them have
better usage then that have had: you should, approve of them as of a law full
and permitted society, beacause there is no such thing committed by them as is
wont to be feared from factious societies, and such as is forbid by the laws.

If I be not deceived, the cause why Magistrates forbid them, is the care they
have of the public tranquillity: that the City be not divided in parties,
for that sooner disturbes all the orders of the Roman people, makes tumults in
the midst of the assemblies of the multitude, and also disquiets the use of the
lawful pleasures of this people, when the pleasures they affect with so much
desire possess their eyes; for it is subject to receive diverse impressions.
They interesse themselves in the factions made by the ambition of evil
Citizens. They share their affections among them, and one may fear these
disorders now more then ever, because we live in a time, in which men fell
their services to commit violences. As for us, as we care not for gaining
honor, and possessing great matters of this world, nothing obliegeth us to
assemble our selves against the prohibitions of Laws; and its far from our
thoughts, to meddle with public affairs. We acknowledge, but one only
republicke of all men, which is the world; We renounce your shows, as we
condemn their diverse originalls, by the knowledge, we have that they are the
effects of superstition and idolatry.

Finally, we regard not what passes there, have no comerce with the furies of
the Cirques, with the unchastity, of the Theater, the vain exercise of the
Athletes, and the cruelties of the amphitheater. If lawful for the Epicurians
to feign a volupruousnesse to themselves, wherein they established the truth of
the Sovereign good. In what then do we offend you if we take other pleasures
then yours? but if we will be ignorant of all kind of delights, me thinks it
is not for your interest; and if there be any loss, it falls all upon us. We
reject, say you, the things that please you: we have reason so to do, because
our pleasures are not yours.

CHAP. XXXIX.
AFter showing Christian Religion (which you call a factious society) innocent
of all crimes by you attributed to it; its time I discover unto you its manners,
to the end, that having refuted the evil wherewith it is reproached, I show
you the good wherewith it is replenished. We make a body, or by certain
knowledge all conspire in the service of the true God, where we live united
under one Discipline, and one only Faith, or, by a happy conjunction,
conceive all of us the like hope of eternal felicity. We assemble together by
troops in our prayers to God, as if thereby we would carry as by force, the
grant of whatever prayers we present unto him; it is a violence that is
agreeable to him; we pray to him for the Emperors, their Ministers, the
magistrates that have the exercise of their power, for the polliticke estate,
the tranquillity of the Empire, the retarding of the general dissolution that
must put an end to all things. We assemble together to read the holy
Scriptures, and we read them according to the condition of the times, what
serves either to admonish, or confirm the faithful. In effct the Scriptures
nourish our faith, lift up our hope, and assure the confidence we have in God,
nevertheless we cease not to confirm our discipline by the strength of
precepts we continually repeat.

In these assemblies we make exhortations, and threatenings, and exercise
Divine censure, that banisheth sinners, and excludes them from our communion
we judge them with very much circumspection, because we know that God is in
the midst of us, and sees what we do; and certainly it is a great fortelling
of the judgment God will, one day, pronounce against the wicked, when the
Church, moved with the enormity of their crimes, darts out upon wilful sinners
the thunderbolts of excommunication, and deprives them from the participation
of its prayers, its society, and all sort of holy commerce with it. In our
assemblies there are Bishops that preside, and have authority over all the
faithful committed to their charge; they are approved by the suffrages of them
whom they ought to conduct, and it is not bribes that acquire them this honor,
but testimonies given of their good life. For in the Church of God nothing is
done by the allurement of gifts: if there be among us any kind of treasure, the
money laid up makes our Religion not ashamed; neithercan it be said what
brought unto us is a tribute, or price paid to participate of its ho inesse:
everyone contributes a little sum, at the end of the month, or, when he will:
but it is, if he will, and can: for none are constrained to give: if we get
any alms, it is of good will, riches gathered in this manner are as the
pledges of piety; we do not confound them in eating and drinking with excess;
we make not use of them for the foul and loathsome exercise of gluttony: but
we employ them in feeding the poor, and burying them, in comforting children
that are destitute of parents and goods, in helping old men who have spent
their best days in the service of the faithful, in helping the poor that
have lost by shipwreck what they had, and in assisting them that serve in the
mines, are banished into Islands, or shut up in prisons, because the profess
the Religion of the true God, that during the time they suffer for the
confession of his name they may be nourished with the stock of the Church. But
its a strange thing that this charity among us gives occasion to some to blame
us. See, say they, how they love one another; this astonitheth them, because
they hate one another, See, say they, how they are ready to die one for
another, hut as for them they are ready, to kill one another; and I think, they
have nothing to say against the name of Christian we give one another, for with
them paternal names, and the affinity that blood produces, expresses but a
fained affection, and disguised amity. It must not seem strange to you if we
call one another brethren, seeing we are all your brethren by the right of
nature, which is mother to us all. We have the same principles as you, but you
renounce the humanity common to us; because you are evil brethren to us: but
with how much more reason are they called and esteemed brethren; who
acknowledge one same father, to wit, the living God, that have received the
same spirit of Sanctity, who being shut up in the same darkness, and
ignorance, as children in the belly of their mother, came forth happily, and in
opening their eyes were frighted at the sight of the same light, which is that
o^ truth? But, it may be, it is not believed we are brethren indeed, because
there are no tragedies, that speak of the bloody disorders of Christians, or
because we are brethren, but unto the common usage of the goods of the world,
which with you have the power to dissolve the union of brotherhood; therefore,
as we live with the same intelligence, as if we had all but one spirit, and one
soul, we make no difficulty to put all things between us in common; we have
nothing in particular but our wives, of all things in the world there is
nothing but wives, whereof we reject community; and, on the contrary, among
them, of their wives only there is community with other men, for as they have
used to desile the marriages of their friends, they prostiture also marriages
with very much patience to the unchastitie of their friends: that which they
have learnt, if I be not deceived, in the school of a Greek Socrates, and
Roman Cato, who have sometimes lent their wives to their friends, those they
married to have children by, to be engendered by others then themselves and out
of their houses. I know not if they lent them against their wills; for why
should they have any care of their chastity, whom their husbands abandon so
lightly? O famous example of a Grecians wisdom, and Roman severitie! A
Philosopher and a Censor make a shameful trade of the chastity of their wives.

Now seeing we live together with so much charity, that all our goods are
common; why should they wonder if we make good cheer? for it is one of the
excesses you reproach us with, besides the infamous crimes where of you accuse
our repasts, you reproove us with prodigality; it may be it is of us Diogenes
has said, the Megarians make feasts, as if they would die tomorrow and they
build also, as if they would never die. Certes, each of you fees easier the
straw in his neighbors eye, then the beam in his own. The air is corrupted
with the ill sents that go out of the mouths of so many people, that spew in
the streets.

What, the Saliens could not make one repast, unless they found some body that
lent them money to supply their expenses? your stewards would be troubled to
make ready the accounts of the money spent in feasts, where you vow the tenth
of your goods to Hercules? In Athens they choose the excellentest cooks to
celebrate the feast of the Apaturies, wherein the midst of their deboystnes,
they call upon the Deity of father Denis; the soldiers who have the charge of
watching by night, to hinder the burning of the City, are troubled at the sight
of the smoke that rises in the air, in making ready supper in honor of
Serapis? And yet they will talk of nothing, but the excess of the Tables of
the Christians? But you need but consider the name given to our repast to know
the quality thereof. They express themselves with the same word that signifies
dilection with the Greeks, whatsoever the cost is that is made, it is
profitable, for they gain always in this expense; because it has piety for
its foundation. Its a sweetness, wherewith we comfort the want of the poor,
but we do not treat them, as you those infamous gluttons, who glory in selling
you their liberty for the price of the good bits, where with they fill their
bellies in the midst of a thousand indignities. But we will have the least
served with our goods, because we know they, among all men, are, the most
acceptable to God.

Then seeing our banquets have so honest an end, consider what our Discipline
should be in the rest of our actions, even those which more concern the duties
of Religion; it permits nothing that is dishonest, nor far from modesty. Before
we go to table we are fed with heavenly meat; which is the prayer we make to
God; we eat as much, as is necessary to satisfy ones appetite, we drink as
much as is permitted to persons that have a care of their purity. They that sit
there take their refection with so much temperance, as they may remember they
are obliged to worship God, even at night. They entertain one another as
people that know God hears what they say. After the repast done, and washed
their hands, and lighted the candles, they are invited to praise God, and to
sing Psalms, taken out of the holy Scripture, or Hymns; every one composeth
according to the capacity of his mind. By this it may be known, it they have
committed any excess at table; as the repast began with prayer, so it ends;
they go forth, no^ in diverse troops to defile their hands with the blood of
men, not in several bands running in the streets, not to do insolences; but
with the same care they had in coming in, preserving their modesty and
chastity.

Finally, Christians retire with so much stayednesse, that we may very well
see, they are not fed so much with corporal meats, as the substance of
heavenly and holy discipline. Certes, it were but reason, that this society of
the Christians should be reputed unlawful, if it were like to that the laws
forbid; it were but good reason it should be condemned, if it were not
different to that which deserves to be condemned; if one would reproach it
with the same things wherewith they accuse factious societies. But tell me, did
we ever assemble to procure the hurt of any one? As we are separated, we are
the same also in a body: as we are in particular, so we are in general that
is to say, in whatsoever estate we are found, we offend no body, we injure no
body; when any virtuous or godly people are associated, when any pious or chaste
persons assemble together, their union should not be called a faction, but a
lawful society.

CHAP. XL.
BUT, contrarily, the title of factious appertains truly to them, who form
intelligences of undoing good men, whom they hate, who, by a wicked
combination, lift up their voices against the blood of innocents, and ground
not their hatred but on the false opinion they have, that Christians are the
cause of all the calamities arrive in the world, and evils that people suffer.

If Tiber overflowes, if Nilus have not watered the plains, if Heaven has
stopped its course, and not powered its raines here below, if the earth quake,
there be famine, or plague, immediately they cry out, cast the Christians to
the Lions. What is one Lion able to devour so many Christians? But consider, I
pray you, how many evils have afflicted the U^iverse and Cities which make a
part thereof before the Empire of Tiberius that is to lay, before the birth of
Jesus Christ. We read that the Island of Hierapolis, Delos, Rhode, and Co,
were heertofore lost with many thousands of men that inhabited them. Plato
reports, that the Atlanticke Sea has covered an Island of a greater exten^,
then Asia, and Africa together. An Earthquake made the Sea of Corinth appear
dry, and the impetuosity of the waves seperating Lucarna from the firm land
of Italy, and banishing it from its continent, has made an Island, which is
now known by the name of Sicily. Certainly al these accidents could not happen,
but the people must have suffered strange misfortunes. But, I will not only
say, where were the Christians, the contemners of your gods, but your gods
themselves, when the deluge covered and drowned all the world, or (as Plato
supposes) the flat countries only? for, indeed, we cannot but doubt your
gods are since this general, inundation, the Cities where they took birth, and
where they died, and those they built render testimonies thereof: they would not
have been, they had not lasted till our time, if their original were not
after this Universal disorder, when the justice of God punnished all the world?
Palestina had not yet served for a retreat to the people of Israel at their
going out of Egypt. The Jews, whose law is the source of the Christian
Religion, was not yet established, when as two Cities near to this province,
Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed by a rain of fire: the Country retains
still the odor of that ancient burning, and if the trees bear any fruits, they
are fruits only to the sight, so soon as one touches them they are turned
into ashes. Tuscany, and Campania did not complain of the Christians, when
fire from Heaven consumed the City of Vulsina, and that of Pompeyes, was burnt
by flames the neighbor mountain vomited. Nobody, as yet, called on the true God
at Rome, when Hanniball, after he had got the great victory of Cannes, by the
number of gold rings he got of the Romans, and measured by the bushel, which
made the count of the men killed in the battle. All people indifferently adored
your gods; when the Gauls came with their arms in their hands unto the
Capitol, and besieged it: but is it not a powerful argument against your
error which we see in your histories, that when Cities were forced, temples
and walls had the same destiny? for, from, thence I boldly conclude, that your
gods send not these evils on the earth, because they are mortal, as well as
you. If discover the source of the evils, wherewith the race of men have been
afflicted in all ages, know it has been their ingratitude has excited against
them the anger of God. For, they have always offended this great author of
nature, because not acknowledged the graces received of him. He has given
them the knowledge of a part of his greatness, in exposing before their eyes
the beauty of the Universe, which publishes his honor so highly; and instead
of employing themselves in so noble a search; they feigned to themselves other
gods, to whom they have rendered the honor that appertained not, but to him
alone.

After this fault, they committed another, which is, in not seeking out him
that is the master, and example of innocence, and who is also the judge and
revenger of sin, abandoning themselves to all sorts of vices, and shamefully
defiling themselves with execrable crimes: the which, if they had looked into,
as they were obliged, without doubt, they had known him, and in knowing,
honored him, and after that had sooner resented his favors, then his wrath.
Let them not then trouble themselves about the cause of these evils, but know
they are the effects of the fury of this same God, who, in all ages, has given
them proofs of his indignation, before they heard speak of the name of
Christians. Man this wicked race that inioyed at case all the goods God created
for him, before all false gods? adored by him were forged, will he not
comprehend that these evils came from the hand of him to whom he has not
rendered homage for his goods? In sum, his ingratitude is his crime, he has
offended the majesty of God, in failing to make due acknowledgement of him. Yet
if make comparison of the calamities of the time past, with this time, we
shall find since the very moment God sent the first Christians on the earth,
public evils have been more tolerable then before they were. Its very easy
to discover the reason of it, the innocence whereof they make profession has
diminished the iniquities of the world, and begun to turn away, with their
prayers, the just vengeance of God. But, see here a manifest proof of your
blindness. During the great draught of summer, when an excessive heat stayed
the rain, and hindered that it fell not on the earth, in the time when every
one desired water, that the fruits of the earth might come to maturity, you
lose not the use of your pleasures, and deboistnesse, and among the pastimes
you take in your bathes, your tavernes, and your unchaste houses, you demand of
Jupiter, by diverse kind of sacrifices, and by the use of many superstitions,
the help whereof you have need; you ordain public prayers, where the people
being baresooted invoke the affistance of the Gods, you seek in the Capitole
that which you cannot find, but in heaven; you stay till the seelings of your
temples be changed into clouds, to give you rain, and think to obtain that
you desire, without addressing your self to God, and turning your self
toward heaven, where he powers down his graces upon men. Our proceedings are
much different from yours, in these public necessities we mortisie our selves
by fastings; we practice continency, with all the severity we can; we
abstain, for a time, from all corporal nourishment, we take sackcloth and
ashes, as marks of our affliction; and in this condition, we strike at heaven
with our cries; we constrain him to have pity on us; we make him ashamed of
our misery; and when we have overcome the anger of God, and pulled down his
mercy, you honor your Jupiter, and thank him for a benefit comes not from him.

CHAP. XLI.
CErtainly, that which you say unjustly of Christians, Christians may, with
good reason, say of you, that you do nothing but hurt the society of men, and
by your crimes, every day, draw public evils upon them; for the evil of
punishment is the effect of the neglect you have of God, and the worship you
render to statues: in a word its more credible, that God neglected by mankind,
should be sooner irritated against you, then those that receive his services,
otherwise the Gods you honor would be very unjust, if in punishing Christians
they make no difficulty to punish them also that adore them. They should
separate their servants from the condition of Christians, their enemies. You
likewise oppose to us that this argument resists the justice of our God;
because he suffers that they who serve him feel the public evils, even as
the profane that do not acknowledge him. But observe the order our God has
established, and when comprehended it, you will forbear this objection. He
that has ordained at the end of all ages the judgment of men, and to
distribute to alrecompenses or everlasting punishments, puts no difference
between them before the consummation of time, does not, before hand, make a
separation of the good and evil, but reservesit for his last judgment; in the
mean time, he equally treats all mankind, whether he shows them mercy, or
reproves them in his anger; He will have both good and bad things common to
his servants and the profane; that we may, in the society of the world,
without any distinction, be all tried by his clemency and severity; as for us,
as we have learnt all these things of him, we love his clemency, and fear his
severity; contrarily, you neglect both the one and the other, and from thence
it comes that all the miseries the world receives from the hand of God, are, to
us, voices from heaven, that admonish, and exhort us to do well, and to you,
they are chastisements of your crimes. In the midst of these calamities, we
feel no displcasure, for nothing ties us to the world, and we have no
interest, but to be gone ere long; besides, we know, they are the disorders of
your lives, that procure these evils, wherewith the world is afflicted; and if
there falls any part upon us, because we are mingled with you, we take
occasion to rejoice, because it puts before our eyes the truth of the holy
scriptures, that confirm in us the confidence we have in the promises made to
us; that fortisies our faith, and assures our hope. If it be true, they are the
Gods you honor afflict you so cruelly because of us, how is it possible you
continue, still to worship so ungrateful, and unjust gods; seeing, contrarily,
to injure the Christians, they should rather assist, and defend you?

CHAP. XLII.
BUt, after all these crimes, they object against us, and say, we are not any
way prositable in commerce of the world. I know not how that can be said of us,
seeing we live with you, we use the same meats, and the same habits as you,
we have been brought up the one as the other, and the necessities of life are
common between us. For, we are not like the Brachmanes, or the Gymnosophists
of India, we retire not into the woods; we banish not our selves from all
things necessary for life, we continually remember, we have great obligations
to our God, our Lord, our Creator: we reject not any good thing, his goodness
has produced, for our use: we contain our selves in a just moderation, that
we may not take with excess, or without having need: we remain with you in
the world, but not separate from the ordinary commerce: we are not without
your public places, your markets, your baths, your shops, your Inns, your
Faires. We sail, bear arms, cultivate the ground, and traffic with you;
so that we mingle our functions with yours; and make open profession of
working for your service. I cannot comprehend how you can imagine we are not
profitable to you, and that we contribute nothing to the offices of society,
seeing it is with it, and by it we live: But if I do not assist at your
ceremonies, if I celebrate not your feasts, yet I am a man as well that day as
other days. During the Saturnalls I go not into the bath before day, because
I will not employ the hours of night and day unprofitably, yet I wash my self
at a convenient hour, that the bath may serve to preserve my health and
conserve my life and blood: is it not enough, When I am dead, that all my body
grows stiff and pale after it is washed? the days on which are represented
games in honor of your Gods, I eat not publicly, as you do, according to
the custom of these wretched creatures, who at the instant they are to be
devoured by wild beasts, fill their bellies before all the world for their last
repast; yet in any other place where I eat, I eat the same meats as you do.
I buy no flowers to make a garland to put on my head: what is it to you what
use I make of the flowers I have bought? me thinks they are more pleasing to
me when they are free, unbound, and scattered without order. But, if we must
put them into the form of a garland, we are used, when they are in this
condition, to put them near our noses to smell to them. Let them that put them
on their heads, try if it be more to purpose to smell by the hairs, or by the
organ of the smelling part? I am not at your shows, but, if my appetite mooves
me to taste the good bitts that are sold in these assemblyes, I will rather buy
them in the places where they are ordinarily sold. I buy no incense: if the
merchants of Arabia complain on it, let these strangers know more wares are
spent, and with greater profuseness in burying Christians, then to sum the
images of the God. You say, the tributes of the temples are less every day by
the malice of men, that there is less given to them that keep those holy
places; but hardly can we suffice to give comfort both to men, and to your
gods that implore our charity. We think, it is enough to use liberallity
toward them that ask it of us: Let Jupiter give us his hand, and he shall
not take it away empty; we will do him the favor, which our mercy refuses
to no body: We distribute more goods, in every street, then your Religion,
with all its sacrifices do in all your temples; and, on the other side, if the
tributes of the temple suffer any diminution, the republicke is obliged for
her own to the piety of the Christians, because they pay what they owe with
the same fidelity, which makes them abstain from all frauds, by which men are
wont to retain unjustly the goods of others. If one consider but the loss the
public receives by these tricks and lies, where you strive to frustrate her
rights, it will be found that the damage your evil conscience causes to the
State in this only ran-counter, carries away quite all the good you can do in
any other thing whatsoever.

CHAP. XLIII.
I Acknowledge there are certain persons that have reason to complain of us,
and may truly say, there is nothing to be gained for them of the Christians.
They are first these infamous corrupters of chastity; these brokers of foul
pleasures, and dishonest loves, these wretched creatures that serve the vildest
ministers of unchastitie; after these, Murderers, they which meddle with
giving of poison, and Magicians, and finally southsayers, Deviners, and
Astrologers. But it is very profitable in this life, to be unusefull to these
people; Yet in what manner soever it be, that our Religion causes damage to
your affairs, it has neither lost where withal to recompense you by the
help you may expect from it. How much do you esteem them, I say not them that
deliver you from the power of Devils, them that pray for you to the true God:
But, them you may have near you, as assured guards, from whom there is nothing
to be feared?

CHAP. XLIIII.
IN effect, there is cause to wonder your passion is so irregular, that in
prosecuting the Christians, you make no difficulty to take away the life of men
that are profitable to the common wealth. The State receives by your injustice
an evident damage, and important loss: and yet no body looks to it: no body
weighs of what consequence the sufferings are of so many persons of good life,
and the punishment of so great a number of innocents. We speak as boldly of
the Christians you put to death, for we have an unreproachable testimony of
their integrity, which we take also from your registers, Sirs, who are
employed, every day, in judging those that are kept in prisons, and who
terminate their processes, by the sentences you give against them, of all the
malefactors accused before you, of so many sorts of crimes; is there any of
them charged with Murder, Robbery, Sacrilege, and other faults, to whom they
impute also that he is a Christian? or else, when Christians are presented to
be punished as Criminalls, because they are Christians, is there, any amongst
them, whose life like that of other prisoners? all the faulty wherewith your
prisons are so filled that they are overcharged, are of your Religion; they are
also of your Religion that make the mines groan under the weight of their
blows, they are the wretched creatures of the same Religion you are wherewith
the wild beasts fill their enttayles. All these poor criminalls, your
Citizens breed up to make them cruelly kill one another before a bloody people,
have the same opinion you have of the deity.

Finally, among all these wretched creatures, there is not one Christian, unless
he be charged by justice, because of his name Christian: Or, if there be found
a Christian attainted of any crime, he has no more the name Christian,
because he has lost that Divine quality, in losing his innocence.

CHAP. XLV.
ARe there none then in the world innocent but we, what marvel? it must needs
be so; and otherwise it cannot be: Forasmuch as God, having taught us
innocence; we know it perfectly, as revealed from a perfect master, and keep
it faithfully as dispensed by one who will not be mocked by us in a seeming
obedience unto what he commands. As for you its the opinion of men that makes
you innocent, and their rules that govern all; thence it comes your
injunctions establish not fully the truth of this excellent virtue; and, as the
things most offectuall to perfection are there wanting, so have they not the
power of imprinting fear, in the hearts of those, that owe them obedience.
For, tell me, what light has humane learning to teach that which is truly
good? What authority humane power to free men from embracing the true
happiness? If it be easy to be deceived by the one, it is no less common
to neglect the other.

Let us consider a little your laws, and compare them with those of our God;
which law is more accomplished, that which says, Thou shall not kill: or that
which says Thou shall not be angry? which perfecter, that which forbids
adultry, or which turns the eyes from the object, surprising the mind when
idle, causes evil desires to enter into the soul thereby? which law wiser,
that which condemns evil deeds, or forbids evil speakings? which purer, that
which permits not to do wrong to others, or which suffers not so much as to
revenge wrong after done unto our selves? but this is not all; for you must
know your laws, which seemed to set out innocence, whereof notwithstanding
they represent but an imperfect image, have borrowed that they have of good
from the law of God as far more ancient then what in laws established by men.

I have already spoken of the time wherein Moses lived, and therefore not
necessary to repeat what before said, to show the laws then published to be
the first, before all other humane laws since, which have not the virtue of
that primitive law: for, I pray you, what force have those laws, whereof men
may avoid the severity because very often their crimes are covered, and we may
sometimes freely violate them when it is by accident, or constraint they are
offended by us. But we need do nothing to make them be neglected, but this
consideration, that the punishments are not of long continuance, and end with
death: so Epicurus mockes at all sorrows and torments that afflict the body,
because he says, one should not apprehend them it mean, and tolerable, and
if violent they will not last long. As for us, who are to answer before a God,
who knows the most hidden things, and that his justice will revenge the faults
of men, with pains that shall never end, it is with good reason we labor
only to attain true innocence; the perfect knowledge we have of so rare a
virtue, the difficulty we have to hide our actions from him that sees all, the
horror of torments this great God prepares for the wicked, torments that are
not only long, but eternal, oblieging us to conserve purity, whereof Jesus
Christ has given us an example; for we fear this God, the Judges ought also
to fear that condemn them, whose hearts are touched with this fear; that is
to say, Christians, who fear God, and not man, whatsoever power man has on
the earth to afflict them with.

CHAP. XLVI.
I Think, I have cleared the Christians of all the crimes, wherewith calumnious
imputations make men thirst for their blood. Explained all that tends to our
justification; shown, by what means, we can prove the verity of the grounds
of our Religion, in that I have produced the says of antiquity consistent with
the Holy Scriptures, and the confession spiritual powers make of the Divinity
of Jesus Christ. He that shall be bold enough to make us pass for impious,
should not rest on the skill of vain eloquence, and the weak endeavors of
fine words: but he must make his proof in the same form, as we have
established ours. Certes, these testimonies are of great authority, but the
admirable fruits our Doctrine produces, the knowledge whereof is become
public by the commerce we have in the world, makes so downright a conflict
with rude incredulity, that to defend her self, she is forced to say our
profession, has no matter in it Divine, but is only a sect of Philosophy,
that obliegeth Christians to rank themselves there, in the exercise of moral
virtues. The Philosophers, says she, teach and practice the same things,
Innocence, Justice, Patience, Temperance, and Chastity. If our Doctrine be
like that of Philosophers, if the comparison you make of us with them be just,
how comes it, we are not treated as they are? for with you their sects are
tolerated, and you do not punish them? But, contrarily, the Doctrine we publish
is forbid by your laws, and exposes us to all sorts of punishments? or else,
why are not they, you esteem like unto us, forced to do the same things you
impose upon us as necessary, and which we refuse on peril of our lives? for,
is there any that forces a Philosopher to sacrifice, or swear by their gods,
or to light candles at noone? But, contrarily, they have the liberty to
overthrow the worship of your gods openly, and to reprehend your superstitions
in the books they compose, which when they make, you commend them, evidencing
thereby that you approve of their opinions. Many among them rail impudently
against the Princes of the world, and you suffer them, and the justice of the
land has rather recompenses then punishments for them. They set up Statues for
them, they recompense them with rewards, and we hear not that they are
delivered to the fury of wild beasts, and must avow that it is with a great
deal of reason, because they bear the name of Philosophers, and not
Christians. This name Philosopher drives not away Devils how should they
drive them away, seeing they put them in the rank of gods, and take them and
Devils, to be for one and the same nature? Socrates had always this word in
his mouth, if my Demon permit me; and the same Philosopher, who witnesses he
had the same light of truth, when he taught we must not honor the gods,
ceased not to ordain when giving up the Ghost, they should sacrifice a cock
to AEsculapius, I think it was an act of gratitude he would render to Apollo,
father of AEsculapius, because he said, Socrates was the wisest of all men: O
strange imprudence of a God! he bore witness of the wisdom of a man, who
denied the power of the gods. Now as truth is wont to kindle hatred, whosoever
is faithful to it and presents it all pure, and without disguise, is liable to
be checked by the lovers of this passion; but contrarily every man that makes
profession of corrupting truth, acquireth by an action so detestable the favor
of those who persecute it. The Philosophers will appear followers of the
truth; and because glory is the end they propose to themselves, in faigning to
love it, they corrupt it; but the Christians that have their salvation for an
object, earnestly desire it, with an holy necessity, and after they have met
with it, conserve its purity, and publish it without bringing any change. It is
not true then, whatsoever you imagine, that the knowledge and Discipline of
Philosophers are like to ours; but there are other arguments of difference
between them and us. What is this Thales Prince of Physicians who when Craesus
solicited him to deliver what believe with certainty of God? Did he not put
him off with sundry delays to think further upon it? every handicraftsmen,
the least Christian knows God, and is able to show how his greatness is to
be comprehended. He shows by the sensible things all that humane understanding
finds in God, although Plato affirms this author of the Universe cannot easily
be known, and when know him, it is hard to express his nature, and make his
essence be conceived. Besides, if you object to us that the practice of moral
virtues is common between the Philosophers and us, let us examine them in
particular. And to begin with chastity, I read the Athenians gave sentence
against Socrates, as a defiler of young boys; a Christian man as making love
to a woman only, accustomes not to seek a brutish pleasure in changing the
sex which nature has ordained. I have heard a Phryne has been made use of
for Diogenes deb^ystnesse, and submitted her body to his foul affections That
Speusippus a Philosopher of platoes school, was killed n adultery; a Christian
is permitted to accompany with his lawful wife only. Democritus deprived
himself of his sight, because he could not look upon women without lusting
after them, and afflicted himself when he could not enjoy them, and so by
consequence witnessed his own incontinence.

A Christian has eyes, and yet in looking upon women, sees them not; that is,
with any unlawful concupisence, being wholly blind in his mind to such
desires; though quick sighted enough to behold such like objects with the eyes
of his body. If question of common civility, behold Diogenes with his filthy
feet in greater arrogance treads on sumptuous carpets, then Plato whose
sumptuous carpets they were; Neither is a Christian high minded toward the
poor. If speak of moderation, Pythagoras among the Turiens, and Zeno among
them of Priene, play the Tyrants, when as a Christian has not the ambition to
be in the least power or office over the people among whom he lives; if we
treat of contentment in mind, Lycurgus will famish himself, because the
Lacedaemonians went about but to reform and amend his laws; A Christian even
when condemned to die, is thank full to those that condemn him. If question of
faithfulness in things committed to another trust, Anaxagoras refuses the
restitution of goods left with him, to his guests; A Christian even by those
that are not Christians is reckoned trusty, because made proof they have of
his fidelity. If touch on lowliness, I find Aristotle, made his friend Hermias
go shamefully from the place he had assumed; A Christian offers wrong to no
body, no not his greatest enemy. The same Aristotle, in design to govern
Alexander, the easier, flatters him with as much infamy, as Plato Dionysius,
when for good cheer he soothed up the Tyrant in his liberty. Aristippus, in
the midst of his purple, carrying the marks of great severity in his looks,
gives himself over to all kind of excesses: And Hippias, when about to betray
his country, is suddenly murdered: an act of barbarous revenge never yet
undertook by a Christian to a man linked with him in the interest of the same
Religion, though with never so much fury persecuted by them. But some will say
even among us, there are a people that gives themselves the liberty of doing
evil, that free themselves from subjection to our laws, from any what ever
exact observation of what legally commanded by us. It is true, there are some
such, but so soon as they fall into this disorder, we hold them on more for
Christaians. But, contrarily, these Philosophers, notwithstanding the
irregularity of their lives, keep still with you the name of wise men, and the
honor which appertains to so glorious a title; so then what resemblance is
there between a Philosopher, and a Christian, a Disciple of Greece, and a
Disciple of Heaven, a mind desirous of vain reputation, and a soul that
seeks his salvation only? A man that is virtuous in words only, and he that
is so indeed: one that is wholly occupied in doing good, and another that makes
no conscience in committing what ever wickednesses: he that corrupts the truth
to establish error, and he that by subduing error renders to truth the beauty
of its original: he that turns truth out of doors as a thief, and steals
it away from the sight of men, and he that keeps it faithfully, that it may
be known by all the world.

CHAP. XLVII.
THe antiquity of the holy Scriptures, which I have heretofore discovered, is
a famous testimony, which may serve me still in this place, to let you know
this holy book is a treasure from whence these wise men of the world who are
come since, have taken all they have left to posterity: this proof is proper,
but long; and the only thing that hinders me to undertake it, is the fear I
have to make too great a volume. Is there any Poet or Sophister that has not
drawn what he has of excellent concernment from the rich sources of the
Prophets? It is in these delicious fountains the Philosophers plunged
themselves to qualify the desires of their minds, and some people have also
banished Philosophy from them, as the Thebans, those of Sparta, and of Argos,
because their Philosophers corrupting what they had read in the writings of
these men sent from God, composed pestilent doctrines, which a man could not
hear but with horror: so these people, who as I have said, labored not but
for glory, and had no affection but for eloquence, having met in the holy
Scriptures, with things that might be gainful to them made their profit of
them, and as they had no intention but to Content their curiosity, accommodated
the same to their designs, not acknowledging its holiness, which should have
hindered them from corrupting it; and not understanding well the sense, then
covered with clouds, and which the jews themselves, for whom the Prophets had
written it, apprehended not, but thorough shadows that wrapped them up. They saw
truth there with simplicity always accompanied; but humane prudence blinded
with her errors, not willing to believe in this truth which was showed to her,
remains more doubtful and unresolved then before; from whence it comes these
wise men of the world have formed opinions variable and uncertain touching the
same things they found, or declared proved with infallible certainty. They have
learnt only from the holy Scriptures there is one God, and the opinions they
have had of the nature of God divides them into many sects: One assitming God
has no body: other, that he is corporeal1, (as the Platonicks and Stoics)
one, that God is composed of Atoms; other, of numbers, (as Epicurus and
Pythagoras) one, that his substance is of fire (as it seems to Heraclitus) the
Platonicks hold he takes care of the conduct of the world: contrarily, the
Epicurians that he remains in an idle tranquillity without exercise, and
meddles not at all with human things. The Stoics believe God has his seat out
of the Universe, from whence he manageth and removes, as a potter turns his
frame. The Platonicks put him in the world, and say, he governes it within, as
he that holds the rudder of a ship; so they are of different opinions
concerning the nature of the world, to know whether it has not been made, or
whether it has not been; if it must end one day, or must last always; so,
they are not agreed of the condition of our soul; some maintain, it is divine
and eternal; others, that it is subject death; each of them has spoken
according to his sense, given way to his thoughts, changed, and corrupted the
truth, to follow their own motions; but we must not wonder, if Philosophers
have made this work of the oracles of the old Testament, seeing we have
amongst us people, who show themselves children worthy of such fathers,
infecting the purity of our new Gospel with the corruption of their own
opinions, animated with the spirit of Philosophy; and who by this only way,
which brought to the knowledge of the truth, have drawn many crooked paths,
wherein men cannot engage themselves without losing themselves: whereof I would
willingly advertise you that the diversity found between us, makes you not
imagine our profession is like that of the Philosophers, and that you judge not
ill of the truth, because we desend it by different means, and are divided in
our doctrine. These people that are separated from us, have violated the faith
of Jesus Christ, and we beat down their crrours by this only exception, that
the true rule of truth is that which has been taught by our Master, and
transmitted to us by these holy persons, who had the happiness to hear his
word, and receive his Divine instructions.

We shall show in another place, that all which is not conformable to this
rule, has been invented by new Doctors, who came not till after the blessed
companions of the son of God; to destroy the truth, men have made use of truth
it self by the suggestions of the spirits of error, who have inspired them to
fight with it with its own arms; they are they who have excited them to
corrupt so saving a doctrine: they are they, have invented fables, wherewith
its holiness has been profaned, that by their resemblance, they take away
the belief from truth, or rather get it for themselves. They would ruinate
faith by this detestable trick, persuading men they must not believe
Christians, by the same reason not believe the Poets, nor Philosophers; or
rather we should believe the Poets and Philosophers, because not believe the
Christians. It is this sacrilegious imitation, that makes them laugh at us,
when we preach the last judgment; the Poets and Philosophers, upon the ground
of this truth, set up a tribunal in Hell. They mock at us also, when we
threaten them with eternal torments, which are those hidden flames the earth
shuts up in her bosom, and are reserved by the justice of God, as in a
treasure, for the punishment of the wicked: for these prophaners have invented,
that there is is hell a River of burning fire; if we speak to them of
Paradise, a place filled with agreeable and Divine beauties, ordained to be the
residence of the souls of the blessed, and separated from the world by the
interposition of this Zone of fire which God has put before it, presently the
Elysian fields comes in their thoughts; they imagine that there is that
delicious place we declare unto them. Tell me I pray you where the Poets and
Philosophers have drawn these things so like to our doctrine? if it be not
from our books and Discipline? if they have drawn them from our Discipline,
they have without doubt the prerogative of antiquity upon them; therefore it
follows, that what we teach is truer, and ought to have more belief then all
these vain opinions. In effect: these opinions are but the shadows of truth,
and seeing the world has given faith to these vailes, they ought rather to
believe the truth that is the substance. If the Poets and Philosophers are the
first authors of these things which they have written, it must be then that
our Discipline is but the figure of that which is come after it, which nature
permits not, because the shadow is not before the body, and the figure cannot
have been before the truth, from whom it takes its original.

CHAP. XLVIII.
IT must be acknowledged that the usage we receive from you, and that you
give the Philosophers, are very different: if a Philosopher sets out what
Laberius left in writing, according to the opinion of Pythagoras, that a mule
is changed into a man, and a woman into an adder; if he displayes all the
cunning of his eloquence, if he sets out with address all his arguments to
settle this opinion, is it not true that he moves your minds? that he draws
you to his party? that he forces you to believe you must abstain from the
flesh of beasts? and that after there are some found with you, that make some
scruple to taste it, because in eating a piece of beese, they fear to devour
some of their ancestors? contrarily, if a Christian assures you, a man that is
dead shall live again one day, that he that is in the grave shall come out
and take again the same form he had, he is abused by the people, not only
with blows of the fist, but also with stones cast at him. Now, me thinks,
there is much blindness in receiving the opinions of these Philosophers, and
in condemning the Doctrine we propose to you upon the point of the
resurrection; for if there be reason persuades that the soul of a dead man
reenters into a body; why may not we believe it enters into the same body
again; and returns into the same matter from whence it is separated; seeing
the effect of a true Resurrection, is to be that which it was before? the
souls after they have changed their bodies, according to the opinion of
Pythagoras, and his Disciples, are no more the same they were heretofore:
because they could not become what they are not, unless they cease to be what
they were: we might find wherewithal to jest on this subject, if disposed to
sport our minds, and entertain our leisure with mirth: it would be a very
pleasant thing to enquire in what beasts, persons have been changed that lived
before us: but it is better we resolve to determine the truth of this
proposition. We say then, it is more convenient to the dignity of our nature,
to believe man shall become man again, that every one in particular shall rise
again to be the same he was, and informed with the same soul, that animated
him, with the same qualities wherewith he was endowed, although the body
receive some change in his exterior figure. In sum, the design of the
Universal judgment, being the effectual reason of our resurrection, it is
necessary the same man that is dead live again, that God may recompense, or
punish for his good or evil actions the same persons. And the same bodies that
are in the dust of the grave must appear at this judgment, because the soul
cannot suffer alone, and without a sensible matter, that is to say, without its
flesh, and as it has not sinned but in its flesh, it also has not merited but
with its flesh the punishments the justice of God has ordained for its crimes.
But you say to me, how can it be that a matter reduced to dust should
represent it self? consider with thy self O man! that make this objection
to me, thou shall find in thy own person the proof of so rare a miracle.
Think on what thou wast before created, thou were nothing. For if any thing
before, thou would remember it. Thou then that were nothing before thy
creation, and when cease to live, shall return to nothing: why can thou not
once again be brought out of nothing by the will of the same Creator, who
created thee of nothing? will there come any new thing unto thee? Thou who
before were not, art made again: after thou ceasest to live here, thou shall
be restored in the resurrection, and after this we would have thee ask by
what means God will raise thee up again?

But seeing he made no difficulty to make thee what before thou were, thou
ought not to think that he finds any to an easier thing, that is, to make
thee what thou were heretofore. Can one doubt of the power of God, that has
made this vast and immense body of the world of that which was not? of
nothing, and out of a Chaos? and who at the same moment animated this world
with a spirit, that gives life to all things? he has given testimonies, that
witness, and sets forth examples to us of the resurrection of man. We see
every day, the light after ir has lost its darkness, takes it again; and by
turns the darkness dissipates it self, and succeeds to light again: the
Stars deprived of their splendour, as if they were not, in being clothed with
their luster seem to be re-animated: the time begins at the same term where
it finished; the fruits fall off the trees, and come again in their season; the
corn puts not forth its ears plentifully, till after its former grain is
corrupted, and rotten in the earth: all things in perishing are conserved,
spring again after dead; and thou, O man! that should be so glorious by the
excellency of thy nature, if thou knew it, and that learnest also by the
Oracle of Apollo, thy self to be master of all creatures, as well of them
that die not to live again, as of those must die to rise again. Is it possible
thou should die to be no more? and that thy death ought not have a return to
life again? No certainly, in what place soever thy soul is separated form thy
body, whatsoever element has destroyed thy being, swallowed up, consumed, and
reduced thee to nothing; it shall render thee all entire, because nothing and
all the Universe appertain to one and the same Lord. It follows by this
discourse, say you, that we must always die, and always rise again: and I
answer you; If God, the great Lord of all things has so ordained it, so it
shall be whether you like of it or no: but that which his providance has
ordained touching the Resurrection of man, is conducted by a more equitable
order: Its a mystery newly revealed by his only Son Jesus Christ. This wisdom
that has composed the Universe with substances of different natures, and makes
it subsist in a body, by the uniting of so many contrary qualities, of void,
and solid, of things animate, and inanimate, of that in our power, and that
above us, of life, and death, the same has ordained time, with this difference
of conditions, that this first part in which we live, since the very Creation
of the World, was perpetually to the term that must accomplish the number of
its years; and the other part that follows, and which we stay for, is
infinite in its durance, and perpetuates unto eternity. Between these two,
there is a middle time, which after arrived to its end, the beauty of this
Universe, which must end one day also, and is for the present, hung up before
all eternity, shall change face; and then all mankind shall arise and appear
before the same God, to be recompensed according to all the good or evil we
have done upon earth, either with infinite joy, or pain in the world to come.
After which we shall neither die, nor rise again any more. But without other
change keep still the being we appear in at the hour of our Universal
resurrection; that is to say, the servants of God, being clothed with the
substance of eternity, which is that of the Angels, shall remain always
united to God; and the Profane, and those that violate the laws of God, be
buried in flames, where suffer perpetually without consuming; because partake
of the nature of this fire, which is of such a sublime quality, as shall make
them live in pains without being subject to corruption. The Philosophers
acknowledge the difference between hidden fire, and fire discovered to our
eyes: so the fire ordained for the use of man, is other then that which serves
for the justice of God: whether it forms the lightnings which heaven darts
upon the earth, or disgorgeth it self from the deep Cavernes of mountains;
it consumes not that it burns, it repaires rather that it destroys, so that
the mountains maintain themselves in their order, and man is struck with the
lightening without offending his body, or being reduced to ashes by the fire
wherewith he has been touched.

This miracle is a proof of the nature of these eternal flames, and an
example of the virtue they have by the decree of the judgment of God, to
preserve punishments, wherewith his justice will punish the wicked; the
mountains burn, and remain entire: why should it not so come to pass with
men found heinous offenders before God, and enemies of their Creator?

CHAP. XLIX.
THese things while we declare to you under the notion of truth, in us alone
you hold for presumptuous assertions, when the self same uttered by your
Philosophers, you esteem admirable lights of mind, and sublime sciences. They
are wise, we simple: they deserve to be honored, we to be laughed at: yea, I
dare say, more severly punished. But suppose the doctrine we preach false,
admit it consists in vain opinions; if vain, they are necessary for the
salvation of men's souls. If follies, wonderful profitable; in regard they who
believe them, are thereby excited to live well, for fear of eternal punishment
if they do not; and again if they do, in hope of eternal felicity.
Therefore it behooves us not to call these things false and impertinent, which
so much import us, to find true; neither condemn that which produces nothing
but good: which granted, the opinions you have for persecuting our doctrine,
rather then the doctrine we profess, should pass for imaginations conceived
without ground.

Again, this doctrine of ours being so profitable to men, deserves not to be
held impertinent: if, notwithstanding, you will have it to be false, and
ridiculous, you must yet acknowledge its innocence; and consequently, that it
deserves not to draw punishments upon the Christians. Know we not, that when
other men have given way to vain, and fabulous opinions, they have not been
reprooved, your Laws have not been armed with so much severity, as to punish
them, they having told freely their thoughts without being treated as
Criminalls. The worst a man can do to those, who after their example, publish
their follies, is, to laugh at them; We find not that ever they persecuted
them with sword, and fire, that they have been exposed, for that only, to the
infamy of gibbets, and rage of wild beasts. This cruelty is not exercised, but
against Christians; and it is a strange thing, that not only this people blind
in their passions, take delight to see us suffer; but some also among you,
cause our blood inhumanely to be shed, to gain the favor of the vulgar, and by
this means seek glory in their injustice: as if, all you can do to us,
depends not of our good will. In effect, I am a Christian, if I will be one,
and therefore you cannot condemn me, if I will not have you condemn me. Now
seeing you cannot use the power you have on me, unless I will, it follows,
that it is of my will, you have this power, and not of the authority of your
Magistracy. Therefore in vain do this people rejoice at our torments; our
punishments that make them rejoice, make us rejoice also, because we had
rather die, then lose the grace of God. Contrarily, they that hate us, should
be afflicted, and not rejoice at our evils, because they make us obtain what we
desire.

CHAP. L.
THerefore say you to us, what reason have you to complain of the evils we
cause you to suffer, seeing you will needs suffer them? are not you obliged
rather to love those that make you endure the punishments you desire? it is
true, we are resolved to endure them; but the reason is, because, without
doing worse, we know not how to avoid them: even as no body exposes himself
to the fury of war, by his good will, because, he cannot come near it, without
being afraid, and hazarding his life, and yet they, that find themselves
engaged there, fight with all their might, and whatsoever aversion they had
before, they rejoice when they get the victory, because they acquire glory, and
enrich themselves with the spoils of their enemies. We enter into a combat,
when we appear before your Tribunalls, and there it is, we fight for the
truth, in peril of our lives; our victory is, to make this truth reign, for
which we contend, and the fruit we have of it, is the glory of pleasing God,
and the precious booty of eternal life: in the mean time we perish, but it is
after we have been conquerors of error; so we are conquerors when we
perish, and, at the same instant we perish, we are freed out of your hands,
and receive our liberty. Give us if you will, names taken from the instruments,
of our punishments, to wit, from the posts where you tie us, and from the
ba^ins you kindle about us, when you burn our bodies, and reduce them to
ashes; this is the ornament of our victory; this our roabe of State; this
pitiful condition wherein your cruelty puts us, is our triumphant chariot.
You must not wonder then, if we do not please them, that overcome us, our
constancy makes us pass with them, for mad and desperate, and yet with you,
these actions of rage and despair are as standards, under which virtue seeks
glory, and marches to the conquest of reputation. Scevola, of his own motion,
left his hand in the flames: O greatness of courage! Empedecoles precipitated
himself into the burning of Mount AEtna: O strength of mind! the foundresse of
Carthage cast her self into the fire, to avoid a second marriage: O
commendation of chastity! Regulus, not willing his life should cost his
country the setting free so many of its enemies, suffered in every part of his
body: O generous man, and victorious in his captivity! Anaxarchus, so long as
they pounded his body, as barley beat in a mortar, beat, beat, says he, the
bladder of Anaxarchus, it is not Anaxarchus you outrage: O generositie of a
Philosopher, that in so miserable an end ceased not to laugh! I speak not of
them, that kill themselves with their own hands, or, have taken an easier
death, to merit a vain praise withal You approve also of contentions in
torments, and honor is the prise you give them that suffer them. A Courtisan
of Athens, after she had wearied her executioners, and bit her tongue between
her teeth, in casting it into the Tyrants face who made her suffer, threw to
him the instrument of her speech, that if she were overcome by the force of
tortures she could not, if she would, discover them, who were of the
conspiracy. Dionysius enquiring of Zeno Eleates, what good, Philosophy brought
to men; and the Philosopher having answered him that it taught them to contemn
death, he signed his answer with his blood, unto the last groans of his life,
by the inhumanity of this Tyrant who made him cruelly to die by whipping. The
rods which tried the patience of the Lacedaemonians, and made them feel the
sharpest strokes thereof in the sight of their nearest kindred, who, in the
mean time, exhorted them to endure it constantly, gave them so much the more
honor, as they lost or had their blood spilt more in abundance; O lawful
glory! because it is of the world; for it is the neglect or death, all that the
cruelty of men has insupportable, is not imputed to an enraged obstinacy, and
a desperate resolution; it is permitted to whosoever desires, to suffer for his
Country, Kingdom, Friend, that which is not permitted to suffer for Gods
cause; it is strange, you abhor our constancy, and yet you make Statues for
all these people, you set up their Statues with rare inscriptions; engrave
Elogies in stone, and marble for them, that they may last to Eternity, and, by
your public monuments, strive, to the utmost of your power, to give, in some
kind, a resurrection to the dead; and, contrarily; you hold him for a mad man,
that endures torments for the name of God, hopes from him, for a true
resurrection. Continue, O magistrates, so full of integrity, juster in the
opinion of this kind of people, if you sacrifice the Christians to fury,
torment us, apply your tortures to us, judge us, and, in the end, exterminate
us; your injustice is the proof of our innocence; therefore, God will have us
endure, that our sufferings may make our purity shine the clearer. And indeed,
a few days since, you condemned a Christian maid to be rather prostituted to
an infamous corrupter of her chastity, then to be exposed to the rage of a
Lion; you acknowledge there is no punishment, nor kind of death which is so
intolerable to Christians, as the loss of their chastity: but, do what you
please, all inventions the most exquisite cruelty can advise you unto, are to
no purpose, so far are they from profiting you, that contrarily they draw all
the world to our Religion. The oftener you make a harvest of the Christians, the
oftener their number increases: their blood is a seed which dies not on the
earth, but puts forth prosperously. Many, among you, have labored, to persuade
men to suffer constantly pain, and death, (as Cicero in his Tusculans, Seneca
in his Treatise against casual things, Diogenes, Pyrrhon, and Callinicus,) but
Christians have better taught constancy, by the examples they have given, in
supporting patiently so many evils, then all the Philosophers, with all their
discourses. This same obstinacy, you reproach us with, is an excellent
mistress of truth, which we believe: for, who is it not, that striveth with
contemplation, to seek what it is? who after made his search, comes not on our
side? who, having embraced the faith of Jesus Christ, desires not to suffer for
him, that by his sufferings he may get the infinite treasures of the grace of
God, and that, in the price of his blood, they may obtain the pardon of their
faults; for the remission of all our sins is the assured recompense of our
punishments. This is the reason, that when they read your sentences of death
unto us we render you thanks; because by a happy emulation that meets
between the judgments of God, and the judgment of men, at the same instant
when you condemn us here below God pronounces our absolution in Heaven.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A
ACcusations of the Romans against the Christians, false 8.9 other of high
treason and sacrilege 47 Actions, not to be safely judged of whose Author we
know not 6, 7 Adrian a Prince, curious of all rare and excellent things 25 The
Author of irregular affections, not sure to make them pass for good actions 5
Albinius 128 Amity of Christians, odious to Idolaters 138 Anacharsis, his
astonishment 4 Anaxagoras, his dealing with his guests 161 Anaxarchus, his
generosity 176 Antoninus Pius Emperor 25 Anubis immodest 65 Apicius 17 Appton
78 Apaturien feasts 140 Apolloes imprudency 159 Aristeus left a public
monument of the holy Scripture, in a book composed by him in Greek 76
Aristotle's pride and flattery 161 Aristippus notwithstanding his severe
countenance addicted to riot 161 Aristides famous for his justice 56 Augures,
Diviners, Astrologers, gain nothing of Christians 152 Augustus would not be
called Lord 124 His humility 125
B
BAcchus his worship, forbid by the Consuls thoroughout all Italy 28, set up
again 29 Bacchanalian furies 132 Banquets of Christians 141 their
entertainments 142 Behavior admirable and excellent of Christians to the Pagon
Emperors 130, 131 Bellonas Priests shed their own blood and consecrate it to
her 43 Brachmanes and Gymnosophists manner of living 150 Bears entrails full
of men's bodies 43 Bargains for committing adultry made in the temple 67
Belenus 105 Belventinus 105 Berosus the Caldean 78
C
Cassius Severus 40 Cassius 128 Castor and Pollux in an instant carry to Rome
the news of the victory won over Perseus 96 and at the same instant change the
color of Domitius his beard ibid Cato and Socrates sometimes lent their wives
to their friends 140 Cicero persuaded to suffer death constantly 178 Christian
chastity 46, 47 Christian, the original of the word 17 Christians voluntary
confession 6 The Romans take away from them only the liberty of justifying
themselves and the only confession of the name Christian was their
condemnation 10 They are put to the rack to deny it, contrary to other
criminalls ibid. Their being sentenced to death for no other crime then for the
name Christian 14 Its a glory to them to be persecuted for the name of Jesus 82
their power over the Devils 100, 101, are obliged to pray to God for their
Kings, although idolaters 120, 121 call one another brethren 139 after meals
are wont to sing Psalms and Hymns 142 since they had being, all public
calamities more tolerable 146 all things are common among them 140 The manner
of burying their dead 151 They are a sure safeguard to idolaters 152 And
profitable to the common wealth 153 Are punished for the only name Christian
and yet innocent of all crimes 154 They only know God and teach what he is
159, 160 Their continency 160, 161 their belief of the refurrection 168 they
suffer persecution willingly 178 are compared to Soldiers ibid. their blood a
seed that dies not 178 Christianities progress 4 Christians show the
difference between their own manner of solemnising the festivalls of the
Emperors, and that of the Pagans 127, 128 Cristians commerce with the
Idolaters 149, 150, 151 Comparisons 6 The comparison of the confession of a
Christian, with that of other criminalls 11 The comparison of Christians
torments, with the same fabrics on which the false Gods are formed 57 The
owning the name Christian, carries with it the guilt of all other crimes 10
Confession of Devils to their confusion 98 Conjuration of Idolaters against
Christians, whereon grounded 143 Conscience not to be forced 113, 114 Celestis
105 Constancy of Christians unprositable to the Romans 4 The courage of the
Couritisan of Athens 176, 177 Cressus and Pyrrhus abused by the Oracles 96
Confession that's voluntary, sooner to be believed then denial by constraint 10
The cross compared to the materials of Idolaters 69 We worship the the
godhead without a cross ibid. excellent reasons on this subject 70 Cleanthes
84 Cornelius Nepos 105 Comneodus the Emperor besieged between the two laurel
woods 128 Children sacrificed in Africa to Saturn 39 and the punishment of the
Priests that sacrificed them ibid The Church what it does 137 and why assembled
138 Human Curiosity not asleep but for the christian Religion 4 Cynocephales
and Sciapodes monsters of India, and Lybia 36 Cyclops with their bloody mouths
31
D
Danaus 78 Delights and pleasures of christians contrary to those of the Romans
136 Delos 143 Demetrius Phalerus, the learned of all the Gramarians 76
Democritus why he put out his eyes 160 Demosthenes eloquence 56 Diana whipped 65
Diodorus Siculus 49 Difference between Divine and human laws 155 Diogenes
mocked at the Deity of Hercules 65 Diogenes, his arrogance 160 Distinction of
the jews from the christians 81 Domitian recalls the Jews banished by him 24
Christian Doctrine began from the time of the Emperor Tiberius 31 Dostrine of
Philosophers compared to that of christians 150 151 a question on this subjec;t
ibid Disorders very great on the selemne days of the Emperors 126, 127 Devils
spiritual substances 93 their fall ibid. what employed in 94 their admirable
manner of working ibid. compared to the corruption of the air 96. their
agillity and promptitude 95, ^6. Authors of evil but never of good 95. How
they foretell things to come, ibid.
E
THe Empire troubled, all its members suffer 111, 112 Emperors in their
triumph put in mind what they are 123 mocked when called golls 124 Empedocles 176
Epithetes of some great persons 55, 56 Erasistratus 17 Excommunication, a
foretelling the judgment God pronounces against the wicked 137 Excuse, that
which seems to serve for it, renders the passion more criminal 3 Epicurus
mockes at all sorrows and torments, and his reason 156
F
THe Fable of the ass, under the figure whereof, Idolaters say we worship
Jesus Christ 68, 69 Fame, the only cause wherefore christians hated by the
Romans 33 Feasts of the Romans, why called hundreds 27 Fire hid, and fire
visible, the difference 172 Fidelity consists not in exterior duties 130 Fruit,
its equally evil to destroy it in the womb, as after when brought forth in
the world 42
G
Gauls, offered men on the altars of Mercury 40 Gauls beseige the Capitol 145
Glory the end of many philosophers 159 God needs not the creatures 52 what God
is 72 prooses that he is 73 Gods of the Idolaters no gods, because men formerly
as well as idolaters themselves 48 Gods of infidels none of them lived without
vice 55 all good actions attributed to them, fabulous 57 Gods of Idolaters
broken, melted, pawned, changed, and sold by Idolaters 60, 61 Gods unknown to
the Romans 103 Gods of the Romans, bear witness in favor of the christian
Religion 90 Gods of pagans conjured at the name of Jesus Christ, acknowledge
his Divinity, and dare not belie him 100 Gods of Pagans many of them felt
Caesar's anger 117 from whom they hold their welfare ibid. Gods of heathen, as
well as their idolaters implore the charity of christians 151, 152 the son of
Gods coming 86 Greeks, from whom they learnt their superstition 92
H
HAnnibals victory over the Romans at Cannes 144, 145 Hatred, the causes and
pretenses examined 2 Hatred of what we know not, what more unreasonable? 3 Hell
approved of by Idolaters 54 Hermias 161 Herodotus 42 Hierapolis Island 143
Higronymus a phaenician King 78 Hippias wherefore killed 161 Hippone, a goddess
of creatures adored together with beasts 69
I
IAnus or Ianes 49 Innachus 78 Jealous men sooner left their wives for being
Christians, then for any other crime 16 Idolaters possessed by Devils 134
Idolaters, their manner of interceding to their gods 146, 147 Idolaters, Gods
ungrateful to them 148, 149 Jesus Christ King of the faithful 17. called a
Magician by the Jews 87. The miracles he did ibid. Signs of his Divinity, when
a dying 88. He expired about midday, ibid. His resurrection 89. He taught his
Disciples, ibid. His ascension 90. why he came into the world. 92 Impertinent
tales of Idolaters and their evil speaking of their gods 62, 63, 64 Ignorance
the first cause that rendered the Romans hatred against Christians unjust 2, 3
Impostures against Christians 30 Incarnation of the son of God 85, 86 foretold
to the Jews by the Prophets ibid Inductions, to prove one God powerfuller then
all other 51, 54 Ingratitude of men, causes the anger of God against them 146
Innocence that's true, necessary for christians 153, 154 Josephus author of the
Jews antiquity 78 Ironies of the Author against the Gods and Goddesses of the
Romans 107, 108, 109 Islands of great extent swallowed up 143 Judgment
universal, to what end 169. what shall happen after it 171 Jews so attered
over all the world 83 Jews were the only people beloved of God 82. their
punishment 83. foretold by the Prophets ibid. Juba King 78 Jupiter less feared
by the Romans then Caesar 115, 116 Jupiter much resembles Jesus Christ, an
irony 41 Justice, according to its rules, not to use different proceedings in
punishing the same criminalls that have failed 8, 10
L
LAberius the Pythagorean, what he thought of man, 167 Larentine, an unchaste
woman adored 62 Lares, household gods 60 Laws, what they command 11, 12 Laws of
Insidels condemned of error by the Author 20 Papy Laws, what they compeld unto
21 Julian Laws 21 Laws not to be esteemed, but for their justice 22 Laws
divine, what they promise to them that observe them 74, 75 Laws and Books of
Christians not hid 175 Lentulus his ridiculous conceits 65 Lucania, known now
by the name of Sicily 144 Lucullus, the first that planted cherry-trees in
Italy, which he brought from Pontus 53 Lycurgus, his Laws sweetened by the
Lacedaemonians, 20 The displeasure he took at it ibid. Lycurgus, wherefore he
dyed by famine 161
M
MAcedonians mocked at the complaints of Oedipus, and against his incest 45, 46
Magicians in their enchantments, bear witness of Angels, and Devils 93
Manethon, an Egyptian 78 Manner of the Christian Religion 137 The Manner of
swearing treaties of certain Nations 42, 43 The cruel Manner of sacrificing
children to Saturn in Africa 57, 58. Marcus Aurelius, pro^ector of the
christians, 25 Marcus AEmilius his Idel named the god Alburnus, 23 Mecenius
absolved for killing his wife, who drunk Wine, 28 Megarians, how they make
Feasts 140 Melampus 91 Menedemus, a Pagan Philosopher, admires the holy
Scripture 76 Menander, an Ephesian 78 The M^ssiah ordained to change the Laws
of the Jews, and accomplish the Prophesies, 83. How conceived, ibid. His
Mother a Virgin 84. He is called the Word by the Ancients, ibid. Miracles done
by the Christian Soldiers 25 Mysteries always to be kept secret 32 Moslesty
of Christians odious to the Insidels, 15 Moses his age 78. Moses sent of God,
to learn the Jews how to serve him, 19 Musaeus 19. Mutunus 106. Moors and
Marcomanes, 133
N
NEro, the first Emperor that persecuted the Christian Religion, 24 Niger 123
Nor^ia 105 Numa Pompilius, the Religion he instituted 91, 92 Nursia 105
O
OEnotrian 49 Onochoetes, what it is 71 Opinions, not to be condemned for their
Authors name 17 Order of judgment compels not to deny 13 the Order God has
established over us 148 Orpheus 91
P
Parallel of the Christians laws to those of Idolaters 155 Pallas Athenian 69
Parthenius 129 Parthians 133 Pagan Philosophers, notwithstanding their evil
life, conserve the name of Sages 158 Roman People spoke evil of their Caesar's
128 made them be assassinated 128, 129 loved change ibid Philadelphus, the
learned of the Ptolemies put the holy Scriptures in his library 76 Persians
mingle themselves incestuously with their own mothers 45 phryne 62 philosophy
why banished from Sparta, and Argos 163 philosophers opinions of Divinily 164
Pisistratus 76 Plato acknowledged the nature of the angels 93 Platoes opinion
of the deluge 144 Plato for his gluttony engages his liberty 161 pliny the
second advertiseth Trajan, that severity diminishes not the number of
Christians, and what he says of them 8 Poets and Philosophers opinions of
Paradise and Hell 166 Poets have drawn their best doctrine from the Prophets
163 Polycrates that was so happy 56 Pontius Pilat Governor of Judea for the
Romans 87 Pontius Pilat wrote to the Emperor the miracles that happened at the
death of Jesus Christ 90 why Christians Pray with hands stretched out, and heads
bare 119 Prayer how it ought to be conceaved 120 Preachers have been named
Prophets 75 Priests idolatrous, vicious 120 Prooses infallible of the true
Religion 98 Proceedings strange against Christians 9, 10 The Progress of the
Christian Religion 133, 134 Precepts confirm ecclesiastical discipline 136,
137 Prophets have foretold all that's come to pass in our days 78 the which is
a true mark of the holy Scriptures 80 Providence divine, which has given a
being, has also provided for all things 52, 53 The Providence of God
reverenced in the Person of Kings 122 Phyrron 178 Pythagoras will usurp Tyranny
over the Turiens 161
Q
Questions of the Author, to the Romans 7 to Trajan 9, 10, etc.
R
RAdamanthus and Minos 101 Reasons of Insidels weak against the Christian
Religion 19 Reasons that confound the divinity of the false gods 52 R^asons,
wherefore the Christians will not sacrifice to Idols, for the welfare of the
Prince 117. has to the true God, and what prayers they make for them ibid. 118
Regulus his generosity 176 Religion Christian, what her condition permits her
to do, draws her original from heaven?. should not be condemned without
knowing her ibid. they that will be instructed therein, must address
themselves to their Superiors 37 Religion not to be dissembled 113, 115
Religion Christian, is exempt from all crime 134 Religion counted asacred thing
where its not permitted to saign, and where lies are esteemed sacrilege 91
Reproaches to the Romans of their injustice against Christians 7, 8
Resurrection, and the proofs of it, 170. confirmed by the Oracles of Apello
ibid. Revealed by Jesus Christ 171 Resolutions of diverse Empires, and Kingdoms
112 Romans attribute the enlargement of their Empire, to their piety 106
Reasons against it 109, 110, 111 Romans answered to that they object against
Christians, of enduring their punishment, and being so willingly put to death
175
S
SAcrificing of men in the Temple of Diana Taurica, and at Rome, in honor of
Jupiter 40 Samothracian mysteries 32 Saliens, their suppers. 140 Saturn, why
the ancientest of all the gods, 49. many bistorians speak of him, but as a man
50 Saturns inventions given to men 53 Scaevola the greatness of his courage 176
Scipio just and warlike 56 Serapu suppers made in honor of her 141 Seneca writ
against the Pagan superstitions 58 Serapis, Isis, Harpocrates, and the image of
the head of a dog, taken away from the Palace of the gods by Pison and
^abinius ^8. reestablished again by the Romans 29 Severus a very wise Emperor
20 Socrates, his manner of speaking, 158 sacrifices a Cock to AEjculaplus, 159
a corrupter of young boys, 160 undervalued his gods, calls for witness of his
oaths an oak, a buck, and a dog 64 Sedom and Gomorrha consumed by fire 144
Soctishnes of the ancient Idolaters 49, 50 Spectacles horrible 65, 66
Speusippus taken in adultery 160 Sterculus 106 Sunday the day of the Sun,
wherefore celebrated by us 70, 71
T
THales, Prince of the Physicians, his answer to Cressus 159 Tallus 49, 78
Tenths of goods vowed to Hercules 140 Treasure of Christians, where every one
contributes what he will, and how employed 138 Tiberius propounded to the
Senate, to receive Jesus Christ among the number of their Gods 23 Trophonius 51
Tuscans and Grecians were the inventers of carving images to the deities 110
Tyrants and their customs 12 Tyrants in vain rejoice at Christians suffering
death for the Christian Religion, and the reason 174
V
VArro brings in three hundred gods without a head, under the name of Jupiter
65 Vespasian conquered Judea 25 Vestals, where of one kept water in a Sieve,
and the other drew a Ship alone 96 Virginity vowed to God by the Christians 46
Vulsina, a City consumed by fire 144
W
WIne, the use of it forbid to women 28 How to know when they had drunk it ibid
Women their Communion odious to Christians 130 Words cannot be condemned
unless they be barbarous, or express some evil sp aching 16 The Word is one
with God 85. and is compared to light, ibid.
Z
ZEno says, that the Word is the Author of the order we see in Nature, calls
it Destiny, the soul of Jupiter, and the necessiry of all things 84 Will usurp
tyranny over the Prieniaes 161 His death 177
ERRATA.
Page 1 line 7. read capital. p. 25. l. 3. r. Marcus Aurelius. p. 60 l. 11.
and 24. r. Lares. p. 65. l. 11. r. actions. p. ibid. l. 12. r. Buffoons. p. 69
l. 24. r. Athenian Pallas. p. 82. l. 1. r. we do not. Page 93 line 6. and 7.
read Demon. p. 96. l. 26. r. retained. p. 100. l. 25. r. when we conjure. p.
103. l. 30. r. wh^^ is it that Plato. p. 122. l. 14. and 22. r. G^ni^ p. 129.
l. 5. r. profess not. p. 146. l. 25. r. drought.
FINIS.

