An ENGLISH PROSODIA, To be Learned immediately after the Accidence, in order
to the better Learning of Propria quae maribus, As in praesenti, and Quae genus.

By J. T. A. B.

Nec minimum meruere decus vestigia Graeca Ausi Deserere. -- Hor. LONDON,
Printed for the Author, and are to be had at Robert Whites in Trinity Court
near Aldersgate, 1685.

To my Much Honored Master, Mr. Joseph Harvey, Master of the Free School in
Hereford.
Honored Sir,
TO You are due these First Fruits of my Learning; By whose Bounty and Care,
(together with God's Blessing) I accomplished my Tyrocinium under You, in the
space of half an Apprenticeship. And it is to You, Sir, that I must stand
indebted for all those Superstructures, which either already are, or hereafter
shall be built upon that good Foundation that You have laid. This is a Tract I
at first Composed for a Kinsman, committed to my Care; upon whom I tried the
Experiment, and found it to answer my utmost Expectation. And hoping it may
prove Beneficial to the Public, I have ventured to Print it, From those I have
discoursed about it, I have met with no Objections against it, but what seem to
arise from an unwillingness to forsake the Old Way: But if the Gentlemen of our
Faculty would but please to consider, That no one man knows all things: And
that no Art is yet arrived to the height of its Perfection, they might,
perhaps, allow me to spy out one thing, overlookt by our Wise Predecessors,
without the imputation of Arrogance.

Sir, I have made bold to prefix Your Name to it; without the least Intimation
before hand; Because hereby You are no ways obliged to vindicate my Errors;
Which if You please to let me know, by my Correcting of them, You shall find
that I am still,

Honored Sir, Your Most Obedient Scholar James Thomas.
Stoke-Newington, Dec. 7. 1684
The PREFACE.
THE Broad High Way through the Accidence, Propria quae maribus, As in
praesenti, Quae genus, Syntaxis and Figura, to Prosodia, is so frequented a
road, and trodden by all Schoolmasters; that I never met with, or heard of
above one, who attempted a better way. And therefore I, who now endeavor to
alter the Path, may expect to meet with as many Discouragements, as did
Columbus, although for the discovery of the Indies: But like him, I have met
with one, upon whose Promise of Encouragement in his School, I have ventured my
Reputation.

The Reason of this my undertaking is, Propria quae maribus, As in praesenti,
and Quae genus, are all made in Verse. And neither I nor my Friends can
imagine, how a Child not understanding Verse, should sooner learn, or longer
retain any Treatise so Composed. Children or Men, first learning Languages are
taught to learn otherwise; Witness the Primar, Accidence, and all the Grammars
of Foreign Languages. Their being made in Verse, seems to me a disadvantage,
to a Child that understands not the reason of a Verse, by reason of the variety
of Phrases for the same expression, as Faemineo generi tribuuntur, Faeminei
generis, sunt Muliebre genus; Gaudent foemineis, all signifying the same: And
the misplacing of words, as,

Nomen 1, crescentis 9, penultima 6 si 5 genitivi 8, Syllaba 7 acuta 11 sonat
10, velut 12 haec 13 pietas 14 pietatis 15, Virtus 16 virtutis 17 monstrant 18,
genus 4 est 2 muliebre 3.

which should be placed as the Figures under them direct; Which two things very
much confound the Child's understanding, and baulk his Memory; Both which
Inconveniences. will I think, be at least removed, if not turned to advantages,
by learning the reason of a Verse, before they enter upon Propria quae maribus,
As in praesenti and Quae genus: For knowing the quantities of such and such
words, a Child may conclude, that this or that word will not stand in this or
that place, because it will make the Verse faulty, which will be no small help
to his Memory, which is much stronger, when the understanding keeps it company,
than when it is alone. That Children may be taught, not only to pronounce those
words rightly, which are either in Propria quae maribus, etc, or elsewhere; But
also to get them perfectly without Book, though they understand not the Reasons
of either Verse or Quantity. None can deny, without giving the lie to the
general experience of Schools, all England over at least. But should that
Casheir this Tract as needless, I think, by the same Reason, not only Lilly,
and all the Grammarians, but also all the Classical Roman and Greek Authors
might be banished all Schools, if the Masters should but think it convenient to
teach Children to speak Latin by roat, in their common Discourse.

In this my Prosodia, I have wholly followed neither Lilly nor Fabricius: And
for my Warrant for deserting both, where Examples are wanting in Smetius, I
have set them down of my own; But when they are to be had thence, I omit the
Transcribing of them, unless in a point that I think may meet with more than
common Opposition, as in the case of Polymnestor, Page 10.

I expect to be opposed by three Figures, namely, Caesura, Systole and
Diastole; which (they say) make Syllables short, that are long by Nature; and
Syllables long, that are short by Nature.

This Nature makes great noise among Grammarians, but I think to little
purpose; for where is any such thing among the Poets, unless by it they mean
their Authority. If they mean any thing else, what natural Reason can they give
for the Quantities of Do and its Compounds? Why should the Characteristic
Syllable of the first Conjugation be always short in them? And why should not
( er) in Pater and Matter be always long, seeing in Greek it is (...) and (...)
with their long ( e eta') and a natural Reason I would fain have too, for all
the Exceptions to Derivation, you may find Page 12, 13, 14, 15, If it is said
that those are excepted from the General Rules: Then I Will say, these may be
excected with as much Reason, without the Patronage of either of those Figures.
And if it is said, the Poets bare Authority, may suffice for first and middle
Syllables, but not for last; Because there are Rules given for all of them: I
answer, either they made their Verses by our Rules, or else, our Rules were
made by their Verses. The first cannot be said, Qaintilian being the first
Schoolmaster in Rome, long before whose time, there were Latin Verses. Nor is
any spoken Language a slave to the Grammars, that are made of it: But the
Grammars are to be revised, corrected, and enlarged ever now and then,
according to the Pleasure of those that speak, and alter the Language. As may
appear from this, that formerly we had no Neuter Gender in our English Tongue;
but whatsoever was not of the Feminine Gender, as being the Female, was of the
Masculine; He, Him and His, being applied to all other Nouns whatsoever, till
now of late Years. If the second be granted, then the unavoidable consequence
will be, that Grammar Rules are not so perfect and complete, as not to admit of
Alterations or Additions, if any thing either thwarting, or not comprehended
under them, be met with in Classical Authors.

Nor have I rejected these Figures without the Authority of one Grammarian, as
whosoever shall please to peruse Fabricius's Prosodia, bound up with Smetius,
will find, though he gives no Reason for his so doing.

Another Opposition is, that Children are not caepable of understanding Rules;
That they are to spend their time in getting things without Book, (without
understanding what they do); That the meaning of Rules will come of course,
when they are arrived to a competent degree of Knowledge.

To this I answer, Childrens Memory, I take to be their greatest advantage in
this point; For thereby they are capable of retaining whatever Instructions or
Documents are delivered to them by their Teachers, as well as the ordinary
Rules.

The Rules which are for Observation only, and not for Imitation, I have noted
with an Asterisk. Most of which, if you please, you may call Vitia Poese^s,
Blots in Poetry.

For the avoiding of Parenthesis in the Treatise, I have, by way of
Introduction, prefixed a short Advertisement of the Letters, etc.

The Latin Letters are commonly reckoned to be Twenty Three, Viz.

abcdefghijklmnopqrsstuvxyz.

These Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

A Vowel is a Letter that makes a full and perfect sound of it self, as a; And
it is so called from vox vocis a voice or sound, because without the help of
another letter it makes a voice or sound.

The Vowels are in number six, namely, aeiouy.

Two of which are sometimes Consonants, namely j and v. Out of the Vowels are
made Dipthongs.

A Dipthong is the coming together of two Vowels, which make but one sound.
From (...) bis twice, and (...) sono to sound, because in a Dipthong is as it
were a double sound.

There are five Dipthongs, namely, First, ( ae) which are joined together thus
(ae), and is pronounced like a single ( e) as aeternus eternal, like eternus.
Secondly, ( au) as audio I hear. Thirdly, ( oe) which are joined together thus
( oe) and pronounced likewise like single ( e), as coelum Heaven, like celum.
Fourthly, ( ei) pronounced like ( i long,) as hei alas! like hi. Fifthly, ( eu)
pronounced as ( u long), as euge well done, like uge.

A Consonant is a Letter that makes no sound of it self, that is, without the
help of a Vowel; as the letter ( b) put alone, makes no sound. It Is called a
Consonant from con with, and sono to sound, a letter that sounds with another.

The Consonants are seventeen, namely, bcdfghklmnpqrstxz.

This may be left unlearnt till the Child come to Position, and then the one
will explain the other.
The Consonants are divided into Mutes and half Vowels. A Mute is a Consonant
that has no sound at all, without a Vowel; from mutus dumb, or that cannot
speak, because without the help of a Vowel, it must be mute and silent. There
are nine Mutes, namely, bcdfgkpqt. A half-Vowel is a Consonant that makes a
kind of imperfect sound without the help of a Vowel. There are seven
half-Vowels, namely, lmnrsxz. Of which five are Liquids, namely, lmnrs. A
Liquid is a Consonant, that coming after a Mute does liquescere or melt, that
is, it sometimes loses the power of making the foregoing Syllable long by
Position. M and n, as the Oxford Grammar notes, are never Liquids but in Greek
words. S was a Liquid amongst the Ancients, but it is not allowable to make it
so now. X z and j Consonant, are double Consonants. K y and z are never used in
pure Latin words. H is seldom reckoned, or has the force of a Letter.
Out of Letters are made Syllables.

A Syllable is the Pronouncing of one or more Letters at one breath, as
Gram-ma-ti-ca has four Syllables in it, being Pronounced at four several
breaths, from (...) comprehendo to comprehend, because it commonly comprehends
more Letters than one.

Prothesis is the putting of a Letter or Syllable to the beginning of a word,
aes tetuli for tuli I have born; from (...) ante before, and (...) pono to put.

Aphaeresis is the taking away of a Letter or Syllable from the beginning of a
word, as temnere for contemnere to contemn; from (...) ab from, and (...) tollo
to take.

Epenthesis is the putting of a Letter or Syllable into the middle of a word,
as relligio for religio Religion; from (...) in, (...) in, (...) pono to put.

Syncope is the taking away of a Letter or Syllable out of the middle of a
word, as amasti for amavisiti, thou have loved; from (...) con with, and (...)
scindo to cut.

Paragoge is the putting of a Letter or Syllable to the end of a word, as
dicier for dici to be said; from (...) producere, to make long.

Apocope is the taking of a Letter or Syllable from the end of a word, as
ingeni for ingenii of a wit; from (...) ab from, and (...) scindo to cut.

PROSODIA,
PRosodia is an Art that teaches the right pronunciation of words, according to
their Proper Times or Quantities.

Time or Quantity is the measure of a Syllable in pronouncing.

Quantity is twofold, long and short.

The long Quantity is noted thus () as spe^s.

The short Quantity is noted thus, as brvs.

Out of Syllables are made Feet.

A Foot is the setting together of two or more Syllables, according to the
observation of their Quantities.

Feet are either Dissyllables, Trisyllables, or Tetrasyllables, that is, of two
syllables, three syllables, or four syllables.

Of each which, we shall at Present mention but one or two.

A Spondee, is a foot, consisting of two long Syllables, as virtus.

A Dactyl is a foot, consisting of three syllables, the first long, the last
two short, as scri^br.

* Which foot is sometimes put for a Dactyl.

A Proceleusmatick is a foot consisting of four short syllables, as tenuerat.

* Which is likewise sometimes put for a Dactyl.

Out of feet are made Verses.

A Verse is a speech, bound to a just and lawful number of Feet.

The dividing of a Verse into its several Feet, is called scanning, as,

Arma vrumque cano Trojae qui^ pri^mus ab ori^s. Virg. In scanning there be
four things to be considered, viz. 1. Synaloepha, which is the cutting off of a
Vowel or Dipthong at the end of a word, when the word following begins with a
Vowel or Dipthong, as vita est, or vitae aeternae, will in scanning be vit'
est, and vit' aeternae, (a) and (ae) being cut off by Synaloepha.

* Sometimes, in imitation of the Greeks, Synaloepha is omitted, as,

Font Md^seo and Hyantea Agani^ppe,
Nubbus esse solet, aut Purpurae Aurorae. Ovid.

And then in imitation of them, the long Vowel or Dipthong that ends the sormer
word, may be made short, as

Insuae Iono i^n magno quas dira Cleno
Credmus? an qu amant, i^psi^ sibi somnia fingunt.
The Interjections, heu alas! and O, oh! are never cut off, as

Te Corydon O Ale^x trahi^t sua que^mqu voluptas. Virg. 2. Eclipsis, which is
che cutting off of (m) with the foregoing Vowel at the end of a word, when the
word following begins with a Vowel or Dipthong, as, Monstrum horrendum inform,
in scanning will be, Monstr' horrend' inform.

* Eclipsis is sometimes, but very rarely omitted, as

Nam quod fluvdum est e levbus atque rotundi^s. Lucret.

Circum agi^ quendam volo vi^sr non tb notum. Mart.

3. Synoeresis, which is the contraction of two Syllables into one, as alvaria
for alvearia, Beehives; under which those words, Dii, Diis, etc, rankt by Lilly
under Synaloepha, seem to me to be more regularly comprehended.

*4 Diaeresis, which is the dissolving of one Syllable into two, as evoluisse
made to be a word of five syllables, instead of evolvisse so have unfolded,
which has but four.

We shall at present treat of but three sorts of Verses, namely, Hexameter,
Pentameter and Hypermeter.

An Hexameter (which is likewise called an Heroic or Long) Verse consists of
six feet, Spondees and Dactyls.

* But sometimes a Proceleusmatick is used instead of a Dactyl, and sometimes
an Anapest, as

Tityr pascente^s a flumn rjc cape^llas.
Fluvorum Rex Erdanus camposque pr omne^s. Virg.

The four first feet are either Spondees or Dactyls, or both, the fifth most
commonly a Dactyl, the last always a Spondee, as,

Tityr tu patulae rcubans sub te^gmn fagi. Virg.

Conseder duce^s, and vulgi^ stant corona.
Perq, hymes aestusque and naequales autumnos. Ovid.

An Elegiac (called also a Pentameter or short) Verse consists of two
Penthemimers.

A Penthemimer consists of two feet and a long syllable.

The feet of the first Penthemimer may be either Dactyls or Spondees, or both;
Those of the last Penthemimer, are always Dactyls, as,

Ad vada Meandri concnt albus olor. Ovid.
Hibernae pretium sic mrue^r rosae. Ut vdatur apis nectar clausa suo Communis
nobrs lectis and unus rat. Mart.


The last syllable of these Verses is always long.

* An Hypermeter Verse, is a Verse having one syllable more than ordinary,
which always ends in a Vowel, Dipthong, or (m), which last syllable is
drowned in the following Verse, which always begins with a Vowel or Dipthong,
as

Jamque tr e^me^nsi, turre^s and te^cta Lati^norum
Ardua ce^ebant juvn^s, m^^oquesubibant. Virg.

where ((...)) in Latinorum is out off, and drowned in (ar^^a) the first word
of the following Verse.

The Quantities of first and middle syllables of words are to be known ten
ways, 1. By Position. 2. By a Vowel before a Vowel. 3. By Dipothong. 4. By
Derivation. 5. By Composition. 6. By Preposition. 7. By Rule. 8. By Example or
Authority. 9. By the increasing of the Genitive Case. 10. By the Analogy of the
Conjugation.

1. Position is, when a Vowel comes besore two Consonants, or a double one.

Position makes a syllable long.

Position is twofold, commonly used, and seldomly used.

Position commonly used is fourfold, first, when a Vowel comes before two or
more Consonants, as, omnis all, adspuo to spit upon, secondly, before the same
Consonant doubled, as addo to add. Thirdly, Before a Consonant at the end of a
word, the word following beginning with another Consonant, as, sic dixit, so he
said, or lastly, before a double Consonant, as e^jus of him, axis an axletree,
as,

Inte^nde^nsque manus pass is surbunda capi^llis
Hic i^nte^r densas corylos modo namque gmellos
Quam responsa Dum Trojanaque fata rtexi^.
But in some compound words (j) is common, as rejicio to cast away, in others
always short, as quadrjugus drawn with four horses.

* The less usual Position is when a word ends in a short Vowel, and the word
following begins with two or more Consonants; which sometimes makes that
syllable long, as,

Fe^rt cti^ fe^rrum, dat te^la, scandt muros. Virg.

Qui^d gladum de^me^ns Romana stri^ngs n ora?
But most commonly it is not taken notice of, as,

Re^ddatur si pugna trplex pastors Ibe^ri^. To Position's making syllables
long, there are these exceptions. 1. If a Vowel come before a Mute, and a
Liquid in the same word, it is sometimes common, (that is, either long or
short,) as, atlas, patris of a Father; which syllable, if it be the last
syllable save one, in a word of more then two syllables, is always pronounced
short in Prose, as, arbtror I suppose.

* 2. Sometimes the Latins in imitation of the Greeks, make (us) short at the
end of a word, though the word following begin with a Consonant, as,

Vict Olympa nunc seno confectus quescit. 3 The antepenultima, or last syllable
save two, of Polymnestor, is short, of Clytemnestra common, and the penultima,
or last syllable save one, of Smaragdus an Emerald.

Bistonis habtata vri^s, Polymne^stors i^lli^c.
Vadt ad artfice^m dirae Polymne^stora caedis
Te^ sclus, accepto Thraces Polymne^stors auro.
II. A Vowel before a Vowel in the same word, is short.

I. Except in Greek words, where it is most commonly long, as,

Cum posuit jussam phoeboei^s urbe^m. 2. Except Adjectives, ending in three
Vowels, derived of Greek Proper Names, have the sirst of them always long, and
the second always short, as,

Tu quoqu Ii^ttorbus nostri^s Aene^a nutri^x. 3. Except the Genitive and Dative
Cases singular of Nouns of the fifth Declension, when (e) comes between two
(i's) as Genitivo faciei^ of a face, Dativo faciei to a face; But if there goes
no (i) immediately before the (e), it is short.

* Though Lucretius makes the (e) even in those words long too. as, fidei of or
to faith.

4. Except in Hebrew, and other Foreign words, when one vowel comes before
another, it is usually common, as, Israel, Joannes.

5. Except the last syllable save one, of the Genitive Cases Singular, of Nouns
and Pronouns in (ius), which is common, as unius of one; (which Syllable is
always pronounced long in Prose) But in alterus of one of the two, that
syllable is always short; and in alius of another, it is always long, to
distinguish it from the Nominative alus.

6. Except fi in fio to be made or done, which is always long, throughout all
Moods and Tenses, unless when both (e) and (r) follow, as,

Omna jam fie^nt, fieri^ quae posse ngabam. 7. Except in the Interjections,
Ohe, hold! and eheu, alas! which are always long.

* 8. Except in Dipthong dissolved, as in pictai for pictae, terrai for terrae
of the earth, which are long, as,

Di^ve^s opum, di^ve^s pi^ctai^ vests and auri. III. All Dipthongs are long,
except a Vowel follow, as, aurum gold, praeeo to go before.

IV. Derivation. Derivatives retain the Quantities of their Primitives, as tmor
fear, of tmeo. to fear.

1. Except some words which make those syllables long, which in their
Primitives are short, as,

Ce^ritus distracted. of Cres the Goddess of corn and tillage. Chi^us belonging
to Chios. Chos, an Isle, whence comes Malmsey, etc. Fe^ralis lamentable,
together with its derivatives and compounds, Frus wild. Fomentum an
asswagement, Foveo to cherish. Fomes fuel, together with their derivatives and
compounds. Fruges fruits, together with its derivatives and compounds. Fruor to
enjoy. Humanus humane, with its derivatives and compounds. Homo a man.
Imbecillis, Imbe^cillus weak, with its derivatives and compounds. Bacillum a
staff. Jucundus pleasant. Juvo to delight or help. Jumentum a laboring beast,
with their derivatives and compounds, Junior younger Juvenis young. Jupiter
Saturn's Son Juvo to help. Lex legis a law, with its derivatives and compounds.
Lgo to read. Maceries a soaking in water, with its derivatives and compounds.
Macer lean. Mobilis moveable, with its derivatives and compounds, Moveo to
move. Nonus the ninth, with its derivatives and compounds. Novem nine. Pe^dor
the stink of the feet, Pes pdis a foot. Pe^nuria want, Pnus provision. Rex
regis a King, with its derivatives and compounds, Rgo to Rule. Se^cius less,
Scus otherwise. Se^des, sedile a seat, with their derivatives and compounds.
Sdeo to sit. Vomes vomis a plough-share. Vomo to cast up. Vox vocis a word or
voice, Vocalis loud, Vocula a little voice. Voco to call. Vocifero to cry
aloud, with its derivatives.

2. Except some words, which make those syllables short, which the Primitives
make long, as,

arena sand, arista the beard of an ear of Corn, with their derivatives and
compounds. of areo to be dry. Dcax talkative, with its derivatives and
compounds. Di^co to speak. Dsertus eloquent, with its derivatives and
compounds. Differo to discourse. Dux ducis a Captain, with its derivatives and
compounds. Duco to lead. Fatuus a fool, with its derivatives and compounds.
Fari to speak. Fides faith, with its derivatives and compounds; but infidus
unfaithful, with its derivatives, are long. Fi^o to be made. Fragor a crash,
fragilis frail, with their derivatives and compounds. Frango to break. Gnui I
have begotten, gnitum to beget, with their derivatives and compounds. Gi^gno to
beget. Lucerna a candle, with its derivatives. Luceo to shine. Molestus
troublesome, with its derivatives and compounds. Moles a troublesome business.
Nato to swim often, with its derivatives and compounds. No, navi, natum to
swim. Noto to mark, with its derivatives and compounds. Nosco, notum to know.
odium hatred, with its derivatives and compounds. odi I hate. Pnitus thoroughly,
Pe^ne almost Posui I have put, positum to put, with their derivatives and
compounds. Pono to put. Pronuba a bridemaid, with other derivatives and
compounds, Nubo to marry. Sagax quick of apprehension, with its derivatives and
compounds, Sagio to perceive quickly. Stabilis stable, statio a station, with
their derivatives and compounds, Sto, stare to stand. Sopor a sound sleep, with
its derivatives and compounds, Sopio to lay asleep Vtium a vice, with its
derivatives and compounds. Vito to shun or avoid.

3. Except words which make those syllables common, which in the Primitives are
either only long, or only short, as quotdie daily, of quoto die? what day?
vitum to bind, the Supine of vieo vie^vi. Abstmius abstinent, of te^metum
strong wine.

V. Composition. Compound words have the same quantity that the simple words
have, as, clarus famous, praeclarus very famous.

VI. Preposition. These Prepositions a, de, e, pro, and these not used but in
Composition, called inseparable Prepositions, because they are never used
alone, or separately, di, co, se, unless a vowel follow, are long.

1. Except pro, which is common in these,

Procumbo to lie down flat. Professus that has confessed openly. Profluus
which flows continually. Profugio to fly, or run away, Prosugus a vagabond.
Profundo to pour out in abundance. Profundus deep. Propago to propagate.
Propello to drive far away. Propino to drink to.
And short in these. Prcella a storm. Profanus profane. Profari to speak out.
Profecto truly. Profestus not holy. Proficiscor to go. Profiteor to profess.
Pronepos a Nephews Son. Propago a stock. Propero to make haste. Proph^ta a
Prophet. Propola a huckster. Protervus saucy.


And in all words written with the Greek short (o) (...).

2. Except (di) is short in drimo to take away, and dsertus eloquent.

All other Prepositions are short, if not hindered by Position.

Except (re) in rficit he refreshes, and rperi I found by chance, which is
common.

VII Rule.

1. Every Praeterperfect Tense of but two syllables, has the first long, as
legi I have read, except in these six,

Fdi I have cloven. Bbi drank. Ddi given. Scdi I have cut. Stti stood. Tuli
suffered.

which are short,

2. Praeterperfect Tenses, that increase a syllable at the beginning, make that
syllable short, as spondeo to be surety for, spospondi: And if Position hinder
not, they make the middle syllable short too, as pello to drive away, pepuli:
Except pepedi I have broken wind backward, and cecdi I have cut, to distinguish
it from cecdi I have fallen; in which it is long.

3. Praeterperfect Tenses ending in (vi) make the foregoing syllable long* as
quaesivi I have sought for.

4. Supins of but two syllables, have the first syllable long, as motum to move.

1. Exc. Qutum to may or can. Stum permit. Ltum dawb. Rutum rush. Ratum
suppose. Datum give. Satum sow. Ctum of cieo to trouble. tum to go, wi^h its
compounds, except ambitum to compass.

Which are short.

2. Except Statum to stand, which is common.

These Rules may be learnt by Children before they enter upon the Moods and
Tenses, or whilst they are in them.

5. In the Present and Preterimperfect Tenses of the Subjunctive Mood of both
Voices, and in the Preterpluperfect Tense of the same Mood of the Active Voice,
(a) and (e) before (m) or (t), or between two (r's), is long, as doceamus,
doceatis, legere^mus, legeretis, legatur, legeremur, legereris vel legerere.

6. In the first person Plural of the Indicative Mood of the Active voice (i)
is short, as amavmus.

7. In the Praeterpluperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood of the Active voice,
the Praeterperfect and Future Tenses of the Subjunctive Mood, of the same
voice, (e) before (r) is always short, as, amavram, amavrim, amavro. As also,
in all Tenses of sum, and its compounds, as ram, furam, to, furim, furo, adram
I was present, adfuram, adro, adfurim, adfuro.

VIII Example or Authority, which is only the example or authority of good
Writers, viz. of those Romans which were counted Authentic, when the Latin
Tongue was spoken in Rome.

IX. The increasing of the Genitive Case, which, as to common Nouns, may be had
from Propria quae maribus; saving that some Monosyllables, which are reckoned
to be under the second Special Rule, have the first Syllable in the oblique
Cases, short, as,

Bos an Ox, Bull or Cow, Genesis Bovis. Crux a cross. Crucis. Dux a Captain,
Ducis. Grex a flock, Grgis. Lar a household god. Laris. Mas the Male-kind,
Maris. Nux a nut, Nucis. Pes a foot, Pdis. Phryx a Phrygian, Phrygis. Pix
pitch, Pcis. Sal salt, Salis. Scobs sandust, Scobis. Scrobs a ditch, Scrobis.
Stips wages, Stpis. Vas a surety. Vadis. Vir a man, Vri.

opis from the obsolete Nominative Case. Ops help. Prcis Prex prayer. Vcem Vix
a turn.

And mulier a woman, in the oblique cases is common.

These Rules may likewise be learnt by Children before they enter upon the
Moods and Tenses, or whilst they are in them.

X. The Analogy of the Conjugation.

1. In Verbs of the first Conjugation, (a) is long, as, amamus, amabam, etc.
except in do to give, together with those compounds of it, that are of the
first Conjugation, as dabo I will give, circumdabo I will compass about.

2. In Verbs of the second Conjugation (e) is long, as doce^mus. Except when a
Vowel follows. as, docamus, it is short.

3. In verbs of the third Conjugation (i) and (e) are short, as, legmus,
legtis, legrem; except in the Preterimperfect and Future Tenses of the
Indicative Moods of both voices, where (e) is long, as lege^bam, lege^mus,
lege^tur.

4. In verbs of the fourth Conjugation (i) is long, as audi^mus, audi^tis.

1. Except when a Vowel follows, as, audam, for then it is short.

2. Except in the Supins of eo to go, and queo to be able, together with their
derivatives and compounds, as tum to go, adtum to go to, where it is short; but
one compound of eo, viz. ambio to compass, makes ambi^tum long.

Of all these ten ways, no one meddles with the last syllables, but Position,
Dipthong and Preposition.

The last Syllables we'll treat of according to their Alphabetical order.

A.

Words ending in (a) are long,

1. Except the Adverb puta to wit, ita so, quia because, postea afterward,
which are short.

2. Except contra against, which is common,

3. Except all cases in (a), as, problema a hard question, tempora times, which
are short.

1. Except the Ablative cases of the first Declension, as ab hac musa from a
song, which are long; but eadem the Ablative case of idem, the same is common.

2. Except the Vocative cases of Greek Nouns in (as) of the first Declension,
as Vocativo Thoma O Thomas, which are sometimes long.

3. Except Nouns of number in (ginta) which are common.

B,

Latin words in (b) are short.

Hebrew words in (b), as Job, are long; but Jacob is common.

C.

Words ending in (c) are long;

1. Except nc neither, donc as long as, which are short.

2. Except hc this, fac do thou, which are common.

D.

Words ending in (d) are short.

E.

Words ending in (e) ar short.

1. Except the Ablative cases singular of the fifth Declension, as die in a
day, together with those Adverbs that are thence derived, as hodie^ to day,
which are long.

2. Except the second person singular of the Imperative Mood, of the Active
voice, of the second Conjugation, as doce teach, which are long; but cav
beware, and respond answer, are common.

Si q?ando v^n^t d^c^t, r^spond; Po^t^. Mart. 3. Except all Monosyllables,
which are long; except n^ whether or no? ve or, and que and, at the ends of
other words, the two first of which are short, and the last common; and so is
fere almost.

4. Except ferme almost, together with Adverbs derived of Adjectives in (us),
as avide greedily, which are long; but been well, and mal ill, are short.

5. Except the Nominative, Dative, Vocative and Ablative cases Singular, of
Nouns of the Feminine Gender, of the first Declension, as Nominativo, Dativo,
Vocativo, Ablativo Penelope^, which are long.

H.

Words ending in (h), if not cut off, are long, as, ah! alas! Joseph, Loath,
Melchisadech, but Judth is common.

I.

Words ending in (i) are long;

1. Except mih to me, tib to thee, sib to himself, to her self, to it self, or
to themselves, cu to whom, quas as though, ub where, ib there, which are common.

2. Except the Dative and Vocative cases singular of Greek Nouns ending in (os)
in the Genitive, as Dativo Phyllid, Vocativo Phyll, of Phyllis Phyllidos; as
also, nis unless, which are short.

L.

Words ending in (l) are short.

1. Except ni^l nothing, sal salt, sol the sun, which are long.

2. Except Foreign words, as Michael, which are long.

M.

* Words ending in (m), if the Eclipsis be omitted, are short, as,

Nam quod fluvdum e^ste^ Ie^vbus atqu rotundi^s. Lucret.

Circum agi^ que^ndam volo vi^sr, non tb notum. Mart.

N.

Words ending in (n) are long;

1. Except forsan perhaps, forsitan by chance, asn whether or no, tamn yet,
attamn notwithstanding, veruntamn notwithstanding, which are short.

2. Except words ending in (in) compounded of the Preposition (in), as exn
afterward, which are short.

3. Except words that lose a letter by Apocope, as mn'! what me! which are
sometimes short.

4. Except words of the third special Rule in (en) which make (nis) in the
Genitive Case, as carmn carmnis a Verse; which are short.

5. Except Greek Nouns in (on) written by their short (o), as Pelion, Caucason;
which are short.

6. Except Greek Accusative cases in (in) by (i), as Alexn, which are short.

7. Except Greek Accusative cases in (in) by (y), as Ityn, which are short.

8. Except Greek Accusative cases in (an) of Nominative cases in (a), as
Aeginan of Aegina; which are short.

O.

Words ending in (o) are common.

1. Except Oblique cases in (o) as Dativo Magistro, Ablativo Magistro, which
are always long; but eodem the Ablative case of idem the same, is common.

2. Except Adverbs derived of Adjectives, as falso falsely, of falsus false,
which are long; but sedulo carefully, mutuo mutually, crebro often, sero too
late, cito quickly, which are common.

3. Except all Monosyllables, as do I give; which are long; to which add pondo
a pound weight.

4. Except Greek words ending in their long (o omega), as Ddo, Hero, which are
long.

5. Except modo so that, with its compounds, as dummodo so that, which are
common.

R.

Words ending in (r) are short.

1. Except Far all manner of Corn, lar a household god, nar a river running into
Tyber, ve^r the spring, fur a thief, cur why? par like, with its compounds,
which are long.

2. Except Greek words ending in (er), with their long (e, eta) as aethe^r the
sky, which are long; but matr a mother, is short, and patr a father, is common.

3. Exeept cor a heart, vr a man, amor love, paritr likewise, which are common.

Omnia vincit amor, and nos cedamus amori.
Ostentans artem parite^r arcumque sonantem.
S. As.

Words ending in (as) are long.

1. Except Greek Nouns in (as), making their Genitive case Singular in (dis) or
(dos) as Arcas Arcadis, or Arcados, which are short.

2. Except Greek Accusative cases Plural of Nouns increasing in the Genitive
case, as hos Heroas, of Heroes Herois a Hero; which are short.

Es.

Words ending in (es) are long.

1. Except the Nominative and Vocative cases Singular of Nouns in (es) of the
third special Rule, as mils, miltis a soldier, which are short; but aries a
ram, abie^s a fir tree, parie^s a wall, Cere^s the Goddess of Corn, and the
compounds of pes a foot, are long, except quadrups that has four feet, which
is common.

2. Except s the second person singular of sum I am, together with its
compounds, as pots thou can, which are short; to which add pens in the power.

3. Except Greek nouns of the Neuter gender, as cacoeths an ill custom, and
Greek Nominative, Accusative and Vocative cases Plural, as Nominativo hae
Naiads, Accusativo has Naiads, Vocativo o Naiads, Nymphs of the Fountains,
which are short.

Is.

Words ending in (is) are short.

1. Except oblique cases Plural in (is) as Dativo musi^s, Ablativo musi^s,
which are long.

2. Except Nouns in (is), increasing long in the Genitive case, as Simoi^s
Simoe^ntis a River by Troy, which are long; to which add fori^s out of doors.

3. Except all Monosyllables, as glis a dormouse, which are long; but s he, bs
twice, and the Nominative case qus who, are short.

4. Except the second persons singular of Verbs, that make the last syllable
save one of the second person Plural long, as audis auditis, in the future
tense of the Subjunctive Mood, audiveri^s audiveri^tis, which are long; but
nescs thou know not, and possis thou can, are common.

5. Except igns fire, sangus blood, ers thou shall be, opers of a work, which
are common.

Militia est operi^s altera digna tui.

Os.

Words ending in (os) are long.

1. Except os a bone, impos unable, exos without bones, which are short.

2. Except Greek nouns written with their short (o), as, chaos a confused heap,
which are short.

3. Except compos that has obtained, which is common.

Us.

Words ending in (us) are short.

1. Except Monosyllables, as thus frankincense, which are long.

2. Except all Greek Nouns ending in their Dipthong ((...) ous) as Panthus,
which are long.

3. Except all nouns of the second special Rule, as salus salutis health, which
are long; but palus paludis a marsh, is common.

4. Except all cases of the fourth Declension ending in (us), save the
Nominative and Vocative case singular, as huj us manus, hae manus, has manus, o
manus, which are long.

5. Except fultus underpropped, fatigamus we weary, pavidus fearful, gravidus
great with child, dapibus of daps dainties, pectoribus of pectus a breast,
futilibus of futilis inconsiderable, which are long.

Auro non dapibus oneratur mensa, ministri.
Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether.
6. Except genus a stock, and succus juice, which are common.

Is.

Words ending in (is) are short.

Except Tethys the Goddess of the sea, which is common.

T.

Words ending in (t) are short.

1. Except words that lose a letter or syllable by Syncope, as petit for
petivit he sought for, which are long.

2. Except aberat he was absent, perrupit he has broken through, which are
long.

3. Except nesct he knows not, timat he is afraid, f he goes, solt he is
wont, caput a head, which are common.

Nubibus esse solet, aut purpureae Aurorae. Ovid.

Nam tibi, Thymbre, caput Evandrius abstulit ensis. Virg.

U.

Words ending in (u) are long.

Y.

Words ending in (y), as Moly the herb all heal, are short.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF any Gentleman shall Please to be so Heartily Generous as to let me know my
Mistakes, (for no Man is to plead exemption from fallibility) by leaving their
Objections with Mr. Robert White; If I cannot give him good and reasonable
Solutions to his Scruples: In the next Impression by my Thanks to my Friendly
Monitor, and Correction of my Oversights, he shall find how much I hold my self
obliged to Him for undeceiving me; And that I am not so wedded to my own
Opinion, as to maintain it right or wrong.


