The third Advice to A PAINTER, How to draw the EFFIGIES OF THE Whore of Rome.
Whose Charactor is Lively represented by a BAD WOMAN.
IF you will observe the Whore, as stripped and stripped,
Let Painter take Advice, with Pencel wiped;
First Draw this Bloody Harlot, naked Born,
And thence grown up, unto a State Forlorn.
Next Draw her, in her best Attire and Dress,
Yet Charged with Crimes, that she will never Confess:
Observe her made the Subject of our Pen,
But after this, thy Pencel wipe again
Thus Naked drawn, without her Golden Tire,
Will make you Blush, and yet with cold Desire;
To be concerned with one so shameless grown,
That every Spark of Grace, is from her flow'n.
2. By Rapines, Slaughter and Murder (Heaven to win,)
As tho a Sacrifice (were we) for Papists sin:
When Artists Pencel's foul'd with such black Crimes,
(Is wiped and dipped again to draw the Lines
Of her Effigies, whom this state aspired
In Crimson Velvet, that the Whore acquired:)
The Effigies of a Strumpet, foul within,
You justly may discry the stinck of Sin:
Whom fair or foul, she may be called the Picture,
Ordained) by Pen) to make out her Convicture,
For thus contriving, how to cause a Slaughter,
So Herod like, to some that should come after.
3. Whence they are charged with the Crimes of Murder
Lately designed, which makes its Cry go further
Than Rome it self, that cannot stop the Tide
Of Breach on Breach, by Inundations wide:
Because in favor she was grown with them,
Who of our Realm are both the Root and Stem:
Since now to palliate her Crime, is not the way,
Nor is there lest a mean, but does bewray
The falacy and pride of her grown high,
Because, danger of Ruin was so nigh
To us, whom once she thought so self-secure,
That all her base Designs we must endure.
4. Under fresh color for the war, and strife
'Bout Features and Forms, to her that Rome calls Wife;
The Painter by Advice, his Skill employed,
To pourtray the Effigies of a Bride:
Who thus being married to the scarlot Beast,
The Nuptials were confirmed a bloody Feast,
That she the Scarlot whore contrived, to make
In such a fatal hour, that did bespeak
Dispensing Bulls, and Pardons that were provided,
A scourge for those, she cou^ts from her back-slided:
That power claims, to charge and quit of Facts,
The guiltless, or offenders 'ginst Romes Acts.
5. The Artist unadvised, a Picture drew,
Considerlng not at first, what might accrue;
While Colors unprepared, such Painter tried
His Skill, about those works, could not abide
A burning Fire of, the angry Fates,
That every rash Attempt so cruelly hates;
In black and white where first such work begun,
To be set out in matter too homespun:
Until on better thoughts a way prepared,
The Painter took advice (who then was cheered,
To see not all pains taken lost or spoiled;
Tho, he was there about most sorely foiled.
6. Wrongly Composed proved very unexpedient,
What other ways had made a good Ingredient.
For time and place, wherein it was employed,
A Corosive of which the Patient died:
The pencel of that Muse (not apt to doubt,)
An Artist took in hand, and yet was out:
In touching upon matters without fear,
Whence jealousies arise, in Natures Sphere.
Wherein it was adventured (Danger nigh,)
Upon a rugged Sea, raised storms high:
As waves did swell and beat against the shore,
Of safety fancied, in the Fates implore. Therefore,
7. Then he encouraged was, fresh skill to try,
By a sure friends Advice, how to employ
His Muse upon a subject, tho not Divine,
Yet more agreeing with the place and time,
For which occasions given are to detect
All wickedness of Rome, that bloody Sect,
Who Murder teach to Subjects against their Prince,
How they may easily with Oaths dispense:
How all the Laws of Nature they may break,
And yet obsolv'd, may stand for Poperi's sake:
Since her called Mother Church, does this allow,
What we have undertook 's no fault I trow.
8. Advice unto the Painter how to draw,
The Effigies of the Whore, of old foresaw,
Riding upon the Scarlot Beast with Horns,
In number tenn, and heads under seven forms:
How her to draw in such a Crimson Dye,
The Saints of old so plainly did discry
To be the Scarlot whore, whose seat was waters,
Tongues, Nations, People, these her Sons and Daughters.
Who also thus does set on seven Hills,
Of her a City, that Romes will fulfils.
This we do say, is such a work and task,
That plainly does the Bloody Queen unmask.
Draw first her Head and Face, etc. where in a while,
9 Observe the Charactor of Woman vile,
Who is the Strumpet, did her Bed defile:
Remarking Head, her power to Rule and sway,
Subjects in Nations fall, her does obey:
In Face is placed the Glory of that form,
Which Nature for Ornament wears to adorn.
I y(...)ead and Face is meant the lustful Ram,
through growth declined from th'Nature of the Lamb:
When she this Woman vile, did first assume,
Man's Government and place; who did presume
Prerogative (of self) to rule and sway
The little world Man, who must obey.
Over her Head she then did Dominere,
Authority she brought to her ^^n Sphere;
By usurpation thus procured their fall,
In her posterity, once placed o'r all.
Next draw her Neck and Throat, with Arms outcast.
10. The Eye does see, the Ear does hear and Pallat taste,
The Nose does smell, the Nerves do feel laid waste
A pleasant Garden, wherein they were placed.
Who once might Challenge right all Worlds to Rule,
And then this Vaunting Harlots spirit was cool:
Which now being set on fire, the Tongue can tell,
Those Flames begotten from th'lowest Hell,
'Twas Tongue bespoke the place where she does dwell.
Whom thus inflamed with Lust, her Head betrayed,
Man she did then inslave, and self betrayed.
In Neck observe the place prepar d for Yoke;
The Throat an open Sepulcher bespoke.
On Shoulders born the Burden that she Created,
To Man disarmed oth' Bliss wherein first stated:
By Neck and Throat is meant the Roaring Bull,
Who tho sprung up from Calf, of Lust is full.
Next therefore draw her Breast, with Heart and Back.
11. Observing Twins, foreplac'd, proceed you may,
To draw from Breasts the tokens where Lust lay.
From Heart then draw the Veins, wherein Blood springs
Then draw from Back, those spondels Marrow brings.
Observe the Crabbed jestures of the whore,
Any Cancerd qualities, Fops so adore.
Postures they are, and manors of a Mind,
Who unto Nature (in all) have proved unkind;
Those crooked wiles and paths found out to stear,
The way wherein all Evils do appear:
From Life proceeding, Tongue thereof does blaze,
The Coat (her Arms) at which her Fiends does gaze.
The Roaring Lion that seeks, Men to devour,
And crabbed Wolf (in Breasts do both claim power.
The Cancers's crabbed, Lyon's Beast of Prey,
By Bancer's meant Night Mantion, by Leo Day,
To Luna and Sol, thus tracing out man's way.
Next, Draw the Bowels Reins and Loins, etc.
12. Bowels of Nature, once were formed in her,
As tender (by Sex ^ Nature did will transfer
To the posterity of Mankind, that have lost,
Restrictive power o'r Lust that must be Crossed,
The Lines perverss and crooked, such is her will,
Who first did aim, and then her Lust fulfill.
These drawn from Natures Center, by Wits skill,
Observing next, depraved the soul that Lies,
Of Bliss bereaved twixt twain her Fate discries
(That she Virginity has lost, now grown a Harlot,
Who tho a woman vile is Clothed in Scarlot;
Her Reins being searched, and Loins exactly tried,
Balance of Justice she could not abide:
For thereinto being put, she is found too Light,
Humanity departed, up goes spite,
But down goes Virtue buried out of sight.
Next draw her secret Membrs and Thighs, etc.
6. For under that all secret Lusts arise,
And therein working, there their Nature Lies
A Scorpion lurking in the Night of Bliss,
After whom comes the Sagiter with kiss --
Who hides his Bow and Arrows, sharp and keen,
Least unto us below, they shouid be seen;
The Scorpions Sting his Dart is made an Arrow,
Who holds the Bow of Conquest, reached the Marrow,
In Bone and Thigh of her, made Nature narrow)
Nature (we say) made narrow; who cannot extend
Those Acts of good, to us, that should defend
Man from the Evils Planted here below,
Which from that painted Harlot, first did flow:
Most comely Dress we put on parts so vile,
And yet unseemly is, what does defile,
More better parts (expressed in Natures Style.
Last, Draw her Legs, her Knees and wandering Feet, etc.
14. On these are her support, where evils meet,
Who first the power of wrath in head did Greet,
Such Seed first sown, such Fruit they may expect,
To Reap from Lust and Envy, of that Sect
Who gave her Body up to be defiled,
And quickly by the same was Man beguiled.
In subtilty and Craft, the Game was played,
By her, who her beloved was thus betrayed.
That Children of wrath, brouhht forth, where Lust embraced
Contractive cause of wrath, Gods work defaced,
The wanton Goat and powerful water Barer,
The Fishes ply to work (by Natures Labor)
Under the pain and Curse, of woman's Crime,
Who thus above her Sphere, was apt to climb;
But to conclude as Crooked as her Feet,
So Crooked are the Paths where all this meet.
FINIS.

