PROPOSITIONS FOR General Land-Banks.
THAT BANKS under Money'd-Directors will not answer the ends of the Landed-men,
Money-Banks not National.
is proved by the Bank of England, nor will the same be effectual in the hands
of a few, (even of the Landed Gentlemen) because Self-interest is incessantly
whispering.

Such Banks therefore deserve the preference, whose prospect is the greatest
for the general Good, and shall deny none (who are willing) to partake.

Land (and that only) is the immovable in place, Land-Banks are National.
and durable Estate of the Kingdom, and the primum Mobile of all things
therein, which feels the jarrings of all other Wheels.

Numbers of Traders will increase Traffic, Landed-mens advantage to increase
Trade, and lower Interest.
with the Productions of the Earth, and Manufactures, as also the Values; which
will enable the Tenants to give the better Rents; but these are checked by the
Scarcity and high Interests of Money, or a Medium as useful to promote the
Commerce, which Obstacles, it is therefore the Landed-men's Interest, (and is,
and ought to be in their power) to remove, and to make the People easy.

On the contrary, Moneyed men's Interest opposite to Landed-men and Trade.
it is the Purse-men's Profit to monopolize Trade, and to keep Money, and all
Mediums scarce, and the Usury high; which is a quite opposite Interest,
oppressive to the People, and destructive to Traffic.

It Is the Landed-men who pay the Great Taxes, Land pays the Great Taxes which
Money'd-men evade.
and feel the Burdens of the rest, whilst the Money'd-men tower up Estates,
sheltering, and hugging themselves in Concealments, and subtle Evasions.

Wherefore, Banks-Credit ought to be on Lands.
as safe Banks will (certainly) have vast Credit, so the same ought to be
founded on that firm Security of Lands, and always lodged in the Hands of the
Possessors, whose Interest will (ever) guide them to the Commune Bonum of the
Kingdom.

The Method of Establishing these Banks, may be, viz.
I. Funds not to exceed of the yearly Rent, and are advantageous to Estates
entailed.
That the Possessors of Lands (though entailed) be permitted to oblige their
Lands for payment, as far as five Shillings in the Pound of the Rents per
Annum, and the Bank-profits to attend the Inheritance. Because, 1. To determine
Titles by Bank-Directors, will be Arbitrary, Tedious, and Uncertain. 2. No
Prejudice can befall the Heirs, as will presently appear. 3. Abundance of Worthy
Gentlemen, of great Estates in Land, will be secluded the intended
Bank-benefits; and both the Banks and Common People will suffer much through
the want of their Assistance. 4. If ought can be called Risque, the Possessors
will bear it, by advancing their Money, which the next Heirs will enjoy with
their Lands. 5. The Profits of the Bank ought to attend the Inheritance, that
the Bank-management may always be in the Landed-men.


II. Bank-Stocks to be four Years Subscription certain, and seven Years more
for Security of Creditors.
That every Sum subscribed be divided into eleven Annual Payments; one Payment
to be made at the Subscription, and the same to be repeated for three more
successive Years, which will be four Years payments for a Stock to circulate
the Bank-Bills, and the rest to attend the yearly Demands of the Directors to
make good the Bank-Credit, if occasion should be, which is not (at all)
probable.

III. No other Dividends than out of the Profits, reserving the first four
Years Stock.
That no Dividend be issued of more than the neat Profits, reserving the first
four Payments for the Bank-Stock, which will give the more sure Credit to the
Banks, and be so much clear Benefit to the next Heirs; and the Possessors
(besides the Bank-profits) will be also encouraged, in hope to outlive the few
Years their Estates will be engaged for.

IV. London and County-Banks.
That one Land-Bank be in London, and branched into the most trading Parts of
England, or each County to manage their own Banks; every of which to have safe
Repositories for Goods pledged, or for sale.

OR THVS, Viz.
If a Fund of (...) in the Pound Rents for (...) years be raised by Parliament,
Land-Banks by a Parliamentary Fund.
and paid into the Banks without Charge, and managed by Directors chosen by
Parliament, either way will create Banks alike beneficial; and if one, or the
other were on foot, the Landed men's Profits would prevent their ever declining,
and as soon advance Taxes, as will be required.

As, Taxes raised by a Land-Bank. Two Millions by Excise on Salt at 7 per Cent.
Interest.
admit two Millions demanded on a Parliamentary Fund by Excise on Salt, etc. at
7 per Cent. Interest, and the Banks Income by Land settled, be but 200000 l.
per. Annum, and Tallies or Bills made of 50 l. or 100 l. each, for the said two
Millions at 7 per Cent. Interest; the Banks having power to hasten the payments
of the Tallies, as their Bank-Stocks and Credit will admit, more Tallies would
be called in, than the Owners would willingly bring, and be as current as any
Bank-Bills whatsoever.

But to advance the Banks Credit, To pay off 1/10 part yearly.
That Fund for the 7 per Cent. Interest of the Two Millions may be so enlarged,
as one tenth part of the said Two Millions to be paid off yearly.

And if the Banks receive out of the said Excise-Fund (besides that Interest)
the yearly Sum (toward discharge of the Principal of the said Two Millions) of
l. 200,000 And that no more Annual Income by Lands settled for the Banks Stocks
(as cannot be imagined but that abundantly more will undoubtedly be subscribed)
than 200,000 The Banks will then receive per Annum 400,000

Besides the 7 per Cent. Interest of those Tallies they shall annually (by
their own Stock) call in from the People.

Consequently all the Tallies for the Two Millions will be paid off to the
People in less than five years without the assistance of the Bank-Credit, The
two Millions paid off in less than five Years.
whereby the Banks will have the certain benefits of that 7 per Cent. for their
Moneys advanced, until satisfied to them by the Nation.

For which Reasons, Banks protected by King, Lords, and Commons.
These Bank-Bills or Tallies with the Interest of 7 per Cent. will be more
acceptable in all Payments, and more like to be paid off on demand, than any
other Set of Bank-Bills whatsoever: And the rather, Because such Land-Banks
cannot fail of the protection of the King, Lords and Commons, these being
entirely in the Interest of the Nation; therefore greater or more secure Credit
cannot be wished for.

'Twill be the advantage of such Banks to lend Money at easy Rates on Goods
deposited, Manufactur'd Goods sold at best Prices, and the Owners freed from
being imposed on by the present Factors.
and become Factors thereof, to sell those at best Prices, and thereby free the
Owners from being imposed on (as is not seldom done) by the present Factors,
through the want of Money for the said Owners necessary Occasions, which often
urges untimely Sales of the Manufactures at under Rates, whereby the
Productions of the Earth (whereof those are made) do also fall low, and disable
the Tenant in their Dues to their Landlords, who are (at Bottom) the Losers;
and e Converso, the more the Manufactures yield, the higher will be the
Products of the Earth, as is evident by the rise of the Wool on the sudden
advance of the Woollen Manufactures.

Managers of Land-Banks will (contrary to Money-Banks) study hard to sink
Interest; Because, as that falls, Land rises, both in Rents, and in Sales; for
the use of Money is equally considered by the Farmers, and Makers of, and
Dealers in, Manufactures, as if the like Tax were put on their Stocks; And as
high Interest abates, less Taxes will be needful to pay that Interest of Taxes.

In sum, Land-Banks will do the most good.
These Banks will be capable of doing (at least) as much good as any other
Banks can pretend to, and more good than can be easily expressed (in so small a
Treatise) or readily thought of; and can injure none, save in disappointing the
Usurers from devouring the Labors of the best Designing, and most Industrious
of the People.

Much more might be said; but not to reflect; The present Intent is to repeat
and promote what has been formerly by me made public, as most National and
Practical; And whether these Methods are (or are not) approved for raising
Taxes this Year, it is heartily wished, that such a liberty by Law be given for
all Landed-men (by Bank-credit) to improve their Estates (and for being most
National under their management); and also, That any Persons who now do (or
hereafter shall) join in the settling safe Banks, may be incorporated under
proper Limitations; For certainly, the greater the number of such Banks, the
better will it be for the Nation in general, and for the Landed-men in
particular: Recommending (with submission) to the observation of our
Legislators, to oblige those by Law to perform their Pretenses, Specious
Pretenders to be obliged to perform their Promises.
who have made (or shall make) specious Insinuations and Promises to lend Money
at low Interest; and not be suffered to purchase Lands, least they lessen the
number of the Country Gentry (by engrossing their Lands) as was formerly done
by the Abbeys, Priories and Nunneries; and that a due care be had to prevent
encouraging the Monopolizing (especially of Foreign) Commodities consumeable in
England. And that Stock-jobbings, and all voluntary Diminutions out of the
Capital be totally suppressed. And no Dividend admitted, save what shall arise
out of the certain Profits of the Banks.

If the Readers find all (or ought herein) for the Kingdom's Advantage, and
will promote the same, I shall think my Pains well spent for the common good of
the Nation, in general; and that my good Intentions may meet with a favorable
Construction, is hoped for. By

Dalby Thomas.


