Whitehall, July 23. 1696.
This Evening arrived here an Express from my Lord Berkeley, with Letters dated
the 20th of this Month, off Vshant, which bring the Account that follows.

Published by Authority.

A Relation of the Bombarding of St. Martins and Ollone.
THE whole Fleet, under the Command of the Right Honorable the Lord Berkeley,
sailed the 3d instant from Ushant toward Bel-Isle, and in the Afternoon, upon
a Signal from the Admiral, Sir Martin Beckman, with the Bomb-Vessels, separated
from the Fleet, with a Convoy of ten Men of War and five Fireships, commanded
by Capt. Mees. On the 5th we arrived, between 3 and 4 a Clock in the Afternoon,
before St. Martins, where the Men of War came to an Anchor; but the Bomb
Vessels went in as far as they could go, which was about three quarters of a
Mile from the Town; where, about six they all sat fast on a soft Ground;
notwithstanding which, they began to bombard the Town about 9 at Night, and
continued it till 3 the next Morning. After one hours bombing, there appeared
five several Fires in the middle of the Town, some were put out, but two
continued with great and lofty Flames; At 3 in the Morning the Bomb-Vessels
hawled off to refresh the Men, and to be recruited with all Necessaries. About
3 a Clock in the Afternoon, when the Tide served, Sir Martin Beckman stood in
again, but more to the Eastward, about the same distance as before from the
Town, and so bombarded it till 4 in the Morning: The Town was all the while on
Fire in many places; and the two Fires first mentioned continued, with
considerable Augmentation, insomuch, that we all judge the greatest and richest
part of the Town was destroyed by Fire, or shattered in pieces by the Bombs, of
which we fired Iwo thousand two hundred and thirty, including in that Number
Two hundred and sixty Carcesses. They fired from the Town with 18 pieces of
Cannon and 4 Mortars, but without doing us any damage. The 7th in the Morning
we gave over bombing of St. Martins, having left one of their Ships on Fire in
the Road, and brought away a Danish Fly-boat laden with Brandy and Salt, upon
suspicion of being French; we took also a Ship going in, besides several Boats
laden with Provisions, etc. The Town is well fortified, and, as the Prisoners
informed us, there was a Garrison in it of 1200 Men. From thence we sailed
directly to Ollone, situated on the Main, where we arrived about 8 in the
Evening; We began immediately to bombard that place, and after a little while,
some of the Houses, which stand scattering, took fire, and were burnt to the
Ground; About 12 a Clock at Night, it growing Foggy, we left off bombing, and
began again about 2 in the Morning, when perceiving there were two several
Towns, divided by a River or Harbor, half a quarter of a Mile broad, Sir
Martin placed 7 Bomb Ships against the North Town, and three against the South
Town, and so bombarded them till half an hour past 5 in the Evening; during
this time the two Towns took fire in fifteen several Places, and after some
burning were put out, except 3 in the Town on the North-side, which continued
burning when we left it, and lasted all the Night, after we were under sail,
perceived by those that had the Watch on Board the Ships, which is to be
imputed to the Violence of the increasing Flames, or to the blowing up of
Houses to avoid the spreading thereof. The North-side suffered most by reason
of its being more closely built, and the best Houses were there: The Enemy had
planted four pieces of Cannon upon the Point going into the Harbor, from
whence, at our coming to Anchor, the Commander of the Society Bomb-Ship,
Captain Jeninfer, was killed: We fired here 1996 Bombs and Carcasses, with very
good effect. The fairness of the Weather, and the light Moon, very much
facilitated this short and successful Expedition; To which Sir Martin Beckman
and Capt. Mees contributed very much by their extraordinary Care and Diligence,
being present both Night and Day in the hottest of the Action, to direct and
encourage the Service; which having thus performed, the Men of War and
Bomb-Vessels rejoined the Fleet.

This Evening came in also a Mail from Holland with Letters of the 16th Instant
from His Majesty's Camp at Nivelle; they inform us, that the Army was come to
that place in two days march from Gemblours, and was to march again the 17th
toward Soignies. The Marshall de Boufflers decamped the 15th from St. Gerard,
and was marching likewise on the other side of the Sambre toward Flanders.
Part of our Heavy Baggage was sent to Hall; and our Parties had cut off and
taken several small Parties of the French on their march the 16th. The
Landtgrave of Hesse was with the German Forces at Namur, where they were to
Encamp till farther Order.

They write from Piemont, That the French Army continued at Volvera; and the
Allies at Moncalier; And that the Generals of the latter had refused to sign
the Cessation of Arms. On the Upper Rhine the Confederate Army continued at
Zeiteren; And the French at Ostofen: Two Regiments of Horse and three of
Dragoons, of the Troops of the Elector Palatin, were come into the
Neighborhood of Francfort, in their march to join the Germans. The Letters
from Vienna of the 14th tell us, they had Advice from Hungary, that the
additional Troops of Saxony, being 4000 Men, had joined the Imperial Army,
which had thereupon passed the River Marosh, and advanced toward Temeswaer.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1696.


