MILK FOR CHILDREN OR A plain and easy Method teaching to read and write:
Together with Brief Instructions for all sorts of People: especially for
Ministers to inform the Ruder sort in their Parishes, for Schoolmasters that
initiate young Children in their Schools, and for Masters and Mistresses in
their Families to train up their Children and Servants in the Grounds and
Principles of Religion. As also an Appendix of Prayer.

BY LAMBROCKE THOMAS D. D. and now Vicar of Pemsey in Sussex.

London, Printed for N. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL The Bailiffe and Jurats of Pemsey, with all others
both Officers and Inhabitants, his loving friends and neighbors whatsoever in
that Corporation, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
THE dignity of this Subject may without ambition aim at an higher Dedication,
and the Dignity of some of your places may well Patronize a more learned work:
Although the Relation we all have to either may well challenge, I no other
Patron, and You all even this Dedication. In as much as the poor endeavors it
is of a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, in one of the Parishes within your
Liberty: the desire of all whose welfare, as you have indifferent Authority in
all the places within your Liberty, do I next tender to those o^ mine own
Parish. Who though not all my equal charge yet my careful endeavor, that
should principally redound^o those of my own charge, I do not bound, but shall
be glad if it may go out into a blessing to the good also of others, and next
to those of my own Parish, to all others within this ancient Corporation. When
this work though mean in show (for I studied therein both brevity and
plainness) is but the grounds and epitome of many years exercises among you:
when what by sermons I have sometimes preached to your ears, I now present to
your eyes, and wish may be imprinted in your hearts: that being intended for
the education of children and servants by instruction of Parents and Masters
may happily teach both, and so abandon that hateful ignorance that for want of
such like instructions by Catechism has too much crept in among us Besides
that after so many years living among you (considering the uncertainty both o^
life and living) my desire is that this small piece thus framed for your use,
may remain with you as a testimony of my good will, and well wishes to your
souls good. And so commending you to God, I rest

Yours in all Christian Love and Observance L. THOMAS.

To the reverend Clergy of England.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren.
THe Day is short, the Labor (...)
(or work) much a, said an old Rabbine, a saying not unlike to that (as old
and true) of the older Physician that said Art is long, life short, (...) Hip.
Aph. 1.
both which may hint our care in this short day and life how to go through that
much and long work and Art: and especially in this both much and long and Art
of Religion: the Grounds whereof we now only in this small piece propose: in
the composing whereof, I have (besides other approved Authors) consulted also
many Catechismes, in most of all which (though many both good and Orthodox) are
meat for stronger folks, and not that I especially hereby aimed at to yield,
Milk for Children. In them many are hard and intricate and obscure words and
Prases, as if set of purpose to puzzell Divines, and not as I desired herein to
express plainness and most easy terms to inform the more unlearned.
However all that I have herein and that you have not in others, is little more
then the Method, and that too not much different from many others: though they
some be more copious, some more concise, not as I conceive so much consonant to
the weak capacities of Children that must learn, and (sometimes) not of them
of most abilities that may teach. So as plainness and perspicuity even to both
may be the best mean to help on this my intendement to administer this Milk for
Children, these instructions for the more rude and ignorant. Which they more
learned may not disdain to peruse, yea too for the advantage of them more
unlearned that depend upon them, as a work done to their hands that might
requir their pains of search and composure, though otherwise never so wise and
knowing. Not to intrude therefore upon any your charges, if what I have here
composed for the instruction of my own, may (by Gods blessing) become an case
to any of you or useful to any of yours: let it have both courteous and
Christian entertainment with you: and that by your charitable supplying what is
defective, and favorable correcting what may be amiss in it.

Goats hair Exodus 35. 5, 6, 7.
was useful for the Tabernacle as wel^ as Gold, Silver, Brass, blew Purple,
Scarlet and fine Linen, and with a willing heart given as well accepted: so
for the Salvation of souls these like mean and familiar grounds of
Instruction may be as useful, as more learned and more eminent Structures. In
as much as those Structures may hardly stand, but where first are laid these
like Grounds. When therefore it behooves some to lay these grounds, as well as
others to erect those Structures. In which, when as servants to one God, and
Laborers in one Vineyard, the Church of God, let us all work together for
good, and that by our every ways careful tender of the People of God
committed to us. And being the work we have is hard and pressing, let us in
what we may ease and releeve each other, the work of one be helpful to the
studies of another, the both works and studies of both be helpful to the
edification of all. Which is all that I hereby aim at, And so rest

The meanest of your Brethren and fellow Labourer in the Ministry of the
Gospel. L. THOMAS.

To the courteous and Christian Reader.
THere is no end says Solomon of making many Books Eccl. 12. 12.
: And of Books as of all things else with the same Solomon may we say Eccl. 1 9
there is no new thing under the Sun: but transcripts and transcriptions of
things be sometimes but one and the same purpose. Although of these like things
and books may we say with a Father, that Vtile est plures libros a pluribus
ficri, diverso stylo, non diverse a fide, etiam de questionibus eisdem, ut ad
plurimos res ipsa perveniat, ad alios sic, adalios vero sic. Aug.
useful it is that many books be made by many men in a different style,
though not in a different faith, and that the matter of the same very Questions
or disputes, may come unto many, to some thus, but to some others thus. And
that may I say according to the variety of Capacities they are to be proposed
to, which as to the understanding of them, some must have delivered in plain
and easy terms, which others yet may understand in them more difficult and
obstruse. Besides that, many good books there that come not to the knowledge
of every one, and books as for their worth some, so others though perhaps of
less worth, or not so excellent as those others, yet are little set by, or
otherwise esteemed for their Authors, as Sermons, Commentaries, Ca^echismes,
and the like, why many times the labors of most excellent men unknown are but
lightly looked upon, cast by: otherwise though of men less eminent, yet for
some relation otherwise, as that they are our friends or our Teachers, or the
like, are often more looked into and used. As this of mine, may chance to be, not
only by those of my now present charge, but also by those many in the many
other places I have had some relation to, that seeing my name prefixed to it
will some perhaps out of love to me renew acquaintance with this remembrances
that hereby again put them in mind of their souls health, the welfare whereof
as it was my endeavor among them, so absent it is also still my endeavor both
by word and writing in both as still tendering that, which is the main end of
these instructions, a Milk administered for the sustentation of souls. A Book
that with the Bible may for a time be a sufficient Library, while in their
Minority to inform Children in the Grounds and Principles of Religion. And if
I have not much mistaken the Method I aimed at, though plain it be, yet such it
is, that may most happily make way to the better use and understanding of more
learned books. When in this they have weighed every fundamental point of
Religion, may they the better judge of the superstructures of others more
eminent Builders that set forth the beauty of the varied Roof: happily make use
and judge of Sermons and Commentaries and what other learned ornaments men of
God compose every one according to the measure of grace given him, for the
edification of the house of God. The hand that first points at which such
eminent pieces must be such like more plain instructions, and Catechismes. And
of such like there are even in the English Tongue many excellent of either
kind: yet not so many of either but that still there is place left for men to
exercise their endeavors in: that though but varying the Phrase or Method, or
the like, keeping still the faith entire, may for their novelty win Readers,
who while but thus conning an old Book new dated, may renew their faith almost
perhaps out of date.

To write again even the sa^e things may be necessary Phi. 3. 1.
, the same things new dressed pleasant. When men of knowledge that see both, and
therefore out of their own fulness loath it, let them suffer others not so
full, by both or either to increase their knowledge. Let neither grudg at the
plenty: the more knowing sometimes may nod, or forget, and may perhaps want a
wakening or remembrance: and for them that know less, their own want may
prompt to them any wise to seek to better their knowiedge: If not, they may
starve and not be pit^ied that having bread to the full will no^ eat it. When
then let the variety of this kind cloy none, but every man take where and what
he will, and leave that he dislikes, may for ought he knows as much like
another. They all are put forth to this end, to profit all, though it may not
be they may profit all alike. Let our thanks be to God rather then our scorn
or envy to the Authors of them, that, unless wanting to our selves, thus
happily feed us with abundance.

What I propose here is out of love and desire to win souls to God, with my
thanks for his goodness that has raised up before me so many candles whereby
I have lighted mine: which (for their sakes in the house with me) I thought not
meet to lay under a bushel, but to put it on this mean candlstick of my
making, that they also may have light with me. And to this end therefore having
thus given account of my purpose, take also this account of my composing this
peec, In the pe^ning whereof, I have seen I confess and made much use of many
commentaries and Catechismes, and in this little piece of mine I have studied
only plainness, without prejudice or detraction to any their Authors,
enlargeing some that were some what short, and abridging and explaining others
long and abstruse. It was bad enough when we had a liturgy and Catechism in
it, a set form both plain and pithie, enjoined to be taught children and
servants: it is now little amended, if not worse, though too much neglected was
the powerful and diligent opening every point and principle of religion
comprised in that catechism: the form yet then kept us in some decorum of
knowledge, though for want of due practice the power of Godliness was much
wanting. But now is lost almost both form and power: When though Catechismes we
have many, yet least ^ad libitum, exercised are they but by a few. Our constant
preaching, neglecting catechizing, makes up a Religion much like that Nebuchad
nezzar's Dan. 2. 32.
Image, that was gold in the head, but in the feet earth. Men and masters we
teach and inform, but children and servants are neglected. When they that are
so much for preaching, and cannot away with catechizing, are such as commonly
have more brain then heart, and would be heard more to dispute, then seen to
live like Christians. But let both, both preaching and catechizing be but in
practice, and some of the overbusied time spent in the one, supply the too much
neglect of the other: when both young and old may mch grow the better by it.
And herein I have endeavored a piece to that purpose, that whoever list to
spare time, (but the too much idle time, spent in useless pamphlits, and more
idle sports) to employ in setting this Method a foot, may for the vain
service done to their own lusts and the much pleasure of man's great foe the
Devil, do service to their souls good, and to the glory of their greatest
friend God. However in this let him have his own time, between whiles both
before and after Sermons, when having called those under their charge, to give
accounts of their attention at the Church, you may in this edify them at home,
and by little and little the better fit them for Church services: understanding
the grounds and principles of religion in this plain and familiar manner will
they the better understand sermons though delivered in more quaint and elegant
Phrases.

Nor let it be only the practice of that Gods holy day, a day that he
challenges to himself, but otherwise having given you six days to do your
work in, between whiles even on some of these, in this duty give him some of
your diligence: when he will so bless you as that you may the better do your
work. If a quarter or half an hour in a day be sometimes spent in the
practice, at the weeks end you will find it no prejudice to your work, but an
excellent preparation on Gods day to do his work in, who doubtless will
thereby both bless and prosper the works of every your own days. But let
not the Gate be great, where the City is but little, or I lavish out time by a
long Preface before a little book, which for the good of you all I composed,
and herein now propose to your both courteous and Christian entertainment, and
so I rest

Yours in the Lord. L. THOMAS.

MILK FOR CHILDREN.
The Great letters of all sorts.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. J. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. U. W. X. Y. Z.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. U. W. X. Y. Z.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.

The small Letters of all sorts.

a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x. y.
z. and. etc.

a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x. y. z.
and. etc.

a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. t. v. u. w. x. y. z.
and. etc.

The Double letters of all sorts.

ff. ss. sh. sl. fl. st. ct.

ff, ss. sh. sl. fl. st. ct.

ff. ss. sh. sl. fl. st. ll. ct.

The numeral letters. I. V. X. L. C. D. M.

The Figures. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 0.

The points or stops in reading.

, A Comma or short stop.

: A middle distinction.

. A full point.

? A note of Interrogation.

! A no^e of Admiration.

() Lines including a Parenthesis.

The division of the letters.
Of the letters these six a. e. i. o. u. y. are Vowels, all the rest are
Consonants. And sometimes i. u. y. are Consonants when going before themselves
or other Vowels. This kind of v. v. v. is used when a Consonant, and whether
Consonant or Vowell ever in the beginning of a Syllable, word, or sentence. The
other u. u. u. is always a Vowell. It is called a Consonant, because it must
always be sounded with a Vowell as, ab. eb. ad. ed. ba. be. da. de. etc. where
a. and e. are Vowels: b. and d. are Consonants. In the English letters these
two sorts of small ers (r. r.) are used indifferently: but the small esses (s.
s.) are thus used, this s. always in the beginning and middle, this (s)
always at the end of words.

There are Syllables in words: every Syllable must have one vowel at the least:
and every word if it has more syllables then one, must have also more vowels.

A Syllable is the pronouncing of one letter or more with one breath.

One Syllable may make one word, as, of, in. One word may have many syllables
as, division

PSALM. 34. verse. 11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the
fear of the Lord.

ECCLES. 12. verse 13. Let us bear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

PSALM. 111. verse. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a
good understanding have all they that do thereafter, his praise endures for
ever.

ECCLES. 12. verse. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youtb, while
the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigb when thou shall say, I have
no pleasure in them.

1 KINGS Chapt. 18. David my Father that thou promisedst him, saying, there
shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the Throne of Israel, so that
thy Children take beed to their way, that they walk before me, as thou have
walked before me.

Israel, let thy word (I pray thee) be verified, which thou spakest unto thy
servant David my Father.







The Creed in twelve Articles.
1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and Earth: 2. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord: 3. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary: 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead
and buried, he descended into Hell: 5. The third day he rose again from the
dead: 6. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty: 7. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead:
8. I believe in the holy Ghost: 9. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints: 10. The forgiveness of sins: 11. The resurrection of the Body: 12. And
the life everlasting.
Amen.
The Commandments in a Preface and ten Precepts.
And God spoke all these words, saying: The Preface.


I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods before The Precepts, or Commandments
themselves.
me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in the Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is
in the water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God: visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the Children unto the third and fo^rth generation of them that
hate me. And showing mercy unto thousands, of them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: Six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work. B^t the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in
it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed i^.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

The Lords Prayer in a Preface, six Petitions, a Confirmation, and a
Conclusion. The Preface. The Petitions.

Our Father which art in Heaven, 1. Hal lowed be thy Name. 2. Thy Kingdom
come. 3. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in heaven. 4. Give us this day our
daily Bread. 5. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our Debtors. 6. And
lead us no^ into Temptation, but deliver us from evil:

For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, The Confirmation.
and the glory, for ever. The Conclusion.


Amen.
^race before meat.
BLessed God, the Father of all blessings and God of all comfort and
consolation, bless us and the Creaturs whatever now provided for us: so fill
both our bodies and souls with good, that both may abound in all goodness to
thy only glory, and both their good, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom
with thee and the holy Spirit be all honor and glory, for ever.

Amen.
Grace after meat.
Give us O Lord we beseech thee all thankful hearts for all thy good graces
and benefits what ever now and at all times bestowed on us, that by us and all
the faithful for that all thy good thou may receive all praise and glory, now
and for ever.

Amen.
A short Catechism.
1. Question.

WHat ought to be our chiefest care?

Answer.

To glorify God. 1 Cor. 10. 31.


II. Q That we may have that Care, and show forth that glory, what ought we
especially to have?

A Zeal. Numb. 25. 11.


III. Q Is Zeal enough to show it?

A No, we must have also knowledge. Romans 10. 2.
IV. Q That we may have both that zeal and knowledge, what ought we especially
to understand and consider?

A The works of God and the Word of God.

V. Q What are the works of God?

A The world and all things therein contained.

VI. Q Doth^bat glorify God?

A Yes. Psalm. 19. 1, 2.


VII. Q Why would he have his works to glorify him?

A That we might be without ex cuse. Romans 1. 19, 20.


VIII. Q What is the Word of God?

A The holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, commonly called the Bible.

IX. Q Why ought we to understand and consider that Word?

A That we might have a certain rule to go by.

X. Q Have we a certain rule in that Word?

A Yes. Is. 8. 20.


XI. Q What especially teaches that Word?

A The Knowledge of God and our selves. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.


XII. Q What ought we to know of God?

A Two things especially.

XIII. Q What be they?

A First, what he is: secondly, what he has done.

XIV. Q First, what is God?

A He is a Spirit. Jo. 4. 24.


XV. Q Secondly, what has God done?

A He has made all things. Genesis 1. ^.


XVI. Q What ought we to know of our selves?

A Three things especially.

XVII. Q What be they?

A First ^^ what we were: Secondly, what we are: Thirdly what we shall be.

XVIII Q First then, what we^e we?

A At our first Creation when God made man and all things, he and they all Genesis
1. 31
were good. k.

XIX. Q Secondly, what are we?

A Since that our first Parent Adams Genesis 6. 5. To. 6. 23.
fall, evil 1: And unless by Grace renewed subject to death. m

XX. Q Thirdly, what shall we be?

A At the last day, the general Resurrection of all Mankind, they by grace
Mat. 25. 34.
renewed shall be blessed in Heaven'n: they that continue in sin shall be
accursed in Mat. 25. 41.
Hell. o

XXI. Q Well, but what was Adams sin to us?

Romans 5. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 22.
A We sinned in him. p

XXII. Q How then can we be redeemed from that his guilt?

A By Jesus Christ.

XXIII. What or who is Jesus Christ?

A The Son of God, and Savior of man.

XXIV. Q Why must we be redeemed by Jesus Christ?

A Because the sin of man was against God, God that is also man, as Jesus
Christ was and is must make the satisfaction.

XXV. Q Are there more Gods then one?

A No, there is but one God, but there are three Persons in the Godhead.

XXVI. Q What are those three Persons?

A The first the Father, the second the Son, and the third the holy Ghost.

XXVII. Q How do you know this?

A My Creed tells me so.

XXVIII. Q What is the Creed?

A The Articles of our Faith.

XXIX. Q Why do some call it the Apostles Creed?

A Because some say the Apostles compos^d it.

XXX. Q What do you think, who composed it?

A It is uncertain.

XXXI. Q Why then is it r^ceived?

A Because whoever composed it makes no great matter, but being of old received
and certainly containing the sum or grounds of Christian Religion comprised in
the Gospel of Christ, it is therefore received.

XXXII. Q How many be those Articles of it?

A According to the number of the twelve Apostles, twelve.

XXXIII. Q What be those Articles?

A I believe in God, etc.

XXXIV. Q What is Faith?

A A certain confidence in, and dependence on Jesus Christ. Ephesians* 3. 12.


XXXV. Q Why need we that confidence and dependence on Jesus Christ?

A Because we are sinners, and none but he bare those sins. Heb. 9. 28.


XXXVI. Q What is sin?

A A transgression of the Law. 1 Jo. 3. 4.


XXXVII. Q What is that Law?

A The Commandments of God.

XXXVIII. Q How many Commandments are there?

A Ten in two Tables. Deuteronomy. 4. 13.


XXXIX. Q Which be the Commandments?

A I am the Lord thy God, etc.

XL. Q What learn you by these Commanmandements?

A My duty toward God, and my duty toward my Neighbor.

XLI. Q What is your duty toward God?

A To love him above all things. Mat. 22. 37.


XLII. Q What is your duty toward your Neighbor?

A To love him as my self. Mat. 22. 39.


XLII. Q Well but can you exactly keep them in every point?

A No, but I daily break some one or other of them in thought, word and deed.
Psalm. 14. 1. 3.
And breaking but one, I am guilty of all. Ja. 2. 10.


XLIV. Q How then to any purpose can you keep any of them?

A I must labor what I may to keep them.

XLV. Q Why must you labor to keep them?

A Because they are the rule prescribed of God.

XLVI. Q Well, but being as you say not able to keep them as you ought, how
ought you to vindicate your miskeeping?

A By Repentance.

XLVII. Q What is Repentance?

A Hearty sorrow for sins past, and purpose of amendment of life for time to
come. Act. 26. 20.


XLVIII. Q But, can you thus repent of your self?

A No, but that also is the gift and goodness of God: To. 2. 4.
and we must pray for it. Act. 8. 22.


XLIX. Q What is Prayer?

A A calling upon God through Jesus Christ.

L. Q Have you any rule for Prayer?

A Yes, the best and most perfect pattern of Prayer, the Lords Prayer.

LI. Q What be the words of the Lords Prayer?

A O^r Father which art, etc.

LII. Q How many parts has this Prayer?

A Four.

LIII. Q Which or what be they?

A First, a Preface, secondly, the Prayer it self, thirdly, a Confirmation,
and fourthly, a Conclusion.

LIVE. Q Which i^ the Preface?

A Our Father which art in Heaven.

LV. Q Which is the Prayer it self?

A The six Petitions. As hallowed etc.

LVI. Q What is the Confirmation?

A For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

LVII. Q Which is the Conclusion?

A Amen.

LVIII. Why must we pray?

A Because a good mean it is to increase faith. Luk 17. 5.


LIX. Q Are there no other means to increase it?

A Yes.

LX. Q What be they?

A The Sacraments. Romans 4. 11.


LXI. Q How many Sacrament^ be there?

A Two.

LXII. Q Which be they?

A The first Baptism: Jo. 1. 26.
the second the Supper of our Lord. Luke 22. 19, 20.


LXIII. Q What is a Sacrament?

A An outward and visible sign or seal of an inward and spiritual grace.
Romans 4. 11.


LXIV. Q What is the outward sign or seal in Baptism?

A Water. Act. 10. 47.


LXV. Q What is the inward and spiritual Grace?

A Remission of sin. Mar. 1. 4.


LXVI. Q Who are to be baptized?

A Believers. Act. 8. 37, 38.


LXVII. Q What is the outward sign or seal in the Lords Supper?

A Bread and Wine. Luke 22. 19, 20.


LXVIII. Q What is the inward and spiritual grace?

A The benefits and deserts of Christ's death and passion. ^ Cor. 11. 24. etc.


LXIX. Q Who are to receive this Sacrament?

A Believers baptized.

LXX. Q Who instituted these Sacraments?

A Christ himself. Mat. 28. 19. Luke. 22. 19. 20.


LXXI. Q Who are to administer them?

A Ministers lawfully thereunto called. Heb. 5. 4


LXXII. Q Why ought we thus to have faith? and to show forth works of faith,
to pray, and to receive the Sacraments, etc.

A That we may obtain Salvation. Act. 16. 30.


LXXIII. Q What is Salvation?

A It is next to Gods glory, the chief end of man's endeavors. Psa. 73. 24, 25l


LXXIV. Q And what is that end?

A Eternal life. Jo. 5. 39.


LXXV. Q. What is eternal life?

A An everlasting living with God in glory. Psalm. 73. 24.


A plain and easy Method teaching to read and write.
WE are all created for the glory of God, and all for the good also of one
another. When it behooves us all therefore, as tending that glory, and to
promote that good, to use still our best endeavors for both. Not only them of
years and knowledge themselves to go on, to grow in favor with God and men,
but to inform also and instruct their Children and Servants, and them whoever
more rude and ignorant, how also to attain knowledge, which cannot better be
done, then first by teaching them to read, and secondly by instructing them in
the grounds and principles of Religion. Both which may easily and at once be
examples of letter forms and writing in various hands The Great Letters

Engl: ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQRSTVWXY

To: ABCDEFGHIJKLLMNOPQRSTVWXYZ

Ita: ABCDEFGGHIKLMMNOPQRSTVWXY

The small Letters of all Sorts

Eng: abcddeeefgghiikkl ll mnoppqrrsstvuwxxyzz

Rom Aabcdefghikl ll mnoppq qu rr stvwxys ss ^ co^ m^ m o

Ita Aabcdefgghiikl ll mno oo ppppq rrsst tt v tt w x x yyzz

Secretary hand

Come ye children hearken unto me

I will teach you the fear of the Lord

Roman Hand

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter Fear God and keep his
commandments for this is the

Italian hand

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding ^aue
all they yt oor^ his commandments his praise endures for ever. ^. B.

Mixed hand or bastard Secretary

Remember now thy creator in ye days of thy youth while the evil days com
not now ye years (...) nigh, when thou shall say I have noe pleasure in the:

done, when by teaching them to read, they make those grounds and principles
the lessons of their instructions. Which grounds and principles are not only
always the consequents of reading, but may be instilled into them also that
cannot read. And therefore not only Ministers in their Parishes, and
Schoolmasters in their Schools are thus to inform in these grounds and
principles, but Masters also and Mistresses of families, as a great part of
their bounden duty to do good service are bound to inform their Children and
Servants: who shall do well to proceed in this or the like manner.

For children, when once they begin to speak, to begin then presently to
instill into them these grounds and principles. And whereas too too many make
ill and idle words their first and familiar instructions, let the more godly
inform them in them good and profitable, and make those weaklings that begin
to speak and those others whoever more rude and ignorant that can speak, but
cannot yet read, familiar with better words, as the name of God, and of Christ,
and of the holy Ghost, and of Sin, and of Death, and Hell, of the Resurrection,
and Heaven, and Glory, and the like. Of God how he made us and all the World,
of Christ how he redeemed us, when by sin made bondslaves to death and hell,
who by his glorious resurrection shall raise up the godly to inherit with him
Heaven and Glory. And then of the holy Ghost, who sanctifies us, and endues us
with graces competent in the merits of Christ to attain that glory. Which like
familiar and timely instructions will kindle in them a love of God and of
Christ, and a study of doing that which is good: and also an hatred against sin
and evil. And to that end let them by little and little teach them even
without book to pronounce the Creed, the Commandments, and the Lords Prayer.
And then after they can say them by heart and without book, to tell them how
many Articles are in the Creed, how many Commandments there are, how many
Petitions in the Lords Prayer, and to pronounce them distinctly one from
another, both in their order, and out of order: so as they may not only be able
to say this Article, or this Commandem^n^, or this Petition is the first, and
this the second, and this the third, and so forth: but this is the sixth, or
this the third, or this the first, and so forth. When it may not be amiss even
without book to teach them the names of the letters in the Alphabet, as a, be,
cee, dee, etc. and how to number, as one, two, three, four, etc.

When while you are thus teaching them this, by this or the like Alphabet here
before set down, may you bring them to read, which even naturally is the
desire of most: and that which when men come to the knowledge of themselves and
cannot read, wish even too late that they had bestowed even a great deal more
pains and cost to attain it, then this timely endeavor may do. Which at
first by a provident foresight and diligence is attained even with pleasure,
and little pains, and less expense: the expense but the buying this or the
like little book, which Masters and they more rich may out of charity buy and
give unto poor children and Servants. When next themselves, or if they cannot,
some other of their children and servants, or some godly Neighbor near by,
that can read, though but a little, may by little and little teach the rest,
yea even their own Parents or Masters, that having so much neglected this great
good, may not be ashamed yet to learn. And that by bestowing were it but even
a quarter of an hour in a day for two or three months, in which time a but
indifferent capacity, (come to some discretion) may perfectly read. Which they
may the better do by observing this Method.

First, to learn to know the letters within book, as they had been taught
before without book to name them. And also the Figures, and the Numerall
Letters, to be able to say both of the great and small Letters wherever they
see them, that this is a, or this is el, or this is pee, etc. And then of the
Numerall letters that this stands for one, this for five, this for ten, etc. of
the Figures that is two, this four, this six, etc.

Secondly, to know and show which are Vowels, which Consonants, so as when ever
they see a Word they may be able to say there be so many Vowels in it, and so
many Consonants.

Thirdly, to learn to spell, first a Syllable, which may perhaps be or make a
word and then after a word which may perhaps have many Syllables. When they
have learnt all this, you may do well to acquaint them with the points or
marks, or stops in reading, which are these fix before set down in the
Alphabet. Where you must first give them their names as before annexed to their
marks: so as when seeing any of them the Learner may say that this Crook (,)
is a Comma, or little or short point, where is to be made a short stop in
reading: These two pricks (:) a middle distinction, where to stay a little
longer: This one Prick (.) a full point, where one may take breath or end a
period: This point with a crook over it (?) a note of Interrogation, where a
question is asked: This point with a downeright line over it thus (!) a note of
admiration, which is but as a short stop, and at which the pronunciation must
be of the words next going before it, as with wonder. And those two crooked
lines () a note including a Parenthesis, or enclosing a sentence between them,
which sentence taken away or left out, the sense yet would remain entire. When
also you may tell them the meaning of those marks at the end of the small
letters, as how and. and. and. are all but one and the same, each answering to
each sort of letters, and stand for And, and is called and by it self: and
that set with a cafter it as etc. etc. etc. is then used when any thing remains
unset down, or is understood to follow though not set down, and is called and
the rest, or and so forth. As also of the double letters teaching them to know
and read them, being that to be thus joined together, they do somewhat differ
from the rest. As also in the written Copy to tell them the differences
between the letters two of a sort in the Alphabet of small letters: that
excepting the two errs (r r) both in print and writing used promiscuously, as
also the esses in both the Roman and Italian, this (s) is used in the beginning
or middle, never at the end of a word, and this (s) is promiscuously used in
all places, beginning, middle, end, as you see good) the first is ordinarily to
be written at the beginning and in the middle of a word, the latter only still
at the end of a word. Let them keep to these set forms of letters, till they
can perfectly write according to these Coppies in either hands: and then they
may easily vary and write mixed hand, in such other letters as are used in
writing, if (though this be enough) they would be further masters of the Pen.

This learnt, you may proceed, and show them some sentence or other, or some
two, three or more sentences together, that have in them all these, as that of
1 Kings Chapt. VIII. in the fourth page before, where you may show and pose
them in most of all these pertic^lars. Where you have most of all the letters
of the Alphabet, some of the Figures at the beginning of each verse, some of
the Numerall letters in the number of the book and Chapter: and all the before
mentioned Points and marks. This let be your practice a while, till they can
exactly know and understand thus much.

Then for their first exercise to read, you may make use of that piece of
Scripture you thus posed them in: or choose some other easy and short
sentence, as some one or other of them set down in the third page before that
Scripture, as, Come ye children, etc. or Let us hear the conclusion, etc. or
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, etc.

When and wherein be not too pressing to teach them too much at once: nor let
them shufflle it over by halves. But go on by leisure three or four words at
most at a time: and them well learnt and understood before you go any further.
Then when those three or four words are so well learnt: go on to three or four
more, till in that manner you have gone through the whole sentence. These with
one, two or three sentences thus well learnt, may you proceed with them to that
Scripture, or rather if you will to the Creed, or Commandments, or Lords
prayer: and then after to some Psalm or what other Chapter or piece of the
Bible, or what other English book you will. And observing this Method, first
taking three or four words, then a line or a verse, then a page, then a leaf
as their capacities and delight will follow it, they will in a short time
become perfect Readers. And so even while Children have obtained that precious
Jewel, that many old folks that want it, would in their minds give all they
are worth for.

Now all this in some measure well performed, may you go on to propose unto
them the learning of some plain and easy Catechism: or rather indeed between
whiles in the learning to read, let Children and Servants, though as yet they
cannot read, being come to some knowledge, be taught to answer without book to
the questions in this before or the like short Catechism: and so without book
learn it, as they may instruct one another, one by questioning, and another by
answering.

Instrustions for the Teacher.
Which short Catechism being thus learnt, may you do well next to proceed to
this or the like exposition of it. That so you may not only have the direct
Questions and Answers as before in that Short Catechism, but to the better
opening to the understanding thereof, by further Explications teaching the
meaning of them. And that too by way of Question and Answer, here and there
inserting some other both Questions and Answers, that may make to the better
explaining the former.

When now in this Exposition where need is you may enlarge your self as
occasion serves upon the Question or Answer, producing proofs of Scripture for
your Expositions: and causing still the Learner where need is to repeat still
the proof, set down before in the Margent, for his answer. Which you may omit
till you come to this or the like Exposition, which you may use for that
purpose: and which I have set down but only by quoting the place without the
words, that both the book might not grow to any great bulk, (it being
necessary that every Learner should have one) and also, that by searching for
it in the Bible (one whereof if their ability may not reach to more, may serve
in one family) the Learner might the better press it in his memory. Or if he
can write (which I would advise you also to encourage your Learne^s to, and to
that end, as in print, so immediately before the Catechism, have I caused also
to be inserted an Alphabet of the most usual written hands, and the same
sentences of Scripture teaching to write) that in a leaf of Paper, set
between every leaf in this book, or otherwise in a piece of paper for the
purpose, he may write down every proof.

A brief Exposition of the former Catechism with here and there some short
Explications, the Teacher may acquaint his Learner with.
1. Teacher. HAve you learnt your Catechism?


Learner. Yes.


2. T. Come let me examine you, and see whither yea or no, you understand what
you have learnt. What understand you by the word Catechism?


L. An Instruction by way of question and answer.

Explication.

Catechism is originally a Greek word and signifies by word of mouth, by way
of question and answer the first instruction or institution of the more
ignorant in any kind of doctrine. In the Church of God the institution in the
Rudiments of Religion.


3. T. Is this like instruction necessary?


L. Yes, most necessary.


4. T. How prove you that?


L. Many ways it may be proved: by these two especially. First, God will have
all to understand and come to the knowledge of the truth of Religion 1 Timothy 2.
4.
Secondly, Catechizing is the readiest way to teach the grounds of Religion,
without which bootlesse it is to think to build up that truth, or to come to
the knowledge of it.


5. T. Say, for little Children it be necessary, and them more rude and
ignorant: yet for great eloquent and more knowing men and Women it may seem
not to be so necessary.


L. Yes for them too, if otherwise great and eloquent and knowing in humane
learning, they be not learned in the truth of God, as may be proved by the
example of Theopbilus a Noble man Lu. 1. 4.
, who disdains not the instruction of Luke* And Apollos an eloquent man Act.
18. 24. and 26.
that condiscends to the instructions and expositions of Aquila and Priscilla.


6. T. You said in your answer to our first question, that our chiefest care
ought to be to glorify God. How prove you that?


L. By that of St Poul 1 Cor. 10. 31.
, which intimates in all our doings our chiefest care of Gods glory.


7. T. Then next in your answer to our second question, to have that care and
show forth that glory, you said we ought to have zeal: How prove you that?


L. By the example of Phineas Numb. 25. 11.
, who by his zeal in slaying Zimri and Cosbi, that by their lewdness had
dishonored God, turns away the wrath of God from Israel: for which Verse. 12.
God gives him his Covenant of peace, testifying thereby the approbation of
zeal to set forth his glory.


8. T. What is zeal?


L. An earnest and great care that one has to do a thing.


9. T. Then again in answer to our third question, you said that even that
zeal was not enough to show forth that glory: but that we must have knowledge
too. Do you still hold that assertion?


L. Yes. And I can prove it too?


10. T. How can you prove it?


L. By that of St Paul to the Romans Romans 10. 2.
, where well it was that they had zeal of God, but it was not well enough
wanting knowledge.

Explicat.

Ignorance God cannot away with: though one may be zealous in his service, yet
truly to perform the service he must be knowing too: and therefore to direct
both that zeal and knowledge, that both may be right in the service, are we to
consider the works of God and the Word of God, both good rules to direct to
Gods glory.


11. T. How are the Works of God the rule?


L. The Psalmist shows it. Psalm. 19. 1, 2.



12. T. How do they declare his glory?


L. Why being a goodly and glorious frame, it shows the glory of the Workman
that made it, who was God.


13. T. You said in your answer to our seventh question that God would have his
works to glorify him, that we might be without excuse. How prove you that?


L. By that of St Paul Romans 1. 19, 20.
where speaking of the Gentiles that otherwise know not God, the Apostle
proposes (as a rule to prove his power and Godhead) the works of God, and so
that they might be without excuse, says he.


14. T. What means he by that being without excuse?


L. That so glorious a frame, that shows both the glory and goodness of God,
could not but condemn the wickedness and ingratitude of man.


15. T. But (though as to his condemnation this may make him without excuse) is
this a rule sufficient for his salvation?


L. No.


15. T. How prove you that?


L. By that of Paul to the Corinthians 1 Cor. 1. 21.


Explic.

The knowledge of God by the Creature, is that more weak and imperfect, and
may avail so as to set forth the glory of God, and make man without excuse as
to well or ill doing: but as to the atttaining of Salvation, he must have yet a
stronger and more perfect knowledge, and a better rule to go by then the book
of Nature, to wit, the book of the Scriptures, which is as you answered to our
Ninth question our certain ^^le to go by.


16. T. Well, but how prove you that to be the certain Rule?


L. By that of Isaiah Is. 8. 20.



17. T. Why, would God have the book of nature first, and then after the book
of the Scriptures to be thus the Rule?


L. That finding nature thus to direct to this truth, we might the better
believe the Scriptures.


18. T. You said In your answer to our eleventh question that the Scriptures
teach the knowledge of God and our selves. How prove you that?


L. Out of that of St Paul 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.



19. T. What mean you by that Inspiration of God?


L. The Dictates and directions of the holy Ghost.


20. T. What by Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instruction in righteousness?


L. The method the Scriptures teach to train up men to God and goodness.


21. T. What where he says, that the man of God may be perfect?


L. That nothing be wanting for his good and godly information.

Explic.

This shows the perfection of the Scriptures, that though Nature may inform
against evil, yet for perfection in goodness the knowledge of the Scriptures
is necessary, Nature being the more imperfect Rule, this of the Scriptures that
infallible.


22. T. You said in your answer to our fourteenth question, that God is a
Spirit. What proof have you for that?


L. That of Christ himself Jo. 4. 24.
.

Explic.

There are other Spirits, as the Angels, they are said to be spirits Ps. 104. 4
Heb. 1. 7.
, and there are spirits of Devils Ephesians. 2. 2. Re. 16. 14.
and the like: but they all with all things else but God are Creatures, that of
some other have their being Pro. 16. 4.
, God is the Creator that has his being of himself Ex. 3. 14.
. They all were made in time and finite substances, God is infinite Job 11. 7,
8, 9.
and Eternal^ Deu. 33. 27. Psalm. 90 2.
. They are changeable, as the Angels at first Jude. 6.
, the Devil ever since 2 Cor. 11. 14.
. But God is unchangeable Mal. 3. 6 Jam. 1. 17
. They are some good Heb. 12. 23.
, some evil Lu, 7. 21
: some lying 2 Chro. 18. 20, 21.
. seducing 1 Timothy 4. 1.
spirits, God is always and altogether good Ps. 52. 1.
true, righteous Ps. 19. 9.
. And the like other Attributes has God, as properly essential to him, as
that he is holy Ex. 15. 11.
, just 2 Chro. 11. 6.
, merciful Ex. 34. 6
, and the like other excellencies of good, that no other has but by donation
from him Ja. 1. 17.
.


23. T. You find in your answer to our fifteenth question that God made all
things. How prove you that?


L. Proofs there are sufficient for that in the whole Gen, 1,
first Chapter of Genesis.


24. T. How prove you that he made all good?


L. Why the same proof may serve for that too k. Genesis 1. 31



25. T. Can you thence as you answer to our eighteenth question prove that he
made us all at first good? when as the Prophet David says we are all evil
Psalm. 14. 1. 3.
.


L. Yes that I can.


26. T. Tell me how?


L. Why that last cited place Ge. 1. 31
says, God saw all that he had made, and that all was good.


27. T. But what is that all to us now?


L. We were then good in Adam that was then made, as afterward I answered to
your one and twentieth question, in him we became evil Romans 5* 18.
.


28. T. But is there no evil in us but that?


L. Yes: that is as the fountainhead of evil, called by some Original sin,
and as still whatever ill thoughts, ill words, and ill actions are as the
streams that flow from that fountain, and called actual sins. And thence is
it, as we answered to your nineteenth question that I said that in that our
first Parent Adams fall we are all evil, and for that subject to death Romans 6.
23.
.


29. T. How prove you that we are so evil?


L. God that tells nothing but truth, tells us so Ge. 6. 5.
.


30. T. How prove you that for that evil we are subject to death?


L. So says St Paul To. 6. 23.
.

Explic.

Where by Death is meant not only as the consequent of sin, the dissolution
of soul and body here, but as also the consummation of it, the damnation of
both hereafter. Which, however some in mercy by grace and Repentance may avoid
that fatal destruction, yet might be the just stipend of all the wicked
offspring of Adam, though living thousands of years after him; God no
otherwise dealing with them then as we use to do with Vipers, kill them not
only for the breed sake coming of a pestiferous generation, though otherwise
having as yet done no evil, yet for the ill they when occasion serves will
surely do. That issuing from that unsavory fountain cannot but be insipid
waters, so as though damned we have no just cause to complain of God,
receiving thereby but the stipend of our sin.


31. T. You said in your answer to our twentieth question that the last day,
the general Resurection of all mankind, they by grace renewed shall be blessed
in heaven, they that continue in sin shall be accursed in hell: What proofs
have you for that?


L. First, that they by grace renewed shall be blessed, that of Christ Mat. 25.
34.
, and that they that continue in sin shall be accursed, that also of him Mat.
25. 41.
.

Explic.

Where by Heaven is meant the joyful vision and enjoyment of God, and the
company of the blessed Saints and Angels professors of the Gospel of Christ.
And by Fire is meant not only Hell torments and the unwelcome company of the
Devil and his brood, Infidels and ill Livers that regarded not the Gospel of
Christ, but as it were trod underfoot the son of God: but also as torments yet
more fatal and insufferable, the for ever loss of Heaven and the blessed
vision of God and his chosen. No hell to an ingenuous mind being more horrid
then the loss of Heaven.


32. T. Well, then you say there shall be a Resurrection: what mean you by the
Resurrection?


L. After our departure hence and a dissolution of both soul and body, the
soul to the place appointed of God for it, and the body to the dust, that the
body shall again rise at the last day, and be united, every body to his own
soul to enjoy the good or the evil appointed for them.


33. T. How then say some as the Saduces, that Luke 20. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 12.
there shall be no Resurrection?


L. They are much mistaken, it is an Article in my Creed, to believe the
Resurrection of the dead: St Paul in that place 1 Cor. 15. 13. etc.
presently, has infallible Arguments for it.

Explic.

Resurrection is from a Latin word that signifies to stand up or arise again,
used diversely in the Scriptures, as sometimes for the immortal life Ph. 3. 11
, deliverance from danger 2 Cor. 1. 10.
, A new birth in Christ Col. 3. 1.
, which is a resurrection from sin to holiness and called Rev. 20. 6.
the first Resurrection: on which the second death, that is damnation, has no
power, and the like. B^t hereby is meant that deliverance up of the dead Rev.
20. 13,
which is a Resurrection (...) the dead bodies of all that dyed, to be judged
every man according to his works, at that great and general day the day of
judgment: a Resurrection of the flesh according to that faithful knowledge of
Job Job. 19. 26. 27.
that though dying, or by death made Worms meat, yet again in his Flesh, with
the very same eyes he then had he should again (meaning at this Resurrection)
^ee God


34. T. You say out of that of St Paul To. 6. 23
that the wages of sin is death, and in your answer to our one and twentieth
question that we all finned in Adam: How can we then be freed from the death of
sin?


L. Why that I told you in our answer to y^ar two and twentieth question, that
it is by Jesus Christ.


35. T. How prove you that?


L. Why, those places before cited To. 5. 18 1 Cor. 15. 22.
prove it.


36. T. All finned in Adam, and if all be made alive in Christ, then are none
subject to death.


L. True it is all finned in Adam, but they all that are made alive in Christ,
are only Believers, all that are made alive, are made alive in him, but they
all are only such as believe in him.

Explic.

Salvation in Christ is offered to all Mat. 11. 28.
though none lay hold of it but the chosen: when though he was a sufficient
satisfaction for all: yet was he efficiently satisfactory only for them Jo.
18. 9.
Where though but the chosen are saved, yet in that Salvation (though perhaps
but of a few in comparison of the damned) does mercy yet prevail against
justice: and more it is that one is saved by his merit, then that thousands dye
by their own merits. And that in as much as possible it is that all without
him may be damned, and though but one saved, that impossible is that salvation
of that one but by him.


37. T. You said in answer to our eight and twentieth question, that the
Articles of our faith are called the Creed: What mean you by that word Creed?


L. The sum of our Faith.

Explic.

Creed is an Appellative from a Latin word that signifies to believe: whence we
take the thus naming of the sum or symbol of our Faith, Creed. Which in sum
is distributed unto these three parts, as some divide: First, of God the father
and our Creation: secondly, of God the Son and our Redemp^ion: Thirdly of God
the holy Ghost and our sanctification. Other some make four parts of it, by
dividig this ^hird into two parts, making that of God the holy Ghost one, and
Gods holy Catholic Church, with the Articles that follow the other. Both
making up but the same in sum, and that as we have said, the sum of our Faith.


38. T. In your definition of Faith you said in answer to our four and
thir^ieth question that it is a certain and sole dependence on Jesus Christ.
How prove you that?


L. By that of St Paul Ephesians. 3. 12.


Explic.


Faith is diversely taken, as for Constancy and Fidelity in keeping promises To.
3. 3.
for the Doctrine of the Gospel Ga. 1. 22.
the profession of any kind of Religion To. 1. 8.
and the like. And is a persuasion or assent to any purpose. And in Scripture
is fourfold, 1. Historical, as is the Faith of Devils, they believe there is
a God Ja. 2. 19,
and tremble too, at the presence and and power of God, believe there is a word
of God, etc. but they beleeeve not he is their God, or that Word good for them,
etc. which like faith wicked men may have, and have no more faith nor hopes
then the Devils 2. Temporary Faith, a degree yet beyond that of Devils and
those wicked men, to assent to Gods truth for a time, but in time again to
fall away, typified by that Parable of the seed that fell in stony ground Mat.
13. 20.
3. Faith of Miracles, which is a persuasion that God will do miracles in the
now work of our salvation, which is a persuasion of ill men, and a perverse
generation are they that after so glorious a light of the Gospel, will besides
the promises of the Gospel now seek unto God for a Miracle Mat. 12. 38, 39.
. 4. Justifying Faith which is as you have said, a certain and sole dependence
upon Jesus Christ, an assent to God and his Word, that he is our God, and his
Word good for us, that in Jesus Christ we have peace with God, will without any
miracle by the sole guidance of his Word, not only believe, nor only believe
for a time, but will in this holy persuasion live and dye.

39. T. What faith is there meant?


L. Justifying faith.


40. T How prove you our salvation by Jesus Christ?


L. Because as we answered to your five and thir^ieth question, he bare o^r
sins.


41. T. How prove you that he bare our sins.


L. Out of that of St Paul Heb. 9* 28.
.


42. T. Why, could no other do i^?


I. No, no man else b^t the man Christ Jesus.


43. T. How prove you that?


I. By those two places of Poul 1 Timothy 2. 5. Romans 5. 6.
: both which places show him alone our Redeeme^, that he bare our sins, freeing
us from the guilt of them, which none others strength could do.


44. T. You said in answer to our six and thirtieth question, that sin is a
transgression of the Law: how prove you that?


L. By that of St John 1. Jo. 3. 4
.


45. T. What is that transgression of the Law?


L. A breach of Gods Commandments?


46. T. Where in consists that breath?


L. In committing what they forbid: and in omitting what they require.


47. T. You said the Commandments are ten in two Tables: How prove you that?


L. They are ten, as we read in the Law, Deuteronomy. 10. 4. and in two Tables in the
verse next before, or both together in Deuteronomy. 4. 13
that one verse or place q.


48. T. Where are they written or repeated at large?


L. In the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, where it is said, And God spoke, etc.
from the first verse of that Chapter down to the eighteenth verse.


49. T. What mean you by those two first verses, And God spoke all these, etc.
Are they part of the Commandments?


L. No: but they are the Pr^face to them.


50. T. What learn you from that Preface?


L. That God is the Author of them, and so they are Gods Commandments.


51. T. But God there speaks to the Jews and of their freedom from Egypts
bondage: what is all that to us?


L. Yes, it is spoken as to us too: that freedom from Egypts bondage by Moses,
being a Type of our freedom from sin by Jesus Christ.


52. T. Why, but will Christ have us keep the Commandments?


L. Yes, all that will testify the^r love to Christ, must keep the
Commandments Jo. 14. 15.
: all that will seem truly to know God, must by keeping the Commandments show
that knowledge 1 Jo. 2, 3.
.


53. T. Why, you said before that we are saved by Christ, and that he ba^e our
sins, and before that, that faith was a sole dependence upon him, as if that
and no more were requisite to salvation* and yet here again you say we must
keep the Commandments.


L. True it is, as the Prophet says, the just shall live by his Faith Hab. 2.
4.
: but see you what Faith, that is that fertile, no barren Faith, but that
emergent by works Ja. 2. 22.
: good faith that is lively and shows it self by doing good. For what says
Christ Mat. 7. 21.
, and how Mat. 23. 3.
does he upbraid those Hypocrites that pretend ^uch to faith, but show it not
by their works?

Explic.

Christ frees those that are his from the Curse and malediction of the Law, but
not from the Obedience. He bare our sins, not that we should live as we list
loosly i 1 Pet. 2. y. 24.
and lewdly, but holily and righteously And therefore even predestination unto
life by Jesus Christ, ordaines as to the end, so to the means that lead to the
end Ep. 2. 10
. We are not tied to the curse of the Law, that having finned we might not
despair of mercy in Christ: and we are tied to the Obedience of the Law that
we might not presume to sin and to be saved by him. And therefore well do you
answer to our fortieth question, that the Commandments teach (and may we add,
God expects our obedience of what they teach) our duty to God and our Neighbor.


54. T. How prove you, as you answer to our one and fortieth question, that our
duty twards God is to love him above all things?


L. Christ himself also says it Mat. 22. 37.
.


55. T. How, as you there answer to our there nex^ question, that our duty
toward our Neighbor is to love him as ourselves?


L. Christ himself also says it verse. 39.
.


56. T. Well, but you say in answer to our three and fortieth question, that
you cannot exactly keep them, but daily break some one or other of them. What
makes you think so?


L. Why, the Scriptures tell me so Ps. 14. 1. 3.
. and if we narrowly examine it our own Consciences may tell us so too.


57. T. But being as (you well say in answer to our five and fortieth
question:) our Rule prescribed of God, and that we cannot keep them as we
ought: How must we labor to vindicate our miskeeping of them?


L. Why, that I also told you in our answer to your there nex^ question, and
that is, by Repentance, which is as we said in answer to the next question to
that, hearty sorrow for sins past, and purpose of amendment of life for time
to come.


58. T. Whence learn you that?


L. Out of that of St Paul Act. 8. 22.
.


T. You cannot do of yourselfe: Tell me why you cannot.


L. It is the gift and goodness of God, as I told you, and we must pray for it?


59. T. Whence prove you that?


L. That it is Gods goodness out of that of St Paul To. 2. 4.
: and that we must pray for it, out of that of St Peter. Act. 8. 62.



60. T. Why, but St Peter there wills Simon to pray for forgiveness.


L. True: but we must understand that without Repentance no forgiveness. Luke
13. 3, 5.
And therefore he had need first pray for that. And that as we said being the
gift of God pray for it he must ere he can have it Mat 7. 7
.


61. T. You said in answer to our eight and fortieth question, that prayer is a
good mean to increase Faith: How prove you that?


L. Out of that we read Luk 17. 5.
: where we have a good pattern in the Apostles praying for it, and may show
prayer as said, that good mean.


62. T. Then next that the Sacraments be also a good mean: How prove you that?


L. Out of that of Paul k.

Explic.

There are besides these, means that might also be instanced in, as 1. holy
Fasting and humiliation L^. 5. 3.
. 2. holy feasting and thanks giving Es^h. 9. 17.
. 3. I i^^^ and religious vows Ps. 50, 14, ^
. The first when ^^nder some cross or affliction wanting some special
blessing Esth, 4, 16, etc,
. The second when in bliss and prosperity, having blessings to the full, or
freed by some great deliverances r Chro, 29, 10, etc.
. And thirdly upon mature deliberation still, as to resolve and vow to pray to
God by the first in the one, and to praise him by that second in the other, so
in this third to be sure to make performance Ps, 106, 12, 13, 14,
.


63. T. Then that you say in answer to our sixty and first question, there be
two Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord: Whence prove you
Baptism?


L. Our of the Gospel of St John Jo. 1. 26.
.


64. T. Whence the supper of the Lord?


L. O^t of that in Luke Luke. 22. 19. 20.
.

Explic.

Understand these to be Sacraments of the New Testament: and they two only
ordained by Christ, and them two in place of those two more material that
typified them in the old, to wit, Circumcision and the Passover. God being the
Author of both Heb. 1. 1
: both signs of Gods favor to his Church and chosen: and both that have both
a sign and the thing signified. True it is there were besides these diverse
Sacraments under the Law, and diverse from these under the Gospel, as that set
Sacrament of the Rainbow Gen, 9, 9,
: besides such as the Sabbaths Ex, 31, 13, 27,
, the Arc of the Covenant Ex, 25, 10, 22,
, washings Le, 14, 8
and the like, though rather Types then Sacraments: two, to wit, Circumcision
and the Pascall lamb being the two special ones, to both which succeeded
these two under the Gospel, to wit, Baptism and the Lords Supper: they
typifying Christ to come, these testifying Christ come.


65. T. You said in answer to our sixty third question that a Sacrament is an
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace: How prove you that?


L. by the same Testimony that I prove the Sacraments a good mean to increase
Faith Romans 4. 11.
, where Circumcision is said to be the outward sign or seal, righteousness
the inward grace, and the thing signified.

Explic.

The word Sacrament is a borrowed word, and derived foom a word that signifies
holy or consecrated, as performed by a holy or solemn Oath, or signifies a
Bond or oblation solemnized by an Oath, as was the compact between a Captain
and his Soldier, the Soldier by oath bound and promising fidelity to his
Captain. And so from that and the like signification this word was brought into
the Church of God to signify holy things: as the oath of fidelity Christian
Soldiers take to be faithful their Captain Christ, as these Sacraments are.


66. T. Wh^nce as you answer to our sixty fourth question, prove you Water to
be the o^tward sign in Baptism?


L. Out in that of the Acts Act, 10, 47,
.


67. T. And whence, as you next answer to the next, Remission of sin to be
the inward grace?


L. O^t of that in the Gospel Mar. 1. 4.
.

Explic.

The Sacrament of Baptism has its denomination from washing or sprinkling, as
with water, which is the outward sign, and signifies that as the body is
outwardly cleansed with Water or washing, so is the soul inwardly and
spiritually cleansed by grace in Christ's blood. And it is called the Sacrament
of initiation or entrance, or admission into Christ's Church, and therefore but
once to be received.


68. T. You said in your answer to our sixty sixth q^estion that believers are
to be baptized: How prove you that?


L. Out of that in the Acts Act. 8. 37, 38.
.

Explicat.

Infidels till converted are not to be baptized Act, 8, 12,
. And the Children of a Christian Parent is to be baptized Act. 2, 39,
: for they because within the Covenant) are also accounted Believers.


69. T. Whence as you answer to our sixty seventh question prove you bread and
wine to be the outward sign in the Lords Supper?


L. Out of that of St Paul 1 Cor. 11. 24. etc.
.

Explic.

This Sacrament has its Name of the Lords Supper, from the circumstance of
time, when instituted, which was at supper-time, when Christ with his Disciples
or Apostles having eaten the Passover, ate his last supper, and signifies, that
as the body is really refreshed and nourished with bread and wine, so is the
soul spiritually by Christ's flesh and blood. And it is called the Sacrament of
Nutrition, and therefore often to be received. Moreover Christ is therein pleased
to use a twofold sign, as some think the better by this Sacrament to imprint
in our minds the horrid usage in his death: as not only thereby signifying the
breaking of his body, but also the shedding of his blood for us, most certain
signs of his death. At the administration of this which Sacrament is to be
seriously noted the Action of the Minister about both, to be sure to put us in
mind of that his death, by breaking the bread and pouring out of the wine, how
much he was molested for us, how severely used: which might hint unto us the
more hatred against sin, the maine cause of that ill usage. And also both he
uses to signify the sufficiently satisfactory offerture of himself, that as
bread and drink is a sufficient and due nourishment to the body, so his body
and blood spiritually is a sufficient refection for the soul. That his blessing
the bread and wine, as thereby showing the blessing of God by the oblation of
his Son for us, by Christ his son in this Sacrament, and the offering of both
to the Communicants, the holy offerture of that blessing. Both which they are
to take, and to eat the one, and drink the other, as assured of the energie
of that blessing and oblation to Believers.


70. T. Why say you in answer to our sixty ninth question that Believers
baptized are they to receive this Sacrament?


L. Believers they ought to be that are admitted to either Sacrament, and order
requires they be first baptized.

Explic.

If Infidels converted, they may presently after Baptism, on the first
opportunity offered receive also this Sacrament. Though Children of Christian
Parents, (though when infants baptized) are not presently so to receive this
Sacrament, til come to years of discretion to know that they are believers.
Where under the Notion of believers we comprehend and understand the penitent,
them that know their misery by sin, and that but in Christ there is no remedy
for it, and by forsaking sins past, and resolving of amendment of life for time
to come, and understanding the doctrine of the Sacraments and the like,
testify their desire of like Salvation by Christ, by their receiving this
Sacrament.


71. T. You said in answer to our seventieth question, that Christ himself
instituted and ordained these Sacraments, How prove you it?


L. For the Sacrament of Baptism that of Christ Mat. 28. 19.
: and for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper that of Christ: before cited Luke
22. 19, 20.
.


72. T. Then next in answer to our seventieth and first question you said that
they to administer these Sacraments ought to be Ministers lawfully called
thereunto: How prove you that?


L. O^t of that testimony of Paul Heb. 5. 4.
.

Explic.

Aaron and the Priests were only ordained to offer sacrifices for sins, those
Sacrifices that were Types of these Sacraments: which none may administer but
them called as was Aaron and the Priests of God, which must intimate the
Ministers of Christ. Besides that as if giving forth the the Rule for it,
Christ bid them that preach the Gospel, go also and baptize Mat. 28. 19.
: and where St Paul says Ep. 5. 26.
, that Christ sanctifies the Church with the washing of Water by the word: as
if also intimating this order that only the Ministers of his word should
administer his Sacraments


73. T. You said in answer to our seventy second question that we ought to have
faith, and show forth, that faith works of faith, to pray, to receive the
Sacraments etc. that we may obtain salvation: How prove you that?


L. Out of that Act. 16. 30.
: where the Jaylors chiefest care is for that Salvation: when verse. 31.
Paul and Silas, that he might have it, bid him believe.


74. T. How prove you salvation to be next to Gods glory, the chief end of
man's endeavors, as you answer to our seventy third question?


L. Out of the Psalm Psa. 73. 24, 25.
, where David's hope was to be received to glory, which was to be saved: which
we must conceive, next to Gods glory his chiefest endeavor, as that of the
Fathers in the place before cited Act, 16.
, and by that comparison of Christ Mat. 16. 30.
.


75. T. Then as you answer to our there next question, how prove you that end
to be Eternal life?


L. Out of that place Jo. 5. 39.
, where the Jews search for Eternal life was their search for this salvation.
They might be assured here, that they might live with God hereafter, which
living with God is that eternal life, as we answered to that your last
question, and prove it by that of David in the Psalm before cited Psalm. 73. 24.
. By Glory there meaning Salvation as we have said, and by that Salvation the
happy end of the godly, that they shall see God and Christ 1 Jo. 3. 2.
, enjoy them Ps. 73. 24
, have fellowship and communion with them Jo. 17. 24.
, have in soul and body endless and everlasting, yea unspeakable,
incomprehensible peace and glory Mat. 25. 34. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
.


Further Instructions for the Teacher.
NOw between whiles sometimes, while thus expounding this Catechism, (instead
of those idle tales and lying legends many teach their Children and Servants)
may you do well to delight and also to profit your Learners, to teach them
some Stories out of the sacr^d Scriptures, which are stories of tr^th, and
whose applications will be much for edification in holiness and honesty. As
out of the Old Testament, either in words of your own, or by repeating the
Text it self, the Story of the Creation, Genesis 1. and 2 Chapt.

1, Story.
God in the beginning made the world of nothing, made man and all the things,
birds, bearts and the other creatures for the use and service of man his
chiefest creature: and all this in the space of six days: placing man in
Paradise* a pleasant Garden God made and planted for his use and exercise,
wherein he might solace himself to the glory of God, and his own good.

Applic.
Which teaches us the power and providence of God, his orderely disposing all
things, his mercy and goodness to man. His power that of nothing could make so
glorious an Universe as the World is: the Heavens beautified with those radiant
and resplendent spangles of Sun, Moon, Stars, and the like: the earth
replenished with all sorts of living Creatures. His Providence in his since
gracious government and preservation of the things thus made. His orderly
disposing of all things, that when in a moment he might as well have made all,
takes six days time to do it: as thereby showing himself a God of order, and
to teach us thus orderly to dispose of all our doings. And his mercy and
goodnesss to man, that all this good he makes for him, which cannot but stir up
our readiness to declare his glory.

Again you may tell the Story of man's fall, Genesis 3.

2 Story.
The Devil no sooner sees man in his prosperity, then under the shape of a
serpent he comes to Eve and tempts her that she might be a means to tempt her
husband to eat of the forbidden fruit. Which having done, he stirs up the
wrath of God, that he packs him out of Paradise and curses the ground for his
sake: that instead of the fertile crops of Corn and fruit (for the good and
nourishment of man) it with little labor of it self at first brought forth,
brings forth of it self now naught but thorns and thistles, and other noxious
weeds to his annoyance. So as he that with pleasure might have dressed his
Paradise, must now in the sweat of his face, and with much toil and t^ouble,
earne out of the earth his living.

Applic.
Which teaches us the ready solicitations of Satan, ever and every ways
laboring to undermine man's happiness: and how dangerous it is by any means
to be induced to sin. That sin is the bane of man's prosperous state, spoils
even his every good here, despoyles him of his glory hereafter.

Then again may you tell them the Story of Cain and Abels first Profession,
Genesis 4.

3. Story.
Adam the Lord and owner of all the earth had two sons Cain and Abel, whom he
breeds not up in ease and idleness, but makes the own his plowman, and the
other his sheepherd: Abell was a keeper of Sheep, and Cain was a Tiller of the
ground.

Applic.
Which teaches us the end of our Creation, that God sent us not into the world
to be idle, but to be busied in honest employments.

And thus of other Stories, as of Dinahs being ravished Genesis 3 4. 2. etc.
, which may teach Maids not to be gadders abroad. Of the 42 Children being
killed by the She-Beares 2 Kin. 2. 23. 24.
, which may teach Children not to mock. Of Isreal's revolt from Rehoboam 2 Chr.
10 16.
, which may teach young men not to be led away by the light counsellings of
young men, but to hearken to old men's sage advice, and the like.

Then out of the New Testament may you also tell them these like stories, as of
the birth of Christ. Mat. 1.

1. Story.
It pleased God when man had lost himself by sin, to send and make his own
Son man's Savior, to bear man's sin, to take upon him man's nature, and to that
end to be borne of a poor Virgin.

Applic.
Which may teach us the goodness of God to man, that will thus make his son
man's Savior, and his impartial regard of man, that though Lord of Heaven and
Earth, despises not the low estate of a poor woman.

2. Story.
Again, you may tell them the Story of Herod's destroying the Children, Mat. 2.

God had no sooner sent his Son into the world, then wicked Herod seeks to
kill him: who not certainly knowing where to find him, being concealed as he
conceived in some of the Coasts about Bethle^em, where he was borne, to make as
he thought sure work, sends and destroys all the children in those Coasts.

Applic.
Which may teach us what spite and malice wicked men have against God and
goodness: who to encompasse their ambitious designs will not spare the most
innocent blood.

Then again you may tell them the Story of Christ's being tempted in the
Wilderness, Mat. 4.

3. Story*
Jesus Christ having fasted forty days in the Wilderness, and being at the
last an hungered the Devil thinks thereby to get the advantage of him: and
although he were the S^n of God, and a most just and upright man, dares yet to
tempt him to sin, at his command to show for^h a miracle, to turn stones into
bread to satisfy that his hunger, knowing that he that could turn stones into
bread, co^ld at his own pleasure otherwise find bread to satisfy hunger,
without being beholding to any the Devils devices. Then he tempts him with
pride and covetousness: with pride setting him on a pinnacle of the Temple,
that he might cast himself down headlong, as who had the Angels at his his
command to preserve him: and then with covetousness^, promising him all the
kingdoms of the Earth and the glory of them, if he would fall down and worship
him who was but a Liar, and had not to do with those Kingdoms but by pretense
and usurpation.

Applic.
Which may teach us both how bold and intentive the Devil is to work our
ruin: that if he thus set upon the Son of God, much more will he seek to
ab^se the sons of men, and to that end seek to undermine our best purposes.

And thus of other Stories, as, of Ananias and his wife Sapphi^a's being
suddenly stricken down dead Act. 5. 1. etc.
, which may hint the danger of lying and collusion: Of Peter's execration of
Simon Magus Act. 8. 20. etc.
, which may teach or hint the danger of cove^ousnesse and hypocrisy: O^ Herod's
being eaten up of worms Act. 12. 23.
, which may hint the danger of pride and vain glory, and the like.

Nor may it be only th^s pleasant and profitable to instill in them good advice
by these like stories, but by select sentences of Scripture by little and
little to allure them to the love of God and goodness. As out of the Old
Testament Genesis 18. 18, 19.
where greatness seems to be consequent of goodness and godliness, and that
God will bless them whose children and household by living uprightly bless
God. Also Pr. 22. 6.
where that men in their old age depart not from godliness and goodness, is
that in their youth they were trained up in it.

Again Ecc. 12. 1
where the wise Preacher wishes as we say to take time by the forelock, and
betimes to inform in golinesse. And then that V. 13. 14
to be godly, and go by the rule of Gods Commandments is man's whole endeavors.

Then out of the New Testament, Mat. 6. 33.
that our first care Christ would have to be to be godly, and no doubt the
endeavors of our first years, as who secking first to be godly should not
miss any good, according to that of David Psa. 8 4. 11.
, who assures all good to the godly, as Christ makes goods the additions to
godliness. Also Jo. 14. 15
Christ would have us to testify our love of him, and to show it by keeping
his Commandments: which is by having faith, and works of faith, hope,
charity, and what other Christian virtues commanded by him. Again 1 Jo. 2. 1.
as if to prepare us for all these virtues, the Apostle warnes against all
vice, and under the salute or title, or appellation of Children, as if to show
we could not be too timely in a contest with them: the spirit of God Rev. 22.
14.
assuring heaven to the godly, blessedness as the right of their inheritance.

These and the like Expositions over, and these like more plain instructions
instilled into youth, for their further growth in godliness, may you next do
well, by yet larger expositions, to explain unto them the meaning of the Creed,
the ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer, with here and there some hints to
some useful Applications.

And first of the Creed.

A brief Exposition of the Creed.
THe Creed (though as some will have it the immediate dictates of the twelve
Apostles, however it be uncertain who were the first compilers of it) is the
most ancient sum of Christian faith received by the Primitive Church and
fathers: and though containing in it the pith and marrow of Gods promises in in
the Gospel, yet because no Canonical Scripture, in the exposition thereof it
behooves us out of the Scriptures to prove every article thereof, and to produce
still such places of Canonical writ, as shall infallably set forth the
substance and sum of it.

And first for the Creed in general, thus the sum of our faith, it behooves
first to prove the necessity of faith. And that do these Scriptures, as Habac.
2. 4. the last clause of the verse: recited Romans 1. 17. and Gal. 3. 11. and
further explained or exemplified Jo. 3. 36. and 1 Jo. 5. 10. By collation of
all which places, there is no living without it, no living as to please God Heb.
11. 6.
, without pleasing whom, even better were it not to be Mat. 18, 6.
. No, but this faith is it that justifies u^ before God Rom, 5, 1 Gal, 1, 15,
, sanctifies us before men Act, 15, 9, Gal, 5, 6
, is that by which we must live: in which we must dye: live we must by faith.
and that is when all we do, we do in faith, and when all we suffer, we suffer
in faith. And then dye we must in faith, and that first by weaning our selves
from an immoderate love of this world, secondly, by depending on the promises
of God, thirdly, by adhering to all helps may bring us to heaven, and
fourthly, in the pursuit of this adherence by no means to fall back or
faulter: but though perhaps at present seeing little or no good come, to hope
and go on still as faithfully assured of its coming Job, 13, 15, Ps, 30, 5,
.

These and the like places prove the necessity of faith. And being that faith
comes by hearing of the word To, 10, 17
of God, see we now next the symboll of faith it self, the Creed, and come we
by the test of that word to prove every the Articles thereof, and first of the

First Article, I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth:
which is also the first Part of it, wherein is to be proved,

1. That there is a God: 2. that he is a Father: 3. that he is Almighty: 4.
that he is Maker of Heaven and Earth: 5. that this must be our faith: and 6.
that this must be every particular man's faith.

1. For the first, that there is a God, (though none but fools Ps, 14, 1,
will deny his being) these like Scriptures prove: and as if the better to
work upon our capacities prove it by evident reasons. As by his works of
Creation To, 1, 20
, and Providence Heb, 1, 3*
where by the one we are to told he made e all things, by the other that he
preserves all things, which none b^t God can do. Where might be added the
Nature of the Creatures, Whose motion points at some still first mover, their
multitudes at some Unite: which again must needs be God, yea our own daily
experience that see his wrath emergent against the wicked, and goodness and
mercy eminent to the good and the godly.

Use. Which may teach the foolish and dull Atheist to lay by his stupid
infidelity, and confess with his mouth, what he durst but deny in his heart,
that there is a God: may teach men to live so, as if there were a God, godly,
and serve him as they ought both dutifully and duly.

Besides that these, like Scriptures and Reasons may prove not only that there
is a God, but also that there is out one God. However to back this assertion
have we also Gods own Testimony in these other like Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 4.
39. Isa. 45. 5. 1 Cor. 8. 4. and the like.

Use. Which again may instruct us against all filthy Idolatry, and them that
count ought else a. God beside him: may teach unity among our selves Act, 4, 32
, and our only sole salvation by him Is, 43, 11 To, 3, 30,
. When proving him thus to be but one, we need not press further or be driven
to prove that he is true, or good, all these like terms being convertible, this
one being every of those two, and they all three but as all one.

2 That he is a Father, con we that Scripture Isa. 9. 6.
where though speaking of Christ the Son of God, the Prophet calls him Son as
the second person in the Trinity, Father as the first person, both Father and
son together with the holy Ghost, though being but one entire substance, God,
yet thus are three distinct subsistences, one God, three Persons Mat. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7.
. That he is called Father, shows him the fountain love, to the other
persons, making the stream thereof flow to us in his Son, and so in him our
father, thus showing God not only good in himself, but good also to us: that
as it is evident by Christ's own testimony Jo, 20. 17.
, God is both his and our father, though we be but the adopted Sons of God Gal.
4. 4, 5.
, he only his natural son, yet have we with him this right to call him Father.

Use. Which should teach us to be imitators of Christ, that our brother, as he
did in all things, so we study how to please that our father, to do, as Christ
did, the will of God Jo. 5. 30.
, with David to delight in doing that his Will Ps. 48. 8
: to be as Paul would have his Ephesians be Ep. 5. 1.
followers of God as dear children. Children of the father who is good to all
Mat. 5. 45.
, to show our selves his children by our alike general goodness.

3. That he is Almighty, (besides that the frame of the most glorious Universe
Ps. 19. 1.
shows that the maker thereof can be no less then the Almighty God) God
himself declares Genesis 17. 1.
that his Almighty being. As also this clo^d of Scriptures, though being
infallible Scriptures, yet to prove the Almightinesse producing undeniable
Reasons. As Psa. 111. 3 and Psalm. 135. 6.
where God is said to do what he will: has might and power to do all things,
as Psalm. 115. 3. Mat. 19. 26. Ephesians. 3. 20. and the like.

Use. Which should bridle the stubborn heads of them, and check the b^^d
foreheads that will be questioning the will and power of God, as, can God do
this or this? or this or this God cannot do: when thus he can do what he will,
and they have not the wit to conceive, though the impudence thus to question
his doings. No, believing that he is Almighty, humbly bow Ps. 95. 6.
we should, labor to make him our friend by our obedience and not by our busy
impudence to provoke his indignation. As he is a Father, and thus an Almighty
God, to comfort our selves not doubting his fatherly care, nor distrusting his
Almighty power: but that as he is Father he will, and as Almighty can depending
upon him, safely Ps. 27. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
keep and defend us.

4. That he is Maker of Heaven and Earth the Scriptures are plain, as Genesis 1.
1. and Act. 14. 15. and the like. Where in these two thus cited one place
expounds the other, by heaven and earth in the first, meaning as in the second
both them, and whatever else contained in them, and as the whole first Chapter
of Genesis does more at large set forth. When though this Creation be ascribed
to the Father, think not therefore the ^on or the holy Ghost excluded, but that
according to the Rule in Divinity, In works without themselves, they all three
Persons work together, the Father by the Son through the holy Ghost, the Son
from the Father through the holy Ghost, the holy Ghost from both the Father and
the Son. This which Creation is made of no pre-existent matter, but made (as we
say) of nothing Heb. 11. 3.
but by the word of God, as Psalm. 33. 6. and 9. as also Psalm. 148. 5. And made
also good Genesis 1. 25 and 31.
, and in good order: the Heaven first and the things of Heaven, and after the
earth and its things. And that in six days Genesis 1. Ex. 20. 11.
and that and all for his glory y. That and all which he has since still
gloriousl Pro. 16. 4.
and graciously governed and preserved Act. 17. 28.
.

Use. Which may teach us, that as God is thus the Creator of all, the Author of
all our good, so that him also we ^agnifie and praise for it Ps. 8. 1. and 73,
25.
. That he made all of nothing, may teach us to consider his power, that
pleasing and faithfully depending on him, from nothing he can raise our poor
estate to something, can again displeasing him bring us to nothing or worse
then nothing, to the penalty of his displeasure 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7.
. That he made all in this good order, Heaven first, and after the Earth, may
teach us where first to set o^r affection, on Heaven Mat. 11. 33. Col. 3. 2.
: and then in six days that as well in a moment might have made it, to show
thereby not only his infinite power, but his mercy to us, by his example to
do things orderly, and with deliberation. Besides that as Father prettily
hints that his mercy, to show the superabundant goodness of it, when it should
cost the Son of God thirty years work to redeem lost man, that wrought out
the fabric of the world in six days: showing thereby the Redemption of man a
far greater work both of mercy and power then the work of that Creation. And
then making all for his glory, and then gloriously still and graciously
governing and preserving all, may teach us where still to refer our glory, and
how even with all dutyfull respect and reverence to attribute to him and
ascribe all glory, doing all still to that end he made all, to that his glory 1
Cor. 10. 31.
.

5. That this must be our faith, our certain, our assured persuasion, intimates
Heb. 11. 6.
not only our this belief of him as he is God, but our trust and confidence
in him as good Jo. 17. 3.
.

Use. Which may teach our discarding whatever trust or confidence on any other,
but that faithfully we have our whole and sole depend^nce on him. And 6.
Lastly, that this must be every particular man's faith, that we must not only
in Genneral^ make this symboll all our belief, b^t that every ones belief it
must be, that beforesaid assertion of St Paul may well hint Heb. 11. 6.
, where he says not, they, but he that comes to God must believe, etc. as if
saying that this must be the faith of every particular person: and where
showing who it is and how we must wait upon God, the just shall live by his faith
Hab. 2. 4.
, says the Prophet: His faith in particular, and not to depend on the general
faith of others. When then this I in the first Article, must be still carried
along to every of the other Articles, and as well as say in this first, I
believe in God the Father, etc. say also in the second, I believe in Jesus
Christ his only Son, etc. and in the third, I believe that he was conceived,
etc. and so of the rest.

Use. Which may teach our care of every particular persuasion, and not in hopes
of happiness to pin our faith on the implicit Creed of another: Every man to
seek the salvation of his own soul, and in Jesus Christ a justification by
his own faith.

From this exposition of the first part and article come we to the second
article, And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord t, which is now the second
Article of the Creed, and with the five that follow next, the second part of
it. Of which in their order, and first again of the first, to wit, the

II. Second Article, And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord: where now the
maine ob^ect of this Article, with all the rest that follow in this Part, is
Jesus Christ: when in this Article are offered to o^r consideration, 1 Titles
of office as he is Jesus, Christ, 2. Of dignity as only S^nne, 3. Of dominion
as our Lord.

1. As to his titles of office, by Jesus, is meant that he is a Savior, so
called of the Angel before he was borne of the Virgin Mat 1, 1.
testified to be so after his birth 1 John 4. ^4.
yea such a Savior, as there is none other such but he alone Act. 4. 12
yea that he that not only can, but will, as said the Angel, save those that
are his, his people, our faith in him making us his people: and every ones
particular persuasion making him every particular faithful man's Savior Joh.
19. 25.


Applic.
Which may teach us first to believe the Angels report Lu. 2. 10.
that we have cause of joy in this Jesus: that when by sin we h^d lost our
selves, he saves us Mat. 18. 11
through faith, by his free grace Ep. 2. 8.
and then being no other then he could do it, Jesus Christ, who as says this
Article is also Christ, etc. how horrible a thing was sin, and how careful we
should be to forsake sin. Then by Christ is meant an^oin^ed, and is the same in
Greek as that M^ss^^h is in H^brew Jo. 1. 41.
Now anointed of old were Kings 1 Samuel 10. 1. and 16. 11.
, Priest Lev. 8. 12. 1 Chr. 29. 22.
and Prophets 1 King. 19. 16.
They that were anointed all were anointed with material Oil by men, but he
of God, with the spiritual Oil of gladness above all Ps. 45. 7.
. Not by pouring out the material O^le, but spiritual gifts and graces Is. 61.
1.
And that as a King Luke 1. 32.
j^stly to govern his Church and chosen Ps 45. 6.
, to fight for them his friends verse. 3.
and to subd^e his and there enemies Col. 1. 13.
Then as a P^iest to intercede with God Heb. 1. 25.
and make at onement for us Romans 5. 11.
And then as a Prophet to teach and declare Gods will and doctrine Joh. 4. 34.
and 7. 36.
. And that by his word, the sum as 'twere of all his Prophesies Ep. 2. 17
. Which offices of Kings, Priests and Prophets, some of old had one, as Saul he
was a King: Aaron he was a Pri^st: Eli^h he was Prophet. Some had two of them,
as Melchizedeck he was a Priest and a King: David he was a Prophet and a King:
Jeremy he was a Priest and a Prophet. No one, as Christ, was all three; King
Zech. 9. 9
Priest Ps. 110. 4
, and Prophet Act. 3. 22.


Applic.
Which that his Kingly power may be a terror and astonishment to the wicked, a
comfort and encouragement to the godly, that God fights against the one Exo.
14. 13.
, defends and supports the other verse. 25.
.

Then his priestly office may encourage us to lay fast hold of our Christian
profession Heb. 4. 14.
as being assured of grace by him ver. 16.
And then that his prophetical office may teach our hearing of him, and
adhering to him, it being not only comfortable to do so, but dangerous if we
do it not Act. 3. 23. Heb. 2. 21.
The hearing of, and adhering to whom is our hearing of, and adhering to his
Word and Sacraments, by the administration of his Ministers: they being as St
Paul says 2 Cor. 5. 20.
the Ambassadors for Christ: and the despising of whom is no less then the
both despising and despiting of Christ: yea of God himself Luke 10. 16.
Whose anointing has yet a further reach, the faithful thereby participating
of both the virtue of his graces Act. 11. 26
having grace Jo. 1. 16.
called Christians c, and dignity or his person, made also Kings and Priests
Rev. 1, 6,
As Kings by him to rule over their own lusts: as Priests through him to offer
up unto God all those Christian sacrifices of praise Heb. 13. 5.
, prayer Psa. 141. 2.
, thanksg^ ving Psalm. 51, 14.
, and the like. And as Prophets too by his word to teach and admonish our
selves and others Deuteronomy. 6, 6. Col. 3, 16,
. Thus of his tit^es of ^ffice.

2. By those words or that title, his only Son, is to the full set forth the
Title of dignity, as God, the second person in the Trinity. That these Titles
of dignity do of due belong unto him, have we testimonies to show both, his
Son Ps. 2, 7,
his only Son Jo. 3, 16,
And for the dignity by Son is showed him to be as the Father is God, by only
Son to be that his Son by nature, coeternall with him, and not as good men and
Angels are by creation and adoption.

Applic.
Which may teach our belief of him as of the only God, and our thanks as the
only Savior, that having him we have all good Romans 8, 32,
, and wanting him have nothing at all but evil Jo. 15, 5, 2 Cor. 3, 5
. Labor we then to become one in grace with him, and then may we become sons
of God with him Jo, 1, 12, Gal, 3, 26,
. Thus much of his Titles of dignity.

3. Of this Title of Dominion a word or two in those words of the Article that
remain, Our Lord: That he is Lord, let that his Lordly title over the world
show Lu, 1, 33
, as to whom belongs the power Mat, 11, 27,
, and service Ps, 119, 91,
of all: and then Our Lord, how may our creation Ps, 110, 3. Cor. 1, 16.
and redemption Lu, 1, 68 Col, 1, 15,
show it? yea that we are his by Gods free gift Psalm, 2, 8,
: yea by the willing service of the godly Act, 9, 6,
. They are his members and subje^ts acknowledging him as their head and
Sovereign Col, 2, 10.
.

Applic.
That he is thus Lord of all, how may it amate any that confront him? or over
masterly are pro^d of any their own Dominion? That he is Our Lord, how teach us
the happiness of all that pio^sly depend upon him Psa, 96, 10, Luk, 15, 17,
? how by holiness Luke 1, 75,
dispose those all to that pio^s dependence 2 Samuel, 3, 18,
? and thus much be spoken of the second Article, come we to the third.

III. Third Article, Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin
Mary: which with the next that follows sets forth the Humiliation of Christ:
and the three next to that his Exaltation. Of which Humiliation two steps or
degrees we have in this Article, and five in the Article following: as in this
first that he was conceived by the holy Ghost: 2. that he was bo^^e of the
Virgin Mary: and theu in the next 3* that he ^^ff^^ed under Pontius Pilate: 4.
that he was Crucified: 5. that he was D^ad: 6. that he was Buried: and 7. that
he d^scended into Hell. To go on with this Article, that he was humbled, yea
humbled himself, the Scriptures Ph, 2, 8,
show, and by this first step or degree conceived by the holy Ghost, the
Scriptures make an Angel Mat. 1, 20* Luk, 1, 35,
the witness: thereby to teach it no power of man, but the power of God, that
could make God man: and that by descending yet by the second step, borne of the
Virgin Mary, as the Scriptures also prove Is, 7, 14. Luk, 1, 31, Gal. 4, 4.
. Though of the holy Ghost conceived, which was a glorious conception, yet far
beneath was it the dignity of the Lord f^lory Ps, 24, 10
to be conceived, but that o^t of wisdom he would humble himself to the
Conception, and that out of love to be thus borne: that by that Conception he
might be free from sin, pure, to purge the impurity of our conception Ps, 51, 5
: and by this birth like unto us in all, man, sin only excepted Heb, 4, 15,
. And borne of a Virgin also to evade the pollution of natures impurity: and
not only so, but thereby to show also the power of God in that too beside the
co^rse of nature to produce so glorious a birth. And then borne of the Virgin
Mary, a woman though poor, yet of the Lineage of David, betrothed to a Man of
that Lineage Mat, 1, 20, Luk, 2, 4,
.

Applic.
He humbled himself as if thereby to teach us to be humble Mat, 11, 29,
. And first in that glorious manner, as if thereby to teach the glory of
Humility Luk, 14, 11,
. Then by many an hard ta^ke thus humble he was for us, that we might undergo
any hardship for him, to be content in what ever state, so as to serve him Ps,
4, 12,
. And humbling thus himself f^r us, that we like hi^ Ph^, 2, 5,
should be humble to each other Jo, 13, 14
. Whose thus Conception shows him God, and that his birth man: thus God and man
in one Person, without confusion of both natures, without mixture of either:
but both perfect God, and perfect man. One person that had the power of God To,
1, 4,
, and the parts of man 1 Pet, 2, 24, Mat, 26, 38,
. The power of God to preserve man for God, and the parts of man's soul and
body for man's soul and body to present man unto God. Without either of which
power or parts or either of them he could not have been the Redeemer. That he
was borne of a Virgin that was poor shows the riches of his grace and power so
to enrich our poverty 2 Cor. 8, 9,
. Then of a Virgin betrothed, to honor marriage, as in token of that honor at
a marriage showing his first miracle Jo, 2, 11,
. And then a Virgin a woman of the Lineage of David and betrothed to a Man of
that Lineage, as if thereby to show, that greatness has not all the
pre-eminence with God, but that the poor also may have right to an inheritance
with him. In both this conception and birth may we read lessons of the great
love of God, that would have our salvation wrough in this manner, in this
exhibition of Christ doing all that might be done for his chosen, as he did for
his Vineyard Is, 5, 4,
, leaving undone nothing that might be done for them. Nor Christ leaving any
step untrod, any degree not undergone, whereby to effect man's salvation, as in
this article not only by these two steps of life, but as in the next, steps he
out by five degrees of death for him. Of which next, and thereof in this.

IV. Fourth Article, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, he descended into Hell. 3. That he suffered under Pontius Pilate, as we
said the other two were steps of life, so may we say these two be steps of
death. And this is his first step to it, those two others of life being little
less then presently an exhibition to death, from his Cradle to his Cross
under-going still as it were deadly sufferings. That he trod every these weary
and wof^ll steps, the Scriptures also show as how 1. he suffe^^d (not only
desertion of God Mal, 27. 46,
, but also Jo, 15, 20,
many other tyrannous persecutions of men, but this worst of all) under Pontius
Pilate 1 Timothy, 6, 13,
as that 2. He was Crucified Mat, 27, 35,
, 3. dead Jo, 19, 33,
, 4. buried Verse, 42,
, and 5. He o Act, 2, 27,
descended into Hell p. 1. Suffered many as we said tyrannous persecutions of
men as his flight from Herod Mat, 2, 14,
, the Pharisees reviling Mat, 9, 34,
and way-laying Jo, 7, 32,
him: yea his own Country men's contemning of him Mat, 13, 54, 55,
, but this worst of all under Pontius Pilate, the true Messiah suffering under
a false Judge, the King of Heaven under an earthly petty President. And that no^
only betrayed by a Disciple Mat, 21, 47, 48,
, apprehended as a Theife verse, 55,
, accused, arraigned, condemned, yea crucified as a most accursed malefactor,
crucified because to suffer the most accursed death Deuteronomy, 21, 23.
, and that to redeem us from the curse Gal, 3, 13,
: crucified because the most shameful Heb, 12, 2,
, most painful Act, 5,
death, and that to redeem from shame and pain Is, 53, 5,
. Thus ere he dies for us enduring most bitter torturings, as the piercing Ps,
22, 16,
hands and his feet, distention and nayling them to the Cross, and the like:
and that to turn away our tormentings, and cross out the guilt of our sins
Col, 2, 14,
. Also 3. dead, to satisfy Gods justice for man's sins Rev, 1, 5
, and confirm to Believers the promises of God in the Gospel Heb, 9, 16,
. Then 4. buried, to ratify that confirmation, that as, when Jonas was cast
into the Sea, then and not till then did it cease raging Jon, 1, 15
: so Christ being buried, then and not till then is Gods wrath appeased Mat,
12, 40,
. Jonas cast into the Sea to appease its raging, so Christ into the grave to
appease Gods fury. And then 5. He descended into Hell, that is, being dead and
buried (when as to our redemption he had sealed its consummation) as if to show
his lowest estate, and that come he was to the bottom of these steps or
degrees, he was in the Grave under the power of death and darkness until the
third day, although in the garden Mat. 26, 38, 39,
and on the Cross Mat, 27, 46,
having suffered the most hellish pains, he yet by this thus continuance in
the grave, would consummate all his sufferings, and for a time be Captive, that
after he might appear the more glorious Conqueror over Death and Hell for ever.

Applic.
That first he suffered, Christ the Son of God, that he should be driven to
such an exigency for man's sin, may not only show the certainty of his
salvation, but also the heinousness of man's sin. And therefore never think
it much what we suffer for sin, or think God auste^e that he will not spare
us, that would not spare his own Son for us. No, but that he thus suffered
for us, the just for the u^just, as says the Apostle 1 Pet, 3, 18.
, lets accuse our selves as the cause of our sufferings, and beware of sin,
that may yet cause us to suffer. Then that under Pontius Pilate he suffered,
may show us the certainty of our Messiah the Shiloh Jacob speaks of Genesis 49.
10.
, (meaning Christ) which was not to come until the Scepter was departed from
Judah, which was now in Pilates time, Jury being become tributary to Rome, and
he a President under Caesar. Then secondly, that he suffers thus, crucified,
the most dreadful, dolorous and dismal sort of sufferings, may teach us how
hard a matter it was to reconcile us to God, and what an hateful and horrid
thing sin is. Then thirdly, that he dies, the Son of God for the sins of man,
may teach us to leave our man sin, and seek unto that our Savior God: to be
as those two Disciples were Jo. 1. 37
, never satisfied till we had found Christ: be as the woman of Samaria was,
having found him, never at rest till we have proclaimed him to others Jo. 4.
28. 29.
, till we have made him ours, and crucified our old man of sin in these
sufferings of this new Man of God Romans 6. 6. Gal. 2. 20.
. Then fourthly that he was buried, may teach us having crucified our sins
with his sufferings, where to bury them in his death Romans 6. 4.
. And to that end by faith and repentance to beat down, to kill in us
whatever reigning contagion of sin verse. 12.
. Christ dying to that end that we should not live to our selves in our sin 2
Cor. 5. 15.
, but unto him in holiness of life, in upright and honest conversation Luke 1.
75.
. And then fifthly that he descended into Hell, may teach us that he has left
unassayed no mean of our salvation, but having lost heaven by our sin, and
merited hell, he by his merits will bring us even from hell to heaven. And
therefore should we leave unassayed no means may make us forsake sin, but by
holiness and righteousness in him make us still fit for heaven.

Disciples, it is true, there are many about this part of this Article, and many
will not have Christ descend to this lower step of hell, the place of the
damned, but that he went only to the grave, the place of the dead. But knowing
Christ to become the Conqueror of hell wherever it is, and to have got the
mastery over death and Devils, we may rather modestly believe the truth of this
part of the Article, then curiously enquire into the manner of it: believe
Christ's descent, though not knowing how he went thither, and that whether or no
while his body was in the grave his soul went into the place of the damned as
some think, or however otherwise, whither in soul or body or both, or
neither, went thither makes no matter, as to our knowledge of the manner, it
being a matter plain enough that he became victorious over hell, that both
death and Devils were made subject to him 1 Cor. 15. 55.
, and not only so, but by that his Conquest over both made us all Conquerors
ve^s. 57.
. Witness his most glorious Exaltation, and steps by which he ascend^d in the
next three Articles, in which are four degrees of it, first in the next which
is the fifth Article, secondly in the sixth, and first more in the seventh. Of
which exaltation now next, and thereof first, the first step thereof which is
in the

V. Fifth Article, The third day he rose again from the dead. Where is to be
noted what now next he did, 1. rise again, 2. when, the third day, and 3.
whence, from the dead. That first he rose again, the Scriptures teach and that
too according to the Scriptures. When, the third day 1 Cor. 15, 4.
. And thirdly also whence, from the dead verse. 12.
. He first thus rose again, as by those steps of his Humiliation abased to
purchase our salvation, so by these of his exaltation raised to apply that
salvation to us Romans 4. 24.
. And as by that last step in his Humiliation having to the full satisfied for
our sin, so in this first step of his exaltation begins he to show his glory,
for till thus raised are we not fully happy, nor he fully glorified Jo. 7. 39,
: the full of our happiness consisting most in that his glory, who thus rises
again as evidence that he has both satisfied for our sins and vanquished
death, and that we also shall rise in him To. 6. 4.
from both sin Romans 8. 11.
and death 1 Cor. 15. 17. and 20.
Then secondly, the third day he rose again, nor sooner, nor later, no sooner
because they might see he was truly dead, no later because they might see his
power over death. And then thirdly from the dead he thus rises to make good
that his saying Jo. 2. 19.
that he would destroy the Temple, meaning his body, by death, and three days
raise it up again, meaning this his third days resurrection from the dead.

Applic.
That first he rose again, may teach us that faithfully applying to our selves
his merits, nor death, nor Hell shall detain us, but that in him we may be
happy, perils and persecutions shall not for ever oppress us, but though for a
while by them bearing the marks of Christ 2 Cor. 4. 10.
, yet this rise of Christ shall raise us from them verse. 14.
. The grave shall not for ever detain us 1 Cor. 15. 22. 1 These. 4. 10.
, but in this his Exaltation shall we ^^se also thence. Then secondly that the
third day he rises, nor sooner, which may teach us not to despair, but
patiently wait the salvation of God, that though a while we may be miserable or
afflicted, yet in the end we shall be blessed. And then that no later he stays
before he rises, may teach us not to distrust that salvation, but waiting Gods
appointed time, which though unknown to us, yet this to know, that salvation
shall come Ps. 30. 5.
. And then thirdly, that from the dead he rises, what comfort may that
administer, that our weakness buried in his death shall be strengthened by the
power of his resurrection 1 Cor. 15. 43.
?

See we next those two steps of his Exaltation how in the

VI. Sixth Article, He 1. ascended into heaven and then 2. sits on the right
hand of God the father Almighty. He first ascended into Heaven, that he might
not only on earth by his resurrection testify his power, but by his ascension
also into heaven creat also our happiness: and that, there to prepare a place
for us Jo. 14. 4
, to send and shower down his gifts and graces on us Jo. 7. 39, and 17. 7. Ephesians.
4. 8, 11, 12, etc.
. And then secondly he sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty:
where by Gods right hand is meant, not that he has hands or feet, or the like,
who is a Spirit Jo. 4. 24.
, but as spoken after the manner of men, who by right hand mean all manner of
pre-eminence Phi. 2. 9. Ep. 1. 20. 21.
which now Christ has at Gods right hand, meaning thereby his Ex. 15. 2
power Ps. 118. 15.
, his goodness and glory Psalm 16. 11, 110, 1, Mat. 28, 20. Heb. 1.
, And there so sits to manifest the full of man's Redemption Heb. 10. 12.
. Not only at first by his Humiliation to plead for us, but by this Exaltation
on this step of judicature continually to plead for us Romans 8. 38. Heb. 7. 15.
and
. Thence to give out writs and mandats for the managing of his Church and
chosen, by the power of his spirit more fully ruling in the hearts of his
people Joh. 14. 16.
: and by the rule of his Word speaking by that spirit Heb. 4, 12.
: by both that Word and Spirit drawing unto himself his chosen, as
fore-prophefied of him Jo. 15. 11.
that he should do, as afterward Act. 2. 41. and 47.
is the doing testified. When though in his humane nature he ascended into
heaven Mat. 26. 11. Act. 7. 56
where he is thus in power on Gods right hand, yet is he with us too, though
not as before in Body Jo. 16. 28. Heb. 8. 4.
, yet more fully then before in Spirit Mat. 28. 20. Jo. 14. 18. 26.
.

Applic.
That first he ascended, and that to shower his gifts and graces on us, may
administer our careful attendance on him, that our hearts be prepared happily
to entertain those gifts and graces: and that by obedience to his Word and
Spirit, that we by sin grieve not the one Ep. 4, 30
, nor pervert the other Col. 3. 16.
That he ascended into Heaven the place of all bliss and true happiness, may
prompt when ever he shall please to call for us, our both readiness and
willingness to be with him, yea our desire to be with him Ph. 1. 23
: and in the mean time to count him most dear, to have faithful dependence
on him Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
. Then secondly that he sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty,
and that to manifest the full of man's Redemption, to intercede for us in
heaven, by his word and spirit to govern us upon earth. How in this advocate
may we have Confidence Jo. 14. 13.
, that not only Heaven at last shall be our home Jo. 14. 3.
, but that here till we come at that home hereafter, have we his word and
spirit to direct us? which may teach us not to faint under crosses, nor lanch
out into carelessenesse, but to take to us these arms of God to draw us to
God, such as the preaching of his word Romans 10 17.
the blessed influence of good motions of his spirit, that we attend the one by
our diligent hearing of it, and quench not 1 These. 5 19.
the other by our contempt or carelessenesse: Seein Christ at Gods right hand,
humbly to submit our selves to Christ. Psa. 2. 6, 11. 12.
And as he gloriously overcame death and hell and the Devil, and those
whatever enemies of ours that erst surprised us, so that we be careful to
overcome those whatever our sins and lusts may without this our care surprise
us. This by the holy spirit of God is still commended to our care Romans 6. 12. 1
Jo. 2. 1.
. And but by our conquest over this, no promise of being happy with Christ Mat.
19. 28. Rev. 3. 21.
Thus of these two steps of Exaltation, the fourth and last, of which lets now
next see as in the

VII. Seventh Article, From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead: which Article offers to our consideration these four particulars, as
first, That there shall be a judgment, 2. That he (Christ) shall be the Judge,
3. the place whence he shall come to b^come this Judge, from thence, to wit,
Heaven, where he sits at Gods right hand: and fourthly (when as a cloze to this
part of the Creed, and explaining this Article, consider we may the Manner of
the Judgment, what it is, and the proceeding of it,) whom it is he shall judge
quick and dead. 1. There shall be a judgment, and Christ, though yet deferring
his coming, shall yet thus come to judge. It Is not the mocks 2 Pet, 3, 4,
of scorners shall trustrate it, but this reason were it no other were enough
for it, that Gods justice to both good and bad may require it Eccl, 12, 13, 14,
Luk, 16, 25, 2, Rom, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 12 Th, 1 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
. But besides not only Scriptures backed thus with reasons: but they also
infallible which we must rather believe then question, evidence the same truth,
that there shall be a judgment Dan, 7, 13, 14, Mat, 10, 15, and 12, 36, Act.
17, 31, 1 These, 4, 16, Heb, 9, 21,
. 2. Christ shall be Judge, the same that ascended shall descend Act, 1, 11,
, and to this purpose to judge, as who has now all power thereof Jo, 5, 22,
Act, 10, 42,
. 3. From Heaven he shall come Mat, 26, 64, Phil, 3, 20,
: that place whence implying a place whither, which though uncertain where,
yet must conclude that it must be on the earth: there where we have done good
or evil, to have this last sentence. But the Scriptures being silent, let us
not press the knowledge of the place, but rather duly prepare our selves
wherever and whenever it be, that also being uncertain, I mean so as to us
uncertain, but certainly known to God Mat, 24, 26, Act, 17, 30,
that Christ shall come to judge, the quick and the dead: which is our fourth
note in this Article. The quick, they that 1 Cor, 15, 51,
then shall be found alive, and the dead, all them sleeping in their dust from
the first man Adam to the last that ever shall dye: all others whoever Rom, 14,
10,
, all the world Act, 17, 31, 2 Cor, 5, 10,
. And all in this manner shall then appear in Judgment, where shall be Christ
the Judge sitting on his throne of glory, with his Assessors the twelve
Apostles Mat, 19, 28,
on theirs, assenting to his glory and judgment. Then the Parties to appear at
this judgment, all Natitions Mat 25, 31, 32,
. When this shall be the proceeding of it. The cause shall be pleaded, the good
and the bad severed one from another verse, 33,
. When they that have done good shall go into life everlasting verse, 34,
: they that have done evil into everlasting fire verse, 41,
.

Applic.
That first there shall be a Judgment, a general Judgment of all at the last
day, may teach us all carefullnesse in faith and holiness to prepare for it,
to rep^nt us of our sins done to others ^uk. 12. 58.
, not to repine at injuries done unto us by others 1 Cor. 4. 4.
: as knowing there is a righteous Judge shall take due cognizance of both,
which is Christ. When secondly, that he is the Judge, labor should we to be
found in him, as without whom all is but as loss Ph^. 3. 78
, and but in him no life at all Romans 8. 1.
. To avoid whose severer sentence and happily to hand his milder one, see we
that we displease not this Judge, but labor we in all we may to please him 2
Cor. 5. 10.
. That thirdly, Christ shall certainly come from heaven, though uncertain it
be where he shall judge, may prompt us to prepare for him, when and wherever he
comes. From that uncertainty of his coming gathering that this is our certain
duty at all times to look for his coming, patiently to wait for that his
coming Hab. 2. 3.
. Then fourthly, that come he shall to judge quick and dead, may hint us the
impartial proceeding at this Tribunal, when now there will be no excuse of
appearance, no shifting off this appearance, but that all shall appear. Let
then all duly prepare for it. Labor to be of the number of the godly, who then
shall be called to glory, and be careful not to be of the number of the
ungodly shall then go into condemnation: which may teach us by well living to
love the presence of Christ, who then shall present us to this glory, and not
by ill living to incur that condemnation: but as of fire the tormenting Agent
to be as much afraid of doing or committing sin the cause of this torment,
as of running headily into the fire the tormentor.

Come we now next to expound the third part of the Creed, which some make all
the Articles following, othersome only that one that next follows which is the

VIII. Eighth Article, I believe in the holy Ghost: where is to be considered
these two particulars, as first what or who the holy Ghost is, and then
secondly, what we must believe as touching the holy Ghost. As to the first, The
holy Ghost is a Spirit as God is, and is even the same or that very God that is
a Spirit Jo. 4, 24,
, is the third Person in the Trinity, distinct from the other two, also
distinct persons, Father and Son, a real subsistence, though one be the
substance of all three, and that God Act. 5, 3, 4. 1 Jo. 5, 7,
. He is called Spirit because of his spiritual being, not that more a Spirit
he is then or Father or Son, but that spired or breathed he is by them both,
and breathes in the hearts of Gods chosen. And holy he is called not that
properly he is more holy then any of the rest of the Persons, (for they also
have this like Title or attribute of holy, both the Father Jo, 17, 11,
and the Son Act 4, 30
are termed holy, yea men 2 Pet, 1, 21,
, women 1 Pet, 3, 5,
, Angels Mark, 8, 38,
have sometimes this Epithet of holy, but that his proper office it is to
sanctify and make holy 1 Cor, 12, 3, and 11
, by him to acknowledge Christ, of him to receive what ever gift or grace he
has, he rules Act, 2, 4,
, he leads Romans 8, 14,
, he regenerats Mat, 3, 11,
, he teaches Jo, 16, 13,
, he comforts Act, 5, 41,
, he confirms Jo, 14, 16.
. And as he is this all, so 2. this all must we believe, this ought to be every
particular man's Creed, as of Father and of Son, so also of the holy Ghost, I
believe, must be every ones Profession, of every one of them, of this third
Person the holy Ghost, as well as of the first or second Father or Son, to
believe as we have said a distinct person a true God, equal to both Father and
Son, though a distinct subsistence, another person, yet for substance the same
God: though proceeding from Father and Son, all three one God from whom all
good comes Jam, 1, 17,
, yet as holy Ghost the third Person, the distributer and dispenser of that
good, as of knowledge 1 Cor, 2, 12.
, utterance Act 2, 4.
, love, c Call. 5, 22.
joy, peace d, and the whatever like gifts and graces holy men are endued with.

Applic.
That first the holy Ghost is thus God, as God let us love and honor him, by
faith and obedience make our selves fit Temples for him 1 Cor. 6, 19.
, by sin not to grieve or reject him 1 Cor. 3. 16. Ephesians. 4. 30.
. And then secondly, that he is the Author of hol^nesse, may teach us,
faithfully to acknowledge that Author, not to any power of our own, but to him
to ascribe the working of it by the energy of his word and working to accost
still our Christianity, to come to Christ by him 1 Cor. 12, 3.
, by them both to God 1 Jo. 4. 12, 13, 14 15.
. And thus much of the third part: the fourth and last follows in the
following Articles, of which next.

Or otherwise, we may consider this Creed (being as says a Father the Rule how
to order our faith concerning God and the Church of God) as divided into these
two Parts first of God, secondly of the Church of God. 1. Of God that (as
already explained) there are three persons and but one God: 2. Of the Church of
God, we are now next to explain that next unto God the Father of blessings
ought we to fix our Faith on the Church of God, as being the fruitful Mother
that brings forth Children unto God. When now in this Part are to be
considered, first the Church it self, secondly the blessings God bestows upon
it. That Church, as in the first clause of the ninth Article, those blessings
as in the lat^er clause, and the three following Articles. Two of those
blessings, to wit, first the Communion of Saints, in the latter clause of the
ninth Article, and secondly the forgiveness of sins in the tenth, being
blessings of God to his Church in this life: and the other two, to wit, first
the Resurrection of the Body in the eleventh Article, and secondly the life
everlasting in the twelfth and last, blessins in the life to come. Of all which
next in their order, and first of the

IX. Ninth Article, The holy Catholic Church the Communion of Saints: and
thereof first the Church it self, (both that triumphant in heaven Heb. 12, 22,
, and this militant on earth 1 Timothy, 6, 12,
this as a door or entrance into that, this of Grace here, that of Glory
hereafter) where we are to consider our Creed as to the Church, 1. What to
believe of it, then 2. What it is believe we must and that again 1. Not in
this or that other particular Church, as this sect or that faction or the like,
in this or that Country, or the like, but that God has a Church in general,
and that is the whole company of the godly, wherever in the whole world, that
this Church has been from the beginning, in all the world, whence it is
called Catholic. Then 2. That this Church as partly we have said is the whole
Company of the godly, of all Gods faithful ones wherever and every where
called out of or from among the faithless 1 Cor, 1 16, 1 Timothy, 1, 12, 13,
, that of Children of wrath by nature Ep 2, 3,
, are by grace verse 5, and 8,
made heirs of God in Christ Rom, 8, 17,
, and beating down the reigning contagion of sin, study and practice
holiness of life Ep, 1, 4, 1 Pet, 1, 15, 2 Pet, 1, 5, 6, 7,
, whence it is called holy. Secondly, as the first blessing God bestows on his
Church, is that as said in the latter clause of this Article, the Communion of
Saints, which is the blessed company of the godly wherever that have holy
fellowship and communion both with God and among themselves, with God of
enemies and them afar off, made friends and nigh by the blood of Jesus Christ
Rom, 5, 6, 7, 8, Ep. 2, 12, 13, and 19,
: then with and among themselves, by holy exhortation Heb, 3, 13,
to well-doing Heb, 10, 24,
, by wise Counsels and admonition Gal, 6, 1, Col, 3, 16,
, by comfortable discourses of God and godliness 1 These, 4, 18, and chap, 5,
11. 14.
, by frequent 1 These. 5. 17.
an^ mutual Jam. 5. 16.
prayer. And as fruits of all these, not only thus well toword it, but also to
show this communion by good works, not only to speak well to and for one
another, but to do well also to and for one another Mat. 23. 3. Act. 2. 44. Heb.
13. 16. 1 Jo. 3. 17,
.

Applic. That (as to that latter division of the Creed) as in the first part
considered there are three persons 1 Io, 1, 7,
in the Trinity, and in unity but one God: why, so should we labor though many
persons we be, yet to be all of one mind Jo. 17 21 Act. 4, 32, To. 15, 6. Ephesians,
4, 5,
. That unity in God pointing (as 'twere) to the unity should be among the
people of God. As to this second part the Church of God, she being the
faithful Mother that brings forth Children unto God, how should we labor that
we may become the Children of God, to become her children? Consider the
Appellations in Scripture given to the Church as the house of God Psalm, 84, 10,
, the spouse of Christ Cant, 4, 8, 9,
, the City of God Ps, 87, 3,
, the Body of Christ 1 Cor, 12 27,
, the Pillar and ground of truth 1 Timothy, 3, 15,
, and the like. And what is all this for? but that they that will be saved by
Christ and be members of that body whereof he is the head, must also be members
of his Church, which is his body, and which he is the Savior of Act, 2, 47
Ephesians, 5, 23
: and therefore confers on it blessings, both here and hereafter, here the
Communion of Saints, the Remission of sins, hereafter a glorious Re^urrection,
and an eternal life of glory.

As to this ninth Article, and thereof as to the first part: or clause of it,
that first we are to believe not in ^his or that particular Church, but that
God has this Church in general, the whole company of the godly wherever, and
therefore called Catholic, may teach where to resort to, to hear and have
the glad tidings of salvation, not by adhering to any particular sect or
conventicle, but to the whole Church of God in general, by that Militant here
to have access to that Triumphant hereafter. That secondly, this Church (as
Catholic, so) is holy too, as consisting of the whole company wherever, of
the faithful, may teach our care to become faithful, holy 1 Pet, 1, 16,
by whatever debosherie not to defile it 1 Cor, 5, 1, and 13,
, nor by whatever wicked means to annoy it Psa. 105, 15,
, in as much as the inj^ry offered unto it is as offered unto God Zech, 2, 8.
: and that he that shall any wise injure it deserves not the Name of a
Christian 1 Cor. 1^. 9.
. Then as to the second clause, that the Communion of Saints which is the first
blessing God here bestows on his Church, is only the wherever Company of the
godly, may hint unto us of what Company we ought to be, of this faithful
society, if in Christ we mean to attain Salvation: these only faithful
being that little Flock on which Christ has promised to bestow a Kingdom Luke
12. 32.
. Which Flock are they that are of this Fold the Church, of which Christ
himself is the Shep^erd, he the one Shepherd, and this Church the one Fold he
speaks of Jo. 10. 16.
. The Unity where of as it was his work, so should it be our endeavor, we to
unite us to him, and to unite us among our selv^s. Thus of the first blessing
here in this Article: the second have you in the next which is the

X. Tenth Article, and that this, The forgiveness of sins: Though other
blessings there are as appertaining to this life, yet these two are the main
blessings, that of the Communion of Saints, which we have expounded, and this
of the Remission of sins, we come next to expound or explain, A maine blessing
it is Is. 33. 24 Psalm. 32. 1.
, a blessing of this life Eccle. 9. 10. Mat. 5. 25.
. No other mean to free us from sin, for being by nature all sinners* dead in
trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2. 1. 3.
: Gods free grace in Christ, which is this forgiveness, is that only must
revive us verse. 5. 8.
. That had, will do: and that if sought, is a certain mean to be had Ps. 32.
5. Is. 55. 7.
. But will we know how? God it is gives it Is. 43. 25 Mark. 2. 7
: but ever upon this condition that we repent Luke ^3. 3. ^. Act. 3. 19.
. Remission never comes but by the way of Repentance 1 Jo. 1. 9
. And by that way it ever comes Ps. 32. 7.
.

Applic.
That Remission of sin is that other great blessing of God to his Church in
this life, how above others ought we to seek for that? To repent us of our
sins, that we may obtain this blessing Act. 3. 19.
. And when a blessing of this life, here had or never had, how ought we to let
pass no time when, but still be both mindful and careful how to obtain it?
and as the Apostle wishes Heb. 3. 13.
, daily to call unto each other to be still mindful of this. That when but by
this there is no mean to free us from sin, that we be mindful still to keep
God the giver of this our friend, who that if faithfully sought too, will give
it us, how again ought we still to seek him Is. 55. 6. Mat. 7. 7.
And being only sin is it that steps between God and us to the prejudice of
this forgiveness, our ever care it must be, that to keep us by God, we ever
keep off sin 1 Jo. 2. 1.
. Thus of the two maine blessings here, come we next to explain those other
two maine blessings hereafter, the first whereof we have in the next, the

XI. Eleventh Article, and that this, the Resurrection of the Body: which is,
that our bodies though buried and turned to dust and ashes, yet shall be
gathered and rise again Is. 6. 19. Act. 24. 15 Rev 20. 12
. Yea the very same bodies Job. 19. 25. 26. 27
, perfect and entire Act. 3. 21
, as no more subject to death Rev. 21. 4.
, so surely not subject to any loss, harm or imperfection, made immortal and
glorified bodies 1 Cor. 15. 53.
. And as here forgiven and remitted by Christ's blood Ephesians. 1. 7
: so hereafter raised by the power Mat. 22. 29.
and virtue of Christ's Resurrection To. 8. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 20.
at the last day Job 14. 11. 12. Jo. 11. 23. 24.
.

Applic.
That this order is observed in Gods distribution of these blessings, first
thus to bless us here, and after so to bless us hereafter, may teach us to
observe and note the order by what steps to attain happiness, that fellowship
we must have with the godly here, and our sins forgiven us, ere we can hope to
have our bodies raised so as to attain everlasting life. Then that our bodies
shall rise again, yea the very same bodies, how may this comfort each dying
soul to think he is not lost for ever, b^t only laid up for a time? and
therefore while living, labor to keep our bodies pure and unspotted from any
the filthy pollution and reigning contagion of sin, that after being dead, at
this Resurrection they may yield a sweet savor to God. And being to be raised
by the power and virtue of Christ, learn we still to magnify that power, not
to doubt, nor any wise to distrust this Resurrection: But that we shall rise
again, yea that all shall rise Jo. 5. 29.
, both good and bad, though the bad to abad, a sad and dismal doom to have
eternal death and damnation, yet that that is, though but just to them, as to
the good to their fuller comfort and consolation, the more to magnify Gods
mercy, and be sensible of their own happiness, everlasting life and
Salvation. Which everlasting life, come we next to explain, the second blessing
hereafter, as set forth in the

XII. Twelfth and last Article, The life everlasting: Amen. This is may I say
the Crown of blessings, and an happy close to our Creed. Wherein our faith
has its full consummation of happiness. In this is it the Sheep which is the
Church that listen to the voice of Christ the Shepherd, have summed up the
price of their happiness, and blessed issue of his voice, they hear him, they
follow him, and he in this blesses them, makes them happy Jo. 10. 27. 28.
. By eternal life, meaning both life of grace Tit. 3. 7.
, and also life of glory hereafter Jo. 17. 24.
: the one an entrance as 'twere to the other Jo. 5 24.
. Which what either is, is beyond our ken or compare, admirable, ineffable
Psalm. 31. 19. 1 Cor. 3. 9 2 Cor 12. 5.
. Be it otherwise what it will be, this we know and are assured of, we shall be
freed from all evil Rev. 1. 4.
, enjoy all good, and that too for ever Ps. 116. 11.
. This life is everlasting life.

Applic.
That this life is such an ineffable blessing, how should we labor to attain
it? And being of everlasting being, what persons should we be if we mean to
attain it? How labor to be Citizens fit for the Celestial City, men not
immerged with any wilful pollution of sin Rev. 21. 27.
, but such as here attend the good pleasure of God, do his Commandments, live
the life of grace here, that we may have right to that life of glory hereafter
Rev. 22. 14.
, every one in his proper place and calling by faith and repentance laying hold
of that temporal life of grace, that so he may attain that everlasting life
of glory. So as whatever our care be here, though by carnal Christians scorned
contemned, despised, derided, yet of Christ may we hear that happy call
hereafter, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Mat. 25. 34.
. And thus have you an end of the Articles.

Amen, is an Hebrew word used even in all Languages, to signify an assent to
what we say, approve of, or pray for, and is to be understood to testify our
faith, even of every these Articles of the Creed as of every petition in the
Lords Prayer. As to the further explanation whereof we refer you to our
exposition of the word at the end of the Lords prayer.

Many other circumstances might be noted incident to every Article of the
Creed: but we study brevity, and to explain that obvious in the words of it as
set down in the s^m or Creed it self, and produced only such proofs as might
thus briefly explain that sum: there being in that sum sufficient as to
matter of faith, without seeking much after circumstance and therefore from
this exposition of the Creed hasten we next to that of the ten Commandments.

A brief Exposition of the ten Commandments.
THe ten Commandments being not as the Creed is, a sum of faith set by
uncertain Authors, (and therefore needed our proof by Scriptures of every the
Articles of it, to add to them infallible truth) but the imediate dictates of
the spirit of God himself in the Scriptures: needl^sse it may be to labor
much after other proofs. Though to strengthen our both credit of them that they
are Gods, and to abet our keeping of them, as good, we have them not only once
but twice Exodus 20. 1. etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 4. etc.
recorded. And that too more then once, twice, yea thrice Exo. 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 4.
13. and 10. 4
by the number of ten, and that again often in two Tables Exo. 24. 12. and 31.
18. and 32. 15. and 34. 1. and 4. and 29. Deu. 4. 13. and 5. 22. and 9. 10. 11.
15. 17. and 10. 1, 3, 4. 1 Kin. 8. 9.
reckoned up by Christ in two Command^ments Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39 40.
, by St Paul in one word To. 13. 10.
, Love.

When now to go on with this explication, take we them as recorded, Exodus
Chapter 20. Ver 1. down to the eighteenth verse. The two first verses whereof
are the Preface: the fifteen following the Commandments themselves. Where by
the Preface we learn, that these Commandments are Gods Commandments, things
commanded us of God.

Use. Which may teach us our obedience, what the true ob^ect of it is, the
things commanded of God, prescribed to us and warranted in his Word Is. 8. 20.
2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
. Then for the Commandments themselves, the two Tables teach these two main
duties, the first our duty toward God, the second our duty toward man or our
neighbor: in both which tables you have the Commandments Note.
for the most part negative, as if to intimate our more careful keeping of
them: only the fourth and last of the first table is in a sort both
affirmative and negative, as if hinting our most Note.
exact keeping and observing of the Sabbath. The fifth and first of the second
Table affirmative, as if to show us worse then ungodly Note.
if at all peccant in that: the Law even of both Nature and Nations requiring
that.

To some of them as to the second, third, fourth and fifth, are Reasons annexed
for our obedience. B^t if Jews were stubborn and might perhaps need such, let
not Christians seem to exact any, but knowing them the Will of our Lord and
Master, as obedient servants strive to perform and work what he wills, without
any respect to these like Reasons. It being sufficient to abet our obedience
thereto, that he commands them, as those others he does without showing such
like reasons. And for the method of them, not to take or one or other negative
alone or affirmative alone: know we, we ought to take them all both ways or in
both senses, one by the rule of contraries implying the other. So as in every
one of them there is both things commanded us to be done, as also things where
of we are forbidden the doing. As, In the first Table as respecting God, and

1 In the first Commandment, respecting God himself, that we acknowledge him,
and no other for God Ephesians. 4. 5. 6.
: truly to profess him by both our words Jon. 1. 9.
, and our works Prove. 3. 6.
. To the true performance whereof is commanded, our knowledge Col. 1, 10.
, faith 1 ^o. 5. 4
, hope Romans 8. 24, 25.
, love Ps. 18. 1.
, patience Romans 8. 28. ^9.
, humility 1 Pet. 5. 5.
, and the like what other virtues 2 Pet. 5, 6, 7,
: And forbidden our ignorance Hos, 4, 6,
, jufidelity Psalm, 14, 1,
, distrust Jer, 17, 5,
, hatred Rom, 1, 30,
, impatience 2 King, 6, 33,
, pride 1 Cor, 4, 6, 7,
, and the like, with other Vices 2 Pet, 2, 9, Rom, 1, 21, etc.
.

II. In the second, respecting the worship of God, and as to the means of that
worship that we use not therein the devices of men I^. 29 13.
, but go by the dictates and directions of Gods word Man. 28. 20.
. To the true appl^ing whereof, is Commanded divine adoration and reverence Ps.
95. 6.
, maugre all opposition of Idolatry, care in performance of it Dan. 6. 10.
, useing waranted helps hereto, and prayer 1 These. 5. 17.
, thanksgiving verse. 18.
, the ministry of the word Romans 10 17.
, and sacraments Mat 28. 19.
, Order and decency in Gods service 1 Cor. 14. 40.
, and the like: And forbidden superstitious adoration of Saints or Angels Rev.
19. 10.
, or of God himself by pictures or images Deuteronomy. 27 15.
, Neglect of prayer Ps. 14. 4.
, or thanksgiving Romans 1. 21.
, the hypocritical abuse of them to be seen of men more then to be regarded of
God Mat. 6. 7,
, contempt of the Ministry Act. 17. 18
, disorder and confusion 2 These. 3. 6. 7. 11.
, or the like.

III. In the third, as to the means of that worship every day, is commanded a
reverend use and esteem of Gods names Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
, as Almighty, God, Lord, and the like: of his Attributes Rev. 15. 3. 4.
, a M^rcie, Tru^^, Justice, and the like: of his ordinances Mal. 1. 11.
, Word Ps. 138. 2.
, Works Job. 36. 24.
, and the like: lawfully called to it to swear truly and ^aithfully Je. 4. 2.
, to promote even among and against the Idolatry of heathens the truth and
purity of Religion Jer. 10. 11.
, and the like: And forbidden vain or careless or contemptible use of any
G^ds names, attributes, ordinances, Word, or Works whatever 2 Pet. 3. 3. 4
, any light or false swearing 2 Chro. 36. 13.
by, or blaspheaming any his names Lev. 24. 11. and 16.
, cursing To. 12. 14.
, profancing Mat. 1. 12.
, in word or work all or 'any what ever abuse or impurity of Religion Iam. 1.
26. 27.
, and the like.

IV In the fourth, as to the means of that worship on Gods own set day, one
day still in seven, which among the Jews and under the Law till the first
coming of Christ, was the seventh day G^* 2. 2.
, among Christians under the Gospel and till the second coming of Christ, to
the end o^ the World, is to be the first day of the week Act. 20. 7. Rev. 1. 10.
, is on that day excepting works of mercy and urgent necessity Mat. 12. 1.
etc. Luke 14. 5.
, commanded to all a rest or cessation from all Ordinary employments whatever
on other days Neh. 13. 15. etc.
, to attend both in public Act. 20. 7.
, and private Cor. 1 c 1 Co 14. 35.
, the exercises of this Gods worship: And, excepting those holy and necessary,
forbidden either for pleasure or profit any other work or exercise whatever
Isa. 58. 13. 14.
.

Thus and this in the first Table.

In the second table, as respecting man, the duty or actions whither outward or
inward, special or general, the person, goods, or good name of one man
toward another: in neither of all these forgeting or neglecting that of our
selves toward our selves, it being not true love to another that begins not on
or with a man's self, both nature and religion thus in the first place pressing
this duty. So as what as to the good or evil of our neighbor is commanded or
forbidden, understand as how also pertaining to our selves, and that though in
this short exposition I pass by mentioning, that yet I still imply that.

V. In the first Commandment (with the 4 following respecting the outward
actions of one man toward an other) as that specially pertaining to the
person, is Commanded the countenancing and preserveing that honor, dignity and
respect God has allotted to every particular calling or relation, as of
Inferiors to Superiors To. 13. 1
, of Superiors to Inferiors Mat, 11, 29,
, of equals yea of all to one another To, 12, 10,
: And forbidden the neglect or contemning that honor, dignity or respect God
has so allotted to every or any those callings or Relations Mat, 15, 4, 5, 6,
.

VI. In the sixth, as that first generally pertaining to the person, is
commanded our care and preservation of the body and soul 1 Th, 5, 23,
of our neighbor: his body as to the preservation of life here, that whither
in danger by himself Act, 16, 23,
or others Act, 23, 16,
, we labor to prevent it in both, and to preserve it both in our selves and
others, that we study peace with all men To, 12, 13,
, be courteous 1 Pe, 3, 8,
, meek Mat, 11, 29,
, kind Ep, 4, 32
, just Hos, 14, 9,
, merciful Luke, 6, 36,
, do good for evil To. 12, 21,
, Love even an enemy Mat, 5, 23, 24, 44, 45,
, his soul as to its salvation hereafter, that we take all occasions by good
life Tit, ^, 7,
, ^ound doctrine verse, 1.
, admonition, Col. 3. 16.
exhortation Heb. 3. 13
, reproof 2 Ti. 4. 2
, instruction 2 Ti. 2. 25.
, to be aiding and assisting to him. And forbidden as to the prejudice or
destr^ction of either his body, that we hurt him not in thought Mat 5. 2^. 1.
, word J^. 3. 12, To. 12, 14.
, o^ deed Ep^, 5, 31, Levit, 24, 19, 20, 21, Act, 22, 20,
: his soul, that by scandal in our selves, Rom, 14, 15,
, by counten^nching Hab, 2, 15, Ezech, 33 7,
, or conviveing at h the sins of others, by not punishing or preventing 1 Samuel,
2, 29,
, where we may, those sins, we become not a snare to it is destruction.

VII. In the seventh, as another part of that General pertaining to the
person, is Commanded in all estates, honest, continent and chaste conversation,
1 These, 4, 4, 5, 1 Pet, 3, 2,
purity of life and manners 1 Timothy, 4, 12, and cha, 5, 2, and 7,
, and as conduceing thereto, and preventing whatever the contrary, useing
lawful and honest means, as marriage 1 C^r, 7, 2, and 17, and 34, and 39,
, temperance Chap, 9, 27,
, modesty of speech Col, 4, 6,
and behavior G^n, 24, 46,
, And forbidden in thought Mat, 15, 19,
, word Ephesians, 4, 29,
, and deed Deuteronomy 22, 21,
, all wanton Rom, 13, 13,
, lustful Mat, 5, 28.
, idle Mat, 12, 36,
, lascivious Gen, 39, 10,
, proud Ez^c^, 16, 49,
, and unlawful Mat, 19, 9,
, prankes and pra^tises, yea or to give any suspicious occasion to any of them
Prove, 6, 27, 28, ^9, Prove, 4, 14,
.

VIII. In the eighth, as respecting the goods whether our own or others Gen,
30, 30,
, to get and keep and preserve it, is commanded honest care in our lawful
callings Ephesians, 4, 28,
, thrifty Jo, 6, 12,
, upright and just Romans 13 7, 8,
dealeings, whither much or little to be content Heb, 13, 5,
, with what our selves have, seeking also honestly to augment the wealth and
welfare of others Est, 10, 3,
: And as to the prej^dice or dispersion of them is forbidden dishonest
carelessness in those our callings Judge, 18 7, and 9,
, wastfull Prove, 18, 9,
, unrighteous and unjust dealeings Prove, 29, 27,
: as covetousness^ Luk, 12, 15.
, sacrilege Mal, 3, 8, 9, 10,
, simonie Act, 8, 18,
, thefts of what ever sort, as not only down right stealeing Exodus, 22, 1,
Deuteronomy, 24, 7,
, but whatever other cunning or crafty fetches as deceit by false weights or
measures Deuteronomy, 25, 13, 14 15,
: fraud in barganing 1 These, 4, 6,
: engrossing of Commodities Much, 2, 1, 2, 3,
: forestalling of markets Amos 8, 4, 5, 6,
, Usury Neh. 5, 7, 8, 9. Ezech, 18, 7,
, Extortion u, yea any deceit or discontent in our selves with that we have,
unlawfall or unjust seekeing also the impaireing of that of others.

IX In the Nineth, as beareing witness to the Truth Prove, 14, 5,
, and respecting the good Name whither our own or others, 3 John, 32,
: to maintain and promote it, is commanded our blameless liveing Luke 1, 6,
: care against sin 1 John, 2, 1,
, sincerity in our thoughts, words and deeds Jo, 1, 47,
, rejoyceing at the good report of others 2 Jo. 1. 4
, where without prejudice to the increase of piety it may be done, loveingly to
conceal some imperfection 1 Pet. 4. 8.
, readiness to report good deserts Act 10. 22.
: and by whatever good means to maintain that good name 1 These. 5. 14, 15,
, And forbidden, lying C^l. 3 9. Jam. 3. 14,
, lewd and loose liveing g, carelessenesse against sin, Ezech 39, 6,
, dissimulation Romans 12, 9,
, scandalous reports Jer. 6. 28
, unnecessary discovering imperfections Mat, 18, 15,
, aptness to report evil sa, 4, 11
, and by whatever means any impairing that good Name Ep, 5, 11
. And,

X. In the Tenth, respecting the inward actions of one man toward another, and
as ^eflecting upon all the former, both special and general duties even in
our very thoughts and desires, which unless well rectified, are the very fo
intaines o^ evil Jam. 4. 1
, is commanded in all our parts, body and soul through san^tification, and to
our own estate to be content with it Heb. 13, 5.
, to bemoan the ill condition of it Job 42. 11.
, and to rejoice in the good Ex. 18 9
: And forbidden in all our parts all unholinesse or unrighteousness To. 6, 13
, all or any discontent with our own estate Est. 5. 13
, and to that of our Neighbors by envy Gal. 5, 26.
, or repining Ja. 5 9.
, any whatever inordinate Col. 3. 5
or lustful 1 Cor. 10. 6.
desire to him Genesis 39 12,
or his 1 Ki, 21, 2, and 4, 12. Z^c, 7, 10,
.

In every of which these Commandments, both of the things commanded and
forbidden, we have instanced in them we could remember most obvious: in the
large extent of which (we writing but a short Commentary) some things in both
may perhaps be omitted, and thus in brief supplied. What as to the things
commanded, let be referred to this, Finally my Brethr^n, etc. Phil. 4. 8. And
as to the things forbidden to this, Abstain, etc. 1 These. 5. 2

And thus have we done with this before Exposition of the Commandments: come
we next to that of the Lords Prayer.

A brief Exposition of the Lords Prayers.
THis Prayer as the Commandments are, is also a part of the Canonical
Scriptures, and at two several times produced by our Savior himself, as
recorded by two several Evangelists Mat. 6, 9 etc, Luke 11, 2,
, who both have upon the matter the same like Copy, in almost the very same
words.

That we have this Prayer thus twice repeated, warrants a set ^orme of prayer,
and confirms the practice usual under both the Law and the Gospel. As under
the Law, in a set form was Aaron and his sons enjoined to bless the Children
of Israel: as you may see both the Injunction Numb. 6. 22, 23,
, and the form 24, 25, 26.
. See another set form of Prayer of him that was to present his third years
Tith Deuteronomy. 26. 15.
. A set form of Thanksgiving Is. 12. chapter
. See also a set form on the peoples conversion Joel 2. 17 1 Ki. 8. 47.
, repeated even word for word Dan. 9 5
, as a set form in the time of Captivity. Then compare Ezra 3. 11. Psalm. 136.
Jer. 33. 11. together, and see how, as may be well gathered by the burden of
the song, that Psalm is recorded by those other two places, and made as a set
form of thanksgiving. See also other Injunctions and examples of set forms 2
Chro. 29. 30. Ezr. 3. 10.
. The Titles of many Psalms show them set forms, as that for the Morning Psalm
22.
, for the Sabbath Psalm. 92.
, and the like.

And under the Gospel, Our Savior himself not only twice prescribes this
form as for others, but himself also uses a set form Mat. 27. 46.
in the very same words of David Psa. 22. 1.
: yea another also of his own words, three several times in the same words
Mat. 26. 44.
. Enough to warrant set f^rmes.

But to go on with this Prayer, that there is some variety in the words
(though to one and the same purpose) as where Matthew has debts and debtors,
Luke has sins or trespasses, and indebted, (as if, both compared, to show that
sins or trespasses are debts) and an omission of some part of the one that is
in the other Copy, warrants also somewhat varied forms, according to this, and
that something now may be omitted that at another time is or may be said.

That in one place it is said Mat. 6. 9
, After this manner pray ye, hints that all our Prayers be by this pattern,
the most exact form, and comprising in brief what ever more at large may be
delivered in Prayer. And then that in the other place it is said Ln. 11. 2
, When ye pray say, Our Father, etc. hints not only this a set form of
Prayer, but that also even with this most exact and perfect form we or begin
or end ours more imperfect.

When as recorded by St Matthew Mat. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, Presace.
to go on with the Exposition of that most perfect form, the Lords Prayer,
From the Preface consider we first the object of all prayer God Ps. 62. 2.
: Then secondly under what Appellation, Father: And thirdly in what place,
heaven: and then fourthly, as to uswards most propitious under this notion of
Our. For to come to God, were it without this or under any other Title of
Majesty, might make us afraid to come unto him, that inglorious Genesis 18, 27,
dust and ashes should dare to approach so incomprehensible 1 Kin. 8, 27,
glory Ps. 24, 7,
But Father may give us confidence of love, that though in heaven, he beholds
us also in earth Ps. 11. 4
, and when the Father of lights Jam. 1, 17,
, is the giver of all good, and in heaven the Lord of both it, and earth, and
as who has all power in both Ps. 135, 6,
, and can give it to, 1 Kin. 8, 30,
, and to whom he pl^aseth Dan. 4, 27,
. B^t yet what may all this be to us, unless to us he will please to give that
goodness? what, that he is that Father, unless also O^rs? Our! there is it
confirms our happiness: that we though on Earth and he in Heaven, thus a
Father, can thus in prayer come unto him under the Notion of our Father. Which
Our cacheth us how it is we come to God, to the Father by the Son, through the
holy Ghost. When then thus praying Our Father we pray not to any one alone,
Father, Son or holy Ghost, but thus to the whole Trinity. Father teaches God
not only Jo, 5, 22,
a Judge Genesis 15, 25.
, but also a Savior Hos. 13, 4,
. Our that we come to him by Christ, who is both that Judge and Savior Mat, 1,
21,
: Our Father as he is God Isa, 9, 6,
, our Brother as Man Heb, 2, 11,
. Our teaches that by him we come to that his and our Father Jo, 20, 17.
, he the Natural Son of God Jo, 1, 14,
, we but in him the adopted Gal, 4, 4 5,
. So as but by him no comfortable Jo, 14, 16 and 26,
, no effectual verse, 6,
coming, though in and by him we are made all able Ph, 4, 13
in thus coming. Nor by this Our have we him, as the head to bring us in our
prayers to God, but in it must we bring along with us all the members: this as
all our prayers being to extend to all 1 T 1, 2, 1,
. For Christ is not only our elder Brother, but we also in and by him brethren
to one another Gen, 13, 8,
. When though alone by a man's self, a man is not only to pray for himself,
but also for all. And therefore must say Our Father: yea could his charity be
so cold as to forget all but himself, he prays not therein rightly but by
saying Our Father. Christ that must present all to God that will come unto him,
must present though but that one that will come, and therefore though but one
with him, must say Our Father. My father Mat, 26, 39.
, well and rightly might Christ say, as who without any other might make that
like address, but so cannot any one of us without him: and therefore must,
though but one he be that prays, and though but for himself alone, say Our
Father.

Thus much of the Preface.

The Petitions are six, or as some divide The Petitions or Prayer it self.
them, seven, making or dividing the last into two. But as six, three concern
God, the other three our selves, wherein is much seen Gods goodness, even in
this division thus equally dividing these Petitions: or yet more, if you make
those three last four: as if (were it possible to imagine so much) showing
himself more propense to us, then provident for himself.

In those three Petitions that concern to God, the first sets forth that not
only first in his intent Pro. 164
, but that which should indeed be still first in all our Prayers Exo. 32. 32.
, and that is his glory. The other two as means to promote that glory. By Name
in the first Petition, meaning all his titles and attributes, his word, and the
ministry of it, his works, and Ordinances whatever: that we hallow them all,
and that is again that we have a reverend esteem of them Ps. 89. 7. Rev. 4. 11.
, as all conducing to set forth his glory.

Use. All which may teach all that will come unto God, what they must above and
before all things do, labor to set forth Gods glory Ps. 19. 1. and 117. 1. 1
Cor. 10. 31. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
. By Kingdom in the second meaning first his Kingdom of power always Ps. 10.
16.
, and everywhere Ps. 10. 1, 2.
powerful: secondly his Kingdom of grace here Mat. 3. 2. 3.
: thirdly his Kingdom of glory hereafter, Luke 23. 42.
. By the first beating down the Kingdom of Satan Ep. 6. 12
, and sinners Ps. 2. 9.
: By the second reigning here in the hearts of his chosen Luke 17. 20.
: And by the third, with eternal happiness crowning those his chosen
hereafter Jo. 10. 28
. Of every of which thus pray we the coming, that that first be put always in
execution Ps. 68. 1.
, and that second advanced Rev. 12. 10.
, and that third hastened Rev. 22. 20.
.

Use. When if pray thus we must for the coming of this Kingdom, this should
teach us what votaries we should be that we may have comfort by its coming, and
that is, that we go by his direction and repent Mat. 4. 17.
that thus dictated this our prayer for the thus coming of it: for as he also
renders the reason Joh. 3. 3.
, without this repentance no comfort, no coming at any good by the coming of
this Kingdom, as he also averreth Lu. 13. 3. 5.
, inevitable ruin and destruction. And then by Will in the third, meaning both
his secret and revealed will: when though that one be his alone to manage, and
but the other belongs unto us Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
, our prayer yet must extend to the doing of both that secret, our praying
Christ's coming to judgment Rev. 22. 20.
, this revealed, our patient continuance in well doing To. 2. 7.
, although yet our earnest Romans 8. 18, 19.
expectation till he come. And that in the mean time though by corruption Gen,
6, 5, 1 Cor, 2, 14.
a verse to ours, yet 1 These. 4, 3,
when the will of God and operation of grace q, we are to pray what he wills, as
for a more perfect knowledge Ep, 2. 5,
of his Will Jo, 17, 3,
, faith and salvation in and by Jesus Christ Jo. 6, 40,
, love and obedience to him, and that by keeping his Commandments Jo. 14, 15
, holy in our selves Ep. 1. 4,
, loving and friendly to one another Jo, 13, 34,
. Which and the like is the will of God: and his Will, that this be done in
earth as it is in he^ven: that is, as the heavenly Host, the Angels are ready
to do his pleasure Ps. 103, 20, 21,
, Christ the head Jo. 6, 38,
, the Saints already departed Heb, 12, 23,
to obey him, so that we yet alive, that are of Christ's true Church, and his
mystical body 1 Cor, 12 12,
be as he was Mat, 16, 39,
, and with the doing of it 1 Cor, 11, 1,
, doing his Will. His Will that is his Commandments Mat, 7, 21, and 23, and 24,
, and that according to his Will, his Word Ps, 147, 19, Luk, 11, 28,
.

Use. Which prayer thus for the doing Gods Will, as knowing all our good his
doing Phi, 2, 13
, should weane our own wills from evil, for what ever our happiness patiently
and piously to ascr be to his 1 Jo, 5, 14,
, to be constant and courageous Josh, 1, 6, 7,
for Canaa^, and not like our Fathers Ps, 106, 24,
as displeased with it, as despising it, wavering Psalm, 78, 57,
, whining and pining after Egypt. Exodus, 16, 3 and 17, 3,


Thus of the three Petitions that concern God:
Those other three (or if you will those four) that concern our selves, One,
to wit the fourth respects the body, and those others the soul.

V^^. As if to teach our care of the soul to be two, yea three to own above
that of the body. And that in as much as the Salvation of the soul is the
happiness of both soul and body: the happiness of the body, yea whatever
World of happiness nothing without that of the soul Mat. 16 26.
.

IV. By bread in the fourth, a figurative Expression, under the notion of that
most necess^rie Ps. 104. 15.
, meaneing also all other necess^ries competent Genesis 28. 20.
and convenient Pro. 30. 8. Mat. 6. 32
, for this our bodily being, as meat, drink, raiment, peace, plenty,
prosperity, health, wealth, liberty and the like Isa. 3. 1.
. And this, as who is the giver of all good Jam. 1. 19.
, that God may not only give, but give also the comfortable use of, that we
may not only have but en^oy 1 Timothy 6 17.
them. And this again that he gives us, not only me, though it be I alone that
make this prayer, and that as to our and not only my Father: That as I p^ay to
him for all, that this also he give both to me and all 1 Cor. 10. 24.
. And this again this day yea daily bread, as much as to say, as for what we
have not, daily to pray for 1 These. 5, 17.
, for what we have to give thanks daily verse. 18,
: least for what we have we be never the better Hag. 1. 6
, or, to make what we have worth noth^ng, esteem of them as our gettings Hab.
1, 16,
, and not as Gods giveings. For though coming to us under the title of ours,
our daily bread, know we yet and consider whose first it is, our goods,
greatness, our what ever else we have, Gods, and to us by but his grace made
ours, which by our ingratitude abused may as soon be another as ours, another
that in thankfulness to God may far better deserve it 1 Samuel 28.
.

Use. Which should teach us to acknowledge the grace and goodness of God the
Author of this our happiness Prove. 10. 27.
, and may justly expect, as we ought obediently to yield him, in our thanks
the glory of them Prove. 104, 24,
: that in them we see his providence 1 Timothy 6 17,
, and are more to trust to that, then our own. And that otherwise he might
give even them, but not to us 2 Ki. 7. 2
: By our ingratitude to become our ruin Psalm. 78, 30, 31,
.

This petition poynting not only on earth by our prayer to it in an earthly
patrimony, but by our thankfulness in it to an heavenly, to which Christ
himself wishes to be the price of our providence Mat. 6, 13,
, to seek moderately and modestly for the things of earth, but in the first
place for heavenly things verse. 33,
. And so as here for the body, though it be that first in Order, yet is it not
to be that first in our intention: when though Christ knowing our natural
Constitution, that while we have so much impure earth about us, and apt to have
more of sense then faith, does somewhat in the first place give way to that,
yet is it but the better to work on this, that seeing that Christ's providence
for the body, may think it not wanting, but much more propense to the soul,
as the preservatives for which are the next Peti^ions.

V. By trespasses in the one which is the first in order, meaning sins, what
ever transgressions against or failings in our obedience to Gods Law and
Commandments 1 Jo. 3 4
: called also debts, in as much as they make us subject to the penalty of the
Law for that transgression, are indebted to God, which debt he must have paid,
and discharged. But woe be to us the payment, when not any wise able to do it
Job 9. 3.
, but die we must Genesis 2, 17,
. But lets take heart of grace, though of our selves we cannot, yet one there
is shall overcome Satan Genesis 3. 15.
. There is balm in Gilead Jer. 46. 11.
: to prevent our scattering, one that lays down his life for the Sheep Joh.
10. 15, 17.
, and one whom God loves, and therefore loves him, and well pleased in him Mat.
3. 17.
, in him will accept of us Jo. 15. 7.
. When in this petition we pray that God will forgive, understand that
forgiveness in him 1 Jo. 1. 7. and 2. 1.
, in whom only is the pardon obtained Jo. 15. ^.
: that it is forgive us, is as before give us, that with our own our prayer also
be for the forgiveness of the sins of others. And then that it is forgive us our
sins, our debts or our tresp^sses, hints only on our behalf the necessity of
this Petition, that sin is only our own Jam. 1. 13, 14.
. This forgive us our tr^spasses, is the Petition: as we forgive them that
tr^spasse against us, being as a condition added. Mark I say, as a condition,
not that it is the cause why God forgives us, but a good mean to prompt to us
Gods propensenesse to forgive us our sins: yea to ass^re, may I say, that his
forgiveness of our sins committed against him, when our hearts can tell us we
are willing and propense to forgive the trespasses men have committed against
us. As if to assure that, does the Apostle wish our performance of thi^ Ephesians. 4.
32.
.

Use 1. Which Petition may teach us in the first place, he hateful nature of
sin, that a work it is of our own, wherein (unless to prevent sometimes the
intolerable exorbitancies of it, or to punish for it) God has no hand Ezech.
18. 31, 32
. So hateful to God is it Ps. 101. 3.
, so hurtful to our selves Numb. 32. 23.
, that that of all things else we be most careful to beware of, that we sin
not 1 Jo. 2. 1.
. If unhappily overtaken with sin, that by Christ we seek forgiveness of our
sin: as in whom alone we have propitiation for it verse. 2.
. Then that this we do not only for our selves, seek to expedite our selves
from this sin, but seek also we ought the Salvation of other^ Genesis 18. 13. to
the end. 1 T^m. 4. 16.
, And then,

Use 2. Which consideration added may teach us how acceptable to God are works
of mercy and compassion: that as he is to us, or as we would have him be to us,
so should we be to each other Luke 6. 36.
, that as in our Petitions God is ready to forgive us asking him, so should we
be, upon the Petitions of them that ask us, as see that Parable, Mat. 18. 23.
to the end.

We now come to the sixth and last Petition, that other preservative for the
souls safeg^ard, to prev^nt sinning, praying God not to lead us not into the
Temptation of Sin, Satan, or the World, but that he will deliver us from the
evil of them. Which is a Petition well added to the other, and coupled as
'twere to it by the Particle Note.
And: as if to teach us still the damnable nature of sin, what though sins past
may be forgiven, sins to come may condemn us. And therefore ought we not only
as there in that still to pray the forgiveness of this or that, or all
whatever sins past, but as in this we be not more entangled by it in times to
come Mat. 12, 43, 44, 45. Jo. 5. 14.
, and so our further sin procure our further or greater damnation. Which
Petition here that some make two, may (to me seeming) seem to make it but as
it were a double shaft, or as two darts, which were they three, all were little
enough to thrust through the heart of this rebellious Absalom, sin 2 Samuel 18,
14,
. And both are to this end delivered and prescribed by Christ, though one be
but (as 'twere) the Exposition of the other.

To explain yet further which:

By Temptation meaning all occasions of sinning, especially here having
reference to sin still to come: and by Evil meaning the whatever still present
occasion of it, the whatever present sin, and so consequently the whatever
issues of sinning, the whatever evils come by sin, as Death, Pestilence, War,
Sicknesses, Seditions, strifes, troubles, persecutions, Death, Hell, and the
like. Which sin being an enemy so importunate, as at every moment to assault
us, needs still to oppose it this frequent prayer: and that armed with the
whole armor of God Ep. 6, 13.
, against those both damnable batteries: Well and how may we have on that
armor of God better then by this our prayer, that God will not lead us into
the one, but deliver us from the other? that is, that God will not by
withdrawing his grace Ps. 51, 11
, (his grace that should curb and prevent our sin) leave us to the swing of
our own lusts, which hurried on by Satan and the world, drives us headlong to
damnation Jam. 1, 15,
: but by his grace 2 Cor. 12. 9.
, deliver us from the whatever assaults of it. And as argument of the presence
of that his grace, that we may hate and avoid evil, love and cleave to that
still which is good Isa. 1, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 3, 11,
. And both these that God still do for us: not lead us into temptation, but
deliver us from evil: that sin, Satan, or the World hurt not us nor others.
This God of mercy will not have us forget our Charity: but this the Saints of
old did as Daniel Dan. 19, 20,
, Stephen Act 70. 60.
, yea Christ himself Luke 23 34.
, pray not only for themselves, but also for others.

Use. When (though temptations of all sorts, of all these enemies may assault
us, and that, though afflictions come by them and perhaps many undeserved
persecutions may infest us, which when happily opposing and laboring all we
may piously either to bear or prevent, we are not to repine at, but rather to
re^oyce in Mat. 5, 10, 11, 12,
yet) are we thus to pray against ev^n them, that though they tempt us, that
is, strive to undo us, that God will not tempt us to, and that is, not leave
us to their undoing, but whither to try o^r faith, as he did Abraham's Genesis 22,
etc,
, or to prove our patience, as he did Jobs Job 23, 10,
, he will not suffer ^s to be tempted above our ability 1 Cor. 10, 13,
to bear it. Whose grace we must implore in our temptations Ps. 1 27, 1 2 Cor.
2. 5
, or otherwise we are strong b^t to our destruction Romans 7, 18, 19, 23,
. And therefore whatever the temptation or evil be, let not only the armor of
God (as said before) be our harnessing against it, but God also the Putter on
of that armor 2 Cor. 10, 3, 4, and 12, 8, 9, Confirmation.


And thus much of the Petitions.

Come we next to the Confirmation, which is as our thanksgiving to shut up
these Petitions, the Preface, the door (as 'twere) that opens to them. Tha^
Preface encouraging us to pray, as to a father willing to hear us, this cl^u^e
as to him able to grant what we pray for: As who is not only a King before and
above all Ps. 59, 3.
, hinted here by Kingdom: and that The Kingdom, as by way of excellency here
thus set to show that both priority Ps. 47. 2
, and superiority Ps. 72 11.
, but his whose Kingdom is also above all, both a King and Kingdom y Ps. 103.
19.
powerful Ps. 29. 4 and 147. 5.
, glorious Ps. 145. 11, 12.
, eternal verse. 13. Ps. 10. 16.
.

Use. Which power may teach us all, and in all to subscribe Ps. 29. 1.
, and to submit 1 Pet. 5. 6.
to his which glory: not to pride or exalt our any pretended worth or glory
Jer. 9. 23
, but ascribe all to his glory 2 Cor. 10. 17.
: and which eternity to remember always Ps. 145. 1, 2. Dan. 4. 3.
, and never to forget or him or it Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 9. 17.
.

And thus again of the Confirmation.

The Conclusion is in the word Amen: and signifies true, or truth, or so be it:
and therefore as the truth is, should not be manifold, but One. As it is the
one word used in all languages to signify our assent to whatever we assert, to
signify the truth of the assertions: as we say is true, what we pray for is in
truth and sincerity. Some make it as a seal, and well as if to sign to all
our sayings, and to signify as the truth of them, so our true prolation of
them, and may be as to our assent to every Petition in this Prayer, so to seal
our belief to every Article in the Creed, and our obedience to every
Commandment. That we truly do believe every Article, truly will do every
Commandment, truly ask every Petition: that an hearty, real, and sincere
truth be in all. Amen, thus used also in all languages and Nations, as if to
signify the unity of all the faithful of all Nations and Languages.

Use. Which should teach us truth in all our undertakings of godliness and
goodness, that a thing otherwise in it self good, to us becomes not so,
unless by us subscribed by this seal, unless coming within the compass of
this conclusion. Though seen to believe we may any good, do any good, pray for
any good, it is all but in hypocrisy unless this Amen be to it, unless it be
truly and really so, and so assented to by us. Christ who is the truth is
called or said to be Amen Rev. 3. 14.
: Amen is his asseveration Jo. 3. 5. and 3. 3.
: so as what he says to us is truth, truth must be also our sayings to him:
our Amen to depend on his, as our happiness on him Jo. 16. 23
.

And thus have we done with this brief Exposition of the Lords Prayer.

Believe we then faithfully these Articles of the Creed: live we according to
these Commandments, when then with comfort may we ask every petition in the
Lords prayer. Thus believe, live, and pray we: and the Lord 2 Timothy 2. 7.
give us understanding in all things. Amen.

An Appendix to the former piece in A Short Discourse of Prayer. With three set
Forms, One in general at all times: the other two more special, the one of
Morning, the other of Evening Prayer for a Family.

COL. 4. 2. Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving.

The Appendix. A brief Discourse of Prayer.
WHereas the Apolste tells us 1 Timothy 4. 5.
that even every thing is to be sanctified by the Word of God and by Prayer,
and that before we have out of that word given some brief Instructions for the
information of Children: and therein together with others, yet especially that
Masters and Mistresses of Families, that otherwise have not that more exquisite
of their own, may have a Method how to inform their children and servants in
those their Families in the Grounds and Principles of Religion: that now
nothing may be wanting to help us to forward that information, it may be
expedient we by this Appendix of Prayer leave them not only in general a set
form of Prayer to be used at all times, and even on all occasions, and for
all, but also in special a form how to open the Day, and another how to shut
in the Night, both in this and all their whatever other holy endeavors, to
have (though but those mean) forms of Prayer for both. Wherein I would not
fain be mistaken, or that any one should think that I, one of the meanest of
Gods servants, should be thought in any thing overmasterly, and bind the
devotions of others to any my forms, or impale ^^em within this my ruder
Method, whose perhaps more excellent gifts and graces administer to them that
far better of their own. No: but them thus expert, and everywise accomplished
for this so holy an exercise I leave to follow the bent of their own
endeavors, according to the flowing measure of Gods word and spirit to
expedite themselves in it: and apply my s^^^ie to the information of my
Children, that have not yet attained those like (...) eminent gifts or graces,
and may, b^ Gods blessing upon these like forms, b^^ som^^hat helped on to
Godwards. And (...) not only Children in years, but i^ (...) ^^^etion too,
that, though men grown th^^ heretofore wanted for better educacation, may be
somewhat helped on by this to better both themselves and theirs: that either
the one or the other, as their abilities and willingness may give way to it,
as they see good, perform this duty by these Forms, not only thus in
general at all convenient occasions, but in special too, in the Morning to
begin their whatever other Works of their own, and in the Evening to end
those works, they both to begin and end with this godly work of Prayer: as by
the one craving a blessing on what ever they shall so do, and by the other as
giving thanks for that and what ever blessings they shall want or desire. I am
not ignorant that set forms of prayer is a thing much controverted: however by
none that I ever yet could speak with or read of, soundly argued as either
unlawful or inexpedient, but rather a pious practice warrantable from Gods
word. Though in these latter times much heaved at, and as it were to be cast
out by them Extemporary which Extemporary votes (though useful I confess in a
man's private closet, and for himself, who himself best knows his one
Exigencies) yet how warrantable in the public, I am yet, I also confess, to
learn. For other discourses, as divine Orations, Homilies, Sermons, or the
like, (which few yet are loath rawlie to vent, but by first some kind of
premeditation) I grant yet may be at a man's pleasure, and as his abilities are,
either premeditated or Extemporary, he being therein but as a Messenger from
God to his people, to propose things to their Consideration: but for prayers,
where he is as the mouth of the people to God, and is to propose not only his
own, but also their requests and resolutions, it might be much expedient they
pin not their positions wholly upon his extemporary verdict, but know also in
some measure before hand what they in that his form should pray for, in as much
as otherwise they may be tied to an implicit Creed, and pray for they know
not what. Is it not the mind of Gods spirit, that as well as be zealous for
God, we be knowing also how to manage that zeal? in as much as even that zeal
without this knowledge is by the Apostle himself Romans 10. 2.
counted scarce commendable. When surely by the word ought we to try both, and
even before hand see not only in discourse but even in Prayer to, what we
mean to produce, that we be sure it be according to the mind of Gods spirit in
that word. That to the Apostles Mat. 10.
when verse. 18.
to be led before Governors and Kings for the name of Christ, it should verse.
19.
in that hour be given them what they should speak, warants not now our
whatever Extemporary speaking: That gift was but contemporary with them, the
Spirit of God that then spoke by them, was yet in his work of the Word the
Scriptures, and had not yet by them set a period to that work, as afterward
he did Rev. 22. 18, 19.
with a Curse to whosoever should or add to, or diminish from them: Whennow he
speaks to us, but in and by those Scriptures: Were every Extemporary discourse
thereon now to be accounted his, it is easy to gues into what absurdities we
might ru^ when of Sermons and Commentaries, and Expositions on them, pretended
as true, are yet we know many heterodox and false: and not according to the
mind of that Gods Spirit in the scriptures. Yea, may I not doubt to say that all the Apostles said, no nor yet before them, all that the Prophets said, was not
of Equal Authority with the Scriptures they by the Dictate of Gods holy Spirit
left us upon record as a rule to guide our faith by? For what says Saint Paul
1 Cor. 7
? some things he commended as the commands of God verse. 10.
, the Spirit of God speaking by him: some things again he counsels of himself
verse. 12.
, and as no express command of God. And beside that, mark that before cited
assertion, where it is said it should in that hour be given to the Apostles
what they should speak: what was it but only that what on their own behalf
they should answer their persecutours, not what should be the rule of our
faith? That was not to be committed to the airie puffes of an extemporary
answer or promulgation of their successors, but to the written word they
should leave them. The mind of the Spirit must now be made manifest by the word
of the spirit which only is in and by the scriptures. No, no, they truly to me
seeming do but weakly provide for their safeguard that from the sounder
pillars of premeditation will fly to, or lean on that extemporarie. But I am
not now to argue the point. Nor (though thus declaring my opinon) do I argue
or accuse any their practice that knowingly use or are affected to that
extemporary way: but in peace let them go that their way: and my prayer is that
the God of peace may bless it to them, and others that depend upon them: while
my alike prayer is that God to me and others that go by this set way, may
bless that also to us, and that though going thus two several ways to
God-wards, we may both attain at our both aimed at jorneyes end, God. And while
others more learned and versed in that extemporary way may go on perhaps
without Hesitation, yet to avoyde Tautologies and some Absurdities that may
arise from others less learned, or not so well versed in that way, and
especially those my Children that I have all along thus labored to instruct,
give them leave to be led along by these or the like premeditated forms, whose
intentive spirits may as effectually go along with, as that of others without
their books or forms, and by Gods blessing be to God as acceptable to. And
therefore while we censure none that go otherwise, let us not feel the lash of
their Censure, by our going this way: but in their Extemporary ways have they
now and then a short ejaculation that God will bless to us these like set
forms: in as much as my Charity is as theirs should also be, that we both in
our ways seek God: we no less in these set forms then they in their
Extemporary ways: When though our opinions may somewhat differ about the Mode
of Prayer (knowing that their opinions may some what differ, whose faith may be
yet the same) yet herein we may both conclude that prayer is necessary: And
let us thus conclude it too, tha^ howevermade, if with sound hearts made and
truly humbled souls, that both are to God acceptable, who looks not upon the
face of things but on the heart of man 1 Samuel 16. 7.
, not on the manner of delivery, but on the hearts that make it. Although by
our Saviors own to me seemeing advice and counsel, we be yet careful in the
best Mat, 6, 7,
manner we may to make it, That l by only much speaking we be not thought to be
accepted: or however though sometimes perhaps there may be occasion of much
speakeing, that vain Repetitions be avoided. Which unless by them of able
parts, and exquisitely versed in it, are too too incident to many, who (rather
then thus adhereing to the times and fancies of some too much affected to this
way, in dispute yet whither or no warrantable) might do well to take up that
which is without dispute warrantable, and by set forms, whither of their own
or others (till as others better versed in the way) avoid those whatever
absurdities, when both they and their hearers before hand prepared for the
service will doubtless after the better discharge it.

A General Prayer at all times of many together or by one Man or Woman alone,
as the occasion serves, changing the Number, and Sex.
LE^ the Words of our mouths and the Meditation of our hearts be acceptable in
thy sight O Lord our strength and our Redeemer! O E^^rn^ll, most glorious, and
most gracious Lord God, thou who art rich in mercy, and abundant in goodness
and Truth, we thine unworthy servants, on our bended knees, and from the
bottom of our humbled hearts, in the Name of thy son our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ (in whose name thou have promised, that if we ask any
thing according to thy will, thou will both hear and do it) do now thus
humbly make our address unto thee, and pray that our prayers now and ever may
with acceptance come in thy presence. We confess Lord, and we are ashamed of
the manifold sins and transgressions we have in thought, word and deed
committed against thy divine Majesty. And that not only in that Original sin
of our first parent Adam, whom thou at first made upright and us in him, but
that by our impious inventions on that accursed stock we have grafted the impes
of our own infinite Actual sins. Graces it is true many we have had offered to
us, had too and received many Graces: but alas! in vain has been our receipt of
them. So many, so infinite have been our sins, that we have even grieved thy
good spirit of grace, with those seducers of old, whatever we have professed as
to thee with our words, with our works yet we have denied thee, turning thy
sovereign soul-saving Grace into the destroying delusion of our own
wantonness. Has not thy longsuffering patience more then abundantly winked at
our manifold sins? And is not that space thou have given us to repent in,
wherein we have not repented* more then enough to testify our ingratitude to
thee our merciful God? O how unclean are we made by sin! how filthy is even
our righteousness? that even much more loathsome must needs be our sin! how
many are the impious inventions we daily plot and practice, as if we meant no
other then only to study how to contrive even our own ruin and damnation? So
many are our mischievous imaginations. So as should thou be so severe as to
mark what has been done amiss, O Lord! who may stand? If thou should lay
Judgment to the Line, and righteousness to the plummets, thou might make
thine anger to smoke, thy jealousy to burn like fire, and all the Curses
that are written in thy book, thou might lay upon us, and blot out our name
from under the Heaven. When then O Lord, what might remain for us, but a
certain fearful looking for the Execution of these severer Judgments thy
wrathful displeasure may justly lay upon us? Yet O Lord, though to the terror
of perverse and obstinate sinners, we know that thou art just, yet to the
comfort of repentant sinners we know thou art merciful too. And therefore in
most humble manner, we now at thy Throne of grace and mercy, beg of thee our
God in thy Son Christ our Savior, the forgiveness of those our sins. O Lord
remember not against us, nor impute to us former transgressions, and for them
otherwise that may ensue, let thy mercies speedily prevent. And that we may
happily lay hold of that thy preventing grace, make us in every respect sit for
it. Is our Faith small? O Lord increase our faith! Is our repentance backwards?
Hasten O Lord our Repentance! dissolve our flinty hearts into godly sorrow, and
by that happy means work in us that more happy repentance, repentance to
salvation not to be repented of. When to further both that faith and
repentance, inflame our holy zeal of glory: and truly to manage that zeal,
endue us with the knowledge of thy will, by the glorious Sunbeams of thy good
word and spirit enlighten the eyes of our understanding, that we may know thee
as we ought and testify our knowledge by our sincere love of thee our God and
Savior. Put us O Lord, in the way of thy truth, and then, Lord, grant us grace
happily to persevere in that way to the end. Let not any the over-sollicitous
cares of earth or earthly things, put over any our care of heaven or the things
of heaven: but with our own estate what ere it be, let us learn therewith to
be content: if prosperous, to praise thee our God for that prosperity, if in
adversity or under the Cross, that patiently we may bear it. Turn, O turn
away those whatever woeful punishments our sins have justly deserved! and the
better to turn away those punishments for sin, turn us away from those our
sins, that so from both them we turn unto thee our God. And that thou will be
thus propitious, we beg not only for our selves here assembled, but became also
Petitioners both in our Prayers and Praises for

In our Prayers, that thou will bless and be favorable to thy holy Catholic
Church wheresoever dispersed, or howsoever distressed, defend all and every the
members of it, let not any the little Lambs there of be by Sin, Satan, or the
World, made to stray from out of that little flock thou have reserved the
Kingdom for. But them already called to thy fold keep Lord, and bless them in
it, and them as yet without the Pale thereof, bring in in thy good time, that
at last we may become one fold under one Shepherd. And to the furthering
thereof, as thy Sons Coat was without seame, so make and keep the garment of
that thy spouse the Church to be without schism: that by any our divided
opinions, the Enemy what ever that is vigilant to sow sedition among us, may
not at any time so get the advantage over us, as to break our unity from thee
our God, or our amity unto goodness: and so instead of being knit unto thee by
it, we be severed by the Babel of his lewd confusion.

Here now next as occasion serves are we to pray for the Commonwealth in
general wherever we live in, that God will bless it with peace and plenty:
and for the happy support thereof, for the supreme Magistrates of State
whatever, for the Ministry, Soldiery, and whole People of God in general, that
they all in their several places and callings may make God and godliness
their aim. Then as need shall require for any one in special for the
obtaining any blessing wanting, for the turning away any emergent evil
^present or to come. As, for a sick person, sick whither in body or mind, or
both, or under whatever cross or calamity that God will graciously look down
upon him, visit him with his mercy, and relieve him in that what ever his
exigencie. That if so be it may stand with his good pleasure, he may again
recover the strength of both mind and body, be freed and exempted from any
whatever crosses or afflictions he may so groan under: comfortably to walk in
his holy and Christian vocation. Or if by it he be to be brought to his grave,
that while waiting for that, he may have in that Gods mercy and favor, grace
and comfort to: that with patience he may attend till his change come, whatever
Gods good will and pleasure, and whither living or dying be so united unto God,
that in the end he may obtain Salvation.

For a woman intravell of Childbirth, that God will be gracious to her: and
though by the fate of sin, at that present destinated to great pain, that he
will yet favorably deliver her out of it, and by a blessed issue, mitigate the
sorrow of hers it must be born with: that both in God and it she may have after
much joy and comfort, that she as a faithful Hannah may with her young Samuel
intend most and ever Gods service.

Thus and the like may be the Prayers: The Prays thus: as,
For one delivered from any such like sickness, cross or calamity, either the
party himself by himself to pray, or others for and with him, that, God will
accept the General acknowledgment of his Grace and favor to the whatever
person so delivered: As For one recovered from sickness of body or mind, that
after in the strength of both, he may grow in strength of grace and goodness:
or freed from other crosses or calamities, in that freedom then and ever by
his thankfulness that he acknowledge that Gods especial favor to him, that
more then the skill of Chyr^rgians or Phy^itians, means ordained of God for the
ease and relief of sick people, more then of friends favors to expedit also
out of miseries, that yet Gods grace and mercy is the supreme mean of health
and happiness, that though by them brought onwards sometimes unto it, yet that
that must be it must Crown the happiness.

For a woman delivered, that God be acknowledged as in travel her only support,
so after her chief comfort: that for therein his especial favor, he have
therefore an especial gratitude, praise for that whatever his goodness. And
that as he was thus propitious to her, that she may be sedulous to magnify and
ever to praise him for it: that by a safe deliverance granting her desire, her
still after-desires may be to maintain his glory. That by his blessing on the
fruit of her womb, there may still be an increase of blessings to the setting
forth of that his glory, an addition still to the number of Christ's faithful
ones.

For any whoever departed in the faith and fear of God: If notwithstanding any
the former prayers, God saw it best and had decreed it otherwise to take him to
himself, that he have our praise also for that goodness, that has not only
by life and health, and peace, and prosperity here a comfortable assistance for
his people, but even in and after death a more glorious life, an health without
any danger of impair, peace without perturbation, prosperity without end or
diminution. So as not only comfortable is the life of the godly, but precious
in Gods sight their death also. So as even for Gods favors to the thus
departed our praise is also due unto him.

And then aefter thus to proceed to a Conclusion, with thanks for whatever
blessing.

Let O Lord, these our both prayers and Praises, as always acceptable, so
always be seasonable in thy sight. And for that our allways both acceptable
and seasonable offerture of them, keep in us humble and prepared hearts, that
in nothing we be wanting for the whatever and whenever due accomplishment of
them. And then O Lord, when ever and whatever this according to thy Will we
pray for, or praise thee for, be with us still auspitious to both: And in both
and for both, and whatever else requisite for us, grant us Lord, we beseech
th^e for thine own sake, and for the sake of thy Son Christ our Savior. In
whose name and words, the name only by which we are saved, and the Words, the
most exact and perfect pattern of prayer, we conclude these our imperfect
Prayers, saying as he has taught us to pray unto thee, saying, Our Father
which art, etc.

Blessing, and glory, and honor, and might, and majesty be to our God who
dwells in inaccessible light: whose love and blessings and comfort, love of
God as our dear and loving father, blessing of Christ as his dear son and our
Savior, comfort of the Holy ghost that proceeds from them both, to comfort
and establish us in the truth, 3 persons and one God, be with us, and be by us
and all the Church of God, ever called upon and blessed, to the blessing and
preserving of our souls from whatever si^, our bodies from whatever sicknesses
or calamities, our estates from whatever ruin and destruction, Now and for
ever Amen.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O come let us worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our maker! O
eternal, everliving, and everloving Lord God and savior, thou that art most
powerful, and yet gracious, most just and yet merciful too, rich in graces,
and superabundant in goodness, give us, O give us both of that thy grace and
goodness, that in this humble offerture of our morning Exercise, we be duly
prepared for it. And that in the first place in the due acknowledgment of our
many and manifold sins and transgressions: that though we thus come nigh thee
in this weighty business of prayers and praises, yet should thou come nigh
us, and weigh us in the balances of thy justice we might be found lighter then
vanity, so horrid, so hideous, have been our sins, so many, so infinite our
transgressions. So as whilst looking on them alas, what can we look for but a
fearful downfall to death and damnation? Ou^ pride, our covetousnes, our
drunkenness, our deboyshery, or deceit, our hypocriasic, our neglect of thy
word, our disobedience to thee our God, and despite to our neighbors, an
aggravation of that desobedience, with whatever other breach of thy blessed
commandments, have so far broken in upon us, that when but seriously laying it
to heart, we may not have heart to hope our a^y wise evading that downfall. Yea
so besotted are we with sin, that notwithstanding our daily both hearing and
handling thy blessed word, we hear but heed it not: yea we know what is good,
but practice it not. A sort of arrand hypocrites we are, that mock thine house
of prayer, thy word, thy sacraments, and whatever other seemly ducies of
Religion and devotion, b^t stales to our lewdersin, clothes to cover our
licenciousness. Yea and too too often the very practice of prayer, but a practice
also to bolster up our carnal desires: not therein heeding the due Method and
end of it, thy endless praise and our eternal Salvation. No, though covertly,
so contemn thy word we do, by our careless, unconscionable regard of doing
thereafter, so grieve thy good spirit by our sin, so abuse thy mercy by our
presumption, so forget thy judgments, cauteriz'd as it were and hardened in that
sin and presumption, that, looking upon us so many sinkes of sin, so many
presumptuous vassalls of indignation, what can we expect but our portion with
the wicked, and with them that forget God, but to be turned into hell, the
place appointed for the Devil and his Angels.

B^t yet O Lord there is mercy with thee, weigh us in the ballanees of that,
when then our hopes may be, it may poize down the scale of thy justice, and
being turned from our sins by thy mercy, we may so evade the fury of thy
justice, and by true faith, timely repentance, happy sanctification of life,
knowledge of thy will, love of thy name, zeal of thy glory, sincerity for thy
truth, boldness in the profession of thy word, perseverance in godliness and
goodness, patience under whatsoever cross or calamity, contentment with our
whatever estate, so arm us against the evil of sin, the evil of punishment
may not fray us: so order our steps to God by good, that no step be made to
either of those evils. When to further our daily morning exercise, yea our
always excecises in these like duties, what especial obligations have we? as
thy continual mercies which should stir up our continual thankfulness for
those thy mercies: our own miseries, which should also force our prayers for
the continuance of those thy mercies: thy mercies, that we are not confounded,
our miseries that they become not that our confusion. Let us, O let us, in a
due acknowledgement of those thy mercies both to free us from and prevent our
those whatever miseries, let us make conscience of all our doings, not to do
any thing contrary to the law of good conscience, but as directing to that good
Conscience to go by the rule and directions of thy good word in the Scriptures,
and be guided by the dictates of thy good spitit in that Word. Try we thereby
and prove we all our thoughts, examine we thereby and therein all our words and
works, that so we may seek thee our good God in all, and find thy good grace in
the execution of our goodness.

Nor for our selves O Lord, let us only become thus suppliant to thee, but let
our prayers also extend to the good both of our selves and others, and be now
next extended for a blessing upon thine holy Catholic Church, etc.

Here go on as occasion serves as in the genenerall Prayer, till you come thus
to conclude.

And now O Lord, having thus made a tender of our bounden duty in this our
first offerture of this morning work of thine, in thus calling upon thee, be
favorable now next to us in the works of our own callings, that by effecting
them to our comfort, we may effect them also to thy glory. That even every one
of us in our several places and callings, may as not only thus opening the
day thy glory by this thy work, b^t by thy goodness may go through with it
to our comfort in our own works. When now to conclude these our imperfect
requests we have thus made to thee both for our selves and others, imperfect in
as much as many things are omitted we should pray for for our selves, many
things omitted we should praise thee for, to supply that imperfection of both
our prayers and praises, let us now at last make our address unto thee for
them, in that most absolute form, that perfectly compriseth them all, saying,
as our Savior himself has taught us to say unto thee, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc.

The peace of God which passes all understanding, preserve us in peace, and
keep our hearts and minds in the knowledge and understanding of him our God and
Father: that his outstretched arm be our defense, stretched out in the
merciful exhibition of his Son Christ our Savior. Whose salvation let be
our auspicious aid, and that made good to us by the grace of that good spitit
of grace the holy Ghost the Comforter he has sent to be with us. To which
Father of peace, Son of mercy, holy Spirit of comfort and consolation, three
Persons and one God, be by us and all the faithful ascribed all honor and
glory, praise, power, might, Majesty and Dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
Let our Prayer be set before God as Incense: and the lifting up of our hands
as the Evening sacrifice.

O Eternal, most glorious, and most gracious Lord God, thou who art rich in
mercy, and abundant in goodness and truth! We thine unworthy Servants here
prostrate before the footstool of thy sacred Majesty do humbly confess and
acknowledge our many and manifold sins and transgressions. As how shapen in
wickedness and conceived in sin, when Children bred up altogether in
childishness, when growing strong, strengthening our selves in wickedness,
giving up our whole selves as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: our
hearts hardened to ill works, our understandings dulled, our wills refractory,
and our whole affections crooked and perverse: our heads set to plotand
contrive mischief, our hands to handle iniquity, our tongues to cursing,
swearing, lying, filthy and corrupt communication: our eyes to look upon and
behold vanity, our feet ready and swift to stand in the way of sinners, and to
walk in the counsel of the ungodly. So as both within and without, from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot there is no whole part in us, but we
are altogether full of putrified sores, sores of abominable sin and
wickedness. As to the things of thy service and the advancement of thy glory,
how have we neglected and omitted our almost every pious duty! As to our
Neighbors good, how intemperate have we been in pride and envy, in
wilfulness and uncharitableness to break all the Christian and godly bands
of unity? How have our words, actions and intentions perverted the better
practices both of our selves and others? O Lord I what have we not done, but
might justly draw down thy vengeance on us? Yet O Lord, there is mercy with
thee! As consequent to this our humble confession, let us implore that mercy,
and desire thine all fatherly goodness, to remove from us thy judgments, and
to prevent all further evils that might justly come on us for our sins. Yea and
the better to prevent those evils, prevent our sins: and let us cast away from
us those our beloved, those our darling sins, to which our perverse nature is
too much prone and inclined. Let no temptation of Satan deceive us, let no
allurements of the world or flesh pervert us. Soften our hearts, enlighten our
understandings, rectify our wills, strenthen our affections, reise up and
revive our dead and benumned Consciences. Let no wandering imaginations seduce
us, and in thy mercies washed let us not relapse into our old mire of sin. Let
not heresy, schism, infidelity, or Apostasy blemish the truth of our
Religion. Let not Wars, Famine, Plague, or scarsity blain the happiness of our
healthful prosperity. No, O Lord, let not any evil whither of sin or
punishment, impair or thy glory or our good. Nor is it only sin that thus
brings us on our knees, or the evil of sin that requires from us deprecations
of evils: but our parts also it is to supplicate thy farther mercies, that tho^
would be pleased to grant a continuance of the happiness we have, and to
supply us with the good blessings we want and have not. Give us, O Lord,
understanding hearts and clear judgments to see our sins. Give us O Lord,
humble wills and holy affections to hate and abandon those our sins. And, Lord,
give us true repentance to bewail those our sins. And for the furthering of
all those graces, further us and furnish us with the assistance of thy good
spirit of grace: supply that we want, strengthen and increase the grace we
have. O Lord, so bless every one of us in our several places and callings, as
that we may truly become Instruments of thy glory, to do the will of thee our
loving Lord and Master here, that hereafter we may receive the Crown of
righteousness which thou haste prepared for all those that do it.

When to conclude our Prayers, give us leave to praise thee, and give thee
humble thanks for all thy mercies, that for our sins thou have not totally
consumed us. But to further thy glory and our good, have elected us before the
foundation of the World, created us in time after thine own Image, redeemed us
from the power of Satan by the more powerful passion of thy Christ and our
Jesus. We thank thee our Lord, for our Christian calling and vocation, wrought
in us by the inward operation of thy spirit, and the outward preaching and
ministry of thy Word: for our justification in Christ, our measure of
sanctification here, and our hopeful ^ssurance of glorification hereafter: yea
for all thy blessings and benefits we now and ever yield thee a thankful
acknowledgement. Nor for our selves are we only thus suppliant, but O Lord,
let our prayers extend also to the good both of our selves and others. Be ever
therefore gracious to thy Spouse the Church, etc.

Here again go on as occasion seems as in the general Prayer. When as
reflecting upon the Church, pray, that God would purge her from Schisine and
Heresy: and as to all the Members of both Church and Commonwealth, that he
would reconcile all the differences of Opinions among us, that in his good time
we may not only obtain, but keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace.

When you may conclude thus:

Bless us all O Lord, pardon our sins this day passed, and let us have quiet
rest this Night to come, that the day following, and so all the days of our
lives, we may still study and strive the advancement of thy glory, our own and
our Neighbors good. And this and whatever else necessary for us, grant us O
Lord, even for thy Sons sake Christ Jesus, In whose Name and Words, concluding
these our imperfect Prayers, come we unto thee, in that his most perfect,
saying as he has taught us, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the
sweet and comfortable fellowship of God the Holy Ghost be with us, bless
preserve and keep us this Night following and for ever. Amen.

The End.

